



















Rm Johnston


The R. M. Johnston
Memorial Volume
Being a Selection of the Principal
Writings in connection with Geology
and the Economic and Social
Problems of the Day
By Robert Mackenzie Johnston
I.S.O., F.L.S., F.S.S.
Government Statistician and Registrar-General of the
State of Tasmania
Tasmania:
John Vail, Government Printer, Hobart
1921




CONTENTS
FOREWORD, PREFATORY CORRESPONDENCE, AND
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
PART I.
The Glacier Epoch of Australasia 16
Evidences of ice-action derived from the study of existing
glaciers in the northern hemisphere. Evidence of former glacial
action. Principal evidence of intense glacial action, boulder-till,
or grund-moraine. The glacial “ till ” of Scotland. Inferences
from the glacial phenomena of Scotland. Evidences of former
glaciation in Australia, New Zealand, and Tasmania. Apparent
absence of glacial deposits corresponding to the “ till ” of Scot-
land. Evidences of comparatively recent glaciation on the Aus-
tralian mainland, as recorded by various observers. Evidences of
glacial action in the elevated valleys of the Australian Alps.
Doubtful evidence at Korkuperrimal on lowlands. Evidence of
recent glacial action in Tasmania. Glaciation in the alpine
valleys of the western highlands of Tasmania. Evidence of glacia 1
epochs concurring with great cycles of change in organic life.
Glacial epochs harmonising with great cycles of change in plant
life. Evidences of glacial action in rocks of permo-carboniferous
age. The causes of glacial epochs. Objections to the astronomical
theory, taken alone, as an adequate cause of glacial epochs. The
weight of negative evidence. Improbability of finding evidence
of intense glaciation in any portion of Australian lowlands among
rocks of the same age as the glacial epoch of the northern hemi-
sphere. Immunity of Australia due to latitudinal position. Syria
and Arabia, and Northern Africa, the equivalents of Australia
in north latitudes. Estimated effect on the lowering of the neve
at the time of the “ ice age ” in Europe. Calculations deter-
mining, approximately, the altitude of the neve for Australia
and Tasmania during the glacier epoch of Australia, and the
later glacial epoch of Europe and North America. General con-
clusions.
PART 11.
Order and Relationship of Australian Terres-
trial Formations 97
How far can Australian geologists safely rely upon the order
of succession of the characteristic genera of fossil plants of a far
distant region, in the determination of the order and relationship
of Australian terrestrial formations?


PART 111.
The Stoey of an Old Lake of the Deewent 11l
Introductory. Nature’s lifting, transporting, building, and
sculpturing forces. The original formation of the old lake basin
of the Derwent. What the records of the vestiges of the sedi-
ments of the old lake reveal of the history of the age, when they
were deposited, and of subsequent changes. Brief description of
the vestiges or sediments of the old lake of the Derwent as
exemplified at Geilston, Lindisfarne, Cornelian Bay, Sandy Bay,
and One Tree Point. Sandy Bay leaf beds. One Tree Point leaf
beds. Ceilston fresh-water limestone. Pipe-clay Bluff, Cornelian
Bay. Summary.
PART IV.
Histoeical Sketch of the Geological Relations
of Austealia and Tasmania 138
Introductory. General physical outline of Australia and Tas-
mania. Likeness to a typical atoll. The building of the present
continent of Australia. Jukes’ early sketch of physical structure.
Jukes’ speculations on the genesis of the existing flora and fauna.
Brief physical outline of Tasmania. The building of Tasmania.
Great physical and organic changes at the close of both the
mesozoic and lower tertiary ages in Tasmania. Concurrence of
glacial epochs with great cycles of change in the plant life of
Australia. Classification, chronological sequence, and character
of the rocks of Tasmania and their approximate equivalents in
the Australian Colonies. Conclusion.
PART V.
Value of Mental Concepts 177
Introductory. The region of fancy. Undercurrents of fancy
experienced during waking state. Common fungoid. The illu-
sions of idea symbols. Illusions related to word symbols. The
common illusion that men of culture and science have a special
tendency to be sceptical as regards truth. Illusions due to
inexperience or defective eqiupment on the part of the active
observer. Conclusion. Index.
PART VI.
Section I.
Is THE PoVEETY OF THE MASSES A NeCESSAEY CON-
COMITANT or Inceeased Accumulation of
Wealth in the Aggeegate ? 203
Wants of man. Division of labour and means of exchange—
advantages and defects. Further difficulties —allocation. Pro-
portional classification of occupations. Causes of existing poverty


and misery. Satisfaction of wants and theory of obstacles con-
sidered. The best mode for effecting exchanges depends greatly
upon the extent and value of local natural sources. Buy in the
cheapest market. Free trade. Aggregate wealth and individual
wealth. The effect of strikes or a rise in wages in food-producing
and food-lacking countries. Rent monopoly. Monopoly of the
gifts of nature. Middlemen. Distribution of consumable w r ealth.
Capital and w r ages difficulty. Improvement in social conditions
largely due to the savings of anterior labour. Comparative pro-
gress in modern times due to increased productive power. Past
and present contrasted. Comparative effective purchasing power
of labour. Present and past conditions of England contrasted.
Increasing numbers. The struggle for existence. Can a higher
culture be maintained in any one country without regulating its
intercourse with other races of men in a lower plane of civilisa-
tion ?
Section 11.
Natural Limits to the Numbers Engaged in
Various Occupations 292
Competition with cheap foreign manufactures —discussion.
Dominating wants determine occupations and necessarily produce
inequalities in the form of services. Utopian schemes of socialists.
What wnuld be the probable effect upon social well-being if the
major source of savings were destroyed? Anterior savings the
true source of capital invested in the creation of necessary satis-
factions. Fallacies of single tax panacea. Effect of the single
land tax upon production. Rent versus single tax. Single taxes
in character.
Section 111.
Observations on the Influence of Strikes upon
Real Wages 322
A strike can only succeed in raising real wages when it is
partial or confined to industries that comprise a small proportion
of the community. Real and nominal wages.
Section IV.
General Increase of Wages Falls upon Con-
sumers of Products, and in No Way
Encroaches upon Rent or Profits of
Capitalists
Theory of rent. Dialogue between landlord and builder. Per-
sonal consumption of commodities by the rich. Distribution and
consumption of wealth. The fruit of labour. Earnings. Active
agents in the production of wealth.


Section V
Notes on the Natural Limits to Occupation on
the Land 362
Section VI.
Observations Regarding Some Economic Aspects
of the Eisenach Social Equality Pro-
gramme 370
Wealth in consumption. Existing distribution of share of
products and services regarded from the democratic socialist
point of view. Utopian schemes of socialists. How the consum-
able wealth of production is distributed in the United Kingdom
and in the Commonwealth of Australia by the individualistic and
only practical method of democratic socialism. Distribution of
consumable wealth. The products of the year 1903 in Australia.
Section VII.
Observations Regarding the Production and
Distribution of “ Consumable Wealth ”
and “ Economic Capital,” with an Inquiry
into the Probable Effect of Arbitrary
Regulation of “ Minimum Wage ” Stan-
dards upon the “ Cost of Living ” 392
Introductory. Wants of man. Limitations of the claims of
capital. What is capital? Capital and wages difficulty. First
great category. Second great category. General effect of the
rapid growth of steam and other natural auxiliary forces since
1840. The standard of living. The inequalities of different wage-
earner’s “ purchasing power.” Minimum wage standards.
Tabular illustrations. Conclusion.
Section VIII.
Observations Regarding Accumulated Capital
Wealth 429
Improper exclusion of man (the wage-earner) as a value-
earning instrument of production, in estimates, usually made, of
accumulated capital wealth.


Section IX.
Unimproved Value Taxation 437
Effect of taxation of real estate when restricted to what is
usually regarded as its “ unimproved capital value.” Conclusion.
Section X.
Taxation : Current Popular Fallacies 447
Introduction. Dr. Smith’s four maxims of taxation.
Equality of sacrifice ideal. Income tax. The advantages of taxes
on consumption (customs and excise).




THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL
VOLUME
FOREWORD
TO be entrusted with the responsibility of writing a fore-
word to this volume, in which will be found collected
some of the most characteristic writings of the late Robert
Mackenzie Johnston, is a privilege, and, at the same time, a
responsibility presenting many difficulties.
It is a privilege, inasmuch as it has been allotted to one
who enjoyed in no small measure Mr. Johnston’s friendship,
and who is deeply indebted to him for many pleasant and
instructive hours spent in his company, and for much sound
counsel and helpful advice, particularly in the realms of social
economy and finance-
It is difficult, because I am attempting to portray in a few
words a man possessed of a many-sided character, of charm-
ing personality, of wide scientific attainments, and of deep
human sympathies. One striking trait in his disposition —
the one by which he will be longest remembered by his
younger friends, and the one which would not be realised
from a mere perusal of his writings —was his intense devotion
to young people. His pleasure in giving them pleasure, his
interest in their life, in their amusements, in their ambitions,
and in their successes, and the kindly encouragement with
which he directed their attention to the great study of
Nature, in a manner peculiarly his own and often unrecog-
nised by them at the time, have left a deep impression upon
those of the present generation who had the pleasure of being
associated with him.
Immediately after his arrival in Tasmania, in the year
1870, Mr. Johnston began a close study of the geology and


botany of his new home, and many of the papers giving the
results of his original investigations are to be found in the
“ Proceedings of the Royal Society.” In the course of his
researches he explored many parts of Tasmania which were,
up to that time, practically untrodden ground, and his
observations were marked by careful scrutiny and thorough-
ness. To travel through the bush of Tasmania in the com-
pany of Mr. Johnston (as it was the good fortune of the
writer to do upon very many occasions) was to his com-
panions a delightful means of absorbing much information
and scientific knowledge.
His researches culminated in the publication by the State
in 1888 of his monumental work upon the Geology of Tas-
mania, and of the volume which accompanied it upon the
Rocks and Minerals of Tasmania. Numerous typical fossils
were then described and illustrated for the first time, and his
geological map of the State was then published, and is the
foundation upon which all subsequent geological maps have
been based.
It was not only to geology that Mr. Johnston devoted his
attention —fishes, molluscs, and flora were at the same time
the objects of his scientific investigations. As a Fellow of
the Royal Society of Tasmania, he was a regular contributor
to its proceedings. To show his untiring industry and keen
interest, it may be noted that he enriched the volumes of the
Society by no less than fifty-six papers upon geological sub-
jects, sixteen papers upon fishes, eight papers on molluscs, and
five papers upon flora, and numerous papers upon social and
economic subjects.
In addition to his contributions to the proceedings of the
Royal Society, Mr. Johnston was an active participant in the
work of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of
Science, in which he took the deepest interest-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


As a member of the Council of the University of Tasmania
from the time of its establishment, he strongly advocated the
scientific side of learning, especially those branches in which
he himself took so much delight.
Mr. Johnston’s work as a scientist, however, was not, in
fact, his life’s work. For thirty-seven years he occupied the
important position of Government Statistician in this State.
He proved himself to be a statist in the truest sense of the
term. It was not only as the compiler of the annual volume
of Tasmanian Statistics, which he was constantly improving,
that his real usefulness to the State was found. His great
services were rendered in a practical way by the clear and
closely-reasoned deductions which he drew from the figures
he had collected and collated, and in the numerous papers
and essays he published upon economic and social questions.
One of the most difficult problems which the framers of the
Commonwealth Constitution had to face was the equitable
distribution among the States of the surplus revenues derived
from the collection of customs and excise duties. Amongst
the statists and other financial experts called in to aid the
deliberations of the conference Mr. Johnston took a foremost
position, and the papers and memoranda in which he gave
expression to his views were freely quoted by the members
of the conference, and by the press, with deference and
respect. Mr. Johnston was from the outset a staunch advo-
cate of the distribution of this surplus upon a per capita
basis, and strongly condemned the book-keeping method
which was originally adopted. Ten years later, after much
learned writing on his part, and the use of unanswerable
arguments, he lived to see the per capita principle finally
adopted as part of the Federal system.
Upon the question of proportional representation there was
no more persistent advocate or clearer exponent than Mr.
FOREWORD


Johnston, and the working out of the principles now govern-
ing elections in Tasmania was largely due to him.
Upon all questions of finance Ministers of the State were
under deep obligations to Mr. Johnston, and no one to a
greater degree than the writer of this memoir. The placing
of the finances of friendly societies upon a sound footing was
his constant endeavour, and his actuarial work, whether in
connection with friendly societies, provident funds, or pen-
sion schemes, was of the soundest.
His reputation as a scientist and economist was world-wide,
and he was in correspondence with many who were engaged
in the investigation of scientific and economic problems in
Europe and in America.
Finally, as a friend, none was more loyal, none more sym-
pathetic. As a worthy and useful citizen he had few equals.
He always saw the best in human nature, and regarded this
world as a bright and happy spot to dwell in. Though I
never knew him utter an uncharitable or harsh word of any-
one, he hated hypocrisy and underhand dealing, and loved to
find in others that simplicity and integrity which were his
own chief characteristics.
His guiding thought was that, as a citizen of the State, it
was his solemn duty to give his very best to the community.
This duty he strove successfully to carry out, and he was able
by his precept and example to impress upon others that they
were under similar obligations.
The object of this volume is as much to give to future
generations the wealth of knowledge which may be derived
from Mr. Johnston’s thoughts and labours, as to keep his
memory ever fresh in this country of his adoption, which he
loved so well, and to the future of which he looked with such
hopeful confidence.
N. E. LEWIS.
Hobart, 20th January, 1920.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PREFATORY CORRESPONDENCE
Premier’s Office, Hobart,
28th March, 1918
Dear Mr. Johnston,
The Government is fully aware of the great value of the
papers and pamphlets dealing with economic, social, and
scientific questions which you have from time to time, during
your long official career, prepared and published.
It is realised that some of these papers, such as those deal-
ing with Federal Finance and Proportional Representation,
were most helpful at the time they were prepared; but they
have served their purpose, and will be in the future of little
more than historic interest.
There are, however, many of your publications, especially
those dealing with economic questions, which will be held in
even higher esteem by future generations than by those now
living, and will prove of even greater assistance in the solu-
tion of the problems which still await settlement than they
have proved in the past.
The Government feels that these should be reproduced and
published in an easily accessible and permanent form. Then
there are original papers on scientific subjects which may be
entirely lost sight of and forgotten if left in their present
scattered form. I am therefore desirous that you should
make a collection of such of your writings as will be of interest
and service in the future.
If you can undertake to make a collection of your papers
and prepare them for republication, with such additions and
notes as you may deem desirable, the Government, on its
part, will be ready to have printed at the Government Print-
ing Office a book, say 200 to 250 pages, which will contain the
results of your best work and thought, and will serve as a


guide to those who in times to come may turn their thoughts
to the consideration of those questions to which you have
devoted so much time and study.
Yours sincerely,
W. H. LEE,
Premier.
R. M. Johnston, Esq., 1.5.0.,
Government Statistician,
Hobart.
9th April, 1918.
Deae Me. Lee,
With reference to your kind communication of 28th ultimo,
I find I am quite unable to express to you how much I feel
honoured and gratified by the appreciative way in which the
Government refer to my life’s work in connection with scien-
tific, social, and economic questions; and I accept with
gratitude the graceful proposal of the Government —to repro-
duce in a connected, accessible, and permanent form a selected
number of the papers, addresses, and pamphlets dealing with
root matters in scientific, social, and economic questions,
which I have from time to to time, during my long official
career (nearly 48 years), prepared and published in various
scientific journals.
As directed, I shall at once begin to make a collection of
the specially-selected publications—keeping as far as practic-
able within the limits prescribed —and shall, with the aid of
the Government Printer, Mr. Vail, prepare them for the per-
manent form of republication.
Such a publication of my work by the Government 1
esteem as a peculiarly rare honour, and shall regard it as the
crown of my life’s best work and thought; and I hope it may
be of special use in the near future in guiding others to
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


obtain a firmer grasp of the great economic and social prob-
lems of the day, the proper understanding of which can alone
prevent the imminent peril of disaster to the social organism
arising out of the more modern aspect of the great conflict
between the organised forces represented by Labour and
Capital.
Yours sincerely and gratefully,
R. M. JOHNSTON,
The Hon. W. H. Lee, Esq., M.H.A.,
Premier.
Statistical and Registration Department,
Hobart, 11th August, 1920.
The Hon. Sir Elliott Lewis, K.C.M.G.,
Treasurer, Hobart.
Sir,
In submitting for your approval the proof of the proposed
Memoriam Volume to the late R. M. Johnston, I desire to
place before you the following particulars regarding same.
Immediately upon receipt of the letter, under the hand of
the Hon. the Premier, informing Mr. Johnston that the
Government had decided to publish in book form a selected
number of his principal papers dealing with social, economic,
and geological subjects, Mr. Johnston asked me if I would
assist him generally in the collection and arrangement of
same. Unfortunately, before the selection of the subjects
to be decided upon could be completed, Mr. Johnston’s health
completely broke down. A few hours before his death he
expressed himself as being quite satisfied to leave the selec-
tion of the subjects to comprise the volume, together with the
PREFATORY CORRESPONDENCE


general arrangement of same, in my hands. This selection
and arrangement, together with the necessary indices to
same, I have done to the best of my ability, and I trust
that my selection of subjects will do justice to, and be a fair
example of, the able work which Mr. Johnston’s efforts have
from time to time produced. As you are aware, Sir, much
of Mr. Johnston’s best work was done in connection with
Federal Finance, but since Federation is now an assured
fact, I thought, perhaps, in making my choice of subjects
(as space was a consideration, and Mr. Johnston’s work
in the realms of Finance had served its purpose) it would
be wiser to confine the volume to a consolidation of sub-
jects that would always be of interest, more especially to
students of social and economic science and geological work.
To keep the volume within the allotted size, it has been
necessary in some instances to considerably curtail much of
th 3 added tabular matter contained in some of the papers,
but such curtailment will not to any extent affect the text
of the papers so dealt with.
I should also like to say that Mr. Johnston, on the day
immediately before his death expressed a hope that you, as
one of his oldest and best friends, would write an introductory
foreword for the volume. This you have done, and having
had the privilege of perusing the lines you have so kindly
written, I feel sure that our dear old friend would have
been much gratified could he have seen them.
I am,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. P. LAUGHTON,
Registrar-General.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
BIRTH AND EARLY DAYS
Robert Mackenzie johnston was bom in
1845 at one of the little fishing villages in the Black
Isle, on the shore of the Moray Firth. His father had a
small croft, and by prudence and thrift he managed to pur-
chase the humble cottage where he lived. As Robert’s
mother died when he was an infant, his eldest sister took
charge of him and taught him the rudiments of education
before he was sent to the village school. From a very early
period he had shown an aptness for study that somewhat
surprised the old dominie; but that worthy did all he could
to encourage that “ lad o’parts ” by lending him books which
opened up a new world to his wondering gaze. Biographies
which told of boys in his social position who rose to eminence
by sheer energy and resoluteness were among his favourite
studies.
While Johnston was at school the name of Hugh Miller,
the stonemason from the neighbouring town of Cromarty, was
in everyone’s mouth as that of one of the local heroes. Here
Johnston found an example he was eager to follow. With the
kindly aid of the old schoolmaster he procured some of the
most striking of Hugh Miller’s books —“ Scenes and Legends
of the North of Scotland,” “ The Old Red Sandstone,”
xt Footprints of the Creator,” and “ My Schools and School-
masters ” —and with these as his chief study he soon out-
stripped his companions. His life was largely spent out of
doors, and in direct contact with Nature he developed a love
for practical botany and geology which latterly proved of
great advantage to him. He was the leader in many a holi-
day excursion, directing his comrades to sylvan spots that
were unknown to them, for he knew the locality well by


experience, and had traced “ every bosky dell from side to-
side.” The undiscovered world of natural history lay before
him, but his solitary plodding study had put him in possession
of the golden key whereby he might unlock its mysteries.
' \ ‘ * ..
DAWNING AMBITION
On leaving school (which he did at an early age) Robert
Johnston was engaged for two years on a neighbouring farm
as herd-laddie and harvest hand. Here he had opportunities-
for prosecuting his reading such as no town-bred boy could
have expected, and of these he fully availed himself. As his-
mind expanded with his studies, ambition developed within
his breast. He felt that the sphere in which he was con-
fined was too limited for the development of his latent facul*
ties. The daily round of duty was conscientiously performed -
But the work was uncongenial; he was not fashioned so as to
become a mere village Hampden, or mute, inglorious Milton.
Outside of his narrow circle lay that great world of which
he had read, and which was calling to him with irresistible
voice, and pointing the way to fame and honour. The
“ divine unrest ” within his bosom became unbearable. He
had no wealthy friend to aid him by influence, no large-
minded comrade to give him wise counsel. Whatever course
he followed must be initiated by himself, and pursued with-
out fear of consequences. On several occasions he had visited
Inverness, and there had a foretaste in a minor degree of
what city life is; and he felt that it was in that direction that
he must go in search of fortune, like some hero in the
“ Arabian Nights’ Entertainment.” He made up his mind
to leave home and venture forth alone into the world.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


OUT IN THE WORLD
To one companion only did lie confide his project, and on
an afternoon in the autumn of 1859 he set out “ with his
bundle on his shoulder,” a few carefully hoarded shillings in
his pocket, and a “ grievous crabtree cudgel ” in his hand,
taking the way towards Inverness, about 12 miles distant.
He parted with his comrade at one of the outlying cottages,
giving him a letter to be delivered late that night to his
sister, when Johnston would be beyond the reach of pursuit.
At Inverness he took passage on board the “ Martello ” for
Granton, going literally to an unknown land and among
“ unkent folk,” a veritable child of circumstances.
Arrived at Granton Pier, Johnston walked to Edinburgh,
and there, by good fortune, when seeking lodgings for the
night, he dropped accidentally into the centre of a kindly
family from Kintail, and was generously treated by the
couple, who could not be other than attracted towards the
brave lad from the North, with his quaint mixture of book
wisdom and unworldly simplicity. The husband managed to
obtain employment for the youth, though not of a very ele-
vated kind; but Johnston had already learned the Carlylean
theory of the dignity of labour, and he set himself to do the
work which lay nearest to his hand. His days were spent in
arduous manual labour, but he had his evenings to devote
to the cultivation of his mind. There is a fascination
about the acquirement of knowledge under difficulties which
makes it an incurable mental disease. When once a youth
falls under the spell of Wisdom only a complete revolution in
his nature will enable him to throw it off. And thus it was
with Robert Johnston. His reading was desultory, but it
was widely diversified; and he devoured alike poetry and
scientific books, and fiction and philosophy.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES.


FROM EDINBURGH TO GLASGOW
The Scottish metropolis was not destined to retain Robert
Johnston for long in the humble position which he first occu-
pied. Shortly after his arrival he noticed an advertisement
for workers at a new line of railway not far from his birth-
place. He applied for leave “to toil,” and soon set out on
his return journey to the north of Scotland. In his new
sphere of labour he found ample opportunities for studying
geology, just as Hugh Miller did when working as a stone-
mason; and that literature is not incompatible with the work
of railway-making has been amply proved by the poetry of
Alexander Anderson (“ Anderson, Surfaceman ”).
Johnston’s ability attracted the notice of some of the rail-
way people, and he was placed in the position of a ticket-clerk
at Greenhill Station. Here he remained for some time, until
it was seen that he was capable of higher work, and he was
engaged as a clerk in the head office of the Goods Department,
of the North British Railway Company, at Dundas-street,
Glasgow. It was while Johnston was in this position, about
1862, that he attended evening classes in the Andersonian
University, his subjects being botany, geology, and chemistry,
in all of which he made good progress. In the midst of his
studies he found leisure to devote to music, and was a mem-
ber of some of the Glasgow choral societies.
REMOVAL TO THE ANTIPODES
The wandering spirit came upon Robert Johnston in 1870,
and he laid his plans for an expedition to the Australian
Colonies. To the most cogent argument against his voluntary
exile he would reply with a smile or a cheery rippling laugh.
He was determined to try his fortune, despite the jeremiads
of his companions, who were unwilling to see him depart. In
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


the autumn of 1870 he sold off his books and all superfluous
belongings, and set out for Victoria. He wandered around
Melbourne for some time without any very settled occupa-
tion. At length his Scottish railway experiences stood him
in good stead.
LIFE IN TASMANIA
The Launceston and Western Railway Company, which had
recently started in Tasmania, was under Government con-
trol, and it was deemed advisable that a proper system of
auditing should be initiated. By a fortunate circumstance
for all concerned, Mr. Johnston’s capacity for this work
became known to the Commissioners. He was appointed to
the charge of the accountant’s department, and was soon
afterwards placed in the position of chief clerk in the Auditor-
General’s office. The Government of the Colony decided in
1881 to form a Statistical Department, and Mr. Johnston
was appointed Government Statistician and Registrar-General
for Tasmania; and he had the task of organising this new
branch, and has issued many reports of great value to the
Colony. This labour, great as it was, did not absorb all Mr.
Johnston’s energy. In many other ways, outside his depart-
mental duties, he also served the community. He was an
authority on fisheries. In 1882 he was appointed a Royal
Commissioner to enquire into and report on the fisheries of
Tasmania, and in the same year was appointed a Salmon
Fisheries Commissioner. In 1887 he became a member
of the Fisheries Board, and he was also a member
of the Technical Education Board from 1880 to 1890,
and Chairman of the Boundaries Board of Advice
in 1890. He was keenly interested in various branches
of science, and from the time of his arrival in Tas-
mania he always took an active part in the exploration
and development of its natural history and geological and
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES


mineral resources. In 1888 the Government published his
large and comprehensive work, “ A Systematic Account of
the Geology of Tasmania,” which met with a eulogistic recep-
tion from scientists generally. He was the author of a large
number of other works on scientific, social, and econ'omic sub-
jects, which also gained him much credit among his scientific
confreres- He was selected President of Section F, “ Eco-
nomic and Social Science and Statistics,'’ at the meeting of
the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science
held in Melbourne in 1890; and was also an Honorary Fel-
low of the Royal Statistical Society of London, a member of
the Council, and Vice-President of the Royal Society of Tas-
mania, a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society of Austral-
asia, a Fellow of the Linnsean Society of London, and several
kindred societies, and a member of the Council of the Uni-
versity of Tasmania. In 1903 Mr. Johnston’s long and faith-
ful service to the State was recognised by King Edward, who
conferred upon him the Imperial Service Order. A few years
ago he was closely associated with musical circles, more especi-
ally in connection with church choirs, and was a member for
some time of both St. George’s and St. John’s choirs, and
also an examiner in the Sol-Fa examinations. Many other
activities claimed his interest, included among which were
various branches of sport.
For some time prior to his death Mr. Johnston’s health
gradually failed. Almost to the last he was able to give a
portion of his time to the supervision of the important duties
of Government Statistician and Registrar-General for Tas-
mania, which offices he held up to the time of his demise.
The news of his death, which occurred on the 20th April,
1918, at the age of 73 years, although not altogether unex-
pected, was received with the greatest regret by a large circle
of friends- His remains lie in the Queenborough Cemetery,
where many of his oldest personal friends were also buried.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Of the personality of Mr. Johnston much might be written.
Unassuming, kindly, and genial, he endeared himself to
everyone with whom he came in contact, from the highest in
the land to the humblest, and they will all, we are sure,
cherish the most fragrant memories of his lovable disposition
and his bigheartedness. Perhaps the most notable of many
public tributes to Mr. Johnston in this connection during his
lifetime was that paid by the late Sir John Dodds, K.C.M.G.,
then the Acting-Governor of Tasmania, at a meeting of the
Royal Society on 14th April, 1904, when, on congratulating
Mr. Johnston on the honour of the Imperial Service Order
bestowed upon him by the King, he said: “ Mr. Johnston’s
personal qualities are widely known and appreciated, but I
should like to say that the actions of his life appear to me to
be governed by those principles of justice and kindness
towards others which God has established as the only true
guide of human conduct.”
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES


PART I.*
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA
Review of the Evidences of Former Glaciation in Australasia, with
Critical Observations upon the Principal Causal Hypotheses which
have been advanced to Account for Glacial Epochs Generally.
(Read before meeting of Royal Society of Tasmania, 13th June, 1893.)
INTRODUCTORY.
HP HE study of the geology of the globe we live in presents
J- many fascinating subjects. In its Cosmical aspect we
may confine ourselves to speculations as to its mode of origin,
from nebular matter to the final stages which culminated in
its specific differentiation as a subordinate among many other
members of the Solar system; in its Geognosy we may revel
in the nature and complexity of the combinations of elements
which constitute its varied rocky materials; in its Geotectonic
or Structural aspect we may enter upon questions relating to
the nature of and the manner in - which the architecture of
the earth’s crust has been developed, modified, or trans-
formed ; in its Dynamical aspects we may inquire into the
complex causal forces which are, or have been engaged in pro-
ducing disturbances, movements, and changes in its physical
structure; in its Stratigraphical aspect we may devote our
attention in tracing the chronological sequence and relation-
ship of the various formations which comprise its visible crust
or shell; in its Physio graphical aspect we may dwell upon its
surface feature of mountain, valley, plain, plateau, lake,
canon, river-bed, or ocean abyss, and try to understand the
causes which have operated in producing its sculptured form;
and finally in its Palaeontological aspect we may trace the his-
tory of the organic life forms whose remains are found pre-
*Relating to Geology and Palaeontology.


served in the rocks, their succession or evolution, and their
relationship to the corresponding succession of rocks. The
geological field is thus wide and varied, and we may become
so absorbed in the investigation of any one division of the
several aspects referred to as to forget the claims and import-
ance of the others. It is well, therefore, from time to time,
that we should have our attention aroused to the claims and
interests of branches of geological study outside of that in
which each of us, respectively, may happen to be too deeply
immersed. We therefore cannot realise the benefits of such
papers as that of Messrs. T. B. Moore and A. Montgomery.
M.A., which arouse us from our own favourite grooves and
recall our attention, for a time at least, to that large and
important phase of Dynamical Geology known as Glacial
Action. This phase also at once inevitably leads on to con-
siderations as to its cause or Cosmical aspect; to its effects
as in its Strati graphical and Physiographical aspects; and to
the period of its manifestation as in its Chronological aspect.
Before we enter upon the question of evidence as to the
occurrence of a former climate in Australasia sufficiently
intense to be designated “ A Glacial Epoch,” we must briefly
consider the character of the evidence by which- we infer its
actual occurrence. It is obvious that we cannot directly
approach the subject of the earth’s temperature at a former
period; for the original cooled air and the frozen water cannot
be conceived to be stored up and preserved for observation,
as in the case of ancient forms of life preserved in the rocks.
But while directly we can gain no information as to tempera-
ture, we have abundant evidence preserved of the effects,
which, according to our present knowledge, can only have
been produced by an intensely low temperature acting upon
watery vapours while subjected to the universal law of
gravitation. It is, therefore, clear that it is in the preserved
dynamic effects of moving masses of snow or ice, and, nega-
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


tively, in the poverty or total absence of life forms that we
have the best, if not the only, means of inferring the severity
of the climate of a former period.
Evidence of Ice Action Derived Mainly from the Study of
Glaciation in the Northern Hemisphere.
We have at present in the Alpine regions of Europe, Asia,
America, and New Zealand, ample means for determining for
various latitudes and for varying levels the peculiar or char-
acteristic effects produced by a long-continued low tempera-
ture upon water vapours and upon forms of organic life long
exposed to it, and we have also obtained, by the careful
researches of many skilled observers, very clear knowledge
of the dynamic action upon rocks of the frozen snow and
ice in gravitating from the higher to lower levels; of its
transporting and abrading power over higher and lower land
surfaces, as in boulder-till deposits in roches-moutonnees, and
scooped lakes; and of its peculiar mode of discharging its
load of foreign matter as it melts, as in the terminal and
lateral moraines, and perched blocks, at the foot or in slopes
of mountain valleys, or in the erratics dropped in the soft bed
of lakes, estuaries, or seas, from the melting or overturning
of ice sheets or icebergs.
The character of these evidences is in no way affected
considerations as to the primary cause of the lowered tem-
perature, which will be discussed hereafter on its own merits.
The evidences, therefore, upon which we must rely, mainly,
as proof for inferring the occurrence of a glacial epoch in
Australia and Tasmania, may be summarised as follows:
Evidences of Former Glacial Action.
1. Terminal Moraines.
The existence at or near the mouth of the fan-shaped open-
ings of narrow mountain valleys, of mounds, sometimes of
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


great extent, of loose tumbled materials, forming hetero-
geneous masses of rock boulders, shingle, gravel, and other
detritus, showing no signs of arrangement in layers or bedding
as in detrital distributed by water. The harder rocks are
often polished and worn on one side, and frequently exhibit,
more or less distinctly, fine lines, scratches, or grooves, which
usually run along the surface parallel to the greater axis.
Some of the blocks may be many tons in weight. These
moraines are evidence of the detritus left at the melting
extremity of a glacier, or mark the line of its final retreat.
2. Lateral Moraines and Perched Blocks.
Similar materials found fringing the sides of the higher
slopes of a mountain valley, especially large masses of rock
(perched blocks), differing in character from the rock slopes
or crown above them, may indicate the retreat of a diminish-
ing glacier; but as the greater part of these accumulations
often falling eventually to a lower level by gravitation, it would
be difficult to distinguish these from accumulations gravitat-
ing from higher slopes in the ordinary way. Large foreign
erratics, and polished and striated stones, alone can be
depended upon where such intermixture is possible, as at the
foot of all steep mountain slopes.
3. Roches-Moutonnees, and Ice-scooped Lake Basins or Tarns.
In certain parts of valleys in which the detritus of glaciers
occur, the river of ice of great weight, and shod with hard-
ened rocky materials, exerts immense pressure and wears down,
polishes, and rounds off the surfaces and edges of such por-
tions of the rocky bed which offer any obstruction to its down-
ward progress. Geikie happily describes the more con-
spicuous of these rounded polished bosses, exposed after the
retirement of a glacier, as “ hummocky bosses of rock having
smooth, undulating forms like dolphins’ backs,” which have
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


received the name of roches-moutonnees. One of the finest
examples of roches-moutonnees in Tasmania observed by the
writer in the year 1887 exists on the northern side of Lake
Dixon, in the centre of the narrow valley leading down from
the ice-scooped lake, tarn, or basin of Lake Undine, lying at
the upper end of this elevated valley (2300 feet above sea-
level). Lake Dixon itself, and several tarns with islets near
to it, have all the appearance of ice-scooped basins.
4. Striated and Polished Sides of Precipitous Rocks along the
Course of a Glacial Stream and Striated Blocks and
■Stones of Moraines.
The stones carried on the surface of a glacier often fall
through crevices to its lower surface, or are jammed in
between the mural edge of the moving ice and the precipitous
sides of rock along its course, and thus act and are acted
upon, producing polished, scratched, and grooved surfaces.
The fixed rock-surface markings of striae, lines, and grooves
record the prevailing direction of the ice stream, while the
striated boulders and rocks of the moraines afford guidance
as to the ultimate source from which they have been derived.
5. Erratics, Boulders, and Foreign Rock Debris , Dropped in
Lake or Sea Bottoms from Floating Ice.
Foreign rocks, both angular and waterworn, may be drifted
for long distances upon lakes, estuaries, and seas by three dis-
tinct agencies.
The roots of fallen trees of great size may be drifted to
great distances by rivers’ and estuaries’ currents, and may
transport, bound up in the ramifying branches of roots, large
quantities of clay and stones, which are eventually dropped
and scattered as foreign bodies among the ordinary sediments
and organisms of estuaries or seas.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


The clasping roots of giant forms of kelp and other marine
seaweed may, when storm-tossed, drag and transport for a
distance the stones upon which they originally grew. These
stones are generally polished and waterworn, are of moderate
size, and show no sign of striae.
The only known agents, however, which are capable of float-
ing and transporting to great distances rocks and boulders
of great mass and weight are floating masses of tee. Glaciers
which descend into the sea break off in huge masses, as ice-
bergs or ice sheets, and carry their burden of moraine stuff,
which often include masses of rock of enormous weight, until
the mass of ice melts or is overturned, when the rocks are
discharged and fall to the quiet sea bottom as erratics. •
Shore ice of Arctic regions when breaking up may, in a
similar way, transport and discharge erratic boulders over the
sea bottom.
Principal Evidence of Intense Glacial Action.
In regions, or at periods when the climate was refrigerated
sufficiently to cause permanent snowfields on the tops of the
higher plateaux of mountains, and merely caused glaciers to
form in the sub-alpine valleys, which melted before reaching
the lowlands, the evidences of ice action are confined to those
indicative of milder glacial effects, viz., lateral and terminal
moraines in the higher valleys, perched blocks, roches-
moutonnees, scooped lake basins, striated, polished, and
grooved rocks and boulders, lines of striation of fixed rocks
running in harmony with the direction of the particular val-
leys in which such marks occur. But when refrigeration of
climate becomes as intense as in the Pleistocene glacial epoch
of Northern Europe and America, which covered all the sur-
face of the land, save the highest peaks of mountains in these
regions; when glacial ice sheets —no longer mere ice rivers
confined within mountain valleys—spread, as in polar lands,
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


in devastating “ seas of ice ” across the whole land and inter-
vening lakes and seas, the action of the travelling sea of ice
produces effects of quite a distinctive character from the
limited drums and longitudinal heaps of moraine stuff of
mere upland ice river*.
The detrital matter of wide-spreading ice sheets, in moving
slowly over the irregular surface of the lowlands of a country,
is best described by reference to the character of what is now
known to be partly the produce and partly the form of redis-
tribution of superficial materials, as seen in the so-called till
or boulder clay of Scotland.
The character and derivation of the “ till ” formed by the
intense glacial action of the great land ice sheet in Scotland
is graphically described by Wallace in his " Island Life ”
(pp. 109-112), whose views are in accordance with those so
ably advocated by Professor Jas. Geikie in his well-known
work, “ The Great Ice Age.”
The Glacial “ Till ” of Scotland. — Dr. Wallace writes:
“ Over almost all the lowlands, and in most of the highland
valleys of Scotland, there are immense superficial deposits of
clay, sand, gravel, or drift, which can be traced more or less
directly to glacial action. Some of these are moraine matter,
others are lacustrine deposits, while others again have been
formed or modified by the sea during periods of submergence.
But below them all, and often resting directly on the rock
surface, there are extensive layers of a very tough, clayey
deposit known as the ‘ till.’ The till is very fine in texture,
very tenacious, and often of a rock-like hardness. It is always
full of stones, all of which are of crude form, but with the
angles rubbed off, and almost always covered with scratches
and striae, often crossing each other in various directions.
Sometimes the stones are so numerous that there seems to be
only just enough clay to unite them into a solid mass; and
they are of all sizes, from mere grit up to rocks many feet in
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


diameter. The ‘ till ’ is found chiefly in the low-lying dis-
tricts, where it covers extensive areas sometimes to a depth
of a hundred feet, while in the highlands it occurs in much
smaller patches, but in some of the broader valleys forms
terraces which have been cut through by the streams. Occa-
sionally it is found as high as 2000 feet above the sea, in
hollows or hillsides, where it seems to have been protected
from denudation.” The “till ” is totally unstratified, and
the rock surfaces upon which it almost always rests are invari-
ably worn smooth, and much grooved and striated when the
rock is hard, but when it is soft or jointed it frequently shows
a greatly broken surface. Its colour and texture, and the
nature of the stones it contains, all correspond to the char-
acter of the rock of the district where it occurs, so that it is
clearly a local formation. It is often found underneath
moraines, drift, and other late glacial deposits, but never
overlies them (except in special cases to be hereafter referred
to), so that it is certainly an earlier deposit. Throughout
Scotland where “ till ” is found the glacial strife-perched
blocks, roches moutonnees, and other marks of glacial action
occur very high up the mountains, to at least 3000, and often
3500, feet above the sea; while all lower hills and mountains
are rounded and grooved on their very summits, and these
grooves always radiate outwards from the highest peaks and
ridges towards the valleys or the sea.
“ Inferences from the Glacial Phenomena of Scotland. —-
Now all these phenomena taken together render it certain
that the whole of Scotland was once buried in a large sea of
ice, out of which only the highest mountains raised their
summits.” “ The weight of this vast ice sheet, at least 3000
feet in maximum thickness, and continually moving seaward
with a slow grinding motion like that of existing glaciers,
must have ground the whole surface of the country, especi-
ally all the prominences, leaving the rounded rocks, as well
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


as the striae we still see marking the direction of its motion. . .
The present glaciers of the Alps being confined to valleys,
which carry off a large quantity of drainage water, lose this
mud ( sticky , tenacious clay) perhaps as rapidly as it is formed;
but when the ice covered the whole country there was com-
paratively little drainage water, and thus the mud and stones
collected in vast compact masses in all the hollows, and
especially in the lower flat valleys, so that when the ice
retreated the whole country was more or less covered with it.
It was then, no doubt, rapidly denuded by rains and rivers,
but, as we have seen, vast quantities remain to the present day
to tell the tale of its wonderful formation. There is good evi-
dence that when the ice was at its maximum it extended not
only over the land but far out to sea, covering all the Scottish
islands, and stretching in one connected sheet to Ireland and
Wales, where all the evidences of glaciation are as well
marked as in Scotland, though the ice did not, of course,
attain quite so great a thickness. That the ice sheet was con-
tinuous from Scotland to Ireland is proved by the glacial
phenomena in the Isle of Man, where ‘ till ’ similar to that
of Scotland abounds, and rocks are found in it which must
have come from Cumberland and Scotland, as well as from
the north of Ireland. This would show that glaciers from
each of these districts reached the Isle of Man, where they
met and flowed southwards down the Irish Sea. Ice marks
are traced over the tops of mountains which are nearly 2000
feet high.” Dr. Wallace concludes with the statement that
It is evident that the change of climate requisite to produce
such marvellous effects in the British Isles could not have
been local, and we accordingly find strikingly similar proof
that Scandinavia and all Northern Europe have also been
covered with a huge ice sheet. In North America the marks
of glaciation are even more striking than in Europe, stretch-
ing over the whole of Canada, and to the south of the Great
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Lakes as far as latitude 39°. There is in all these countries
a widespread deposit, like the “ till ” of Scotland, produced
by the grinding of the great ice sheet when it was at its maxi-
mum thickness; and also extensive beds of moraine matter,
true moraines, and travelled blocks left by glaciers as they
retreated towards the mountains, and finally withdrew into
the upland valleys.” After combating objections, he con-
cludes thus: —“ There is perhaps no great conclusion in any
science which rests upon a surer foundation than this; and
if we are guided by our reason at all in deducing the unknown
from the known, the past from the present, we cannot refuse
to assent to the reality of the glacial epoch of the Northern
Hemisphere in all its more important features.”
Evidences of Former Glaciation in the Southern Hemisphere
(Australia, New Zealand, and Tasmania) Subsequent to
the Deposition of Rocks of Miocene Age.
New Zealand. —One of the most accomplished geological
observers, Prof. T. D. Hutton, in commenting “ On the Sup-
posed Glacial Epoch in Australia ” (Proc. Roy. Soc. of N.S.
Wales, pp. 338, 339, 1885), states that “ In New Zealand
there are, as is well known, ice marks dating from the pre-
sent day to some period when the glaciers were at their great-
est extent, and for many years New Zealand geologists have
been accustomed to call this latter time the glacier epoch of
New Zealand, in order to distinguish it from a glacial epoch,
which term implies a considerable reduction of temperature.”
The term glacier he considers does not imply any hypothesis
as to the cause. He affirms also that all New Zealand geolo-
gists are of opinion that the glacier epoch there was long
anterior to the glacial epoch of Europe and North America.
In combating erroneous views of Dr. von Lendenfeld as to
the date of the former glacier epoch, he states that “ The
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


islands in the Sounds are not moutonnees, and although some
of the smaller ones are rounded, they show no signs of lee and
strike sides. The precipices on either side of the Sounds are
also in general quite rough, and I noticed only two localities
(both previously observed by Dr. Hector) where there was
any appearance of polishing; one was in Milford Sound on
the south side of the entrance to the “ Narrows,” the other
near Deas Cove, in Thompson Sound. I saw neither grooves
nor strise; but Dr. Hector noticed them in Thompson Sound,
and in the Cleddan Valley.” He, however, continues:
All this is very different from any glaciated district in Scot-
land, Wales, or Ireland, where nearly every rock tells the
same tale, and, judging from published accounts, it is very
different from the fiords of Norway, the rocks of which are
much the same as those of the West Coast Sounds of New
Zealand: Yet that these Sounds have at one time been occu-
pied by ice is proved by the huge granite boulders lying on
the sandstones and mudstones at Kisbee Bay in Preservation
Inlet. ’ ’ He refers these evidences of glaciation and great
glacier epoch as belonging to a very ancient date, long
anterior to the glacial epoch of Europe and North America,
There is apparently nowhere in New Zealand any evidence
of such intense glaciation as that which spread over the lower
levels of Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, as we have no men-
tion of anything corresponding to the “ till ” of the great
northern ice sheet. The absence of such evidence in a region
whose mountains rise to a height of over 12,000 feet,* and
whose southern borders extend to 47° 10' south latitude, is
full of significance when we come to consider the various
theories advanced to account for the occurrence of the great
glacial epoch in the Northern Hemisphere, and especially so
when we come to examine the proofs of a true glacial epoch
in the more northerly limits of the Australian mainland.
* Mount Cook, 12,349 feet.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Australia. —In the Australian mainland there are no high
mountains as in New Zealand. The highest peak in the east-
ern cordillera occurs in the southern and eastern Australian
Alps in about 37°, corresponding to the position of Mt. Etna
in north latitude —Mt. Kosciusko and Mt. Townsend, the two
highest peaks, attain here an elevation of 7171 and 7256 feet
respectively. The whole of the mainland lies within 11° and
39° south latitude, broadly corresponding to the position of
Northern Africa or Syria and Arabia in northern latitudes.
As, moreover, the greater portion of Australia is low-lying,
it can be no more expected that we should find any traces of
intense glacial action within its borders in past times, than
that we should look for evidences of the extension of the great
ice sheet of Northern Europe in the lowlands of the lower
northern latitudes of Syria and Arabia.
Apparent Absence of Glacial Deposits Corresponding to the
il Till ”of Scotland. — Setting aside for the present the origin
of certain erratic boulders and other marks of glaciation
which are found in beds of conglomerate in New South Wales,
Victoria, and Tasmania, in rocks corresponding to the close of
the Permo-Carboniferous age, and which undoubtedly appear
to have been transported to their present position by means
of floating ice—no satisfactory evidence of glacial action has
yet been discovered in Australia corresponding to the till,
boulder clay, moraine-profonde or grund-moraine of the great
ice age of Northern Europe and North America. Indeed, it
would be a matter of the greatest surprise, even to the most
ardent disciples of ice-cap extension, in Europe and America,
if such evidences should appear; for neither the advocates of
the effects upon climate of the extremes of eccentricity of the
earth’s orbit combined with the precession of the equinoxes,
the advocates of changes in the distribution of land and
water, nor the advocates of a combination of astronomical
and geographical causes, have ever attempted to show that
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


influences could possibly induce such an extreme lowering of
temperature as would cause the northern polar ice cap to
creep and extend beyond the north latitude of 39°, which
point corresponds in south latitude nearly with the most south-
erly limits of the low-lying Australian Continent. . In West-
ern Europe, during the great ice age, there is no evidence of
the great ice sheet extending further south than 51° north
latitude. When we consider that the most southerly point
of Australia corresponds with Lisbon in north latitude, or 12°
to the south of Ireland, we may more readily comprehend
the improbability of an extension of the southern polar cap
to any part of the Australian Continent under similar condi-
tions to those of the European ice age.’
Evidences of Comparatively Recent Glaciation on the Aus-
tralian Mainland , as Recorded by Various Observers. —Sub-
sequent to the earlier observations of Selwyn, Daintree, and'
others in respect of ancient glacial phenomena in rocks of
Permo-Carboniferous age, it would appear that Professor
Tate, in the year 1877, was the next observer who drew par-
ticular attention to the existence of glacial phenomena on the
mainland of Australia of a comparatively recent date. In a
paper of a later date, read before the Australasian Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science (Proc. 1887, pp. 231,
232), entitled “ Glacial Phenomena in South Australia,”'
he again describes the nature of the evidence upon which he
bases his conclusion as to their glacial origin. He describes
the glaciated surface as well developed on the coast cliffs at
Hallet’s Cove, south of Holdfast Bay, in St. Vincent Gulf,
That is, therefore, in 35° south lat. ; and, as the surface plane
of the track inferred to have been polished by the ice is now
only 40 feet above the level of the adjacent sea, it is more than
probable that the track was marked prior to the final stage
of the known upheaval of the floor of the old Tertiary sea,
whose remains in the vicinity, and as cliffs along the Great
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Australian Bight, form the most characteristic feature of the
South Australian coast-line. Professor TaTe states that “ The
path of the glacier (?) is traceable for a distance of 2 miles
along the top of the scarped cliffs, at about 40 feet above the
sea-level; on the north it is cut off from the cliff by encroach-
ment of the sea, from this point the glaciated surface is con-
tinuous in a southerly direction for a distance of 1 mile to
Black Point, the north headland of Hallet’s Cove. On the
line of the glacier there now intervenes the long but narrow
bay of Hallet’s Cove, but on the south headland the track is
picked up on about the same trend, though apparently at a
little higher level. Here again the glacier (?) path is soon
cut out by removal of the cliff. On the north side of the
cove the glaciated surface is beautifully displayed; the edges
of nearly vertical strata are sheared off, and when of quartz-
ite the surface shows a high polish, and when of mudstones,
conspicuously grooved and striae. Some moraine debris, includ-
ing stones that have been beneath the glacier,( ?) occur here.
On the south side moraine matter is very abundant, and
includes many boulders, some occurring as blocks 'perches.
“ The common rocks of the moraine debris are granites,
gneiss, hornblende schists, and others, which do not occur in
situations nearer than the Gorge at Normanville, about 46
miles to the south. In all, 17 distinct varieties of rock,
chiefly metamorphic and foreign to the immediate neighbour-
hood, have been collected along the path of the glacier. The
proximity of the Miocene escarpments suggests the possibility
of the Pre-Miocene (Post-Miocene?) age of the glacier. . .
It is highly probable that the glacier cut its way through
the incoherent Miocene formation, and that some of the Mio-
cene shingle furnished some portion of the moraine debris."
Professor Tate selects particular examples of the debris for
illustrating their glacial character, viz., slab of quartzite hav-
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


ing a highly polished surface and faintly striated; chip of mud-
stone having a smooth surface, strongly striated and grooved;
ice-worn pebble polished and striated on its upper and lower
faces, found partly embedded in soil resting on glaciated
surface. Professor Tate also draws attention to some for-
gotten early observations of Mr. Selwyn in relation to glacial
phenomena in South Australia, discovered by him further
south in the bed of the Inman, Cape Jarvis Peninsula, con-
sisting of smooth striated and grooved rock surfaces, of which
Mr. Selwyn wrote: —“The direction of the grooves and
scratches is east and west in parallel lines, and though they
follow the course of the stream I do not think that they
could have been produced by the action of water forcing
pebbles and boulders detached from the drift along the
stream.” The rounded surfaces of mica slate on the south
flank of Kaiserstuhl and Crafer’s on the Adelaide chain
referred to by Professor Tate are less satisfactory, and are
only suggestive, and their value as collateral supports depends
entirely upon the character and derivation of the ice which
caused the phenomena near the present sea-level at Black
Point, Holdfast Bay. Professor Tate’s own conclusions as
to the cause of these undoubted glacial phenomena are three-
fold, viz., either —
(1) The prevalence of a very much colder climate.
(2) That the land stood at a much greater altitude (say
10,000 feet), or the mountains (presumably the
Adelaide chain, whose few high peaks at present
do not much exceed 2000 feet, R.M.J.) may have
had a more plateau-like form, and therefore need
not have been so high, and consequently collected
more snow.
(3) A combination of both of the preceding conditions
(1 and 2).
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


There is another condition, however, which Dr. von
Lendenfeld* and others favoured, which also embraces Pro-
fessor Tate’s first condition—much colder climate—as a con-
tributing cause, viz., the grinding action of partly stranded
sheets of the Antarctic drift ice, whose extreme northerly
limits, even in the present mild epoch, ascend almost into the
same degree of south latitude in the vicinity of the Cape
of Good Hope. But Professor Hutton points out that the
existence of granite in the south polar region has not yet
been discovered. All the land at present known is volcanic.
It is suggested, however, that Tasmania and New Zealand
could furnish such materials, but it is improbable that the
well-known glaciers of the western highlands of Tasmania
descended to sea-level.
It is almost certain, however, that at the last great period
of eccentiicity of the earth s orbit with winter in aphelion,
the limit of Antarctic drift ice would touch the southern
extremity of the Australian mainland when Tasmania would
stand well within it. It is not improbable, therefore, that
in the extreme of winter portions of the drift ice might for a
time be stranded on the precipitous shores of Tasmania and
New Zealand, or ev<jn on the south-western shores of Western
Australia, long enough to receive from overhanging cliff or
pebbly beach debris which, on breaking away in the extremely
hot and short summer, might find its way northward, to be
again partly stranded on projecting points of the Australian
mainland in St. Vincent Gulf, and there to leave in its trail
the channelled traces of its course and part of its debris
picked up on the coasts further south. To my mind this is
the only reasonable interpretation which would sufficiently
account for all the verified data, so clearly brought forward
to our notice by my distinguished friend, Professor Tate.
* Proc. Linu. Soc., N.S.W., 1886.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


The curved form of the encroachment of the sea in the
Great Australian Bight also favours the idea that the well-
known Antarctic drift current might have operated more
powerfully in the last glacial epoch in contributing to the
waste action which has determined its present deep bay-like
indentation.
It is evident that Professor Tate, who invariably uses the word
“ glacier,” inclines to the view that the debris on the shore
of Black Point has been carried down by an inland glacier
descending from local mountain tablelands —now only reach-
ing a height of about 2300 feet —which he assumes, without
satisfactory evidence, to have stood 10,000 feet higher since
the close of the Miocene period, and he further objects to the
floating ice theory, because he thinks it involves the necessity
of assuming the submergence of southern parts of the South
Australian province by as much as 1000 feet, and of this
submergence he rightly adds, “ That the known facts do
not warrant such assumption.” But is there any necessity
that the advocates of the hypothesis of “ floating ice ” as
the agent of abrasion and transport should assume any depres-
sion whatever ? On the contrary, it seems to me that an
elevation of, say, 70 to 100 feet of the old sea-bed at the
time of glaciation would answer all the conditions which the
phenomena of glaciation and present elevation (40 feet above
present sea-level) demands; and this would allow a depth of
from 5 to 10 fathoms of sea over the channel along whose
course the glacial phenomena have been traced. It would,
in the latitude of St. Vincent Gulf (35° S. latitude), require
an elevation of the whole land to a height of 12,000 to 14,000
feet, with a subsequent final depression of about from 11,600
to 13,600 feet to account reasonably for the present level of
the glacial phenomena at Black Point, and for the present
altitude of the higher members of the old Tertiary marine
beds; and this double assumption is of a far more serious
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


character, and is far less warranted by known facts, than the
submergence of 1000 feet, for which, also, there is not the
slightest necessity for assuming, unless it be also insisted upon
that the very doubtful appearances of glaciated surface on
the heights of the Adelaide range are also to be explained as
having been caused by the same agency which produced the
glacial phenomena. Notwithstanding my very high appre-
ciation of the judgment of Professor Tate, better evidence
than has yet been produced will be required before such a
conclusion can be satisfactorily established.
Until such evidence is produced, I shall be inclined to
favour the hypothesis of “ partly stranded polar drift ice,”
carrying debris in summer from neighbouring southern shores,
not necessarily polar, where the ice drift may have been
stranded for some time during the long severe winter. The
period when such action took place is likely to have been at
a time when the eccentricity of the earth’s orbit combined
with winter in aphelion attained its greatest limit subsequent
to the deposition of the rocks of Miocene age. According to
Dr. Croll’s published tables showing the varying amounts of
eccentricity for three million years back, it would appear that
the periods of high eccentricity have been exceedingly numer-
ous in that time, and one or two of them far higher than that
which is supposed to have been the principal cause of the
great glacial epoch of Europe and North America in the
Pleistocene period.
Now most of the Australian geologists incline to believe
that the period of greatest glacial action in Australasia
occurred long anterior to that known as the glacial period of
Europe. And it is not without significance as bearing upon
this question, and also upon the disputed question as to
whether the extreme effects of glaciation could, at any time,
have been produced by astronomical causes alone («.<?., with-
out the concurrence of favouring geographical causes), to find
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


that the highest eccentricity occurred, according to Croll,
850,000 years ago, at which time the difference between the
sun’s distance at aphelion and perihelion was millions of
miles, whereas during the last glacial period of Europe and
North America in the Northern Hemisphere, the maximum
difference was 10| millions of miles only —that is 3 millions
of miles, or 22'22 per cent. less. As from the nature of the
distribution of land and water in the Southern Hemisphere,
it is probable that geographical causes would not play so
important a part in barring the introduction of warm equa-
torial currents from the hemisphere specially affected; it is
also probable that the alteration in climate in the Southern
Hemisphere would be almost purely the result of astronomical
causes alone. If we admit this, we should seek for the cause
of the milder glacier period of Australasia since the Cretaceous
age, at that point of time when the eccentricity of the earth’s
orbit was at its highest, and that was about 850,000 years
ago, or fully 550,000 years anterior to the time of the great
glacial epoch of Europe in the Pleistocene age. This happily
corresponds very closely with estimates as to the period which
closes the Miocene age, at which time there is evidence that
the glacier period of Australasia began to mark its effects on
our jocks and upon the organic life associated with them.
Evidence of Glacial Action in the Elevated Valleys of the
Australian Alps.—-In the year 1885 Dr. von Lendenfeld
(Proc. Lin. Soc. of New South Wales, pp. 44-53), in a paper
entitled “ The Glacial Period in Australia,” gives an
account of glacial phenomena discovered by him in the ascent
of Mt. Kosciusko, the highest elevation of the Australian Alps
(7200 feet), situated in about south lat. 36° 40' long. 148°
east, near; the south-eastern border of New South Wales. On
the southern slope it is drained by the head waters of the
Snowy River, while its northern slope is drained by the head
waters of the River Murray. The marks of glaciation dis-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


covered by Dr. Lendenfeld occur principally in the Wilkinson
Valley, at elevations nowhere below 5800 feet above sea-level.
These consist entirely of smoothed and rounded surfaces,
whose grooves and scratches are supposed to have been
removed by weathering, but yielding, as Dr. Lendenfeld
states, to an eye experienced in reading the signs of glacier
action indubitable proof of having been originally polished
and rounded by ice. He states that “ One of these instances,
on a spur high above a tributary to the Snowy River, was
so remarkable that my assistant (sic), who had never seen
any roches-moutonnees in his life before, was immediately
much struck by its appearance. There, there is one rock
polished off with a surface of about 3 acres, and about 25 other
much smaller ones around it, all polished down to exactly the
same surface, divided from one another, however, by depres-
sions of varying depth.” He also states that on a spur descend-
ing from the Abbot Range roches-moutonnees similar in char-
acter are very numerous. He did not observe any signs cor-
responding to perched blocks, moraine stuff, nor actual traces
of striated or grooved surfaces anywhere, although he conjec-
tures, as regards the possibility of glacial action being traced
at levels below 5800 feet, beneath which he was unabD to find
further signs, he states: — “I have looked carefully around
on my way up and down the mountain, but I was not able
to detect any glacial action below 5800 feet.” He, however,
is of opinion that in the Snowy Valley a glacier might be
expected to have descended for some distance from the
mountains, and thought it likely that moraines may eventu-
ally be found there; but he also adds that it is only in this
valley where moraines may be expected, “ because it is the
only one which comes down from an extensive plateau on
which a glacier was formed.”
Dr. von Lendenfeld refers the age during which such glacial
action occurred to the period which marked the more intense
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


form of glaciation in New Zealand. Mr. Jas. Stirling has
also written two or three most interesting papers, in which he
gives us the results of careful observations made by him on
several occasions among the Australian Alps.
Mr. Stirling corroborates Dr. von Lendenfeld in attribut-
ing the polished rock surfaces on Mt. Kosciusko to compara-
tively recent glacial action. He also states that, in his
opinion, the observed widespread dispersion of the boulder
deposits, the rounded contours of the crystalline rocks, and
the undulatory outlines of the foothills in many valleys, all
bespeak agencies distinct from ordinary fluviatile action, and
point very distinctly to glacier action. He further cites addi-
tional evidence of glaciation as follows “ Erratics in the Mitta
Mitta and the Kiewa Valleys; huge blocks weighing many
tons; smooth surfaces on the Cobberas Mountains and Mt.
Bogong; moraines at the base of the latter on the Mountain
Creek Valley; eroded lake basins, Dry Hill, Hermongee
Swamp; Omeo Lake basin; Morainic Lake, Mt. Wellington,
&c.; but he carefully observes, in conclusion, that “ although
the fact of a glacier action can ... be satisfactorily estab-
lished in the Australian Alps, yet further evidence is desir-
able as to the synchronism of the glacier period in Australia
with that of the glacial epoch in the Northern Hemisphere.”
So far as the higher levels of the alpine regions of Aus-
tralia are concerned, the observations of Dr. von Lendenfeld,
Mr. Stirling, and other observers leave us in little doubt as to
the genuineness of the evidences of glacial action, and of their
occurrence at a comparatively recent date; although there
is no proof of the date of the occurrence as being coincidental
with the glacial period of Northern Europe. Nor is there here
any evidence which compels us to infer such refrigeration
of climate as would in such a low latitude (36° 40') cause
glaciers to descend below the 2000-feet level above the sea.
It is true that certain conglomerates bearing the marks of ice
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


action have recently been discovered in Victoria by Messrs.
Graham, Officer, and Lewis Balfour as low as 750 feet above
sea-level, but these undoubtedly striated boulders, apart from
other objections, are so similar in character and so intimately
associated in regions of recent igneous disturbance with the
well-known glaciated conglomerates of Permo-Carboniferous
age, which will be referred to hereafter, that I cannot at
present see my way clear to accept the conclusions of Messrs.
Officer and Balfour, who recognise some of the deposits as a
true boulder “ till,” or moraine-profonde, formed by severe
glacial action during “ Eocene times,” and inferred by them
to be quite distinct from the earlier glacial deposits associated
with them of Permo-Carboniferous age, and from the ice
erratics and moraines of the Australian Alps, which they
ascribe to a mild glacial period during the Pleistocene age.
I freely admit that the appearance of some of the deposits
so lucidly and ably described by Messrs. Officer and Balfour,
especially the deposits on the Korkuperrimal (Fig. 3) seem to
justify the conclusions arrived at by them; but, what about
the similarity of the striated and polished blocks and stones
so huddled together in dislocations or fractures of the under-
lying sandstone to the adjacent and almost contiguous to the
ice-borne conglomerates of Permo-Carboniferous age; the
" pell-mell accumulation ” of angular and rounded block;
the broken and disintegrated clays or shales; the “ angular
blocks of sandstone in every conceivable position ’’; the under-
lying “ broken and shattered sandstones ”; and the associa-
tion with the more recently erupted basaltic sheet ?
Do not these cumulative evidences, taken together with the
latitude and low altitude, rather tend to prove that the rocks,
including the older glacial conglomerates immediately under-
lying the basaltic sheet, have been broken up, dislocated,
and jumbled together by the eruptive forces which more
recently ejected the overlying basalt ?
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Surely this seems to be the more reasonable inference in
accounting for the so-called boulder “ till.” Why, in the
pell-mell ruin of the older sandstones, shales, and Permo-
Carboniferous conglomerates, should we omit to look for the
broken remains of the latter conglomerates as well as for
the broken remains of the similarly disturbed sandstones and
shales? And if the supposed “ till ” does not contain the
fragmentary remains of the admittedly associated older con-
glomerates of Permo-Carboniferous age, in respect of which
we have already ample evidence, as being composed of such
polished and striated blocks as are found in the “ till ”
what have become of them ? The causes which broke up and
huddled the older sandstones and shales must have also broken
up and jumbled afresh the older associated conglomerates;
and it appears to me unreasonable to suggest the intense
glaciation involved in a glacial “ till ” theory for the origin
of the later conglomeration, while the remains of the older and
similar conglomerates—so intimately associated over a wide
area with the sandstones and shales —have not been satisfac-
torily accounted for.
Apart from these objections, even the most ardent advo-
cates of the powerful dynamic agency of moving ice are now
beginning to recognise that, while influenced by gravitation
on steep slopes, the abrading power of ice may have a won-
derful grinding action; but they are far from satisfied in
regard to its power to tear up, dislocate, and fracture the
underlying harder rocks over which it glides, at least not to
any great extent. The dislocations and fractures of the
underlying rocks at Korkuperrimal, on the evidence given, do
not appear to me to be the work of ice.
It is not improbable also, as regards some of the examples,
that on abruptly sloping sides of creeks, the gravitating value
of older conglomerates, which may have been suddenly thrust
up by recent dislocations, may now partly overlie the original
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


deposits of undisturbed older conglomerate at a lower level
in their immediate vicinity. Such occurrences are common
in Tasmania, where the stratified rocks of Permo-Carbonifer-
ous and Mesozoic are frequently faulted and disturbed by the
forces which ejected the more recent diabasic greenstones
which ramify everywhere throughout these rocks in Eastern
Tasmania.
In any case, a preconception in favour of a particular
hypothesis is apt to play the same tricks with the sicentific
imagination as it does with the imagination of unscientific
sentimentalists; and in no part of a careful observer’s duty
is it more imperative that he should guard himself by careful
measurement of the “ personal equation of error,” whether
due to enthusiasm or preconception, than in cases where the
imagination is apt to read or project hidden foregone causal
conclusions or anticipations into those facts of evidence,
which, taken by themselves, are readily adaptable to any
one of many possible interpretations. There is no field of
geological observation where there is more avidity shown in
drawing hasty inferences, and forming generalisations from
imperfect data, than in that section which concerns itself
with the occurrence, dynamical effects, and hypotheses of
causation, in respect of former glacial action. In no field
is there such assurance expressed, based upon partial or
imperfect data, and in the face of the widest divergence of
opinion in the interpretation of the same facts. Where sym-
pathies are too strongly enlisted on behalf of a glacial or any
other theory they are apt to disarm the true critical faculty
of the observer. He is apt to infer, too readily, that all
rounded bosses and smoothed rock surfaces in the vicinity of
old shingle beds are veritable roches-moutonnees, and that all
shingle beds are moraines; and under this preconception he
is sometimes not critical enough to distinguish the difference
between the unequal wearing away of the laminations of
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


polished stones derived from schistose rocks and the veritable
striae of ice action.
He is apt to magnify one of the elements which, with other
links, are necessary to form the complete chain of proof —
as itself the only element which may constitute proof in
favour of a conclusion. As evidence of this partiality, we
sometimes hear of the discovery of a single striated stone put
forward as constituting the only real proof of the occurrence
of former glacial action. Yet the occurrence of huge perched
blocks or erratics, many tons in weight, of a rock foreign to
the immediate neighbourhood, resting on a recent accumula-
tion of a well-known rock —loam, clay, gravel, or peat —
although now devoid of either polished surfaces, scratches, or
grooves, may, of itself, afford more unmistakable evidence in
proof of ice action of a certain age than any number of
polished, striated, and grooved stones, taken from a tumbled
drum of waterworn stones and clay; for the present accumu-
lation in which the striated stones occur may not have been
formed by ice action, although some of its contents may have
been derived , immediately, from former moraine stuff; and
even should the striated and polished blocks be now found in
a veritable moraine, they do not form absolute proof that the
ice markings, or at least all of them, were actually caused by
the glacier which formed the moraine in which they are now
found; for in many of the Scotch fiords or sea-loch basins —
if we accept the theory of an inter-glacial period—we must
be prepared to find that the older moraines, in the path of
the descent of the more recent glacier, would partly be dis-
persed, while some of its contents might be picked up, and
eventually form part of the latter moraines of such districts.
Thus, in respect of undoubted ice-striated blocks, we must
in some cases be prepared to find them as not indicating with
certainty the mode of origin of the deposit in which they
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


are now found; but, like certain fossiliferous rocks, they may
have been derived from an older formation.
An enthusiast is also apt to attribute all lake basins as due
to the action of glaciers, and is tempted to confound the debris
of rocks adjacent to steep slopes of mountain due to gravita-
tion, with superficially similar remains left in such a situa-
tion (lateral moraines) by the retreat of an ancient glacier.
Of course, a typical geological sceptic may. from prejudice,
err as widely in the opposite direction, and remain stubbornly
unconvinced in the face of the most conclusive evidence. But,
in the latter case, although the individual may injure himself,
his very stubbornness may benefit geological science in causing
search to be made for still more perfect evidence, and in caus-
ing the evidences already in our possession to be submitted to
still more careful sifting and weighing. I have been led to
make these remarks, certainly not as a reflection upon the
judgment or conclusions drawn by any of the very able
observers commented upon in this review, but rather as my
humble apology for venturing to criticise, generally, the
opinions of men of better general qualification than myself,
in respect of doubtful matters where independent judgment
may, without either humiliation or presumption, arrive at
very different interpretations with respect to the same facts.
These remarks, moreover, apply as strongly to myself in
respect of the contributions, for which I am responsible,
regarding the evidences in favour of glaciation in Tasmania
at two widely separated periods in the history of our rocks.
Evidence of Recent Glacial Action in Tasmania.
Mr. Charles Gould, foimerly the Government Geologist of
Tasmania, was the first person who appears to have drawn
attention to the abundant evidence of glacial action in the
alpine valleys of Western Tasmania. His geological observa-
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


tions in these regions about 40 years ago, amid great hard-
ships and privations, extended over a period long enough to
enable him to work up the topography and to map the char-
acteristic rocks of a very large portion of what has been, until
recently, a comparatively unknown and almost inaccessible
region. He has left no special memoir on the evidences of
glaciation, but it was through verbal communication to a
personal friend of my own,* and one of his early associates,
that I first, about 20 years ago, became aware of his discovery
of many evidences of glaciation in Tasmania, especially in the
valleys of the western highlands, which trend westward from
the great elevated plateau of 4000 to 5000 feet level, which
occupies an area of some 400 square miles in the centre of our
heart-shaped island. On its northern and western sides this
elevated plateau rests upon a less elevated but still more
extended plateau, whose undulations preserve a general level
of from 2000 to 3000 feet above the sea. The extreme west-
ern and southern part of the island presents a wild and broken
array of lofty mountain ranges and isolated peaks, with
deeply-cut ravines and valleys, but whose bases rest generally
upon lower levels than the western portion of the massive
central pateau. Although Tasmania does not possess any
mountains of great altitude, its mountainous character may be
best realised when we consider that within its limited extent
(26,215 square miles) there are 20 names of mountains over
4000 feet in height, and as many as 50 named mountains
whose heights exceed 2500 feet.
The large inland plateau which maintains a general alti-
tude of about 4000 feet, rising at times to over 5000 feet, is
worthy of special attention when regarding the conditions
necessary for the development of a sufficiently large permanent
snowfield, which would suffice to feed glaciers flowing from its
marginal slopes, during a period of extremely low tempera-
* The Hon. Jas. Reid Scott, formerly Chief Secretary of Tasmania.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


ture; for great height or extremely low temperature, per se,
does not constitute all the necessary conditions for the
development of glaciers.
We must also conjoin with either of these conditions breadth
of area of the neve or snow catchment, and a great local pre-
cipitation of water vapour. The necessary combinations of
these requisite conditions are not dreamt of by many who too
readily invoke glacial action within the Tertiary or Pleistocene
period in regions where it is difficult to realise the full com-
bination of the essential conditions necessary for its produc-
tion.
The following description, already given by me in a former
publication,* may help to afford the necessary information to
those who may wish to know whether, in the event of a greatly
lowered temperature, due to astronomical or other causes, the
great inland plateau of Tasmania possesses all the other requi-
site conditions for the generation of glaciers:
“ The great central greenstone plateau of the Lake Country
(42° south lat.f), in its northern part especially, preserves a
general rugged or undulating level of about 4000 feet alti-
tude, and its higher bosses and peaks and its valleys do not
vary much more than 1000 feet above or below this uniform
level. From the Picton to Gad’s Hill, a distance northerly
of over 100 miles, its westerly limit may be roughly traced,
forming a bold and widely undulating margin relative to the
western country, whose immediate general upland surface
ranges between 2000 and 3000 feet above sea-level. This
margin is markedly broken by the elevated outlying spur
forming the Eldon Range, near Lake St. Clair. From
Gad’s Hill in a south-easterly direction to the Table Moun-
tain, a distance of not less than 90 miles, its similarly-indented
* “ Geology of Tasmania,” p. 101.
A height of 5000 feet in this latitude would have an inland tem-
perature of that of nearly 6500 feet altitude in the region of the Aus-
tralian Alps.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


margin presents a still bolder character as it approaches and
contrasts with the lower fertile plains and valleys of the
Meander and South Esk, which seldom exceed an altitude of
from 600 to 700 feet above sea-level.
At the great northern and southern water divide, in the
neighbourhood of the Table Mountain, it suddenly recedes,
and contracts, forming a large bight in the direction of the
Upper Derwent tributaries, notably the Rivers Nive and
Ouse, from which its level tends to fall, and its marginal
boundaries, though frequently rising into high mountain
ridges towards Mt. Wellington, no longer maintain the uni-
form boldness of outline which characterises its northern
aspect. . . . Nearly everywhere along and against this
plateau and the greenstone crests of Mt. Dromedary, Mt.
Nicholas, Eldon Range, Mt. Gell, Grass Tree Hill, Consti-
tution Hill, and most of the elevated south-eastern dividing
ranges, the various members of the Carboniferous (Permo-
Carboniferous) and Mesozoic rocks are seen to repose invari-
ably in a horizontal position, or, at most, with a very slight
dip towards or away from them.”
From this description it will be apparent that, given a
period of extremely low temperature, the great elevated
plateau of Tasmania possesses, in a special manner, a great
width of space at a high level for the formation of an exten-
sive snowfield. It is also significant that in its present west-
ern margin, in the vicinity of the mountain valleys, where
evidences of former glacial action are so abundantly manifest,
there is now even the greatest amount of rainfall. This is
shown by the records at the stations at Corinna, Strahan, and
Waratah, on the western aspect, as contrasted with the records
of Great Lake, Ross, Oatlands, and Bothwell, towards its
eastern limits, as in the following table;
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Western
Rainfall (1800).
Station.
Altitude
(feet).
Annual
Rainfall
(inches)
Maximum
Month.
Corinna
15
69-50
October
Slrahan
20
51-39
October
Waratah
2,000
Mean ...
76'45
65-78
October
Eastern Rainfall.
•Great Lake
3,822
34-64
June
Ross
580
19-95
June
Oatlands
1,337
23-48
J une
llothwell
2,000 (?)
Mean
23-63
25-42
June
So far as we can judge from existing meteorological condi-
tions, which show that precipitation on the western portion of
the plateau is nearly three times the amount of that in its
eastern portion, it is obvious that if astronomical causes pro-
duced a lowered temperature in the Southern Hemisphere
during the last period of maximum eccentricity, combined
with winter in aphelion, the greatest precipitation of snow
would take place near to the western margin of our great
mountain plateau, and would there probably collect in suffi-
cient mass to outweigh the short, hot summer melting, and to
supply its western alpine valleys with numerous ice streams
or glaciers; and while, therefore, supplying prima facie evi-
dence of favourable conditions for the development of glaciers
on the west, it is also suggestive as an explanation of the
apparent total absence of evidence of glaciation on its eastern
slopes, where the summer melting might exceed the amount
of precipitation. In any case, it adds greater force to con-
clusions drawn from the positive evidences of glaciation
observed by various persons in the alpine valleys of our west-
ern highlands, a brief account of which may now be given in
chronological order.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Evidences of Glaciation in the Alpine Valleys of
Western Highlands of Tasmania.
I have already alluded to Mr. Charles Gould’s observations,
made about 40 years ago, of abundant evidence of the usual
dynamic effects of ancient glaciers in the principal alpine val-
leys of the western highlands of Tasmania, although it is to be
regretted that this most accomplished observer, so far as I
know, has left no special memoir of his extended observations
on this subject.
In the year 1874, in company with the late Honourable
J. A. Scott, W. C. Piguenit, Lieut. Burgess, and two other
persons, I spent six weeks (all of the party laden with knap-
sacks weighing from 60 to 70 lb.) in exploring the whole of
the south-western region of the western highlands lying
between the mouth of the Huon and Macquarie Harbour, and
in making collections and observations on the geology and
botany of this region. In the year 1879 I formed one of a
similar party in exploring the northern region of the western
highlands, including Gad’s Hill, Middlesex Plains, Vale of
Belvoir, Valentine’s Peak, Mt. Bischoff, head waters of the
Mackintosh Valley, and other tributaries of the Pieman and
Arthur.
In the year 1887, in company with my friend, the late C.
P. Sprent, Deputy Surveyor-General, and five others, I
traversed on foot and examined the whole of the region lying
near to the route across the island by way of the Ouse,
Bronte, Lake St. Clair, Mt. King William 1., Mt. Arrow-
smith, Collingwood Valley, King River, Mt. Lyell, Queen
River, Macquarie Harbour, thence northward across the
Hentys, Mt. Heemskirk, Corinna, Whyte and Heazlewood
Rivers, Magnet Range, and Mt. Bischoff, to Emu Bay on the
North-West Coast. I had the opportunity at this time to
visit many of the lakes, including Lake Dixon, and to spend
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


three days in examining more particularly the rock-formations
on Mts. Owen, Lyell, and Sedgwick.
I had thus ample opportunities for observing the many
evidences of former glaciation in these regions, enabling me
to confirm the earlier obervations of Mr. Gould, and also
enabling me to record the general results of such observations
in my work on the “ Geology of Tasmania,” begun in the
year 1884, and published in the year 1888. I only gave my
general conclusions in this work, although my notes con-
tained particulars regarding the abundant occurrence of
moraines, roches-moutonnees, scooped tarns and lakes innu-
merable, huge ice-born erratics, polished rock surfaces, &c.,
in many localities; notably in the gorge descending from
Scott s Peak in the centre of the lofty and picturesque
Arthur Ranges, and along the Alpha and other tributaries of
the Craycroft and Huon River; in deep gorges descending
from Mt. M edge towards Lake Redder and the Serpentine;
on the neighbouring slopes of the Frankland Range; in deep
upper gorges and valleys of the tributaries of the Mackin-
tosh River leading from Granite Tor and Barn Bluff; but
particularly in the romantic valley of the Lakes Dixon and
Undine, at the source of the Franklin, in the immediate
vicinity of Mt. Gell and Mt. Hugel. The valley of Lake
Dixon is, par excellence, the ideal of a perfect glacier valley.
No one, however ignorant of glacial action, could in this
neighbourhood gaze upon those beautiful scooped, or rather
abraded, lakes or tarns (many with islets, as also observed
by Mr. Montgomery in the region of Barn Bluff and Mt.
Pelion); the snow-white, polished, billowy, and cascade-like
roches-moutonnees, composed of quartzites, on the upper
margin of Lake Dixon, together with the tumbled moraines
and large erratic on the lower banks—at a level of about
2000 feet—without being impressed with the idea that its
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


singularly characteristic features must have been produced
by the slow rasping flow of an ancient river of ice.
The numerous beautiful lakes, many with wooded islets, on
the lap and all around the base of the steep slopes, as at Mt.
King William 1., the beautiful Lake Augusta under Eldon
Bluff, Lake Petrarch in the romantic Cuvier Valley, lakes
and lakelets near Mt. Hobhouse, and southward in the Valley
of Basselas, as well as the clusters of lakelets at the head of
Traveller’s Best, and other sources of tributaries of the
Bivers Derwent, Gordon, King, and Pieman, are all emi-
nently suggestive of being originally carved or sculptured by
ice action during a former glacier epoch in Tasmania.
The abundance of conclusive evidence so impressed me, that
when I referred to them in the descriptive part of “ The
Geology of Tasmania,” I was content to summarise them
merely as a general confirmation of the previous observations
of Messrs. Gould and Sprent. Thus, at p. 164, in referring
to the remains of our coal measures on the western crests of
the Great Plateau, I state: “From information obtained
from the Hon. J. A. Scott, now deceased, and from the
appearance of their bold stratified cliffs, as seen by the writer
from Mt. Arrowsmith, it would seem that, like the coal seams
at Ben Lomond, Mt. Nicholas, and Fingal, the coal measures
of this basin are the remains of a deposit of considerable
thickness and extent, lying at the higher levels against the
flanks of elevated peaks of the ancient greenstone, that is,
above the marine beds, which also occur there in the same
relative position as the places already mentioned. It is evi-
dent that the valleys intervening between the great greenstone
plateau and the neighbouring isolated greenstone peaks have
been carved out of this upper deposit and the underlying
(Permo-Carboniferous) marine beds. The work of denuda-
tion has been so vast that only fragments of this once more
widely extended system, abutting against (or underlying) the
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


greenstone, now bear evidence of their original extent. Both
Mr. Gould and Charles Sprent bear testimony to the fact that
glacial action at one time must have been an important agent
in the denudation of the immense canons or gorges which
trend away from the elevated plateau westward. Mr. Sprent
informs me that for a great distance along the bed of the
Mackintosh River, which suddenly cuts its way to the lower
levels towards its main artery, the Pieman River, are to be
found immense blocks of granite, some of which are many
tons in weight. These granite blocks are truly erratic, as
the granite is not now to be found in situ anywhere along
the present course of the river. It is probable that the
former have been derived from glaciers which descended into
the lower valley from the direction of Granite Tor, whose
summit still rears its head 4500 feet above the existing, sea-
level.” At pp. 216, 219, 254, 255, 256, and 296 there are
also extended references attesting the prevalence of evidence
as to the local glaciation of the Western Alps of Tasmania
during the glacier epoch of Australia.
Mr. C. P. Sprent began his laborious explorations in the
north-western highlands in the year 1875. No one had a
more intimate knowledge of this wild country, for he was
the pioneer who first opened out the greater part of this
country to miners, by a process of track-cutting almost like
tunnelling in the horizontal, bauera, and other scrubs —the
terrible barriers to progress in this region. In 1876 he par-
ticularly observed the striking evidences of glacial action in
the alpine regions of the west; but, although he gave me,
verbally, almost graphic descriptions of these evidences, it
was not until the year 1886 that he gave a brief written
description* of his observations made 10 years previously.
At p. 58 he thus refers to evidences of glaciation observed
*“ Recent Explorations on the West Coast of Tasmania,’ by C. P.
Sprent. (Trans, and Proc., Roy. Geo. Soc. of Austral., Vic. Br., Vol.
111.-IV.)
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


by him in the year 1876 in the Mackintosh Valley; “At the
place where I struck the Mackintosh there are two immense
cliffs standing a little back from the river, and at least 600
feet high. Looking at these cliffs from above or below
stream they look like two small mountains; but from the top
of the gorge they are completely lost in the dark shade of
the slope. The river bed is full of immense rounded boul-
ders of granite, although I could not ascertain that any occurs
in situ thereabouts. The cliffs are of sandstone, and, judging
from all appearance, I am of opinion that this deep gorge
represents the track of an ancient glacier flowing down from
the vicinity of the Cradle Mountain and Barn Bluff. Traces
of glacial action are common all over the West Coast in locali-
ties close to high mountains, hut it is probable that these
glaciers did not descend to the lowlands. The granite houl-
ders of the Mackintosh are of a very large size, some at least
five tons in weight, and. it is impossible to account for their
presence except on the glacial supposition.” He then pro-
ceeds to state: “ On the sides of the gorge there are many
small boulders. In one I found a quantity of carbonate of
copper. I had not sufficient time to search for striated mark-
ings on the rocks, btit my impression was confirmed in later
years by the account of Mr. IF. 11. Bell, who described the
position of the moraine of this ancient glacier. The same-
indications are to be found in the King River and, the Frank-
lin River.”
It is evident, therefore, that the recent account of all the
characteristic phenomena of glaciation observed in 1892 and
1893 by Messrs. Dunn and T. B. Moore* in the same region—
that is, in the neighbourhood of Mts. Tyndall, Sedgwick, and
Murchison, and charted so clearly on Mr. T. B. Moore’s
map, confirms Messrs. Gould, Sprent, and Bell’s earlier obser-
* “ Discovery of Glaciation in the Vicinity of Mt. Tyndall, Tasmania,”
by T. B. Moore. (Roy. Soc. Tas., 1893.)
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


vations; and although the later observers, Dunn and Moore,
write as if they were unacquainted with the much earlier obser-
vations of the persons named, as well as of the descriptions
to be found in my work on the “ Geology of Tasmania,” it
does not detract in the smallest degree from the valuable
additions which they have made to our knowledge of the
evidence of former glacial action in the alpine regions of
Western Tasmania.
The occurrence of what appears to be the older conglomer-
ates, so closely associated with newer drifts, and also bearing
ice-marks, according to Dunn and Moore, and which may
possibly be local representations of the debris of floating or
partly-stranded ice-sheets, so abundantly manifested in rocks
of Permo-Carboniferous age in South-Eastern Tasmania, and
also in similar rocks in Victoria (Bacchus Marsh) and New
South Wales, suggests doubt as to whether some of the
moraine stuff, found on the flanks of western mountains, upon
whose crests this older conglomerate rests, may not be con-
founded at times with the true moraine stuff of the more
recent glacier epoch; for it is possible that recent disintegra-
tions of the older ice-marked conglomerate, gravitating over
the steep slopes, may also be largely respresented, and some-
times mixed up with the more recent moraines. It is barely
conceivable, however, that the older conglomerate would still
preserve the finer marks of scratches, striae, or groovings; but
if the less perishable rocks were, until recently, preserved
undisturbed in some peculiarly favourable matrix, it is con-
ceivable that some traces of original markings might still
remain unobliterated.
There are one or two facts of very great importance dis-
closed by Mr. T. B. Moore’s charts and observations which
deserve special attention. First, as regards the height up to
which the marks of glaciation are found, Mr. Moore informs
us that the surface of the conglomerates, within 25 feet of
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


the summit of Mt. Tyndall, is polished and striated, that
is, at an altitude of 3850 feet. It is evident here that the
collecting ground for the snow to generate glaciers in the
small remaining peak of 25 feet would not of itself adequately
account for these higher polished surfaces, nor for the supply
of glaciers on all sides which shed such extensive moraines as
those lying all around Lakes Rolleston, Garnet, Dora, Dunn’s
Boss; and, similarly, the small portion of Mt. Sedgwick
remaining above the original neve would not, of itself, ade-
quately account for its higher glacial markings, nor for the
extensive moraines around Lake Margaret, Hamilton Moraine
(enclosed by a circular belt, Basin Lake), Lake Spicer, &c.
The general trend of striae may as readily on lower levels have
the arrow-head of lineal direction turned the other way. Is
it not conceivable that the great elevated catchment basin
of the great plateau, a little further east, may have sent down,
by the existing deep channels of the North and South Eldon,
its far mightier glacier streams, which, obstructed partially
by the slightly elevated plateau of Lake Spicer and Lake
Dora, might, nevertheless, ride over them, abrading and
scooping out the basins of the present lakes and lakelets in
the line of their path, until they were finally stopped by
impact and convergence with whatever local glaciers flowed
from the crests of Mt. Sedgwick and Mt. Tyndall, and there-
after their united streams, producing the large accumulation
of moraine stuff on the 2182 to 2400 feet plateau at their
bases, and at their arrested or final melting points 1 These
remarks, however, are merely suggestive, and are mainly
occasioned by the difficulty of adequately accounting for the
moraine stuff and the extent of the glaciers, when so small
a collecting ground remains above the ancient neve or snow-
line on the caps of Mts. Tyndall and Sedgwick. At any rate,
Mr. Moore has supplied us with most valuable evidence which
helps towards the solution of these and other difficulties, and
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


his topographical charts of the leading features of this inter-
esting neighbourhood are simply invaluable to anyone who
wishes to study them. The prevalence of moraines at the
2000-feet level, both here and at Mt. Pelion and Lake Dixon,
indicating generally the retiring points of the principal
glaciers, is very significant, and strongly supports my former
views as to the absence of evidence of glaciation in the lowest
levels, and also as to the probability that none of our Tas-
manian glaciers ever reached the sea.
The able paper by Mr. A. Montgomery, M.A., Govern-
ment Geologist, which has been read ts> us this evening, I
had the privilege of reading beforehand. It contains a very
interesting account of his recent geological observations, many
of which are new and extremely interesting; but, above all,
it not only greatly extends our knowledge of glacial
phenomena in Tasmania, but we have also a valuable examina-
tion of all collateral evidences, which bear directly or indi-
rectly on the possible extent of glaciation in Tasmania gener-
ally during the glacial epoch, its intensity, and its cause; and
upon the whole I am gratified to find that his extended and
independent inquiries lead him to a conclusion similar to my
own, viz., that although refrigeration of our climate was suffi-
ciently intense during the glacial epoch to produce streams
of glaciers upon our alpine regions in the west, and possibly
in other mountains further south, he is inclined to believe
that the refrigeration was not so intense as to cause the ice
to invade the levels of our lowlands. He seems disposed,
however, to expect the initiation of snowfields and glaciers in
isolated mountains further east, but I have given my reasons
already why I incline to think that the smaller amount of
precipitation, and possibly the milder local climate of the
eastern part, may have combined to turn the balance of
summer melting against winter precipitation, and so cause a
pluvial epoch, at most, in Eastern Tasmania. This inference.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


in ray opinion, would harmonise more closely with all the
known facts, and particularly with the total absence of any
clear signs of glacial phenomena among our pluvial terrace
drifts iu the lower levels of Eastern Tasmania.
Mr. Montgomery is also inclined to ascribe a greater denud-
ing power to glaciers in the formation and deepening of
mountain valleys and ravines than I am myself disposed to
allow. I admit they are very important agents in intensify-
ing the great work of denudation in mountain valleys, whose
channels have already been deeply cut by flowing water;
but, on the whole, the real carver of valleys and ravines, and
the great waster of land surfaces, is great precipitation, the
more mobile gravitation, and the infinitely greater dissolving
power of water in motion. Valleys originally formed by
water agency determine the course which glaciers have fol-
lowed, rather than that glaciers have determined and cut out
the channels of valleys in which they have been known to
occur. lam also of opinion that the greater denudation of
the western slopes of the great greenstone plateau—which,
in my work, “ The Geology of Tasmania,” I inferred
extended, probably at the close of the Mesozoic age, west-
wards as far as the West Coast Range, which it partly
embraced—was effected, and the leading features carved out,
much as they are now found, long prior to our glacier epoch,
and this denudation must have been in constant and intense
operation ever since the upheaval of the plateau. Even if
we allowed only a period of millions of years to have
elapsed between the upheaval of the great greenstone
plateau, while allowing a waste at the average estimated rate
of 1 foot of rock in 3000 years, we must also allow that
denudation, especially that powerful form of eating back
against watercourses, would have removed a quantity of mat-
ter —from its ravines especially —equivalent to a uniform
depth of 833 feet over its whole area: and this estimate iu
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


such an elevation is probably far too low. The denudation,
which has been effected even since the earlier glacier epoch
relatively, could not he a third of this amount; and since the
maximum stage of the glacial epoch, 210,000 years ago, pro-
bably not a tenth of the amount of denudation which must
have been effected prior to the later glacial epoch.
The probability that our valleys would originally eat inward
in cuts against the vertical faces of the elevated plateau also
invalidates any inferences drawn from the latest cuts made
in its watercourses far in the interior of the upland regions;
for the beginnings or initial stage of a valley system at its
original outer edge would give widely different results. How-
ever this may be, Mr. Montgomery’s observations of recent
action are valuable, although some of the inferences drawn
by him may not apply as widely as he may be inclined to con-
sider at the present moment. In the greater number of con-
clusions formed by him, however, I cordially concur. The
evidence given by him of glacial phenomena in the vicinity
of Mt. Pelion and Lake Eyre are particularly full and clear,
and leave not the slightest doubt as to their genuine character.
His demonstration of the existence of glaciers flowing from
the elevated regions of Barn Bluff and Mt. Pelion (whose
peaks are fully 1000 feet higher than Mt. Tyndall), of their
discharge of moraine stuff, of their singularly perfect roches-
moutonnees, and erratics at the 2000 to 2792 feet level, near
Lake Eyre, is simply complete and unassailable. His paper,
as a whole, is the most comprehensive contribution which I
have yet seen as regards the whole question of glaciation and
its supposed cause, so far as Tasmania is concerned. I do
not here refer to Mr. Montgomery’s views as to the causes of
the glacial epoch further than to remark that he adopts in
the main the view which requires the concurrence of astro-
nomical and favouring geographical and physical causes, a
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


view which I myself have adopted in “ The Geology of Tas-
mania.”
The whole subject of causation is treated separately here-
after.
Evidences of Great Glacial Epochs Concurring with
Great Cycles of Change in Organic Life, and also
Concurring with Exceptional Terrestrial Disturb-
ances.
The adoption of the astronomical theory as the sole cause
of glacial epochs throughout all time naturally excited a pre-
judice against it in the minds of many able geologists, because
the known records of the rocks,' with the exception of, per-
haps, the last two great cold epochs —viz., “ The glacier epoch
of Australasia,” at the beginning of the Pliocene (Neogene
of Tasmania), and the “ ice age ” of Europe and North
America, in Pleistocene age —there is not the feeblest
evidence of glacial phenomena intercalated within the sedi-
mentary formations, even going as far back as the close of
Permo-Carboniferous times. This utter lack of correspond-
ence with the frequent recurrences of periods of maximum
eccentricity of the earth’s orbit with winter in aphelion in
any one hemisphere every 21,000 years, through all this time,
certainly appeared to demonstrate that the astronomical
theory alone could not adequately account for the facts.
The “ imperfection of the record. ” theory of effacement
which was sought by Sir Robert Ball and others to form a
buttress to it, breaks down completely when closely and
widely inquired into. But perhaps the greatest blow to the
” imperfection of the record ” theory of effacement in
attempting to show harmonious reasons for the total absence
of glacial phenomena in the Tertiary rocks generally —in
Europe at least —corresponding to recurring cycles of eccen-
tricity, is the discovery of glacial phenomena, consisting of
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


vast beds of striated conglomerates, polished rocks, perfect
roches-moutonnees, and huge ice-borne erratics in the rocks
of Permo-Carboniferous age, of nearly all countries in both
hemispheres; and thus even showing a greater universality
of broadly contemporaneous intense glacial conditions than
was exhibited during the last “ ice age ” of Europe and
North America in the Pleistocene period. For, surely, if
obliteration by denudation, carried on over a long period,
was considered to be an adequate reason for the removal of
all traces of glacial action in the earlier Tertiary rocks of
Europe, the actual preservation, universally of abundant and
undoubted glacial phenomena in the much more remote
Permo-Garhoniferous rocks, during such a vastly greater
period of time, utterly collapses the “ imperfection of the
record ” theory of effacement, as applied to the secondarv
and Tertiary rocks.
The older glacial epoch of Permo-Carboniferous age,
together with the glacier epoch of Australia in the early
Pliocene, and the later “ ice age ” of Europe and North
America in Pleistocene age, are undoubtedly thus shown to
be truly exceptional conditions recurring irregularly and not
concurrent with the comparatively frequent cycles of the
earth’s eccentricity, except at very wide intervals of time .
when, probably, the peculiar combination of astronomical,
physical, and geographical causes combined to produce those
extreme and exceptional conditions, corresponding to the
three almost universal glacial or cold epochs, of which the
rocks contain the most abundant and undoubted evidence.
Glacial Epochs Harmonising with Great Cycles of
Change in the Plant Life of Australia and Tasmania.
The acceptance of the “ exceptional occurrence ” view of
glacial epochs is also strongly corroborated by the great cycles
of organic changes, especially as regards plant life.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Thus, about the time of the glacial epoch of Permo-Carbon-
iferous age, the original flora of Australia and Tasmania con-
sisted, mainly, of the following characteristic genera, viz.,
Glossopteris, Gangamopteris, N oeggarathiopsis, Schizoneura,
Lepidodendron.
After the Penno-Carhoniferous glacial epoch, correspond-
ing to the ushering in of the milder Mesozoic age, the old
flora of Permo-Carhoniferous age suddenly died away com-
pletely. Not a vestige remained ! The Mesozoic rocks then
became almost suddenly characterised by the abundance of
the following plant forms, viz. ;— Pecopteris, Neuropteris,
Sphenopteris, Thinnfeldia, Cyclopteris, Tceniopteris, Odont-
opteris, Sagenopteris, Alethopteris, Phyllotheca, A nnu-
laria, Podozamites, Pterophyllum, Otozamites, Sphenozamites ,
Brachyphyllum, Taxites, Sequoites, Walchia, Cunningham-
ites, Araucarites, Bcdera, Salisburia, Ginkgophyllum, Zeu-
gophyllites (Poacordiates).
At the close of the Mesozoic age in Tasmania all its rich
and varied flora in its turn disappeared, or “ yielded to the
great law of death ’’; and although for the most part no
marine beds intervene between our Upper Mesozoic rocks and
the immediately succeeding Lower Tertiary leaf beds, the
flora of the latter were “ brought to the birth and ushered
upon the scene ” suddenly, and appearing locally as if a new
creation. But it is significant that this sudden change is
exactly isochronous with an unparalleled eruption of igneous
rocks (later greenstone) concurrent with widespread convul-
sions of the older strata. These greenstones even now are
so widespread as to form the leading physiographical features
throughout the mountains and lowlands of the island. At
the time of eruption, probably recurring at intervals over a
long period, it seems as if the conditions for plant life were
everywhere impossible. There is no evidence at this time of
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


glacial phenomena,* but as Mr. J. S. Gardner has arrived at
the conclusion, from the study of fossil floras and “ strong
negative and positive evidence,” that, although there were
no intense glacial effects, there were alternating warm and
colder conditions produced, most probably due to astronomical
causes alone, and therefore it seems probable that our great
eruptive period, which destroyed our Mesozoic flora, may have
been concurrent with a cold epoch, due perhaps to a less
intense eccentricity of the earth’s orbit, and thus showing a
correspondence with the next great eruptive period (basalt)
which, concurring with more potent astronomical and geo-
graphical conditions, during our glacier epoch at the com-
mencement of our Neogene period (Pliocene), the whole ' f
our rich and varied Tertiary flora was similarly suddenly and
almost completely destroyed, locally at least.
These three great changes in our flora, therefore, corre-
sponding with the exceptional glacial epochs, and also corre-
sponding closely with the periods of great physical convul-
sions, go to show that there is an underlying bond of connec-
tion with exceptional concurrences, at remote intervals, of
astronomical, physical, and geographical causes,! and that the
combination of the three latter causes is essential to the initia-
tion of conditions which produce glacial epochs contempor-
aneously in widely separated parts of the globe. The univer-
sality of glacial action towards the close of the Permo-Carbon-
iferous age is testified by the following observations of their
occurrence in rocks of different countries.
„ If a recognised the close of the Cretaceous period as “an epoch
of cold.
t This conclusion is in harmony with the originally expressed
opinions of Agassiz and Dana, according to Dr. Wallace’s account (p.
222 ~ Island Life ”): “ Agassiz appears to have been the first to sug-
gest that the principal epochs of life extermination were epochs of cold;
a /id Dana thinks that two at least of such epochs may be recognised at
the close of the Paleozoic and of the Cretaceous periods.” To which we
may certainly in Australasia add a third at the close of the Paleogene
period (miocene) concurring with the great glacier epoch of Austral-
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Evidence of Glacial Action in Rocks of the Permo-
Carboniferous Age.
Tasmania. —lt is fully nine years ago (1884) since I first
communicated to the Royal Society of Tasmania my discovery
of evidences of ice action in the rocks of Permo-Carboniferous
age at Maria Island. In the year 1886 I made a further dis-
covery of similar evidences of ice action in the shape of huge
erratics and polished blocks of the harder rocks foreign to
the neighbourhood, in the same formation, at One Tree
Point, Bruny Island. Since that time I have obtained abun-
dant evidence in rocks of the same age throughout South-
Eastern Tasmania.
Everywhere these ice-borne conglomerates and erratics are
found in more or less barren layers of the lower marine beds,
locally known as “ Mudstone Rocks.” In places, however,
as at Beltana, near Hobart, Bedlam Walls, Blackman’s Bay
Heads, Variety Bay, Adventure Bay, Esperance, and Eagle-
hawk Neck, the dropped erratics and conglomerates are asso-
ciated in dense white or yellow, close-grained mudstones, with
the following organisms :
Spirifera Darwinii ,1. Morris
~ Strzelecki de Kon
~ convoluta ... Phillips
~ glaher W. Martin
~ tasmaniensis J. Morris
Texebraluta sac cuius J. de Sow
Sanguinolites Etheridgei de Kon
~ undatus J. D. Dana
Fachydomus carinatus . ... J. Morris
Edmondia ovalis R. M. Johnston
Aviculo-Pecten limoeformis ... J. Morris
Tellinomya Etheridgei R. M. Johnston
Platyschisma occula J. de Sow
Orthonata compressa J. Morris
Astartila cytherea Dana
Theca lanceolata J. Morris
Goniatites micromphalus J. Morris
~ strictus Dana
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Also, among other forms, a stray fragment bearing a cleat-
impression of the well-known fern, Gangamopteris spathu-
lata, McCoy.
The erratics generally are found in the middle or lower
horizons, and are nowhere associated with the fine laminated
zones almost wholly made up of the remains of the common
lace-like Fenestellae. There can be, therefore, no possible
doubt as to the age of the rocks in which the ice-borne con-
glomerates and erratics occur.
For the most part the polished or angular pebbles, boul-
ders, or angular blocks, occur singly, embedded in what must
have been, at the time of deposition, an exceedingly soft, fine,
homogeneous mud, showing in these beds scarce a trace of
lamination. In some places, however, they occur in thin
lenticular patches as an irregular conglomerate bed. The
rocks are either polished or angular pebbles, or blocks grad-
ing from small pebbles to blocks over a ton in weight, princi-
pally composed of various kinds of granite, gneiss, quartzites,
mica-schists, slates, quartz-rock, all being rocks foreign to
the localities in which they are found. The larger erratics,
composed of granite or quartzite, generally occur singly, and
appear as if they had been quietly dropped upon the soft
muddy floor from floating ice. The polished sides of many
of them plainly indicate ice action, and certainly the huge
single granite and quartzite blocks found at Beltana, One
Tree Point, Bruny, Bedlam Walls, and Maria Island, weigh-
ing respectively from half a ton to over a ton, could not
have been transported to their present position in the original
soft muddy bottom of the ancient and comparatively shallow
sea floor, except by the agency of floating ice. Although
here no favourable conditions occur for tracing fine mark-
ings of striae or groovings, the cumulative evidence, otherwise,
is certainly conclusive in referring the transport of these con-
glomerates and huge erratics to ice agency.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


The mudstone beds in which the erratics occur are now
everywhere cross-jointed in the most curious fashion.
At Eaglehawk Neck, at a place famously known to the
curious sightseer as the “ Tesselated Pavement,” the wonder-
ful regularity of the cross-jointing is marvellously perfect.
It is curious to observe that, whether the jointing be perfect
or irregular, they cut through small, hard, polished pebbles
or quartz blocks as though they formed a perfectly homo-
geneous substance with the now hardened mudstone matrix.
In the large granite erratic, over half a ton weight, on the
shore at Bel tana, several joints, some fine as a hair, others
coarse, continuous with those of the mudstone, meet and
intersect in the solid grey granite and divide it as completely
as in similar cross-jointings in the now homogeneous, hard
and siliceous mud rock itself. This feature of the cross-
jointing is constant everywhere in the planes in which the
erratics occur.
It is possible that some of the thick, conglomerate beds
occurring in the vicinity of Mt. Tyndall, Mt. Lyell, and Mt.
Owen, in which marks of ice action are reported to have
been recently discovered by Messrs. Dunn and Moore, may
yet to prove to belong to the same horizon.
Australia. —What is known among Australian geologists as
the “ glacial conglomerates ” of Victoria, and occurring at
Bacchus Marsh, Wild Duck, and in other places in Victoria,
are the best evidences in Australasia of glacial action on a
large scale in rocks deposited towards the close of the Permo-
Carbpniferous age. It is now about 27 years ago since these
ice-borne conglomerates were first referred to this mode of
origin by Sir E. Daintree, whose view of their mode of origin
was soon after confirmed by Dr. A. K. C. Selwyn. E. D.
Oldham, in the year 1886, further confirmed the conclusions
of Daintree and Selwyn, and correlated the deposits with simi-
lar glacial phenomena occurring in the Newcastle beds, New
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


South Wales, and with the Talchir and Salt Range ice-borne
conglomerates of India, whose position is known to be of
Permo-Carboniferous age. Other observers, notably Mr.
J. E. Dunn, F.G.S., have conclusively shown by the abun-
dant proofs of glacial action that the conglomerates of this
legion have been transported thither by floating ice, as in
the case of the conglomerates and erratics of a similar hori-
zon in New South Wales and Tasmania.
Mr. Dunn states that the conglomerate is spread over a
wide area on both sides of the dividing range, and particu-
laily at Bacchus Marsh, Wooragee, Wahgunyah, Rutherglen,
The Springs, El Dorado, Tarrawinga, Badaginnie, Wild
Duck Creek, Carisbrook, and the Gordons. Its thickness
is stated to be over 100 feet at Bacchus Marsh and in a shaft
at Wooragee.
It contains granites in great variety, gneiss, schist, quartz
rock, &c., the great mass being derived, as in Tasmania, from
schistose and other ancient rocks. The material, Mr. Dunn
states, “ ranges in size from the finest silt up to great blocks
several feet across, and weighing in some cases probably from
20 to 30 tons. From the well-rounded, almost polished pebble
boulder to the rough angular fragment of rock that has been
torn from its parent mass, and not subsequently abraded, all
are represented in these conglomerates. ” Elsewhere Mr.
Dunn states that “ Not only are the pebbles, &c., scored and
scratched, but great numbers are rubbed on one or more
sides (facetted).” From the occurrence of the same genus
of ferns (eithei Clossopteris or Cangamopterv s) occurring in
similar ice-borne conglomerates in the Dwyka’s or Ecca beds
of South Africa and in New South Wales, Mr. Dunn believes
them to be of the same age, i.e., Permo-Carboniferous.
Other Countries. —Similar evidence of glacial action in the
corresponding Permian of England has long been made
known to geologists by Mr. Ramsay.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Thus, in England; Talchir and Salt Kange, India; Dwyka
conglomerates, South Africa; Bacchus Marsh conglomerates,
Victoria; and in similar conglomerates in New South Wales
and Tasmania we have abundant evidence in rocks of the
same Permo-Carboniferous age in widely-separated regions
of both hemispheres, that a general refrigeration of climate
occurred near to the close of the Permo-Carboniferous age,
indicating that a general refrigeration of climate of great
intensity existed, probably due to exceptional combination of
astronomical, physical, and geographical causes, as in the
glacier and glacial epochs of Pliocene and Pleistocene ages
respectively; and we may, therefore, safely term the older
period in which such phenomena has occurred—the ancient
glacial epoch of Permo-Carboniferous age.
The Causes of Glacial Epochs.
Mr. Searles V. Wood, Jun., enumerates no less than seven
different causes which have been advanced, more or less stren-
uously at various times by different persons, to account for
the marked changes in climate of which the record of the
rocks bears unmistakable evidence. These are—
(l) A decrease in the original heat of the planet.
(2) Changes in the obliquity of the ecliptic.
(3) Changes in the position of the earth’s axis of rota-
tion.
(4) A variation in the amount of heat radiated from
the sun.
(5) A variation in the temperature of space.
(6) The combined effect of the precession of the
equinoxes and of the eccentricity of the earth’s
orbit.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


(7) Changes in the distribution of land and water. To
these we must add another, or rather the combina-
tion of the last two, as ably put forward by Dr.
Wallace in his “ Island Life,” viz. ;
(8) A particular distribution of geographical and physi-
cal conditions operating concurrently with high
eccentricity of the earth’s orbit with winter in
aphelion.
As regards the first five supposed causes, I follow Dr.
Wallace in rejecting them on the grounds that they are either
inadequate, taken singly or in combination, to explain the
whole of the known phenomena associated with glacial epochs,
or there is no geological evidence which reveals their occur-
rence.
There remain, therefore, only two, taken singly with the
third, which demand their causal concurrence.
Before entering upon a discussion as to the efficiency or
otherwise of the principal hypotheses which would at least
explain the observed dynamic effects of former glaciation, and
which, after all, are the only phenomena that require special
explanation from a geologist’s point of view, it is necessary
to mark strongly the distinction between (1) a period of
abnormally low temperature in a given region, and (2) glacial
action, per se y in the same region. In ordinary discussions
on probable causes of glaciation the two ideas are mixed up,
or appear to signify the same thing, and consequently not a
little of the antagonism between some of the advocates of the
geographical theory and the astronomical theory respectively
is due to the lack of precision with which they grasp the
essential differences which exist between them.
The mere lowering of temperature throughout the various
zones of isotherms of any one hemisphere during a period of
extreme eccentricity with winter in aphelion, as first demon-
strated by the late Dr. Croll, and as lately confirmed and
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


amplified in some particulars by Sir Robert Ball and others,,
would no doubt cause the limits of the polar ice cap W extend
considerably towards the lower latitudes. But this result
would not of itself involve the dynamic effects of glaciation
without (1) the agency of highlands, and (2) without sufficient
precipitation of moisture to turn the balance in each separ-
ate locality against the loss by melting during the short but
excessive heat of summer. Inasmuch also as the now
depressed isochional of the neve or snow-line, the result of
the astronomical cause, would still continue to rise in height
towards the Equator, there would (3) still be a point or iso-
thermal line towards the Equator, beyond which the lowered
temperature, from astronomical causes, would be inadequate
to produce the freezing of water vapour near to the earth’s
surface, even in cases where the latter attained to a consider-
able height, yet falling short of its still more elevated snow-
line isochional.
On the other hand, the evidences of former glaciation in
any one place are only direct proof that the particular area
affected was formerly subjected to conditions involving a
temperature at or below 32° F., but they do not directly
determine whether the area so affected was mainly influenced
by (1) a general change in the regional temperature of that
place, due to astronomical causes; or (2) by geographical and
physical causes which, subsequent to the glacial action, of which
evidence remains, may have operated in lowering the mountain
cap below the influence of normal temperature of the existing
snow-line isochional, above which it may have formerly
reared; or (3) by alteration in the distribution of land and
water in the same region, and thereby altering the thermal
currents of air and ocean, whereby the isotherm of a former
climate, as in Labrador, may have been changed —with or
without the conjunction of astronomical causes —to an iso-
therm like that of Ireland. Notwithstanding all such qualifi-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


cations which arise in the mind when dealing with the milder
and detached examples of former glaciations which occur on
the border-line of latitudes lying almost beyond the scope of
the astronomical cause to produce intense meteorological
changes—as on lowlands in lower latitudes—it is almost con-
clusive that it would require a general astronomical cause, in
combination with the geographical, to account for that
intense form of glacial action which repeated itself after a
small geological interval of time in Northern Europe, and in
North America, during the Pleistocene period. How far any
one of these causes would fail to account for all the known
evidence of glacial phenomena in the younger rocks of both
hemispheres is best realised when we consider the matter
more closely.
Ihe Objections which Suggest Themselves when Attempt-
ing to Explain the Phenomena of Glaciation in Both
Hemispheres by Reference to the Astronomical Theory
TAKEN BY ITSELF.
As my object is to go straight to the root of the difficulty
of explaining the intense form of glaciation over Northern
Europe and North America during the Pleistocene period by
reference to the astronomical theory alone, I will at once
grant that the necessary amount of precipitation and vapour,
the thermal currents of air and ocean, the elevation of the
land, the distance of inland regions from vapour-producing
sources, and the difference in latitude, would result in pro-
ducing all those variable effects upon isotherms and amount
of snowfall within the same latitude as they are known to
do at present; although we must anticipate greater intensity
of effect, and a greater extension of the isotherm of frost at
sea-level, together with a general lowering of the snow-level
or neve.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Thus, though it must still be contended that geographical
and physical causes would continue to operate in producing
some such variations in isotherms, and in the variableness
of the distribution of snow, even in the same latitude, or
even in different faces of great physical barriers such as lofty
mountain chains, it is still quite conceivable that the astro-
nomical cause alone might adequately account for the glacial
epoch of Europe and North America, as well as for the milder
effects of glaciation exhibited in the rocks of Australia.
The real difficulty to the acceptance of the adequacy of the
astronomical theory, taken hy itself , is as much due to its lack
of consistency with astronomical facts as it is to its inade-
quacy to explain the facts of geology, and in the latter case —
not so much as regards positive evidence in respect of glacial
effects actually preserved in our rocks, as for its inadequacy
to explain the absence of glacial effects at numerous points
within the Tertiary period corresponding with the cycles of
extreme eccentricity* of the earth’s orbit combined with
winter in aphelion; many of which were as great, and, at two
cycles, enormously greater than in the Pleistocene period,
where alone correspondence appears to occur. To be consis-
tent with itself, therefore, it must demand that similar effects
of glaciation in both hemispheres in the same latitude, or
nearly so, should be produced at intervals, and in intensity
-corresponding with the recurrence of astronomical periods of
extreme eccentricity with winter in aphelion, alternately
every 10,500 years in each hemisphere. There is not, how-
ever, the slightest evidence of glacial epochs, such as that of
the Pleistocene period in Europe and North America, occur-
ring within the Tertiary period, corresponding to the recur-
* This is on the assumption that Dr. Croll’s calculations of periods
of eccentricity calculated for the last three millions are relatively cor-
rect, if not absolutely so, and that there were many cycles within the
Cainozoic age alone, two of which were enormously greater than the
last, which is supposed to correspond with the glacial epoch of Pleisto-
cene age.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


rence of cycles of extreme eccentricity. Indeed, the double
or repeated recurrence of a glacial epoch within the Pleisto-
cene period in the Northern Hemisphere, and probably the
glacier epoch towards the close of the Tertiary period in Aus-
tralasia, appear to be peculiarly exceptional occurrences
within the whole range of the Cainozoic period.
Both Dr. Croll and Sir Robert Ball clearly perceived the
difficulty presented by the lack of evidence of earlier glacia-
tion in our rocks corresponding to former recurrences of cycles
of maximum eccentricity. The latter dismisses this serious
difficulty far too curtly, by allusions to the alleged imperfec-
tion of the records of the rocks, and to the perishable nature
of boulder clays, rendering them peculiarly liable to be
washed away; and, as regards moraines, erratics, &c., he
adds, The advent of one ice sheet ploughs away the traces
of preceding ice sheets.” But surely some definite traces
ought to be found intercalated among the many well-preserved
beds of the equally perishable sediments of the Tertiary
formations within the region covered or affected by the last
great spread of ice during the Pleistocene age. References to
the rate and amount of denudation by atmospheric and other
causes, based upon the amount of sediments held in suspen-
sion, and solutions derived from the waste of the land in
rivers flowing into the ocean, may be fairly correct, but surely
this waste is not composed entirely of the latest-formed
deposits. The destruction ever going on in our rocks does not
operate so intensely upon the latest layers formed as upon
particular areas whose slopes and troughs favour the rapidly
erosive action of the great destroyer, water in motion; and
this action operates in vertical cuts and gashes through the
envelopes of whatever strata may be underneath, rather than
in sweeping away all trace of the most-recently formed layers,
many of which must occur in such situations where they were
covered and permanently protected by the newer sediments
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


in course of formation, and, perhaps, largely derived from
the immediate waste of the very oldest rocks.
Why, therefore, should we not expect fairly complete ver-
tical fragments of ancient boulder clays, moraine stuff, erratic
drifts, and in the Tertiary formations at least, as commonly
as we do of contemporaneous clays, deposited gravels, lignites
and sediments, equally perishable stuff, otherwise derived ?
This is not the only difficulty which bars the way to the
acceptance of the astronomical theory taken by itself in ade-
quately accounting for the glacial epoch of Northern Europe
and North America during the Pleistocene age. For if the
general belief of Australasian geologists be correct that the
great glacier epoch of Southern Australia, Tasmania, and
New Zealand occurred prior to the Pleistocene age of Europe,
and probably at a point of time contemporaneous with the
Pliocene of Europe, the astronomical theory alone would be
an inadequate explanation of the whole facts. It is gener-
ally believed, however, that during the Pleistocene period
Australasia had experienced a pluvial epoch almost the paral-
lel of corresponding northern latitudes —North Africa and
Syria —during the glacial epoch. Thus, in a very able
address recently delivered by Professor Jas. Geikie, D.C.L.,
LL.D., F.R.S., as President of the Geological Society of
Edinburgh, he states: —*
“ But while the conditions in Northern and Central Europe
were markedly glacial, further south only more or less iso-
lated snow-capped mountains and local glaciers appeared —
such, for example, as those of the Sierra Nevada, the Apen-
nines, Corsica, the Atlas, the Lebanon, &c. In connection
with these facts we may note also the Azores were reached by
floating ice; and I need only refer in a word to the evidence
of cold, wet conditions, as furnished by the plant and animal
* Supposed Causes of the Glacial Period ”: Professor Jas. Geikie,
D.C.L., LL.D., F.R.S. (Trans. Edin. Geol. Soc., p. 212.)
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


remains of Southern Europe. Again, in North Africa and
Syria, we find in now desiccated regions widespread fiuvia-
tile accumidations, which, in the opinion of a number of
competent observers, are indicative of rainy conditions con-
temporaneous with the glacial period of Europe.”
I have marked the latter portion with italics for the pur-
pose of drawing particular attention to the fact that the geo-
graphical position of Australia, at least, in southern lati-
tudes, corresponds exactly with the position of North Africa
and Syria, in northern latitude. If, therefore, the causes
which produced the great glacial epoch in Northern Europe
did not extend glacial effects into Syria and North Africa,
why should some Australian geologists expect intense glacial
effects in Australia, seeing that corresponding latitudes in the
Northern Hemisphere only experienced mild glacial effects
on high mountain slopes, and only an increased rainfall on
lower levels ? If the opinion of our most competent geological
observers in Australia be correct, an increased pluvial action
in Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand is the only con-
temporaneous effect observed during the Pleistocene period,
as in corresponding latitudes in Syria and North Africa; and
thus far there is harmony with the astronomical theory. But
if, in the opinion of the same observers, the isolated snow-
capped mountains and local glaciers of Southern Australia
and Tasmania, and the more intense glacier period of New
Zealand, indicating a still more marked refrigeration of
climate, occurred anterior to this, namely, in the Pliocene
period, it would prove that geographical and physical causes
must be added to the astronomical before we can adequately
account for the special refrigeration of Northern and Central
Europe at a later epoch.
From independent reasoning, based mainly on the absence
of evidence of glaciation in the earlier Tertiary rocks of
Europe, corresponding to former cycles of even greater
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


intensity of the eccentricity of the earth’s orbit than occurred
during the Pleistocene period, Dr. Wallace and Mr. Searles
Y. Wood, Jun., arrive at an exactly similar conclusion, viz.,
the necessity of the concurrence of geographical and astro-
nomical causes.
There is one remarkable point connected with the supposed
earlier occurrence of the glacier period of Australasia, which, if
confirmed, will be a strong argument in favour of the potency
of the astronomical theory, considered, at any rate, as a con-
stant ana necessary major element or great coefficient in the
causation of great glacial or glacier epochs. In the extended
calculation of the cycles of eccentricity of the earth’s orbit,
Dr. Croll places the highest limit reached in three million
years at a point of time nearly 850,000 years ago, or about
550.000 years anterior to the last great cycle, extending from
80.000 to 250,000 years ago, which is supposed to correspond
with the glacial and inter-glacial epochs of Europe and North
America. Now, as already stated by me*: “ Although it
be admitted that the primary cause of the glacial epoch in
the Northern Hemisphere in the Pleistocene period may be
due to the high phase of eccentricity of the earth’s orbit in
combination with winter in aphelion—the effect of preces-
sion—it does not necessarily follow that the extreme effects of
glaciation have been produced in both hemispheres, or in dif-
ferent epochs, by the recurrence of such astronomical causes
alone. It is admitted that warm ocean currents have such
an important bearing upon the question that, if they were
not debarred to a great extent from the hemisphere specially
affected by the astronomical causes referred to, glaciation of
any extraordinary character would not be appreciable. Now
the preponderance and the nature of the distribution of the
land in the Northern Hemisphere render the latter more
liable to the obstruction or diversion of the warm equatorial
* “ Geol. of Tasmania,” p. 255.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


ocean currents produced by geographical changes, while, with
the smaller extent of elevated land and its insular position,
the Southern Hemisphere would be comparatively unaffected
Now, from these considerations it is important to observe
that, as regards Australasia, the influence of geographical
barriers may be said to be nil, and that this region, what-
ever great general climatic changes may have taken place,
can be referred with greater certainty to astronomical causes
alone. But if we admit this, we must also allow that the
major astronomical cause must produce the major effect.
Seeing, therefore, that Dr. Croll has calculated the amount
of eccentricity of the earth’s orbit 850,000 years ago to be
28'57 per cent, greater than during the last cycle, which is
supposed to correspond with the glacial epoch of the Northern
Hemisphere, ought we not to expect to find in Australasia,
where alone the purely astronomical effect would be most clearly
revealed, the most marked extreme of climate ? If we reason
correctly we must answer in the affirmative, whatever may
be our preconceptions, which are ever too prone to take side
glances at consequences before making a reply. We must
therefore, in Australasia at least, expect to find, probably
near to the close of the Tertiary period (according to the very
moderate estimate of geological time by Dr. Wallace), evi-
dences of a greater intensity of refrigeration of climate than
during the period corresponding to the glacial epoch of the
Northern Hemisphere, whose intensity there is mainly due
to combined causes. The evidences of our rocks by which the
most competent geologists of Australasia were originally led
to place our glacier epoch in the Pliocene period, and a great
pluvial epoch in the Pleistocene period, are remarkable as a
confirmation of the potency of the astronomical cause in itself
to produce at periods of maximum eccentricity great climatic
changes, corresponding in effect to the degree of eccentricity
at the respective periods.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Of course, it is taken for granted that the astronomical
cause, even although operating in a broadly contemporaneous
manner in both hemispheres in any one epoch, must neverthe-
less, in its minor phases of variation every 10,500 years, due
to precession, place the scene of greatest severity in either
hemisphere consecutively and not contemporaneously.
It is admitted that a glacial epoch is broad enough to con-
tain many of such consecutive alternations.
The Weight of Negative Evidence.
The weight of negative evidence against the astronomical
theory by itself, as regards the absence of glacial deposits in
other Tertiary formations, is ably summarised by Dr. Wallace
in the following terms :— * ‘ But when we proceed to examine
the Tertiary deposits of other parts of Europe, and especially
of our own country, for evidence of this kind, not only is such
evidence completely wanting, but the facts are of so definite
a character as to satisfy most geologists that it can never have
existed, and the same may be said of temperate North
America and of the Arctic regions generally.”
Mr. Searles V. Wood, Jun., who wrote a remarkably able
paper on ” The Climate Controversy,” is quoted by Dr. Wal-
lace in support of this conclusion, as follows:
“ Now the Eocene formation is complete in England, and
is exposed in continuous sections along the north coast of the
Isle of Wight from its base to its junction with the Oligocene
(or Lower Miocene according to some), and along the
northern coast of Kent from its base to the lower Bagshot
Sand. It has been intersected by railway and other cuttings
in all directions and at all horizons, and pierced by wells
innumerable; while from its strata in England, France, and
Belgium the most extensive collections of organic remains
have been made of any formation yet explored, and from
THE R. M, JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


nearly all its horizons, for at one place or another nearly
every horizon may be said to have yielded fossils of some kind.
These fossils, however, whether they be the remains of a flora,
such as that of Sheppey, or of a vertebral fauna, containing
the crocodile and alligator, such as is yielded by beds indica-
tive of terrestrial conditions, or of a molluscan assemblage,
such as is present in marine or flurio-marine beds of the
formation, are of unmistakably tropical or sub-tropical char-
acter throughout ; and no trace whatever has appeared of the
intercalation of a glacial period , much less of successive,
intercalations indicative of more than one period of 10,500
years’ glaciation. Nor can it be urged that the glacial epochs
of the Eocene in England were intervals of dry land, and so
have left no evidence of their existence behind them, because
a large part of the continuous sequence of Eocene deposits
in this country consists of alternations of fluorine, fluvio-
marine, and purely marine strata; so that it seems impossible
that, during the accumulation of the Eocene formation in
England, a glacial period could have occurred without its
evidences being abundantly apparent. The Oligocene of
Northern Germany and Belgium, and the Miocene of these
countries and of France, have also afforded a rich molluscan
fauna, which, like that of the Eocene, has as yet presented
no indication of the intrusion of anything to interfere with
its uniformly sub-tropical character.’ ’*
Dr. Wallace, in confirmation, goes on to sayf : “ When we
consider that this enormous series of deposits, many thou-
sand feet in thickness, consists wholly of alternation of clays,
sands, marls, shales, or limestones, with a few beds of pebbles
or conglomerate, not one of the whole series containing irregu-
lar blocks of foreign material, boulders, or gravel, such as
we have seen to be the essential characteristic of a glacial
* “ Geol. Magazine,” 1876, p. 392; “Island Life,” pp. 173-174.
t “ Island Life,” pp. 174, 175.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


epoch; and when we find that this very same general char-
acter pervades all the extensive Tertiary deposits of temperate
North America, we shall, I think, be forced to the conclusion
that no general glacial epoch could have occurred during their
formation.’ ” And Dr. Wallace further anticipates Sir
Robt. Ball’s argument, which relies solely upon the “ imper-
fection of the geological record,” by the concluding part of
his observations, where he states: “ It must be remembered
that the ‘ imperfection of the geological record ’ will not help
us here, because the series of Tertiary deposits is unusually
complete, and we must suppose some destructive agency to
have selected all the intercalated glacial beds, and to have so
completely made away with them that not a fragment
remains, while preserving all, or almost all, the interglacial
beds; and to have acted thus capriciously, not in one limited
area only, but over the whole Northern Hemisphere, with
the local exceptions on the flanks of great mountain ranges
already referred to.” On the whole, therefore, it seems to
be conclusively demonstrated that a concurrence of favour-
able geographical conditions with astronomical causes is essen-
tial to the initiation of glacial conditions even in existing
temperate zones, and that changes of eccentricity, however
great, have no potency in themselves to produce glaciation of
an intense form on the lower levels of existing temperate lati-
tudes, because warm air and ocean currents have so pre-
ponderating an influence, that, if they were not diverted and
barred by physical and geographical conditions from the
regions affected, glaciation on lowlands of existing temperate
latitudes would be impossible. These conclusions are in no
way disturbed by the more recent calculations by Sir Robt.
Ball in regard to the exact proportion of direct heat received
by any one hemisphere during the long winter and short sum-
mer of a period of great eccentricity of winter in aphelion in
the respective hemispheres; for he himself acknowledges that
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


the heat influence affecting either hemisphere under the most
extreme conditions is not confined to the direct sun rays.
At page 126 (“ The Cause of an Ice Age ”) Sir Robt. Ball
states: ‘ ‘ There are two causes by which the severity of a
glaciation is somewhat modified. There is, first, the actual
storage of some of the copious heat of summer in the glaciated
hemisphere itself, to be doled out again during winter; there
is, secondly, the contribution of heat from the opposite hemi-
sphere, which may he conveyed via air or via water across the
equator into glaciated regions Hence it follows that his
calculations—proving that within the same hemisphere the
heat received direct from the sun amounts to 63 per cent, in
summer and only 37 per cent, in winter —do not help us to
gauge the actual heat received in the winter of the glaciated
hemisphere, as he has not formed any estimate of the known
indirect sources of heat which would be received by air and
ocean currents from the genial hemisphere, but the value of
which we may have, now, some means of conceiving from the
study of two regions in nearly the same northern latitudes,
viz., Labrador and Ireland —the former being in a
glaciated condition owing to the influence of the Arctic
cold current of water; the latter in a genial condition
owing chiefly to the influence of the warm Gulf Stream,
whose heat has been mainly derived from south equa-
torial regions.* While I cannot but admire the masterly
and lucid manner in which Sir Robert Ball explains the astro-
nomical theory, and supports the main conclusions of Dr.
droll, I am still disposed to think that in limiting his observa-
tion too closely to the direct sources of heat and their exact
measurement, as regards the glaciated hemisphere, he has not
sufficiently reflected upon the powerful modifying influences
of the indirect supplies received from the genial hemisphere,
* Dr. Croll estimated that the quantity of heat transferred bv the
Gulf Stream from eqiiatorial regions was not less than one-fifth of the
entire heat possessed by the North Atlantic.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


nor of the possible changes which might occur in geographical
conditions, which might greatly multiply or diminish the
nominal amount of heat transmitted by the opening of new
equatorial channels of communication, or by barring former
channels. Nay, more, according to Herschel’s astronomical
theory, as modified by Sir Robert Ball, and its expected influ-
ence upon climate during a period of great eccentricity with
the winter in aphelion, in the Southern Hemisphere, as at
present—it is stated : "In the northern we should have a
short but very mild winter, with a very long but very cool
summer, i.e., an approach to perpetual spring"; but from
Mr. Robt. H. Scott’s recent work on Meteorology, we find
from existing conditions* " the opposite is the case , owing
to the unequal distribution of land, and water,” f and also
owing to the fact " that in the summer in the Northern
Hemisphere the sun’s rays fall on the greatest possible land
area.” Here we have a complete reversal of the supposed
influence of the astronomical cause, proving that the geo-
graphical conditions, which Sir Robt. Ball almost ignores as
a necessary concurring cause in the initiation of a glacial
epoch, has a preponderating effect in the determination of
existing climates; and although Sir Robt. Ball only admits,
to a certain extent, the modifying influence of geographical
and feels the result " a little disappointing ” in
view of the astronomical theory put forward, he nevertheless
has practically§ to admit that a glacial epoch cannot take
place without the concurrence of two great causes, viz., a
period of great eccentricity of the earth’s orbit, with winter
in aphelion, conjoined with specially favouring geographical
conditions.
* “ Elementary Meteorology,” by R. H. Scott, p. 231
t Ibid., p. 230.
1 " The Cause of an Ice Age,” p. 134.
S fhid., pp. 134, 159, 160.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Improbability of Finding Evidence of Intense Glaciation
in any Portion of Australian Lowlands Among Rocks
of the Same Age with the Glacial Epoch of North and
Central Europe and North America.
There are some enthusiasts who are so infatuated by the sup-
posed omnipotence of the astronomical theory when regarded
as the sole cause of glacial epochs, that they are somehow
imbued with the idea that the same cause or causes which
produced the Till or “ Grund Moraine ” of the northern
glacial epoch in the lowlands of Scotland, Wales, and Ire-
land, between north lat. 51° to 59°, and covered these coun-
tries with a continuous ice-sheet, may also be expected to
have produced similarly intense results of glaciation in south
lat. 36° to 38° in the lowlands of Australia, in a region cor-
responding to North Africa and the middle of the Mediter-
ranean Sea in the Northern Hemisphere.
Now, while it is granted that the actual facts of observa-
tion may be faithfully recorded by persons holding such
extravagant notions, it may be doubted whether they are able
to draw inferences from the less perfect portion of supposed
glacial evidence without being coloured to some extent by
the extravagance of their ideas concerning the potency of
causal influences.
If we are to be guided by the true scientific method in the
investigation of the potency of causes relating to climate and
glaciation, we must surely proceed in a reasonable manner
by deducing the unknown from the known, the past from the
present.
Now, the potency of the causes which produced the glacial
epoch in Northern and Central Europe have been fairly gauged
by very able observers; and they have not only closely deter-
mined the limits of the spread of the northern ice-sheet in a
southerly direction, but, by a careful chain of observation of
the upper and lower limits of ice action on elevated slopes of
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Northern Hemisphere.
Southern Latitudes.
1. Southern limit of
N. Z’ alan i
2. Southern limit of
Tasmania
3 Southern limit of
Au tralia
Northern Latitudes.
Mouth of River Loire,
France
Venice, Bayonne
Lisbon, Valencia
9,520
6,520
4. Mount Cook, New
Zealand
Pyrenees, Rotondo, Bal-
kans, Apennines
9,520
6,520
5. Mount Olympus,
Cradle Mount,
Tasmania
Cape St. Vincent, Sicily,
Athens
11,187
8.187
6. Bacchus Marsh,
Yictoria
Sierra Nevada
11,480
8,480
j 7. Mount Kosciusko
Tangiers. N. Africa,
. 8. M o u n t Lofty
Range, Adelaide
9. Australia
Malta, Cyprus. Mount
Atlas, N. Africa, Mor-
occo
North Africa. Syria
mountains in a series of latitudinal points, they have arrived
at a fairly approximate idea of the altitude of the glacial
epoch neve or snow-line; and from such materials have given
us broadly satisfactory isochionals for various latitudes,
embracing at least the whole of the region subjected to glacia-
tion, excepting, of course, the local glaciation of mountains
ascending beyond the neve in higher temperate and tropical
countries.
It is also necessary to understand clearly the position which
Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand occupy in southern
latitudes, as compared with the position of countries in
Europe, in northern latitudes, over which it is known intense
glaciation extended during the Great Glacial Epoch.
For this purpose I have placed in parallel columns the
names of a few well-known places nearly in the same line of
isotherm or latitude, and therefore approximately the respect-
ive equivalents of each other in north and south latitude.
Approximate Equivalents.
Estimated height of
snow-line (feet).
Present Glacial
Time, Epoch.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


The importance of this contrast is great, because it brings
forcibly before our minds that the position of Australia cor-
responds, not with the glaciated area of North and Central
Europe, but with those more genial southerly regions of North
Africa and Syria, lying beyond the scope of the intense
glacial influence of the glacial epoch; and it reminds us also,
although we may be prepared to agree with Sir Robt. Ball,
that we might find evidence of corresponding glacial intensity
to the northern ice age of Europe in the Southern Hemi-
sphere, that Australasia in any part —perhaps with the excep-
tion of Stewart Island lying at the southern extremity of New
Zealand —does not come within that 'portion of the Southern
Hemisphere which corresponds with the specially glaciated
region of Nor them and Central Europe and North America.
If we reason from the known to the unknown, therefore, we
have good a posteriori grounds for doubting the value of evi-
dence which locates the effects of intense action, during the
glacial epoch of Europe, in any part of the lowlands of even
the most southerly region of the Australian mainland, at
least. These conclusions are in perfect harmony with the
most recent investigations of the extent and comparative
intensity of the glaciation of Europe in the last ice age. Per-
haps there is no one entitled to speak with greater authority
on such a matter as Prof. James Geikie, D.C.L., LL.D.,
F.R.S., the accomplished author of “ The Great Ice Age.”
In his last presidential address* to the members of the Geo-
logical Society of Edinburgh—from which I am proud to have
received the honour of being elected as one of the honorary
foreign corresponding members—he deals with the whole of
the “ Supposed Causes of the Glacial Period ” with a master
mind. In referring to the extent of knowledge now possessed
by us in measuring the limits and intensity of glaciation of
the “ Ice Age,” he statesf :
* Trans. Edinburgh Geol. Soc., Vol. VI., Part 3. pp. 209. 230.
+ Ibid., p. 211.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


“So greatly has our knowledge of the glaciation of
Europe increased during recent years that the height
of the snow-line of the glacial period has been deter-
mined by MM. Simony, Partsch, Penck, and Hdfer.
Their method is simple enough. They first ascertain the low-
est parts of a glaciated region from which independent glaciers
have flowed. This gives the maximum height of the snow-
line.
Next they determine the lowest point reached by such
glaciers. It is obvious that the snow-line would occur higher
up than that, but at a lower level than the actual sources of
the glaciers, and thus the minimum height of the former snow-
line is approximately ascertained.
The lowest level from which independent glaciers form-
erly flowed, and the terminal point reached by the highest-
lying glaciers having been duly ascertained, it is possible to
determine with sufficient accuracy the mean height of the old
snow-line. The required data are best obtained, as one might
have expected, in the Pyrenees and amongst the mountains of
Middle and Southern Europe.
In those regions the snow-line would seem to have been
some 3000 feet or so lower than now! From such data Pro-
fessor Penck has constructed a map showing the isochional
lines of the glacial period. These lines are, I need hardly
say, only approximations, but they are sufficiently near the
truth to bring out the contrast between the ice age and the
present. Thus the isochional of 1000 metres, which at pre-
sent lies above Northern Scandinavia, was pushed south to
the latitude of Southern France and North Italy; while the
isochional of 2000 metres (now overlying the extreme north
of France and North Germany) passed in glacial times over
the northern part of the Mediterranean. . ..It is
interesting to note that while in the Tabra (North Car-
pathians) the snow-line was depressed in glacial times to the
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


extent of 2700 feet only, in the Alps it descended some 4000
feet or more below its present level. With the snow-line of
that great chain at such an elevation it is obvious that only
a few of the higher 'points of the Apennines could rise
into the regions of the neve. This is the reason why moraines
are met with in only the higher valleys of that range.”
Professor Jas. Geikie elsewhere remarks: “ Isochional lines
are not isotherms. Their height and direction are determined
not only by temperature, but by the amount and distribution
of the snowfall.* Nevertheless, the position of the snow-line
in Europe during the ice age enables us to form a rough esti-
mate of the temperature. At present, in Middle Europe,
the temperature fallsf 1° F. for every 300 feet of ascent.
Hence, if we take the average depression of the snow-line in
glacial times at 3000 feet, that would correspond approxi-
mately to a lowering of the temperature by 10’2°. This may
not appear to be much, but, as Penck points out, were the
mean annual temperature to be lowered to that extent, it
would bring the climate of Northern Norway down to South-
ern Germany, and the climate of Sweden to Austria and
Moravia, while that of the Alps would be met with over the
basin of the Mediterranean. Let it be noted further that
this lowering of the temperature, this displacement of cli-
matic zones, was experienced over the whole continent,
extending on the one hand south into Africa, and on the
other east into Asia. But while the conditions in Northern
and Central Europe were markedly glacial, further south only
more or less isolated snow-capped, mountains and local glaciers
appeared, such, for example, as those of Sierra Nevada, the
Apennines, Corsica, the Atlas, the Lebanon, &c.”
* The better known term “ isochrvme ” only implies equality in
extremes of cold. (R.M.J.)
t From independent calculations based, by the writer, on Mr. R.
H. Scott’s tables of existing: mean temperatures for various latitudes,
together with limits of existing snow-line over both hemispheres, it
would require only a fall of 1 deg. F. for every 400 feet of ascent.
(R.M.J.)
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


It is of particular interest to note the portion of Professor
Geikie’s remarks which have been italicised, as it is just this
milder form of glaciation which we can reasonably expect in
the southernmost part of Australasia, including Tasmania
and New Zealand, whose position is almost the exact equiva-
lent of the regions bordering the Mediterranean referred to
by him; and also, that even within this southern region of
Australia, it is only in the vicinity of mountains whose crests
are likely to have ascended into the neve at the time of a
glacial epoch that we can reasonably hope to find good evidence
of former glaciation due to local glaciers, and there only in
the higher valleys. As this region, however, corresponds to
the southern extremity of Europe and the northerly extremity
of Africa, it is probable that during a period of lowered tem-
perature there would be a greatly increased rainfall, with a
great increase in the dynamic effects of existing rivers and
watercourses, both in highlands and lowlands.
Such was the condition of similar latitudes during the ice
age of Europe, according to Prof. James Geikie; for in the
same address, from which I have so largely quoted, he states,*
“ that in the extreme south of Europe, and in North Africa
and West Asia, increased rain precipitation accompanied low-
ering of temperature; from which it may be inferred that
precipitation in glacial times was greater generally than it is
now. ”
Now, it is important to observe that in New South Wales,
South Australia, Victoria, New Zealand, and Tasmania we
have abundant evidence, in the extensive, irregular, coarse,
shingly terrace-drifts formed in the main valleys frequently
overlying our older Tertiary basalts, of conditions which indi-
cate, clearly, that during the period extending throughout the
Neogene (Pliocene) and Pleistocene ages there was a greatly
increased rainfall; and so generally throughout these colonies
* Loc. cit., p. 214.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


are these characteristics manifested during this period that
Australian geologists have long been in the habit of referring
to it as the “ pluvial epoch of Australasia. The representa-
tive geologists in Australasia are almost unanimous in placing
the beginning of our glacier and pluvial epochs as far back as
the commencement of the Pliocene age, and it would appear
that this refrigerated pluvial epoch was either continuous or
recurred again and again, well up to the close of the Pleisto-
cene period; and only the later terrace drifts, therefore, may
be said to be the isochrones of the glacial drifts t>f the ice age
of the Northern Hemisphere.
I have referred to the evidence of lowered temperature,
local alpine glaciation, and greatly increased rainfall of the
pluvial epoch very frequently in my larger work on “ The
Geology of Tasmania.”
Thus, in commenting upon the climate of the Neogene
period (Pliocene), I stated (p. 219) :
“Mr. Wilkinson is of opinion that the great drift deposits
left at different levels upon the sides of the valleys as they were
deepened towards the close of the Neogene period indicate a
much greater rainfall than at present, and this greater rain-
fall is inferred to be due to the greater extent of glaciation of
portions of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. What-
ever grounds there may be for this view, it is clear, from the
absence of huge ice-borne erratics, and other evidences on the
lower levels, we are not justified in assuming a very serious
and general refrigeration of the climate in the Australasian
regions.
“ That a considerable change of climate, however, had its
beginning at this time is most probable, as evidenced by
the sudden disappearance of the characteristic flora of the
older, or Paleogene, epoch; and especially by the striking con
trast which its unstratified, irregular drift deposits (almost
barren of all traces of life) present, as compared with the
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


more regularly stratified members, replete with life remains
of the Paleogene epoch.”
Again, in discussing the causes of colder climate
(pp. 254-257), I stated: “It is clear that the con-
ditions under which the successive, irregular, coarse,
shingly terrace-drifts had been formed in the main valleys
were very different from those under which the Paleogene
formations were deposited, and it is also probable, as sug-
gested in respect of equivalent formations in New South
Wales by Mr. S. Wilkinson, and in South Australia by Pro-
fessor Tate, that the mode of deposition and other circum-
stances indicate a greater rainfall than at present. The
paucity of life in the formations by itself, while depriving us
of the aid of palaeontology in the classification of the rocks
and in inferring local climatic conditions, only affords nega-
tive evidence in support of a growing refrigeration of climate.
Whether this supposed change in the direction of a colder
climate became sufficiently intense within the period to pro-
duce the local ice-sheets and glaciers, of which there is evi-
dence in valleys of the western highlands of Tasmania, notably
along the deeply-cut ravines of the Mackintosh River, it is
difficult to determine. It is quite conceivable, however, that
simultaneously with the rising of the floor of the old Paleo-
gene sea the adjacent land partook of a corresponding eleva-
tion ” —(and to this we may now add the conception of maxi-
mum eccentricity of the earth’s orbit, whose occurrence is.
placed about 550,000 years before the glacial epoch by Dr
Croll, which time would approximate closely to the early part
of our Neogene period or beginning of our pluvial epoch)—
“ and we may therefore expect to find, as a direct consequence,
a considerable change of temperature over the area so
affected.”
It is important also to observe, here, that Prof. Hutton is of
opinion that the former greater extension of the New Zea-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


land glaciers occurred during the interval between the Pare-
ora system and the marine beds of the Wanganui system, i.e .,
at a period isochronous with our Neogene pluvial drifts and
terraces.
The difficulty of explaining these facts by reference to a
cause which only came into operation at a much later period,
i.e., in the Pleistocene glacial epoch, and which forms the
greatest stumbling block to the acceptance of the potency of
the astronomical thory as being alone sufficient to account for
such a refrigeration of climate as that which produced the
intense glacial epoch of Europe, is next discussed by me in
the same place at considerable length —pp. 255, 256—and
the following conclusions were arrived at:
“ Accordingly from the very much smaller proportion of ele-
vated land in the Southern Hemisphere, and from the impro-
bability of the equatorial ocean currents having been appreci-
ably excluded at any time, owing to the absence of connected
land barriers, it is reasonable to infer that the combined effects
of astronomical and geological causes, similar to those which
brought about the glacial epoch in Europe and North
America (but especially to the favourable latitudinal posi-
tion) —are not likely to have operated intensely in Austral-
asia.
“ That this seems to be the more reasonable view as regards
Australia is borne out by local evidences.
“ In the first place the Neogeue epoch of Australasia cor-
responds with the Pliocene epoch of Europe, and, conse-
quently, whatever the local climatic conditions may have
been, they cannot in all respects be referred to causes which
entered into combination in a succeeding epoch in the North-
ern Hemisphere.
“ In the second place, while admitting the evidence of
former glaciation in local alpine regions, there is no satisfac-
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


tory proof that the erratics found in such regions belong to
the period in which our raised terrace drifts were formed;
and neither in these nor in the later deposits of the extensive
lower levels do we find any clear signs of ice action, such as
are exhibited so widely in Europe and America, in the shape
of moraines, boulder drift striated blocks, parched blocks,
and other huge ice-borne erratics, &c. On the contrary, the
prevailing terrace drifts in Tasmania are formed from
materials derived from the adjacent or underlying rocks; and
with the exception of huge boulders at the base, or on the
slopes of mountain ranges, clearly traceable to gravitation,
there is not the slightest trace of rock-masses which would
necessitate the agency of ice as a means of transport,* if we
except also those evidences (i.e., of glacial action) in alpine
regions in the western highlands, which are more probably
local effects due mainly to a much greater elevation of the
land in former times (and I am now able to add, perhaps,
also the influence of the greater limit of the eccentricity of
the earth’s orbit with winter in aphelion occurring, accord-
ing to Dr. Croll, 550,000 years prior to the glacial epoch of
the Northern Hemisphere).” I then conclude with the
observation (p. 256): “The author is personally familiar
with the various evidences of glaciation in Scotland at the
higher and lower levels, and his knowledge of Tasmania is
sufficiently wide to enable him to state with confidence that
corresponding evidences in the latter place (i.e., obviously
the lower levels ) are entirely wanting within the Tertiary and
later periods.”
In the recent paper already referred to, prepared by Messrs.
Officer and Balfour, of Victoria, the authors erroneously con-
* These remarks do not apply to the ice-borne erratics found in rocks
of Permo-Carboniferous age. of which there is the most abundant evi-
dence throughout the older mudstones of this age in Tasmania, Vic-
toria, and New South Wales.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


vert my statement as to the absence of evidence of intense
glaciation into an assertion “ that there is no evidence there
(Tasmania) to show that a, glacial 'period has ever taken
place.” I make no such statement. I was the first person
not to observe, but to publish evidence clearly proving ice
action in the alpine regions of our western highlands, but the
absence in lower levels of any evidence of ice action confirms
my opinion as to the absence of intense glacial action during
our glacier and pluvial epochs. In this view, regarding the
absence of evidence of glaciation on the lower levels of Tas-
mania, I am gratified to have the support of our able Govern-
ment Geologist (Mr. Montgomery), for in his paper just read
(“ Glacial Action in Tasmania "), in referring to this very
question, he states; “ In the main I agree with his view,"
that is, with the view which I had inclined to take, as
expressed in p. 256, “ Geology of Tasmania."
Mr. Montgomery’s most valuable contribution to our know-
ledge of ice action, together with similarly valuable papers
of Messrs. Dunn and Moore, now enable us to fix the limits
of the upper and lower indications of positive ice action
on the shoulders and slopes of our western highlands with a
close approximation to the truth, at least sufficiently so to
give us a fairly good base for determining the isochional of
the neve or snow-line of our western highlands, during the
two great glacier periods already referred to. But first it is
necessary to consider how far denudation may have reduced
the height of our mountain tops. If we even allow in such
situations a rate of denudation of three times that of the
average rate, which is estimated to be nearly 1 foot in 3000
years (that gives 1 foot per 1000 years), we can only allow
a lowering of altitude by about 850 feet since the beginning
of the Pliocene period, at which time it is probable the
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


refrigeration, due to the maximum of eccentricity in the
earth’s orbit 850,000 years ago, might probably have caused
the earlier glaciation of our western alpine region, which,
even now, has a very extended surface (Great Greenstone
Plateau) with a mean altitude of 4000 feet. This allowance
for denudation would bring the mean altitude of the same
mountain plateau up to about 5000 feet, and the same cause
would also incline us to extend its elevated area further west,
so as to embrace at least Mts. Tyndall, Geikie, Murchison,
Read, Jukes, Owen, and Lyell. This would give us a very
extended elevated catchment platform for the collection and
piling up of a permanent snowfield sufficient to form an
adequate supply for feeding the numerous glaciers which are
known to have descended from its western slopes.
If we also assume for the lat. 42° south that the snow cap
would at least be 1000 feet thick, we should then have reached
a surface-level of 6000 feet. The question now is a crucial
one. Would a height of 5000 feet in this latitude ascend into
the isochionol or plane of the permanent freezing point, sup-
posing that the general lowering of the temperature pro-
duced by the astronomical cause during the last glacial epoch
of Europe also produced exactly corresponding effects under
similar conditions as to latitude, &c., in Tasmania and neigh-
bouring Australasian colonies ? Let us see. In the cor-
responding latitudes of the Pyrenees, the neve was only lowered
3000 feet during the maximum effect of glacial action in the
recent European ice age. As the neve at the present time,
there, is placed at 'about 9520 feet altitude, it is obvious that
during the glacial period of Europe the neve of the Pyrenees
must have stood at a height of about 6520 feet. This would
indicate that the mean height of even our restored western
plateau would fall below the neve by about 1520 feet, and
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


under such conditions there could have been no mow-cap,
and hence no glaciers produced by the same general cause
which produced the ice age of Europe in the Pleistocene
period. It must also be borne in mind that the Southern
Hemisphere at present has its winter in aphelion, and that
the existing level of the isochional or neve is far below the
altitude of the neve in corresponding latitudes in the North-
ern Hemisphere; and, therefore, in my opinion, it would
not be correct to measure the fall of 3000 feet in relation to
calculated height of existing neve in the Southern Hemi-
sphere, for the limit of 3000 feet fall is calculated in relation
to existing isotherms in the Northern Hemisphere. But sup-
pose the mean of existing difference of the level at the neve
in both hemispheres be taken for the same latitude, it would
still leave our restored western plateau about 1225 feet below
the estimated local neve or snow-level at the time of the
glacial epoch in Europe. This bears out the evidence of
Australasian geologists that our glacier and pluvial epoch
was not brought about by the same cause which produced the
glacial epoch of Europe and North America in the Pleisto-
cene period. Let us now see whether, by the same method
of reasoning, a more favourable argument can be advanced
on behalf of the earlier cycle of maximum eccentricity of
about 550,000 years earlier in the Pliocene age and contem-
poraneous with our older pluvial terrace drifts on lower
levels. It may be remembered that the eccentricity of the
earth’s orbit at this maximum period of cyclic eccentricity
is calculated to have been 28’57 per cent, greater than the
cycle of eccentricity which occurred during the last ice age
of Europe. If we reason that the effect on temperature
should be in proportion to the intensities of eccentricity, we
must assume that the lowering of the neve or snow-line in
the earlier maximum cycle would be as much as 3857 feet,
and this, with the restored level of our western mountain
THE GLACJER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Feet.
Alt.
Feet.
Existing isochional of Mt. Kosciusko (say)
11,000
Less 3857 feet, due to lowering of tem-
perature during period of max. eccen-
tricity of earth’s orbit with winter in
aphelion, 850,000 years ago, say in Plio-
cene period
3,857
Isochional of older glacier period of Aus-
tralia in latitude 36°
7,143
Present height of Mt. Kosciusko
7,200
Add waste by denudation in 850,000 years
850
Difference showing height above neve
8,050
907
plateau, which would have been wasted for 850,000 years,,
would place the mean level of its upper surface at a height
of about 400 feet above the neve or snow-line, and thus pro-
duce the necessary initial conditions for the formation of a
snowfield which might eventually accumulate snow and ice
whose surface might be as high as 1400 feet above the snow-
line, and would then, by the assumed balance of precipitation
over melting, be able to send glaciers down its western slopes,
possibly within 1000 feet, or, in favourable valleys, perhaps
to 600 or 700 feet above sea-level. According to personal
observation, and to the testimony of Messrs. Montgomery,
Moore, Snrent, Jones, Dunn, and others, the same calcula-
tions would indicate corresponding results for Mt. Kosciusko
and other peaks over 6300 feet in the southern Alps of Aus-
tralia.
Thus, if we take 11,000 feet as the isochional or neve for the
latitude of Mt. Kosciusko we have the following result:
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


The above calculation would, also justify us in looking for
alpine glaciers on the slopes of the lofty Bogong Range, in
the direction of Beechworth, adjoining, and almost a con-
tinuation of, the Australian Alps. Mt. Bogong itself, 6508
feet high, and the highest mountain in Victoria, may be said
to be the south-westerly continuation of the Australian Alps,
which rises into the lofty peak of Mt. Kosciusko, the most
elevated mountain in Australia. The careful observations of
Messrs. Stirling and Dunn regarding the abundant evidence
of glaciation in these Alps of Victoria are strongly fortified
by the calculations given, proving that without any material
alteration of present levels the elevated table lands and
peaks of this region would ascend above the neve or iso-
chional of the earlier Pliocene period, and so form the initial
condition for producing a permanent snowfield, with its
attendant glaciers, in the Kiewa, Mitta Mitta, and other
mountain valleys; in which places the two observers named
have given ample evidence in the discovered moraines, huge
erratics, roches-moutonnees, striated blocks, &c.
That the evidence of glaciation on these Alps is more
probably isochronous with the earlier cold pluvial epoch*
which produced our older terrace drifts on lower levels of the
Australian mainland and Tasmania is favoured by the same
mode of determining the isochional of the neve for the period
corresponding with the later glacial epochs of the Northern
Hemisphere, thus:
* It is of importance to note here that Dr. Croll, impressed with the
much greater eccentricity of the earth’s orbit corresponding with this
period, was fully convinced that a glacial epoch must have occurred at
this time.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


Feet.
Alt.
Feet.
Existing isochional of snow-line about ...
11,000
Less depression of neve due to extremity of
orbit at last glacial epoch in Northern
Hemisphere. Max. effect estimated to
be about 210,000 years ago
3,000
Estimated height of neve or snow-field at
the time of last glacial epoch
8,000
Present height of Mt. Bogong, highest
point of Victorian Alps ...
6,508
Add waste by denudation in 210,000
years (say)
210
Falling short of the neve or snow-line of
the last glacial epoch by about 1282 feet
6,718
1,282
Surely the acceptance of the earlier epoch showing not only
harmony with the causes which produced our earlier pluvial
terrace drifts, but also satisfying all physical conditions for
the initiation of glaciation, is a more reasonable conclusion to
arrive at than to refer the glacial evidences to the later
epoch, which would not satisfy physical conditions essential
to the initiation of glacial action without involving the
double assumption of an elevation and subsequent depression
of 1282 feet, for which there is no evidence whatever.
As regards the very doubtful evidence of intense glacial
action in the shape of “ boulder till ” discovered by Messrs.
Officer and Balfour in the lowlands of Korkuperrimal, situ-
ated nearly 200 miles to the east of mountains where alone
in Victoria a permanent snowfield capable of yielding glaciers
could be formed, it is evident that the potency of neither
of the two great epochs of cycles of maximum eccentricity
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


could be adequate to produce such intense effects, even if
the lowlands of Victoria stood 5000 feet above their present
level.
As there is no proof of any kind to indicate such elevation
and final depression at any time corresponding to these
glacial epochs (i.e., subsequent to the deposition of their
Miocene leaf-beds), it is probable that a mistake has been
made in the inferences drawn from the facts. The certainty,
moreover, that an elevation, not depression, of considerable
extent has taken place since the upper Eocene or Miocene
period is evidenced unmistakably by the Tertiary marine
beds over a great portion of the lower levels of the Victorian
territory on both slopes of the great dividing range. The
supposed glaciation of the Korkuperrimal region is there-
fore quite anomalistic.
Sufficient illustration has now been given with respect to
evidences bearing upon causes of glaciation, in Australia and
Tasmania at least, to justify me in adopting for the present
the following conclusions :
(1) That the glacier epoch of Australasia was probably
comparatively mild in its effects, manifesting itself mainly
by increased rainfall in lowlands, and by establishing local
glaciers in the alpine regions of Southern Australia and Tas-
mania, and in greatly extending the spread of the existing
snowfields and glaciers of the New Zealand Alps.
(2) That probably, in Australia, the local glaciers of the
Alps melted before reaching the 2000-feet levels within the
valleys whicn descended continuously from the elevated snow-
fields; and in Tasmania it is most probable that only on the
western slopes of our western highlands was there sufficient
precipitation to yield glaciers, any of which did not reach
the sea, and probably were melted within their own valleys
before reaching the 1000-feet level.
THE GLACIER EPOCH OF AUSTRALASIA


(3) That the date at least of our most refrigerated period
was probably isochronous, and mainly caused by the maxi-
mum cycle of eccentricity of the earth’s orbit with winter in
aphelion, probably near to the beginning of our Neogene
period, say, 850,000 years ago.
(4) That if the latter be true, it proves that the astro-
nomical theory by itself (i.e., without concurrence of geo-
graphical conditions) would not adequately account for the
ice age of Europe and North America, nor for the absence of
marked glacial phenomena among the earlier Tertiary deposits
of Europe at points of time concurring with the earlier cycles
of eccentricity of the earth’s orbit with winter in aphelion.
I do not expect that my conclusions will be accepted at
present by many geologists who have already attained to
crystallised views on the matter, but even these may be pre-
pared to allow that, granting the premises assumed by me.
my conclusions follow as a logical necessity.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PART II.
ORDER AND RELATIONSHIP OF AUSTRALIAN
TERRESTRIAL FORMATIONS
How Far Can Australian Geologists Safely Rely upon the Order of
Succession of the Characteristic Genera of Fossil Plants of a Far
Distant Region, in the Determination of the Order and Relationship
of Australian Terrestrial Formations?
(From “Proceedings of Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,”
Sydney, 1888, p. 302.)
/ T'o Australian geologists the question proposed at the
head of this paper is of the very deepest importance.
Hitherto, questions relating to the order and relation-
ship ot Austi alian rocks have been, in a very large measure,
influenced by the opinions of eminent palasontologists, formed
mainly upon deductions made with respect to the order of
the appearance of certain genera in Europe, or in far dis-
tant regions.
I wish it to be taken for granted in criticising some of their
conclusions, that I yield to no one in esteem for their valu-
able labours. Happily for me the question upon which I
may have to express any widely different opinion is not one
affecting the exact determination or classification of the
organisms themselves. The question which I propose to
confine attention to does not raise doubt as regards the deter-
mination or affinities of the plants characteristic of particu-
lar rocks,, although, even in such matters, there are many
obscure points from which difficulties may arise.
The question here discussed is of quite a different nature,
and may be expressed as follows:—How far does the assem-
blage of the characteristic genera of a particular formation


in a distant region (say Europe) afford a clue to the proner
determination of the stratigraphical position and relation-
ship of Australian rocks. The belief that the community or
resemblance of organic remains in rocks of different regions
indicates strict contemporaneity —once so prevalent amongst
palaeontologists—is not yet dead, although the recent utter
ances of a few leading authorities show that such a belief is
no longer tenable.
Geikie, for example, states in his last work* that “ simi-
larity or identity of fossils among formations geographically
far apart, instead of proving contemporaneity may be com-
patible with great discrepancies in the relative epochs of
deposition. ”
So far there is complete accord, but when the same author
goes on to describe the difference between homotaxial and
contemporaneous relationship of rocks of different countries
he makes use of an ambiguous phrase, which cannot be
accepted without much qualification. He states: “In fine,
in every country where the fossiliferous geological formations
are well displayed, and have been properly examined, the
same general order of organic succession can he made out
among them. Their relative age within a limited geographi-
cal area can be demonstrated by the law of superposition.
When, however, the formations of distant countries are com-
pared, all that we can safely affirm regarding them is that
those containing the same or a representative assemblage
of organic remains belong to the same epoch in the history
of biological progress in each area. They are homotaxial;
but we cannot assert that they are contemporaneous, unless
we are prepared to include within that term a vague period
of many thousand years.” The value of this statement
entirely depends upon what may be deemed to be the true
meaning of the phrase “ containing the same, or a repre-
* “ Text Book of Geology,” p. 619.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


tentative assemblage of organic remains .” Does it mean
such close relationship embracing not merely a characteristic
assemblage of genera, but also complete identity as regards
the principal characteristic species of each genus of the
assemblage ? Or, does it mean a similar assemblage of organ-
isms identical so far as the genera are concerned, but differ-
ing with respect to the number and identity of their respect-
ive species ? Upon the answer to these two queries depends
the possibility of accepting Dr. Geikie’s statement.
Where, in the rocks of two regions far apart, both genera
and their species are absolutely identical within a very large
and characteristic assemblage, there would primd facie be
good giounds for classing homotaxial relationship-, and con-
sequently it might be allowed that the formations in which
this identical assemblage of organisms occurred, belonged to
the same great epoch; but if the characteristic assemblage,
however great, only involved identity so far as genera are
concerned, it would not of itself form sufficient evidence to
prove either homotaxis or contemporaneity; for such an
assemblage of particular genera might possibly occur in
inverted order in rocks of widely separated regions belong-
ing to different great epochs or systems.
It is but right to state that this is partly admitted by Dr.
Geikie, lor in the same work (p. 619) he observes: “ A
species may have disappeared from its primeval birthplace,
while it continued to flourish in one or more directions in its
outwaid circle of advance. The date of the first appearance
and final extinction of that species would thus differ widely
accoiding to the locality at which we might examine its
remains.” And again he clearly announces this view by
observation.
At the present day, for example, the higher fauna of Aus-
tralia is more nearly akin to that which flourished in Europe
AUSTRALIAN TERRESTRIAL FORMATIONS


far back in Mesozoic time, than to the living fauna of any
other region of the globe. There seems also to be now suffi-
cient evidence to warrant the assertion that the progress of
terrestrial vegetation has at some geological periods, and in
some regions, been in advance of that of the marine fauna.
And among such examples we mention that the “ Cretaceous
flora of Aix la Chapelle, with its numerous dicolytedons has
a much more modern aspect than the contemporaneous
fauna.” But while such clear-thinking writers as Dr. Geikie
allow all that is necessary in the restrictions to be placed
upon the phrase “ community,” or “ general facies of
organic remains in common,” there is good reason to fear
that many geologists and palaeontologists, in dealing with
fragmentary collections of plants from widely separate
regions, still perpetuate in their mode of reasoning ancient
fallacies, some of which have been referred to by Prof. Hux-
ley in “ Lay Sermons.”*
Examples of two of these fallacies are as follows:
(1) “ Animals and plants began their existence together
not long after the commencement of the deposition of the
sedimentary rocks; and then succeeded one another in such
a manner that totally distinct faunas and floras occupied
the whole surface of the earth, one after the other, and
during distinct epochs of time.”
(2) “ The population of the earth’s surface was at first
very similar in all parts, and only from the middle of the
Tertiary epoch onwards, began to show a distinct distribu-
tion in zones.”
(3) In the latest edition of Prestwich’s “ Geology,” Prof.
Prestwich, in discussing geological equivalence, has made a
great advance in his treatment of the great problem of strati-
graphical geology. But while he insists that in distant areas
* “ Geological Contemporaneity,” p. 228.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


strata cannot be correlated by identical species, and
although acknowledging to some extent the effects of
migration ol forms oi life from one region to another,
he still clings to the idea that rocks of distant regions may
be properly correlated by the aid of “ the presence of
the same characteristic genera. ” But it must be borne in
mind that English geologists have not had this aspect of the
question pressed heme so closely to them in a practical way •
for, unlike Australian workers, they have not been hampered
in their schemes of local classification by references or depeiid-
ence upon the widely differing association with respect to the
stratigraphy and palaeontology of a far distant region.
If English geologists had now to form afresh their systems
and subdivisions of systems upon the lines laid down by Pro-
fessor Prestwich, with strict dependence upon the evidence
of the association of Australasian stratigraphy and palaeon-
tology, the difficulties of the matter would have at once
become apparent to them, as it now appears to Australian
geologists, in attempting to correlate their rocks with Euro-
pean equivalents.
In further opposition to some of the statements objected
to, we have to look at the following facts:
(1) Among the prevailing genera of plants in the Carbon-
iferous beds of Europe, are Alethopteris, Neuropteris, Odon-
topteris, Pecopteris, Sphenopteris, Tceniopteris, Datura, Uhi-
de udr on, Poacordaites. Eight out of the nine genera also
prevail in the Mesozoic rocks of Tasmania, while not one of
them is present among the coal plants of the Carboniferous
rocks of the same region !
(2) The most abundant and typical genus of plants in the
Carboniferous rocks of Tasmania and Australia, is a Glossop-
teris (several species). The genus is not represented in the
AUSTRALIAN TERRESTRIAL FORMATIONS


rocks of the same age in Europe, but a representation spar-
ingly occurs in the Upper Mesozoic beds of that region.
(3) The genera Phyllotheca , Podozamites, Pterophylhim,
Salishvria, Ginkgophyllum , Bniera, Zengophyllites, Sagenop-
teris, Thinnfeldia, Rhacophyllum, are very characteristic in
what is deemed, on the evidence of local stratigraphic suc-
cession, to be the lowest division of the Mesozoic rocks of
Tasmania. Seven of these are equally characteristic of the
middle or upper division of the Mesozoic rocks of Europe.
(4) The fauna and flora of the Tertiary period in Europe,
are in many important respects more akin to the existing
floras and faunas of Australia and Tasmania than are the
existing floras and faunas of both regions; and conversely:
(5) The flora of the Teritary period in Australia and Tas-
mania is in many important respects more akin to the exist-
ing flora of Europe than are the existing floras of these dis-
tant regions.
Many other striking examples, unmistakable in their
character and in the order of their appearance, might be
cited to prove :
That the order of the appearance of genera or other
affinities in plants in the strata of any one region, affords
no reliable clue to the order in which plants of similar genera
or other affinity make their appearance in the strata of far
distant regions; and that the known history of the order
of appearance of characteristic genera of plants in Austral-
asia and Europe, leads us to expect that inversion of the
order after an epoch of interval is more likely to occur, than
homotaxial, harmonious, and progressive parallelism.
If these considerations are admitted—and I do not see
how they can be disputed from facts —it follows that theories
of the succession of rocks in Australia and of their relation-
ship with the known subdivisions of far distant regions,
based upon the study of the order of appearance and generic
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME






affinities with fossil plants of these distant regions, must
inevitably lead to error and confusion, as it has done in the
past.*
In further support of these statements I have prepared a
comparative table (PI. XVII.) showing approximately the
order of the appearance of characteristic genera of plants in
Europe and Tasmania, the latter closely corresponding to the
order in Australia. If we examine this table carefully we
are compelled to admit the following conclusions:
(1) That similarity in the characteristic genera, solely
of the rocks of two far distant regions, forms primd facie.
evidence not of their correspondence as regards contempor-
aneity oi homotaxis or parallelism of biological t>r strati-
graphic progression—but of the reverse of these.
(2) That such gaps, inversions, and lack of parallelism in
the biological progression in separate, far distant regions,
supports the Darwinian hypothesis of single specific centres
of origin ; for if plant life passed through similar stages of
development from similar independent specific pairs in everv
region of the earth, beginning at the same homotaxial stage,
we should certainly fail to find such gaps, inversions, and
lack of parallelism in biological progression, as those referred
to in the table of comparative order of the appearance of
plant life in Europe and Australasia.
The only reasonable conclusions to be drawn from these
considerations are such as have already been advocated by
the author in a paper read before the Royal Society of Tas-
mania in the year 1886,f viz. :
(1) It is most probable that all the higher specific forms
of life, including even those of the known genera of ferns,
sprang from one centre and from one pair.
* See the controversy regarding the age of the Gfossopteris-bearing
beds of N.S. Wales.
t Papers and Proc. R. Soc. Tas., 1886, pp. 164-182.
AUSTRALIAN TERRESTRIAL FORMATIONS


(2) It is improbable that all species had their origin in one
particular hemisphere, but rather —
(3) It is probable that some species originated in the
Northern Hemisphere, while others had their origin in the
Southern.
(4) It is reasonable to assume where species or genera have
spread from the centre of origin, or from a subsequent sta-
tion to another hemisphere, that a very considerable period
of time may have elapsed.
(5) Where such wqrld-wide distribution of forms has taken
place, it is perfectly admissible to conceive that the particu-
lar assemblage of organisms in any point or division of a
vertical series in either hemisphere, would embrace forms
some of which originated locally within the age of the system
of formation, while others were immigrants from an opposite
hemisphere, dating their original appearance on the globe in
a former epoch among associates differing widely in char-
acter from those met with in the last station reached by
them, in their long process of migration.
For my own part, I do not see what other explanation
can be given which would satisfactorily account for the gaps,
inversions, and lack of biological progression in any one
regional centre, when viewed in relation to the order and
grouping of organisms in far distant regions.
The acceptance of separate centres of specific origin from
one independent pair in conjunction with time consumed
in migration, does of necessity involve such inharmonious
relationships, when the view is restricted to any one spot on
the earth’s surface; but it is perfectly compatible with
orderly relative biological progression when concerned in rela-
tion to all centres of the globe.
Let it be firmly borne in mind that the principles contained
in these reflections are neither new nor fanciful. They flow
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


naturally and consistently from conceptions regarding the
doctrine of single specific centres, firmly held and advocated
by Sir Henry De la Beche nearly 50 years ago. Edward
Forbes, according to Huxley, firmly held to this view, for
he was in the habit of asserting that the similarity of the
organic contents of distant formations was yriind facie evi-
dence, not of their similarity, but of their difference of age,
and Huxley himself, whose name is always associated with
Darwin, has long devoted his clear reasoning mind to estab-
lish the same ideas. Similarly, the writings of Sir Roderick
Murchison, Jukes, Blandford, Ettingshausen, Starkey, Gard-
ner, Feistmantel, Daintree, Prof. Hutton, Prof. Judd, and
many others, could furnish strong support in favour of the
conceptions now brought specially under the consideration
of this Association for the purpose of evoking discussion.
In making use of the phrases “ stages of biological progres-
sion ” and “ stages of stratigraphical succession ’ ’ there is
also much danger.
We can conceive of the development of the lower to the
higher forms of life occurring in a broad harmonious order
as under :
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Plants —Thallogens. Ferns, Mosses, Cycads, Angiosperms.
and Lycopods. and Conifers.
Invertebrates. Vertebrates.
Animals- Protozoa ; Molluscs, &c. Gill-bi eathers ; Lung-breathers.
Whatever gaps are found in the simple series, it is conceiv-
able that the order might be found without inversion in all
regions, and so far it is possible for stages of stratigraphic
succession being recognised, which would in any country
broadly correspond with such stages of biological progression.
But if the correspondence between orderly biological progres-
sion and orderly stratigraphic succession is expected to coin-
cide in regions far apart, beyond these general lines I am
AUSTRALIAN TERRESTRIAL FORMATIONS


convinced the results would be anomalous and confusing. To
expect this would pre-suppose that organic development went
on at a corresponding rate with time, no matter how the
local environment was conditioned. This would be expecting
too much, and hence I am of opinion that even homotaxial
relationships, based upon relative biological progression, must
be received with the greatest caution when dealing with the
comparison of rocks of widely separated regions. However
unpleasant it may be to relinquish convenient time-honoured
methods, it must be allowed that in science, as in morals,
the desire to have them true is preferable to the desire to
have them sustained. In science, as in religion, our rever-
ence for the great names of a past age exerts a powerful
enslaving influence, tending almost as powerfully to induce
us to bolster up uneliminated error, as to sustain and expand
the great truths which were originally unfolded. If on the
one hand, as recently pointed out by Prof. Judd, there is
danger that impatience at the rate of progress of geological
knowledge leads many to attempt “ to cut the tangled skein
of research by hasty and ill-considered speculation,” there is
an equal if not a greater danger, with others, to become
enslaved to time-honoured generalisations based originally
upon limited observation; a tendency, moreover, which often
causes many to overlook the express limitations of the earlier
authorities. .
Generalisations, which may be of much value within cer-
tain limits, may be absolutely false, and widely misleading,
when applied beyond the limits originally ordained. Thus,
as pointed out 34 years ago by Sir Roderick Murchison,*
“ however certain distinctions may be clear and good in
typical tracts of Siluria and Wales, there are many parts- even
of the British Isles, and numberless foreign localities, where
separation into the formation of Llandeilo and Caradoc is
* Siluria, p. 51.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


absolutely impracticable either by mineral distinctions or by
dislocations,” and accordingly he announced his conviction
then—a conviction, by the way, of the fullest signification
to Australian geologists —“ that in many regions of the earth,
the geologist will find it impossible to classify by the means
of such smaller divisions.”
If these facts be duly weighed we may well ask : Of whit
value is any classification of Australian rocks which follows
too slavishly the nomenclaUire of the subdivisions of great
periods or systems as adopted in Europe upon the mere
evidence of two or three genera whose association in the rocks
of a particular horizon in Europe has been proved to be only
of local value 1
It is also of the greatest significance that Prof. Judd admits
this in his recent interesting articles in “ Nature.”* He
distinctly affirms that recent knowledge indicates that
<c attempts to establish a universal system of nomenclature
or classification of sedimentary rocks are indeed greatly to be
deprecated, for if the zoological and botanical distribution
of past geological times were at all comparable to that of the
present day any such universal system must he impossible.”
The italics are mine.
Moreover, the generic groupings of the flora and fauna of
any one region, as in Australia, often afford in themselves
contradictory evidence, when comparisons with distant regions
are attempted on the lines laid down by Prof. Prestwich,
viz.: “ the presence of the same characteristic genera .”
Thus, in the Upper Palaeozoic division, out of a list of 311
species of marine organisms in Australasia, there are fully 23
per cent, specifically identical with those of the Carboniferous
marine beds of Europe; while the typical plants associated
with the Carboniferous marine beds in Australasia do not
show the faintest correspondence with the corresponding typi-
* The Relations between Geology and the Biological Sciences,
“ Nature,” March 1, 1888.
AUSTRALIAN TERRESTRIAL FORMATIONS


cal plants of Europe. Both species and genera are altogether
different. * This also is borne out by Prof. Judd’sf statement
that the growth of our knowledge concerning the terrestrial
floras and faunas of ancient geological periods since 1869 has
constantly forced upon the minds of many geologists the neces-
sity of a duplicate classification of geological periods based on
the study of marine and terrestrial organisms respectively.
1 do not, however, think that a “ duplicate, classification ”
wpuld be of much value. The evidence rather points to the
conclusion that the assemblage of typical organisms of any
one region, owing to the interweaving at any one point of
emigiants from many independent distant centres of origin,
affords no satisfactory clue to the order, relationship, 07
succession of the strata of a distant region.
It is, however, a great satisfaction to me to know that the
main contention upheld in my paper to the Royal Society of
Tasmania, in October, 1886,* has the support of such a dis-
tinguished observer as Prof. Judd.
There is, it appears to me, no royal road for establishing
the relationship of the rocks of opposite hemispheres. We
must be content to work out the true association of local
stratigraphy and local biology unimpeded by references to
such associates elsewhere. In short, we must establish the
relationship between the successive formations and their con-
tained fossil remains exactly on the lines begun by the great
English pioneer, William Smith, and we must not, in our
eagerness for geological progress, expect to establish at once
in Australasia such close harmonious relationships as have
been determined in Europe by the accumulated labours of
several generations of distinguished workers.
Slightly altering a phrase used by Prof. Huxley, I am of
opinion —“ All that palaeontology can prove is local order of
succession,” and therefore the work before the Australian
* See Table (PI. xvii.) t Loc. cit., p. 427.
IHL R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


geologist, however slow in progress, will be more satisfac-
torily advanced if we stick close to the evidences afforded by
the unmistakable observed order of succession of local strati-
graphy in the first place ; and afterwards, by carefully observ-
ing the nature of the contained fossils in each succeeding
horizon, gradually build up the locally true order of biological
succession. The dependence upon the succession of rocks of
distant regions, as based upon the affinities of organic remains,
though temptingly convenient, must assuredly prove to be a
will-o’-the-wisp chase leading to geological disaster.
The order of biological progression depends largely upon
local external conditions, and unless we assume what is impos-
sible, that environment varies in every separate region at the
same time and in the same degree, the rate of biological
variation or development must almost of necessity vary with
the locality.
This helps to explain the greater differences exhibited by
the contemporary floras of two widely separated regions, than
is shown by the contemporary faunas of the same regions.
As already suggested by me*, the closer parallelism between
the marine remains of two widely separated regions is pro-
bably due to the greater facilities for inore rapid diffusion of
types among the marine inhabitants of a continuous sea, as
compared with the slower diffusion of terrestrial organisms,
barred as it must often have been by wide tracts of sea and
other physical obstructions. This conclusion is borne out by
the illustrious Darwin, f who states : “ The process of diffusion
would often be very slow, depending on climatal and geo-
graphical changes, on strange accidents, and on the gradual
acclimatisation of new species to the various climates through
which they might have to pass, but in the course of time the
dominant forms would generally succeed in spreading, and
would ultimately prevail. The diffusion would, it is probable,
* Papers and Proc. R. Soc. Tas., 1886, p. 166.
f “ Origin of Species,” pp. 229-230.
AUSTRALIAN TERRESTRIAL FORMATIONS


be slower with the terrestrial inhabitants of distinct conti-
nents, than with the marine inhabitants of the continuous
sea. We might therefore expect to find, as we do find, a less
strict degree of parallelism in the succession of the produc-
tions of the land, than with those of the sea.”
In summing up the various considerations touched upon in
this paper, I anticipate your verdict will be, that Australian
geologists cannot safely rely upon the order of succession of
the characteristic genera of fossil plants of a far distant
region in the determination of the order and relationship of
Australian terrestrial formations; and that even within its
own wide borders, covering an area nearly equal to that of
the whole of Europe, considerable differences may be
expected in the biology and minor subdivision of systems, as
developed in some of its widely separated colonies.
Ideal Distribution of Genera from Independent or
Widely-separated Geographical Centres.
On the hypothesis that all organic genera did not arise and
radiate repeatedly from one geographical centre only, and
that a considerable space of time would be consumed in the
greater extremes of distribution as regards terrestrial plants
of higher organisation, a diagram has been designed,* roughly
to illustrate the possible complication and inversion of order
arising out of the radiating distribution of genera from
widely-separated centres; and also illustrating the different
nature of the possible associates to be met with at different
stations should the survivals succeed in reaching a middle
station or the antipodes of the place of their generic origin.
The cross dotted lines indicate the possible lapse of geo-
logical time between the commencement and close of the
migration of each genus, and also the curious interweaving
of different genera which originated in centres widely apart
* Papers and Proc. R. Soc. Tas., 1886 (facing p. 182).
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PART III.
THE STORY OF AN OLD LAKE OF THE
DERWENT
(Lecture delivered at the Masonic Hall, Hobart, 30th July, 1894.)
INTRODUCTORY.
DURING the past century the exodus of the overflowing
populations of Europe has peopled islands and has
spread over continents in various parts of the globe which,
prior to this invasion, had either been the hunting-grounds
of a few primitive wandering tribes or a wilderness of rank
vegetation, swamps, and barren wastes, tenanted only by sav-
age beasts. The pioneer settlers who but yesterday made their
homes and raised their altars in these new lands, of necessity
carried with them the language, habits, ideals, and associations
of the older or more advanced civilisation in which they
were cradled; and although nature —ever prodigal in her
gifts—affords them, in their new home, every material com-
fort and luxury, and presents for their contemplation mani-
fold strange natural objects of ideal wonder and beauty,
they at times feel, as a want, the absence of the historic and
romantic associations * which, in the course of ages, have
come to cling around and enhance the interest of all time-
worn natural surroundings in older inhabited countries.
The recentness of the first occupation of Tasmania by Euro-
peans —being within the life, if not the memory, ol some pei-
sons still living —and the primitive character of the rude
aboriginal tribes, whose history, so far as we know it, has
been so graphically described to you recently by my friend,
Mr. A. J. Taylor, provide us with but scanty material for
enhancing our interest in local natural objects with the


charm of mystic primeval historic associations familiar to the
inhabitants of older countries. Natural scenes and objects
in the ancient homes of civilised races are hallowed by many
associations, as they still occupy the very same region within
which their forefathers, for a vast number of generations,
lie buried, and in the same region from which savage, bar-
barian, and older civilisations, more or less dimly known,
have long passed away, although leaving many traces of their
life’s warfare and inspirations. All such associations are
often recalled to their imagination by the abundant evidence
still preserved to them by inheritance, as in language, arts,
and customs, and in the stories revealed to them by their
ancient ruins, places of sepulture, hieroglyphic writing, and
obsolete instruments, ornaments, and weapons.
But while it is impossible for me to attach to the prom-
inent natural objects and grand and beautiful scenery of
Hobart a corresponding charm of myth and story of past
generations of older civilisations, I hope to heighten your
interest in many scenes and objects in the immediate environ-
ment of our beautiful city by disclosing something which, in
the course of many years’ investigation, I have learnt of their
birth, growth, and history, and of the many agencies which,
for untold ages, have been engaged in modifying their
original form.
The natural sculpture of our rugged mountain tops, hills,
valleys, gorges, lake-like bays, and river-beds, forming our
present charming surroundings, have a past history far older,
more variable, and often quite as interesting as that which
peculiarly attaches to the earliest traces of human history,
which, at the best, is but of yesterday as compared with the
origin of ancient hills and valleys around us. The time at
my disposal this evening, however, does not allow me to trace
the story of the gradual elevation of the old primary sea-
floor itself —the graveyard of many thousand generations
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


of extinct types of marine life—which forms the foundation
platforms of Mt. Wellington, Mt. Nelson, Knocklofty, Mt.
Direction, Collins’ Bonnet, Mt. Falconer, The Gunner’s
Quoin, Mt. Rumney, and other enclosing mountain ranges,
all of which encircle, as with an arm, our beautiful estuary
and valley of the Derwent ; nor of the building of their ele-
vated capping-crests by the extrusion of vast sheets and
streams of molten rock, originally forced upwards by many
channels to the higher surfaces by mighty subterranean secu-
lar forces, which, although probably again and again
repeated over a vast period, suddenly transformed the whole
face of the landscape of our own neighbourhood at that time,
as well as the greater part of Eastern Tasmania. This great
change occurred towards the close of the secondary geological
age, which, according to the most recent computations, must
be placed as far back as three to four million years ago, or
nearly six hundred times older than the oldest known period
of human history. Neither does time permit me to describe
extinct ancient forms of animal life of the older rocks, nor of
the rich and varied vegetation of extinct types of ferns,
cycads, conifers, and other forms of plant life, which, up to
this time, grew luxuriantly all over the land of Tasmania,
and whose characteristic remains, where preserved in ancient
silted swamps, lagoons, and lakes, now form our coal seams,
as at New Town, Jerusalem, Richmond, Sandfly, Southport,
York Plains, Mt. Nicholas, Fingal, and other places. All
that I can tell you at present is, that when the fire-formed
caps of our neighbouring mountains and hills were being
ejected the whole land was deluged with accompanying dis-
charges of ashes and scoriae, and showered abroad from their
neighbouring elevated vents and fissures; and, so far as the
record of the rocks shows, culminated locally in the entire
destruction of the peculiar terrestrial vegetable and animal
life of the period within the Tasmanian land region of that
time.
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


We must here, however, caution anyone against the con-
ception that this local break in the continuity of plant life
in Tasmania involves the conclusion that there might occur
at some time a complete break in the continuity of the chain
of life throughout all time as regards the world as a whole.
hi om an evolutionist s point of view—which is the view now
firmly entertained by nearly all living naturalists—it is
impossible to conceive a break or hiatus in the continuity
of physical and organic processes connected with the succession
of rocks and organic life as regards the whole globe. We
believe, with Darwin,* that as all the living forms £>f life
are the lineal descendants of those which lived before the
Cambrian epoch, we may feel certain that the ordinary suc-
cession by generation has never been broken, and that no
cataclysm has desolated the whole world.” Dr. H. A.
Nicholson f has expressed the same idea more explicitly as
follows: “ Upon any theory of 'evolution ’ at any rate it
is certain that there can be no total break in the great series
of the stratified deposits, but that there must have been a
complete continuity of life, and a more or less complete con-
tinuity of deposition from the Laurentian period to the pre-
sent day. There was, and could have been, no such con-
tinuity in any one given area, but the chain could never
have been snapped at one point and taken up at a wholly
different one. The links must have been forged in different
places, but the chain, nevertheless, remained unbroken.”
Thus, although as in our local cataclysms at the close of the
Secondary and also again at the close of the Teritary period
there were at least two distinct breaks in the continuity of
local terrestrial plant life, it is also conclusive that these
local breaks only involve “ a shift of the conditions to other
regions where the threads of continuity were maintained.”!
* Darwin: “ Origin of Species,” 6th ed., 1875, p. 428.
t Dr. A. Nicholson: “Manual of Palaeontology,” 2nd ed., pp. 49, 50.
tR. M. Johnston ; “ Geology of Tasmania,” p. 208.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Before attempting to describe the origin and history of the
old lake of the Derwent, it may also be of advantage to some
of those before me, if I pause for a few moments to draw'
attention to the great ever-active natural agents engaged in
lifting, transporting, building, and sculpturing the materials
forming the characteristic features of our globe, and by means
of w'hich its limits of land and sea, mountain, valley, and
plain, lake and river-bed, are ever undergoing a slow but
momentous process of never-ending change. This change is
almost imperceptible, when traced by the memory of creatures
whose span of life at its greatest does not cover one-milliouth
of the time during which the great natural agents have been
employed in making and modifying the superficial features
of this world of ours itself, but an infinitesimal dust-speck in
the great universe of star and planetary systems.
Nature’s Lifting, Transporting, Building, and Sculp-
turing Forces.
The various forces and movements continuously in opera-
tion in modifying the external features of our globe may all
be traced to one twin-root, or primary cause, viz., heat and
gravitation. These two grand prime motors of expansion and
contraction, or diffusion and attraction, co-extensive with
universal matter, are the forces which in the past have caused
the great movements of elevation such as those already
referred to, as well as of subsidence and other minor modi-
fications of the earth’s crust. Both are causes of motion:
the one—heat—promoting the separation, expansion, repul-
sion, or diffusion of matter; the other —loss of heat,
with gravitation—promoting condensation, shrinkage, or
closer alliance. Thus, for example, if we raise a kettle full
of water to a heat of 212° F., its particles will so expand
in bulk and volume that in , the altered or heated state
(212° F.), when it is converted into water-vapour or steam,
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


it would require 1700 kettles to contain the latter. On the
other hand, if we cool a pint of steam below 212° F., it will
eventually condense and gravitate to the bottom of the vessel
as water, and occupy the space of only of a pint. The
sun is the great source of heat which operates in expanding
and diffusing the matter exposed on the surface of the earth,
such as the immediate susceptible upper layers of water in
our seas, lakes, rivers, and the various exposed chemical ele-
ments and compounds which form its rocky crust, and its
gaseous envelope, the common air of the atmophere.
Again, it is of importance to know, at this stage, that the
density or weight of any form of matter, such as air or
water, decreases with the increase of heat, and, conversely,
density increases with every decrease in heat. Hence the
continuous action of gravitation towards the earth’s centre
will tend to cause the readjustment of all kinds of matter
whose particles are mobile, or free to move, to a more or less
systematic series of layers, arranged according to their
respective densities, the lighter and hotter ascending to the
top, the cooler and heavier layers descending to their proper
levels towards the bottom. This tendency again induces
widespread circulation and movement of particles, or cur-
rents, in more or less well defined channels and directions,
and to such deep-lying causes we owe the great oceanic cur-
rents, such as the warm Gulf Stream of the Atlantic and
the great circulating currents of our atmosphere, by which
the enormous evaporation of water from the ocean is spread
over the whole earth and condensed in the form of rain,
hail, and snow. Without such distribution, terrestrial life
would be impossible. We may get some notion of the lifting
and distributing power of heat as an evaporator of oceanic
surface water by measuring some of its dynamic results, as in
rainfall. A gallon of rain-water weighs about ten pounds
(10 lb.). In some places, such as the deserts of Sahara,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Arabia, Gobi, and Central Australia, there is a total absence
of rainfall. In the neighbourhood of Hobart the annual
rainfall is about 25 inches; and on the West Coast of Africa
it is as much as 189 inches.
If, for the sake of illustration, we assume 28‘5 inches as
the mean annual rainfall for the whole globe, equivalent to
413’25 million gallons per square mile = 1,844,500 tons;
representing an annual lifting and transporting power of
nearly 362 million million tons for the whole globe ! Even
our water system of the Derwent basin receives by this means
a supply of about 6045 millioia tons of heat-evaporated and
distilled sea-water, the greater part of which is again returned
to its original source, carrying with it, however, in solution
and suspension a considerable portion of the constituents
the rocky materials of the land, which has been estimated to
be equivalent to a uniform waste or denudation of 1 foot of
our total land-surface in every 3000 years. Thus in the ebb
and flow of oceanic water in the form of rainfall, primarily
caused by heat and gravitation, we have a powerful twin-
agent quietly and continuously operating in sculpturing the
face of the land, and carrying the waste of its sculpturing
action in mineral solutions and transportable sediments to
intercepting lakes and finally to the sea, there to settle in
successive leaf-like pages and volumes wherewith also is
incorporated the remains of the contemporaneous life of the
sea, mixed occasionally with stray fragments of terrestrial
animals and plants. These sediments may increase in volume
for ages, until some new grand rhythmic movement of secular
wave upheaval takes place, when its irregular fractured or
broken vertical faces will disclose the plan of its original
deposit in leaves and beds of stratified rocks, just in the
same manner as the older stratified rocks, originally deposited
in the sea, which now, upheaved in some cases over 2500 feet,
form the major part of the present dry land in the vicinity of
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


Hobart. The mudstone rocks of Huon-road and Bedlam
Walls, with their teeming remains of long extinct winged-
spirifers, corals, and crustaceans, and the sandstones of our
quarries at Knocklofty, Cascades, and Belleiive, with theii
strange armour-plated ganoid fishes, have originally been thus
formed at the bottom of the sea many million years ago.
By these brief references to the building, wasting, lifting,
transporting, and other grand natural forces which now, as in
the past, are engaged in sculpturing afresh the features of
our beautiful environment, I hope I have sufficiently accentu-
ated the truth that it is the quiet, slow, continuous, uniform,
and therefore almost unnoticed, forces of nature which effect
the mightiest changes on the earth’s surface, although our
imagination is more deeply and awfully impressed by the ter-
rific and sudden convulsions of nature such as the earthquake
of Lisbon (1755), whose influence extended from Morocco to
Ireland, and whose terrible power and violence is indicated
by the fact that the shock caused a mighty tidal wave, from
50 to 60 feet high, to roll in upon the shores of Cadiz and
Lisbon, effecting the complete destruction of the latter city,
together wih 60,000 of its inhabitants, within the space of
six minutes; the twice-repeated destruction, within 12 years —
(years a.d. 63 and a.d. 75) —of Pompeii and Herculaneum,
which, in the second visitation, were completely overwhelmed
and buried under the burning lava and deluge of ashes,
ejected from the erstwhile treacherously slumbering Mt.
Vesuvius.
The recent eruption of Tarawera, in New Zealand, brings
these violent disturbances more home to us. There a great
fissure, 9 miles long, suddenly gaped, from which lava and
ashes were ejected, destroying and burying the surrounding
vegetation of forest and bush, as well as the famous White
Terrace hot springs, and making deep fissures for many miles
in solid ground. The ashes from this recent eruption were
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


carried by the wind over a vast portion of the country. Still,
how insignificant are the dynamic effects of these occasional
violent throes of nature as compared with the silent continu-
ous action of heat-evaporation, of gravitation, of rain, hail,
frost, snow, and chemical action, and of erosive streams and
rivers of rain-water gravitating to the ocean !
The two following illustrations, obtained by simple calcu-
lation of known factors, relating to the lifting force of heat
in evaporation, and the transporting power of rainfall pre-
determined by loss of heat and gravitation, would fill your
minds with awe and astonishment if you could fully compre-
hend what a billion cubic yards really signifies, regarded as
a unit of volume or mass. It may be of some help to your
imagination to state that the whole of the land surface of the
earth above the sea-level is estimated to contain 119,142 bil-
lion cubic yards, weighing about 238,295 billion tons. Yet,
notwithstanding the immensity of this volume, such is the tre-
mendous power of heat in the evaporation of oceanic waters,
that it annually lifts and transports over the face of the
globe a volume of water-vapour which, when condensed as
rain-water, would represent a solid volume of water of 479
billion cubic yards, equivalent, actually, to . 2 | B th of the
existing volume of land above sea-level, i.e., as if heat lifted
a volume of water equivalent to the total volume of land
surface every 248 years, and therefore equal to eight times its
volume since the beginning of the Christian era !
A similar illustration may afford help to your imagination
to gauge the stupendous wasting, carving, and transporting
force of aerial waste, chemical waste, and especially the con-
tinuous operation of rainfall, gravitating in branching
trickles, rills, rivulets, and all gathering into their main
stem-trunks of broad sweeping rivers, which ever flow onwards
to the eternal ocean.
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


Thus it has been carefully computed that the waste of laud
surface actually transported in solution, or as floating sedi-
ment, and buried below ocean-level by the agencies referred
to, represents a vertical foot of total land surface in every
3000 years. It follows, therefore, that if there were no
counteracting, uplifting, and building forces, such as earth
waves and volcanic upheaval, the whole land surface of the
globe would be buried below the surface of the oceanic waters
in about 6,756,000 years, or a space of time little more than
double of that which marks the birth of the Old Tertiary
Lake of the Derwent, whose history I will now briefly
describe.
The Original Formation of the Old Basin of the
Derwent.
Having explained something of the mighty natural forces
constantly at work in the denudation, waste, or fresh sculp-
ture of all land elevated for any length of time above the
ocean, let us now in imagination return to the time, at the
close of the secondary period, when the mountains round
about Hobart were uplifted, and when the volcanic forces
which capped them with molten rock, and destroyed the whole
of the life of the period, became still. At this time, say
3,000,000 years ago, it is probable that not only did Tas-
mania extend fully 100 miles further south, but that its
land surface was correspondingly broader. It is probable,
also, at this time that Eastern Australia was separated from
the older continent to the west by a broad gulf or sea, stretch-
ing from the present Gulf of Carpentaria, in the north, to
St. Vincent Gulf, in the south; and that Tasmania then
formed (without any break or strait) the southern extremity
of the great eastern cordillera of Australia. When, as
already pointed out, land elevated above the sea undergoes
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


waste equal to 1 foot vertical in 3000 years, we must be pre-
pared to allow for an enormous denudation of the land about
Hobart, which has been continuously elevated above the ocean
for at least 3,000,000 years. In that time denudation, if
uniform, would represent the waste of a land surface of 1000
feet vertical. This at once enables us to imagine the land
about Hobart standing, in a general way, probably 1000 feet
higher than at present, although partaking of irregularity
of surface. In the wasting which has taken place since this
early time, the simple water-parting, cut first into river-bed
gorge or canon, and thereafter gradually deepened and
broadened out into valleys and glens, eating inwards and back-
wards to the great talus slopes of the mountains as we now see
them. The main channel of the Derwent water system near
Hobart probably was originally determined by a fault, or
dislocation, running in the trend of its present bed. When
this valley was primarily scooped out by denudation to the
depth which we now know it, some harder rock or obstructing
bar towards its outlet to the open sea —which then must be
placed far beyond its present land limits—caused the River
Derwent to gather itself into a mountain lake in the neigh-
bourhood of Hobart—like the existing Lakes St. Clair,
Marion, Laura, Crescent, and Great Lake — i.e., almost
within the same limits, and following nearly the same bends
and sinuations that the present estuary near Hobart, and
towards Bridgewater, would assume if its waters stood some
20 to 40 feet higher. At the same period the upper tribu-
taries of the Tamar watershed flowed into a large lake long
ago completely silted up, which occupied an area of not less
than 600 square miles within the limits of those undulating
plains lying along the Western Tiers from Deloraine to
Beaconsfield, and reaching southward as far as Ross, and
following the beautiful South Esk valley towards Fingal and
St. Marys.
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


A contemporaneous fresh-water lake also occupied the
basin of Macquarie Harbour, since invaded, and all but a
fringe of its sediments since wasted by the waters of the sea,
like the sediments of the old lake of the Derwent. Another
important lake of the period occupied the country at a higher
level near Magnet Range, and encircling Mt. Bischoff. The
sediments of this early upland lake are now mostly concealed
under massive sheets of basalt like the lacustrine leaf-beds of
Glenora, Cornelian Bay, Geilston, and One-Tree Point,
which now form the scattered vestiges of this ancient lake of
the Derwent.
The silting-up of these old lakes of the early Tertiary
period alone (and apart from their subsequent waste or
denudation, and the partial protection and concealment by
the latest great basaltic eruption which closed the period)
must have occupied a vast number of years. The depth of
the fragments, or vestiges of the sediments, of the
old Derwent lake has not yet been tested to any great
depth, although the vestiges naturally exposed above present
sea-level at Upper Sandy Bay indicate a depth of over 300
to 400 feet.
The Launceston Tertiary lake basin sediments have been
tested vertically to a depth of nearly 1000 feet without pass-
ing through them; even if we allowed a general deposition of
sediment at the rate of 2 feet in every 1000 years —or sixfold
the normal rate of general denudation of land surface—that
would require a period of 500,000 years alone for the silting-
up process of these old lakes. This mav seem an immense
period, but its magnitude is in perfect harmony with facts
relating to the length of time necessary for the genesis,
development, and final extinction of the peculiar fauna and
of the rich and varied forms of flora which are now entirely
extinct, with the exception of some few congeneric
descendants.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


What the Records of the Vestiges of the Sediments
of the Old Lake Reveal of the History of the Age,
WHEN THEY WERE DEPOSITED, AND OF SUBSEQUENT CHANGES.
During the last 24 years I have spent much of my time in
a close study of the ancient records contained in the sedi-
ments of the old lake of the Derwent, and in contempor-
aneous lacustrine deposits, common elsewhere in Tasmania
as well as in Australia. My object was similar to that which
animates all students of ancient records. I desired to know
from them what, they could reveal of the nature, character,
and habits of the life of the age when the records were first
impressed; of the conditions under which the sedimentary
register was built up; of the thermal and climatological char-
acter of the times as revealed by the known character of a
similar class of inhabitants, whose habitats now can very
clearly be seen to conform to certain conditions of heat and
clime; and finally to trace in the subsequent action of waste
and denudation, and in subsequent evidences of disturbance
and change, the vicissitudes in the history of the lake from its
beginning until now. Many who hitherto have only thought
of attaching the words record and register to the modern arti-
ficial symbols of things and ideas exemplified in various forms
of print, writing, and pictorial representation, may be sur-
prised to hear that artificial record by such means, however
useful and advantageous, is very inferior to natural writing
as a means of conveying clear and perfect ideas of the things
or ideas so symbolised.
Natural writing is the exact impress of the thing or idea
itself, however blurred or imperfect the impression. Arti-
ficial writing, at the best, is but a crude symbol or index to
things or ideas, and is only, after long years of special train-
ing and study, remotely helpful to the more perfect idea of
the thing conveyed more easily by natural writing.
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


A single slab of clay impressed with the natural writing of
its exact and microscopically perfect impressions of perfectly-
defined leaves, flowers, fruits, and woods of trees, fresh-water
shells, microscopic diatoms, and entomostraca, wings of
strange insects, prints of raindrops, skeletons of strange
animals, ripples of sand waves produced by gentle pulsa-
tions of water or wind, order of successive leaflets of mud,
clay, or fine sand, similarly or differently inscribed. &c., con-
vey to the mind more perfect ideas than could possibly be
conveyed by artificial writing or artificial picture. Of course,
in either case the observing mind must reasonably exercise its
logical faculties of inference or deduction; but that is quite
as formidable a bar to truthful conclusion in the case of
artificial writing or representation as it is in the case of
natural writing. But there are important characteristics
which distinguish the natural from all forms of artificial
record, viz.: The former does not distort, magnify, nor lie;
does not invert or play tricks with the order of events to
suit a loved preconception; and cannot be successfully inter-
polated or forged. The latter are scarcely ever free from
such defects. Then look at the extent of the natural volume,
or library of volumes, as compared with all the written or
printed books that have ever been produced. Some notion
of the insignificance of the latter may be appreciated by the
following illustration: —One inch of the fine leaf impressed
clays of Cornelian Bay, or One-Tree Point, contains at least
100 filmy leaves delicately but clearly covered with impressions
of leaves, fruits, flowers, twigs, &c., and a square mile, 1000
feet thick, of such clays represents a folio surface as large as
could be contained in 80,290 million books of 500 12 x 10
or royal quarto pages, equivalent to the aggregate, produc-
tion of 116,150 of such large volumes every day since the
beginning of the Christian era !
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Brief Description of the Vestiges of Sediments of the
Old Lake of the Derwent as Exemplified at Geilston,
Lindisfarne, Cornelian Bay, Sandy Bay, and One-Tree
Point.
I have already indicated that the waters of the old Der-
went lake extended prettly nearly over the same space now
occupied by the waters of the present estuary, when the land
probably was elevated above the sea-level much higher than
at the present time, and when the pristine unwasted masses
of the adjacent high mountain crests, with their slopes —prob-
ably 1000 feet higher than now —stood much closer to the
deep, sinuous, elongate lake margin. The dammed-up waters
of the lake, moreover, must be supposed to have covered its
sedimentary floor with a more or less deep envelope of water,
whose general level may have been, relatively, about 30 to
40 leet higher than the level of the waters of the present
estuary. Indeed, some of the fine clayey sediments are now
to be found about that height above the encroaching sea-
waves at One-Tree Point, Sandy Bay, and Cornelian Bay,
although the great bulk of the lake sediments still lie buried
to a great, though unknown, depth beneath the later super-
ficial sediments of the estuary and its tidal waters. Its sur-
face waters may, therefore, be supposed to have extended
laterally a slight margin wider than the present estuary,
especially invading the many low-lying marginal flat terraces,
under a 40-feet level, in bays and indentations between The
Forest, near Glenora, and One-Tree Point, and perhaps
extending southward nearly to the region of the Derwent
Light, Ralph’s Bay, and the Passage mouth. The vestiges
which I am now going to describe are those of the upper
members only, as the lower members probably lie still undis-
turbed at a great depth below the present sea-bed.
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


The general characters of these sedimentary deposits can-
not be seen always at any one naturally exposed section, but
from several they may be separated into four distinct hori-
zons, taken in ascending order, the first two horizons
covering the history of the lake proper, the latter two
being stages in the later history of events that have trans-
pired since the silting-up, and subsequent to the probable
drowning of the lake-bed by a gradual sinking or depression
of its outer marginal rim below the level of the ever-advancing
sea. The southern part of Tasmania, with its labyrinth of
spider-like arms and peninsulas of land, and its many enclosed
lake-like fiords and bays, has all the appearance of drowned
valleys and low hill-encircled flats or plains. The four hori-
zons taken in ascending order are as follow:
1. Lignite and Leaf-bed Formations. —Mainly composed of
white, yellow, red, or grey coarse sandstones, often alternating
with gritty bands, blue, white, yellow, or blackish clays, and
irregular beds of lignite, and occasionally, as at Geilston, con-
taining bands of fresh-water limestone. These formations
are often from 400 to 1000 feet in thickness, and sometimes,
as in the old Launceston lacustrine basin, cover an area of 600
square miles. The clays, sandstones, limestones, and lignitic
muds are replete with the drifted remains of an extinct vege-
tation, sometimes showing the remains of the large extinct
Unio shells, the animals of which inhabited the fresh-water
lakes of the period. Frequently the shells of many extinct
kinds of land snails have been washed down by streams and
preserved —as at the Geilston Quarry—among the sediments
of the lake, together with other drift from land, such as bones
of extinct marsupials, insects, and trunks, branches, and heavy
stone fruits, and seeds of various kinds of trees and shrubs.
Ligneous, siliceous, and calcareous trunks of araucaria-like
conifers are most abrxndant in all such deposits, indicating the
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


prevailing character of this form of tree in the forests fringing
these ancient lakes.
2. Feldspar Basalt Sheets and Flows, Ash and Tuff Beds.
One of the most remarkable features of these old lake deposits
throughout Australia and Tasmania is that at their final
stages of sedimentation we come to trace the beginnings of
the second great period of physical convulsions in the sedi-
ments derived from ashes of active volcanoes, among which
the same forms of plants and other fossils are preserved,
showing that up to this stage the peculiar life of the Tertiary
period survived. As the terrible eruptions became more gen-
eral and violent, we find evidence of the sudden overwhelm-
ing of the land with widespread outpouring of ashes and
bioad streams and seas of lava. At Breadalbane, in a railway•
cutting, we can still see the great trunks, branches, fruits, and
leaves of an ancient forest that was overwhelmed and
destroyed by a sudden outpouring of lava, mud, and ashes.
The universal spread of these basalt sheets is everywhere to
be seen on highlands and lowlands, in the rich chocolate
soils of agricultural areas, such as at Brown’s River, One-
Tree Point, Cornelian Bay, Prince of Wales Bay, Geilston,
Lindisfarne, New Norfolk, Glenora, Macquarie Plains,
Bronte, Great Lake, Lake Sorell, Magnet Range, Mt. Bis-
choff, North-West Coast, Avoca, Fingal, Ross, Campbell
Town, Evandale, "W lute Hills, and all over the Western
Plains. It is now conclusive, that before the close of this
great periodic paroxysm the conditions of terrestrial life,
whether plant or animal, were rendered impossible every-
where throughout Tasmania. The rich and typical flora of
the Tertiary period suddenly disappeared; not a vestige
remained. Thus we have had in Tasmania and Australia
also for the third time—that is, at the Permo-Carboniferous,
Mesozoic, and Tertiary ages—violent paroxysms of nature,
bringing about in each case the entire destruction of the local
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


and peculiar terrestrial life of the respective periods. After
each convulsion a new and strange terrestrial flora and fauna
“ were brought to the birth and ushered upon the scene,”
and appearing locally as if a new creation, although, in
reality, migrants, from forms evolved naturally from centres
Iving beyond the local disturbed areas.
Thus, though Nature has never allowed the chain oi life to
be altogether broken, as regards the earth as a whole, she has
hitherto been singularly careless of the preservation of par-
ticular individual types of life. The very recent disappear-
ance of a peculiar type of the human race —the Tasmanian
aboriginal —shows that in the evolution of man, her most
favoured type, she slowly but surely encompasses the destruc-
tion of many distinct racial types.
“ So careful of the type she seems,
So careless of the Single life;
So careful of the type! But no.
From scarped cliff and quarried stone
She cries! A thousand types are gone
I care for nothing: All shall go.
And he —shall he,
Man, her last work, who seemed so fair,
Such splendid purpose in his eyes.
Be blown about the desert dust,
Or seal’d within the iron hills?
What hope of answer, or redress,
Behind the veil, behind the veil?”
There are now good reasons for believing that these three
great changes in our Tasmanian flora correspond in time
with three exceptional glacial epochs, with which were curi-
ously and intimately associated the three great cycles of
physical paroxysms convulsing the earth’s crust. This triple
combination of exceptional conditions and effects goes to show
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


that there is an underlying bond of connection with excep-
tional concurrences, at remote intervals, with astronomical,
physical, and geographical causes, and that the combination
of the three latter causes is essential to the initiation of condi-
tions which produce glacial epochs contemporaneously in
widely-separated parts of the globe, and effecting, by their
joint agency, such sudden momentous changes in the terres-
trial life as have been already referred to.
3. The Pluvial Drift Deposits. —Succeeding and overlying
in many places, as at Cornelian Bay Cemetery, Beltana, and
Lindisfarne Bay, are to be found throughout the island,
extensive terraces and plateau composed largely of drifted
pebbles and rough shingles, in which the fossil woods derived
from the older beds are again largely intermixed in the form
of finely-polished pebbles or blocks. During this period there
is a strange absence of evidence of contemporaneous plant
life, as if the conditions of climate, locally, were unfavour-
able for its development. There is abundant evidence of a
colder climate, and of increased pluvial action.
It is not improbable that the changes in the distribution of
the land surface at the close of the last period (Palaeogene),
e.g., the rising of the bed of the old marine sea formerly
dividing Eastern from Western Aiistralia, running north and
south, together with greater elevation, may have diverted the
warm gulf streams, and so helped, with other causes, to
produce a great refrigeration of climate. The abundant evi-
dence of glaciation in the higher plateaux and valleys of the
western highlands of Tasmania at this time greatly confirms
the accuracy of this view,
4. Shell Mounds of the Tasmanian Aboriginals. —The
fourth horizon characteristically associated with the vestiges
of the old lake of the Derwent is only important because of
the human interest which attaches to it. Overlying the
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


clayey leaf-beds or their capping basalts and gravel drifts,
occur round or elongate heaps or mounds, composed mainly
of the charred and broken shells of marine animals now living
in the estuary, the prevailing shells being mussels and
oysters. These are the “ myrnyongs,” kitchen middens, or
feasting camps, of the Tasmanian aboriginals, so common
along the banks of the estuary, and, indeed, everywhere along
our coasts. Mr. Taylor has already given you a graphic
description of the natives and their habits ; but the associa-
tion of the life of an extinct race of the human family with
the vestiges of the remains of the much more ancient extinct
forms of life of the old lake of the Derwent helps to heighten
our interest in them.
For when we come to consider that with the exception of
the rude inconspicuous flints of the aboriginal race, and the
accumulated remains of their feasts in the myrnyongs,
or native shell-mounds along our coasts, we have no other
visible evidence of their former existence; and even these
will soon be obliterated or disappear, for the agiicultuiist s
plough is day by day engaged in scattering the mounds, and
the shells are being used as fertilisers in the adjacent fields.
As an aid to those who may wish to study the history of
the vestiges of the old lake of the Derwent, which together
give splendid examples of the four horizons referred to, I
will now briefly describe the character of the sections exposed
at Sandy Bay, One-Tree Point, Pipeclay Bluff, Cornelian
Bav, and Geilston Limestone Quarry.
Sandy Bay Leaf-beds.
The best and most interesting section at Sandy Bay is to
be seen at a small projecting sandy promontory, nearly oppo-
site to the Rifle-range. At this point a series of finely-
bedded blue and reddish clays are tilted at a very high angle
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


against a thick-bedded reddish sandstone of doubtful age.
Theie appears to be a fault or fracture at the point where
the clays are inclined at a very high angle against the sand-
stone; and it is evident that strong lateral pressure has bent
them up since their original deposition as muddy sediments.
W hen we take into consideration the eruptive disturbances
which took place subsequently, we may reasonably expect
considerable crumpling and fracture of this kind. The fine
blue and red clays are extremely rich in fossil leaf impres-
sions, but as the purer clays are often very soft, and the
sandy beds friable, it is difficult to secure perfect specimens.
Leaves of extinct species of oak, elm, beech, laurel, willow,
eldei, with ancestral forms of banksia (“ honeysuckle ”),
lomatia, pittosporum, cinnamon, fig, araucaria, celery-top,
dammara, and other conifers are very common to this and
all the other vestiges of the period. It is curious to find
this mixture of existing European types with those peculiarly
Australian, and it goes to show that in the more temperate
climate of the age of the old lakes the common ancestral
foims of European and Australian vegetation were more
widely distributed and less restricted into distinct life pro-
vinces than now. It is probable that the lower levels of
Sandy Bay Town Board district were beneath the waters of
the ancient lake.
One-Teee Point Leaf-Beds.
The portion of the old lake whose remains are preserved
here is very interesting. It may be traced from one of its
old shore-lines, near the 3-mile stone southward, for about a
mile. The beds are composed of the following rocks in
ascending order, thus:
(1) Kough tumbled blocks of older marine beds (mud-
stones) imbedded very irregularly in the later fine
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


white or yellow sandy or clayey sediments of the
old lake, and caused by the undermining action
of the waters of the lake against an old shore cliff.
(2) A series of layers of hard, finely laminated clays,
rich in all forms of leaf, fruit, and stem impres-
sions of the characteristic forms occurring at
Sandy Bay.
(3) These, at the engine-house of the battery electric
searchlight, are overlaid by a thick boss of dense
blue-black basalt, which, indeed, forms the rock in
which the battery defence crypts are hewn out, and
which was erupted from a vent probably at the
crest of the Alexandria battery. Further south,
along the shore, the more crystalline basalt has
been covered with successive flows or discharges of
scoriae and ashes and vesicular, or pumice-stone
forms of basalt, often traversed by veins and
strings of aragonite; unmelted fragments of older
stratified rocks are frequently found imbedded in
the solid basalt.
(4) Along the shore-line the basalt is concealed on the
surface by the native shell mounds. The leaf-
beds at this place are evidently of great, though
unknown, thickness, and they dip at a high angle
towards the sea, and follow the same angle south-
easterly below the existing bed of the sea.
The eruptions at One-Tree Point may have occurred again
and again after wide intervals of rest. This view is con-
firmed by the discovery of teeth and other bones of extinct
marsupials allied to the wombat and wallaby beneath and
between solid sheets of basalt. Evidently the bones were
washed into crevices of an older flow prior to being engulphed
by the later one, which covered them. Similar remains of
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


marsupials were discovered beneath the overlying basalt
sheet at the limestone quarry at Geilston.
Geilston Fresh-water Limestone.
Ihis limestone forms lenticular patches among the clays,
sands, and tuffs of a fragment of the sediments of the old
lake, which is still preserved in the charming little bay of
Geilston. The limestones are really old chalky sediments, as
they are often richly impressed with the casts of leaves, wal-
nut-like fruits, imbricating twigs of various species of arau-
caria and other trees. I have described several new species
of extinct land-shells imbedded in these limestones, which
must have been washed into the lake by adjacent streams of
water.
dhe upper beds, immediately below the capping basalt, are
covered by a thin pan of opal-like rock. Like the limestones,
this originally was a fine mud, as it contains the remains of
a small entromostacan. It is evident that hot thermal
waters, with siliceous and calcareous solutions, thrown out
periodically by the later volcanic forces, have caused the
crystalline transformation of the limestones and the opalescent
and flinty pan. The Geilston beds are additionally inter-
esting. as they were the first to attract the attention of geolo-
gists, because of their peculiar fossils, and it is of importance
to note that the quarry was actually visited by the great
Darwin during his voyage in the “Beagle” in the year
1836, who briefly dismisses this vestige of the old lake with
the comment: “ A solitary patch of limestone, or travertine,
which contains numerous impressions of leaves of- trees,
together with land shells not now existing.” He errone-
ously inferred, however, that “ It is not improbable that this
one small quarry includes the only remaining record of the
vegetation of Van Diemen’s Land during one former epoch.”
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DEE WENT


Pipeclay Bluff, Cornelian Bay.
The beds at this place are composed of white, chalky-look-
ing sands and clays, the latter very fine, and the separate
lamination very filmy. They repose upon the older green-
stone rock of the Domain, and they dip under the waters of
Cornelian Bay towards Geilstou, with which they are probably
still connected, and they are evidently overlaid by the little
basaltic promontory of Cornelian Bay Cemetery. The clays
are readily reduced to a milky state in water, and are some-
times locally used as a whitewash. It is in these beds where
the characteristic fossil leaf and fruit impressions of the vege-
tation of the period are most abundant and most perfectly
preserved.
Summary.
If, in imagination, we now carry ourselves far back to the
epoch immediately preceding the reign of the existing
Eucalypts, when the oak, cinnamon, laurel, and the araucaria
graced the slopes of the neighbouring hills, we might, from
some commanding eminence, such as Mt. Nelson, look down
upon a magnificent sheet of water at our feet, which, in a
general way, would resemble in outline the existing estuary
of the Derwent. With a few minor exceptions, its sinuous
boundaries would follow the same lines, but its waters would
be fresh, and the Domain and Trinity Hill would be almost
insulated in their midst. The great features of the surround-
ing country —Mt. Wellington, Mt. Nelson, Knocklofty, The
Gunner’s Quoin, Mt. Direction —would be almost unchanged,
save that they would stand higher and their slopes closer to its
margin. On a stormy day we might also see the lake sur-
face broken into crested waves, and in the neighbourhood of
One-Tree Point and Bedlam Walls we might watch how the
chalky-looking cliffs of mudstone rock were undermined and
crushed by their repeated blows, and also see the milky sedi-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


ment, the result of such waste, as it was floated uway to
settle eventually as lake sediments in the quieter depths, or
in sheltering bays. The vegetation luxuriantly fringing its
shores would appear somewhat strange, more like the decidu-
ous trees of European forests. The botanist would find,
instead of the sombre giant gums and green wattles, a large
number of trees with elm-like leaves, and walnut-like fruits
(Cordia tasmanica) with four and five valves. In the slopes
of the bay near Geilston a species of araucaria ( A. johnstonii,
F. V. Mueller) like A. cunmnghami, or A. excelsa (Norfolk
Island pine), would rear its curiously imbricated branches
crowned with their singular spiny cones.
If we searched among the dead wood in the shady places
we should find an abundance of strange land shells {Helix
huxleyani , H geilstonensis, Bulimus gunii, Vitrinualhurycma),
one of which, a larger species {H. tasmaniensis) , would, like
the existing H. launoestoncus, be especially interesting in the
eyes of a conchologist. It is even possible that the several
fine species of Unio found in the contemporaneous lakes near
Launceston would be absent, just as the existing TJnio more-
tonicus, which at the present day is restricted to the northern
lakes and rivers. Many animals, the ancestral types of the
existing tiger, devil, badger, kangaroo, and kangaroo rat,
abounded in the scrubs close by. But if we looked for the
signs of human habitations, or the curling smoke of aboriginal
camp fires, we would look in vain ; for the living scene thus
presented to our imagination would antedate his advent upon
the scene of life by at at least a million years.
This imaginary picture may be taken to represent what
we know of the earlier stage of the ancient lake of the
Derwent.
The close of the second stage, if witnessed by us, would
present a more terrible picture. Instead of the quiet sleeping
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


lake our ears and eyes would witness, from many cinder cones
and gaping fissures, the escape of sulphurous fume and nois)
gases, the belching forth of ashes and scoriae, and the slow
travelling flows of molten lava, overwhelming the forest? and
filling up old valleys and low-lying flats. We would see below
One-Tree Point and at Geilston the seething waters sending
up white columns of steam as the streams of lava came into
contact with the fast shrinking waters of the lake, soon to
shrink into a narrow river channel as the sinking land pei-
niitted the approaching sea to penetrate its old outer rim.
The vegetable and animal life formerly enlivening the scene
had now vanished entirely, having been killed by sulphurous
fumes and buried beneath many feet of cinders and ashes.
The third stage marks the increase of volume and force of
the water of the ancient River Derwent owing to the greater
rainfall of a glacial epoch; the formation of vast shingle
beds carried down from the higher glaciated regions by the
great floods caused by the melting of the snows in the short
but excessively hot summer intervals, the sea, too, now, was
advancing slowly and eating away the upper layers of the
sediment of the old lake, for the draining of the older lake
waters was now fully effected. At the close of this stage, as
the climate became more genial, the land was again made
bright and pleasing by a new creation of vegetation, the
immediate harbingers of the forest shrubs and herbs of the
present day; and the land was again peopled from other
undisturbed centres of Australia with the more modern types
of animal life; from whence, also, in due time, appeared the
ancestors of the primitive race of man, which only but
yesterday finally vanished. The gradual shrinking of the
land by denudation, and partly by sinking, continued inces-
santly, until the present stage of things were produced. The
horizontal encroachment of the sea in the direction of its pre-
sent limits must have been very slow, and occupied, probably,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


over a million years from the time when the earliest lake sedi-
ments were deposited. When we reflect that the changes
which take place within our own life’s observation with
respect to existing animals and plants are so slow and imper-
ceptible, we can estimate, in better measure than years, the
immensity of time which separates the extinct characteristic
vegetable and animal life of the old lake epoch from that of
the present hour.
M y task has now come to a close. 1 have humbly endeav-
ouied to throw some rays of light along the corridors of time,
and hope I have heightened your interest with regard to
the beautiful and familiar scenes which environ the favoured
city oi Hobart. I conclude with the eloquent words of the
famous Scotch geologist, Hugh Miller; “ Who shall declare
what throughout these long ages the history of creation has
been ? We see at wide intervals the mere fragments of suc-
cessive floras and faunas, but know not how what seem the
blank interspaces were filled, or how, as extinction overtook
in succession one tribe of existences after another, and species,
like individuals, yielded to the great law of death, yet other
species were brought to the birth, and the chain of being was
maintained unbroken. We see only detached bits of that
green web which has covered our earth ever since the dry
land first appeared; though ever, as breadth after breadth
issued from the creative loom, the pattern has altered, and
the sculpturesque and graceful forms that illustrated its first
beginnings and middle spaces have yielded to flowers of richer
colour and blow, and fruits of fairer shade and outline : and
for gigantic club-mosses stretching forth their hirsute arms,
goodly trees of the Lord have expanded their great boughs;
and for the barren fern and the calamite clustering in thickets
beside the waters, or spreading in flowerless hill slopes, luxu-
riant orchards have yielded their ruddy flush and rich harvests
their golden grain.”
AN OLD LAKE OF THE DERWENT


PART IV.
HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE GEOLOGICAL
RELATIONS OF AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA
INTRODUCTORY.
r I A 0 the industrial geologist, as well as to the general or his-
toric geologist, the possession of a reliable key to the true
order or sequence of the stratigraphy or position of the various
upper rocky envelopes of the earth’s crust, is, equally, a
desideratum of the utmost importance. Of similar value to
the two groups of students is the possession of facts which
throw light upon the relationships which subsist between
the successive rock formation of different countries, especially
between countries lying close to each other, or within the same
great geographical division.
But there is necessarily a fundamental distinction which
marks the respective limits of the field of observations of the
industrial geologist and the purely historic interest of the
general geologist. The former has a more definite, though
less extensive, scope. The scope of the latter is wide and
indeterminate. In short, the observations of the industrial
geologist are, from a commercial or economic point of view,
of a more practical character, and are, therefore, intention-
ally restricted to the study of all geological questions which
throw light upon the rocks which yield products of economic
value ; and only include the study of the character and history
of other rocks in so far as they afford aid to the more perfect
comprehension of the best manner in which materials of eco-
nomic value are likely to be sought, and the best means


whereby these products may be secured for the material
advantage ol the community. The motive of the general
geologist—in most cases—is a love of the study of some par-
ticular branch or province of the geological field, and the
fascination of opening a new volume in Nature’s library,
and the hope of extending the realm of knowledge, however
slight, are often sufficient, as a motive, to enlist the energy
and life’s devotion of the true brethren of the ham-
mer, irrespective of considerations regarding the com-
mercial utility of the pursuit. But there can be no
doubt where such labours can be seen to have a direct bear-
ing upon the acquisition of products of value, and,
therefore, upon our mining industries, the interest of the
student is greatly heightened by the thought that his studies
are not altogether a pleasant pastime; but may also lead
occasionally to results of great practical concern to the mining
industries; and thus indirectly aid in the work of those
engaged in increasing the material wealth of the country.
The love of research for its own sake is an instinct which has
been the principal, though at the first, perhaps an unconscious,
factor in the discovery of the great methods and inventions
whereby the effective power of man’s labour has been so
greatly increased in modern times. Since 1841 the added
forces of steam alone, as an auxiliary to human labour, in the
United Kingdom—-and there utilized in the lifting, transport,
and modification of materials, and in various other ways—is
estimated to be equivalent to the manual force of 103 millions
of workmen, or fully six times the manual force of the total
number of breadwinners in the United Kingdom at the pre-
sent moment.
It is true that the increasing perfection of the varied instru-
ments worked by steam has been attained by the services of
OEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


skilled minds animated by the thought of reward in an eco-
nomic sense; but it must never be forgotten that in this, as in
nearly all great discoveries of natural force auxiliaries, the
germs of the more perfected applications of the present day
were first revealed to the lovers of research and speculation,
whose studies were eagerly pursued in obedience to the instinc-
tive love of speculation and research for its own sake. A
simple incident of James Watt’s boyhood, in the story of the
kettle-lid, is one of the best examples of the instinctive love
of research for its own sake out of which has arisen results of
immeasurable value to the industrial and economic world.
The story is related of Watt, that at the age of 15 his natural
bent for study and research obtained from his practicallly-
minded aunt—Mrs. Muirhead the following memorable
reproach ;
James Watt, I never saw such an idle boy! ” she
exclaimed indignantly. “ Take a book at once and
employ yourself usefully ! For the last hour you have
not spoken one word, but instead of that have taken off
the lid of the kettle, and put it on again—have been
holding a spoon over the steam —have been catching and
collecting the drops of water that steam formed when
you held the saucer near it over the tea-cup. Are you
not ashamed of wasting your time thus 'I ’'
How often has the pioneer of research been addressed in a
similar strain ?
How much the utilitarian world owes to such pure love of
discovery for its own sake, can never be properly realised.
But it is undoubtedly true that the practical industrial world,
guided mainly by motives of personal reward and utility, can
never properly estimate the debt it owes to the initial—and
at the time apparently useless—researches of such men as
THE R M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Watt, Faraday, Joul, Kelvin,, Edison, and Bell, among which
we ought to include the English pioneer of stratigraphic
geology —William Smith. For to the latter the geologist
and the practical miner owe the stratigraphic key which now
is so helpful in directing the search for valuable mineral
products locked within the complicated rocky envelopes of the
earth’s crust. These introductory observations must serve
me as an apology to the many skilled practical men engaged
in the direction of our important mining industries whom I
have now the honour to address, when I take for my subject
A Historical Sketch of the Geological Relations of Aus-
tralia and Tasmania,” a subject which properly pertains to
general geology, and only indirectly having special relation
with the practical ends of the mining engineer.
But in the selection of the subject, which was originally
suggested to me by my • distinguished friend, your
President—himself deservedly acknowledged by the scien-
tific world to be both an accomplished metallurgist,
mining engineer, and geologist—l am encouraged and
reminded by the consideration that all good mining
engineers who are fitted to enter the honourable Association
which you have wisely formed, are also equipped for the
important duties entrusted to them by special training in
mineralogy and general geology. That, in fact, the title
of Associate of the Institute of Mining Engineers of Australia
also includes the title of expert in the science of general
geology as well as practical mineralogy, metallurgy, and mine
engineering.
Before drawing particular attention to the general rela-
tionship subsisting between the various systematic divisions
of rocks as represented in the colonies of Australia and Tas-
mania, it may be of some advantage to give a brief sketch
<2EOL. RELATIONS; AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


of the physical changes and general characteristics of the rocks
of Australia and its scarcely separable southern outlier, Tas-
mania. At present our knowledge of the interior of the
greater part of Australia is due to the daring explorers
(beginning with Oxley, 78 years ago), who forced their way
into the desert interior, and even across its whole extent,
through many hardships and privations, and, unfortunately,
but too often, ending in the starvation and death of some of
the noble band. The unknown fate of the brave and accom-
plished Leichhardt in 1844-5, and the terrible hardships and
death of the noble Burke and Wills, are examples of the experi-
ence of the brave men who have accumulated our information
of the great and comparatively unknown interior of Australia.
The border or fringe of the Continent of Australia and Tas-
mania—accessible by sea —almost alone contains the settle-
ments of population. In the latter, the general geology of
each colony has been systematically studied by distinguished
workers, prominent among whom are the names of the Rev.
W. B. Clarke, Jukes, Strzelecki, Rev. J. T. Woods, Dain-
tree, Selwyn, Sir F. McCoy, Brough Smyth, T. S. Wilkinson,
R. L. Jack, R. Etheridge, Jun., Rands, Norman Taylor,
Krause, Dun, Murray, J. Stirling, Prof. David, Prof. Tate,
H. Y. L. Brown, H. O. Woodward, Dr. Milligan, Chas.
Gould, T. Hainsworth, S. H. Wintle, T. Stephens, T.
Thureau, and A. Montgomery. The author of this paper,
too, may with pardonable pride claim, so far as Tasmania is
concerned, that his own labours in the geological field during
the last quarter of a century may entitle him to some small
share in the honour of the work in general geology already
accomplished.
Geneeal Physical Outline of Austealia and Tasmania.
The present area of Australia and its scarcely separable
south-eastern island outlier, Tasmania, is estimated to be
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


about 3,057,000 square miles, representing a land surface
nearly as large as the whole of Europe. Curiously enough,
the general shape of Australia and its principal island outlier,
Tasmania, is very similar. Both are heart shaped; the former
being somewhat oblate-obcordate; the latter, its obverse, being
elongate-cordate. As regards their plan of elevation, they
are again obverse : Tasmania being broadly convex with a
high central plateau; Aiistralia being concave, having its
great central interior depressed, and in some places, as at Lake
Eyre and its vicinity, scarcely raised above sea-level. The
outer rim of Australia, broken here and there in the south,
extreme north, and north-west, is often raised into mountain
ranges or tablelands.
(1) The Great Eastern Cordillera*, stretching almost con-
tinuously from Cape York in Queensland to South
Cape in Tasmania, a distance of about 2370 statute
miles, and traceable through Torres Straits to the
highlands of New Guinea. The sequence of the more
detached portions of this elevated outer rim may
be traced—following the circular course of the
hands of the clock —from the south-western fur-
cation of the Great Eastern Cordillera, near Cape
Northumberland, thus:
(2) The mountain chain of South Australia, known as
the Adelaide chain, running north from Cape
Jervis to the vicinity of Lake Torrens and Lake
Fromef, with a low spur towards the now famous
silver mines near the Barrier Range.
(3) The highlands of the south-western partj of West-
ern Australia, running from the vicinity of Cape
Pasley—the western horn of the Great Australian
* The Enronotian Region, of Professor Tate,
t The Eremian Region, of Professor Tate.
I The Autochthonian Region, of Professor Tate.
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


Bight —traceable west and north to the neighbour-
hood of Barlee Bange, near the River Ashburton,
that is, within south lat. 35° and 23° 50', or a
distance of 2150 geographical miles.*
(4) The sub-marginal highlands in the neighbourhood
of the Dampier Archipelago, in the north-west,
stretching from near the mouth of the Fortescue
River (south lat. 21°, long. 115°), and running
eastward to Mt. Macpherson, long. 121° 50'. This
is the De Witt Land of the earliest voyagers (year
1628).*
(5) The highlands of the extreme north-west, forming
the Kimberley division* from the neighbourhood
of King Sound to the Victoria River. The Tas-
man Land of the earliest voyagers (year 1644).
(6) The high tableland of the extreme north, stretching
between the Victoria River and the Gulf of Car-
pentaria, by which it is separated from our start-
ing point, the extreme northern termination of
the Great Eastern Cordillera. This is the Arn-
heim Land of the earliest voyagers (year 1623).
The accumulation of knowledge regarding the great and
shallow desert interior of this great circular but still narrow
marginal rim, although Rut too scanty and imperfect, is yet
sufficient to guide us to the conclusion that, with the excep-
tion of a few isolated exserted peaks and bosses of older rocks,
and one or two island-like central groups of granite high-
lands such as are found grouped together in the respective
central regions of the Reynolds, Macdonnell, and Musgrave
Ranges—the whole of its vast surface is comparatively low-
lying, and mainly occupied superficially by soft rocks of cre-
taceous age (rolling downs and desert sandstone), and, as
* Within these groups the now celebrated goldfields of Western Australia
occur.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


described by Robt. Jack, the accomplisheci Government
Geologist of Queensland, it “ is generally dry and treeless,
and for the most part presenting a dreary, barren, and mono-
tonous aspect.”
Marine rocks of Tertiary age no doubt overlie and conceal
the older cretaceous rocks towards the region south of the
Darling and Murray, and towards the Great Bight of Aus-
tralia. Here and there throughout its whole area, since its
final upheaval from the shallow floor of the cretaceous sea,
denudation must have greatly modified its surface, carving its
higher hard parts into low ridges and plateaux, and filling
up its lake basins, hollows, and other lower levels with sedi-
ments and sub-aerial drifts of Tertiary and recent age, by
which means the marine formations of Cretaceous age towards
the north, and the more recent marine formations of Southern
Australia, are largely overlaid and obscured, and so often
directly hid from the eye of the passing traveller.
Likeness to a Typical Atoll.
If we glance at the Rough Sketch Physical Map of Australia,
prepared by Jukes as early as the year 1850*, or the more
recent Geological Map of Continental Australia, compiled
from latest information in the year 1887, and geologically
coloured, by the aid of the most recent official geological
charts, by Arthur Everett, under the direction of C. W.
Langtree, Chief Secretary of Mines in Victoria—we perceive
by the bolder colours indicating the granites, porphyries,
traps, and the older stratified rocks, a great outer elevated
fringing rim, enclosing the wide shallow depression of the
interior. The whole continent thus presents a striking super-
ficial likeness to a huge oceanic atoll.
* “ Physical Structure of Australia,” J. B. Jukes.
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


The keeling atoll, Indian Ocean (figured, after Darwin,
by Sir Archibald Geikie),* and the chart of the ring-enclosed
group of the Gambler Islands of the Pacific (figured, by the
same author, after Beechy), give a fair bird’s-eye picture of
what the present Continent of Australia and Tasmania would
present towards the close of the Lower Cretaceous period. At
this time the Australian region did not present the appearance
of a connected continent, but, like the atolls referred to, it con-
sisted externally of an aggregation of more or less disconnected
island groups distributed in the form of a heart-shaped fringe,
the interior space being occupied by a wide, shallow, lagoon-
like sea, whose surface was probably broken here and there
near its centre, by smaller detached groups of islands. A
somewhat similar condition of things now exists in the shal-
low sea, under 50 fathoms, which separates Java, Borneo, and
Celebes, and in the large shallow sea, under 100 fathoms,
in the north of Australia, which now separates Australia
and New Guinea, and the intervening islands.
The Building of the Present Continent of Australia.
We may safely conclude that the building of what now con-
stitutes the present Continent of Australia had its beginning
at a time not older than the close of the Cretaceous era. The
marine tertiaries which succeed the marine cretaceous rocks
are not found in the mesial division which runs north and
south between the Gulf of Carpentaria and the Great Bight
of Australia, within the 11 degrees of latitude lying between
19° and 30° south, and hence —however wide the area, still
remaining covered by the later teritary seas, in the south,
fringing the Great Bight, and extending to the lower regions
of the Murray and its great tributary, the Darling; and in
the north extending the limits of the present Gulf of Car-
pentaria perhaps to 19° of south lat.—it is most probable
* “ Text Book of Geology.”
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


that even as early as the close of the Cretaceous period there
was a biological bridge 11 degrees in width connecting the
erstwhile separated Eastern Cordillera- with its great western
dI T n ’ t lOB6 mam maSS OCCU P Ied a v ery extended region
m the south-western division, Australia, which (together with
the Eastern Cordillera and the main portion of Tasmania)
ior a vast period of the geological time, had never been
depressed below the waters of the ocean. The present island
ol Tasmania is essentially a southern prolongation of the
Great Eastern Cordillera, and within its narrow borders are
found all its characteristic features, and it moreover con-
tains representatives of nearly all its wide range of systems
o rocks. It is very probable, during the Cretaceous period
that it was separated from the southern spur of the contin-
ental portion of the Cordillera by a narrow strait as at pre-
sent; but there is good evidence at Table Cape, Flinders
Island and Kent’s Group, that when the bed of the cretaceous
or perhaps eocene sea was finally elevated on the mainland,
the floor of Bass Strait partook in the general movement ;
thus forming a biological bridge, for a time, connecting Tas-
mama and Australia, and permitting the migration of plants
and animals heretofore isolated in terrestrial provinces of
narrower limits. The smaller, and, perhaps, more local,
depression which again severed Tasmania from the main-
land probably occurred towards the close of the Teritary
period, prior to the evolutional development of the giant mar-
supials of the Mainland, viz., Diprotodon , Nototherium and
Marsupial Lion ( Thylacoleo ), &c., and this may account for
the fact that no remains of these giant marsupials have been
discovered in Tasmanian rocks. It is most probable, there-
fore, that the destruction of the connecting link of the pre-
viously upheaved tertiary marine beds in the region of Bass
Strait, was accompanied by a local subsidence of the land
* The Euronotian Region, of Professor Tate.
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


perhaps during the Early Pleistocene period, of which there
is also some evidence along the eastern and southern coast-line
of Tasmania. The fact that the older lacustrine leaf-beds of
Tertiary age in the Launceston, Derwent, and Macquarie
Harbour basins, are now found at a considerable depth below
the existing sea-level (proved to a depth of 300 to 400 feet
below sea-level in some places) is in harmony with this view.
The very much more recent elevation of the land on the north-
east coast of Tasmania and the islands of Bass Strait during
the recent or human period, as evidenced by the well-known
raised sea-beaches containing shell remains in all respects
identical with living species in the same localities, is quite
local in character, as there is no evidence of this final move-
ment southwards. It was also certainly a much more limited
vertical oscillation, as it failed to reconnect completely the
island of Tasmania with the Australian mainland.
Jukes’ Early Sketch of Physical Structure.
With the scanty information at his disposal, it is to me sur-
prising how, in a broad sense, Mr. Jukes, 45 years ago, formed
so accurate a conception of the condition of Australia prior
to the final uplift of its great desert interior. It is true the
limited materials at his command at that time could only
indicate the comparative later age of the great sandy marine
formations of the great interior, which was inferred by him
to be of Tertiary age. But if we substitute the word cre-
taceous for tertiary in the following summary of conclusions
at which he tentatively arrived, we must marvel at the saga-
cious prediction of this talented geologist. He modestly
describes these conclusions as speculative notions, which, if
proved to be incorrect by future evidence, he submits himself,
in the true and honourable spirit of science, by the expres-
sion—“ No one will be more rejoiced than myself at the acqui-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


sition of the more accurate and full knowledge that shall over-
throw them. ”
At the close of a book published by Jukes, in the year
1850, entitled A Sketch of the Physical Structure of Aus-
tialia So tar As It Is At Presept Known,” he summarises
his interesting observations and shrewd speculations as fol-
lows :
Supposing that after the deposition of the palaeozoic
rocks what is now Australia was raised into dry land,
and that some portion or portions of it at all events have
ever since remained above the level of the sea.”
During some Tertiary period (Cretaceous?), however,
it was again partially submerged; that a sea of no great
depth extended over by far the greater portion of Aus-
tralia, in which sea was deposited the beds of limestone
and ferruginous sandstone, and the loose incoherent
sands that form the great plains (rolling downs and
desert sandstone), of which we know so large and /
helieve so much larger—a part of the country is com-
posed. During this Tertiary (Cretaceous?) period, we
should have one long island or chain of islands, running
along the Great Eastern chain of Australia; a similar
island or islands, but of much less extent, formed of
the chain of South Australia, with many smaller groups
between the two, in what is now Australia Felix.
These latter were probably added to at this period
by a number of volcanic cones, that probably arose above
the level of the sea from the volcanic foci that certainly
found vent in its bed. There would probably be another
group of islands formed of the highlands of Western
Australia, and again running probably east and west,
where we have highlands on the north-west coast, and in
the interior south of Port Essington. After this par-
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


tial submergence of the country it has again been elevated
above the sea, and left in its present condition.”
Mr. Jukes then goes on to say;
“ This geological history would account for the pre-
sent physical features of the country, and likewise for
the specific differences which may be detected under the
strict generic resemblances of the fauna and flora of dif-
ferent parts of Australia.
“ The mountain chains of the old rocks have not
only passed through the destructive plains of the sea-
level, and being everywhere subject to the wearing action
of its breakers, which, in addition to the dislocating
and disturbing forces acting on the interior, must have
destroyed and removed so large a portion of their mass;
but they must for long, long ages have stood the wear
and tear of the wind and the rain, and the other atmo-
spheric causes of degradation and disintegration, which
would sufficiently account for their remarkably furrowed
character, and their deep erosion into valleys and ravines,
which even where the rocks are but little disturbed, is
so striking a characteristic of the old rocks of this
country.”
Mr. Jukes here refers to the grand elevated, horizontally-
bedded plateau of the Blue Mountains (Hawkesbury sand-
stones), whose deep tortuous labyrinths of narrow or wide
canons have been worn precipitoiisly, often to a depth of from
1800 to 2000 feet, by the slow, prolonged action of the small
branching streams eating backwards from the lower levels,
as in the case of the deep channel of Niagara below the cele-
brated falls, or as in the case of the much more stupendous
canons of Colorado.
In contrasting the results of many agencies operating upon
the older rocks of the Eastern Cordillera over so long a period,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Mr. Jukes states: “ The rocks of the interior of Australia
(cretaceous) have been merely elevated en masse, and that,
geologically speaking, at so recent a date, form (in contrast to
the older wasted rock) level or gently undulating and
unbroken plains, which are an equal characteristic of the
(great desert interior) of the Australian land.”
Jukes’ Speculations on the Genesis of the Existing
Flora and Fauna.
Although Jukes had not the advantage of our large stores
of material accumulated during the last 40 years, relating to
the origin, nature, extent, variability, and distribution of the
existing peculiar flora and fauna of the Australian region,
nor of the valuable labours of Professor von Ettingshausen
in the elucidation of our cretaceous and teritary floras, still,
his broader generalizations as to genesis, causes of dispersal
or specialization are so wonderfully correct, that we find little
room for amendment, even when regarded in the light of
the later and more exhaustive inquiries in this direction by
such accomplished naturalists as Dr. Wallace, Professors
Hutton, Tate, and Baldwin Spencer. Writing of the causes
which brought about dispersal and specialization of the exist-
ing flora and fauna, he concludes admirably in the following
words:
” Now, our hypothetical geological history would
account for this. We may suppose that previous to the
depression that let in the tertiary (cretaceous?) sea over
Australia, that country (and, perhaps, a large portion
of the adjacent surface of the earth), was covered by
trees, plants, and animals, whether terrestrial or fresh
water, and its coasts bordered by marine animals, all of
a common type; that these species and genera varied only
with the variation in latitude, depth, altitude, nature of
soil, &c., or all those circumstances that go to make up
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


the ‘ climate ’ of the place. When this country, how-
ever, was broken up into islands, it is probable that each
island or group of islands would preserve some species or
genera of animals or plants that would be lost in the
others. Lapse of time would tend still further to modify
these different assemblages by the extinction of some of
the old species, and the introduction of new ones, until
at last the more distant groups exhibited a specific con-
trast, while they had a generic resemblance to each other.
We should thus have a reason for a certain peculiarity
of the flora and fauna of each tract of country; for the
eastern coast, which was once one long island or group
of islands, having plants and animals of the same
species throughout its extent which did not occur on the
western, and vice versa. Each group of islands when
raised so as to be all connected by dry land would be pre-
pared to act the part of a specific, or even perhaps a
generic centre, and its inhabitants would descend on the
newly-acquired plains, to reconquer and reclaim their
old territories or to occupy the new. Some of the islands,
however, having remained as islands, might preserve
their peculiarites, which would account, in the instance
of Tasmania, for its peculiar possession of those extra-
ordinary animals, the ‘ Dasyurus ursinus ’ and ‘ Thy-
lacinus cynocophalus ’ (the ‘ Devil ’ and the ‘ Tiger ’of
the colonists). Others might still be separated by impas
sable deserts from the rest, as in the instance of Western
Australia, where the peculiarites of the fauna and flora
are more marked than in the other colonies.”
When we consider that these observations of Jukes were
written nine years prior to the epoch-making book, Darwin’s
“ Origin of Species ” —which first accented the great bio-
logical truth of the natural tendency of species to vary, and
to persist and survive in competition with the parent or other
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


forms, when the variation of new environment favoured the
particular form of variation —we must marvel at the saga-
cious reasonings and the wide knowledge possessed by this
talented geologist, and the close agreement of his reasonings
and conclusions with the more recent \itterances of Wallace,
Hutton, Tate, and Spencer, who worked more advantage-
ously, as they were aided by the fresh light which modifica-
tion of species by descent affords, and which was first demon-
strated to the world by the wide searching investigations of
two great minds (Darwin and Wallace), working independ-
ently towards the same grand conclusions.
In this place it may be well to remark that Professor Tate,
in his admirable presidential address “ On the Influence of
Physiographic Changes in the Distribution • of Life in Aus-
tralia,” delivered to the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, in Sydney, in the year 1887, states
that Dr. Wallace had erroneously assumed—in discussing
recent physiographic changes in Australia, in his work on
Island Life ” —“ that the old tertiary sea extended in a
wide gulf from north to south through Central Australia.”
This bald statement —which has been since repeated, no doubt
upon Professor Tate’s authority, by Professor Baldwin Spen-
cer, and more recently by C. Redley, F.L.S. —does not do
full jiistice to Dr. Wallace, as it does not exactly state his
expressed views on the subject, as contained in the pages of
Island Life.” At page 466, “ Island Life,” I)r. Wallace’s
chart, showing the assumed separation of Western Australia
from the Eastern Cordillera, distinctly depicts the dividing
sea as “ cretaceous and under this chart are the words—
“ Map showing the probable condition of Australia during
the Cretaceous period.” Again, at page 464, he writes:
“ But while this rich and peculiar flora was in process of
formation, the eastern portion of the continent must either
have been widely separated from the western, or had, perhaps.
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


not yet risen from ocean.” At page 465 lie observes; “We
shall see good reason to conclude that the eastern and western
divisions of the country first existed as separate islands, and
only became united at a comparatively recent epoch.”
It is only in the following paragraph, where Dr. Wallace’s
expression only partly justifies the restricted idea conveyed
by Professor Tate’s words, viz. : “ During the Cretaceous
period, therefore, and probably throughout a considerable
portion of the Tertiary epoch , there must have been a wide
arm of the sea occupying this area, dividing the great mass
of land on the west —the true seat and origin of the typical
Australian flora—from a long but narrow belt of land on
the east.” The qualified extension of the conditions to
include portion of the Tertiary epoch is only suggested as a
probability, no doubt, out of some respect to Professor P. M.
Duncan, who is quoted in a footnote as holding the view that
the central area of Australia was occupied by sea, having
open waters to the north,” at a time when the teritary marine
beds on the south-west of Victoria were being deposited. It
is clear, however, that Dr. Wallace’s most assured belief was
in favour of a dividing cretaceous sea, which is in accord with
Professor Tate’s own views. At any rate this fuller explana-
tion will help to remove possible misconception of Dr. Wal-
lace’s opinions on this important subject.
Beief Physical Outline of Tasmania.
The island of Tasmania is situated in the Southern Hemi-
sphere, between the parallels of 40° 33 and 43° 39' south
latitude, and between 144° 39' and 148° 23 meridian of east
longitude, and corresponds nearly with Southern France and
Northern Italy in northern latitude. It is irregularly heart-
shaped, and occupies an area of 26,215 square miles. It is
bounded on the north by the shallow and narrow Bass Strait,
which separates it from the south-eastern extremity of the
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Continent of Australia, while on its western, southern, and
eastern sides its shores are exposed to the roll of the great
Southern Ocean.
Nearly 40 years ago its general physical features were most
graphically described by Count Paul de Strzelecki (“ Physical
Description of New South Wales and Tasmania,” pp. 462,
Bvo., London, 1845); and, soon after, many of its geological
features were again briefly sketched by the late J. Beete
Jukes (” A Sketch of the Physical Structure of Australia,”
pp. 95, Bvo., London.) Although the extended researches of
many local observers since that time have added very con-
siderably to our knowledge of the physical details of Australia
and Tasmania, the descriptions of the main features as
recorded by the two accomplished observers already referred
to are wonderfully accurate, and, even as regards local details,
are still, so far as they extend, most valuable sources of refer-
ence.
The main axis of the Great Cordillera* bordering the east-
ern coastline of Australia may be traced across Bass Strait
in the chain of islands forming the Furneaux and Kent’s
Group, which almost continuously link Tasmania with Wil-
son’s Promontory, the nearest and most southerly part of the
Australian mainland. From Wilson’s Promontory its course
may be traced in a similar manner along the whole eastern
border of Australia, and even across the Torres Straits to
New Guinea, not by an uninterrupted elevated mountain
chain, for, as described by Mr. Jukes, it is made up of many
masses of various characters : sometimes peaked and serrated
ridges; sometimes detached hills rising from slightly elevated
ground; sometimes great tablelands, which, wtien composed of
the prevailing diabasic greenstone, often end towards the sea
in nearly pedpendicular escarpments ; and sometimes gently
*So termed originally by Sir Roderick Murchison.
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


sloping plains, furrowed by innumerable precipitous gulleys
and ravines. Large lateral spurs often diverge on either hand
from the central portion of the chain, and, especially on its
seaward side, appear like separate and independent moun-
tain masses.
Tasmania is wholly occupied by the ramifications of this
chain, and, in itself, may be said to embrace one and all of
its characteristic features.
If we take our stand near Lake Fergus, to the east of Lake
St. Clair, we find that we are situated nearly in the centre
of an extensive plateau—a smaller Tasmania—with an eleva-
tion, especially on the northern side, of between three and
five thousand feet above sea-level.
This elevated plateau extends from Dry's Bluff in the
north-west to the Denison Range in tin south-west, and
although often receding at points adjacent lo the sources of
the principal rivers, invariably presents a bold-crested front
to the north, west, and east. At its greatest elevation, it
is comparatively level, and contains many extensive fresh-
water basins, such as Lake Augusta, Lake St. Clair, Lake
Sorell, Lake Echo, Arthur’s Lake, Lake Crescent, and the
Great Lake. The latter is estimated to be above 90 miles
in circumference. The marginal crests of this mountain
tableland, together with its upper surface, are composed
principally of diabase, are known locally as “ Tiers,” and
have a very commanding aspect in the neighbourhood of Long-
ford, Westbury, Deloraine, and Chudleigh. The extent of
the principal elevated plateau is best appreciated when we
consider that it maintains its general altitude in a westerly
direction from Dry’s Bluff (4257 feet) on the north to Cradle
Mountain (5069 feet) in the north-west, a distance of nearly
50 miles; from Dry’s Bluff, in a south-westerly direction to
Denison Range, a distance of over 60 miles; and from the
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Dry’s Bluff (4257 feet) to Table Mountain in a southerly
direction, a distance of above 43 miles.
This plateau itself again rests upon a more extended table-
land, composed mainly of metaphoric schists or slates. The
level of this tableland stretches westward, and —including
the Middlesex Plains, the Hampshire Hills, and the Emu
Plains—maintains an altitude of 1200 to 2000 feet. Its
limits follow the coast-line more or less closely, the space
between it and the sea often broadening out into low-lying
tracts, not much raised above the sea-level. Here and there,
rising abruptly from its surface, are to be seen isolated peaks,
chiefly of schistose formation, the most characteristic of which
are Valentine’s Peak (3637 feet) and Mt. Pearse.
Ridges and plateaus of a similar character, but more or
less isolated, such as B,en Lomond (5010 feet) and Mt. Wel-
lington 4166 feet), are to be found in the north-east and
south-west of the island. Towards the extreme west and
south, granites, metamorphic mica and quartzose schists,
with overlying slates, grits, and limestone of Cambro-silurian
age, reappear again and again in anticlinal and synclinal
ridges, which trend north and south, the most characteristic
being the Huxley, Owen, Sedgwick, Franklin, and Arthur
Ranges.
These rocks may also be seen following the south coast, and
evidently occupying nearly all that extensive mountain region
to the south of the River Huon.
Settlement of population has principally taken place along
the plains and lower levels of the north-western, midland,
and south-eastern parts of the island, following, in the main,
the rocks of Tertiary and Mesozoic age. In the recent Ter-
tiary period the soils of these plains and valleys have been
greatly enriched by extensive outbursts of basalt, with accom-
panvmg tuffs. These comparatively level sheets ol basalt aie
GEOL. RELATIONS; AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


often of great extent in the midland, north-western, and
north-eastern districts, and there is ample evidence to show
that, as in France and other parts of the world, they are
invariably intimately associated with the ancient tertiary
lake systems. These basalts produce a very rich chocolate
soil; and were it not for their influence, the greater part of
what is now the most fertile part of the island would have
been comparatively poor, or altogether sterile. The climate,
upon the whole, is exceptionally genial, and the appearance
of the island throughout is wonderfully beautiful, with its
open plains, bordered by far extending precipitous mountain
tiers; its isolated shaggy peaks and wooded ranges; and its
many noble rivers and lakes. Its coast for the most part,
especially towards the south, is bold, and frequently indented
with splendid bays and harbours, affording ample shelter and
safe anchorage for ships. On the * western side one is
reminded of scenes in the highlands of Rosshire and Inver-
nesshire, in Scotland, from the picturesque character of the
blue, white, and pinkish crystalline peaks and the fantastic
outlines of the mountain ranges, which rise abruptly to a
height of from 2000 to nearly 3000 feet above the Button
Grass Plains.
The vegetation which now prevails among the older schistose
rocks of the west and extreme south, presents a totally dif-
ferent appearance to that which prevails in the more exten-
sively settled districts of the east.
The western vegetation, as compared with that of the east,
presents as marked a contrast as do the prevailing rocks upon
which it flourishes. The characteristic trees and shrubs of the
west include the following genera, viz. : — Fagus, Genarr-
henes, Anodopetalum, Eucryphia, Bauer a, Boronia, A gas-
tachys, Richea, Telopea, Grevillea, Orites, Athrotaxis, Dacry-
dium, Phyllocladus.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


On the eastern side, the plains and rocky ridges, where not
artificially cleared, are occupied by shaggy and often sombre
forests, mainly composed of the following prevailing genera,
viz .'.—Eucalyptus (Gum-tree), Casuarina, Bursaria, Acacia,
Leptospermum, Drimys, Melaleuca, Dodonta, Notolea, Exo-
cat pus , Hakea, Epacris, A author rhoea , Ertnela. The moun-
tain slopes and ravines of the east have a vegetation well
marked. In character it is more akin, and in many cases
identical with that of the west. The Tree Fern ( Dicksonia
autarctica) in the mountain ravines is especially remarkable.
The following genera are also found in such position in great
luxuriance, viz. : — Fagus, Anopterus, Phebali'tcih, Eucalyptus,
Richea, Cyathodes, Pomaderris, Prostanthera, Boronia, Gaid-
theria, Correa, Bedfordia, Aster, Archeria, Atherosperma, &c.
In the extreme west the trees and larger shrubs do not
appear to ascend the schistose rocky mountain slopes to the
same height as in the greenstone mountain slopes of the east.
The flora and fauna are almost identical with the flora
and fauna of the Continent of Australia, and there is, even
now, sufficient evidence to show that both have been derived
immediately from ancestors who had established themselves
in Australia and Tasmania during, and possibly even prior
to, the dawn of the Tertiary period.
The Building of Tasmania.
It has already been noticed that the rocks of Tasmania,
as a whole, correspond more particularly with those of the
older atoll-like formations of Australia, especially those of
the Eastern Cordillera, and with them formed the island
groups, composing its already described characteristic fringe,
at one time everywhere environed and insulated by the broad,
shallow cretaceous sea which almost unbrokenly occupied its
interior, and whose sediments now form the newer rolling
down and desert sandstone of Central Australia. As neither
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


the older part of Australia nor Tasmania contains marine
formations of later age than the Permo-Carboniferous period
(if we except also the still doubtful marine origin of the
earliest mesozoic sandstone, such as at The Cascades, and
Knocklofty, Hobart, containing remains of ganoid fishes,
which may possibly have been formed in old fiords that may
have been cut off from connection with the open sea, on the
first rising of the old upper palaeozoic sea floor at the beginning
of the Mesozoic era), it follows that the older region of Aus-
tralia, and almost entirely the whole of Tasmania, have been
permanently elevated above sea-level since the close of the
Upper Palaeozoic age; that is, since what are generally known
as the upper marine beds of Permo-Carboniferous age, with
their characteristic and uniformly similar species of brachio-
poda corals and polyzoans, were uplifted from the bed of the
shallow sea in which they were originally deposited. The
conditions affecting Tasmania and the older land of Aus-
tralia being so closely analogous, it follows that if we picture
the sequence of physical causes and conditions which resulted
in the final building up of Tasmania, it will equally serve to
illustrate the corresponding sequence of changes in the further
development of the older lands of Australia. It would be
idle to speculate as to the distribution of land and sea in the
area now occupied by the Island of Tasmania prior to the
age which closed the Devonian period at least. During the
succeeding Permo-Carboniferoiis age it is probable that the
same area was occupied by two or three islands or island
groups, environed and separated by a comparatively shal-
low sea. In this sea the characteristic large-winged spirifers,
globose Pachydomi, corals, and lace-like Fenestellce lived
and died, and their remains give quite a character to the
marine mudstone sediments of that sea, which are now so
commonly distributed throughout the older rocks of Aus-
tralia and Tasmania. Sometimes intercalated in basins
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


there exist the remains of a characteristic flora (the conifer
Noeggerathiopsis and the net-veined ferns, Gangomopteris
and Glossopteris), which then flourished on these islands and
on the older lands of Australia, and which now form the older
coal measures, as at Greta and Newcastle, New South Wales;
Henty River, Mersey and 1 ippagory Range and elsewhere in
Tasmania; and the Star and Bowen coal measures, Queens-
land. These upper palaeozoic islands of Tasmania—composed
of granites, porphyries, serpentines, schists, conglomerates,
felsites, and slates, and now the great centres of our metal-
lifeious deposits consisted probably of a long narrow strip
ol land in the west, stretching from the present Cape Grim,
in the north, to the neighbourhood of the Maatsuyker Islands
in the south; a cluster of islands in the vicinity of Magog,
Mt. Ronald, and Dial Range in the north; and a larger
island in the north-east, which may have been connected
with a thin prolongation or string of islands, still traceable
along what now forms the eastern border of Tasmania,
through the Schouten and Maria Islands, and the granite
rocks of the Hyppolites.
Great physical changes took place at the close of this period.
It is evident that a combination of geographical and astro-
nomical causes set in, producing a marked refrigeration of
the climate of the period. This is evidenced unmistakeably
by the abundance of huge polished ice-borne erratics strewn
over the soft muddy floor of the upper marine beds, and in
places forming lenticular patches of conglomerate, not-
ably in the estuary of the Derwent and at Maria Island,
Tasmania, and in a similar horizon at Bacchus Marsh, Woora-
gee, and elsewhere in Victoria.
The old typical flora died away in consequence, almost
suddenly and completely; and it is probable the floor of the
old permo-carboniferous sea was almost simultaneously raised
over all the region of Australia as well as Tasmania. The
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


older separated islands of Tasmania were then for the
first time connected much in the same manner as is presented
by its existing land limits, since which time Tasmania, with
the exception of a fringe on its northern shores, has never
again been buried below the waters of the ocean. Gradually,
after the uplifting of the permo-carboniferous sea-floor, so
greatly extending the old land limits, there is evidence of
the climate becoming more genial, and of the ushering in and
rapid development of an entirely new type of flora, character-
ised in Tasmania, and over all similar lands of Mesozoic age
in Australia, by the abundance of the following typical
plant forms Conifers : Baiera , Salisburia, Ginkophyllum,
Zeugophyllites, or Poa-cordaites, Taxites, Sequoites, Wedchia,
Cuminghamites, Araucarites, Gy cads, Podozamites , Ptero-
phyllum, Ptilophyllum, Otozamites, Sphenozamites, Brachy-
phyllum. Horse-tails: Phyllotheca, Annularia. Ferns:
Tcemopteris, Macrnticeniopteris, S-agenopteris, Pecopteris,
Neuropteris, Sphenopteris, Alethopteris, Thinnfeldia , Cyclop-
teris, Gleichenites, Odontopteris, Trichomanides, &c.
The remains of this rich and peculiar flora are widely dis-
tributed throughout the midland, eastern, and south-eastern
parts of Tasmania, chiefly in basins among the older permo-
carboniferous rocks, and form the principal coal districts of
Tasmania, as at Fingal, Mt. Nicholas, Seymour, Longford,
Jerusalem, Richmond, New Town, Hamilton, Tasman’s
Peninsula, Schouten Island, South Cape, Southport, and
Port Esperanoe. [Examples of their equivalents on the
mainland containing the same flora, and occurring under
similar conditions, are: — Queensland ; Burrum and Ipswich
coal measures. New South Wales: Baltimore, Clarence,
Hawkesbury, and Weanamatta series. Victoria: Mesozoic
formations near Coleraine, Waanon River; Cape Otway, with
the Barabool Hills; Western Port, Cape Paterson; Bel-
larine, near Geelong.]
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


It is now veiy evident, as stated by me in my larger work
on “ The Geology of Tasmania ” pp. 162, 163), “ that as
the floor of the ancient upper palaeozoic sea was gradually
being elevated above its waters at the close of the Permo-
Carboniferous period, asolian, atmospheric, and organic
agencies immediately began to operate upon it in carving out
valleys and river channels, and in filling its many cup-shaped
basins and irregular hollows with lakes and sediments. It is
mainly from such waste, and by such agencies, modified by
(later) igneous intrusions, that the sediments and materials
of the rocks of the Mesozoic period were deposited in Tas-
mania.”
Again, observing that there is evidence to show that the
great mass of Tasmania has never since been submerged below
the ocean, ‘ it follows that there should be found through-
out the area now occupied by secondary and tertiary rocks,
or connected, although perhaps necessarily, a greatly broken
and wasted representation of all the rocks of the two great
divisions. It is not likely that the fluviatile and sub-aerial
agencies, however prolonged and intense, would altogether
destroy the older deposits in the formation of the later rocks;
and it is reasonable to assume that, where there are no sudden
breaks, such as occur elsewhere by the sudden alternation of
marine and terrestrial formations, that the transition, as even
now indicated by the fossil flora, would be very gradual in
the limited basins where sediments were deposited, which
probably were again and again partly redistributed as suc-
cessive formations in gradually lessening areas. . . . From
such considerations as these, and while willing to recognise
the fact that all the European subdivisions may be represented
by equivalents in Tasmanian rocks, it would seem altogether
improbable that the many little groups of our mesozoic rocks,
as a whole, will show the faintest correspondence with the
tertiary sub-groups (triassic, Jurassic, cretaceous) of Europe.
GEOL. RELATIONS; AUSTRALIA ANT) TASMANIA


Any attempt to make corresponding divisions in Tasmania,
with our present knowledge respecting stratigraphy and
palaeontology, would be purely artificial, and altogether mis-
leading.” The same remarks equally apply to the great
region of the Cordillera in Queensland, New South Wales,
and Victoria, where similar formations succeed each other,
and which have been also permanently elevated above sea-
level since the beginning of the Mesozoic age.
Great Physical and Organic Changes at the Close of
Both the Mesozoic and Lower Tertiary Ages in Tas-
mania.
The close of the Mesozoic age marked another great cyclical
change in the physical conditions and organic life of the
island, for at its close all its rich and varied flora in its turn
disappeared, or “ yielded to the great law of death,” and
although for the most part no marine beds intervene between
our upper mesozoic rocks and the immediately succeeding
lower teritary lacustrine formations with their characteristic
leaf-beds and lignites—proved in places to nearly a depth of
1000 feet—the flora of the latter were “ brought to the birth
and ushered upon the scene ” suddenly, and appearing locally,
as a new creation. But it is significant that this sudden
change is exactly isochronous with an unparalled eruption
of igneous rocks (diabasic greenstone) concurrent with wide-
spread convulsions of the older strata, and which have their
counterparts at the same time throughout the mainland of
Australia, and may even be isochronous and caused by the
same chain of physical agencies which eventually raised the
floor of the great internal cretaceous sea of Australia. These
greenstones (diabase) even now are so widespread as to form
the leading physiographical features throughout the moun-
tains and lowland of Tasmania.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


At the time of the commencement of the eruptions, our char-
acteristic mesozoic flora still flourished, for I have recently dis-
covered a splendidly-defined branchlet of the well-known coni-
fer, Baiera tenuifolia (mihi), on splitting open a crystalline
block of greenstone from the cap of Mt. Faulkner near
Hobart, indicating that at least large masses of the now solid
and crystallized greenstones were originally extruded in the
form of trap-tuff or ash, the change to the solid crystalline
condition taking place subsequently. During the great erup-
tive period probably broken by long intervals of rest or inac-
tivity—it seems as if the conditions for the existence of plant
life were everywhere impossible. There is no clear evidence
locally at this time of severe glacial phenomena, but it is
known that Dana recognised the close of the Cretaceous period
as “ an epoch of cold,” and J. S. Gardiner, from the study of
fossil floras and strong negative and positive evidence, also
concludes, that although there were no intense glacial effects,
there were alternating warm and colder conditions at this
time. These conclusions are also in harmony with the origin-
ally expressed opinions of Agassiz and Dana. According to
Dr. Wallace’s account (p. 222, “ Island Life ”) “ Agassiz
appears to have been the first to suggest that the principal
epochs of life-extermination were epochs of cold ; and Dana
thinks that two at least of such epochs may be recognised at
the close of the Palaeozoic and of the Cretaceous periods.” To
which we may certainly recognise a third epoch of cold in Aus-
tralasia at the close of the Palaeogene (Miocene) period con-
curring with the great glacier epoch of Australasia. It seems,
therefore, most probable that our great eruptive period at
the close of the Mesozoic age, associated with the destruction
of our mesozoic flora, may have been concurrent with a cold
epoch, due, perhaps, to one of the milder forms of extreme
cyclical eccentricity of the earth’s orbit, and thus somewhat
differing from the third great eruptive period (basaltic extru-
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


sions) which probably with the concurrence of more intense
astronomical and geographical casual conditions during the
Australasian glacier epoch at the commencement of our Neo-
gene period (Pliocene), by which combined agencies the whole
of our extremely rich and typical flora of Lower Tertiary age
was, like the former mesozoic and permo-carboniferous floras,
almost completely annihilated, locally at least.
Concurrence of Glacial Epochs with Great Cycles of
Change in the Plant Life of Australia.
Similar evidences are to b© found throughout Australia;
and it is almost conclusive that these three great changes in
our fossil flora —corresponding with the exceptional epochs of
cold, and also corresponding closely with the periods of great
and wide-spreading physical convulsions —go to show that
there is an underlying bond of connection with exceptional
concurrences, at remote intervals, of astronomical, physical,
and geographical causes, and that the combination of these
three great causes is essential to the initiation of conditions
which produce glacial epochs contemporaneously over widely
separated parts of the globe.
Classification, Chronological Sequence, and Character
or the Rocks of Tasmania and Their Approximate
Equivalents in the Australian Colonies.
It is a difficult matter within the limits of a single lecture,
to give a satisfactory outline of the character and chronological
sequence of the rocks of Tasmania so far as we know them, and
at the same time give examples of their nearest alliances or
equivalents where they occur in the rocks of the various colonies
of the mainland of Australia. Summaries of this kind are best
conveyed in a tabular form, and therefore I have drawn up
from latest sources of information a comparative table showing
THE E. M. JOHNSTON MEMOEIAL VOLUME


briefly “ The Classification and Chronological Sequence of the
Principal Rock I ormations of Tasmania, with Examples of
Their Nearest Alliances or Equivalents in Australia.” As
such a table can only be studied satisfactorily in a printed
form, I am obliged to give you a very much condensed abstract
of its contents, commencing with the oldest rocks, as fol-
lows :
Lower Palceozoic.
It is not easy, in a brief sketch, to indicate the distribution
of the various rock systems in Tasmania; but in a general way
it may be correct to state broadly that the oldest rocks, rang-
ing from the Pre-Cambrian to the Devonian, are largely
represented in Tasmania, forming, with the associated granites
and porphyries, remarkably rugged ranges in the north-east-
ern part of the island in the vicinity of the gold and tin min-
ing centres, as at Asbestos Ranges, Beaconsfield, Lefroy,
Branxholm, Gladstone, Gould’s Country, George’s Bay,
Schouten’s and Maria Island. In the north they occur in
the vicinity of Chudleigh, Mt. Roland, Mt. Claude, and
Latrobe. In the western highlands they occupy the greater
part of the country, forming a broad strip nearly 200 miles
long and 50 miles broad, running obliquely north and south in
anticlinal and synclinal folds, between Cape Grim and Dial
Range in the north, and traceable to the Mewstone Rock and
South Cape in the extreme south.
Pre-Cambrian. —The rocks of Pre-Cambrian age consist
mainly of crystalline schists; gneissoid micaceous schists and
quartzites, are usually greatly metamorphosed, and are char-
acterised by highly-folded, tilted, crumpled strata with
puckered laminae. Rarely in any country do they exhibit
any trace of life.
Tasmania. —Rocks of this age are found in the neighbour-
hood of the Davey River, Arthur, Frankland, and Wilmot
GEOL. RELATIONS; AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


Ranges, western border of Macquarie Harbour, Mt. Heems-
kirk, Parson’s Hood, Latrobe, and Asbestos Ranges.
3 ew South Wales. —Pre-Cambrian rocks, although doubt-
fully determined, are said to exist near the silver and tin
fields of the Barrier Range.
Queensland. —Such rocks are inferred to be exposed, but
they have not been determined satisfactorily.
I ictoria . —Selwyn was of the opinion that the metamorphic
rocks of the Mitta Mitta Valley belonged to this age.
South Australia. —Represented in metamorphic rocks near
Lake Gardiner, Musgrave Range, and elsewhere.
Western Australia. —Mr. Woodward states the Archaean
(Pre-Cambrian) and crystalline rocks are more largely
developed in this colony than in any portion of the world,
particularly near the Murchison River, forming a broad strip
southwards to the south-western extremity between Cape
Leeuwin and Cape Pasley. The series are highly contorted,
and, as on the West Coast of Tasmania, they are folded into
a number of parallel anticlines and synclines running north
and south, and, like the former, are often rich in tin, gold,
and other valuable metals.
Cambrian. —Rocks determined to be of Cambrian age are
found associated with gneissoid mica-schists at Caroline Creek,
Mersey.
They consist of rusty tilted sandstones, thinly bedded.. The
remains of trilobites (. Dikelocephalus , Loganellus , &c.) and
the tracks of annelids are very abundant.
New South Wales \
Queensland | Representatives not yet discovered.
Victoiia I
South Australia. —Represented by rocks similar in char-
acter to Caroline Creek beds in the Parara limestones, near
Ardrossan, in Yorke’s Peninsula.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Western Australia. —The cambrian formation is stated by
Mr. H. P. Woodward to have been proved to exist in the
Kimberley District, where it contains the gold-bearing lodes.
Silurian (Lower and Upper).— The silnrian rocks consist
mainly of hydro-mica schists, clay-slates, sandstones, grits,
conglomerates, and limestones. Although not so greatly
metamorphosed as the pre-cambrian, they are generally found
tilted at high angles, and are usually much folded and dis-
located.
Tasmania. —The siluriau rocks are frequently penetrated by
metalliferous lodes and veins; and in various parts of the
island, as at Mt. Bischoff, Mt. Zeehan, Mt. Dundas, Mt. Lyell,
Heazlewood, Beaconsfield, Lefroy, Gladstone, Branxholm,
Gould’s Country, these are often highly charged with valu-
able metals, such as gold, silver, copper, tin, lead, bismuth,
antimony, &c. The limestones of the Gordon, Ida Bay Caves,
and the brachiopod sandstones and schists of Queen River,
Mt. Lyell, Zeehan, and Heazlewood, are rich in fossils.
Corals and chambered shells of the Orthoceras type character-
ise the limestones; and the sandstones and schists are replete
with casts of comparatively small or minute brachiopods of
the genera Pentamerus, Bhynchonella, Orthis, A try pa,
Strophomena.
These older rocks are also exposed in the neighbourhood of
Mt. Roland, Chudleigh, and Mersey, and they are to be
traced forming a marginal boundary in the east through Frey-
cinet Peninsula and Schouten and Maria Islands. Granites
and porphyries are commonly associated with them in various
localities.
New South Wales. —Represented doubtfuly in the lower
division by altered gneissoid schists, sandstones and limestones
of the Barrier Ranges, and probably also by similar rocks near
Moruya and Murrumbidgee. Represented in the upper
GEOL. RELATIONS; AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


division' by conglomerates, sandstones, and slates, at the
sources of Murrumbidgee and Lachlan Rivers, Broken Hill,
Barrier Range, Bathurst, Truron River, Adding, Yass,
Benda, Jenolan Caves, and elsewhere.
Queensland. —Frequently exposed, but not as yet clearly
determined.
Victoria. —Represented in the lower division by the aurifer-
ous slates of Bendigo, Bulla, Castlemaine, Barwon Creek,
Gippsland, Melbourne. Graptolites abundant. Represented
in the upper division by Calymene and Fentamerus beds at
Upper Yarra, Moonee Ponds, Bald Hills, Kilmore, Deep
Creek, Waratah Bay, Woori-Yallock, Bruce’s Creek, and else-
where.
South Australia. —Represented only in the lower division
by auriferous slates, grits, and conglomerates, of Main Range,
Kangaroo Island, Anthony Range, Golden Range, and else-
where.
Western Australia. —Mr. H. P. Woodward states that “the
silurian rocks have only been identified in the Kimberley Dis-
trict, but they are probably represented in other parts of the
colony by clay-slates andquartzites as in the Stirling Range.’’
Devonian. —lt is doubtful if the rocks referred to in this
system can be permanently retained, and whether it may not
be found necessary, as originally suggested by Mr. Jukes, to
abolish this system in classification, and to class part of the
series with the silurian, and the uppermost portion with the
carboniferous series.
Tasmania. —At present it may be convenient to class as
Devonian certain soft clay-slates in the Fingal District, con-
taining remains of a species of Anodonta, together with a
large part of the upper conglomerates of the West Coast
Range, Dial Range, and Table Cape, which often contain
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


derived fossils of Silurian rocks m pebbles wlncli are much
waterworn.
dew South If (ties. —Said to be represented by the sandstone
and quartzites of Rydal, Mt. Walker, Mt. Lambie, Cudge-
gong, and Truron Rivers, Wolgan Valley, Yass, Goulburn,
and elsewhere.
Queensland . —Said to be represented by the Burdekin
formation.
Victoria. —Said to be represented in its lower division
(lower devonian) by limestones of Buchan and Bindi, Tab-
berabara shales, and Snowy River porphyries ; and in its upper
division by Iguana Creek beds, Snowy Bluff beds, and Mt.
Tambo beds.
South Australia. —Not determined as yet.
Western Australia. —Said to be represented (1) by horizon-
tally-bedded series of sandstones, grits, conglomerates, shales,
and limestones, containing characteristic fossils in the Kim-
berley District; (2) doubtfully by magnesian limestones on the
Ashburton River.
Upper Palaeozoic Age.
Permo-Carboniferous. — Tasmania. —The characteristic
rocks of the Permo-Carboniferous age in Tasmania chiefly con-
sist of thin regular horizontal bands of siliceous conglomerates
and grit, blue slaty shales, limestones, argillo-calcareous and
argillo-arenaceous mudstone rocks of a yellow or whitish
appearance, with intercalated beds near its upper limits in
some places, composed of white, red, and yellow sandstones,
fine greyish laminated friable shales, and occasionally thin
coal seams.
The members are, for the most part, extremely rich in
fossils, and are more or less horizontally disposed, although
often greatly dislocated by later intrusions of greenstones and
GrEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


by secular upheaval, and subsequently subjected to a long-
continued denudation. The varying altitudes (sea-level to
2500 feet) at which apparently the same members are found
together with the deep valley of erosion, so common through-
out the country, testify to the vastness of the dynamical
agencies which have operated upon them since their deposi-
tion.
These rocks are mainly deposited throughout the eastern
and midland parts of the Colony, and are found fringing the
whole of the great central plateau of greenstone. There
exists also a notable patch, more recently discovered, near
the mouth of the Henty River. In the basin of the Mersey
there is evidence of a temporary elevation and subsequent
depression of the old sea-floor in which the major part of the
rocks were developed, between which elevation and depres-
sion sedimentary deposits of carbonaceous matter (forming
the lower coal measures of Tasmania) were deposited. The
typical plant remains of this period are two species of a genus
of conifer (Noeggerathiopsis); net-veined ferns (Gangamop-
terift, glossopteris); lycopods ( Schhoneura , Tasmanites), and
the earliest known Tasmanian insect (a species of some form of
Neuroptera) . The fossils of the marine beds are very numer-
ous, but the characteristic forms, consisting of large-winged
iSpirifers and abundant lace-like FenesteMoe, enable anyone to
easily identify the rocks in which they are found. The vari-
ous beds of the system are well represented in the vicinity ol
Hobart, especially so in the cuttings of the Huon-road towards
the Fern Tree Inn.
The sequence of the principal formations of this age are
hereafter given in ascending order for Tasmania, and for their
approximate equivalents in Australia.
Tasmania. —(1) Lower marine series; (2) Tasmanite series;
(3) Lower coal measures, Mersey and elsewhere; (4) Upper
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


marine beds; (5) Adventure Bay and Mt. Cygnet coal meas
ures, (6) Southport series of carbonaceous shales.
New South Wales. —(l) Lepidodendron or lower carbon-
iferous beds; (2) Lower marine beds; (3) Lower coal meas-
ures, Greta and Anvil Creek; (4) Upper marine beds of
Greta and Anvil Creek; (5) Middle coal measures of Tomago
or East Maitland; (6) Newcastle coal measures (productive
group).
Queensland. (1) Star formation; (2) Lower Bowen forma-
tion; (3) Middle Bowen formation (coal measures and marine
beds); (4) Upper Bowen formation (coal measures and marine
beds).
Victoria. —(l) Avon River formation (red and yellow mica-
ceous sandstones); (2) Bacchus Marsh sandstones and glacial
conglomerates.
South Australia. —Not known as yet.
Western Australia. —(l) Lower Carboniferous —Shales,
fire-clays, sandstones, and limestones with coal seams, near
the coast, between the Irwin and Lyons Rivers; shales with
quartzite cappings and limestones, largely developed in the
Kimberley district, forming flat-topped hills and ranges. (2)
Upper Carhoniferoxbs —Shales, sandstones, and fire-clays with
coal seams, upon the Collie River.
Mesozoic Period.
Tasmania. —The rocks of Mesozoic age in Tasmania consist
mainly of variegated sandstones; regularly or falsely bedded
shales; blue and white clays, often of great thickness, and
extending throughout the midland, southern, and south-
eastern districts. They frequently contain seams of coal,
sometimes, as in the Fingal, Seymour, Douglas River, Hamil-
ton, and Sandfly districts, of considerable thickness and of
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


fair quality. The beds of the system are, as a rule, dis-
tributed in distinct basins, often greatly concealed and dis-
turbed by intrusive greenstones. On this account, and because
of the great sameness of fossil plant remains, there is great
difficulty in attempting to separate the beds into distinct sub-
divisions. The beds, as a whole, probably cover the whole
period from the close of the permo-carboniferous coal meas-
ures to the beginning of the Tertiary period. The marine
cretaceous rocks, rolling downs, and desert sandstones are
nowhere represented in Tasmania.
The principal local subdivisions are: —(1) The lower sand-
stone series, consisting of a series of reddish or yellow mica-
ceous sandstones, flagstones, and friable shales, sometimes
containing remains of Vertehraria and of ganiod fishes; (2)
Ida Bay coal measures with Pecopteris lunensis (mihi); (3)
Upper coal measures as at Fingal, Hamilton, Jerusalem, Sand-
fly, New Town, Oatlands, and Longford; (4) Immense extru-
sion of trap-tuffs throughout the mountains of the Midlands
and Eastern Tasmania, associated at Mt. Faulkner with
remains of Baiera tenuifolia (mihi) embedded in trap-tuffs,
now solid and crystalline.
New South Wales. —(1) Narrabeen series; (2) Hawkesbury
beds; (3) Wianamatta shales and Clarence series; (4) Rolling
downs (lower cretaceous) of the interior; (5) Desert sandstones
of the interior (upper cretaceous).
Queensland. —(1) Lower Trias-jura, Burrum coalfields; (2)
Upiper Trias-jura, Ipswich coalfields; (3) Rolling downs of the
interior (lower cretaceous); (4) Desert sandstone of the
interior (upper cretaceous).
Victoria. —(1) Sandstones, shales, and coal seams of Boora-
bool Hills, Cape Paterson, and the Bellarine beds; (2) Trap-
tuffs and greenstones.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Sonih Australia. —(l) Lower division not represented; (2)
Upper division, represented by the extensive rolling downs
and desert sandstones of the great northern interior.
T 1 estem Australia. —(l) Supposed Jurassic formation
underlying the cretaceous rocks in the Champion Bay district
with characteristic fossils; (2) Rolling downs of the interior
and chalky deposits with flints along the coast (lower cre-
taceous); (3) Desert sandstones of the great interior (upper
cretaceous).
Tertiary.
Taken as a whole the general features of the Teritary system
in Tasmania conespond exactly with those of the mainland of
Australia, and may generally be divided into the following
subdivisions taken in descending order:
Neogene
(Pliocene)
Palaeogene
(Miocene
to
Eocene)
J Older raised terrace drifts often overlying
( the plateaux of basalt.
(1) Basaltic sheets and associated.
(2) Lacustrine deposits of great thickness and
extent. Deep leads, &c., composed of
sands, clays, lignites, travertines, and
sometimes including auriferous and
stanniferous drifts; contains the re-
mains of a rich and varied flora, now
wholly extinct, in which are found
types of the oak, elm, beech, cinnamon,
and various forms of conifers and of
proteaceous trees.
(3) Marine deposits of Eocene age, rich in
fossils; only 1 or 2 per cent, of the
species of shells having living represen-
tatives.
In Tasmania , only small patches at Table Cape, Cape
Grim, and Flinders Island, remain of this old raised tertiary
GEOL. RELATIONS: AUSTRALIA AND TASMANIA


sea-floor; but in the lower levels of the mainland, south of the
Darling and Murray and along the Great Bight, the members
of this formation are most extensively developed.
In Tasmania the lacustrine leaf-beds are well represented
in the Launceston, Derwent, and Macquarie Harbour tertiary
basins. In Victoria the same plant remains are found in the
deep leads of Fingal, Dargo, and Russell’s Creek. In New
South Wales by similar plant deposits at Vegetable Creek,
and in deep leads at Gulgong, Parkes, Forbes, Home Rule,
and Dalton, near Gunning; and in Western A ustralia by the
plant beds of the Gascoyne River.
Fost-T ertiary.
The cave deposits, with bones of existing species and also of
extinct species of marsupials, together with superficial drifts,
sand-dunes, raised sea-beaches, and recent lake and river
alluvia and native shell mounds are found in all the Colonies,
and require no particular description in this sketch.
Conclusion.
My hasty sketch of such a vast subject as “ The Geological
Relations of Australia and Tasmania ” has now drawn to a
close. It is hoped, notwithstanding its baldness of outline
and many imperfections, of which I am but too conscious,
that it may prove of some value to those who are interested
in the great mining industries of Australia.
Discussion.
Mr. A. Montgomery (the President), in introducing the
author of the paper, remarked that the Institute was fortunate
in having a gentleman so able, both as a geologist and a statis-
tician, as Mr. Johnston to address them on the subject.
At the close of the lecture a vote of thanks to Mr. John-
ston was passed amid hearty applause.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PART V.
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS
Proposed Psychometer Index designed as an Aid to the Better Deter-
mination of Common Fungoid Illusions and of the Comparative
Value of Mental Concepts
INTRODUCTORY .
TN a subject of the nature indicated as above, it is desirable
-i- to avoid the very common mistake of at once launching
into the mazes of a complicated argument while employing
terms which are either ill-defined, or are apt to receive differ-
ent interpretations from different persons.
The whole value of an argument often depends upon the
exact definition of one or two important terms, and where
such terms are loosely applied and but vaguely understood,
the outcome of discussion, so conducted, must result in con-
fusion of judgment.
The point around which the present argument hinges is
the word “ illusion.” By illusion is meant any error of sense,
perception, memory, or representation, or of judgment,
based upon these which counterfeits reality.
In one particular sense it is admitted that the objective
aspect of all subjective concepts is illusory; but, in this sense,
concepts, for the limited purpose of this argument, are not
regarded as “ fungoid.” For the purposes of the present
argument it is sufficient to confine ourselves to the common-
sense appreciation of phenomena, and to what are commonly
regarded as realities of commonsense. Thus limited we may
define all counterfeits of realities as illusions of commonsense.
By reality is meant the opposite of counterfeit, t.g., the
pictorial representation of the features of a person, scene, or


tiling is a counterfeit when not regarded as a symbol of the
thing represented. Art has reached a high limit when it pro-
duces illusion. But the art of the modeller, sculptor,
mechanic, or necromancer can only succeed under restricted
conditions as regards healthily constituted minds, armed with
the full complement of the ordinary sensiferous organs. Those
who lack, or who are deprived of one or more of the essential
normal senses, can never be certain of freedom from illusion.
It is by the sister or auxiliary senses that we continually—
perhaps unconsciously—correct our impressions, or take “ our
bearings,” so to speak. Deprive anyone of these natural
auxiliary aids, or even weaken or render any of them artifi-
cially inoperative, and lo i the individual mind is a ready prey
to all the illusions and disorders of sense and imagination.
The senses, however imperfect in the normal condition, are
wonderful checks upon each other. Combined, they are the
props of true knowledge and understanding. The most simple
impressions are liable to be illusory if the particular sense
concerned be weakened by disease or overwork. Render
inoperative, or weaken at such a time the sister senses, and the
strong commonsense appreciation of the real differences between
orderly waking or primary concepts, and imagination,
memory, dream, illusion, breaks down, or disappears alto-
gether. In fact, the conditions under which the insane are
bound are then most closely realised. Let those whose inex-
perience may have led them hitherto to trifle with the full
value of the natural guardians of our reason beware of this
consequence when they would erect the illusions of the crippled
senses into equality with the evidence of the combined senses
when free and unconditioned and at their best.
Although in a waking state, and under ordinary circum-
stances, we may have within ourselves a tolerably clear and
unmistakable standard of what is real and unreal, yet at
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


times, and with relation to particular concepts, there may be
produced a very gradual and subtle blending of the two.
Especially is this result apt to arise when the region of
fancy is in its most active stats.
The Region of Fancy.
There is something most mysterious and perplexing in the
concepts of fancy. They flit before our minds in myriad
shapes, moods, and colours, without summons; change their
humours as in a kaleidoscope before we can well define them;
and finally vanish, but to appear again and again, under
favourable circumstances, as at first. Many suppose that the
world of fancy, automatic introspection, or imagination
(clearly distinguished by the conscious mind in health, from
what, for want of a better description, we may call “ external
perception ”) is only fully disclosed to our minds during sleep
or in delirium. But this supposition is traceable to inatten-
tion or inexperience. The retrospect of memory, the poet’s
trance, and the air castles built by the waking dreamer gazing
upon the burnished cloud or glowing ember, although allied
creations lack the vivid tone development of those creatures
and scenes of fancy which startle us in the horrors of night-
mare, or elate us in our more exalted moods during sleep.
But the waking state has also an undercurrent of fancy which
in every respect is analogous to our concepts during sleep.
Undercurrents of Fancy Experienced During Waking
State.
During our active waking state, when the external world
has its maximum effect, the senses are continually drinking
in fresh concepts at their various portals, each sense interpret-
ing its varied impressions with that order and consistency
which distinguishes the character of external impressions or
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


fresh concepts. The reception of these primary concepts,
characterised by their greater intensity, eclipses the softer
reflex echoes of the imagination just as the stars are blotted
from our vision by the approach of the radiant sun. The
reflective imagination is not necessarily reduced to absolute
inactivity, but rather it is that to the imaginative listener the
louder speaking voices eclipse the more feeble.
The ghosts of the waking state are clearly analogous to the
horrid nightmare demons of sleep. Such horrid dreams may
be produced artificially by wilful interference with the
breathing of the unconscious sleeper (See “ Illusions,” by
James Sully, p. 146 —International series.) Thus, disturb
the breathing of the unconscious sleeper by placing a heavy
fold of the bedclothes over the mouth and partly the nostrils.
By degrees his face flushes, the skin exudes a sweat, the limbs
are aimlessly jerked about as if in distress, and at last it is so
oppressive as to awake the unconscious object of our experi-
ment, who immediately proceeds to relate that he has awoke
from a frightful dream, wherein he vividly felt he was being
suffocated by some monster of horrid shape who sat upon his
chest and grasped his throat with angry claws.
But intense fear during the waking state may at times, with
superstitious minds, produce somewhat corresponding distorted
concepts. The young and timid whose minds have been satur-
ated with the weird legends of the Scottish Highlands, are at
times specially subject to the influence of such disturbing
illusions when obliged to travel alone in the silence of the
night through dismal glades of sighing pines and peopled by
repute by ghostly shades. To such it is possible that the indis-
tinct outline of a dead stump faintly shining by moonlight,
the phosphorescent fungus, or even a curiously shaped nodding
furze bush, to their half-averted but spell-bound gaze, may be
distorted into forms as unreal and horrid as those due to indi-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


gestion or other interference with the necessary vital functions
during sleep.
The imagination it would seem has the power under expec-
tancy, fear, or extreme pleasure, to order and magnify generic
reflex groupings of images which agree with the simple state
of fear, pleasure, anxiety, and suchlike; but it has not the
power to be specifically accurate or consistent, and thus it would
seem to be the blind groping of a dim generic grasp, not of
specific value like the consciousness of the undisturbed waking
state at its best.
Let any one in a quiet mood, as he is musing before the
evening fire, purposely close the eyes, and, to increase the
effect, place the palm of the hand lightly over them to
exclude, as far as possible, the still active effects of external
impressions. He will then find the images of Fancy bursting
apparently upon the view of sense in that strangely vivid,
changing, incoherent evolving and melting away character;
and yet, withal, giving an illusory sort of impression that there
is a reality and a natural sequence in the shapes, forms,
colours, and pictures, which rapidly displace each other as he
gazes.
These gleams which we are permitted to be the spectators
of are not or. are but feebly under the control of the conscious
will. The writer has frequently tested this fact by personal
experiment. On the last occasion he did so his own thoughts
were to a large extent impressed with the scenery of the Huon-
road through which he had travelled that day. Although he
purposely tried to work into the unbidden scenes and images
which floated before his mental vision, the form of a wattle-
tree in blossom, he found he was unable to order its inclusion
in many wooded scenes that unbidden would vividly evolve to
his conscious sense. One remarkable scene seemed to thrust
itself unbidden, again and again, viz., a small rocky promon-
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


tory crowned with a group of the graceful she-oaks so common
on the margin of the estuary of the Derwent (Casuarina quad-
rivalvis). In the sheltered bay beneath this rocky cliff scene
where he felt he was situated he could see distinctly the wave-
ripples, and reflections of the sun’s rays, together with a
strange bright patch of sunshine, which seemed to brilliantly
light up the sea at its base. He tried to force a change by the
attention of the memory to the romantic Huon scenes, but he
found he could but slightly vary the sea-cliff scene already
described, the patch of light still forming one of its distinctive
features. On other occasions he had no difficulty of picturing
the wattle-tree in blossom, but in every case he felt he was as
much a spectator as one feels in sleep amidst the scenes of
dreamland.
It is quite possible, therefore, that the proverbial moods of
some people —the grave and the gay —may, to a larger extent
than we are aware of, be coloured by this unsuspected under-
current of fancy during our waking moments.
My chief object in drawing particular attention to the region
of Fancy is to show that under peculiar circumstances it is con-
ceivable that its hidden reflex activities may surge up among
the primary concepts of the senses, and thus be the origin of
sense illusions even in the minds of those who are otherwise
of a sound, healthy constitution. It is quite clear that these
undercurrents of Fancy are distinct from ordinary concepts of
memory, although it is not improbable that memory and fancy
concepts are intimately related, and may powerfully act and
react upon each other. The curious way in which a memory —
say of a name which we at the moment in vain try to recall-
bursts in unbidden soon after upon a foreign train of thought,
is very remarkable, and it is therefore quite possible that
through the hidden agency of active undercurrents of Fancy
the dormant memory may be awakened.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Illusions, as regards simple concepts, are comparatively rare
among sane persons, where all the senses are free or uncon-
ditioned and healthy. External or primary sensations of
forms, colours, sounds, touch, motion, and such like, are for
the most part readily distinguished from simulations of reali-
ties, even in some cases of partially impaired sense organs.
There are numberless circumstances, however, which readily
tend to produce illusion in the minds of persons untrained
and inexperienced. For example, persons strongly tend to
believe in a second shouter, while, for the first time, they
listen to a remarkable voice—echo. Similarly, the untutored
must also be strongly impressed at first with the illusory reality
of reflected sight objects. Who, again, has not felt the power-
ful tactile illusion of duality in unity by crossing the finger
lips—preferably the second and third—while with eyes shut
pressing the surface of a round object, such as a marble or
the tip of the nose; or the converse of this—unity in duality—
in the pressure upon the skin of the body by the two adjacent
points of a pair of compasses ?
If in such cases the particular senses were not aided by the
more extended experience of others, and by free comparisons
and repeated trials in conjunction with the sister or comple-
mentary senses, we should all be subject to illusions to a much
greater extent than we at present conceive.
Where, on the other hand, the senses are not merely
unaided, but are crippled my conditions which are unfavour-
able for the reception of clearly-defined and undisturbed con-
cepts, we may be certain that as sure as the lowly organised
fungi attack and destroy the more highly organised animal and
vegetable forms whose vigour has abated, or whose tissues are
diseased, so sure is it that fungoid illusions will batten upon
and distort the judgment of all those whose hidden springs
are poisoned at the source by conditions unfavourable to the
formation of strong healthy primary sense concepts.
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


Common Fungoid Illusions.
The references to what have been termed “ Common Fun-
goid Illusions ” in this argument, are restricted to a few
common types, and do not pretend to comprehensiveness.
One or two types have been chosen which are particularly
characteristic of our own race and age. It would be less diffi-
cult to bring conviction to most people with regard to the
prevalence of gross illusions among lower races of men, or
among people of a bygone age; for it is proverbial that errors
of this kind are likely to be more correctly appreciated from
the standpoint of an observer untrammelled by local influ-
ences. If we refer, therefore, to the illusions of the existing
lower races of men, or to those of ancient times in regard to
demonology, withcraft, astrology, epilepsy, lunacy, the shape
of the earth and its position in the solar system, and such like,
it is merely to show that the natural fruit of ignorance is
illusion of some kind or another. Illusions are sometimes
mimetic, and, like all organisms of a mimetic character, they
are difficult to distinguish from the surrounding conditions,
from which they take their shape and colour. There are
many current illusions, therefore, which are only superficially
different from those of older times. They may be clothed
in a pseudo-science garb, in mimicry of the prevailing spirit
of this age; but, fundamentally, they, on examination, will
be found to present the well-known features of the fungoid
illusions, which in all ages have been known to prey upon
weakness and ignorance.
The Illusions of Idea-symbols.
The first examples under this division refer to those “ fun-
goid illusions ” so closely associated with all fonns of the
outward expressions of the ideas; especially those related to
the sound-symbols of articulated words, and those related to
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


the form, sight, or touch symbols of all kinds of writing.
Simple pictorial representations being more natural are less
liable to be illusory. Perhaps no age has been subject to this
form of illusion so much as the present, and, paradoxical as
it may appear, there is good reason to believe that many of
the so-called “ educated classes ” are likely to be as great
slaves to the myriad illusions arising therefrom as are to be
found among the illiterate.
What we know, think, and feel, and through what chains
of previous knowledge we have arrived at our present condi-
tion, can only be disclosed partially to others by means of
idea-symbols. Outwardly we can observe a man laugh, cry,
speak, sing, gesticulate, but even though we could enter and
penetrate to the remotest molecule of his brain we could not
by all our perceptive organs of sense discern his actual feel-
ings or thoughts.
If in ourselves there were not an orderly and consistent con-
nection in the ordinary causal relation between certain similar
groups of such external symbolic sounds, forms, gesticulations,
and expressions with our own concepts, thoughts, and feelings,
we could not hope to understand others, or be understood by
them. Laughter in another, e.g., might really in itself mean
grief, did not such outward symbolic expression correspond
with a similar causal relation between our own constant forms
of outward expression and our inner real feeling which we
have learned to designate by the word symbol—laughter,
(See Lange’s “ History of Materialism, Vol. 11., 316.) To
the inexperienced this analysis may seem trivial, but it is
really necessary; for it will be disclosed presently how closely
all forms of illusion, by the intervention of word-symbols,
may, through mistaken interpretation, result in much unne-
cessary strife and confusion. For it logically follows that if
any idea-symbol be used by anyone in an abnormal way,
whether in ignorance, at random, or as a wilful misrepresenta-
VALUE OF MENTAL‘CONCEPTS


tion, he is likely to produce a wrong conception in the minds
of those who are in the habit of using the idea-symbol cor-
rectly.
Illusions Related to Word-symbols.
The form, colour, intensity, and specific significance of
actual ideas can never be closely approximated by the agency
of words between persons whose capacities differ, or whose
mental culture may happen to be at different stages of develop-
ment.
Every cultivated person knows from experience that par-
ticular words or phrases related to complex ideas —although
at first used familiarly in a general sense —come by closer study
and wider culture to stand for a much broader, deeper, and
clearer conception than that afforded by the insignificant seed
idea which at the first stage was associated with the particu-
lar word-symbol in this person’s mind. It is at this stage
where confusion is apt to arise in controversy between good,
earnest men. Philosophers, too, find in this region their favour-
ite battle-ground. But as regards the latter, so long as dis
tinctions remain unclassified, it is perhaps well.that a wisely
conducted conflict should be maintained; for it is in such
conflict that we come to expand the new idea, and to form the
needful expression. The ignorant person, as well as the super-
ficial word-glutton, so largely produced by our gramophonic
systems of education, only catch remotely the order or genus
of the cultured thinker’s idea. To the class referred to —the
species, or the fully developed light and shade of the cultured
person’s idea, is more or less concealed in penumbral darkness.
The illusions which arise out of these differing conditions, how
ever, are often very disastrous; for to these may chiefly be
attributed the reason why the prophets of each succeeding age
have been stoned, crucified, maligned, or otherwise maltreated.
The fungoid illusions which batten upon forms of expression
have been the cause of much evil. That the evils arising out
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


of word-illusion is not exaggerated may be easily proved.
Let anyone attempt to get a clear grasp of the ideas of any
two persons of average education with respect to the real
nature and particular meaning of the following group of idea-
symbols as used by the learned, viz.:—Anthropomorphism,
Atheist, Christian, Communist, Deist, Darwinian, Determin-
ism, Evolutionist, Hypnotism, Paganism, Pantheism, Realism,
Sceptic, Socialism, Teleologist, Spiritualist, Agnostic, Mind,
Force, Matter, Spirit, Soul, Body, Ego, Non-Ego, Religion,
Moral sense, Will, and suchlike.
These terms cover a very wide field. They are in common use
in some sense by the learned and unlearned; by the learned of
opposing schools of thought; but as there are comparatively few
who take the honest trouble, or have the mental capacity, to
understand in their fullness the history and complex ideas
underlying these words or symbols, it follows that they must
be fertile sources of illusion; and the fruit of such illusion,
where strong feelings are concerned, have been, and ever will
be, confusion, bitterness, and strife. The proof of this is
manifested by the frequency of the use of terms ending in ist ;
not so much as an expression of the appropriate underlying-
thought or feeling, as of a dim notion of a quality involving-
reproach and depreciation. Clearly to all such the particu-
lar teirn is illusory; and the application, so far as intention
is concerned, is likely to be as false and unjust as when, at
Antioch, the fierce opponents of the followers of Jesus Christ
coined the term of reproach “ Christian,” now fortunately
transmuted into one glorious to humanity.
As a further illustration of the common illusions related to
word-symbols, let us examine the illusory conceptions so fre-
quently held by many persons with regard to the use of the
terms “ Matter ” and “ Mind.” The illusion to such per-
sons is, that we know directly a substance of matter as distinct
from mind. And again, further, it is conceived by such persons
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


that matter, in itself, is dead, inert, distinct from, and less
mysteriously constituted than that part of mental phenomena
to which they restrict the term “ mind.”
This is a common fungoid illusion. The cultured thinker
knows and can demonstrate logically that the substance of
matter is a hypothesis of the mind to account for certain of the
mental concepts chiefly related to direct primary impressions
of sight, touch, and muscular effort. It can be demonstrated
to minds sufficiently developed to receive such demonstration
that all our concepts—whether relating to form, colour, space,
time, resistance, opacity, transparency, smell, heat, cold,
hunger, thirst, weariness, memory, mental introspection, self,
not self; in a word, all sensations are mental. In the words
of an able expositor (Huxley) immediate knowledge is confined
to states of consciousness, or, in •other words, to the phenomena
of mind. Knowledge of the physical world, or of one’s own
body and of objects external to it, is a system of beliefs or
judgments based on the sensations. The term “ self ”is
applied not only to the series of mental phenomena, which
constitute the ego, but to the fragment of the physical world,
which is their constant concomitant. The corporeal self, there-
fore, is part of the non-ego and is objective in relation to the
ego as subject.
Elsewhere the same able expositor states clearly, “ that if
we possessed no sensations but those of smell we should be
unable to conceive a material substance. We might have a con-
ception of time, but could have none of extension, or resistance,
or of motion ; and without the three latter conceptions, no idea
of matter could be formed.”
It may be conceived, therefore, that the only knowledge we
consciously possess, directly or indirectly, is purely mental
One portion we call external perception; other parts (includ-
ing feeling, judgment, memory, dream, delirium, illusion—
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


all parts of one whole) purely subjective, and equally mysteri-
ous. The mind tends to infer, ejectively, its impressions, as
symbolic of a mysterious objective, something external to it.
That is all.
The Median harp, if endowed with the sense of hearing
only, and so limited to the range of its own chord sounds,
would conceive its own chord, objectively, as external to itself.
It would tend to seek external to itself the exact origin and
idea of its own specific sounds. It could not dream, as ,the
objective cause of its own subjective chord sounds, the gentle
vibrating breeze, except in the manner of some harp
sound.
The Common Illusion that Men of Culture and Science
have a Special Tendency to be Sceptical as Regards
Truth.
This may be regarded as a type of the many fungoid illu-
sions which naturally arise in the prejudiced and antagonistic
minds of the slothful and ignorant.
Lovers of ease favour conceptions which involve no trouble
of mind. To hold the mind in suspense when in doubt, and
when immediate action is not imperative; to sift the grain of
wheat from the associated chaff; to qualify the observation
with the ascertained knowledge of one’s personal equation of
error; to seek truth with a single eye in scorn of cowardly fears
regarding possible consequences to one’s self; to suffer mis-
understood the mental pain of transition of thought due to the
unequal growth and change of the intellect and one’s per-
sonal clinging ideals and sympathies, are matters which are
no more than the sound of words to the indolent mind, whose
faith, too often, is a mere accident of time and place, The
indolent mind is irritated by complexity, and insists upon
the enjoyment of simplicity, even though it should be arti-
ficially created by the mutilation of valuable complex truths
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


It is not here maintained that the earnest enquiring mind
is not advantaged at times to desire when wearied a somewhat
similar refuge. But to the latter it is consciously sought,
and is the well-earned repose after the strain of mental toil.
In their case it is the natural half-sleep following upon mental
activities wherein at times the great and beautiful generic
truths of poesy and parable have their birth. It need not
be pointed out, however, that there are many indolent of mind
amongst us, while the group of earnest and thorough thinkers
are few. It is not surprising, therefore that the aims and
methods of the scientific worker should so frequently be mis-
understood and misrepresented.
Of course it is not meant that the opponents of scientific
work and methods of investigation are so unjust as to suppose
that the alleged tendency to scepticism, on the part of the
men of science, would be blameable in matters which are false
or which appear to be so; for in such case there would be no
room for discussion.
To oppose even the appearance of falsehood or vice is a
healthy attitude, and can only be considered objectionable
by those minds antagonistic to truth and virtue.
As a matter of fact, the charge as regards scientific observers
is manifestly absurd. Science is simply carefully proved
knowledge. True men of science are those who are ever actu-
ally engaged in wresting the fruits of knowledge from the vast
unexplored regions of nature, and whose highest reward is the
feeling that, by their labours and discoveries, they have con-
quered some part of the region of chaos, doubt, and obscurity,
to the great benefit of their kind. The railway train in rapid
motion may cause the illusion that the increased resisting
current of air is in itself moving more swiftly than the
same train is at rest.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


In like manner inexperienced minds see only in the active
forward advance of scientific investigation, the sifting, weigh-
ing, and measuring processes, and often labour under the illu-
sion that because in this pioneer work the workers are obliged
to reject large quantities of truth husks, the latter process—
and not the acquirement of the fewer and less conspicuous
truth grains—is the particular object of their remarkable
activities. Their positive advance, and greater need to dis-
criminate and to reject, being a mere consequence of their
relatively greater love for the acquisition of more truth or
knowledge. Relative to the indolent they appear to reject
more —nay, blunder more—but it is altogether due to the
fact that their love for knowledge is more active. Those who
can endure an imperfect mixture, or do not love purity, need
not reject much dross; but it is hard that the refiner should
be blamed for the unavoidable accumulations of the conserving
and refining processes.
Illusions Due to Inexperience or Defective Equipment
on the Part of the Active Observer.
Thoughtful men are well aware of the danger of being over-
sure about matters which many able men have arrived at pro-
foundly opposite conclusions. The thoughtless have no such
dread. And yet, though all our observations are so apt to
be faulty if not properly directed, few think that for exact
observation in any special branch of knowledge, special apti-
tude, and a long, careful training in the instruments of
observation are absolutely necessary. For example: Look
what long years of patient training of the muscles of the hand,
ear, and eye, is necessary before the musician can render with
skill and feeling the masterpieces of a Mendelssohn or a Schu-
mann. The skilled botanist may be called upon at any time
to distinguish a new plant, and to describe its characters.
But in order to do this satisfactorily he must be prepared to
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


show in what respect it is related, and in what respect it differs
from, say, about 85,000 flowering plants already scientifically
described and classified. When we learn also that prior to
the proper study of botany and zoology, the student, by
laborious training in morphology and physiology, must equip
himself for the special work, we can have some notion of the
pains taken by men of science that observations in the line of
their studies are not marred by lack of skill or of previous
training. Nay, so necessary is it that all scientific observa-
tion should be carried out with the greatest rigour and exact-
ness, that the greatest pioneers in scientific investigation have
been the foremost in the discovery of more perfect instru-
mental aids designed to further extend the range and neutral-
ise the errors of our senses, and in this way secure that pre-
cision which modern science demands of its followers.
It takes the great expositor and thinker, Lange, over 1000
closely printed pages of matter, to unfold to us a mere
abstract of the history and meaning of the schools of material-
ism and idealism. Bastian, with numerous carefully executed
figures, tries to convey to us in 700 pages of descriptive matter
a summary of his own observations regarding the structure
and functions of the brain. Hitzig, Ferrier, and other skilled
specialists, had long and profoundly studied the functions
and physiology of the sensorial apparatus of the brain in all
its bearings, and their combined testimonies have been of the
greatest service to us in dissipating many of the older and
cruder conceptions of phrenology and physiology, and in
explaining many of the more mysterious problems of mind
and body.
One important lesson has been given to us in regard to
observation, which has an important bearing upon the subject
of this argument, viz., that not only as regards eyesight and
for astronomical observations merely do we require to provide
ourselves with a carefully determined “ personal equation of
THE R. M. JOHNSTOWN MEMORIAL VOLUME


error,” but every other sense should be similarly guarded, as
they are all subject to varying degrees of error under certain
conditions. From what has already been stated it is obvious
that should any untrained person think he can properly under-
stand the mysteries of new and complex phenomena, without
first studying carefully the laws which make phenomena at all
possible to him, together with the ascertained conditions of
sensorial error, he will undoubtedly and unconsciously land
himself in the Cimmerian darkness of illusions, kindred to
the ancient witchcraft or its twin sister, spiritualism, now so
often guised in modern pseudo-science dress.
To the cultured thinker all phenomena are purely mental
and subjective, and as such are equally mysterious. To the
average spiritualist only a small portion of phenomena—and
that the most disordered and unreliable part. —seems to be
regarded as possessing any wonder or mystery. The most
orderly, valuable, and equally mysterious part of subjective
phenomena —orderly primary concepts —is despised by the
spiritualist, for the vulgar reason that such orderly mani-
festations are as common as the green grass; and yet the pro-
foundest thinkers see in the lowliest organism so common
by the wayside a mystery greater than that of human folly,
whose epidemics have so often puzzled the moralist and psycho-
logist.
Whilst,dissecting the living tissues of the common trig
lochin and other weeds of our ditches under the microscope,
I have often been impressed by the beauties of structure
which are shut off from the feebler powers of the unaided
eyesight. I have watched the mysterious life of the cell in
the humble yeast plant and desmid, and I have seen the
living building processes grow into form and beauty before
my wondering sense, and a feeling of awe has frequently
filled my mind, as form after form seemed to come mysteri-
ously into existence before my eyes, and to frame themselves
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


upon a structure of wondrous design and beauty. Each
living “ brick ” in itself being guided and determined in its
course as if by the immediate agency of a hidden Almighty
finger.
Most- naturalists have been similarly impressed while con
templating the silent building forces of organic nature. They
are thus frequently reminded of the mystery underlying the
more familiar and perhaps uninteresting externals of com-
mon objects. They are also so accustomed to witness mysteri-
ous design and movements for which they can give no explana-
tion that they are not so apt to be led into illusion by the
appearance of phenomena, which, for the time being, may
seem extraordinary and inexplicable to the crippled or
unaided senses. Nor are they so apt to be overwhelmed by
mere novelty or rarity because the momentary wonder seems
as inexplicable as the origin of all mental phenomena to the
cultured thinker. The average form of spiritualism would
appear to be a corrupt or degraded form of the poetry of
Materialism, although it affects to despise that system of
philosophy. It is far from my mind to treat with levity the
ordinary crudities so commonly manifested at the many
spiritualistic seances which I have had the opportunity of
witnessing.
One grave objection to the value of the testimony of such
seances is, that wherever any phenomena have been observed
which appeared to be inexplicable, they were always mani-
fested under conditions where at least some of the comple-
mentary senses, if not all, were at a disadvantage. It has
already been stated that the senses are particularly liable to
all forms of illusions, at times, even where they are free and
unconditioned. It has also been shown that the only differ-
ence between the waking concepts, dreams, subjective delu-
sions, and such like, is in the invariable strength, and unmis-
takable order, consistence, and harmony of the primary
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


concepts as compared with the feebler, inconsistent, shifting,
kaleidoscopic phenomena of fancy, ghost delusion dream, and
other illusions of the diseased brain. The only way to dis-
tinguish any form of illusion would be to dispel the condi-
tions favourable to the manifestations of healthy concepts.
One significant circumstance which may enable strong-
healthy minds to free themselves from the degrading errors
of spiritualism is to discern that the conditions favourable
to illusion and fraud are ever the conditions under which
typical spiritualistic phenomena are manifested. Lord Lind-
say and others —by moonlight—fancied that they saw the law
of gravitation opposed by some new force in the deviation of
Mr. Home. But that men, in a sane state of mind, should
accept the idea off-hand that they had discovered a new force
when all the senses were so absurdly handicapped (for ordin-
ary purposes of observation even), and that they were tram-
melled by the disadvantage of best position for verification,
shows, for the time being, they were not aware of the great
liability to illusion under such conditions.
To have contemplated even the possibility of discovering a
new force under such crippled conditions shows that their
minds, like those of ordinary madmen, were for the time
being constituted to favour illusionary conceptions.
It ought to be strongly impressed that there is no well-
marked line between the sane and the insane, and scarcely
any where illusion is concerned, apart from its permanency.
There are many remarkable points of agreement between
some of the concepts of spiritualists and those of the hopelessly
insane.
(1) In both the concepts are frequently normal, in contra-
diction to common sense, and without any apparent purpose
or reason. The intensity of the conviction, nevertheless, in
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


both seems to be greater than the ordinary convictions of
common sense.
(2) They manifest themselves under conditions where the
common organs of sense are partly or wholly crippled.
(3) In both classes they are manifested frequently under
physical excitement or strong emotion.
(4) In both they are frequently manifested by people
who have, or who appear to have, a well-known epileptic ten-
dency, frequently resulting in bodily prostration.
(5) The moral sense of many such intermittently affected
epileptics—the trance medium —seems to be very low, and
their testimony worthless.
It is a significant circumstance observed by Dr. Maudsley
and other experts that in the incipient stages of epilepsy the
destruction of the moral sense seems to precede the more vio-
lent physical accompaniments of this dread calamity.
(6) In both classes referred to extreme excitability is fre-
quently exhibited; their imagination and originality remark-
able, and often of a poetic order. But, unlike the normal
stages of sanity, they are extremely irritated when the reality
of their illusory concepts are called in question. It would
seem as if all the creative and other powers of the mind were
diverted from critical and other proper uses, and devoted to
the creation of wonderful theories, whose sole object is to
buttress or build up the loved illusion.
The explanation of spiritualism is not to be found in the
typical phenomena, but in the thorough study of the deeply
rooted causes, mental and physical, in men’s natures, of which
the phenomena which so impresses them are a fairly reliable
index. Tell me a person’s wonder, and I may fairly infer
whether the intelligence of the person is of the order of a mad-
man, a savage, a child, or a Newton.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Wonder is purely a relative state, and varies with the stage
of intelligence. Higher intelligence is like a kingdom of
a higher order of useful vigorous plants, whose advance into
a wilderness absorbs and takes the place of a less useful
and a more lowly order.
The mystery which caused the deep agitation of Newton’s
mind as influence which binds the Pleiades, gradually dawned
upon his wondering soul, is a very different one from that
which fascinates the gaze of the ignorant trick-worshipper.
To penetrate the interior of a world in motion ; to trace as
far as possible the orderly laws which determines its course,
and to contemplate the mystery of the cause of its original
impulses, are matters which lie within the field of wonder
of the higher intelligence. To be callous to the inner life of
everything, to see a wonder only in novelty, rarity, or in the
unusual exterior, are sure indices of a lower stage of intelli-
gence.
Conclusion.
The order and equilibrium of the mind are intimately con-
nected with the vigour, fulness, and health of the organs of
sense.
Many persons commit mental suicide for the sensual delight
of a useless momentary wonder.
The insane, by disease, are forced to live always within a
world of wonders such as those sought after, at times, by the
ignorant.
I have prepared a classified “ Psychometer Index ” which
to some may be useful in showing the treacherous nature of
the apparent value of judgments based upon observations of
the crippled senses. I have shown by this classified “ Psycho-
meter Index ” that we may only hope for orderly concepts,
free from illusion, within narrow limits. Beyond this limit
orderly conception diminishes or lessens in value. It would
seem that passion distorts or gains ascendancy over sane judg-
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


ment in proportion to the degree of the diminishing power
of the senses, until, approaching the zero of the understand-
ing, the state coincides exactly with insanity.
The insane state consists of all kinds of unreasoning beliefs;
but, unlike sane concepts, they are marked by a real pitiful
intensity of conviction to which the sane mind can never hope,
or ever wish for, within the logical order of the higher states
of consciousness. Better be a dull, pulsating mass of proto-
plasm than to be adrift upon a stormy ocean of disordered
concepts, when the rudder and helm of the senses have been
rendered nugatory, or have been for ever destroyed. Let us
beware, therefore, of the intensity of a conviction which is,
in this way, related.
Notwithstanding what has been stated in opposition to
illusions of a fungoid character, I am far from being con-
vinced that all illusions, as such, are harmful. lam inclined
to think that a beneficial purpose is served by many of them,
especially of such as are born of the extraordinary strength
of love, affection, sympathy, and the higher poetic fancy.
The mother, for example, sees favourable qualities in her
child which no other eye regards, and, frequently, have no
real existence. Who, therefore, would wholly banish the
mist of the affections? I, for one, would not if I could. A
large group of illusions might fairly be classed under this
order. All illusion or partial illusion, which for the moment
may be necessary to our comfort and well-being, spiritually,
and not liable to introduce more remotely great, evil conse-
quences, I would be sorry to see wholly dispelled. Ido not
regard or class such as “ fungoid illusions.” Illusions which
are harmful are alone regarded as “ fungoid ” in my estima-
tion.
We have seen that it may be possible to reach the zero of
valuable concepts, and, indeed, of all consciousness, in two
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


widely different directions. On the one hand, it may be
gradually approached through varying stages of fictitious
wonder, imagination, dream-illusion, insanity, and by the
destruction of one after the other of those wonderful organs
of sense which, though of feeble range, are yet, in the highest
sense, God-given, Heaven-born.
On the other hand, by humble mien and fearless confidence,
we may, through all the channels of widening sense, advance
to still greater heights, wider horizons, which may be ordained
that we should yet conquer. There are still almost infinite
circles within the legitimate domain of natural science, but
beyond the limits of our present knowledge and range of
powers.
Yet, even now, from a thousand heights of sense, we can
perceive that, however we may increase in subjective know-
ledge — i.e., natural knowledge—the objective mystery which
surrounds us, which we feel we can never penetrate, is but
increased by every advancing step in natural knowledge. We
feel that though new chords should continue to be struck on
“ the harp of a thousand strings,” the “ Everlasting Arm ”
which is the cause of their harmonious vibrations can, itself,
never be revealed to us save through that veil of the sensible
in which “ we live, move, and have our being.”
Do not, therefore, foolishly tremble under the illusion
that all mystery shall be dissipated, or that the veil may be
pierced, if we but open wider our dim eyes, or stretch out a
little further our feeble hands. Their limits —not determined
by us —not written on tables of stone, and soon enough
reached —are the truest and best guides. The created
mysteries of distorted imagination and the crippled senses are
but a poor “ mess of pottage ” as compared with our glorious
birthright of orderly natural knowledge and feeling.
If still —like wilful children —we will have a deeper mystery,
let us, with the fullest possible equipment, attempt to pene-
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


* Common Phenomena : —
Condition a
2
3
4
„ h
5
6
7
8
c
10
11
12
d
14
15
16
>> e
17
18
19
20
/
21
22
23
24
,. (J
—
—
—
trate from every portal of sense the cause of which they are
themselves wrondrous symbols. The effort to do so will con-
vey an impression which cannot be effaced. Thereafter the
appalled and humbled mind will gratefully shrink back within
its own protecting luminous mist of the higher poetic ideal,
and, with the chastened submission of a child-cry—
“lt is enough.” “ Thy will be done.”
Nor swords of angels could reveal what they conceal.
PROPOSED PSYCHOMETER INDEX DESIGNED AS AN
AID TO THE BETTER DETERMINATION OF THE COM-
PARATIVE VALUE OP MENTAL CONCEPTS.
Table specially prepared with the object of showing approxi-
mately, in diminishing order of sequence, the Relative
Value of Observations and Related Conclusions or Judg-
ments as Determined by the Nature of the Testimony and
Other Conditions under which the Original and Other
Observations have been made :
Key to Classification. Order of Value of
Testimony.
Direct. Indirect.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(A) Phenomena of the Waking State—
(a) Mind not diseased and little or not affected by the disorders
arising out of passion, prejudice, or ignorance.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


(A) Phenomena of the Waking
State — contd.
Key to Classification.
Order of Value of
Testimony.
Direct.
Indirect.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
* * Extraordinary Phenomena : —
Condition a
26
27
28
29
„ h
30
31
32
33
,, c
34
35
36
37
? j d
38
39
40
41
„ «
42
43
44
45
/
46
47
48
49
» 9
50
—
—
—
(b) Mind not diseased, but more or
less subject
to the
disorders
arising out of passion, prejudice, or ignorance.
* Wonderful or Miraculous Phenomena, including the Ghost,
Vision, or Illusion stage; —
Condition a
51
52
53
54
b
55
56
57
58
)) £
59
60
61
62
,. d
63
64
65
66
m e
67
68
69
70
„ f
71
72
73
74
» 9
75
—
—
—
(c) Mind diseased, and subject, more
or less, to all its disorders.
Condition : —
* Hallucination, milder form
76
77
78
79
* Dementia
80
81
82
83
(B) Phenomena of
' Sleep —
(a) Peaceful or pleasurable visions...
84
85
86
87
(b) Painful or horrible visions ... ...
88
89
90
91
(c) Profound slumber
92
—
—
—
Explanation of Terms Used :
in Classified Table.
Subdivisions of order of value of testimony : —
(1) Indicates testimony directly appealing to
senses
, feeling.
or consciousness. Memory
of former
experiences
aid-
ing the judgment.
VALUE OF MENTAL CONCEPTS


(2) Indicates testimony directly appealing to the senses, feel-
ing, or consciousness. Memory of former experiences
not an aid to judgment.
(3) Indicates experiences more or less remote. Testimony
dependent upon observer’s memory mainly.
(4) Indicates that testimony is wholly dependent upon the
observation of others —not personal observation.
Conditions a, b, c, d, e, f, g, qualifying the value of the sub-
ordinate stages of observation:
a Indicates stage of the scientific method. All sense organs
available for verification, together with the advantages of
health, perfect organisation, best position, special train-
ing, and full equipment of tested instrumental aids.
b Indicates the common sense stage. The same as a stage,
but lacking the advantage of special training, best posi-
tion, and the absence of tested instrumental aids.
(Crippled sense stages more or less liable to illusion.)
c Indicates the b stage, but lacking the co-operation of one
of the least valuable of the complementary sense-aids.
d Indicates the b stage, but lacking the co-operation of two
of the least valuable of the complementary sense-aids.
e Indicates the h stage, but lacking the co-operation of three
of the least valuable of the complementary sense-aids.
/ Indicates the b stage, but lacking the co-operation of four
of the least valuable of the complementary sense-aids.
g Indicates that all the sense organs are rendered nugatory
as far as direct observation is concerned; memory of for-
mer experiences alone available to qualify the testimony
of others upon whom the crippled mind and senses are
now wholly dependent.
Column numbers under order of value of testimony :
The numbers under each one of the four columns indicate,
in the order of downward sequence, the relative qualita-
tive (not the quantitative) value of the particular stage of
observation, or of the conclusion or judgment based there-
upon.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
(Read 18th November, 1889.)
Section I.
IS THE POVERTY OF THE MASSES A NACESSARY CONCOMITANT
OF INCREASED ACCUMULATION OF WEALTH IN THE AGGRE-
GATE ?
ALL observers are nearly agreed that the accumulation of
wealth and wealth-producing power have prodigiously
increased within the present century. Of this there can be
little doubt. Modern discoveries—as regards the properties
of matter, the discovery and development of new lands, the
uses of steam, electricity, and labour-saving inventions in
every department of social and industrial life—have enor-
mously increased man’s power over the forces of nature. With
this immense gain of power vast continents of virgin forest
and barren swamp have become gardens of plenty. Rivers,
mountains, and other formidable obstacles to communication
or distribution of products have been bridged or pierced by
railways, roads, and other superior means of distribution;
and the wide ocean, connecting far distant lands, now forms
the easy and open highway of magnificent steamers, which vie
in regularity and speed with the railway train in bringing
to local markets daily supplies of the fresh meat, fish, fruit,
and cereals of lands many thousand miles away. As a natural
consequence famines, such as are known to have been so com


mon and so terrible in England in the immediately preceding
centuries, are rendered an impossibility.
How is it, then, that we are again brought face to face
with the old terrible problems; “ The Misery of the Masses,”
“ The Labourer’s Struggle for Existence,” “ The Growth of
Poverty,” “ The Increase of Pauperism and Crime.” If
we can judge by the popular literature of the day, the state of
the masses in Europe seems to be verging into as hopeless a
condition as that which existed prior to the introduction of
our vaunted discoveries.
Indeed, one writer, who recently has been heard above all
other claimants for reform, confidently affirms that “it is
true wealth which has been greatly increased, and that the
average of comfort, leisure, and refinement has been raised;
but these gains are not general. In them the lowest class do
not shared’ He broadly insists that increase in poverty is
the constant concomitant of increase in aggregate wealth, and
that this constant “ association of poverty with progress is
the great enigma of our times.” Is it true, as this writer
confidently affirms, that with all the advantages which man
has gained in his increased and increasing command over the
forces of nature, our present civilisation has by its customs
and provisions barred the effectual distribution of accumu-
lated wealth; and the only effect produced is that of making
the rich richer and the poor poorer ?
This cannot be answered effectively without some enquiry
into that form of wealth which constitutes man’s chief satis-
factions.
Are these sufficient in the aggregate to suffice for all, if
proper means for effecting distribution were employed, sup-
posing such means were possible ? Or is the aggregate supply
THE K. M. JOHNSTON MEMOKIAL VOLUME


of primary wants insufficient to provide all needs, even were
the most thorough means devised for its distribution 1
Wants of Man.*
The satisfaction of the wants of man is the mainspring of
all his activities. Wants are interminable. Some affect his very
existence, while others only concern his greater degree of com-
fort or happiness. In all enquiries into matters deeply con-
cerning the existence and welfare of man it is well, therefore,
to keep these fundamental distinctions clearly in view; for
not a few of our misconceptions arise from a failure on the
part of social and political economists to establish a satisfac-
tory classification of wants according to their varying
importance.
Broadly speaking, these may be divided into three great
groups —
(1) Wants Essential to Life Itself.
(2) Wants Essential to Comfort.
(3) Luxurious Wants.
Whatever eccentricities may be exhibited by isolated indi-
viduals at times, it is unmistakable that the fierceness or
intensity of the struggle for wants among communities is
determined by the nature of the wants; and, invariably, so
long as the reason of man is preserved, the greater intensity
• Definition of “ Wants.” —This term is used in a double sense throughout the
various chapters: (1) the term is often used in its more legitimate sense, viz..
anvetites cravings, or desires ; (2) the term, however, is also employed less correctly
in the sense of the things, objects, or desiderata which satisfy cravings. It is used in
the latter sense when such terms as the following are used creation of wants
“wants in exchange,” “aggregate of primary wants,” wants essential to life”
“ wants essential to comfort,” “ production of wants ” struggle for wants, .supply
of wants,” &c. It is used in the former sense in the following phrases wants
are interminable,” “ satisfaction of wants,” sufficiency for the wants of all,” &c.
On reconsideration it would, perhaps, have been an improvement if the term wants
had been restricted toils more legitimate use as indicating cravings and desires,
or lacks ; and that the term satisfactions should have been substituted where the
things wanted are concerned.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


of the struggle —beginning with the most important —is in
the order before given, viz. :
Wants essential to —
(1) Life.
(2) Comfort.
(3) Luxury.
Man can, and, unfortunately, the masses of men are often
obliged to, exist without the enjoyment of luxurious wants.
He may even be deprived of all wants beyond the first group
and still maintain a more or less extended life-struggle with
misery of some kind : but if the wants of the first group be
ever so little curtailed below a certain minimum, he will
speedily perish miserably.
Preserve to man his life, and if needs be he will eagerly
exchange for its preservation all his comforts and luxuries.
Deny him life, and all the Economist’s wealth of exchange
becomes to him as dross —absolutely valueless. This being
so, let us endeavour to investigate some of the more import-
ant social problems closely connected with the welfare and
progress of man. It is for many reasons necessary at this
stage to confine attention to those primary wants essential to
life itself; and for greater clearness these may be restricted
to that minimum of each great want necessary to maintain
the life of each person. The exact minimum of these, what-
ever their form may be, depends upon the energy destroyed
by work, and upon the physical condition of the labourer’s
environment, and may be stated thus;
The minimum to maintain existence of—
Food.
Shelter.
Rest.
Without a certain minimum of these, man, like all living
organisms, must perish inevitably.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Division of Labour—Advantages and Defects.
Division of labour necessary to produce necessary satisfac-
tions, and to distribute them in large civilised communities,
undoubtedly ensures greater skill, and prevents unnecessary
waste of the aggregate time and energy of the individuals.
Were it not for this provision no country could sustain the
life of large numbers. This division of labour, however,
rests upon the tacit understanding that energies in other
directions than that of actually producing food may constantly
be exchanged for food and other primary wants. Individual
societies, communities, and nations are alike in this respect;
for no matter the skill, time, and labour proffered or applied
for or in the production of other than primary wants; it is
necessary that they be constantly exchangeable in sufficient
amount to obtain at least that minimum of primary needs
from other persons or communities, who, under this system,
are supposed to produce a sufficient surplus for the satisfaction
of all other members of society not immediately engaged in
the production of primary wants. Were it not for this
understood assurance, the present civilisation —with special
centres of manufactures for the world at large, its defined
local division of labour and individual rights in large areas
of land —would be altogether impossible.
Among the conflicting opinions of political economists,
socialists, and communists, there is at any rate this one funda-
mental point of agreement, viz., that by a proper division of
labour or services, the sum total of human satisfactions is
greatly superior, and is enjoyed by vastly greater numbers
than would be possible to men were each to work in a state of
isolation, and each one obliged to attempt to create the whole
round of his own requirements. Let us take it for granted,
then, that division of services is a necessity; but while so
doing, let us bear in mind that the greater satisfaction of
wants in the aggregate may be attained, and yet owing to an
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


imperfect scheme of distribution a sufficiency, nay, even the
minimum of primary satisfactions necessary to maintain life,
may fail to reach many; and hence it may appear that much
of the idleness, pauperism, crime, misery, and death experi-
enced in crowded centres is due to the defects of distribu-
tion.
Let us therefore examine this root difficulty, free from the
clouds of irrelevant or less urgent considerations. Division
of labour without facilities for exchange may render a unit
more helpless in such a scheme than he would be in a savage
state. Much ingenuity and ability has been exercised by
many writers in showing to us, as Bastiat does, the glorious
provisions of one of the so-called social harmonies ( Liberty
alias G ompetition) in preventing monopoly, and in effecting the
distribution of wealth. And it may be at once conceded that
human society does reap all the advantages claimed on behalf
of competition.
The question, however, is not—Does competition effect
much good ? That may be readily conceded. But confining
attention to the minimum of primary wants alone—Do the
combined effects of division of services, competition and modes
of exchange now existing, provide for the preservation of due
proportions between the different classes of services, so as to
ensure the production of primary needs in sufficiency for the
wants of all; and are the means of exchange sufficiently per-
fect to secure with more or less certainty a due modicum of
primary needs to all. In a word, is the “ all for each ”as
effectively complete as the “ each for all?”
If this latter provision be defective —and this unfortunately
seems too true —can the defects be removed ? And if this be
impossible —can the evils be minimised to any extent ?
All possessors of services must be enabled to secure primary
wants, or they perish. References to the wide distribution of
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


wealth m exchange or commercial value; or to standard prices
or wages low or high—are utterly misleading. Without the
power to acquire, or the actual possession of a due provision
of that portion of exchange wealth—not necessarily possess-
ing a high exchange value'—the whole aggregate of the
remaining part of the world’s wealth in exchange would be
worthless; for it would fail to preserve the life of the man
destitute of primary wants. This is the root difficulty; and
it is forcibly exemplified in the first notable exchange
recoi ded in sacred history between the typical representative
of the hunter of wild animals, and the more skilled and peace-
ful agriculturist.
. And Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the
field . and Jacob was a plain man dwelling in tents.
And Jacob sold pottage : and Esau came from the field and
he was faint: And Esau said to Jacob, ‘ Feed me, I pray
thee, with that same red pottage, for lam faint. . . ’
And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.’ And
Esau said, Behold lam at the point to die, and what profit
shall this birthright do to me ? ’ And Jacob said, ‘ Swear
to me this day ’; and he sware unto him ; and he sold his
birthright unto Jacob. Then Jacob gave Esau bread and
pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up and
went his way; thus Esau despised his birthright.”—
(Genesis xxv., 27-34.)
It is fortunate for Esau that he had the power of effecting
an exchange, and that, notwithstanding the exorbitancy of
the seller’s terms, he had no hesitancy in exchanging (or
despising, as it is stated) the less needful wants for the more
pressing or primary; for in the trial of Job’s integrity and
fortitude it is affirmed, with truth, that skin for skin, all
that a man hath will he give for his life.
Unfortunately for the working class breadwinner, his only
birthright is physical power and manual skill, and although
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


these are all he can offer for his life needs, he cannot always
as a competitor effect the necessary exchange; and too often
he, and those depending upon him, travel the swift road to
beggary and death.
Thus, there are still defects, whether remediable or other-
wise, in the present civilisation, so long as these fundamental
necessities of a power to exchange with primary wants are
imperfect, e.g., certain divisions of humankind are not
directly engaged in producing primary wants for themselves.
They are mostly engaged merely in rendering more or less
skilled services, in return for tokens (money or other medium)
understood to have at least the power of effecting correspond-
ing definite supplies of primary wants. But this division
has another difficulty.
The actual owner of the power (rich capitalist) to effect the
production of things which may be exchanged for a corre-
sponding quantity of primary wants, may in all likelihood
be able to effect such exchanges; but the poor capitalist, the
possessor of the power of mere services, such as the navvy,
the house servant, the blacksmith, may often be unable to
exchange his services towards the production of these very
things; and under such conditions as the needful, exchange
cannot be effected, the unemployed wage-earner in the divi-
sion of human labour must be supported by drawing upon a
more or less limited surplus previously earned; failing that
he must either borrow, take the risk of violent means to secure
primary wants, be fed by private or public charity, or die
of starvation.
This, then, is the problem of problems of the present day.
References to current high rates of wages, the low prices of
provisions, or the increasing aggregate value of wealth in
exchange, do not always disclose this skeleton in the social
cupboard. When the ship of society is barred into many
more or less watertight compartments the ship itself may
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


not founder, although, one or two minor chambers be
damaged and waterlogged, and their contents destroyed.
If the larger and more important chambers, however, be
destroyed the whole ship may founder, and those who may
effect escape may be small indeed. This allegorical picture
must not be pressed too hard. It may be sufficient, how
ever, to draw attention to a dangerous side of the division ot
labour composition of modern society.
But, says the theorist: True, his services were shut out by
over-competition in that particular place or in that particular
occupation; but if he only knew at that moment that by trans
ferring his services to other employments, or to the same
occupation in another place, the balance of service for service
would be adjusted, and the life of himself and his dependants
would be saved. Ah, if he only knew ! But the possession
of knowledge is in itself practically a form of wealth, and
that he did not possess any more than he did the necessary
capital to acquire the necessary skill in the new occupation
calling for services, or in the necessary capital to transfer
himself and his household to a great distance where his own
special skill was then in demand. We may therefore sum-
marise the difficulties lying at the root of all social problems
as follows:
(1) All breadwinners and their families to maintain
existence must possess primary wants, whether
they can effect exchange of services or not.
(2) Many breadwinners —whether due to lack of know-
ledge or inability to change their occupations or
locality —cannot obtain employment, and there-
fore cannot effect exchange.
(3) Such of the latter as by former misfortunes have
been deprived of every form of wealth in
exchange, must beg or steal from public or pri-
vate resources, or die of starvation.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Thus it is shown that one of the great economic harmonies
in competition, while it effects much good in distributing
wealth and breaking down monopolies and privileges, and in
enlarging the domain of community in the enjoyment of the
gratuitous products of nature and invention, it also, as one
of the mills of God, directs its force terribly on the mere
monopolists of bone and muscle; competition grinding them
smaller and smaller as its force is augmented by increasing
numbers.
Further Difficulties Connected With the Division
of Labour—Allocation.
One of the most formidable difficulties connected with the
division of labour is allocation; for it is evident that if in
the technical training of the young due regard be not paid to
the chances of finding employment in the service to which the
future breadwinner aspires, disaster or a disappointed life
may be the result. This, being a relative matter, applies to
a small community as well as to a large one. Few take into
consideration that there is a natural law in operation which
as surely determines the numbers required for each great
class of employment as do the natural laws which locally
determine the times and relative heights of the tide. No
social advancement by means of the higher education of the
people can ever alter the relative numbers of the various
branches of human service; and should it be thought pos-
sible that the education of the masses exerts any influence in
the nature of its training in disturbing the necessary pro-
portions of each great group of services upon which our lives
and our civilisation depends, it would certainly prove that the
general spread of higher education was a curse and not a
blessing.
Services would never become a marketable commodity of
value in exchange if it were not for wants. Kinds of ser-
THE E. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


vices, therefore, must be exactly proportionate to kinds of
wants. The wants which demand the expenditure of the
greater amount of labour must necessarily absorb the greater
amount of persons requiring employment without regard to
their capacities, attainments, or personal desires; and, so far
as the mass of human beings are concerned, there is no choice.
The great wants, food, clothing, and shelter, are by far the
greatest factors in the determination of the aggregate num-
bers that must be employed if the wants are to be satisfied.
The same three great wants also determine the necessary
amount and proportions of capital, machinery, and land to
be employed, together with the necessary proportion of
labourers for each kind of occupation which directly or
indirectly is somehow utilised in the production of the said
three great wants.
It is true the strict average proportions of the various
classes of labour machinery may not be found to be quite the
same in each country; but this does not affect the aggregate
of all countries. It is not absolutely necessary that the
manufactures and agricultural industries of any one country
should preserve the world’s strict average proportions to each
other, so far as that one country is concerned, so long as it is
free to make necessary exchanges with other countries for dis-
posing or making good their respective local surpluses and
deficiencies. Nevertheless, countries confined to the produc-
tion of their own wants —or, what is the same, the world as a
whole—must preserve the strict average proportion and quan-
tity of labour and machinery in the production of those three
great wants which are the mainsprings of all human activities
and efforts. It is necessary, therefore, to make a very wide
net to obtain approximate information with respect to the
amount and due proportions of all kinds of services employed
in the production of the whole round of wants of each coun-
try. It is unfortunate that figures relating to the occupa-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Proportional Classification of the Occupations of All Persons
Engaged in the Supply of Human Wants.
1
Breadwinners (Percentage).
Dependants
1 Percentage).
All.
rC
o
d
o
Country.
Population last
Census (1=1000).
j Professional. | i-
Domestic. j
3
2
S
o
Q
j Industrial. j
5
B
o
So
| Toial of Group. | U
j Property, Rank, j a>
7
Q)
O
6-7
3
O
5
O
8
P
■— jS
0 9
c h o
c. m
>
%
9
a c
*g
8-9
g
o
H
1-9
All.
Persons supported by
Breadwinner.
United King-
dom
35,003
2-7
70
3V;
23 0
7-5
43'5
100
2-25
Total of Six
Colon es of
Australasia ..
1991
1-5
4 4
4'4
17-7
13-7
41-7
0-2
0-6
08
56*6
0-9
57-5
100
2 35
Totals of Six
Foreign
Countries
433,304
1 6
30
2-3
13-3
23-2
43-4
2-26
tions of all countries are not accessible, but reference to the
ascertained occupations of Australasia, United States of
America, British India, and seven principal States of Europe,
embracing 433 millions of people, and representing all climes
and all forms of industry, afford a basis wide enough to
secure fairly accurate information.
The figures contained in the following summarised group
table of classified occupation of these countries afford valuable
information with regard to the definite proportions of the
division of labour engaged in the production of human
wants;
From this table we learn that all people are divided into
two important groups; —viz., breadwinners, representing
about 44'2 per cent, of all persons, and non-breadwinners or
dependants, composed mainly of wives and children, repre-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


renting 55‘8 per cent, of the total populations. Thus it
appears that the wants of all must be provided by the service
ol less than half the total number of those who consume
wants. The proportions of the breadwinners necessary to
effect this service are as follows. That is to say, for every
100 persons engaged in services of exchange value there must
be on the aggregate the following proportions nearly;
Percentage Pi oportion.
Agricultural and pastoral services ... 52'5
Industrial services ... 30-f
Domestic services ... ... ... 6 - 8
Commercial services 5 2
Professional and other undefined services ... 5'4
Total ... ... ... ... 100-0
It will be seen that the simple services of the agriculturist
and herdsman are by far the most important (52'5 per cent.),
and that the next in importance are the industrial services,
embracing all artisans and labourers, representing 30’1 per
cent. The higher skilled workmen of this group only repre-
sent about 11 per cent, of all services. As the balance of
services—commercial and professional—only amount to 10'6
per cent., it follows that of all services required only 21‘6 'per
cent, demand skill of a higher order; and that 78'4 per cent,
represent agricultural and other labourers and domestic ser-
vants, in respect of which skill of a high order is not abso-
lutely requisite.
It is largely due to the flooding of particular kinds of
employment beyond the strict proportions which local wants
demand that inconvenience or distress is felt in as
well as old countries. The numbers which can find entry
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PKOBLEMS


into the higher industrial, the commercial, and professional
divisions cannot, without unhealthy competition, be increased
beyond the relative proportions which these divisions must
bear to the producing industries of the particular country,
and these dominating industries in Australasia are agricul-
tural, pastoral, and mining. Employment in other divisions
can only follow substantial increases in the three industries
named; for manufacturing industries cannot alter their pre-
sent proportions independently, as in England, until such
time as they are able to manufacture for the markets of other
countries than the local one. This applies much more
strongly to the smaller division represented by unskilled
labour (not agricultural), and by the commercial and pro-
fessional classes. These certainly may only increase accord-
ing to their rigid proportion; and this must be determined
by a previous increase in the fundamental producing industries
of the particular place.
The principal producing industries of the place may
increase irrespective of other local divisions ( [i.e ., agricultural,
pastoral, and mining), as their products may find the neces-
sary consumer in foreign markets. Whatever influence,
therefore, may bar the progress of the dominating producing
industries of the place must also har occiopations in all other
divisions of services.
It is clear from what has been stated that applicants for
a given kind of employment may often fail, not because there
is no room for more labour, but because the direction in which
the applicants have been trained, or in which they desire to
be employed, is out of harmony with the natural or local
proportions of that particular service necessary in the pro-
duction of general wants.
From this cause arises much difficulty and distress. It
largely adds to the proportion of dependants, and conse-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


quently the direct or indirect strain (i.e., support of friends,
relatives, private and public charities) upon the actual bread-
winners becomes oppressive. Ido not here touch upon arti-
ficial aids to local production in its effects upon the altera-
tion or disturbance of the relative proportions of the division
of services upon which such aid must have an immediate
effect, further than to remark, that if the aid by tariff duties
or other means enables the local division at once to cover the
ground formerly supplied by foreign industry, it can only do
so either by increasing the machinery or the relative pro-
portion of numbers employed locally in the division of ser-
vice affected. The advantage or disadvantage of adopting
such a policy is hereafter discussed. It is sufficient for the
present purpose to show the possible effect it may exert upon
local employment alone.
Causes of Existing Poverty and Misery.
It cannot be denied that in spite of the great accumulation
of wealth, and the increased command over the forces of
nature during the present century, that there is still to be
found much poverty and distress, and that much of it is due
to the unequal distribution of wealth ; and whether we may
or may not be able to point a remedy, it is utterly repugnant
to the best feelings of human nature to sink into the despair
or apathy of many who say,“ Let alone; whatever is is best
or worst, and cannot be helped.” Whatever errors the
socialists and communists are chargeable with they must be
credited with warm aspirations for the amelioration and
improvement of suffering humanity, and are free from the
charge of indifference. The latter, however, are too emo-
tional to perceive the great difficulties of the problems which
have always engaged the deepest attention of earnest social
economists, and are too ready to advocate the introduction
of their own pet schemes, without having taken sufficient
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


trouble either to test their adequacy, or to fathom the true
nature of fundamental difficulties, which would in most cases
be made vastly more formidable by the various plans pro-
pounded by them for their removal. Thus some, having
been misled by the assumption that all our evils are due to
individual property right and unequal distribution of wealth,
employ all their ingenuity to show that all existing evils are
attributable to these, and to these alone.
Yet there are many other influences far more potent for
evil which no scheme yet propounded by political economists,
socialists, or communists may wisely undervalue or ignore.
Of such are the following:- —
(1) The superabundant proportions of human beings in
existence who, free from restraint, are naturally
disposed to be idle, sensuous, and wicked; or who
are ignorant, foolish, and improvident.
(2) The difficulties of supplying other motives more ade-
quate than self-interest to so many in effecting
conformity to the necessary social laws and virtues,
and as a spur to industry and useful application
of powers.
(3) The inequalities of different habitable portions of the
earth as regards productiveness, climate, disease,
density of population, and the difference of civilr
sation and racial characteristics.
(4) The periodic failure of food-supply (famine),
whether due to seasonal influence, exhaustion of
soil, violence, wilful waste, or improvidence.
(5) Effectual means for elimination from society of the
more pronounced forms of hereditary vice and
madness which, if allowed to persist, would
endanger society.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


(6) Absence of facilities for relieving the pressure of
population in over-peopled lands by migration.
(7) Difficulties connected with free exchange of products
between different nations whose artisans and
labourers are living under different material and
social conditions, c.g., slave labour and free
labour.
(8) Difficulties in effecting adequate exchange of pro-
ducts with other nations where, as in England,
local foods, products, and the raw materials for
manufacture are locally far below the level of
requirement of an ever-increasing population.
(9) Difficulties and dangers arising from local increase
of population, especially when foreign, thinly-
populated lands are forcibly closed to emigrants,
as in the experience of the Chinese.
(10) The misery caused by war, strife, murder, accident,
painful disease, and preventable forms of death.
(11) The terrible root difficulty connected with either (1)
decrease, (2) stationariness, or (3) rapid increase
of population.
(12) The absolute limits of space requisite for the recep-
tion and sustenance of man.
The last two form the population difficulty; in itself the
chief cause of human trouble.
This difficulty cannot be banished by sentimental tirades
or bad argument. No tinkering with schemes affecting
“ Rights of Property,” “ The Battle of Interests,” “ Com-
petition,” or “ Community of Goods, ” can do other than
make the dominant difficulty more formidable. As this great
difficulty is often denied or misunderstood by those who
attribute all the evils to rent and free competition, it may be
well to touch upon these important subjects separately.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Satisfaction of Wants and Theory of Obstacles
Considered.
Human satisfactions are enjoyed to the fullest extent with
the smallest expenditure of time and human energy in regions
where the natural sources of human satisfactions are vast and
rich, and under conditions where the fewest obstacles inter-
vene between actual producers and actual consumers. Extra
time and labour, often necessarily spent in mere distribution,
are in themselves obstacles, and directly tend to lessen the
quota of satisfactions which might be enjoyed by each indi-
vidual. All conditions, therefore, which necessitate the
larger expenditure of time and labour —(such as extreme
distance between the several kinds of producers and manu-
facturers) as well as conditions which necessitate extra pro-
vision against loss or waste of satisfactions produced or being
produced (such as dangers from loss by storms, inundations,
fire, waste by war, civil strife, robbery, depredations by wild
animals, idle and useless dependants, plagues of parasites,,
disease, &c.), curtail of necessity the amount of necessary
satisfactions which otherwise might be enjoyed by each use-
ful human unit. Obstacles, therefore, greatly reduce the
amount of human satisfactions so far as each individual is
concerned, although in the aggregate this is not so easily
comprehended. Lowness of nominal prices is not a correct
index of conditions most favourable for the attainment of the
greatest amount of satisfactions, with the smallest expendi-
ture of time and human energy : for it often happens that low
prices may be caused by excessive expenditure of human
energy forced upon a struggling producer or by poverty due
to forced idleness on the part of a large body of consumers.
While it may often happen —as in young colonies—that a
high price is no index of a lower supply of satisfactions; but
rather of the smaller amount of obstacles intervening between
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


consumer and producer, and gratuitous sources of nature'
the smaller amount of enforced idleness on the part
of consumer, giving him a greater purchasing power ! and the
greater advantage of the producer, due to similar causes,
enabling him to obtain all the most necessary round of satis-
factions with a smaller expenditure of time and labour.
Mere cheapness of satisfactions, therefore, is not a reliable
index of individual welfare. Purchasing power, as indicated
by expenditure of time and labour is the only true
index as between countries differently circumstanced, and
this purchasing power of the consumer—unlike the unreli-
able nominal cost or wage —is always in harmony with the
amount of obstacles intervening between the actual producers
of satisfactions and the actual consumers.
This method of determining the condition of different com-
munities will be better understood if we carefully investi-
gate the effect of obstacles more closely. As the factors are
variable and numerous, the only way to arrive at true con-
clusions is to approach the question by the mathematical
method ; thus :
Let N = Natural agents and products; or the gratuitous
forces of nature.
P = Productive power of hurrtan agencies, includ-
ing skill and energy, and skilled appliances.
O = Obstacles intervening between NP or producer
and consumers.
C = Producers, dependants, distributors, &c., repre-
senting the living population; or consumers.
Then NP —O _ j^ e p resen^s the amount of the average satis-
factions provided for each individual.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


And hs P + O__ Represents the nominal cost of satisfactions
for each individual on the average —or it
may fairly represent the amount of exer-
tion or energy expended by human
energy.
Having stated the general effect of obstacles between direct
producer and consumer as minimising the actual supply of
necessary satisfactions to each consumer where the values of
N and P and C are constant, it follows inevitably that che
amount of satisfactions to each individual is in direct corre-
spondence to the amount of O increasing with its decrease,
and decreasing with its increase.
The effect upon price, however, is exactly the reverse of
this, as a definite amount of satisfactions increase in price in
correspondence with the increase in obstacles (O), and decrease
correspondingly with its decrease.
This law is not invalidated, because in particular cases (1)
price is comparatively low when O is absolutely great, and
conversely, (2) price is comparatively low when O is abso-
lutely small, for in every such case there must be correspond-
ing dissimilarity in the other elements to explain this
effect; i.e. :
The effect (1) could only happen in cases where either N
or P is abnormally or relatively great, or C is comparatively
small; and similarly the effect (2) could only happen in cases
where either N or P is abnormally or relatively small or C
is comparatively great.
The failure to grasp these fundamental considerations is
the chief cause of the blunders in all reasonings connected
with questions related to the policy of different nations in
respect of artificial restrictions, hindrances, or facilities in the
interchange of foreign products.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


To make this matter more clear it may be advantageous in
demonstration to set forth a number of examples for the sake
of illustrating the important truths involved in the effects
produced where one or all the factors are different in value :
(1) Where soil, climate, or natural utilities are particu-
larly advantageous the value of N is at its best or
maximum = N :1
(2) Where skill and energy exist and are employed to
the best advantage the largest results are attained
for P = P"
(3) Where the smallest number of obstacles occur
between NP and C, the largest amount of satis-
factions fall to the share of C = C m
(4) The most perfect conditions favourable for eff-jcting
the highest amount of satisfactions to each indi-
vidual consumer coincide with .V m P m —0"
T"
Or,
If we separate P"' into labourers (L), and instruments (1)
the fruit of former efforts saved from previous consumption,
and devoted by inventive skill and energy to more or less
permanent aids to L, we have a more perfect statement of (4),
thus :
N m (L n l rn ) 0 n
(A) g m — -A- = The ideally best conditions for
the attainments of the
Or greatest quota of satisfactions. llio-hest satisfactions of
human wants with the least
expenditure of human
energy.
Understanding by m and n the indices of the maximum and
minimum of the various conditions, then it would logically
follow that the converse or worst possible conditions for attain-
ing the necessary satisfactions of human wants, involving also
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


the greatest expenditure of human energy, would be when the
equation becomes
(B) N u fL m I u ) - o,n0 ,n _ „
(J m ~~ S
This being so, it also follows that this stage will be coinci-
dent with conditions which favour the maximum of cost for
each satisfaction, thus:
N u (! m T u ) O m
— = p
C m
Similarly the conditions favourable to the attainment of
minimum of lowest cost or price (P ) would coincide with
stage A, thus —
n™ n'* i m ) + o u
1 Pu
<J n r
Reasoning from these premises it is clear that the results
S and P, or their values, can never be satisfactorily known,
unless we can gauge the values of their respective co-efficients.
That is, we must know not merely what is the tendency of
any one factor but we must also know the tendency of all
factors affecting the problem. Nay, more; if political economy
is ever to be dignified by the name of “ The Science of
Political Economy,” it must not merely take cognisance of
the tendency of every one of these factors, but, like the skilled
physicist, its disciples must not talk of the “ teachings
“ or conclusions ” drawn from them until they are prepared
to place approximate values against the tendency of each
factor, and then to strike a balance showing the ultimate
effects of the ever-varying combinations in ever-varying
localities.
The difficulty of the problem is no excuse for ignoring the
necessity for the adoption of this course. Hitherto, to a great
extent, the subject has been governed by the more or less
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


plausible generalisations of mere literary men; and their
deserved fame and undoubted ability and skill as such have
given them a prestige in political matters to which they are
not entitled from a practical or scientific point of view. That
they have done good service in arousing and sustaining
attention on such important matters is readily admitted; but
further progress is impossible so long as the inexact methods
of the mere literary athlete are employed. In future the pro-
gress of political economy as a science depends upon demon-
strations based upon quantitative analysis, and not as hereto-
fore upon authoritative dogmas based upon the qualitative
analysis of any one factor of the problem arbitrarily chosen
from a compound or complex equation.
It is obvious that we may concur with most of the writers
on political economy as to the general tendency of any one
influence; but while this is so it may not be a safe proceeding
to trust the effect of this on© tendency—even admitting its
importance—as determining the ultimate conclusion; for
other tendencies, minus or plus, must be reckoned with before
any reliable conclusion can be arrived at. Pathos and literary
merit are powerful adjuncts, no doubt, but in the solution of
political problems they are worse than useless where complete
and exact methods are eschewed.
The Best Mode for Effecting the Highest Quota of
Satisfactions with a Minimum of Trouble Depends
Upon the Local Value and Extent of Natural
Sources of Supply.
The principal material satisfactions essential to the hap-
piness and cultured content of human life primarily depend
upon natural sources of supply, and that country whose
natural sources afford the greatest potential of elements which
may be made to contribute to the material satisfactions of
cultured men, is also the country wherein the greatest num-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


ber of people may best fulfil all those mutual services to each
other which cover the whole round of wants of an ideally
happy community. The essential natural conditions for the
sustenance of a highly-cultured community, and permitting
.a natural, healthy expansion, are:
(1) Large area covering all zones of climate favourable
for the production of all reasonable wants, and
possessing richly all the elements essential to pro-
duction, such as water, fertile soil, the varied
mineral and vegetable products, and such flocks
and herds as most contribute to the welfare of
man.
(2) Division of labour —each division carefully appor-
tioned in relation to the probable amount of dif-
ferent satisfactions required; and each labourer
in every division carefully trained in that branch
of work to which he has been apportioned.
(3) The creation and maintenance of instruments which
best supplement man’s efforts in modifying and
distributing the products derived from natural
sources, and so enabling each unit to enjoy the
maximum of desirable satisfaction with that mini-
mum of exertion which is most conducive to the
health and happiness of the individual.
Now, if it were possible to find such a combination of favour-
able conditions, wherein all the wants of man could be com-
pletely met, it follows that interchange with other countries,
so far as material needs are concerned, would not only be
unnecessary, but disadvantageous.
It is true, on moral grounds, a nation enjoying the maxi-
mum of satisfactions with a minimum of exertion or maxi-
mum of ease, might either reduce the amount of satisfactions
or increase its exertions for purposes of benevolence as directed
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


towards a country less favourably situated; but there would
be no such necessity on commercial grounds as laid down
by the earlier economists, except upon the plea that we should
buy in the cheapest market. But this last plea, the favourite
maxim of freetrade theorists, ignores many consequences of
the most vital importance.
First, the people of the ideal state contemplated had already
discovered and achieved that final state of content or end
to which a people can aspire to —that is, a maximum of desir-
able satisfactions combined with a minimum of reasonable
exertion. This being so, why should they attempt to procure
this end by another method untried by them, seeing that they
could not improve their condition in this way, but might make
it worse. But as this plea must be discussed, let us see under
such circumstances what it might lead to.
Buy in the Cheapest Market.
In our ideally perfect state, let us for convenient reference
call it “Euphrasia.” One of the fundamental conditions
regulating its well-being is, that all for each is considered of
as great, if not greater, importance as each for all.
The favourable natural conditions were experienced to be
such that the round of wants of all might be satisfactorily
supplied without demanding from any one group of its divi-
sions of labour more than 44 hours of public labour per week.
But it was also carefully determined that although a certain
a gg re g a te of labour w’hen properly directed would affect this
desirable end, a corresponding or even a much greater amount
of labour could not produce the same result if the previously
carefully arranged and periodical regulation of the apportion-
ment of labourers were subsequently disturbed in an arbitrary
way. Every arbitrary disturbance of the proportion of
labourers trained and originally apportioned to a special work
or function, has the effect of lowering the purchasing power
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


of the section which was arbitrarily increased, because it
introduced either curtailment of employment, wrongful com-
petition, over-production, or diminished purchasing power
within that particular section of the division of labour; and
in the section from which they were arbitrarily withdrawn, it
either lessened the amount of aggregate satisfactions required
for all; or, if it has not that effect, it increases the hours of
labour of those within the division beyond the maximum
standard without additional recompense for increased exer-
tion. If, however, the additional hours are rewarded by
extra satisfactions, it must be at the expense of the general
consumers, thus lessening their average of aggregate satis-
factions.
The wrongful over-production is a direct loss to the whole
community so healthfully regulated by community of
interests.
Oh; but your ideal Euphrasian forgets, says the economist,
that the surplus of A division might by interchange with
another nation be made to restore the balance thus arbitrarily
destroyed by A recompensing through products needed in
Division B, where a deficiency was caused. This is true, but
at best this course only helps to restore the loss occasioned by
the arbitrary disturbance of the apportionment of the local
Euphrasian division of services. Nay, more; the loss occa-
sioned could not be fully restored by an equal exchange of
labour and skill, for the exchange with the distant foreign
country involved a fresh expenditure of labour in transfer
and agencies of exchange—thus increasing the value of Oor
obstacles —between producer and consumer, and so inevitably
lessening the quota of the essential material satisfactions to
be divided among consumers. It must be borne in mind that
Euphrasia is assumed to possess the maximum of favourable
natural resources—plus best art appliances—and consequently
the restoration of the destroyed eqriilibrium in Euphrasia
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


could only be effected by a skilled people, who of necessity
weie forced to adapt themselves to circumstances by either
being satisfied with a lower requirement of wants than that
enjoyed by the Euphrasians, or by a similar standard of
material satisfactions gained at a much greater expenditure
of labour.
For the sake of illustration, let us further examine this
theory of obstacles. It will readily be granted that where
two producing centres are situated at vastly different dis-
tances from consuming centres, that supply from the nearer
producing centres can be effected by a much smaller expendi-
ture of labour than by the more distant centre of production.
Thus, if A be 8000 miles distant, and B 40 miles, it follows
that the extra labour and time consumed in carrying the
extra 7960 miles is a serious disadvantage. Men do not con-
sume distance. In itself it does not add a jot to the ultimate
material wants of man otherwise produced. Distribution is
certainly a necessity, but the smaller the need for distribution
the larger the produce to be divided, for it is obvious that
the more machines and human beings that are abstracted from
direct production of essential satisfactions, the smaller is the
quantity falling to the share of each consumer of wants.
Thus, if 100 producers and 50 distributors provide the ideal
quota of wants of an Euphrasian at the maximum of eight
hours per day —say 10 wants per day, then the 100 producers
must each have produced 15 wants, for consumers include
producers, and non-producers or producers and distributors,
and these number 150, and—
-100 xls in
TSO
for each consumer: or on the basis of exertion which lies at
the root of price or cost, we might put it that for the aggre-
gate hours of labour in producing and distributing each con-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


sumer was put in the possession of 10 wants. Now, if we
increase obstacles we cannot supply the same number of wants
without individually increasing the hours of labour. Thus,
if the additionad distance involves the labour of 50 additional
distributors, and if producer and consumer alike share the
additional labour thrown upon them, we have—
-200 x JB_ _ 10 .66 hours.
150
Thus, to maintain the same share of wants as formerly, the
necessary increase of 50 non-producers or distributors involved
an extra two hours labour per day fully, or 25 per cent, extra
exertion on the part of all breadwinners. In like manner it
may be shown if the amount of exertions per individual
remain undisturbed —then the amount of wants formerly
supplied to each consumer must be lessened, thus —
150 x 10
g— — = 7’5 wants per consumer
Thus we have with the increased obstacles a diminution in
the satisfaction of wants equivalent to a reduction of 25 per
cent.
In these simple illustrations the direct effects of increased
obstacles between producer and consumer are set forth in
plain terms, so far as interchange with a distant country
affects the conditions of a country circumstanced like our ideal
Euphrasia. To apply the argument involving obstacles to
other countries not so favourably conditioned as Euphrasia
might favour the adoption of interchange between two or
more distant countries, as effecting improvement in the con-
dition of consumers in each country —but this improvement
could only reach the highest possible quota for such a place
where the exchanges are confined to the necessary products,
which are either naturally easily produced beyond local needs,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


or in respect of products which are naturally deficient within
its own border. In such case the exchange of the former
by exports would have to be met with a similar value of
imports of the latter. But even here the disadvantageous
effects of obstacles have to be endured so long as they do not
outweigh the advantages of the desired exchanges.
Nay, there is one form of want —food—which no obstacle
can outweigh so long as the energies of the labourer in other
directions remain unexhausted. The unfortunate country so
circumstanced must of necessity effect exchanges with food
countries, or perish as a community. Still more terrible is it
for the masses of this country if it should happen that it lacks
the natural or raw products upon whose manufacture the
exchanges for the food of other countries depends.
In such a case the friction of obstacles (distance) between
(1) producer of raw products, (2) manufacturer, and (3)
consumer attains its maximum—notwithstanding that science
and skill may have done, and are still doing, wonders by
steam and other contrivances on sea and land to minimise
its lowering influence on the amount of satisfactions propor-
tionate to labour exerted.
The economist may here exclaim, “ How does the Euphra-
sian argument from obstacles reconcile itself with such a case
as the United Kingdom? ” He will no doubt proceed to
show that no nation on earth has carried the method of inter-
change with other countries to so high a pitch as the United
Kingdom. Her vessels are found laden with the products of
exchange in every important harbour of every country.
Her aggregate wealth is the envy of nations, amounting to a
sum something approaching £1, 300,000,000 as a yearly income
Her external interchange trade amounts to 643 millions
yearly, 362 millions being imports and 281 millions being
exports. Her annual value of real estate alone reaches
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


<£196,000,000. Surely, he would continue confidently, this
is the most complete vindication that could be given prac-
tically, that the nation which has the greatest amount of
foreign interchange trade and, presumably, the greatest
amount of obstacles—is also the nation which, by her great
wealth, affords the greatest amount of satisfactions to divide
among her consumers.
The answer to this supposed objection certainly involves
many complex questions, but it may at once be affirmed that
it does not in the slightest degree diminish the value of the
argument from obstacles as applied to Euphrasia. In mak-
ing this affirmation it is not denied that the wealth of the
United Kingdom in the aggregate is unbounded, and no one
can reflect upon her grand achievements in science, wealth,
and progress, without admiration and pride. The skill and
energy of her people are marvellous, and our admiration is
not lessened, but increased, by the thought that her vast
resources and enormous interchange of trade have been built
up by her prodigious energy and industry in spite of obstacles
of every kind. Her skill, daring, and enterprise have given
her the command of important lands under every clime. This
skill and enterprise, however, cordd not within her own
borders increase beyond a certain limit, the necessary supplies
to meet her rapidly growing needs, as regards food and
clothing for her people and raw products to supplement her
needs for supplying manufacturers in exchange for prime
necessaries, failing which she could not support the lives of
her people. It is necessity, therefore, which inevitably forced
her to direct her industries in such a manner that her lack
in food and other raw products at home should be purchased
by a surplus creation of manufactures. Food, being one of
the prime essentials to the life of each person, must be
secured in sufficient quantity, or the lives of her workers can
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


not be sustained. A nation possessed of all the world’s wealth
of exchange could not preserve the lives of her people if this
one form of wealth—food—be lacking or insufficient. With
such a nation—so unfavourably conditioned—her existence
depends upon her power to command supplies of the food of
other countries in exchange for such products as food-produc-
ing countries may think it desirable to take from her.
The food-producing countries may carry on this exchange
as a matter of choice or preference; but with the food-
requiring country the exchange must effected—on the best
terms possible but if necessity presses hard, it must he
■effected upon any terms forced upon her.
Fortunately for such a country all lands capable of pro-
ducing large food supplies are not in the condition of our ideal
Euphrasia, and hence there is little danger of a stoppage of
food exchanges for manufactures so long as the food-producing
country is tempted by cheapness to buy those of the food-
lacking country in preference to making them for herself; or
of buying them from a rival manufacturing country on still
more advantageous terms.
Free Trade.
A food-lacking country must therefore favour free inter-
change of trade, for it is necessary to her existence. A
country with ample natural sources unutilised or partly
utilised would only suffer, a temporary inconvenience by the
cessation of imports of foreign manufactures, and it is possible
that this inconvenience which forced her to supply her own
wants from sources and agencies within her own borders might
result in increasing the amount of satisfactions for each con-
sumer with an expenditure of a smaller amount of exertion
on the part of each producer and distributor.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Tasmania.
United
Kingdom.
Area,
16,778,000
77,800,000
Ditto per head of population
114-13
2-05
Aggregate earnings of wages class*' ...
£5,519,340
£800,084,000
Working-class breadwinners, estimated
61,326
15,884,000
Earnings of ditto, per head
Average hours employed per week ..
£90
£51
44
55
Average wages per head per week * ..
34s. 6d.
19s. 3d.
Average wages per hour
9'40d.
4*20d.
Average cost of one quarter of wheat...
Equivalent of ditto in true purchasing
32s. 6d.
32s. 6d.
power, viz., hours labour
41'5 hours
92‘9 hours
Aggregate Wealth and Individual Wealth.
But let us again return to the outward indices of the pros-
perity of the United Kingdom. Admitting that she has.
great wealth in the aggregate, it does not necessarily follow
that the share of satisfactions falling to the bulk of her people
compare favourably with countries whose aggregate wealth
is comparatively small. In point of fact, any aggregate
respecting the wealth of a country is a pure abstraction. It
is as such enjoyed by no one. It is the share falling on the:
average to each individual which is the true indication of
real wealth, or of the satisfactions enjoyed by the unit.
This is significantly demonstrated by contrasting two widely
differing countries in respect of that abstract idea called
national wealth:
Thus it will be seen that notwithstanding the imposing
effect of the vast aggregate wealth of labour in England,
representing over eight hundred million pounds sterling—the
purchase of one-quarter of wheat, the staff of life —demands
of her workmen the expenditure of 92'9 hours time in labour,
* The average rate is here based upon all kinds of breadwinners. (See also p. 267.)
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


whereas in Tasmania the same amount of satisfactions can
be gained by the expenditure of 41 -5 hours of labour. That
is, the English workman would have to work—if work could
be placed at his disposal (in itself a greater difficulty)—l23
per cent, more hours to attain the same purchasing power pos-
sessed by the Tasmanian workman, whose aggregate wealth
only represents 0'69 per cent, of the corresponding aggregate
in England.
This clearly proves how misleading are the effects produced
by allowing the mind to dwell upon mere abstractions based
upon aggregates.
The Effect of Striker or a Rise in Wages in Food-
Producing AND FoOD-EaCKING COUNTRIES.
But the difference in the purchasing power of the English
breadwinner is not the only disadvantage. England’s pur-
chasing power is also not merely limited by the extent of the
market foi her manufactures, but upon her success in under-
selling foreign rivals, who are also by necessity compelled to
exchange manufactures for the prime necessaries of raw pro-
ducts of food and clothing • and hence her success depends
either upon her superiority in skill and local appliances, or
in cheapness or extending the hours of labour. It is a neces-
sity that a manufacturing country must produce cheaply, and
necessity will force her to attain this end by extending the
hours of the labourer without extra recompense, should other
means fail her as a competitor for the bread and raw products
of food-producing countries. Strikes and combinations
among workmen are only of value to them within very narrow
limits. For let us suppose that England’s supremacy as a
manufacturing country depends upon her present power to
undersell rival countries to the extent of 15 per cent., it
would then follow that any nominal success attained by the
combined strikes of her workmen, thereby improving their
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


hours of labour or rates of wages to the extent of, say, 16
to 20 per cent., would be altogether disastrous; for it would
destroy the competitive power of England as a manufacturer
for other countries than her own. But if England was thus
shut within herself there would probably be no employment
whatever, and no means of subsistence for perhaps 20 millions
of her present population of 38 millions. This would be a
terrible result arising out of the success of combined strikes
among her manufacturing workmen.
That an increase of the cost of her products to the extent of
what has been indicated is not a very improbable matter,
springing from strikes, has been foreshadowed by the recent
combination among English dock labourers, who succeeded in
having their rate of wages raised 2d. per hour. As the average
rate of workmen in England is only 4'2od. per hour, a general
increase of lid. per hour would raise the cost of wages 35'7
per cent.; and as the price of labour is the chief item of cost
in all manufactures, it is not improbable that the ultimate
cost of her manufactures would be raised 20 per cent., thus
cutting her off from her previous advantage, which enabled
her successfully to outrival all other countries in supplying
the external markets of the world with manufactures.
In countries where food and raw products is or can be pro-
duced far in excess of local requirements, the effect of pro-
hibitive tariffs in raising local prices would not have a similar
effect. If the cost of living would be nominally raised thereby,
it would be exactly or nearly counterbalanced by a nominal
increase in earnings locally. Thus, for example, if the con-
sumer had to pay 20 per cent, extra for all articles of con-
sumption it is probable that even this would not be disad-
vantageous; for it is almost certain that the true purchasing
powers of labour —relative to staff of life—would be very
little altered, as the price of labour would also tend to
approach an increase of 20 per cent.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


But there is one effect which this would have upon a food-
producing country which would show a decided contrast with
a similar rise of wages in a manufacturing country such as
England, viz., it would draw to the former the manufacturing
labourers of manufacturing or densely-peopled centres; for
instead of cutting off sources of employment, as in England,
it would of necessity require her to import labourers to pro-
duce those wants locally, or a great portion of them, which
foimerly had been supplied to her by the manufactures of
external labour. That is, broadly, its main effect would be
to increase the local labour market or widen the field for the
employment of local labour. At first this would also have
the effect of diminishing the aggregate extent of external
commerce ' but it need hardly be discussed, all things being
fairly equal as regards natural sources, that the supply of
exchanges by home products, instead of by foreign, is all in
favour of diminution of obstacles, and therefore, upon the
whole, advantageous . . . This problem has already been
worked out in the United States of America, and whatever
the ultimate effects may be when local population approaches
too close to her limits of natural powers for producing food
and necessary raw materials for her own people, it is
undoubted that 60 millions would not be profitably employed
and well supported if it were not for her policy of favouring
the creation of her own wants as far as possible by the energies
of local labourers.
It must be granted, however, that the policy which is
advantageous to a rich food and raw-producing country, such
as America, would be annihilation to a country such as Eng-
land, where the population by far exceeds her natural sources
of supply as regards food and other essential raw products.
A country so circumstanced must maintain a free trade
policy or perish. With countries thinly populated, possess-
ing illimitable sources of natural wealth, including soil,
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


climate, and all conditions favourable for the production of
food and raw products in excess of local wants, it must inevit-
ably follow that the tendencies and influences arising from
the desire to extend the local field of employment must be
in the direction of Protection, or restrictions upon foreign
trade. It is the conditions of the various countries which
determine means to ends. In one country the means is Pro-
tection, in the other Free Trade; but the end in both cases is
the same, viz., the best available mode of supplying the
greatest amount of satisfaction to each individual (including
local employment to the rising generation) with the least
expenditure of individual effort.
If Mr. Henry M. Hoyt, who has so ably defended the
American policy of Protection, had premised that he was
referring solely to countries rich in all natural resources —far
surpassing the demands of all possible local requirements
we might agree with his ideal as regards the policy to be pur-
sued, viz. : —“ The nearer we come to organising and con-
ducting our competing industries, as if we were the only
nation on the planet, the more we shall make, and the more
we shall divide among the makers. Let us, at least, enter
upon all the industries authorised by the nature of our things.
Thus we shall reach the greatest annual product of the
industry of the society.”
When, however, any country’s population fails or is unable
to cultivate 2'Bl acres per head within her own borders the
policy suggested by Mr. Hoyt must of necessity be abandoned
in favour of Free Trade. This necessity—involving the popu-
lation difficulty—is, however, an evil, and not an advantage
to the masses.
Rent Monopoly.
Emotional and inexact writers, carried away by some fore-
gone conclusion, or by the fascinating exaggerations of a cer-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


tain literary style, are constantly blundering when they
attempt to investigate the causal relations of complicated
matters. Rent presents a fertile theme for mere emotional-
ists, yet no subject presents greater difficulties to the earnest
and more exact investigator than that of rent, whether
regarded as (1) a proper object to be included among indi-
vidual rights of property, or (2) in its effects, in the opinion
of some, in increasing by its amount the cost of production.
(1) What is the peculiar claim upon land which, when
used or let to a tenant, is called rent, and when
occupied by the legitimate owner is in official
assessment rolls termed annual value?
(2) How has the owner acquired such a right to land
which empowers him to monopolise its uses in
any way not otherwise restricted by law, or to let
it to another for an equivalent in value termed
rent?
Perhaps the progress of property acquirement in a young
colony affords the best means for giving a correct answer to
these questions.
In Tasmania, for example, there is an area of 16,778,000
acres, of which, up to the present time, 4,572,649 have been
converted by purchase or grant into private property, and
whose annual value equivalent to rent is estimated at
£860,555, or 3s. 9'l6d. per acre. The remainder, represent-
ing nearly three-fourths of the whole, is still owned by the
State. But this includes the land and its improvements. If
we eliminate the value of buildings alone—which we could not
put at a much lower figure than £584,000, viz., 29,200
buildings, most habitable at £2o—this leaves only £276,555,
or a value of Is. per acre for lands and other improve-
ments, embracing fencing, grubbing, clearing, burning tim-
ber and scrub, &c.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


It is true that of the 4,572,649 acres private property only
about 150,000 acres are under tillage, and about 410,000 laid
in permanent grasses, fenced, cleared, or otherwise improved;
this represents only 12‘22 per cent, of all private property.
Even if we suppose the 87'78 per cent, of uncultivated
land to possess no exchange value whatsoever, and that the
existing rent only bears relation to the 560,000 acres of cul-
tivated land, then this only provides 9s. 10|d. per
acre as the proprietor’s recompense for capital (the fruit of
previous labour or service, paid for the proprietorship)), and
for the labour value expended in bringing the wild bush land
of nature into a condition fit for the plough. Leaving out
the loss to the owner expended in obtaining the rights of
proprietorship, it follows that there is now only 9s. per
acre per annum of exchange value left to cover former out-
lay, which, in a rough bush country like Tasmania, would
hardly compensate the actual labour of the pioneer bush
man in reclaiming it. Here, then, vanishes the last trace of
the element in rent, supposed to form an important propor-
tion accruing to the landlord without the expenditure of
labour.
But some may object on the ground that I leave out of
consideration the increment from which favoured properties
derive the benefit, in consequence of the enhancing effect of
subsequent influences (not the proprietor’s) as, for example:
(1) The establishment of a town or city continually rais-
ing the value of lands within or near its bounds.
(2) The etablishment of roads and railways* at the pub-
lic expense improving means of communication,
and saving time and money in the transit of per-
* In a colony where these works are constructed at the cost of the public, it
must also be conceded that the proprietor contributed his share of the general cost.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


sons and products—and thus directly enhancing
or diminishing the value of the property.
(3) The limited nature of naturally fertile land.
Such enhancement, for the most part, I fully admit, is in
itself an unearned increment, and cannot always justly (from
this point of view) be claimed by the proprietor as a value
produced by his individual services.
But it must also be remembered that this increment in the
a gg re g a^e is already included in the <£276,555 present value
of aggregate annual rental of all cultivated lands.
If, therefore, the present annual value of land, with incre-
mental value, does not cover the actual value of the original
services in rendering it fit for tillage or stock, it follows
either that the exchange value of the land, as a whole, has
fallen below the original cost of services rendered to as great
or to a greater extent than property value, as a whole, has
been raised by the unearned increment. It becomes a fair
contention, therefore, on the part of the proprietors of land
to say that the possible loss from downward fluctuations in
the exchange value of land would hinder the development
of the occupation and cultivation of wild forest land, or
obtain a lower value from purchasers if it were not for the
hope that other influences —unearned increment, for
example—gave promise, as in other speculations, that such
possible losses might be compensated for by such possible
gains; and we might also urge that if the community does
not share in the gain of unearned increment it is compensated
by its freedom from sharing the actual losses which are
brought about frequently by external influences affecting a
gradual or sudden depression in exchange value below the
original cost of preparing the soil for tillage, or below the
price of original purchase.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


It is fairly consistent, therefore, to contend that so long
as unearned increment does not exceed in amount the limits
of a possible downward depression in exchange value (i.e.,
risk of loss), it would be unjust to deprive proprietors of
land of the benefit of compensation in an upward direction
(i.e., chance of profit), and this improvement in value, how-
ever caused, cannot rightly be claimed by the community
as an unearned increment until its amount, as a whole,
exceeds the original cost of services in converting the original
land to the condition necessary to the uses to which it may
now be devoted.
Monopoly of the Gifts of Nature.
But, say others, have you forgotten the free gifts of
Nature —the oxygen, carbon, rain, and the forces of life —
called into play by man's industry, increasing his original
stores every year forty, fifty, and a hundred fold; these forces
silently working, whether the proprietor sleeps or wakes, are
surely embraced in the products reaped. Most certainly.
Man’s labour would be of no avail without these natural
forces. But who reaps the benefit of these general gratuitous
services ? Most clearly it is the consumer. The free forces
of Nature common to all lands are not produced at the
expense or by the labour of the producer, and it would scarcely
ever occur to him to introduce them as possible ingredients in
the selling value. They no more can enter into the selling
value of common terrestrial products than can the value of
the free winds of heaven enter into the merchantman’s
freight charges. In truth, the selling price of products —
such as wheat, for example —is not now determined by the
producers of any one country; nor by the immediate actual
cost of production defrayed by any particular producer; nor
by the greater or smaller natural fertility of the soil of any
one place or country.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Tt is not now iarm against farm, but terrestrial region
against terrestrial region, in which natural agents, such as
climate and largeness of cultivable area, play a greater part
than human skill, or even richness of soil.
r lhe aggregate quantity produced in relation to present
demand is the only determining measure of selling price.
When supply is much above demand the producer must often
sell under cost price. When supply falls short of demand the
profit is still measured in the same manner without reference
to immediate cost of production. Competition forces all pro-
ducers to give the consumer the benefit of all gratuitous aids—
whether natural or artificial—that are free to all other pro-
ducers, and the only effect of actual cost of production is
that it determines the extent and quality of the lands which
are best capable of promising success in the competition for
supply. It also spurs industry and invention in the direction
of lessening cost, all of which benefits inevitably are reaped
by the community. No gratuitous element entering into
products can ever form part of exchange price so long as
there are many competitors and free competition. In the
case of the products of agriculture, too, there is the greatest
possible security against the arbitrary acts of monopolists in
the hugeness and the universality of producing operations
which can be focussed at any point of demand in the globe by
the mighty steamships on the ocean highway, and which would
require omnipotence and omnipresence to monopolise.
If any one country had a monopoly of the production and
supply of an important product of the land, such as wheat,
I frankly admit that the owners of more fertile parts would
reap the sole advantage of this limited gratuitous gift of
Nature (the one rent of Political Economists), provided that
in the acquirement of these more valuable parts the present
or original possessor had not given the state or community an
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


equivalent in purchase value; but this monopoly of good
lands, while securing a better return locally as compared with
poor lands, may not secure as much additional profit as the
difference in the fertility of rich and poor lands would seem to
indicate.
The world’s supply, if not artificially barred or shut out
from any country, determines the actual price of corn, and it
is significant that America, with her bonanza method of farm-
ing on a scale far grander than is possible in England, is
enabled, with a much lower natural yield per acre, to grow
grain cheaper, and in much larger quantities than in Eng-
land ; and consequently she regulates the price of corn in
England more by her methods and scale of farming than by
higher fertility of soil. The nature of the season’s rainfall,
too, falling indifferently, and often irregularly, on good or
bad tracts of lands, and sometimes restricted in sufficient
quantity for produce, a high yield to particular provinces
further breaks the influence of fixed fertility of soil in any one
country as a regulator of price. The mere difference of
fertility of soil of any one country may not, therefore, be the
dominating influence in determining price to consumer, and
hence the consumer may even have the advantage of the
gratuitous influence—a more fertile soil —in reducing the
general average of the price of corn.
In the century ending 1888 it is estimated that the popu-
lation of Europe and North America increased from 150 to
470 millions, that is, 80 per cent. This must have cor-
respondingly increased the demand for food and the unearned
increment of land. Notwithstanding this, such were the
mighty effects of steam and electricity introduced, adding to
the effective force of man’s labour and time, that the supplies
were multiplied at a greater rate, and relatively at a much
smaller expenditure of man’s labour.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Abolish the Middleman and the Monopoliser of
Natural Wealth.
Many are of opinion that the consumer of wants would be
greatly benefited if he were brought more immediately into
contact with the producer without the intervention of the
middleman. No doubt some of the latter, where circum-
stances favour them, succeed in monopolising a larger share
of profits than he is entitled by his services, but the evil may
well be left, in the long run, to be remedied by the action of
rival competitors for custom. True the co-operation of con-
sumers may successfully employ salaried agents for perform-
ing the same services, but this is not abolishing the middle-
man, but rather controlling his charges by converting him
from an independent dealer or agent into a salaried servant.
It is not always possible, however, for consumers to secure
wise and trustworthy agents, and there are many advantages
valued by many consumers profitably risked by energetic,
independent middlemen which would not be safe to commit
to a hired servant, and hence it seems improbable that
association, often necessary and successful, will entirely occupy
that division of the social exchanges of services.
Not a little of the objection to middlemen, however, arises
from the misconception that the wealth earned by middle-
men, professional men, and the rich, is equivalent to wealth
individually consumed by them.
This naturally leads on to
Distribution and Consumption of Wealth.
There are many fallacies current with respect to the dis-
tribution of wealth. If all the enormous wealth year by year
created by stored fruits of previous labour (capital), current
labour, and the gratuitous forces of Nature, were directly
devoted to consumption or enjoyment, no doubt the pro-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


portion per head allotted to the industrial labourer would be
small indeed in comparison with the rich. Indeed, it is
urged by Lange* that it might be better for society gener-
ally, as well as for the rich industrial chiefs, that if all those
who have acquired a more than moderate income were to
retire from business life, and henceforth devote their leisure
to public affairs, to art and literature, and, in fine, to a cul-
tured enjoyment of life upon moderate means, “ not only
would those people lead a more beautiful and worthier exist-
ence, but there would also be secured an adequate material
basis to maintain permanently a nobler culture with all its
requirements, and thus to give a higher content to our pre-
sent epoch than that of classical antiquity.” As it is, he
charges, not inaccurately, the few colossal capitalists and
industrial chiefs of the present age with miserly abstemious-
ness as regards the proportion of wealth gained by them which
they devote to immediate personal enjoyment and consump-
tion. He adds: —“ It is true that forces on forces are
created, new machinery continually devised, new means of
communication; it is true that the capitalists, who have the
means at their command, are ceaselessly active in creating,
instead of enjoying , the fruits of their toil in dignified leisure ;
but, nevertheless, the constantly increasing activity aims
directly at anything rather than the furtherance of the com-
mon weal (?) . . . The great interest of these times, how-
ever, is no longer, as in antiquity, immediate enjoyment, but
the accumulation of capital.”
Again he states (p. 241) : “ We live, in fact, not for enjoy-
ment, but for labour and for wants; but amongst those wants
that of pleonexia is so over-bearing that all true and lasting
progress, all progress that might benefit the mass of the
people, is lost, or, as it were, gained only incidentally.”
* Lange’s “ History of Materialism.” B. C. Thomas’ translation. Yol.
iii., pp. 237, 238, 239, 241.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


If this be a true picture, and it must be confessed it is to
some extent borne out by experience, we may ask, Wlao derives
the benefit of the capitalised wealth ? This requires careful
analysis; for the conclusion to be drawn as regards the public
weal may be widely different from that indicated by Lange.
We may truly premise, in the first place, that capital in the
hands of the rich, in so far as personal consumption is con-
cerned, is as much a tool of trade as is the plough to the
farmer. By its means he sets in motion the wheels of many
industries, and so enables the smaller capitalist of muscular
services to exchange his capital for primary wants, necessary
minor tools of trade, and such comforts as his varying rates
of profit may afford. The rich capitalist in like manner, but
with much larger profit, reaps the reward of his ventures.
But there is this important difference: The rich capitalist
cannot or does not abstract from his profits the same propor-
tion of earnings towards his personal wants and enjoyments
as the workman does. On the contrary, what he can directly
consume personally of the said primary wants and comforts
is limited by the same natural law as his humblest workman,
and the necessities of tear and wear in his machine ( capital ),
or the passion or necessity to increase the number and power
of his machines, and to keep them ever at work, abstract the
greater portion of his increasing or decreasing profits. In
consequence of this inevitable tendency it is really a difficult
question to say which of the two —rich capitalist or work-
man—personally consumes the largest portion of products
created each year for actual consumption and enjoyments.
It is almost certain that as regards some of the most valuable
necessary natural products the balance would be in favour
of the workman. What immense capital is devoted to mak-
ing and working or developing railways, steamships, sailing
vessels, telegraph lines, machinery of all kinds agricultural,
farms for food and various textile products, pastoral farms
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


for the produce of animal meat and materials for clothing,
houses for shelter of men, animals, and products.
What is usually termed “ The Enormous Accumulations of
Wealth in our Times/’ “ The Riches of Capitalists,” are
really those tools or instruments themselves. But the owner
no more consumes or 'personally enjoys this form of commer-
cial wealth than does the poorest labourer who toils upon
these machines and instruments of his employer. This is
seen at once by asking for what purpose is it that so much of
the vegetable and mineral products of the earth, and so much
of the former energies and labours of man have previously been
saved, abstracted, or diverted from former possible powers of
consumption and personal enjoyment; and for what purpose
is it that capitalists and workmen alike devote such a large
portion of their present services in fresh creations, and to the
repairs of the consumption (tear and wear) of these very
machines which do not themselves enter into their personal
consumption or enjoyment, although they nominally make up
the greater part of the so-called accumulated wealth of
capital ? The answer is very simple. Their sole end is the
production, transport, distribution, and protection of man’s
primary wants —food, clothing, shelter. Luxurious articles
of consumption are insignificant as compared with the neces-
saries.
It is mainly for food and clothing, therefore, that all this
vast machinery of the capitalist has been created and set in
motion by the savings of previous efforts. How much, then,
of this ultimate fruit of the combined result of the capital of
machines and instruments, the forces of Nature, and men’s
labour, is actually absorbed or consumed by the rich capitalist,
as compared with the poor servant or artisan ?
Let us see:
(1) The human body can only consume and assimilate a
certain quantity of food per.day. The old, sickly,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


and very young cannot consume or assimilate so
much as the strong, healthy persons of youth and
prime of life. Health and hard physical employ-
ment cause the body to burn more food just for
the same reason as greater energy exhausted by a
steam engine demands a much higher consumption
of fuel.
This is the reason why an average, strong, healthy navvy
can, and does, consume a much greater quantity or weight of
food in the day than the less robust city clerk or the brain-
worried financier. Similarly, it is safe to affirm this of all
persons who are obliged to put their bones and muscles into
greater activities than their brains, and hence it is reasonable
to state that man for man the average food consumed and
enjoyed during the life of a labourer is much greater than
that personally consumed by those whose physical exertions
are smaller, as in the case of clerks, shopkeepers, teachers,
professional men, bankers, and rich people. As the produc-
tion, transport, and distribution of this food for consumption
is by far the greatest object for which all the capitalist’s
savings and machinery have been put in motion, and must
continue so, it follows that at least in this respect the wealth
of food, the chief primary want; wealth iru highest utility as
well as their wealth of exchange, the end and aim of the
greater part of all wealth in capital, is more largely dis-
tributed among and consumed by the poorer classes than is
the case with the rich. It is true luxurious foods, having a
relatively higher price, are to be found more on the rich
man’s table; but the limits which determine what the rich
man really can consume of common and rare substances must
again be reckoned with. When we regard the cheap foods
now found on the humblest cotter’s table, and much of which,
because of former rarity and price (tea, coffee, spices, &c.),
are still termed luxuries, we can well perceive the utter
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


insignificance of the limited quantities of rare food monopo-
lised by the rich, more costly because rare; not because of
superiority, or because in its production it originally
demanded more of the gratuitous forces of Nature, the devo-
tion of more capital, or the expenditure of more labour —
but mere rarity —one of the chief characteristics of that part
of nominal exchange wealth termed pleonexia.
The next item, clothing, has to be considered, and here
again it may be affirmed that the tear and wear of hard work
of the labourer demand that his clothing should be stronger.
He, as a rule, therefore, personally consumes a greater weight
of the produce of the sheep and the cotton plant than the
rich man, and however dirty and ill-looking they may seem
from the nature of the labourer’s employment, the produc-
tion is as great a tax upon the land and the forces of nature;
upon the means of transport, upon the capitalist’s looms,
and upon manufacturing labour, as the clothes of his
employer. The silks and satins, like rare foods, are more
beautiful and rarer; but their high price is on account of
rarity, not because they are more useful. Indeed, they are
for the real purpose of clothing far inferior in general utility
to the commoner cheap woollen and cotton fabrics. The
same reasoning is applicable to the remaining portions of the
real wealth of primary wants and ordinary comforts, all
going to show that underneath the nominal proprietorship
of the means which produce consumable wealth, the share
allotted and falling to the humblest classes is greater than is
generally supposed.
If the material comforts are, as shown, most fully dis-
tributed according to wants, and not to relative powers of
purchase, it may also be shown that the highest forms of
culture and enjoyment are within the reach of all.
We have but to refer to cheap periodicals, cheap editions of
valuable works, newspapers; the stage, music, fine arts. In
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


fact, it is notorious that the more elevated and healthful
amusements are obtainable at the least cost, and, owing to
the spread of education, it is curious to observe that the child-
len at public schools are now better trained in reading music
at sight than are the children of the wealthy in the higher
academies.
If it were possible for the skilled craftsman of the present
day to compare his condition with that of his representative
of the last century, or even with the rich of the same period,
he would realise that, whatever misery or difficulty still exists
among us, the condition of the masses is vastly superior; and
this improvement could not possibly have taken place if the
few wise and provident in past times had personally consumed
their yearly profits in the same proportion as the many
improvident; for if the latter had the capital, now engaged
in meeting the demands of increasing millions of men, would
not have been created, and further increase in population
would be impossible.
Capital and Wages Difficulty.
It may seem a bold and hazardous thing to propose new
definitions for terms so frequently defined by the ablest
minds, but as in their application it is undoubted that in the
many definitions of capital and wages each varies considerably
from the other; and as most of them fail more or less in con-
sistency and relevancy with the matters upon which they are
brought to bear, it is not unreasonable nor over-presump-
tuous on the part of anyone to attempt the solution of the
difficulty, so long as these difficulties are also fairly appreci-
ated.
The expansion or limitation of the meaning of the words,
Capital and Wages, I am of opinion, would not be the source
of so much confusion if it were more firmly grasped by each
one that the terms belong to two important and distinct
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


(A) Agents or Powers
Necessary to be Employed in
the Production
of
Wants in Exchange.
a.
Labour
1.
Of highly-skilled minds in the
(Present Labour).
determination of the modes
in which labour may be made
most productive ; labour thus
devoted may be the means of
adding from two to many
times the effective power of
the physical force of the
labourer of mere brute force.
Types: The inventor of spin-
ning jenny, steam-engine.
director of operations, &c.
2.
Highly-skilled hands. Types.
Mechanic, carpenter, weaver.
categories; the first either wholly or partly related to the
agents or powers involved in the Creation or Production of
Wants in Exchange; the second either wholly or partly
related to the Appropriation of the Wants of Exchange
Produced.
Instead, therefore, of dwelling upon the contradictions
involved by the inconsistent use of these terms, it may serve
a good purpose if we discuss ideas rather than terms before
involving the issues with a fruitless logomachy regarding
unstable definitions. First, let us honestly try to bring under
the first category all the elements or ideas that are necessary
to be reckoned with in making it complete, viz. :
What are the necessary powers and forces now used in
the effectual production of wants in exchange.
To realise these powers and forces it will admit of clearer
apprehension if they be classified in tabular order thus:
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


h. Indirect Fruits of
3. Ordinary skilled hands. Types:
Navvy, messenger, plough-
man, shepherd, soldier, police
officer.
Products of food, clothing,
Labour and Skill
shelter, &c., on hand in
(Anterior Labour of
smaller or greater proportions
Bastiat).
by different persons; the
c. Indirect Fruits of
fruit of previous labour and
other forces saved (1) partly
by greater individual econo-
my, or abstemiousness in the
consumption or enjoyment
of wants previously earned;
or (2), the saved and pre-
served surplus of previous
earnings, due to the pro-
ducts of previous labour and
skill being much greater than
the power to reasonably con-
sume or enjoy.
The possession, by inheritance
Labour and Skill
or purchase, of improved
(Anterior Labour of
lands, mines, costly energy,
Bastiat).
railways, roads, canals, ships,
buildings, instruments of all
kinds that have or may be
bought or sold by the accum-
ulated previous or current
savings of skill, industry, or
common physical labour.
If capital, as a term, be confined to h and c, there could be
no objection if it were not assumed afterwards that these
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


(B) Modes of Appropriation of Wants in Exchange
Created or Produced, or About to be Created or
Produced.
Mode.
a. (By Wages or Salary.)
Labourers or poor capitalists
share in respect of personal
services mainly.
b. (By Commission, In-
Employers or possessors of a
terest, Rent, or Income.')
more than ordinary share of
the equivalents of previously
stored labour and skill —rich
capitalists —obtained mainly
from the possession of a
larger share than ordinary
of the actual fruits, or the
equivalents of previously
stored labour and skill.
alone formed the whole of the forces necessary to produce
fresh wants in exchange in sufficiency for all. Similarly,
there would be no objection to confine the term capital to
labour, if it were not ignored in after applications that the
important portions, viz., Indirect Fruits of Previous Labour
and Skill or Anterior Labour (b c) are also necessary for the
effectual 'production of the wants of all, and that those gained
by right of previous savings are not generally distributed
possessions.
We come now to the second great category:
From this analysis, which is sufficiently comprehensive, it
would appear that labourers are simply poor capitalists, and
employers and wealthy people are rich capitalists’, that both
forms of capital are necessary to the production of fresh wants
for all, and that both —whether as wages or salary, or whether
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


as commission, interest, rent, or income—derive their share of
these wants by the aid of the combined action of the two
groups. In this sense, it is no more true or false that wages
are derived from capital , than that commission, interest, rent,
or income is derived from capital. If this view of the case be
correct, it would seem to appear that certain Economists, as
well as their critic, Mr. Henry George, are wrong,* for if the
former may be justly accused of ignoring E a’s part in the
production of wants in exchange (in their wages fund theory),
the latter errs quite as much in ignoring the vast part which
the increasing store of previous savings, or more or less per-
manent creations (anterior labour), represent in the com
bination necessary to produce in sufficiency for all the ordin-
ary wants of exchange of human beings.
Improvement in the Condition of the Individual Largely
Due to the Savings of Anterior Labour (Capital)
Skilfully Applied as Instruments Aiding Pro-
duction.
This solution of the vexed problem of the so-called “ Wages
Fund ” is, moreover, in harmony with all related facts and it
clearly establishes the important truth that it is to pre-
served previous savings (anterior labour) skilfully applied,
that the powers to further increase of production per head
* The admirably expressed views of Bastiat, however, are in entire
accord with these views. Thus Bastiat writes (p. 43, “ Wages—Har-
monies of Political Economy ” :
“As capital is nothing else than human services, we may say
that capital and labour are two words which in reality express one
and the same idea; and consequently the same thing may he said
of interest and wages. Thus, where false science never fails to find
antagonism, true science ever finds identity.
“ Considered, then, with reference to their origin, nature, and
form, wages have in them nothing degrading or humiliating any
more than interest has. Both constitute the return for present and
anterior labour derived from the results of a common enterprise.
Only it almost always happens that one of the two associates agrees
to take upon himself the risk. If it be the present labour which
claims a uniform remuneration the chances of profit are given up
in consideration of wages. If it be the anterior labour which claims
a fixed return, the capitalist gives up his eventual chance of profits
for a determinate rate of interest
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


is mainly secured; for if the increase in appropriation to neces-
sary machines and instruments be only proportionate to
increase in mouths to be fed, there would be no improve-
ment in the appropriation of wants per individual, even
though “ each mouth ” be accompanied by “ two more
hands,” as urged by some. It follows, therefore, that if the
individual necessary wants be now better supplied than in
former times, it must either be due to relative diminution
of the mouths to be fed, or to the multiplication of productive
power (anterior, labour) largely due to the great advances
made in recent years in the power which man has obtained
over the forces of Nature. As it is undeniable that popula-
tion has largely increased since the beginning of the
eighteenth century, and as it is also demonstrable, notwith-
standing the great simultaneous increase in population, that
the supply of wants per head, rich and poor, have also materi-
ally improved, while the hours of labour have been shortened,
it follows logically that this improvement, in the aggregate
and per head, is entirely due to the vastly increased pro-
ductive power obtained through a greater knowledge of
Nature’s forces—more especially in the uses of steam and
electricity. The contrary allegation by Mr. Henry George
and others has no support from reason or facts.
It is clear, therefore, that the greatness or smallness of
accumulated wealth is not necessarily an index to the pres-
ence or absence of individual comfort and happiness, but
rather both depend upon the relative proportions which the
total wealth and total population bear to each other.
From this it is easy to show that the chief source of misery
and discomfort—or the diminution of necessary supply of
wants per head—is mainly due to the tendency of population,
in times of distress, to increase in a greater ratio than the
powers of production.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


The extravagant statement of Mr. Henry George, that
there is nowhere any improvement which can be credited to
increased productive power,” is too absurd, perhaps, to
require serious consideration. Yet it may be well to show by
a simple illustration its utter fallacy.
Let us take one of the most important wants of man, neces-
sarily consumed alike by rich and poor, viz., common water.
Although in natural reservoirs or channels, as in springs,
lakes, and rivers, it is generally a gratuitous gift of Nature
to all men, it has to be transferred to points of consumption •
and although the gratuitous element never enters into
exchange 'price , it is generally a marketable commodity in
large centres of population where a large daily supply is
absolutely necessary. The element which here forms price is
labour of transfer. The labour of transferring water by
primitive means is great, as one gallon weighs 10 lb., and if
the distance be considerable both time and muscular powers
of labour must be consumed, and, therefore, the carrier must
earn the equivalent of such time and labour as may be
expended in this most necessary service. It is true water,
for the support of a few individuals, may be supplied at a
minimum of the expenditure of time and labour ; for their
habitations might be fixed contiguous to the natural supply;
but for large towns this, for the most part, is quite imprac-
ticable. In the latter case water supply would fall into one
of the most important divisions of marketable labour, and the
price of water to the consumer would be determined by the
present time and labour, bestowed by water carriers engaged
in the service, plus the proportion of cost and maintenance
of equipment necessary —(anterior labour).
Now, if we were to confine attention to the producer (only
about 44’2 per cent, of living persons are producers of market-
able wants), we would never perceive the full significance
of the statement that the greater the proportion of skilfully
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


applied previous labour or service (tools, instruments, appli-
ances, <kc., or anterior labour) introduced as cmxiliaries to
present labour or services, the greater is the power of produc-
tion and supply, and the smaller is the price of the product.
But if we bear in mind that all persons are necessarily
consumers, w© can at once perceive that abundance and les-
sened cost of primary needs, consumed alike by rich and poor,
by producers and dependents, are real benefits in which all
must equally participate. If it can be shown, then, that the
statement respecting the introduction of anterior labour is
correct, it follows unmistakably that Mr. Henry George’s
statement is contradicted in the experience of all men as
consumers of marketable wants.
The city of Launceston contains about 15,000 inhabitants.
Each person consumes on an average at least 20 gallons of
water per day = 200 lb. weight. Thus the population con-
sumes each day at least 1342 tons weight of water per day,
or 488,840 tons per year, and each person consumes 7300
gallons per year.
The transit of this 488,840 tons over 13 miles from source
is at present easily effected by permanent waterways, iron
pipes, reservoirs, &c. ( representing anterior labour ), in con-
junction with a staff of men engaged in the maintenance and
working of the water-supply ( representing present labour ),
and there is ample power (potential) in the store of existing
anterior labour to double the supply, if required, without any
addition to cost.
Now, the exchange value of anterior labour and present
labour, combined in effecting this service each year, is esti-
mated to be £68,243 and 2133 respectively, or about £32 to
£l.
The only way to measure the true value of the benefits
effected by the direct influence of anterior labour as an aux-
iliary to present labour, is to try and estimate the number of
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


1st Mode.
2nd Mode.
1 3rd Mode.
Water transported 13 miles per head
of population per day
20 gallons
20 gallons
20 gallons
Number of men required per day ...
75,000
1342
23 or 1
or 3261
or 58*35
Cost of present labour service pe r year
£6,844,875
£122,290
£2133
or 90*73
or 64'57
or 3 - 03
Value of instruments—
Anterior labour
£18,750
£67,100
£68,243
or 0*27
or 35-43
or 96-97
Cost of ditto per year
£1125
£4026
£4094
Total cost of transit to consumer
per year
£6,844,875
£126,316
£6227
Cost per 100 gallons
£6 10 0
£0 2 3£
£0 0 1-36
men required to effect the same work of transfer, viz.,
488,840 tons per, year a distance of 13 miles by more primi-
tive means. It is impossible for men to do any part of this
work without some anterior labour in the shape of instru-
ments j but if we reduce the latter to the most simple form,
it will be sufficient to demonstrate the enormous advantage
gained by every accession to the power of anterior labour.
Let us suppose, therefore, three modes of transfer :
(1) The primitive mode by pails of 2-gallon or 20-lb.
capacity, requiring 5 men and 10 pails per day
foi carrying one day’s supply to each person, viz.,
20 gallons, or 200 lb. weight.
(2) One man and a horse and water cart effecting the
transfer of 224 gallons per day.
(3) A system of pipes and waterworks, with a staff of
men to maintain and work the system, capable of
transferring at least 1342 tons of water per day,
i.e., 300,000 gallons.
We may now, in a tabular form, compare the effective-
ness and cost of the three modes as follows. To supply 15,000
persons:
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


It is here clearly demonstrated that by the accession of
anterior labour, or the fruit of applied previous labour saved
from personal consumption, and skilfully applied in accord-
ance with the knowledge which man has gained with respect
to natural laws, the effective power of each man’s labour is
multiplied 3261 times, and the cost to consumer is reduced
thereby to about ]T t )() th of that which it would cost if the
proportion df anterior labour was at a minimum.
That is—when in the combined service of anterior and pre-
sent labour, anterior labour only represented 0’27 per cent,
of the combined service—the cost of water would be £6 10s.
per 100 gallons to consumer; but when the proportions were
reversed, and anterior labour represented 96'97 per cent, of
the combined service, the cost of water would be reduced to
1‘36 per 100 gallons. It will readily be perceived, therefore,
that the mere accompaniment of “ two hands to each fresh
mouth ” is insignificant as a force to effect improvement in
the condition of the individual consumer of needs without a
corresponding gain in anterior labour.
Why the present population of the United Kingdom and
her colonies do not individually perceive the full benefit of
the immense addition made to the store of anterior labour
now used as an important auxiliary to the force of present
labour, is not because of a failure in the production or in the
distribution of the products or wants created, but primarily
because the numbers of consumers of wants have kept pace
hitherto with the increased producing power.
The individual does not necessarily benefit by the aggre-
gate increase in production, as it depends upon the propor-
tion which consumers bear to aggregate production. Thus;
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Average Individual Share of Products.
Let A = Aggregate products created by anterior and
present labour.
C = Number of consumers.
P = Average proportional share of products falling
to each individual.
Then A p
C =
It follows, then, that P will only improve so long as A
continues to increase faster than C. The aggregate of A,
however large, is of no account. It is the proportional rela-
tion to C which determines increase or decrease to P.
Denial of Comparative Progress in Modern Times Due
to Increased Productive Power.
“ THE RICH ARE BECOMING RICHER, AND THE POOR POORER.”
There is nowhere any improvement which can be credited to
increased productive power.
The tendency of what we call material progress is in nowise to
improve the condition of the lowest class in the essentials of happy
human life. Nay . . . it is to still further depress the conditions
of the lowest class.—“ Progress and Poverty.”
Of all the mischievous and erroneous statements current, per-
haps these are the most notable. The statements imply that
the relative state of rich and poor were formerly more
equable, and that the working classes, or the lower zone of
them, have not benefited by the introduction of steam and
electricity, the occupation of vast new virgin lands, and by
manifold inventions and improvements in labour-saving
machinery, and in knowledge during the present century. It
would be nearer the truth to say that, owing to increase in
productive power, at no time in human history has the condi-
tion of the vast masses of skilled and unskilled workmen been
so highly raised materially, intellectually, and socially. No
one who has studied the writings of one of the ablest living
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PEOBLEMS


authorities on this subject—Robert Giffen, President of the
Royal Statistical Society of England—can help admitting
that the humblest workmen of the present generation in
civilised countries have marvellously improved their condi-
tion as compared with any known period in past history.
Material improvement, unfortunately, cannot eradicate all
evils so long as we have those who are vicious, idle, and
improvident, and the fruit of these evils must ever fill our
records with statistics of crime and pauperism. Paradoxical
as it may appear, it is in itself a grand index of moral
improvement in our modern civilisation that we are able to
refer to State-supported paupers, even although this benevo-
lence may itself be the fruitful cause in time of adding to
our social difficulties.
To state, however, or to imply that pauperism is propor-
tionately greater now than when productive power was much
less, is contrary to reason and fact.
The chief advantages of the present century in Europe and
in English colonies are, that owing to the wonderful progress
made in means of communication, in knowledge, and in
labour-saving machinery, the masses of men—
(l) Are better fed, clothed, and housed than formerly,
and are almost free from the terrible periodic
famines which were so common in the four pre-
ceding centuries, and which still afflict the masses
in India nearly every third year.
(2) Are able to obtain primary wants, and even luxuries,
with less hours toil.
(3) Education and luxuries are now more diffused among
the wage-earning classes than among the ruling
classes two centuries ago.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


(4) Freedom and privileges, social and political, are
immeasurably greater than in former times.
(5) Notwithstanding that within the same area (United
Kingdom) the wants of 37 millions have to be
supplied, instead of 2,300,000, as at the close of
the fourteenth century, and about millions at
the beginning of the eighteenth century, these
wants are now supplied much more certainly and
in much superior quantities per head.
(6) Life of each individual on the average is greatly pro-
longed, owing to improvement in hygiene, social
habits, and in the improvement in material con-
dition.
(7) There is a much smaller mortality per 1000; pauper-
ism and crime is greatly reduced proportionally,
and the effective power of labour is immeasurably
superior.
Past and Present Contrasted.
Therefore, whatever evils remain they may still be con-
sistently admitted without denying the great comparative
progress made generally in the age in which it is our good
fortune to live. If we could really picture to ourselves the
actual condition of society in former times, all doubts regard-
ing progress made in recent times would be speedily set aside.
Let us for a moment take a glimpse into past history, as
revealed to us in the pages of Hallam, the historian. Passing
over the Dark Ages, when the husbandman was either
degraded to menial slavery by brutal predatory lords, or, what
was little better, was afforded such miserable tenure of villen-
age as the feudal lords were pleased to allow, we find the rul-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PKOBLEMS


ing classes themselves brutal, poor, and ignorant. Thus Hal-
lam writes of the fifteenth century:— * “It is an error to
suppose that the English gentry were lodged in stately, or
even in well-sized, houses. ... A gentleman’s house,
containing three or four beds, was extraordinarily well pro-
vided; few, probably, had more than two. The walls were
commonly bare, without wainscot or even plaster. It is
unnecessary to add that neither libraries of books nor pictures
could have found a place among furniture. ... No
mention is made in inventories of such conveniences as chairs
or looking glasses. Cottages in England at this time seem to
have generally consisted of a single room without division of
stories. Chimneys were unknown.”
Even at the close of the seventeenth century the progress
made was comparatively small. Draper states: —f “For a
long time London had been the most populous capital in
Europe; yet it was dirty, ill-built, without sanitary provi-
sion. The deaths were one in twenty-three each year J; now,
in a much more crowded population, they are not one in
forty ” (one in fifty in the year 1886).
Much of the country was still heath, swamp, and warren.
Nothing more strikingly shows the social condition than the
provisions for locomotion. In the rainy season the roads
were all but impassable. Through such gullies, half filled
with mud, carriages were dragged often by oxen. ... If
the country was open the track of the road was easily mis-
taken. It was no uncommon thing for persons to lose their
way and to spend the night out in the air. Between places of
considerable importance the roads were sometimes very little
* “ Hallam’s View of the State of Europe During the Middle Ages.”
(Murray & Son, London, pp. 779, 781.)
t “ Draper’s Intellectual History of Europe,” vol. ii., pp. 238, 239.
1 1.e., 43 - 48 per 1000, or higher than the birth rate.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


known, and. such was the difficulty for four-wheeled carriages
that a principal mode of transport was by pack horses, of
which passengers took advantage by stowing themselves away
between the packs. The usual charge for freight was 15d.
per ton per mile. The country beyond the Trent was still
in a state of barbarism, and near the source of the Tyne there
were people scarcely less savage than American Indians, their
half-naked women chanting a wild measure, while the men
with brandished dirks danced a war dance.'’ At the begin-
ning of the eighteenth century even, the only press in Eng-
land north of the Trent was at York. Social discipline was
very far from being of that kind which we call moral. The
master whipped his apprentice, the pedagogue his scholar, the
husband his wife. ... It was a day for the rabble, when
the culprit was set in the pillory to be pelted with brickbats,
rotten eggs, and dead cats; when women were fastened by the
legs in the stocks at the market place, or a pilferer flogged
through the town at the cart tail. . . To a debased public
life private life corresponded. The houses of the rural popu-
lation were chimneyless) huts covered with a thatch; their
inmates, if able to procure fresh meat once a week, were con-
sidered to be in prosperous circumstances. One-half of the
families in England could hardly do that. Children six years
old were not infrequently set to labour. In London the
houses were mostly wood and plaster, the streets filthy beyond
expression. There were no lamps. . . . As a necessary
consequence there were plenty of shoplifters, highwaymen,
and burglars.”
No earnest and dispassionate person can contrast the con-
ditions of the past with those of the present without frankly
acknowledging the great progress among all classes, including
the lowest in the scale; and further, that were it not for the
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


vast increase in productive power the 30 millions of souls
added to the population of the United Kingdom since the
beginning of the eighteenth century would not have been
called into existence. Misery and death would have arrested
population at the limit of its old lower productive power, just
as it has in all times prevented population from passim
beyond the productive power of the respective times and
places. Nay, no reasonable mind can for a moment doubt
that the extra 30 million souls —with wants supplied more
effectively than were the 7 millions at the beginning of the
eighteenth century —is in itself the best proof that can be
conceived of the beneficial influence exerted by the knowledge
which man has gained over the forces of Nature since that
time. Indeed, so palpable must this appear to any thought-
ful mind that he or she would readily assent to the proposi-
tion that increase of population is possible only so long as the
productive power makes a corresponding advance. When it
becomes stationary population must become stationary; and
that means intense competition for primary wants of exist-
ence, resulting in misery and starvation to the weakest, and
indicated most infallibly by a sudden rising of the death rate
to, or even above, the birth rate. These inevitable conse-
quences will be more fully discussed hereafter under the
heading “ Population Difficulties.” In the meantime,
instead of making idle assertions, let us contrast the present
with the past as regards the comparative progress made in
population, and in material and social condition.
This can best be realised by tabulating for distinct pro-
gressive periods, statistics bearing upon population, crime,
pauperism, effective purchasing power of the labourer in
relation to primary wants and comfort. The condition of
the United Kingdom since 1541 affords the best index of com-
parative progress.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


00
s
00
00
o
s
s
►P
i
i
O
o
CO
CO
to
I k|
1 2
! *
o«
*C5 3-
Kn
i
£ B
09
4k.
05
J<*
CO
i «
c+
CO
C*
CO
o
o* S'
f-
..-4
o
O
E3 P- 1
•<1
o
o
o
CN
o
o
V
p.
bO
>
Average
CO
di. o
cr
Increase Per
t>
o
o
o
CO
Year in
d
CO
o
o
o
o g
Population.
H3
S3
CO
00
>
Sf
05
w
CO
Average Price of
tr*
the Quarter of
o
CO
t—i
CO
*
1-4
o
fCO-
Wheat.
O
CO
cn
O,
p 2
Average P rice of
c«
Wages Per
*<»
Q
O
pCC
bS|H
Qj
Week.*
o
g>
A
Effective Power
3
CO
CO
of Labourer in
05
o
05
Purchasing ]
IP
05
CO
O
O*
o
£
Quarter of
Wheat.
CO
fS
to
»p
.
Death Rate Per
O
o>
o
■
1000 Persons.
§v
3
CO
00
o
fi-O-
d 5
o
CO
Ct> I'D
Qj >
i
fcO
CO
>
S
* ct>
co
o
o
o
o
Crimes Com’t’d for
£
00
!
Trial Per 1000 Per.
Comparative Effective Purchasing Power of Labour.
Much information of value is lacking in the earlier periods
referred to, but what is lacking would tell all the more in
favour of the condition of the labourer in existing times:
The few figures in the preceding table tell a significant
tale. Of course, it would be alleged by all who had pre-
conceived notions that rates of wages and prices do not
always reveal the effective power of the labourer to command
primary wants. But no index of this relative power can be
so satisfactorily shown than by reference to the relative pur
chasing power of the labourer as regards the staff of life.
Whatever qualification may be urged, it is undoubted that
the purchasing command of bread is the most powerful index
to purchasing command over other wants.
* The average rate is here based upon the wages of male adults of
about twelve selected occupations. (See also p. 234.)
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Now, when it is shown that the average weekly wage of
the wage-earning class at the present, time, by the expenditure
of 6’86 day’s labour, commands as much power in purchas-
ing one quarter of wheat as it would take the same class—
-16‘30 days in the period 1541-1582
40 - 28 days in the period 1583-1642
3P09 days in the period 1643-1702
what possibly could be more conclusive ?
Especially favoured is the wage-earner of Australasia who
can command the same power by the expenditure of 4'34
days’ labour; whereas it would cost the same class in 1583-
1642 the fruits of 40 - 28 days, i.e., nearly ten times more.
Surely, this alone should dispose of all reckless statements
having a contrary tendency in measuring comparative advan-
tages with the present time. The lowering of the death rate,
and the consequent more rapid increase of population; the
relative decrease in the proportion of paupers, especially the
able-bodied; the decrease in serious crimes, all tell the same
tale of unparalleled progress.
The Present Condition of the Masses in England and
Wales as Compared with Their Condition During the
200 Years Ending in the Year 1800.
If still we must admit that the present condition of Eng-
land and Wales is such that great misery oppresses many, it
must also be borne in mind that her present death rate, 19'3
per 1000, is the lowest upon the records; and her natural rate
of increase, although far below that of the colonies, shows
an increase of P 4 per cent, per year.
No statistics directly bearing upon the misery and death-
rate of the 200 years ending 1700 are available, but there is
good evidence to show that the population in the year 1500
numbered about 2,300,000. In the year 1700, or 200 years
later, it only numbered 5,475,000, i.e., an increase of
THE E. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Progress of National Income in Millions of £’s.
Income.
Increase.
—
In 1843.
Present
Time.
Amount.
Per Cent.
Capitalist Classes from
Capital
190
400
210
110
Working Income in
Income Tax Return
90
180
90
100
Working Income not
included in Income
Tax Return
235
620
385
160
515
1200
685
130
3,175,000 in 200 years, equivalent to an increase of one per
1000 per year. There is every reason to believe that the
birth-rate was at least as high as in recent years; and if
this be correct, it follows that the death-rate must have aver-
aged 34 3 per 1000, instead of 19'3 per 1000, as in recent
years.
Now, what does this mean ? Why, that formerly the struggle
for means of existence was so terrible that 15 deaths per
1000 persons took place beyond the number now occurring.
This lamentable state of things is better realised when we
see that it represents the destruction of the possibility of
2,364,800 lives in the 200 years referred to, above the average
rate now occurring.
Surely this evidence should dispel all doubt respecting the
comparative state of misery, past and present.
Nor is this all. Mr. Giffen (1) has shown by unmistak-
able reference to facts that in the admitted great increase of
wealth during the last 50 years the rich have not improved
their incomes in the same ratio as the working classes.
Thus:
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Thus we perceive the falsification of Mr. Henry George’s
statement with regard to the alleged exemption of the work-
ing classes from any share in the present progress in the aggre-
gation of wealth; for not only do they also share in the
material progress of our times, but it is shown that the pro-
portion of the lowest group in the increased wealth (160 per
cent.) is by far greater than that of the two higher (100 to
110 per cent.). It is impossible to enumerate all the com-
parative advantages of those who live in the present day, due
to improvements in knowledge, but the indices given should
decide all earnest enquirers that whatever difficulties still
exist are small, indeed, in comparison with what men suffered
from in former times. The greatest difficulty which now
threatens, is not that man’s power to further command the
forces of Nature may fail, but the far more serious considera-
tion, “ Will the increase of such power be commensurate with
the high rate of natural increase which is the inevitable con-
comitant of a comfortable existence?” This brings us to the
problem of problems —Population.
Increasing Numbers.
Residents of new countries, with a scant population, and
with vast natural resources in the shape of unlimited areas
of unoccupied and unutilised virgin lands, longingly picture
the transformation of these areas into yellow cornfields, fruit-
ful gardens, verdant pasturage teeming with browsing cattle,
busy industrial centres crowded with the homes of industrious
and happy people.
Ah ! little do they know of the never-failing Nemesis which,
like a sleuth hound, dogs the steps of an ever-increasing
population. Happy selectors of easily-acquired choice lands
may luxuriously grumble at the amount of their taxation, the
low yi'ice of mutton and corn, their bad roads, and the impos-
sibility of extending their operations in the production of
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


corn and wool, so long as the wages of and other labour
are so high.
The professional and merchant class may reasonably
grumble at the scarcity of men and products which restricts
their respective callings, and may impatiently rail against the
slow progress which the country is making in population and
the creation of products. The few wealthy men of leisure
may hanker after the amusements and honours so common in
thickly-crowded centres, where the attractive ministry of cheap
labour is but too common.
The comparative comfortable artisan or labourer, under
such favourable conditions, may in verbal or literary debate
still wage a lively dispute whether the irksome eight hours’
labour —or weekly half-holiday—may not be further
improved, and the rate of wages further raised above the
rates of over-peopled old countries, but he does not view with
favour the fresh introduction of labourers in his own craft.
The consumers of the services of local dear labour may
desire the introduction of the surplus cheaper labour of
Eur.ope, and for the sake of Protection may urge upon the
Government the necessity of extending the advantages of
external Free Trade. On the other hand, the protector of a
local monopoly of relatively high wages or dearer local manu-
factures, may more strenuously advocate the necessity of
increasing the tariff on all manufactures from other cotintries,
especially on such as may be produced locally. It will be
seen, therefore, that in young countries, as well as in the old,
we have the battle of interests still waged, if not so keen.
The competitor or seller of services cries for Protection; and
the user or consumer of services enlarges upon the harmonies
and advantages of universal Free Trade.
Few recognise the truth that individual welfare depends
less upon the greatness of the aggregate wealth of a country
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


than upon the proportion which freedom from excessive com-
petition gives each individual over the local natural sources
of utility, including primary wants; and that the country
possessing the greatest aggregate of material wealth may,
owing to the competition of excessive numbers, present the
spectacle of a small privileged minority absorbing an unparal-
leled share of luxurious wealth, while the masses are strug-
gling for the barest subsistence.
All other things being equal, it follows that in the country
where Nature’s gratuitous stores of wealth, as regards food
and other essential products, far exceeds the power of its
inhabitants to utilise, yet, notwithstanding the comparative
insignificance of its accumulated wealth in exchange, its
inhabitants on the average are individually happier, and
enjoy a much larger share of material comforts, than the
inhabitants of countries, however great the aggregate wealth,
but whose natural resources as regards food products are far
below the local requirement of its teeming inhabitants.
Two nations standing in this relation to each other would
correspond to the relation of two individuals where one is the
privileged capitalist or buyer, and the other the unprivileged
seller of labour service. In other words, the latter would be
in the position of the needy Esau in being forced to sell his
whole birthright to preserve his life; the former would occupy
the favourable position of Jacob, who had merely to part with
a portion of his surplus of primary wants (red pottage) to
secure a large augmentation to his wealth of pleonexia.
This, unfortunately for many old centres of civilisation, is
no overdrawn statement —the creation of enthusiastic decla-
mation or sentimentality—for if we take one of the most
vigorous countries of Europe (England) with its untold wealth
in the aggregate, and compare it with the young colony of
Victoria, we may readily demonstrate the verity of what has
been alleged.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Population Difficulties, or the Struggle for
Existence.
Darwm (page 52, “ Origin of Species ”) has observed “ that
in a state of nature, almost every full-grown plant annually
produces seed, and amongst animals there are few which do
not annually pair. Hence we may confidently assert that all
plants and animals are tending to increase at a geometrical
ratio that all would rapidly stock every station in which
they could anyhow exist. And this geometrical tendency to
increase must be checked by destruction at some period of
life, and, as an inevitable consequence, he goes on to add
that each individual lives by a struggle at some period of
its life, that heavy destruction falls either on the young or
old during each generation, or at recurrent intervals. Lighten
any check, mitigate the destruction ever so little, and the
number ol the species will almost instantaneously increase to
any amount.”
These considerations, when 'fully appreciated, form the
foundation of the problem of Malthus.*
That Mr. Henry George altogether failed to grasp the vari-
ous elements of this problem is at once apparent by the man-
ner in which in his otherwise very attractive work, “ Pro-
gress and Poverty," he has attempted to refute the con-
clusions of Malthus.
As he has fallen into the most simple errors in his adverse
comments upon Malthus, it may be as well to state with
greater precision the factors of the problem, thus:
P. —Actual population.
I. —Natural tendency to increase.
(a) At its maximum in an ideal state of per-
fect health, virtue, peace, and pro-
sperity.
*“ An Essay on the Principle of Population.” Malthus. 2 vols.
(London, 1826.)
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


(b) At its minimum, when the opposite of
this state obtains.
Natural limit of life; death at extreme old age.
C.—Checks, cutting off life before the healthy limit
of life has been reached, among which are pro
minent:—
(a) Competition of other forms of animal life—
zymotic diseases, parasites, attacks by
beasts of prey, &c.
(b) Insufficiency of food or famine, whether
from seasonable influence, poor soil,
climate, ignorance, wilful waste, or
improvidence.
( c ) Violence, wars, murders, accidents, physi-
cal causes, such as earthquakes or vol-
canic outbursts, cannibalism, infant
and senile murder, massacre.
(d) Diseases, whether due to ignorance, vice
human neglect of hygiene, climate
cosmical influences, &c.
(e) Diseases due to the tendency of civilised
communities to aggregate in dense num-
bers, as in cities and towns.
(/) Misery the close attendant of these evils.
M. —Moral restraint operating upon I.
E. —Means of subsistence, varying with season, but
increased absolutely by numbers and increasing
knowledge of natural resources; the ratio per
individual, however, gradually lessening as the
poorer lands and waters are invaded by swell-
ing numbers.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


F. The absolute limit when a greater density for each
square mile of the earth’s surface is reached by
removal or the minimising of all repressive
checks. About 2’83 acres in cultivation is now
necessary for the support of each person living.
G. —The final stage, the world peopled to its full limit,
and the struggle for existence only permitting a
perpetuation of the maximum population at F
by the effects of T; and the failure of either in
any degree, again reintroducing of necessity
checks C, a, h, c, d, e, and so producing a
decline in population, although the natural ten-
dency I to multiply may still be conceived to be
as vigorous and prolific as at the first.
When Malthus affirmed that the ration of increase of popu-
lation advanced faster than the ratio of increase of means of
subsistence, he never stated or conceived that population
could actually outstrip the means of subsistence as interpreted
and discussed by Mr. Henry George (p. 17, book ii.), and
hence the whole of Mr. George’s citations and reasonings are
either fallacious, or they never touch upon the real causes at
the root of Malthus’ problem. That there is a thorough mis-
conception on the part of Mr. Henry George is clearly proved
by the following quotation from Malthus (p. 243, vol. ii.,
Malthus on Population ”) :
“ According to the principles of population the human
race has a tendency to increase faster than food. It has
therefore, a constant tendency to people a country fully
up to the limits of subsistence (F or G), but by the laws
of Nature, it can never go beyond them, meaning, of
course, by these limits the lowest quantity of food which
will maintain a stationary population. Population,
therefore, can never, strictly speaking, precede food.”
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


This clear expression on the part of Malthus casts aside the
whole of Mr. George’s ratiocinations as worthless. His ina-
bility to grasp the most important elements of the problem
is still further made manifest by his query, p. 17,. “ How is
it, then, that this globe of ours, after all the thousands, and
it is thought millions, of years that man has been upon the
earth, is yet thinly populated ?
I can hardy conceive that a man of Mr. George’s intelli-
gence could put forward such a plea in proof of his conten-
tion that the natural tendency of population (I) is not towards
an increase in the direction of the limits of subsistence.
His query indicates unmistakably that he confounds the
product with the ever-varying factors plus and minus I, T,
and C, which make the product (P). There is no argument
necessary to show the absurdity of ignoring the value and
tendency of I, because the product P does not disclose a simi-
lar value and tendency.
For example, the query entirely ignores the whole burden
of Malthus’ problem by the effects of the checks T and C.
The mere fact, notwithstanding the powerful influence checks
T and C, which have always been in operation—the human
race is now, after a million years, still vigorous, and numbers
over 1480 million souls, is in itself the strongest proof that
the natural tendency to increase has been the powerful influ-
ence counteracting the terrible effects of C, which we too well
know have always exerted a most powerful and dire influence
in preventing a large increase of population.
The fallacy of Mr. George’s arguments is more clearly
appreciated by stating the problem thus—
Let I.—Natural tendency to increase (birth-rate).
D.—Actual rate of increase or decrease of popu-
lation (a) surplus of births over deaths; ( b )
stationary state, &c.; (c) surplus of deaths
over births.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


I + S — M
C + T
D a
Birth-rate
Death-rate
Surplus of births
per 100
per 100
over deaths
persons.
persons.
per 1000 persons.
Norway
30-9
17-1
13-8
Spain
36-6
30-6
6-0
Hungary ...
45-3
32-6
12-7
T.—Death as the full termination \
of a natural healthy life. (
C.— Death from preventible causes )
Death rate.
M.—Moral influence lowering the value of I.
s -—Prosperity heightening the effect of I.
P result upon the population (a) increase;
(b) stationariness; (c) decline.
D- The actual surplus ( a ); stationariness (h)•
decline ( c ) per year.
1. When I + S - M exceeds T + C, the result will be
P a or D a, or an increase of population.
2. When I + S - M only equals T + C, the result will
be P h or D b, or a stationary state of population.
3. When I + S M falls below T + C, the result will
be Pcor D or a decline in population, caused
by the checks being greater than the birth-rate.
What folly, therefore, to conceive a stationary state of
population as being due to the lowered absolute influence of
I alone, when the same result, according to our experience,
based upon the vital statistics of all countries, is due rather to
the increased value of C, the root evil, which Malthus wished
to see eliminated.
That a high death-rate has a greater influence than a low
birth-rate in diminishing the surplus of births over deaths is
easily proved by reference to vital statistics—our only guide
in such matters. For example, take the case of Norway and
Spain and Hungary for the year 1885 :
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


No better example from actual facts could be obtained to
show that the increase of disease and misery, as shown by
the death-rate C + T has more influence in lowering the
value of B a, or surplus of births over deaths, than the lower-
ing of the rate of births; for Norway’s actual rate of increase
is higher than that of Spain and Hungary respectively by
7'B and I*l per 1000 persons; although its birth-rate is actu-
ally lower than in these countries by 5'7 and 14'4 per 1000
respectively. In a healthy, happy, prosperous, and peaceful
country, the actual rate of increase is invariably high, due to
a high birth-rate and a low death-rate.
In an unhealthy, miserable, and savage society, the ten-
dency, while these conditions last, is invariably shown in a
higher death than birth rate, resulting in a positive decline
in population.
It is clear, therefore, that when population is declining it
is rather because misery, disease, and vice have abnormally
raised the death-rate higher than the birth-rate, and not
because of any material tendency to a decline in the birth-
rate.
While there are different stages of civilisation in existence,
over-population is a relative term applicable to the particular
country, and not an absolute quantity to be determined by
an absolute number of persons to a given area, as most errone-
ously indicated by Mr. George. This is clear to anyone who
studies the civilisation and the sanitary state of different
countries.
When peoples who have attained to the same state of civili-
sation are so situated that the struggle for existence is made-
lighter for a given community by local causes, such as may be
seen in the comparison between the Australian colonies and
the older countries of Europe—than the increased prosperity,
the diminution of competition for labour, the increased health
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


due to the smaller density of population, and other advan-
tages climate not being too unequal—would show such an
improvement in the actual rate of increase from natural causes
alone that their effect is significant and instructive. Thus,
although the actual rate of increase in the colonies, during
many yeais, is equal to about 20'5 per 1000 (not including
the effects of immigration), or about 10 per 1000 above the
rate of Europe, nevertheless, its average birth-rate is only
about I‘s per 1000 higher. This again forcibly proves that
the higher rate of actual increase to population is due mainly
to favourable circumstances lowering check C, or deaths from
preventible causes. These illustrations by explicit reference
to actual facts entirely overthrow the arguments of Mr. Henry
George, which solely confine attention to one of the two great
factors in the problem relating to the causes of the increase
stationariness, or decline in the population of different
countries. Malthus was not so visionary as to expect
the entire elimination of any of the factors. He only
hoped to regulate population in relation to means of subsis-
tence by the substitution of an increased power of check M,
in place of the terrible check C. He conceived that as man
grew in knowledge and dignity, he might be able by degrees
to lower the terrible influence of C, thus favouring the state
P a; the latter being prevented from again re-introducing
the evil effects of C by the substitution of influences increas-
ing the power of the superior central check M. If the check
C now ruthlessly in operation be removed altogether or
reduced to a minimum—a most desirable thing for its own
sake, it is certain that the geometrical increase of I would
produce a maximum effect as D a, and this would sooner
or later, if unchecked, over-populate the whole earth. No
matter in what degree the final stage was delayed by increased
knowledge and productiveness, fairer modes of wealth dis-
tribution, and the gradual spread over all habitable areas; or
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


hastened by exhaustion of existing sources of wealth, or a
state of anarchy; the stage would in effect be often reached in
particular isolated districts, although, not in all, by reason
of human ignorances, jealousies, prejudices, not to mention
lower types of human beings unfitted for the reception of a
higher civilisation.
Had it not been for the fortunate discovery of the steam-
engine, the perfecting of means of transport, and the discovery
of new fertile continents (Australia and America) thinly
populated, opening out vast additional sources of production
and affording relief to the pressure of crowded European
centres, it is certain the state of Europe would be very dif-
ferent at the present hour; and the check C would long ere
this have reduced existing crowded centres to half their pre-
sent numbers. What would England do with her present
population (37 millions) if America and Australia were no
longer open to her immigrants and no longer furnished food
and other products ? England is now a striking example of
country whose population has rapidly outstripped the means
of subsistence so far as local supply of food is concerned.
It will readily be conceived, therefore, that the complicated
problem of Malthus is—the elimination of C altogether, or,
as far as it lies within man’s control; with the substitution of
an increased power of M, only when deemed to be absolutely
necessary to banish the dire influence of C. Both Malthus
and Mr, Henry George agree in desiring the elimination of
check C, but Malthus showed that this constant effect, due
to vice, ignorance, disease, and misery, could only be finally
grappled with effectually, by never allowing P, or density of
population, to press too strongly on the means necessary to
preserve a population in a healthy and happy state, and this
could not be practically effected without some such controlling
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


influences as M. The nobleness of Malthus’ aims, and the
problems which he endeavoured to grapple with, are alto-
gether misconceived by Mr. George and other opponents.
Some (might 1 not add the popular view) even maliciously or
carelessly identify the Malthusian problem with the revolting
physical check of Condorcet and others; and also of the view
which rests in considering vice and misery as necessary evils.
This pioves that such people have not honestly studied the
views of this much-wronged philanthropist. This is indis-
putably pioved by the following quotations from his writings,
pp. 478, 479 :
V ice and misery, and these alone, are the evils which
it has been my great object to contend against. I have
expressly proposed moral restraint (M) as their rational
and proper remedy; and whether the remedy be good or
bad, adequate or inadequate, the proposal itself, and the
stress which I have laid upon it, is an incontrovertible
proof that I never can have considered vice and misery
as themselves remedies.”
In connection with these unfair charges urged by a Mr.
Graham, he, in a dignified rejoinder, maintains: “It is
therefore quite inconceivable that any writer with the slightest
pretension to respectability should venture to bring forward
such imputations, and it must be allowed to show either such
a degree of ignorance, or such a total want of candour, as
utterly to disqualify him for the discussion of such subjects ”
And with respect to charges identifying his views with the
restraints prescribed by Condorcet, he distinctly affirms: “1
have never adverted to the check suggested by Condorcet
without the most marked disapprobation. Indeed, I should
always particularly reprobate any artificial and unnatural
modes of checking population on account of their immorality
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


and their tendency to remove a necessary stimulus to Indus
try. . . . the restraints which I have recommended are
quite of a different character. They are not only pointed
out by reason and sanctioned by religion, but tend in the most
marked manner to stimulate industry. It is not easy to con-
ceive a more powerful encouragement to exertion and good
conduct than the looking forward to marriage as a state
peculiarly desirable, but only to be enjoyed in comfort by the
acquisition of habits of industry, economy, and prudence, and
it is in this light that I have always wished to place it.” How
clearly and nobly Malthus explains his check of moral restraint
is a matter which ought to leave no doubt of the purity and
nobleness of his views, whatever doubts may remain as regards
the efficacy of the moral check in itself. The possibility of
the check, too, presupposes the general possession of moral
strength sufficiently inadequate, not merely during large
intervals of time, but at all times; for the effects of opposing
passion might wreck its efficacy at any moment if we do not
contemplate the superior strength and continuous exertion
of the higher moral virtue.
I think I have in these observations fairly vindicated the
nobility of Malthus’ ideal, however we may demur to it as
regards adequacy. It has also been clearly shown that the
problem is a serious one; and individuals, and the poorer
classes, often reach the limit of the means of subsistence long
before society as a whole feels its pressure. How are we to
eliminate the elements of disease, vice, and misery which at
present form the only check C against over-population in
crowded centres without substituting some adequate check of
a superior kind ? This is the problem of Malthus.
Let us see what a small percentage of increase in popula-
tion would effect in a short period of time.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


If murder, war or epidemic, disease or misery, be not fur-
ther increased, it would follow inevitably—
That the offspring of eight persons alone, at the present
rate of natural increase in Australasia, would so multiply
that—
(Eight persons)—
In 961 years they would number 1480 millions,
equal to the whole present population of the
globe.
1314’3 years they would place one person on every
100 square yards of the land surface of the
globe.
1527 years they would place one person on each
square yard of the estimated cultivable por-
tion of the earth’s surface.
1543'9 years they would place one person on each
square yard of the total surface of the land
of the globe.
But it is more terrible still if we contemplate starting with
the existing population of the earth, viz., 1480 million per-
sons, and if we also reckon that the same number of acres
must be cultivated to supply each person, as at present, viz.,
2'83 acres per head nearly.
With these conditions —
(1480 millions)- —
In 85‘03 years there would be one person to every
2 - 83 acres of all the cultivable land surface
of the globe.
122'48 years there would be one person to every
2‘83 acres of land surface, whether cultiv-
able or not.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


In 157'6 years, or in the year 2047, there would be
one person to every acre of land open to
the foot of man, supposing that one acre
was by some miraculous means sufficient
for his support, and that all arctic and tor-
rid parts of the earth could be made habit-
able.
586‘15 years, or in the year 2476, there would be
one person to every square yard of total
land surface on the globe, supposing that
by miraculous intervention life could exist
under such conditions.
United Kingdom.
The natural increase of the population of the United King-
dom in recent years, owing to comparatively low death-rate,
has been increasing at the rate of T 4 per cent, per year. The
density of population of London is at present about one per-
son to every 90 square yards.
In 339’9 years —if misery and disease does not
increase the death-rate—her population
would cover the whole land as a vast city
with a density equal to the present city of
London.
157‘7 years this density would be reached under
the same conditions, if the death-rate was
as low as in Australia at the present time.
United States.
The present limits of the United States are stated to be
about 2,291,355,000 acres, and her present population may
be stated at about 57,000,000. Allow that the present aver-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


age of 2'Bl acres per head in cultivation is necessary to supply
the wants of each person, and that three-fourths of her whole
area are available for cultivation. Then if her death-rate
be not raised by misery and disease the population would
increase at the rate of 2 per cent., as at present in Australia
(i.e., if no providential influence checks the birth-rate), and—
In 119'8 years, or in the year 2009, the limits of
available land would be reached, viz.,
134‘4, or in the year 2023, under the same con-
ditions, this limit would be reached, even
if it were possible to cultivate every square
yard of the whole country.
Nothing shows better the incoherence of Mr. Henry
George’s so-called disproof of the Malthusian theory as in that
portion where he deals with man as limited by space. The
figures referred to show, without doubt, that if misery as a
check to population be banished, the increase to population
would at least be not less than 2 per cent, per year, and this
would in 85 years, or within the limits of the life of the per-
sons now living, exhaust all available lands, even if all avail-
able lands (providing 2‘Bl acres for each person) could be
made to yield the same average as the better lands now cul-
tivated; and this near contingency Mr. Henry George scoffs
at as something so distantly remote “ as to have for us no
more practical interest than the recurrence of the glacial
period or the final extinguishment of the sun.” Rhapso-
dical nonsense of this sort ill-becomes one who professes to
discuss so momentous question, and one who professes to be
so enthusiastic in attempting to grapple with the real diffi-
culties which hitherto have barred the material, intellectual,
moral, and social progress of mankind.
On the other hand, it is logically impossible by any scheme
of civilisation yet propounded by man, except that suggested
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


by Mai thus (moral check), to dispose of the existing misery
of mankind.
It would be inhuman to perceive this terrible dilemma, and
not in heart and spirit rebel against it. Who does not flinch
as he gazes upon this terrible enigma ? It is no wonder, there-
fore, tha/t many emotional natures are either struck mentally
blind at the fierce light, or try to escape the bitter conclu-
sions which calm reason points out as inevitable by conceal-
ing, ostrich like, the eyes of reason in the sands of passionate
rhetoric. The worst calamities that exist seem to be far
more easily borne if we could but suppose them to be solely
the results of man’s own doings. In this conclusion there is
a hope of escape in the thought that man may undo or amend
what he has done amiss. Hence, no doubt, the natural
repulsion of Mr. Henry George to the terrible thought that
the inexorable laws of Nature dominate, corporeally at least,
over the single life, and over the types of Adam’s race, much
in the same way as Nature has hitherto dealt with the thou-
sand types of earlier races that have vanished. He but
utters the human cry of passion when he urges that this is not
the doing of the Almighty Ruler. “We degrade the Ever-
lasting; we slander the Just One. A merciful man would
have better ordered the world.” Alas! alas! Who does not,
or has not at times, made similar despairing exclamations and
passionate protests.
With respect to the statements of Mr. Henry George, which
led to this outburst of declamation, they are but a repetition
of the attitude of the gifted and eloquent M. de Lamennais
that drew from Bastiat the following just rebuke, which
applies equally to writers of Mr. Henry George’s class: *“ In
all this we see only fallacious declamation which serves as the
basis of dangerous conclusions; and we cannot help regretting
* Bastiat: “ Harmonies of Political Economy.” (Part ii., p. 90.)
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


that an eloquence so admirable should be devoted to giving
popular currency to the most fatal errors.”
The possible annihilation of our race, like those races that
have gone, has weighed upon the thoughtful and pitiful in
all ages, but nowhere does this feeling find nobler expression
than in the words of the most thoughtful and tender of living
poets :
“ Are God and Nature then at strife,
That Nature lends such evil dreams :
So careful of the type she seems,
So careless of the single life?
‘ So careful of the type!’ but no,
From scarped cliff and quarried stone
She cries, ‘ A thousand types are gone;
I care for nothing; all shall go;
Thou makest thine appeal to me;
I bring to life, I bring to death,
The spirit does hut mean the breath;
T know no more.’ And he —shall he,
Man, her last work, who seem’d so fair,
Such splendid purpose in his eyes,
Who roll’d the psalm to wintry skies,
And built his fanes of fruitless prayer, —
Who trusted God was love indeed,
And love Creation’s final law.
Though Nature, red in tooth and claw,
With ravine shrieked against his creed—
Who loved, who suffered countless ills,
Who battled for the true, the just,
Be blown about the desert dust,
Or seal’d within the iron hills?
No more ! A discord. A monster then a dream,
Dragons of the prime
That lure each other in their slime
Were mellow music, match’d with him.
O life, as futile then as frail —
O for thy voice to soothe and bless
What hope of answer or redress,
Behind the veil, behind the veil!”
Thus the poet’s refuge is in the after life. But have we no
hope of amelioration in the present. Yes, we do hope. But
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Per
1000.
Percentage
Birth-rate.
Death-rate.
Increase.
Average of thirteen European
States
33-8
23-5
1-03
Seven Colonies of Australasia
34-4
13-6
2-08
France
24-8
22-2
0-26
all our hopes may prove fruitless if we do not bravely face the
real difficulty.
The substitution of the providental preventive check (the
moral check of Malthus) to over-population, for the hitherto
prevailing misery or repressive check is the one escape for
society, even if it be only to maintain the social advantages
that we now enjoy. Of countries which have as yet shown any
tendency to successfully grapple with this problem, the only
examples known to us are those of Switzerland and France,
notably the latter.
The average birth and death rates of 14 States of Europe,
and seven colonies of Australasia, afford some idea of their
relative influence upon population, thus:
The low birth-rate of France (not her death-rate, which is
even below the average of Europe) is the special reason why
her population remains almost stationary.
That her birth-rate should be 9 per 1000 below the average
of Europe is a remarkable thing. Is it due to a lowered racial
vitality, or to moral and providential causes ? If it be due to
the latter influence, a study of the conditions of social life
in France is of peculiar importance. The Hon. G. Shaw
Lefevre, M.P., in his work on “English and Irish Land
Question,” has carefully studied the influence of large and
small ownerships of the land, and unhesitatingly concludes
that to the large proportion of small owners in France, as
compared with England, is to be attributed the great superi-
ority of the great mass of its industrial population. He
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


states: “ The prophecies of Arthur Young and McCulloch
that her system of small cultivation would lead to her becom-
ing the pauper warren of Europe, and her sons the hewers of
wood and drawers of water for the rest of Europe, have not
been fulfilled. On the contrary, ‘ Production has been greatly
stimulated by the sense and security of ownership; hut the
population has not increased relatively in the same propor-
tion; the average condition of the people, therefore, is vastly
improved. Pauperism is almost unknown in rural districts;
the habits of industry and thrift are universal.’ ” The same
author wisely observes: “If the institutions of France have
resulted in a self-acting process of adapting the growth of her
population to the means of subsistence, it would seem to be
not the least merit of a system which is based upon the wide
distribution of property, bringing home to the lowest, as well
as the highest, the motives of restraint lf only a portion of
this be true, the world will owe to France the grandest lesson
in social economy. Here we see a possible escape from the
terrible Malthusian dilemma. France has attained her pre-
sent state of social welfare in rural districts by legal restric-
tion against family entails, which lead to the agglomeration
of big estates in few hands, and by legal facilities for land
transfer; and Mr. Lefevre urges that England should follow
her example. This matter should receive the greatest atten-
tion at the hands of legislators in these colonies, for mighty
issues are at stake, socially and politically.
Can a Higher Culture be Maintained in Any One Country
Without Peculating Its Intercourse With Other
Races of Men in a Lower Plane of Civilisation?
There is still another difficulty to face, even if one enlight-
ened country by providence had succeeded in adapting the
growth of that population to the means of subsistence.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


And this difficulty now presses hard upon the labourers of
a higher civilisation open by Free Trade to the competition of
the labour market of a lower or more degraded form of civili-
sation. The partial exclusion of cheap Chinese labour from
America and these colonies may, or may not, have been in
accord with the principle of Free Trade; but it opens up a
grave subject. For if a higher culture could be enabled by
provident moral or self-control to successfully grapple and
overcome the present enigmas of social science, how is it pos-
sible that such a culture could be effectually preserved if it
were open to be disturbed by the cheap labour or the starva-
tion price products of other nations, who, by improvidence
and lack of moral control, were still sunk in the abyss of that
wretchedness which is due to over-population ? In this aspect
I am humbly of opinion the doctrines of Free Trade and Pro-
tection require further consideration; and it is with the hope
that the reasonable discussion of such matters may shed fresh
light upon this and related problems that I have had the
courage to address you upon these old, well-worn, but hitherto
insoluble difficulties belonging to social and economic science.
One thought impresses m© not a little. It is this: All
truths that are painful are blindly and passionately resisted
by the majority, who also are ever prone to reward skill when
it is employed in opposing or obscuring what is hateful. It
cannot be hoped, therefore, that the warnings given with
respect to the danger that awaits us in the near future will be
much heeded at present. The world’s greatest intellects and
genius are, for the most part, supported in defending popular
views; for it is not found to be a difficult matter for men of
greatest literary talent and skill to show, where complications
abound, that the true is false, and th© false is true. Popular
favour is a terrible taskmaster, for she refuses bread to those
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


who fail to work her pleasure. Ido not, therefore, undervalue
the temptation which ensnares the majority of able minds to
continue the defence of pleasant delusions, when these alone
find a ready market of exchange value. But the evil time
draws too near for delusive teaching. It is now necessary
that those who see the rocks ahead should speak out faith-
fully.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
(Read 20th May, 1890.)
Section II.
NATURAL LIMITS TO THE NUMBERS ENGAGED IN VARIOUS
OCCUPATIONS.
MOST writers on social problems tacitly assume that no
other considerations than those of supply and demand,
or competition and remuneration, need be taken into account
when questions relating to the numbers that may be employed
in the various branches of human industry are concerned.
Indeed, so able an exponent of the principles of Political
Economy as Mr. Henry Sidgwick, assumes with confidence that
the adjustment of the apportionment of the employed in the
various divisions of industry is sufficiently determined by
“ rates of remuneration.” He states (p. 182 “ Principles of
Political Economy ”) :
“We assume that labour and capital are mobile or
capable of being attracted by a higher rate of remunera-
tion, both from district to district, and from industry
to industry, so that not merely are the wages paid for the
same quality in any one industry approximately the same,
but also when the remuneration of labourers or capitalists
in any industry is known to be higher than that of
labourers or capitalists in some other industry entailing
no more sacrifice or outlay, and requiring no scarcer quali-
fications, the difference tends to be gradually reduced
by the attractions which this higher remuneration exer-
cises on actual or prospective labourers or employers.”


There is not the faintest recognition here of natural limits
to or absolute necessity for employment in a given direction,
irrespective of the aggregate intensity of energies expended,
or market rates and prices. Neither does he recognise the
universal truth in matters animate and inanimate, that
mobility or movement in a new direction requires a fresh
expenditure of force commensurate with the nature of the sub-
ject, the time occupied in transition, and the friction to be
overcome due to inertia or foreign resisting media. A physi-
cist would never dream of discussing the mobility of material
substances in such a loose way. He would first consider the
mass or weight of the substance; the distance and direction
of movement; the rate of movement and time; and the fric-
tion due to inertia or existing diversity of movement; and
from these he would compute the fresh demand upon energy
or force to execute the desired movement.
Because the Political Economist does not think, or does not
choose to think, that the transfer of a labourer or capitalist
to a new place, or to a new kind of occupation, involves a
process analogous to the movement of inanimate bodies, it is
not the less true. Take the case of a shoemaker reduced to
a state of idleness, or partial idleness, by competition among
excessive numbers, or some other cause, locally or generally.
We will suppose that this workman has a family of 5 per-
sons, including himself, to provide for, in addition to his
quota of expenditure required for State purposes, such as
General Government, Law and Protection, including Gaols,
Military and Naval Defences, Police, Education, Public Hos-
pitals, Asylums, support of Paupers, &c.
It is obvious, therefore, that when fairly employed in this
branch of labour —making boots and shoes—he is not merely
rendering reciprocal services to his countrymen, but he helps
them to provide for such expenditure as the requirement of
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


the particular State demands. The greater the effort or
energy expended by him during the year, the greater is the
value of products by him added to the common wealth, in all
these respects, in addition to the important part of support of
the four dependants specially related to him.
Under ordinary circumstances (excluding foreign interfer-
ence, and making due allowance for special skill), all branches
of services within a certain country are paid at rates of
wages which are, broadly speaking, correlative to effort or
time expended, and consequently so long as the rates of wages
are locally proportionate to definite effort and skill, it matters
not whether the average rate per hour be nominally high or
low, so long as expenditure is also determined locally by such
correlative conditions. Thus, take the following illustra-
tions : Suppose the price of bread is determined by a daily
effort of 10 hours, and that all other services are modified
and constantly exchanged in prices which, whether high or
low, are also proportional to the nominal price of, say, the
quarter of wheat. Under such circumstances it would not
matter to the shoemaker whether the nominal amount of his
wages was high or low, for it would have the same purchasing
power over the things which he required to satisfy the wants
of himself and family, besides the proportion required from
him for the service of the State. Thus, if the standard—
the quarter of wheat —bore always the same relation to his
remuneration for 10 hours labour and to the various items of
his expenditure, it mattered not a whit to him whether the
nominal money cost of wheat was high or low. In Australia
the average relation between a breadwinner’s effort expended
and a quarter of wheat usually represents hours labour,
equal to 5i days labour (8 hours) nearly. If, therefore, the
quarter of wheat, and other things (including expenditure)
always bore a corresponding relation to each other, as 44-|
hours common labour bears as the equivalent to one quarter
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


wheat, it follows of necessity that nominal prices, whether
high or low, would not increase or decrease his receipts or
expenditure, nor his average gains or losses. Thus, so far,
the various divisions of labour within any one State would
never be affected in reciprocal interchanges with each other by
alteration in the nominal cost of services, so long as the altera-
tion in cost was a general one within the State, and governed
solely by local natural conditions. But a different result
would follow, so far as the shoemaker is concerned, if manu-
factured boots and shoes were largely introduced from a coun-
try where nominal money prices were generally much lower,
or where the average breadwinners of the population—
reduced to a perilous condition —were forced to increase their
expenditure of daily effort relative to the standard of cost
of one quarter of wheat to 89 hours, or 7 days labour of
12 hours per day. The local shoemaker would not have the
advantage of distance and cost of transit, as in the case of the
local quarryman or coal-miner, for shoes and boots can be
transferred long distances at a relatively small cost, and
hence, if not protected in some other way, the local shoemaker
would be unable to compete with the foreign low-paid
worker. Not only would he have to increase his efforts to
the same extent as the foreign competitor, but, were it not
impossible, he would have to exceed his efforts before he could
drive the foreign competitor from the field; failing this he
would be reduced perhaps to half-time employment at the
foreign rate of wages, and, probably, soon he and his family,
overwhelmed with poverty, would become local victims to
competition; and instead of being a help to the State, would
become dependants upon the rest of the breadwinners, thus
increasing their State burdens.
It is usual with theorists to talk lightly of the mobility of
labour under such circumstances, and to show that the local
shoemaker, finding himself unable to compete in his capacity
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


as shoemaker, would at once transfer his services to some
other branch of labour, where it is supposed by theorists that
there is always some providential provision. But all such
writers do not seem to be aware that in a country where manu-
facturing industries do not dominate, there is a tendency to
narrow the scope of operations, and to close more and more
the doors of entrance to the remaining branches of active
industries in proportion to the number of local industries actu-
ally driven out of existence by the influx of foreign manu-
factures. This is undoubted so far as the local market is
concerned. No one can affirm with reason that an industry
driven out does not correspondingly delimit the demand upon
the local market. Logically, therefore, the only direction in
which our shoemaker could maintain his existence as a bread-
winner would be —(1) to convert himself into a labourer in
raw products, for which there is still a profitable demand in
foreign markets; (2) transport himself and his family to a
country where his particular services are in demand; or (3)
starve or become dependent paupers supported by the local
State, already too heavily burdened by poor rates, &c.
In theoretical discussion this case would be disposed of by
wordy wrangling, or special pleading; indictment of the
capacity or lack of reasoning power of opponents; references
to alleged harmonies of competition; and to dogmas and
general conclusions of various political economists of accepted
authority.
The usual ruts of controversy may afford ample oppor-
tunities for theorists to display literary skill, aided by the
usual handy assortment of stock illustrations. But instead
of a literary sham-fight, let the theorist enter into the real
difficulties by discussing the matter practically with the dis-
tressed shoemaker. For this purpose we will take a common
incident in these colonies.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


A Deputation From the Shoemakers Driven out of
Employment by Competition with Cheap Foreign
Manufactures.
(Shoemaker, Spokesman for Deputation. Theorist, representing
the Government.)
Shoemaker . —On behalf of myself and my distressed fellow-
workmen and their families, I have been asked to represent
to the Government the terrible distress into which we have
fallen by the influx of manufactures of boot and shoes from
Europe at such low prices that we have not only been
knocked off employment by local manufacturers, who were
unable to compete with foreign houses, but we find that as
individual workmen, with such high ruling rates in rent, cloth-
ing, and other necessaries, besides a high local taxation,
we are unable to earn enough to maintain ourselves and
families—even if we were able to get full employment at the
foreign selling prices.
Theorist. —I sympathise deeply with your distress, but we
cannot interfere with the laws of free interchange. You must
therefore seek employment in some other way.
Shoemaker. —But we cannot turn our hands to another
trade, and even if we tried, we would have to spend years as
apprentices. Even in our own trade we had as young men
to spend three or four years as apprentices, partly or wholly
supported the while by our parents. Now we have no such
help. On the contrary, we are each burdened with the sup-
port of a family. Even if we could manage for ourselves,
what is to become of our families in the meantime ?
Theorist. —l admit this difficulty, but is there not plenty
of work open to you in this country, where you could turn
your labour to account where no special skill is required, or,
at any rate, where bone and muscle is all that is necessary ?
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Shoemaker. —True, in time some of us might obtain work
as labourers in the field among farmers, or on public works
or mines; but the failure in our own industry, in such a
thinly populated country, causes a depression in nearly all
local occupations; for it must be admitted a considerable
portion of the products of other trades and industries have
been directly affected by our distress and lessened consumption
due to our lack of purchasing power. Besides, I have been
told by farmers that they have themselves long struggled
with adverse circumstances in competing against more
favoured agriculturists in America —who are able to sell in
European markets —our only customers—at prices which tend
to become lower year by year, and if a local market is not soon
established, many of them will have to give in. If other
trades in turn are crushed by foreign competition as we have
been, what hope have the farmers of holding on, let alone the
outlook for their own children, where every branch of indus-
try seems to be already overstocked, even in this rich and
extensive country, with a sparse population. In addition to
what I have stated, I am informed by those who have given
much attention to agriculture, that there is only a limited
amount of land whereon agriculture might be successfully
carried on, but this form of industry will not admit of the
employment of more than 35 persons to the square mile of
land in cultivation, and if this be so, and if farmers cannot
exchange products of the same kind with each other, how can
a local market become a possibility in the absence of a local
community of trades and manufactures ?
Theorist. —I admit that the home-trader and home-work-
man may temporarily suffer loss from the competition of
foreign traders and workmen in the same branch of industry;
but it must be remembered that everything will again be
adjusted, because capital is constantly exerting a tendency to
smoothe down any temporary inequality in the profits
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


of different trades. Even if you suffer from foreign importa-
tions the Government is not bound to protect you; for there
can be no right which has a juster claim than that every indi-
vidual of the community should be freely permitted to obtain
commodities where he can buy them on the cheapest terms,
and to sell them where he can realise the highest price.
Shoemaker . —lt is easy for theorists to write such things.
I am unable to understand exactly what you mean by suffer-
ing a temporary loss, or what the process may be which you
euphoniously term a tendency to smoothe down any tempor-
ary inequality. I and my fellow-workmen are now unem-
ployed. Many of us, with our families, are in great distress.
Without instant employment or relief from some source many
of us will die of starvation. We have no means, and if we
had we do not know where to go to better our miserable con-
dition. Do you mean if many of us succumb and die from
want and misery, thereby thinning our own ranks as com-
petitors for the existing small field of employment still
remaining—that this is the smoothing down process to which
we are referred for comfort. Good Heavens, surely not this ?
Remember that we are human beings, not machines. The
machine may stand idle for a time and live; men cannot.
Friction in inanimate machinery means dissipation of power
in heat. With men, friction means distress, misery, and
death. Men are not machines, and loose analogies based
upon the laws of physical processes cannot be grimly applied
to men fighting for life and exposed to suffering. You say
that Government is not bound to protect its own workmen,
and that there can be no right having a juster claim than
that every individual should have the most absolute freedom
in buying in the cheapest market and selling in the dearest,
irrespective of any local claims of sympathy, or national or
racial ties of common interest. Such a commercial law, not
bond, cannot be consistent with the conditions which neces-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


sitate the maintenance, defence, and independence of dis-
connected individual nationalities. To be logical, it would
necessitate the breaking down of all individual States, all
individual race conglomerations, and the fusing of all human
elements into one grand State of the world. Until that time
arrives there must of necessity be localised interests governed
by the same local general conditions which maintain separate
nationalities. All the social organisations of the State, sucli
as Railways, Roads, Bridges, Harbours, Post and Telegraph,
Schools, Defence and Protection, Poor Laws, &c., can only
be logically maintained upon the admitted necessity of some
common local national interest, having special concern for
the general welfare of the particular nation.; and these special
local interests are so intertwined by so many bonds more
precious than mere questions regarding absolute cost of 'pro-
ducts in money , that it seems absurd to say that the destruc-
tion or suffering of any of its members is locally only of equal
concern to a corresponding evil in a foreign state similarly
constituted. The necessary gravitation and concentration of
interests and sympathies around home and fatherland are as
natural as perspective in optics; the greatest density must
be near the centre of —self, home and family —becoming
weaker and weaker as the relative rings of friends or rela-
tions, club, townsmen, nation, race, are passed through to
the thinner sympathies lying beyond, embracing humanity
generally, where foreign races and states are bound in; and
they themselves are related obversely to us in a similarly
graduated series of interests and sympathies. It is this grand
gravitation of human interests and sympathies which make
possible ideas and forces, which make home, friend, and
fatherland; and these —not nominal cost of products —are
the great factors which determine the energies and welfare
of any community. Commercial laws tend to destroy the
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


heart of all ideas which centre in home and fatherland, and
if the nation is to live, it must carefully guard against its
decrepitating influence. Its shuttle seems just as ready to
weave the shroud of a nation as to bind nations in bonds of
broader sympathies.
Dominating Wants Determine Occupations, and Neces-
sarily Produce Inequalities in the Form of Services.
Hitherto, in the writings of social reformers the greater
part of their attention has been confined to the monopoly
by the rich of the lands, houses, railways, and other instru-
ments connected with the production, security, and distribu-
tion of the necessary wants of human beings. It is generally
assumed that there is abundance of primary satisfactions for
each one of the aggregate products annually created were
more equitably distributed. But even of the necessary prim-
ary satisfactions were annually produced in sufficient quan-
tity for the wants of all, it would go to prove the curious and
inexplicable circumstance that the present haphazard train-
ing and supply and demand of those who are engaged, or who
are being trained to engage in the various divisions of labour,
are in perfect harmony with conditions which combine to
effect a result which might seem too formidable if undertaken
by the most absolute regulations of intelligent prevision. The
present supply of satisfactions is determined by the estimates
or combined action of self-interested producers. It cannot
be affirmed on the basis of producers’ self-interest, that wants
are produced with the sole idea of providing the highest quota
of satisfactions to each individual; at best they favour the
minimum supply, as self-interest is best rewarded by a keen
demand involving high prices; a result which would not be
attained if the maximum quota of satisfactions for each
individual was created. Of course, the absence of a perfect
scheme of combined prevision among producing competitors,
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


and the unforeseen variable effects springing from natural
causes year by year, often produce abundance, or superfluity,
or over-production, as it is termed; but this is a result not
premeditated; and although favourable to consumers for the
time being, it is a mere accident causing a fall in prices, and
is likely to be followed by purposeful under-production dur-
ing the succeeding period, in order to produce a straitened
market with a corresponding rise in prices; and results in a
certain reduction of the ideal quantity of satisfactions falling
to the lot of each consumer of the poorer classes. But this
tendency of self-interested 'producers, striving to produce
under the necessary requirement, is just the very condition
for involving the poor in the continual battle with poverty
and want;* and all that can be said in favour of self-interest,
is that hitherto there has been no better method devised
which would so effectually serve the majority of human
beings.
Is it to be wondered, then, that the less fit —happily a
minority- —in the struggle for existence should at times cruelly
feel pinching want, when upon them must fall the evil of the
barely sufficing aggregate or scarcity, the idea] creation which
the self-interested producer strives for ?
It has been shown that the supply of wants is at present
alone roughly predetermined by the self-interested calculations
of producers, and that their aim is to extend the field of
production as far as they can in safety to themselves; and
that means as near an approach to a full supply as will ensure
good prices, involving a tight market, or scarcity. Consumers
who desire abundance do not determine the forthcoming sup-
plies. Producers’ interests, therefore, are antagonistic to any
* Bastiat even is forced to admit that “ antagonistic desires cannot
at one and the same time coincide with the general good.” . . . .
“As a purchaser he desires abundance; as a seller scarcity. . . . the
wishes and desires of the consumers are those which are in harmony
with public interest.”
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


social ideal which would bring the highest quota of necessary
satisfactions easily within the reach of all men. Therefore,
so long as producers’ self-interest rules supreme in the creation
of necessary products, so long must we expect the periodic
suffering and pinching of the lower stratum of the working
classes.
Food, clothing, houses, railways, steamboats, and the vari-
ous machines of production, are almost wholly regulated in
the interests of producers; competition alone preventing this
interest from working in too great antagonism to the interests
of consumers. Nearly all breadwinners, therefore, in detail
defeat to some extent their own ultimate interests as general
consumers, by regulating the production of supplies upon a
principle which is inimical to their interests as consumers.
Nor is this the only evil. All wages —breadwinners must
produce, or serve to produce, before they can earn the right
to share or consume the fruits of production. But the num-
ber of those actually employed depend almost wholly upon
the self-interest of the large capitalist producers.
It is not the interest of large capitalist producers to pro-
vide the full quota of wage-earning employment to all bread-
winners. The larger the number of fully employed labourers
the keener is the demand for products, and indirectly this
may have some influence upon certain producers. But this
indirect consideration is too feeble to interest producers in
any scheme for the general good which might be directed to
ensure full employment to all breadwinners. It is manifest,
therefore, that in the present scheme of the division of labour
there are two ugly defects. First —there is no interest intel-
ligently organised to train and determine the occupations of
the future breadwinners according to natural proportions.
Second —the only existing agencies which determine the
extent of employment are guided by a principle which has for
its object neither the supply of the highest quota of satisfac-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


tion to consumers, nor the more needful provision for secur-
ing employment to all breadwinners. In the latter case com-
petition, instead of befriending the wage-earner and depend-
ants as consumers, operates all the more harshly upon the
larger number who are handicapped in the race by aimless
training, or no training, for the nature of services that might
possibly be otherwise open to some of them.
Utopian Schemes of Socialists.
It is not a matter for surprise, therefore, that the mass of
wage-earners should readily sympathise with every vague
Utopian scheme of the Socialists, which holds out, however
faultily, some promise or plan for dealing more effectually
with the root difficulties which affect them most nearly, viz.,
security of employment; protection from over competition;
shorter hours labour with more adequate remuneration; redis-
tribution of wealth, &c.
But it is needless to point out that before the redistribution
of the aggregate of all forms of existing wealth of exchange
(so-called) can be dealt with, it must be clear that this wealth
consists of such forms as might effectually satisfy all the
primary wants and comfort of human beings. That existing
wealth in exchange , even if equally distributed, would fulfil
this most necessary provision, is a pure assumption.
It has already been shown that a great part of the existing
nominal wealth of exchange, largely owned by the rich,
consists of the mere tools and instruments of production, and
that the real wealth, appropriated as consumable wealth or
primary satisfaction, is already more widely and evenly dis-
tributed than is generally supposed. Even under the most
thorough Socialistic scheme this form of wealth would be far
less generally distributed than at present; for, according to
such a scheme, it would be wholly reserved in the hands
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


of the Executive Government. It is utterly misleading to
reckon upon the existing wealth of capitalists as a source
foi raising the quota of the real consumable and primary
satisfactions. The only distribution possible in this respect
would be the empty idea of part ownership. It is the increase
to necessary current productions designed for actual con-
sumption material satisfactions—which alone can raise the
average standard of primary satisfactions, and so dispose of
material want, or poverty and distress. The question there-
fore arises. Suppose that such a scheme were practicable,
would the producing energies of men be greater and more
effective than under the Scheme of Competition, Liberty, Right
of Inheritance, Property Right, or Individualism, as it is
called ? To be more effective in one essential it must utterly
fail in the other. The workers must be trained and allocated
to specific occupations in strict conformity to the amount and
nature of the labour actually required to produce the primary
satisfactions and comforts desired. Training for every specific
occupation requires considerable time; but for the occupa-
tions of skill a large amount of time must be consumed in
acquiring the necessary training, irrespective of question with
regard to the unequal distribution of capacity.
Now, on the basis of equality, it may be easy to divide pro-
ducts; that, according to actual needs is simple enough,
involving no insuperable difficulty. But what about the allo-
cation to different employment ? How can the easy, the
refined, and the skilled occupations be allocated on any scheme
of equality ? The majority must, as heretofore, stveat at the
hard and dirty forms of labour. But what power, or what
plan can be devised which will enable any elective executive
to doom once and for ever the majority of learners and workers
to the hard and irksome occupations, and to fix the minority
in the refined, the easy, and skilled services
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Suppose it were for a time instituted, how long would the
unfortunate majority be content to submit to their lot before
an irresistable cry for redistribution of occupations arose; and
if it arose, where is the force stronger than the majority of
freemen to prevent the breakdown of the social organisation
necessary to produce the supply of primary satisfactions
according to individual needs ? What compensation can be
given to the masses toiling in the more wearisome occupations ?
Extra allowance of satisfactions cannot be thought of, for that
would destroy the coveted ideal of equality in the distribution
of satisfactions according to needs. Shorter hours cannot be
allowed without trenching upon equality of leisure.
The unequal distribution of natural capacity, and the time
necessary to acquire knowledge of more than one technical
branch of skilled employment, make it impossible to share in
turn for a time all possible forms of labour. In short, the
practical difficulties standing in the way of equality in the
allocation of employments appear to be insuperable, and would
most certainly, if there were no other objection, destroy any
social organisation on a large scale which had been courageous
enough to attempt it. Reference to simple communities —as
in America —following agricultural pursuits mainly, and not
of themselves fulfilling for themselves the whole round of
human wants, are utterly misleading. Such small com-
munities are composed of a peculiar select class, who volun-
tarily bind themselves to a more or less ascetic life, and all
such partial attempts tend to perish from lack of internal
vitality. With a large mixed body of men embracing all
occupations and endowed with ordinary passions and desires,
the results would be chaotic and disastrous in the extreme.
One effect, terrible to contemplate, would seem to be
inevitable, viz., that the indiscriminate distribution of pro-
ducts among all men would destroy the major source of sav-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


mgs at present so largely devoted to the creation and main-
tenancy of the powerful and costly auxiliary aids to human
labour; and the slight individual gain per head in material
satisfaction would only be of a very temporary character, for
it would soon be lost by the new impulse given to the improvi-
dent to rapidly increase their numbers.
What Would be the Probable Effect Upon Social Well-
being if the Major Source of Savings were Destroyed ?
In another place it has been indicated that the mere “ two
hands, or the unaided labour of man, would not only fail to
produce the average comforts and luxuries now enjoyed by
nearly all classes of men, but more calamitous still—they
would fail to produce the 'prime necessaries of life in sufficient
quantity to maintain the lives of the existing population.
Defects in the existing scheme of civilisation—some of which
seem to be ineradicable—may be truly charged yearly with
the destruction of thousands of valuable lives, but were the
present major source of savings dissipated or destroyed by
equality in share of earnings—either by lowering the powers
of production, or by slightly raising temporarily the average
amount of satisfactions consumed or enjoyed —the new con-
ditions (equality of earnings) would be a blight and a curse;
for while the existing defects in distribution may be the cause
of the misery and destruction of thousands of valuable lives,
the equality scheme would certainly entail the misery and
destruction of millions now living in a state of comparative
comfort.
Many who fail to ponder upon these root difficulties may
exclaim: “ How can you explain this paradox? Why should
the fairer distribution of wealth (that according to actual,
individual needs, without regard to inequalities of natural'
powers, capacities, or inheritance)—raising the average com-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


fort of the majority, and lowering the superfluous and luxu-
rious satisfactions of the minority—be productive of such
disaster?” The answer is plain enough. The power to
effect large savings or to create the more costly auxiliaries
of labour depends mainly upon the existence of specially
favourable conditions.
1. The desire to accumulate or save can only become strong
enough to be effective when the stronger desires for primary
satisfactions are appeased.
2. Savings or accumulations, therefore, can never be pro-
duced by labourers or others whose earnings do not exceed
the supply necessary to satisfy the three primary wants. The
majority of breadwinners are always in this hand to mouth
condition, and rarely of themselves are able to contribute to
the maintenance and increase of machines and instruments to
serve as auxiliaries of production to future labour. They,
however, in their social relations more than contribute the
average share of the future surplus workers, whose efforts
must be proportionately supplemented by capital and power-
multiplying instruments, if they are to enjoy the same or a
further improved condition.
Those workers whose earnings are sufficient to provide
comforts beyond the limits of bare prime necessaries, may,
however, by self-denial in the satisfactions of comforts, lay by
a small store of savings, which in time may swell into such
valuable auxiliaries to earnings, that the self-denial in
comforts hitherto may be rewarded in the greater satisfac-
tion of comforts in the future; and even add considerably to
the store of: wealth which may be converted into the more
permanent capitalised auxiliary instruments of power, which
will benefit the generations coming after them.
Those, however, who contribute most largely to the creation
of the permanent instruments which add unknown power to
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


the efforts of hand labour, are chiefly those who either have
inherited these or similar creations from their ancestors, or
who by extraordinary energy, skill, or self-denial, or all
together, in the earlier part of their lives, are now enabled,
after satisfying the three primary wants and comforts, to
indulge the prevailing passion of comfortable people, i.e.,
the accumulation of wealth or power over wealth. This pas-
sion in itself is at this stage undoubtedly a personal luxury ;
but, unlike the luxuries which are directed to greater personal
consumption, it is fortunately directed to that form
of immaterial enjoyment which springs from the knowledge
that the owner possesses the power to direct the mode, or
secure the best conditions, in which wealth may be further
employed. Fortunately for the world at large, self-interest
at this stage converts into a virtue what otherwise would be
a vice : for the passion to further secure the luxury of power
over wealth, and to augment it, restricts personal indulgence
in further consuming the material fruits of labour and the
material gratuitous stores of nature, and runs parallel with
that course which favours increased production relative to
numbers, involving the improvement of the social and eco-
nomic condition of all labourers;' i.e., the wealthy man or
industrial chief does not, or cannot, increase his own personal
consumption of the material fruits of labour, skill, enterprise,
and the gratuitous gifts of nature beyond a moderate stand-
ard; the unconsumed material surplus—by passion, self-
interest, and even the better motives —is necessarily devoted
to multiplying and sustaining the inanimate, costly, and
powerful permanent aids to human productive power, which
alone distinguishes civilised populous communities from those
of the miserable and bare-handed savage, whose command of
a continent of the richest land upon the globe is too feeble to
support in comfort a few insignificant wandering tribes.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Anterior Savings the True Source of Capital Invested
in the Creation and Distribution of Necessary Satis-
factions.
Capital invested in land, railways, ships, canals, mines,
mills, &c., and all labour-aiding machines and instruments
devoted to the production and distribution of man’s satis-
factions, are the fruits of that portion of the products of
anterior labour saved from the actual earners’ consumption,
and devoted or transformed into permanent and powerful
skilled auxiliaries of 'present labour ; and consequently it is
an error to assume, as many do, that such forms of capital
are the fruits of the major part of anterior labour already
absorbed in current personal consumption.
That is—the capital in machines and instruments now
devoted to production and distribution is derived from the
saved products of anterior labour engaged in production,
and not from the efforts of such labour necessarily absorbed
in sustaining the said labours. It is true in one sense that
all products, whether saved, transformed, or consumed, are
obtained by means of labour; but it is equally true that only
a minor portion of the products of labour is yearly devoted
to fixed instruments to act as auxiliaries to future labour;
and this minor portion is wholly derived from products of
labour and skill saved from immediate destruction or con-
sumption, and skilfully applied or directed to the creation
of fresh auxiliaries to labour.
It follows from these considerations that existing capital
so applied is wholly derived from providential savings and
skill , and that only labourers who have contributed to these
savings—with their natural representatives (inheritance) —
have any real claim to a corresponding right to its present
utilities and fruits.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Savings may be effected in various ways. They may be
effected by greater industry • by the devotion of former sav-
ings to appliances aiding production; by increase of skill; by
curtailing enjoyment in the consumption of satisfactions
beyond primary needs —or by a combination of all these;
thus —
Let I = Industry or energy expended.
K = Skill.
A = Skilled appliances or aids, the fruit of anterior
providential savings.
C = Actual current consumption.
S = Current savings.
Then I K A C = S, or current savings.
So long as C or current consumption absorbs all the powers
of IK A there can be no savings. When C exceeds IK A,
debt, pauperism, crime, or death, may be the result.
When I K A exceeds C, there must be prosperity and aug-
mentation of the powers for producing more wealth.
The maximum savings are effected when I K A are at the
maximum ( ir ) and Cis at the minimum ( u ) necessary to
secure the satisfaction of primary wants; thus —
I m K m A ll C u = Maximum of savings.
#
But if the power of C to waste, destroy, or consume the
results of IKA be indefinitely increased, say, to ( x ) power,
there may be no balance or savings; thus —
jm K ra A m C x O Savings.
That is, the stage of no savings is produced by the absorp-
tion or consumption of a very great amount of luxurious satis-
factions.
But this state of no savings, or the minimum of savings,
may be, and is, more frequently the result of the diminished n
powers of I K A with the minimum of C, or minimum stage.
I n K n A n —C n = O Savings.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


We have here four or five important conditions affecting the
appropriation of the fruits of industry, skill, and skilled aux-
iliary appliances and aids.
C Minimum of satis-
(l) l m K m A m C n = < factions and maxi-
f mum of savings,
i Maximum of satis-
I" K ll A m C n (*2) or I m K m A m —o= factions and no
( savings.
i Minimum of satis-
factions and in-
crease of savings.
(4) I m K m A n C ta =) No savings, and
(5) I n K u A n —C n = j poverty.
The first group is composed almost entirely of rich
capitalists possessing skill, energy, and living moderately or
abstemiously.
The second group is composed of rich capitalists possessing
skill and energy, but living in extravagance.
The third group is composed of skilled minds and hands,
middlemen, professional men, and better class of skilled
labourers living moderately within their means.
The fourth group, the same as the last, but living up to
their means, or lacking skill or energy. *
The fifth group is composed of unskilled workmen lacking
industry or lacking employment, or skilled workmen lacking
energy or employment, or improvident in their manner of
living.
Whatever defects spring from riches there is this to be said
in its favour—that by passion for accumulation or savings of
its owners it secures the necessary fund to invest in the expen-
sive tools and instruments of production, without which the
primary wants of the existing population could not be sup-
plied. The desire to sacrifice present ease to future benefit
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


is confined to the few, and if the products were generally
distributed in equal proportion they would be almost entirely
lost by slightly raising for the moment the average consump-
tion of satisfactions; and this slight advantage would soon be
dissipated by the impulse which it would give to the masses
of improvident persons—in heightening the marriage rate,
and causing a rapid increase of population or mouths to be
fed.
FALLACIES OF THE SINGLE TAX PANACEA.
Mr. Henry George’s name among modern writers stands
pre-eminent in the advocacy of the abolition of the existing
modes of levying taxes mainly derived from land and pro-
perty, luxuries, and foreign products, and substituting for
the same a direct tax upon the value of the land,* minus such
tangible artificial additions to its value that may be truly
estimated as improvements solely created by the labour or
services of man. Waiving the serious objection at the thres-
hold of this proposal, viz., the difficulty—nay, the impos-
sibility —of justly determining the proportional values of the
land and the improvements added to it by man’s services.
Let us examine it fairly in the light of the various canons of
taxation which Mr. George himself quotes with approval:
thus p. 63 (People’s Edition), “ Progress and Poverty,” he
affirms :
“ The best tax by which public revenues can be raised is
evidently that which will closest conform to the following
conditions :
1. That it bear as lightly as possible upon production
so at least to check the increases of the general fund from
which taxes must be paid and the community maintained.
* That means in practice a tax upon local products in lieu of a tax
upon foreign products.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


2. That it be easily and cheaply collected and falls as
directly upon the ultimate taxpayers, so as to take from
the people as little as possible in addition to what it
yields the Government.
3. That it be certain, so as to give the least oppor-
tunity for tyranny and corruption on the part of officials,,
and the least temptation to law-breaking and evasion on
the part of the taxpayers.
4. That it bear equally, so as to give no citizen an
advantage, or put any at a disadvantage, as compared
with others.”
The Effect of the Single Land Tax upon Production.
Mr. George asserts, without, the slightest attempt to show
by argument or demonstration, that “ Taxes on the value of
land not only do not check production, as do most other
taxes, but they tend to increase production by destroying
speculative rent.” This, certainly, is one of the most absurd
and fallacious assumptions that could be made, and yet, with-
out reason or argument, Mr. George supposes that we can at
once build upon this rotten foundation without question or
hesitation. He evidently thinks that different names for the
same thing have some occult power to alter the inevitable effects
due to the thing per se, and not to the name applied to it.
This is the fault of all visionary theorists. Let us brush away
the thimble-rig of words and terms, and come at once to plain
practical issues. No person can become a successful primary
producer among other primary producer-competitors, unless
he possesses the necessary capital and speculative skill. There
is no business so uncertain in its results as farming, both as
regards total income and total expenditure. More especially
do these uncertainties apply to the enterprising farmer, who
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


ventures into the speculation of entering upon virgin bush
land with the view of earning a living for himself and his
family ultimately from the profits derived from the sales of
cultivated 'products. This profit consists entirely of the mar-
gin which the aggregate of his yearly revenue from sale of
products shows above the aggregate of his yearly expenditure.
It is the amount of the several items of revenue and expendi-
ture which determines his pro-fit or his loss, and not the
specific nature of the various items of revenue and expendi-
ture.
All items of expense, including profit, must come out of
products, or he will speedily become bankrupt and cease to be
a producer. Consequently, all products embody all charges,
whether interest, mortgage, rent, tax, wages, other working
expenses, and cost of farmer’s own services as director and
speculator, viz., profit.
Rent Versus Single Tax.
Rent adjusts itself to the producing capabilities of the land.
But a single national tax upon the land would be likely to
prove a more formidable check to the cultivation of the soil
or local production than the most heavy form of rent.
Rent is admittedly determined by the average margin left
from the sale of products, after giving the working expenses
of the farm phis the minimum profit to the working farmer.
It cannot seriously affect production without destroying itself,
and hence it must accommodate itself to the said margin,
even though it should fall to rent zero. The latter stage, if
reached, might check production, but so long as any margin
remained production would be determined by the capabilities
of the land and the enterprise and skill of the farmer. There
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


is, therefore, no predetermined charge fixed in character ,
forming a charge on production in the shape of rent. On
the contrary, it fluctuates in time in correspondence with the
revenue yielded from the sale of its products. Rent rising,
with relative improvement, either in price of products or
with relative decrease in the cost of working the farm, due to
improved machines or methods of cultivation; rent falling
with the reverse of these conditions. On the whole, there-
fore, rent, interest, mortgage, and working farmers’ share
of profit resolve themselves into mere subdivisions of the total
profit due to farm speculations drawn from sale of products,
the balance of sale of products being absorbed by wages and
miscellaneous expenses of working, all entirely governed by,
and not exceeding, the total revenue of products, the amount
of which is regulated by the local competition of similar goods
that may be conveyed in any market from foreign as well as
local sources. It is absurd, therefore, to suppose that a tax
upon land does not enter into the ultimate cost of the pro-
duct just as surely as the items of charge known under the
names of interest, mortgage, wages of farm servants, profit
of farmer; for as soon as the prices governed by local and
foreign competition fail to cover all the items of expenditure
and minimum of profit, so soon will a check appear to Pro-
duction, so far as the land which is so affected is concerned.
There is no trick of words about this result. Every practical
farmer knows it too well, although he may not understand
the word-splitting and theory-chopping of some speculative
economists. Thus, with average energy and skill, if the pro-
duce per year of a grain farm at current prices only covers
the minimum of wages and ordinary working expenses, and
minimum of profit to farmer by £SO, then such farm could
only yield that sum for all other charges, whether tax, rent,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


£
s.
T ax
12
10
Rent
12
10
Mortgage
12
10
Interest
12
10
Total
£50
0
Or simply thus :
£
s.
Tax
50
0
Rent
nil
Mortgage
nil
Interest ...
nil
Total
£50
0
mortgage, or interest. It is immaterial to the farmer whether
the charges be distributed over all these items, thus:
The effect upon production, producer, and consumer would
be exactly the same. If this sum of £SO could be disposed
of altogether it would be possible for the farmer to reduce to
that extent the price of products to consumer, but the con-
sumer must necessarily pay for it so long as it remains a
charge either as tax, rent, interest, or mortgage. It is the
amount remaining as a charge that concerns the producer and
the consumer, and not the nature or name of the item forming
the said charge.
So long, therefore, as foreign products are not artificially
excluded from local markets the consumer is perfectly secure
against the monopolists of local rents raising the price of
products by arbitrary increases to rent.
But a very different conclusion must be arrived at if rental
and other charges, such as interest or mortgage, are abolished,
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


and merged in the shape of a single tax upon land. In the
first place, if we abolish all burdens on land in the shape of
rent or mortgage—How are we to do so ? In these colonies
at least, the right to the rent of land has been acquired by
honest purchase. Even now the State in Tasmania derived
(in the year 1888) a revenue of £77,504 from rental and fresh
sales of land; a sum equivalent to 19'09, or nearly 20 per
cent, of the total yearly taxation. In the 10 years ending
1888 the State derived a revenue of £646,497 from the same
source; and yet, after taking from honest purchasers this
original value of the land, Mr. Henry George and his fol-
lowers would urge upon the State to retain the original pur-
chasers’ money, and wrest from them all rights in land thus
acquired without compensation. Such a proceeding would be
revolting to all who possess any remaining trace of the sense
of honour. The hypocrisy of glossing over such wholesale
robbery by any fine-sounding phrase only shows how far the
modern robber has fallen from his ancient prototype, who,
at least, had the courage to consent to an appropriate name
for his violence and dishonesty. We have no representatives
of feudal lords in these colonies, and if we had, the proprietors
of the land for the time being are as much and as little their
representatives as any other capitalist; for every year a con-
siderable portion of the land changes hands by fair purchase,
and there are now few owners of land who can trace their land
to the State by purchase or grant, who have not parted with
it on fair terms of risk-purchase to those who amassed wealth
from other sources of wealth and enterprise. The condition
of society, if it is to be improved, cannot be ameliorated by
State robbery or violence. There is, therefore, only one hon-
ourable course for the Single Tax theorists to adopt, viz., to
compensate the existing owners for the loss of their rightly
acquired property. This course would involve capitalising
the land. Now, supposing this to be done, and that we made
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


some profit by borrowing, say, at 34 per cent, (allowing that
the revolutionary scheme has not the immediate effect of
destroying our credit), what would be the sum to provide for?
The last estimate of private property in Tasmania is stated to
be £21,386,848, and it will be near enough the mark to state
that 40 per cent, of this value refers to land minus improve-
ments. This represents a capital sum of £8,554,739. Even
if we raised this sum at 3| per cent, par, it would increase
our existing charge for interest on debt by £299,415.
Single Tax Fixed in Character Determined by the Needs
for Public Expenditure Without Regard to the
Capabilities of the Land or to its Power to Sustain
the Burden so Imposed.
But if we are to meet the demands of public expenditure
we must concentrate all the other modes of raising revenue
from taxes and land sales in one single tax or burden upon
the land. At present the revenue raised in this way in Tas-
mania amounts to £455,027 per year. If to this we add the
fresh charge for land transfer to the State, the tax upon
land would be necessarily raised to £754,443. The present
value of the annual ratable value, minus improvements, is
estimated to be £440,800. It would, therefore, follow that
the direct burden upon land would be raised £313,643 per
year , or 71 per cent, above the burden now imposed upon it by
way of rent; or if we take the land and improvements, it
would mean an increase of 28’45 per cent, on land and its
improvements above the burden at present imposed due to
rental. It is true there would be some set-off to this in the
abolition of other forms of taxation, at present mainly
derived from the luxurious consumption of spirits and
tobacco, &c., averaging £2 16s. 2d. per head per year, or
£6 ss. Bd. per breadwinner , £ll 4s. Bd. per family of four
persons, or £l4 13s. lOd. per household.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Capital Value.
Annual
Bent
of
House.
The same as affected
by Land Tax.
Annual
Bent
of
House.
In-
crease.
Per
cent.
Land.
House.
Land.
House.
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
A
200
2000
110
342
2000
117
7
6-3
B
200
1500
85
342
1500
92
7
8-2
C
200
1200
70
342
1200
77
7
10-
D
200
1000
60
342
1000
67
7
11-6
E
200
500
35
342
500
42
7
20-
F
200
300
25
342
300
32
7
28-
G
200
200
20
342
200
27
7
35 *
,,
Land 40 feet frontage
on street same block.
But it must be borne in mind that at present the taxes
actually paid by any one individual, by an inevitable law, is
adjusted to the means of the individual. For example, the
large part of the necessaries of a poor man is not taxed—
bread, meat, vegetables, and such like —and even on the tax-
able articles the amount of tax is proportionate to the amount
the individual is enabled to expend upon taxable articles,
principally drink and tobacco. A non-drinker and non-
tobacco smoker, therefore, at his own pleasure, escapes the
greater part of the State tax. In this way any persons, by the
present mode of taxes, need in case of distress, pay only a
very small portion of his income in taxes.
But in the case of a single tax upon land (ground rent) the
poor man in a four-roomed weatherboard hut might have to
pay the same amount of tax as his rich neighbour in a fine
house. Thus, take the following possible cases:
Thus, if the total rental be a fair index to the means of each
tenant, the table shows that the effect of the single tax in
adding £7 alike to rich and poor, would be only a relative
tax to the rich (a) of 6 per cent., while to the poor (g) it
would be equal to an increase of 35 per cent. Thus it would
appear that the single tax would violate the most valuable
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


canon of taxation—B, (Adam Smith). “ The subjects of
every State ought to contribute towards the support of the
Government as nearly as possible in proportion to their
respective abilities.” When we consider also that if the
farmer is able to add the increased burden of 28'45 per cent,
to his products (and if he fails by foreign competition to do
this, he can no longer carry on th© farming industry in Tas-
mania), we must also add 28'45 per cent, to all products of
Tasmania which the poor man’s family consumes, we perceive
at once that the single tax scheme would mainly fall with
cruel severity upon the poor man, and thus th© scheme, instead
of a boon, would be a curse to him, and perhaps check half
or most of our great producing industries. If our principal
industries were checked it would operate at once in throwing
a great part of the population out of employment. Even if
it only curtailed a labourer’s employment by 10 per cent, it
would have the effect of reducing his wages (at 6s. per day)
by 0’92 pence, nearly Id. per hour; while if th© whole land
rental were directly distributed among workmen yearly it
would only have the effect of raising their wages by 0’679d.,
or only | of a penny per hour.
As regards th© supposed effect of decreasing the cost of
collecting revenue, and preventing fraud, it would have the
opposite effect. Collection by Customs in Tasmania only
represents 2’B per cent, of the total revenue collected, as
against a charge of 5 per cent, for collection of Real Estate
Duties and Police Rate.
Thus the whole of the canons of taxation cited by Mr.
George would be violated by any single tax proposal.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Section III.
Observations on the Influence of Strikes upon Real
Wages
(From Proc. Roy. Soc., 1890, p,p. 195-217).
ORGANISED INDUSTRY A NECESSITY.
AT the present moment in Europe. America, and Austral-
asia, many industries are paralysed and the well-being
or comfort of thousands of families are more or less sacrificed
by organised or enforced idleness involving a considerable
diminution in the creation of commodities or real wealth.
These strikes, as they are termed, are entered upon by thou-
sands of honest, hardworking, peace-loving men. In loyalty
to their order and to their recognised leaders, they display
many characteristics which cannot but excite some degree of
wonder and admiration; for this voluntary suspension of the
means of livelihood to them not only involves unflinching
self-denial of ordinary comforts, but also the facing of a ter-
rible risk that in the dark, prolonged struggle, the lives of
those that make life dear to them may be crushed and over-
whelmed by want and misery.
Facing such risks, it is only natural that the ordinarily
peaceable man should become restless and excited, nay, vio-
lent, when the campaign of self-sacrifice and loyalty to their
fellows seems about to be jeopardised by the opposing action
of those who seem to them to be lawless renegades of their
order.


Those of the community whose interests .are in conflict or
are not supposed to be immediately affected by a combined
strike—whether for shorter hours, resistance to the lowering
of the rate of wages, or the raising of wages—may be sur-
prised and may condemn “ unionists ” on strike for violently
opposing the filling up of their places by so-called outsiders,
freemen, non-unionists, or blacklegs: but a little considera-
tion from the standpoint of “ Put yourself in his place ” will
reveal much that tends to palliate their modes of action or
behaviour, if it does not exonerate or justify them. Be it
remembered that their hope of success entirely depends upon
their loyalty to each other under the most severe strain to
human beings, viz., privation and misery; that their battle
squares, if broken, entails defeat; that the breaking away
of any of their number or the intrusion of opposing outsiders
destroys all their hopes, makes their prolonged sacrifice of no
avail, and leaves them in a much worse position than at first.
On the other hand (making allowance for mistakes in judg-
ment), there is much that is admirable in the sympathetic,
sacrificing support of brother workmen in other trades or
divisions of labour, who, although not themselves immediately
concerned, yet voluntarily resolve to help by docking Is. per
week from their own small earnings : nay, often sacrifice for
a time their earnings, altogether, where it is thought that a
strike in their own branch, would serve more speedily to bring
their brother-workers’ campaign to a successful conclusion.
In the present day —with its hard and fast divisions of
labour, its fluctuations of demand and supply, its hordes of
unemployed, and its crushing competitive rings and interests—
the intelligent wage-earner perceives plainly enough that as
a unit he is perfectly helpless, and that he can only succeed in
bearing up against opposing organised interests by a similarly
organised action.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


No one who has closely followed the struggles of workmen
during the last 30 years can fail to perceive that upon this
organisation (solidarity) rests the whole strength of their
position in the industrial scheme, and that anything which
tends to weaken or demoralise their centres of organisation,
meets with their most strenuous resistance; for it is manifest
to them that the breaking or weakening of the heart or centre
of their organisation detaches them again to helpless units who
are unable to enforce any claim whatever.
It will be conceded, therefore, when it is proposed to ask
the question, Can Strikes Raise Real Wages of Wage-earners
All Round? that the writer is one who regards combination
or co-operation amongst wage-earners as of paramount neces-
sity to them, and thar when all better modes of appeal for
reasonable concessions are unavailing, the last and terrible
resort “to strike ” may in certain cases not only be justifiable
but imperative.
Strikes Can Only Succeed in Raising Real Wages When
it is Partial or Confined to Industries that Comprise
a Small Proportion of the Community.
While much has been granted in favour of organisation,
and the right to resort to strikes under certain circumstances,
it cannot be concealed that many expect by organised strikes
to effect what is plainly an utter impossibility, even if
employers gave way at every point.
A strike may be the means of successfully raising the
status of some branches of labour that are comparatively
underpaid or overworked; it may raise the real wages of a
particular country or locality which formerly laboured under
the average remuneration of other countries; it may tem-
porarily be the means of forcing the capitalist or employer to
give a fairer or larger share of the profits of capital and
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


labour— i.e., machinery plant, skill, and labour—but from
the very nature of the common source of all profit and wages
(viz., the current -products created by the combined services
of capital—instruments—and labour), strikes cannot raise
the real wages of all wage-earners.
In other words, it is possible to regulate and alter the dis-
tribution of the aggregate wealth of consumable necessaries of
life, but so long as this aggregate wealth fails to be increased
per capita per year, strikes cannot increase the real wages or
the purchasing power of a day’s labour of all wage-earners.
In a word, they cannot divide more than what has actually
been created or produced, although the nominal rates of wages
and nominal prices of commodities may both be raised to any
extent without real benefit to anyone.
To secure a general nominal rise of wages in all branches
of labour would further have the immediate effect of lowering
once more the real wages of those who already had effected
for themselves an advantage by successful combination or
strikes. This may seem hard to believe by many who have
not taken the trouble to discern the fundamental distinction
which exists between real wages —which alone can improve
the workman’s condition—and nominal wages , which, if raised
ever so high, in all branches of labour, leaves the workman
just in the same condition as at the beginning.
But, directing the attention to the fact that there is an
important distinction, it may prepare the more thoughtful
to contemplate that there is something underlying these terms
which they would do well to understand, for it cannot be too
often asserted that strikes might possibly raise the nominal
wages of workers all round a hundredfold, and yet result in
the positive lowering of the real wages of all workmen who,
by means of organisation, hitherto have succeeded in better-
ing their condition as compared with their less perfectly
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


organised fellow wage-earners. It is the failure to recognise
the essential difference between real and nominal wages that
renders futile the many schemes of sentimentalists, which have
for their object the laudable design to improve the condition
of the people.
Real and Nominal Wages.
No one has more clearly defined the nature of real and
nominal wages than Mr. George Gunton, in his admirable
work “ Wealth and Progress.” He states (p. 74): “By
real wages is meant the actual amount of wealth (social well-
being) obtainable by a day’s labour. By nominal wages is
meant the amount of money obtainable by a day’s labour,”
In other words real wages means the actual purchasing power
of a day’s labour, while nominal wages may or may not always
afford a correct index of the comparative purchasing powers
of a day’s labour. For example, in England the minimum
supply of the necessaries of life for a workman and his family
for one day may be secured by a nominal expenditure of 4s.
in money. If his nominal or money wages for a day of nine
hours be 55., then the purchasing power of his real wages for
one day’s labour is equivalent to the command over 1 1 /sth
day of the necessaries of life. If the same necessaries exactly
in America cost a nominal or money value of 65., it follows
that a nominal or money wage of 7s. 2'4d. for a nine hours
day in America would only have the same purchasing or real
wages value as the nominal or money wage of ss. per day in
England.
Now, as it can be shown that the nominal cost of a day’s
labour mainly determines the ultimate nominal cost of the
commodity, product, or service related to that effort, it fol-
lows that if nominal wages of the worker all round were arbi-
trarily raised 20 per cent, without actually increasing pro-
ducts, it would inevitably result in raising the nominal
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


prices of commodities or necessaries all round to the same
extent, and thus leave the purchasing power or real wages
of the labourer in the same position as at first.
It has been purposely assumed that this effect would only
be brought about where the arbitrary increase to nominal
wages was equally spread over all classes of wage-earners;
for it is not denied that an arbitrary increase to nominal
wages if restricted to a few industries might increase both
the nominal and real wages of these trades; but in all such
cases it would be obtained by a proportionate decrease of the
purchasing power or real wages of every other class in the
community who were obliged to purchase the products so
enhanced in price of the various industries who succeeded in
having the nominal wages so raised. It is the consumers of
products or services who would ultimately lose by the advan-
tage gained by the industries whose wages were nominally
raised, and not the capitalists and employers who directly
were obliged to advance the nominal wages.
It is only under such restricted circumstances where strikes
could really benefit any industry by raising real wages. They
would of necessity fail to raise real wages if the nominal wages
of every class were raised by the same percentage of increase
as has already been explained. Unfortunately, the workers
in many industries whose labour is worst paid {e.g., seam-
stresses and agricultural labourers) lack organisation, and
thus fail to improve their position among other labourers,
although the nominal cost of the necessary satisfactions of
life is the same to them as to the better-paid wage-earners.
But here again it must be borne in mind that any increase in
real wages gained by them by the nominal raising of wages
could only be secured where the nominal increase to wages is
restricted to a few industries. This is made all the more
apparent when we try to estimate (however roughly) the com-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PEOBLEMS


Per-
centage
Pro-
portion.
Satisfactions
Per Day.
Total
Satisfactions
if Equally
Distributed.
Increase or
Decrease
Per Cent.
Assumed
Existing
Proportion.
Total.
1, Upper Class Rich
1
s.
@ 40
s.
40
s.
6-66
— 83-3
2. Middle Class
5
@ 20
100
33-30
— 66-7
3. Higher Industrial & Artisan
15
@ 10
150
99-90
— 33-3
4. Middle Industrial
20
@ 7
140
133-20
“ 4 1
5. Lower Industrial
59
@ 4
236
392-94
+ 66-5
Total or Mean ...
100
6-66
666
666
—
Note. -
indicates Decrease. + Increase.
position, numbers, and nominal earnings of the various classes
of any society.
It is impossible with our present knowledge to gauge all
such conditions accurately, but if, for example, we divided
all breadwinners —rich and poor —into, say, five distinct
groups, thus —
Assumed Proportion.
1. Upper Class Rich, say 1 per cent, of beadwinners
2. Middle Class, say ■ 5 „ »
3. Higher Industrial and Artisan, say 15 ~ „
4. Middle Industrial, say 20 „ ~
5. Lower Industrial, say 59 ~ ~
100
If, further, the total satisfactions secured per day amounted
to £33 6s. per 100 breadwinners, and were divided as fol-
lows, viz.—for the Ist, 405.; 2nd, 205.; 3rd, 10s.; 4th, 75.;
sth, 4s., —we may ask; “What then, would be the effect
upon all if the satisfactions were equally distributed according
to the day’s labour, disregarding the nature, quality, or
quantity of the work or service performed by the various
classes I ?’’ Some indication of the effect that would be pro-
duced is shadowed forth in the following table:
From the preceding table it would appear that if all classes
shared equally in the satisfactions assumed to be created by
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


the aggregate labour of men, only the lowest would receive a
positive increase, while the four higher would lose a consider-
able percentage, amounting to a decrease from 4'B per cent,
in the middle industrial to 83"3 per cent, in the upper class
rich share. Even the higher industrial and artisan class,
who often dream that a redistribution of wealth would be
to them of untold advantage, would, as shown, probably
lose 33"3 percentage of their present allotted share of created
satisfactions if the world’s created wealth were equally dis-
tributed among all men.
This equality of distribution is the dream of many socialists,
whose present share of the satisfactions of life would certainly
have to be lowered, not raised, if their visionary schemes
could be carried into effect.
In conclusion it seems only too true, as asserted by Mr.
Gunton, “ That nothing can improve the social condition of
the masses, whether it raises nominal wages or not, which does
not increase the general rate of real wages , the degree of which
may be universally taken as the accurate measure of social
progress and, “ there are no economic means by which the
material condition of the masses can be permanently improved
which do not tend to increase the aggregate production of
wealth per capita.” Invention, increasing command over the
forces of nature, thrift, and industry can alone accomplish
this. Schemes of distribution and strikes for higher nominal
wages must end in failure and disappointment, so far as the
great masses of men are concerned.
It would be well for capitalist and wage-earner, employer
and employed—whose interests as producers and consumers
are almost identical —that when matters requiring adjustment
are proposed, there should be greater facilities afforded in the
councils of both interests for securing a friendly settlement.
So long as high-handed action on either part bars the way to
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


the friendly conference of acknowledged representatives
(except after the bitterness and friction of an industrial war),
so long will the unsatisfied claims, the suspicions and mis-
understandings of both parties, result in injury to both; and
to the absence of these facilities, mainly, may be attributed
the most disastrous of all such evils, viz., strikes.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Section IV.
General Increase of Wages Falls Upon Consumers of
Products, and in no way Encroaches upon Rent or
Profits of Capitalists
(From Proc. Roy. Soc., 1890).
observers standing at different points of
view in the midst of many complex problems are hardly
ever likely to concur in each other’s conclusions if their
respective views are limited to a few isolated facts belonging
to, but still forming an insignificant part of, the whole series
of facts upon which the true solution of the complex problem
depends. Each observer under such conditions may arrive at
opposite conclusions, which may be perfectly consistent with
the fragmentary data upon which they respectively rest, and
yet be altogether wrong and inconsistent when correlated with
the more important series of co-efficients , which were over-
looked or ignored.
The conclusions of even the most extended observations
may also be consistent with the data upon which they are
based, and yet be altogether inconsistent with the truth, if
the data themselves be inaccurate. Further, there are always
some points so difficult of solution that only the powerful
restraint of a particular habit of mind or training can pre-
vent one’s sympathetic leanings from leaping the gap to the
goal desired, in preference to the wiser course of making fur-
ther exploration or waiting for further gleams of light.
These obseravtions are necessary when called upon to review
the arguments of Mr. Ogilvy, in so far as they are supposed


to touch upon my former paper on “ Strikes and Their Influ-
ence Upon Wages.” It affords me great pleasure to find
myself in agreement on so many points with one like Mr.
Ogilvy, whose well-known generous sympathies for the
amelioration of the condition of the masses of the people must
command the respect of all right-thinking persons. We are
substantially in agreement in the view stated by me in my
former paper, that “ A strike may be the means of success-
fully raising the status of some branches of labour that are
comparatively under-paid or over-worked; it may raise the
real wages of a particular country or locality which formerly
laboured under the average remuneration of other countries;
it may be the means of forcing the capitalist or employer
to give a fairer or larger share of the profits of capital and
labour — i.e., machinery, plant, skill, and labour —but from
the very nature of the common source of all profit and wages,
viz., the current products created by the combined services
of capital (instruments) and labour, strikes cannot raise the
real wage of all wage-earners.”
In other words, it is possible to regulate and alter the dis-
tribution of the aggregate wealth of consumable necessaries
by means of strikes.
So far there is a substantial agreement between us.
It is in the following statement made by me wherein our
views are in diametrical opposition, viz. : —(1) “It is not
denied that an arbitrary increase to nominal wages , if
restricted to a few industries, might increase both nominal
and real wages of these trades; but in all such cases it would
be obtained by a -proportionate decrease of the purchasing
powers or real wages of every other class in the community
who were obliged to purchase the products enhanced in price
of the various industries who succeeded in having the nominal
wages so raised , ” and more especially is the fundamental dif-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


ference between us set forth in the next paragraph used by
me, viz. : (2) “It is the consumers of 'products or services
mho would ultimately lose by the advantage gained by the
industries whose wages were nominally raised, and not the
capitalists and employers as such who directly were obliged
to advance the nominal wages.” And again, we are dia-
metrically opposed in relation to the following observations
of Mr. Gunton’s, with which lam completely in accord. (3)
That nothing can improve the social condition of the masses,
whether it raises the nominal wages or not, which does not
increase the general rate of real wages (i.e., purchasing power)
the degree of which may he universally taken as the accurate
measure of social progress and ‘‘ there are no economic
means by which the material condition of the masses can be
improved which do not tend to increase the aggregate produc-
tion of wealth per capita. ’ ’ And these differences between
as regards the means by which alone the condition of
the masses can be improved—are finally summarised by me
in the statement: “ Invention, increasing command over the
forces of nature, can alone accomplish this. Schemes of dis-
tribution and strikes for higher nominal wages must end in
failure and disappointment, so far as the great masses of men
cure concerned.”
In opposition to these three statements Mr. Ogilvy makes
the following observations, to all of which I am sorry to give
a categorical No !
(1) That “No increase of production can improve the
condition of the masses unless accompanied by an increase
of nominal wages.”
(2) “In the primary industries, that is those con-
cerned in extracting or producing the raw materials of
wealth from the land (as in agriculture and mining),
every increase of wages will come out of the rent” and
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


again, “ Every department of industry (including carriers
by sea and land) which is concerned in supplying the raw
material of wealth from the land, every enforced rise of
wages will be clear gain to the labourer, because the loss
will fall upon the landlord, and stay there."
It is remarkable that Mr. Ogilvy’s usual penetration
should in these two propositions have so far failed him that
he did not perceive that their support wholly rests upon old
economic fallacies long since exploded, and discountenanced
by the best, if not nearly all, modern economists. Even Mr.
Henry George does not support these old economic fallacies,
associated with “ The Theory of Rent ” and “ The Wages
Fund ” ? and yet, notwithstanding this, Mr. Ogilvy’s con-
clusions regarding rent and wages depend wholly for support
upon the resuscitation of those old fallacies which so long
darkened men’s minds regarding the true theory of rent, and
the true relations between rent, profit, wages, production,
and prices.
Theory of Rent.
“ Ricardo’s Law of Rent,” now almost universally
accepted by economists, is so well established by reason and
experience that even Mr. Henry George is forced to admit
that “ its mere statement has all the force of a self-evident
proposition.” It is thus set forth, according to Ricardo:
“ The rent of land is determined by the excess of its
'produce over that which the same application can secure
from the least productive land in use."
Or, as stated more specifically by Mr. F. A. Walker —
“ The rent of any piece of land is determined by the
difference between its annual yield and that of the least
productive land actually cultivated for the supply of the
same market, under equal application of labour and
capital." (P. 197, “ Political Economy,” London, 1887.)
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


If this be granted, we have the following distinguishing
elements:
Let R = Excess of Produce over that of the least pro-
ductive land actually cultivated for the sup-
ply of the same market under equal applica-
tions of Labour and Capital = Rent.
N = Produce of the least productive land actually
cultivated under similar conditions to R.
C = Profit of Farmer and Capitalist.
W = Nominal Wages of Labourer.
P = Produce of Land, Labour, and Capital.
D = Demand of Consumers.
D"’ = Maximum Purchasing Power of Consumer.
D n = Minimum Purchasing Power of Consumer.
p r m __ Maximum Nominal Price of Products.
P™ = Minimum Nominal Price of Products.
Then R+N = P or Supply
C - W
—jj m - - = P rm or Price Maximum.
C+ W „
iy n —P rn or Price Minimum.
Now, it can be seen at once, if these premises be granted,
that as th© application or efforts of labour receive the same
reward whether engaged upon the least (N), or most pro-
ductive land in cultivation (R), that any alteration in the rate
of wages, if general, would not affect the proportion falling
to R, no matter whether the nominal wages rose or fell • for
R (rent) is solely determined by N, and—excepting cases
where employment and area under cultivation are curtailed—
is in not way concerned with the rate of wages. The surplus,
R (rent), has not come into existence as the sole work of
labour; for in relation to the laws which determine price it is
a measure of the gift of nature monopolised in the hands of
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


landowners as rent. It is the fluctuations of demand (D)
which directly affect the value of products coming to R, and
not the scale of wages, whether high or low, so long as the
scale is general. As about 52 per cent, oi the breadwinners in
various countries depend upon agriculture and pastoral indus-
tries, it is also clear that if the increase of their wages was
only local, or partial, the condition of the great mass of
workers would not be improved.
Going back to our analysis it follows that—
R + N = P or produce of land, labour, and capital
or = Supply.
Seeing that supply and demand are among the principal
factors in determining price or nominal value in the market,
and as these are ever varying factors, it follows that nominal
value or price ever fluctuates with the variations of (P) supply
and demand (D). Thus —
R+N _ „
or £ P 1 or Price.
But the actual cost of products being determined mainly
by the cost of labour and machinery cannot fall below the
actual aggregate cost of the standard of living for the labourer
and the actual cost of maintaining the capitalist’s machines
and instruments.
On the other hand, the nominal value for products divided
between R + G + W cannot be increased much above the
minimum producing cost without operating upon demand
through the lowered purchasing power of the consumer, and
so producing a check, or temporary equilibrium.
From this reasoning it follows that the surplus produce (R),
while increasing the general store, and thus tending to lower
prices to consumers, yet rent or earnings of landlords per se
do not enter into the market price in any way, and therefore
do not increase the price of products to consumer.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Therefore it follows that the ultimate exchange price,
whether maximum or minimum, is wholly determined thus -
C+ W | + ( Dm ~ D I _ ( P rm
( -(D -D n ( ~ I Prn
How, then, can any arbitrary increase or decrease of W
affect H (rent), except in an indirect way, by its effect upon
consumer, who certainly would have his real wages -or pur-
chasing power diminished correspondingly with any arbitrary
increase to the nominal wages of W.
It can be shown, in a similar way, that the profit of the
farmer or entrepreneur, and the interest of capitalists are
determined solely by competition with each other, and are in
no way affected by cost of machinery or wages of labour so
long as these latter elements of cost are common to all com-
peting farmers, entrepreneurs and capitalists. In all their
enterprises such charges plus their own pro-fit (solely
detei mined by comparative skill, enterprise and competition)
make up the final cost of products which does not stay with
the landlord or entrepreneurs, but is passed on, and wholly
borne by consumers; and therefore it is as consumers (not as
landlords, farmers, entrepreneurs, capitalists, or wage-earners,
that all classes concerned in production are affected by any
arbitrary increase to the nominal wages of the labourer.
These arguments, while demonstrating the accuracy of my
original observation that "It is the consumers of products or
services who would ultimately lose by the advantage gained
by the industries whose wages were nominally raised, and not
the capitalists and employers (as such) who directly were
obliged to advance the nominal wages,” they also form a com-
plete refutation of Mr. Ogilvy’s opposing argument, tending
to show that " Every enforced rise of wages will he clear gain
to the labourer, because the loss will fall upon the landlord,
and stay there.”
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


The fact that rent forms no part of the price of agri-
cultural produce may startle many who have not given the
matter deep consideration, and although affirmed by me as a
truth, it must not be supposed that I take up a singular atti-
tude in respect to this question; for it is the generally
accepted opinion of the ablest economists and thinkers of the
day. In proof of this I need only cite one witness, Mr. F. A.
Walker, whose able work on “ Political Economy,” published
in 1887, deals so thoroughly with all vexed questions of this
character. At page 200-201 (“ Political Economy ”) he
writes :
From the law of rent, as it has been stated, we
deduce the very important conclusion that rent forms
no part of the price of agricultural produce.
"No proposition which the political economist has occa-
sion to announce is so startling, at the first hearing, as
this; nor does any other contend against such persistent
incredulity. And yet no proposition can be more clearly
established. ”
Notwithstanding what has been said, it is quite possible,
and has actually occurred recently to a large extent in Eng-
land, that a rise of agricultural labourers’ wages there, or
what has the same effect, the opening up of large areas of
more fertile land, as in America, or both together, may have
the effect of throwing the poorer lands of any one place out of
cultivation, and thus directly diminish the value of rent in
that place. This is happening now, and for the last fifteen
years in England, mainly by the influx of cheaper products
from the distant vast plains of Dakota and other fertile areas
of America. But what does this involve ? Why, that for
every 1000 acres thrown out of crop cultivation, thereby
diminishing rent, about 30 breadwinners, equal to 173 per-
sons, are directly deprived of employment. This is the only
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


way in which rent can be injuriously affected, but it is a pro-
cess which is equally disastrous to the local agricultural
labourer. It is also, on the other hand, advantageous to the
consumer, so long as these themselves do not form too large
an element of the general population; for otherwise their
cheapened foods of foreign creation might be more than
counterbalanced by their diminished earnings as producers,
and thus operate unfavourably upon their purchasing power
or real wages.
But returning to the question of rent and price, it is clear,
as affirmed by Mr. F. A. Walker, “ That in the same market,
at the same time, there is but one price for different equal
portions of any (similar description) of commodity ’’; and
"We have also seen that the normal price is fixed by the cost of
producing that portion of the supply which is produced at
the greatest disadvantage. Apply these principles to the case
in hand. England does not raise all the wheat needed for
the subsistence of her population (mainly mechanical and
industrial). Besides cultivating the most fertile of her own
fields she makes heavy draughts upon the United States,
France, Egypt, Hungary, India, and the Black Sea region.
For the wheat of all these countries, however, so far as it is
of the same quality, there is hut one price. That price is
fixed by the cost of raising the million, say of bushels, which
are raised at the greatest disadvantage, which means at the
greatest distance , viz., on the plains of Dakota.” Wheat
may be raised in Middlesex at an actual cost not exceeding
two shillings per bushel; but the Middlesex farmer will not,
on that account, sell his wheat below the market price, say
six shillings (four shillings), which price is fixed, as we have
seen, by the wheat from America. The difference, four
shillings (two shillings?) is to be profit for somebody; and we
will now proceed to show* that this body must be either the
*As he afterwards does—p. 202.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Income and House Bent Before and After a Twenty Per Cent.
Bise of Wages and Cost of Materials
in Building Trade
Amount of
Per Cent.
0)
1 fcc
—
Before Rise.
After Rise.
Net Increase
Net Increase
0)
or Decrease.
or Decrease,
O
o
Annual.
Annual.
Upon Income
less Rent.
UponIncome
less Rent.
o
32
-
02
02
d
o3
02 jJ
d, ®
02
i
i %
3 CD
« s
w S
m a
fl C
02
02
c °
u °
oQS
P s
o«
art
O «
O
O
-p a
23
w
£
2!
33
£ Q
o
£
£
£
£
£
£
£ £
p.c.
p.c.
100J
500
110
85
*35
25
20
18
890
1000
500
130
100
*40
870
20
2*25
18-2
415
400
15
3-0
17’6
*125
110
102
90
'90
85
82
72
*150
♦110
# 20 1 ..
*22’2
*14'3
110
102
90
28
22
20
82
80
70
3
3-53
2-41
2-77
12*0
Tailor!
2
10*0
Labourer,! (not Builders’) ..
• • 1 2
hi
landlord or the tenant, not the agricultural labourer, and
not the consumer of flour.”
To give a more explicit illustration of the probable effects
of an increase in nominal rate of wages and of the process
by which any increase in wages must fall upon con-
sumers, and not upon rent of landlord, or the profit of the
capitalist or entrepreneur—the following table is drawn up.
And to throw further light upon the matter, let the points be
discussed as if in dialogue between three persons, represent-
ing—landlord, builder, and workman.
t The land element of value in house rent is assumed as if not affected by rise in the
wages and cost of materials in building trade, and therefore it does not show 20 per cent,
increase on gross rental.
* Indicates the effect upon one of those who benefited by the rise in wages.
% Indicates the effect upon others.
Let us then suppose (as indicated in the preceding table)
that all persons whose services are necessary to complete the
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


building of dwelling-houses, from the quarryman to the house-
painter and glazier), succeeded by a strike in having their
wages or services raised 20 per cent. The question at issue
between Mr. Ogilvy and myself is involved in the query. “ Out
of whose pockets would this 20 per cent, be derived ?
Mr. Ogilvy adopts the view that it would come out of the
pocket of the capitalist or employer-, and I from a consider-
able practical experience in the building and letting of houses,
gained during five years in a large city, affirm that it comes
out of neither employers nor wage-earners as such, but out
of the pockets of all persons who inhabit houses, i.e., the
consumers of houses, so to speak. For let us take an instance
of the process whereby the 20 per cent, increase ultimately
comes to fall upon the consumers of houses, whether rich or
poor, employer or employed, as it is attempted to be shown
in the following imaginary dialogue between the three per-
sons already referred to.
Dialogue between Landlord and Builder.
A- Capitalist, a landlord of houses, deriving his income from
investing his money in houses.
B- Employer, a building contractor, who derives his income from
his capital and plant and his directing skill as a builder
and organiser.
A . —My dear B, I propose to build four additional dwelling-
houses, similar to the four which you built for me for £I6OO
two years ago: one at £SOO, two at £4OO, and one at £300;
and I shall be obliged if you will give me an estimate of what
you will now build four similar houses for me in the same
locality.
B- I shall be happy to do so, but you must be prepared to
pay a higher price, as all building trade wages and materials
have now gone up 20 per cent.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


A . —What ? Do you mean to infer that I can afford to pay
the extra 20 per cent, out of my pocket when my average
profit hitherto at the old rates only yields me 5 per cent, on
capital outlay in buildings, repairs, taxes, and other neces-
sary expenses in connection with letting, &c. ? It is impos-
sible !
B. —Well, there is no help for it. If you won’t build others
will; for as the population increase is not likely to be greatly
affected for any length of time by the rise in the wages and
materials of the building trade, more houses must be built by
some one or other.
A . —That is all very true, but how can landlords afford to
build houses at such prices at the old scale of rental ?
B. —Rental of buildings, not land rent, in all times and
places, you are surely well enough aware, is determined by
current rates and prices of land, labour, and materials, and
not upon old rates of rental. You are no more called upon
to let your houses at the old rates of rental than I am to con-
tract for the building of houses at the old contract prices. In
my profession we base our estimates of costs, not upon the
old rates, but upon what we infer the rates of wages, money,
and materials will be on the average during the time and at
the place where the new contract is to be carried out ; and
if you are to survive as a successful landlord you will have
to be guided by the same unavoidable commercial principles.
A . —But that would only be done by making a correspond-
ing increase in the rents of houses ?
B. —Certainly. If competition hitherto among landlords
obliged them to restrict their profits to 5 per cent, on capital
outlay, the altered conditions for the labour market affect
thevi all alike, so that all who do not become bankrupt must
earn the same profit which competition among landlords them-
selves determined as a safe working minimum profit long
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


before the recent rise of wages and materials came about.
That means that rental of houses must bear the extra cost of
building. Rents must be raised. The occupiers of houses must
inevitably bear the burden of the increase, and as both you
and I occupy houses we must also pay additional rent as occu-
piers of houses. But although we do expend more of our
income as occupiers ( i.e ., consumers) of houses, that cannot
affect our income as derived from our business concerns as
landlord and builder.
A . —Why so ?
B. —Because the profits of either are determined, not by the
wages, high or low, paid to workmen under them, so long as
they are general , but upon the intensity of competition
between employer and capitalist, and other employers or
capitalists in the same business.
A. —But the workmen think that their higher rate of wages
comes out of the “ Wages Fund ” of the older economists,
and this is one of the reasons why they are so bitter against
the employers or capitalists for absorbing, as they think, a
too great share of the joint produce' of labour and capital.
B. —The older economists are largely to blame for the pre-
sent hostile attitude between the employer and his workmen;
for undoubtedly this attitude is, in a great measure, based
upon the mistaken notion that the increase in wages is an
encroachment upon the employer’s share of profit; whereas
it is in reality an additional charge on the values of products
affected, which is ultimately borne by the consumers of the
particular products.
A. —But will the workmen be satisfied if they comprehend
this matter in the light in which you regard it.
B. —Why should they complain? They have got their 20
per cent, increase. But if you are anxious to ascertain their
views let us pixt the matter to the test by asking Jones the
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Hewer, one of the most intelligent of my workmen, who is
now approaching us.
A. —Good-day, Jones, I suppose you feel satisfied with the
results of your strike contest, which has terminated so favour-
ably for the workmen in your trade.
Jones. —Ah, sir ! we are glad to have scored a success, but
it has been at a bitter cost to all of us.
A . —But surely with 20 per cent, increase to your wages
you ought to be fairly well satisfied.
Jones. —Oh, that's true enough, so far as the rate of wages
is concerned, but trade is now in a very depressed state, and
as a consequence many of our brother workmen are but half
employed, and even if we were all fully employed at the better
wages now ruling it would take fully ten months to cover our
losses due to enforced idleness during the long bitter strike of
nine weeks, which brought us all so much distress and misery.
A . —Ten months, do you say ?
Jones. —Yes, fully that, without mentioning the increased
cost of living, now that the landlords are about to raise our
rents by about <£6 a year.
A. —I should like to hear how you account for your loss
being so great that it should take so long a time at the pre-
sent higher wages to cover it.
Jones. —Oh, that’s easily proved. Our nine week’s idle-
ness caused us a direct loss of £2O 12s. 6d., reckoned at our
old rate of Bs. 4d. a day, for 44 hours in the week. Our
present wages are higher by Is. Bd. a day (viz., 10s.), and it
is easily reckoned that it will take days of that increase
to make it good; and as we can only reckon 300 working days
in the year it means the better part of ten months’ earnings
to put us straight.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


A • How do you account for so many of your men being
still only half employed ?
Jones.- Well, you see, the higher rents asked for the better
class of houses are driving the poorer classes into the inferior
houses that were formerly empty, and there is less demand
than usual for new houses in consequence.
B- Jones is quite correct there, as I know to my cost; for
I have not had a third of the contracts this year, as compared
with the average of the last three years, and my experience
is also the experience of other builder contractors. But in
my opinion there is another reason for the present slackness
in the building trade.
A .—And what is that ?
B. —I have long observed that statisticians are quite right
in their statement that a sudden increase, however caused, in
the cost of living, has an immediate effect in checking, or,
rather, postponing marriages; and in no trade has this effect
so immediately a depressing influence as upon the building
trade.
A . —But things will take their natural course in time.
B. —True, but in the meantime our trade, whether for work-
men or employers, suffers, and, as Jones has said, it will take
a long time for the better state of things, when they do come
about, to make good the losses of the present year of enforced
idleness, and its evil consequences to both employers and work-
men. Employers now see, when it is too late, that it would have
been better for employers and workmen had they approached
each other at the outset of the strike in a more friendly way,
instead of fighting it out to the bitter end of a nine weeks’
struggle.
’
Jones. — I say “ aye ”to that, too.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


A. —Then you, Jones, also think it was a mistake to enter
upon this strike without a serious attempt to gain your cause
by a more reasonable course ?
Jones. —Aye, sir, I do, and I have always been of the
opinion that it would have been better to have settled our
dispute by a friendly conference, even if it were to end in a
compromise, rather than strike first and be obliged to confer
when we were embittered by a long and cruel struggle for
victory.
A . —And why, then, was the strike originated so suddenly
without an earnest attempt to settle matters by a friendly
council of conciliation ?
Jones. —Why? You well enough know that the thought-
less, and those not burdened with the cares of a family, form
the majority of workmen, and these are always too eager to
enter a conflict without counting the bitter cost.
A.—The workmen are not singular in this respect, for the
majority of employers at the outset were also too anxious to
precipitate a conflict without proper consideration, and are
also much to blame in their eagerness to fight out the struggle
rather than compromise or make any honest attempt to
approach the settlement of differences of opinion by con-
ciliatory conferences. I, too, am comforted with the feeling
that, although one of the minority of my class, I used all the
influence I could exert to promote a friendly conference at
the first; but, as in Jones’ experience, I and those who acted
with me were over-ruled by the majority, who were too eager
for conflict to give the matter the consideration that was
necessary.
A. —Then both of you think that the strike might have been
avoided with advantage to all 1
B. —Yes; I think so. We could have arrived at the same
result had we discussed the matter fairly at the outset.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Jones. —I am sure we could if the same arguments on both
sides were considered at the beginning of the dispute, and if
we had an opportunity to discuss on even terras our misunder-
standings of each other.
A. —Then both of you are of opinion that all future
struggles of this kind in various industries will be settled by
friendly conferences rather than by lock-outs or strikes.
I
B. —I fear not. The majority of men only see that the
strike effected a rise of wages; and that will induce other
trades to follow their evil example. The misery of the thing
they do not consider. Nor do they perceive that the raising
of wages if made general would cancel all the advantages
gained by the first few industries who reaped the advantages
of the wages increase; for the nominal increase in cost of
living would then actually counteract all the advantages
obtained by nominal increases to income.
A. —You have stated that before, but I confess I do not
quite see how such a result comes about.
B. —lt is, however, a matter the truth of which can easily
be demonstrated by a simple process of reasoning, and I will
try to make it clear to you. First let me assume, according
to the modern course of exchange, that no element of the
gratuitous gifts of nature, as such, enters into nominal values
of products, and therefore the final nominal cost of all
products and marketable satisfactions to consumers is solely
determined or made up from the aggregate nominal cost of
all the services engaged in the work of producing them. In
this way it is obvious that the aggregate nominal value of all
wealth in exchange or satisfactions would be exactly identical
in nominal value to the nominal earnings of all persons
engaged in producing them, whatever the nature of
the services may be; whether organising and directing skill,
wealth producing instruments, or the simple physical power
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


of human bone or muscle. Any addition, therefore, to the
nominal cost of production must correspondingly increase the
a gg re g a te nominal cost of products.
A. —I can follow you so far, although I confess I am not
able to see as yet why the gratuitous gifts of nature should
not be monopolised by some, and in this way come to be a
charge upon products to consumers, without forming an item
of expenditure of energy or capital on the part of the pro-
ducer.
B. —Your observation is a very important one; for although
upon another occasion I may discuss this point with you, I
must ask you for the present to take it for granted, as an
assumption on my part, the truth of which may afterwards
be discussed on its own merits.*
A. —Well, let us for the present admit this important
assumption on your part, it still remains to be proved that no
benefits would accrue to wage-earners if the nominal incomes
of all the services of breadwinners, were equally increased.
B. —Yes, that is the point I desire to prove. But you must
also bear in mind that it is the mere raising of the nominal
rates of wages or incomes I refer to; for if by raising the rate
of wages we could also correspondingly increase the number
or actual quantity of products, my argument would completely
fall to the ground.
A. —Yes, I perceive this, but I cannot myself see any indi
cation of increased energy on the part of the great body of
workmen who have had their wages raised.
B. —I am glad you admit this, for I can assure you that so
far as my business is concerned the amount of work performed
per hour, per man, upon the whole remains unchanged.
* See “ Monopoly of the Gifts of Nature ” (“ Root Matters ” —First
series, pp. 31, 32).
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


A May not, however, the indirect effects of the improved
condition of your workmen—giving them greater opportunities
for self-improvement and greater power to improve the edu-
cation of their children—result indirectly in promoting the
spread of a higher culture and intelligence, and by this means
increase the agencies at work which promote invention and
discovery, and so multiply man’s power over natural forces.
For if this should be the outcome, our experience in the past
shows that the satisfactions of life might be increased indefi-
nitely without an additional tax upon the labourer’s physical
efforts or time, and without a very much larger expenditure
of his income towards labour-saving instruments.
B.—-1 do not deny that something of this may be expected,
providing the rise in wages is not general; but under any
circumstances it must be infinitesimal; for invention and dis-
covery spring from the individual mind, and have very little
to do with the material condition of the individual, or a more
comfortable state of life. The phrase, “ Necessity is the
mother of invention,” has not come to be quoted as a world-
wide phrase without some broad show of reason and truth;
and this certainly does not encourage us in expecting a larger
crop of inventors or discoverers from those whose condition
has become more comfortable.
A. —This may be true, but surely you must admit that a
greater spread of intelligence must broaden the sources from
which inventive genius springs.
B. —Again, I repeat that I do not deny that this may have
some influence; but I fear the mer© attainment of a more
comfortable state of existence among a section of our indus-
trial classes would in itself have an infinitesimal influence upon
invention, discovery, and increased energy. The new idea
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


springs from the single mind, and not from the society or
aggregate.
“ Men perished in winter winds till one smote fire . .
They gorged on flesh till one sowed corn . .
They mowed and babbled till some tongue struck speech.
What good gift have my brothers, but it came from
Search, and strife, and loving sacrifice.”
Professor Hearn had a clear perception of the conditions
which determine invention when he wrote the following
words: —*
At every time and in every place the master of all
arts and the bounteous bestower of genius is Want. It
quickens the perception and sharpens the power of con-
trivance. This action is felt in every part of industry.
There is scarcely one of the great improvements in the
arts which has not immediately been connected with the
expansion of some want. The want may be caused by
the natural development of the capacities of the person
by whom it is felt, or by the presence of some external
obstacle. But whatever may be its origin, or whatever
form it may assume, there is always a want, and want of
considerable persistence and intensity.”
It was to strikes among workmen, and the dearness or
scarcity of skilled labour in America and in other countries,
that we mainly owe the origin of many ingenious labour-sav-
ing instruments, such as the cotton gin, the reaper and binder,
and sewing machines. It was the craving for more leisure
to play or scrog which led the boy Humphrey Potter to dis-
cover the first method for making the steam-engine self-
acting.
A . —It seems to me that the logic of your argument is to
undervalue the results arising from improvements in the
*P. 194. Plutology.—Extent of Invention—Circumstances which deter-
mine it.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


material condition of the people, and to magnify the influ-
ence of difficulties, obstacles, and want.
-#•—You are no doubt in one sense justified in making this
observation; but remember it is restricted by me to the fol-
lowing questions:—What are the potent influences in pro-
moting useful invention or discovery ? Do they spring more
freely from men’s minds when their material conditions are
improved, or are they originated more frequently under the
pressure of wants and difficulties. My own opinion tends to
the conviction that the latter are the more potent influences.
In closing this imaginary dialogue, which might be greatly
extended with advantage, let me now touch upon the ques-
tion raised by Mr. Ogilvy as regards the relative personal con-
sumption bf wealth by rich and poor respectively.
Personal Consumption of Commodities by the Rich.
It is evident that Mr. Ogilvy had not bestowed his usual
care upon the question concerning commodities consumed
respectively by rich and poor, whether luxuries or necessaries.
He has taken a very strange course in forming an opinion of
the relative amount of consumption of goods by rich and poor
from a superficial impression made on his mind by the showy
displays seen in shop windows.
Rich articles are more fitted for attractive display as adver-
tisements, but only the inattentive, or the unskilled, would
ever dream of estimating, upon such evidence, the relative
quantities and the relative aggregate values of goods held in
stock for sale intended for the rich and poor respectively.
Although the gorgeous silks, satins, velvets, ribbons, and
dress goods form the chief displays in the windows of estab-
lishments devoted to the sale of textile fabrics generally,
they certainly form an infinitestimal part of the value, and a
still more infinitesimal part of the weight of the general stock
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


on shelves and in warehouses. This stands to reason; for it
is well ascertained that all persons receiving upwards of £l5O
per annum — i.e., under the annual average income of the
skilled mechanic —only form about 2'28 per cent, of the total
population even in rich England. But a better plan would
be to ascertain the value of these luxurious silks, satins, &c.,
as determined by the imports of a country whose principal
supplies of textile fabrics come from foreign sources. Vic-
toria is such a country, and an analysis of that colony’s imports
shows that scarcely 7 per cent, of the value of textile fabrics
and dress are represented by the richer articles, such as silks,
satins, ribbons, velvets, dress goods, and scarcely 1 per cent,
of the weight of materials.
As regards Food , certainly not more than 5 per cent, can
be set down as consumed by the rich personally, although
their expenditure would be a little more than this if the con-
sumption of their boarded servants were by error allowed
to be included.
As regards Luxuries, again, it is remarkable that although
we gave to all persons over £l5O income the whole of luxurious
articles imported represented by works of art, paintings, musi-
cal instruments, jewellery, and plated-ware, &c., it would not
represent more than 7 per cent, of what the masses alone con-
sume of luxuries, in the shape of drink and tobacco.
Again, as regards the consumption of the fruits of labour
connected with the building trades, it is well to bear in mind
that 64 per cent, of the value and 92 per cent, of the num-
ber of all dwelling-houses in Great Britain are connected with
those (certainly not the rich) living in houses under £3O
annual rental.
Although the nominal incomes of the rich appear to absorb
a far greater proportion of the aggregate nominal earnings
than their proportional numbers as units of the population,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


yet it must be borne in mind that a reference to the mere
nominal incomes is a most deceptive guide as regards the
individual consumption of the rich; for in the latter are
aggregated much of the incomes of vast numbers of profes-
sional classes and domestic servants, which, being reckoned
again and again as distinct incomes, although derived chiefly
from the expenditure of the rich, make the nominal aggre-
gate of the income of the rich and of total income enormously
above the true net income of both the rich and the national
aggregate. That is, the real incomes of individuals are
counted over and over again, and thus falsify the true pro-
portions of net personal income coming to rich and poor
respectively.
In opposition to Mr. Ogilvy’s statement, then, I may con-
fidently repeat part of what I have already dealt with more
fully in a former chapter of “ Root Matters in Social and
Economic Problems ” regarding—
Distribution and Consumption of Wealth.
Under this heading I have observed, “ There are many
fallacies current with respect to the creation and distribution
of wealth. If all the enormous wealth year by year created
by (1) stored fruits of previous labour (capital —of which
steam-engines alone represent approximately the work of
1,000,000,000 men, or more than the physical energy devoted
to the creation of fresh wealth, than double the working
population of the earth, (2) current labour, and (3) the
gratuitous forces of nature, were directly devoted to consump-
tion or enjoyment, no doubt the proportion per head allotted
to the industrial labourer would be small indeed in com-
parison with the rich.”
But the human body, whether rich or poor, can only con-
sume or assimilate a certain quantity of food per day. The
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


old, sickly, and very young, cannot consume or assimilate
as much as the strong healthy persons of youth and prime of
life. Health and hard physical labour cause the body to burn
more food, and the greater tear and waste consumes more
weight of the products of the sheep and cotton plant just for
the same reason as greater energy exhausted by a steam
engine demands a much higher consumption of fuel and a
much greater waste of parts in tear and wear.
From this reasoning it is almost conclusive that a strong
healthy navvy can, and does, consume more weight of the pro-
ducts of the soil, of the flour-mill, and the weaver’s loom,
than the less robust city clerk or the brain worried financier;
the mere quality or rarity of the materials involving more cost
in some of the materials of the rich is comparatively insignifi-
cant, and involves no more tax on the soil, on the capitalist’s
machines, nor on the workman’s labour.
Further, it can be shown that if the steam engines alone of
the capitalist perform more work than twice the number of
the whole working population of the earth, and if these only
form a part of his machinery, tools, and instruments, known
vaguely or concealed under nominal values as “ capital,” it
follows that the rich capitalist, or organising entrepreneur,
cannot or does not abstract from his profits the same propor-
tion of his income towards his personal wants and enjoyments
as the workman does. On the contrary, what he can directly
consume personally of the primary satisfactions which make
up the bulk of consumable wealth is limited by the same
natural laws as the humblest workman; and the necessities
of repairing the tear and wear of his costly machines (real
capital) or the passion or necessity to increase the number
and power of his machines, and to protect and keep them ever
at work, abstract the greater portion of his increasing or
decreasing profits, which the thoughtless imagine are absorbed
altogether in personal consumption.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


What is usually termed “The enormous accumulations of
wealth in our times,” “ The riches of capitalists,” do not con-
sist of fine houses, luxurious equipages, money or grand parks,
or if so, it only forms a most insignificant portion of it. The
great bulk of the nominal and real wealth of capitalists con-
sists of land improvements, mines, railways, tramways, ships,
canals, stores, warehouses, manufactories, machines, tools and
instruments, &c., themselves; and though rightly included in
the aggregate wealth of a country by statisticians, these do
not in any sense enter into the personal consumption of the
rich owner any more than they enter into the personal con-
sumption of the workman engaged in connection with these
forms of national wealth.
The Fruit of Labour.
Familiar phrases, such as “ The fruits of labour,” “ The
toiling masses,” “ Man shall live by the sweat of his brow,”
Capital is the fruit of labour,” and such like, though cor-
rect enough as pleasing figures of speech, are too often wrested
from their proper uses to adorn the fallacious arguments or
rhetorical displays of well-meaning, kind-hearted people, in
whom the logical faculty too often is easily overborne by
sentiment. Although I have a high appreciation of Mr.
Ogilvy’s logical acumen, I cannot help feeling that his
enthusiasm and kind heart have, for the moment, dominated
over his logical faculties when he spoke “ of the lower ten
millions whose toil is the active factor that produces all wealth ,
not of the upper ten thousand who in some mysterious way
manage to get rich upon that toil.” I am not disposed to
quarrel with these words in so far as they convey the idea
that their services (whether functional as accumulators of
capital energy, or organising energy as entrepreneurs —man
for man), absorb a very much larger share of the aggre-
gate satisfactions produced than is ideally just or desirable.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Earnings.
Average
Per Cent.
Average of Rich and
Per Day
Increase.
Poor Per Day.
Above.
Below.
S. d.
8. d.
s. d.
1. London Seamstress
1 G
4 6
2. English Agricultural Labourer
2 G
100
3 6
3. Australian Labourer
6 G
200
0 6
4. Australian Carpenter
12 G
100
6 6
5. Average of the Rich Classes in
England 3 - 3 per cent
40 0
233
35 6
6. Average of Rich and Poor ...
5 6
But this objection is merely one of degree, and is applicable
to all persons between the earnings of the poor city girl of
London, who has to wearily “ stitch, stitch ” for dear life
for Is. a day, and the colossal earnings of a Vanderbilt. The
following table may help to convey an idea how far 'privilege
permeates throughout the whole range of human services, so
far as reward bears any relation to either time or the amount
of muscular energy expended:
This proves that the total income of rich and poor —in one
of the richest countries of the world (United Kingdom,
£1,250,000,000) —only averages ss. 6d. per day per breadwin-
ner, and that all those who earn over that rate per day really
belong to the “ privileged classes for even the common
labourer of Australia at 6s. per day receives 9 per cent, above
the level of equality, which, if once attained, so many vainly
dream would procure them a vast addition to their present
allotted share in the distribution of wealth. The Austral-
asian carpenter actually receives a higher relative rate of
income (not a greater absolute difference, however) above
the London seamstress (viz., 1100 per cent.) than is the average
rate of the rich (3’3 per cent, of population) above that of the
Australasian carpenter —being only 233 per cent, higher.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


It follows clearly from this that strikes for higher wages
among those who already earn above the standard level of ss.
6d. per day cannot justify their claims by the appeal indicated
by Mr. Ogilvy that it “is a movement of the underpaid
against the overpaid.” It is not a fact. So far as the
majority is concerned, it really would be a movement of the
overpaid against the underpaid, or more specificially, it would
be a movement of the lower grade of the privileged classes
against the masses forming the unprivileged, i.e., all those
whose earnings are now below ss. 6d. a day, or the standard
level of equality. Nor can the lower grade of the privileged
classes contend with justice that their higher wages are in
proportion to greater expenditure of time or muscular energy.
On the contrary, it can be easily demonstrated that the lowly
paid agricultural labourer or common lumper expends far
more of his time and muscular energy than the better-paid
carpenter, engine-fitter, or mason.
Active Agent in the Production of Wealth.
Finally, let us examine what truth there may be in Mr.
Ogilvy s statement in which he leads us to infer that the
toil of “the masses,” “ the lower 10 millions,” alone
is the active factor that produces all wealth Entertai-
ning such a view, it is not remarkable that Mr. Ogilvy should
regard the riches of the “upper 10 thousand ” as a hoard
mysteriously and wrongfully abstracted from the forces
actively engaged in producing wealth.
If by the toil of the masses he means all the physical forces
requisite to transport and transform natural materials to suit
the needs of man, he is manifestly wrong. For (exclusive
of the more gratuitous forces of Nature, such as natural
chemical changes, multiplication by the mytserious forces of
life, sunlight and heat forces, gravitation, the rain, dew, and
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


the fertile soils, and the animal, vegetable, and mineral pro-
ducts in their natural state and position) there are the active
forces set in motion—not of the expenditure of muscular
energy —but of mental and moral force, exerted by men of
forethought, of skill, of invention, and of the provident who
designedly saved from immediate personal consumption and
devoted such savings purposely to the construction of mechani-
cal and other aids, devised or discovered by skilled minds,
whereby the forces of nature (such as gravitation, chemistry,
steam, water, wind, electricity, leverage, lower animals) are
so captured, tamed, and drilled, that they now exert a physical
force, in the production of man’s wealth—whether in the
way of transporting from place to place, or in transforming
materials from the natural raw state to the highly finished—
compared with which the hrute or muscular force actually
exerted by all the working men of the globe, forms the most
insignificant fraction.
I have already pointed out that it is estimated that the
steam-engines alone now engaged actively in the production
of man’s real and nominal wealth represent double the
potential muscular force of all men in the world at the pre-
sent time, exceeding the muscular force of men actually
engaged in the production of man’s wealth by, perhaps, three
or four times. The mere muscular pressure of a man, which,
on his part, only exhausts his muscular energy by what would
be equivalent to the movement of his body by one step, may,
and in fact now incessantly does, liberate and set in motion
a transporting force in one machine equal to the combined
total muscular force of from 200,000 to 500,000 men.
At the present moment on the railways of Pennsylvania,
in America, a single engine conveys a load of 1500 tons, 29,927
miles in one year. It would, in a primitive stage, say by the
strong African carriers of Stanley, take the mere muscular
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


force of 4.65,360 men, carrying 60 lb., and travelling at the
rate of 12 miles per day, to accomplish the same work in the
same time; and even though they only received wages at the
rate of Is. per day, it would cost £6,980,400; at ss. per day
it would cost £34,902,000. The single Pennsylvanian engine,
however, carries the same load, viz., 1500 tons, 29,927 miles’
within one year for the sum of £92,721, or id. per ton per
mile. That is, a single modern locomotive exerts as much
wealth-producing energy as could be effected by the whole
muscular force of 465,360 strong men, and at _1 0 f the
nominal cost. Even if we went into refinements, and
attempted to abstract the human muscular energy expended
in the manufacture of the engine from raw materials, and the
consumption of stores and materials consumed in the work,
also partly the produce of the muscular force of man, it
would be more than covered by the subtraction of the mus-
cular energy of 600 men, leaving still to the credit of the
single machine a balance of natural physical wealth-produc-
ing energy, i.e., non-muscular, equivalent to the muscular
energy expended of 464,960 powerful men during one year.
When in addition we think of the Spinning Jenny, the elec-
tric telegraph, the sewing-machine, and the thousand com-
plicated forms of machinery—such as the Naismith Polka
Hammer, which by the slight pressure upon a handle a small
boy can instantaneously pour 100-ton blows upon ductile
masses of iron—we can have some faint conception of the
immense mechanical and natural forces ever at work in civil-
ised countries—outside of the muscular force exerted by
man —and contributing its giant share of the physical agencies
which give commercial value to man’s wealth.* It is clear,
therefore, that nothing can be further from the truth than
See also p. 40-44, Root Problems, Ist series, which also demonstrates
that “ Improvement in the Condition of the Individual is largely due to
av iP^ s Anterior Labour (capital) skilfully applied as instruments
aiding Production.”
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


the assumption by Mr. Ogilvy that the energy of “ the lower
ten millions,” or the “ masses,” alone represent the active
factor that produces all wealth.
The brains of man can alone be credited with invention and
discovery, not his muscular power. It is to the accumulations
of savings from personal consumption by the labourers of
former times that we are indebted for the stores devoted to
the construction of the powerful mechanical and other auxil-
iaries now engaged in aiding the current labour of men, and
not, as falsely assumed, to the mere energy exerted by those
who happen to be the labourers or workmen of the present
moment.
The large body of the capitalists of to-day are, broadly
speaking, really the natural descendants and inheritors of the
savings of former workmen, who not merely worked but saved;
and it is specially because of the savings of former workers
that we have now a vast accumulation of cajntal invested in
labour-saving appliances, and in works of permanent utility
to all men, and not generally because those who saved were
indebted to labour for their savings. All labourers in the
past, as well as in the present, did or do not accumulate
savings, and the descendants of those who did not save have
no just claim to the capital or accumulated savings now largely
in the possession of those who saved, or their natural
descendants.
Of course, the children of the former savers of capital are
thereby now often raised above the social scale of their fathers.
But this is natural; for it must not be forgotten that the
affection and solicitude of parents for their children are ever
the active motive forces which induce parents to sacrifice pre-
sent personal gratification, and to save up in order that their
children may enjoy a larger amount of the world’s material
satisfactions than their parents permitted themselves to afford
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


out of the fruits of their own labours. Take away this powerful
motive and you destroy the main source of the savings which
make capital accumulation a possibility. Capital wealth,
therefore, has not been wrongly abstracted from the labourer
as such. It is a real addition to the world’s power and wealth,
solely built out of the savings of those who providently
abstained from consuming at the time the whole of the fruits
of the labour to which they were entitled, which otherwise
would have been as much lost to the world as if it had been
destroyed by fire.
It is not because nominal wages are much higher to-day in
Australasia than at the close of the sixteenth century in
Europe that the present workman is so much better off in
every way than his predecessor of three hundred years ago, but
mainly because of the great increase of capital wealth invested
in labour-saving appliances, whereby the annual wealth
created for consumption and real wages or purchasing-power
over wealth have so improved that the workman of Australia
can, by the expenditure of 4 1/3 days’ labour, command a
much larger share of the world’s wealth or satisfactions than
could be done by the accumulated savings of 40| days’ labour
amidst the dirt, discomfort, and almost enslaved condition
of the labourer 300 years ago.
I think Mr. Ogilvy’s objections to my former paper on
strikes have been shown by these observations to be based upon
assumptions which cannot be sustained when subjected to
close scrutiny, and I can only reaffirm that it is by increase
of savings properly applied in the creation of instruments
which will still more greatly multiply the powers of man that
any marked improvement in the condition of the masses can
be successful. Without this the mere raising of wages can
only benefit a few industries at the expense of the many.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Section V.
Notes on the Natural Limits to Occupation on the
Land
(Read before meeting of Royal Society of Tasmania, 14th June, 1892.)
I ''HE number of persons that may be employed upon the
land varies with the country, with the form of cultiva-
tion, and with the degree of civilisation. But whatever the
civilisation may be, there are natural limits to occupation on
the land which bar the introduction of more than a certain
number. The natural conditions which principally determine
these limits are: — (a) The total extent of land surface of the
particular country, (b) The degree of fertility and the
extent of land open to hunting wild animals, or gathering
natural vegetable roots or fruits; cultivation for pasturage
only; cultivation for either crops or pasturage (c) Know-
ledge and capital as factors in determining and employing the
best methods for extracting the greatest amount of produce
from a definite area, (n) The absolute number of hands
necessary to cultivate a given area in any form, beyond which
limit human labour is wasted in fruitless effort or in positive
idleness, (e) The proportion of cultivable area already
occupied. If, in addition, we employ the indices m, e, and
n as indicating maximum, medium, and minimum of each
condition, we may express by simple formulae the conditions
which determine the largest (D m ) and the smallest (D n ) num-
ber of hands which can find occupation on the land; always


Proportional Percentage
Total Area in Cultivation
—
Tillage.
Pasturage,
All cultivated.
Hands per 100 acres
in cultivation.
United Kingdom
43"56
56*44
100-00
5-08
France ...
86-96
1304
100 00
7-17
Russia ...
39 23
60-77
100-00
7-88
Germany
58-40
41-60
100-00
12-19
Belgium ...
82-46
17-56
100.00
17-91
Five Countries ...
53-79
46-21
100-00
8‘22
assuming that their time is wholly occupied within the field
of their own division of labour.
We are now able to express definitely the conditions which
determine the maximum (D 1,1 ), medium , and minimum (D“)
number of hands that it would be necessary to employ upon
the land according to the existing conditions under which
agricultural and pastoral pursuits are carried on in the United
Kingdom.
The maximum number of hands employed upon the land
could only occur under the following conditions :
A m x B m x O= D m
The minimum number could alone be employed under the
opposite of this condition, viz. :
A n x B n x C m =D n
But it never happens that a country as a whole can devote
all its cultivable lands to one form of cultivation, say, crops
from tilled lands. The following proportions show what
obtains in five great countries in Europe:
From this analysis we can perceive that there is a variation
in the hands employed per 100 acres, ranging between 5'38
per cent, in the United Kingdom to 17'91 in Belgium. The
tilled lands requiring a larger proportion of hands, account
for the larger number employed per 100 acres in some coun-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


tries; but against this must be placed the reduction in the
hands employed, effected by the introduction of machinery
and improved methods of culture —when all other things are
equal. The space limit to occupation on the land, however,
can only affect countries that are already densely populated
and whose land area relatively is limited. Let us, therefore,
apply this method to a particular country, say, the United
Kingdom, for the purpose of ascertaining:
(1) The maximum number of hands that could find employ-
ment upon the land, supposing it was conceivable to bring the
total area into cultivation.
(2) The maximum number that could find employment on
the more probable supposition that only 75 per cent, of the
area could possibly be utilised.
(3) The number of years in which the full limit would be
reached supposing it conceivable to cultivate the whole area
of the country including sites of dwellings in towns, villages,
and cities, and lake and mountain areas.
(4) The number of years in which the full limit would be
reached, supposing it probable that no more than 75 per
cent, of the total area could be brought under cultivation.
Then let A = Total area in acres = 77'80 million acres.
H = The number of hands required to cultivate
each 100 acres according to existing con-
ditions = 5’35 hands.
R = Average natural rate of increase of Rural
Population = say, L 25 per year.
C = The actual area already in cultivation in
(1840) = 43'80 million acres.
N = The number of hands already employed in
1840 in cultivating the land = 3'400
million hands.
N a = Ditto ditto in 1881 = 2'561 million hands.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


The answers to queries 1,2, 3, and 4 would be as follows :—-
AH
SJuery (I.) .-.— X or maximum number of hands or
= Ans. (1)=4T62 millions.
(75 AA
(2.).’. V 100 / x H = Y or max. number of hands,
190 or Ans. (2) = 3T22 millions.
/o \ . log- X—log-. N _ log. 4-162-000 log. 3-400-000
log. R log. 1-25.
= 16'28 years, or year 1856,
M) f •’•log. Y— log. N a log. 3T22-000—log. 2-561-000
' ‘ \ log. H ~ log. 1-25
) = 15*94 years, or year 1896.
j ' .*. jog. X log. X _ log. 4-162 000 —log. 2-561-000
/ log. R log. 1-25
' 39*09 years, or year 1929.
It has thus been demonstrated that the ordinary growth
by natural increase of the agricultural population of the
United Kingdom of 1841 (if migration was prevented by
placing them on the land still uncultivated) would fully
stock the whole of its land area of every description in 16’28
years later; that is in the year 1856, or 36 years ago. Start-
ing with the agricultural population of 1881, the same rate
of natural increase, under similar conditions, would fully
stock 75 per cent, of its land surface in the year 1896, or four
years hence; and even if we conceive what is impossible, that
its total area was open to cultivation, this same natural
increase would fully stock land occupations in the year 1920.
It is clear, therefore, that employment on the land in the
United Kingdom is bound within very narrow limits by space
(one of the most formidable of all natural limits, and no
alteration in the rate of remuneration of the agricultural
labourer, nor improvement in his condition, can effect this
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


limit in the slightest degree. But in addition to the space
limit, the number of hands necessary to cultivate a given area,
or produce a definite quantity of produce, there is a gradu-
ally contracting limit brought about by natural forces, such
as steam, electricity, and improvements in labour-saving
machinery. Thus the same area in 1881 was cultivated in a
higher degree, and with better results, than in 1841, with a
reduction in the hands employed equivalent to 3L06 per cent.
Since 1841 the added force of steam, as an auxiliary to human
labour in the United Kingdom alone, and there utilised in
the transport of materials and in various other ways, is esti-
mated to be equivalent to the manual force of 103 millions of
workmen, or fully six times the manual force of the total num-
ber of breadwinners of the United Kingdom at the present
moment. It is not surprising, therefore, that agricultural
hands per 100 acres should have decreased from 7’76
in 1840 to 5'35 in the year 1881; and that these
combined causes should of necessity compel a regular
stream of migration from rural districts to urban centres or
to other countries; and so long as a healthy condition exists
in rural districts (unmistakably indicated always by a high
rate of natural increase) such migration is inevitable. Accord-
ing to calculations made by Mr. Mulhall, in the United States
9,000,000 hands raise nearly half as much grain as 66,000,000
hands in Europe. Thus it appears that for want of imple-
ments or proper machinery there is a waste of labour in
Europe equal to 48,000,000 of peasants. In other words, one
farm labourer in the United States is worth more than three
in Europe. This state of affairs in Europe, however, is alter-
ing for the better each year. Since 1840, owing to improve-
ments in implements and machinery, tillage has become more
productive, and grain has become cheaper. From the same
authority we learn that “ in 1840 each peasant produced
about 75 bushels of grain; in 1860 the average was 87, and in
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


1840.
1887.
Perceutage Increase or
Decrease since 1840.
Increase.
Decrease.
Total population Millions
No.
26-71
37-08
38-86
Agricultural hands
55
99
340
2-50
24-70
Other occupations
Total acreage under
99
99
7-96
14-16
77-89
—
crop
Total under all forms
„ Acres
22-00
21 • 00
—
4-55
of cultivation
Agricultural capital
99
99
43-80
47-88
9-19
per hand ..
Agricultural pro-
99
£
579
893
54-23
—
duels per hand ...
Agricultural hands
per 100 acres in
99
£
65
97
49-23
crop
Ditto per 100 acres in
No.
15-45
12-19
—
2110
total cultivation ...
Wheat consumed per
No.
7-76
5-35
—
3106
head
Meat consumed per
lbs.
255
354
38-82
—
head
lbs.
87
109
25*29
—
Price of wheat per ton
£
16-60
8-15
—
50-90
Capital wealth
Horse-power of steam
used as a motive
Millions £
4,100
9,400
129-30
power
Paupers per 1,000
No.
600,000
9,200,000
1,433
—
persons ...
No.
67-40
25-80
55-05
1887 it had risen to 114; that is, two men now produce more
grain than three did in 1840.” From these observations we
are able to understand that a smaller number of hands
employed in agriculture is no indication of smaller produce.
Take the results of two periods in the United Kingdom, 1840
and 1887, and we at once perceive that the tendencies upon the
whole are beneficial —not injurious.
Nothing could more plainly reveal the general tendency of
modem agriculture than these figures. It shows clearly, so
far as the United Kingdom is concerned, that progress in
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


improved modes of cultivation means:—lncreased capital,
increased products, cheaper food, increase of hands in other
occupations, and a gradual decrease in the hands employed
in agricultural pursuits, associated with a general decrease in
the amount of pauperism. Employment upon the land, there-
fore, is lessened relatively by every advance made in the modes
of culture, and is blocked absolutely so far as many populous
countries are concerned by limits of space available for ulti
vation of any kind. Unless, therefore, a country like the
United Kingdom takes a backward step in mode of cultivat-
ing the land, she cannot, while foreign products are of neces-
sity admitted freely, place more than 5'35 hands upon each
100 acres in cultivation. No legislation under such condi-
tions, made with the view of giving facilities for land owner-
ship, can affect the numbers that may b© employed. It is
conceivable that the lot of the worker may by such means be
ameliorated or improved, but legislation within a freetrade
border cannot enlarge the field of employment for the agri-
cultural labourer. Nor under any circumstances whatever
can legislation increase the number of agricultural hands with-
out loss and injury to the people as a whole.
In conclusion, let me not be supposed to indicate by these
observations that the lessening numbers of persons employed
on the land in such a-country as the United Kingdom is to
be regarded as a matter to be deplored. On the contrary, I
regard it as an index of advance in civilisation. If the food
and raw products necessary for man’s needs and satisfactions
could be miraculously produced without the agency of a single
labourer, mankind would be enriched, not impoverished; for
there would then be so much more labour force available for
the creation of comforts and satisfactions, in such cheapness
and abundance, that all men might possess and enjoy them
in a degree now only possible to a few rich individuals. What
is wanted, therefore, in countries passing through a transition
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


of the kind referred to is, not to place any check upon free
migration and other movements which now act as safety-
valves to congested fields of labour, but rather to increase the
facilities for transfer from those places and those occupations
where pressure of competition for employment is greatest. It
is the obstruction which natural and artificial barriers offer
to transfer from blocked areas and blocked occupations that
causes the so-called congestion of labour in crowded centres of
population, and any discovery which would remove such
barriers would mark a new era in the progress of civilised
communities.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Section VI.
Observations Regarding some Economic Aspects of the
Eisenach Social Equality Programme
(Read 13th June, 1904.)
TN my previous contributions to the Royal Society of Tas-
mania, dealing with many “ Root Matters in Social and
Economic Problems,” I have elaborately dealt with ques-
tions touching the conditions affecting the production, accumu-
lation, distribution, and consumption of wealth. These,
together, occupy too large a field for even a passing review in
a simple address, and therefore I have restricted my observa-
tions this evening to “ Wealth and Its Distribution,” as at
present in the United Kingdom and in the Commonwealth of
Australia.
Before dealing with this aspect of what is deemed to be a
most important part in all socialistic programmes, it is abso-
lutely essential that we should at the outset understand the
true meaning of the terms in use. For example, even if we
exclude (as we must do to reason correctly) the free or unmono-
polised gifts of Nature —such as air, rain, and sunlight—
which form no element of “ price ” or “ exchange value,”
there are still, at least, three different conceptions of the
phrase, “ The Wealth of a Country,” the lack of a precise
grasp of which, is the rock upon which the extreme wing of the


socialists of the Eisenach, Gotha, and Halle type become
wrecked in confusion and absurdity.
The statistician’s “ Wealth ” may mean either private
(* e -, individual wealth), public, or State wealth, or both; but
in any case it rarely embraces more than one-third of the
real labour or monetary value of the total “ Wealth in
Exchange of the exact Economist; and certainly seldom
more than 2 to 3 per cent, of the corresponding total capital
value of the true wealth in exchange intended for actual con-
sumption and enjoyment by either capitalist or wage-earner.
The so-called Statistician’s Wealth,” to which attention
of social reformers of existing individualistic democratical
organisations is invariably restricted excludes the primary
source of all wealth in exchange (consumable wealth), viz.,
the existing productive personal services of man (Karl Marx’s
labour unit), although the annual monetary effective value is
fully three times as great. For example, in Tasmania the
annual value of wealth produced and actually devoted to con-
sumption and personal enjoyment or satisfaction is estimated
at present to be equivalent in money to £7,796,000. This
annual wealth, mainly the direct product of man’s personal
services and of his auxiliary machinery of production, must,
therefore, have at least a harm fide capital value of, say,
£155,920,000; whereas, at most, the fixed capital wealth, the
statistician s wealth, or the inanimate and other forms of the
auxiliary tools and machinery of production, only amounts to
about £40,000,000, or merely 25’65 per cent, (nearly a fourth)
of the actual wealth available to capitalist and wage-earner
alike for the purposes of consumption and enjoyment.
Similarly we have for the following countries a correspond-
ing analysis of their wealth accordingly as we refer the term
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


The Wealth of the Country.
AUXILIARY.
1 CONSUMABLE WEALTH.
Tools and Instruments of
The Product of Current
Production
Labor, Skill and A ux-
(Capitalist’s or Fixed
iliary Tools of
Wealth.)
Production.
A
B
C
Capital Yal.
Annual Yal.
Capital Yal.
Annual Yal.
Mil. £.
Mil. £.
Mil. £.
Mil. £.
Absolute.
United Kingdom ...
15,000
750
35,000
j 1,750
Commonwealth of Australia
912
456
3,706
185
Tasmania ...
40
2
'155-9
7-8
Centksim
AL.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
Per Cent.
United Kingdom ...
42-87
2-14
100-00
6-00
Commonwealth of Australia
24-60
1-28
100-00
5-00
Tasmania
25'65
1-28
100-00
5-00
to two very widely differing conceptions to which the same
phrase or term is often loosely applied :
Wealth in Consumption.
When the socialists complains of the unequal distribution of
wealth, such is the confusion arising from the various applica-
tions of the term that he is often misled by references to facts
which have, at best, only a partial relation to the subject to
which his attention is particularly directed.
If he bases his conclusions on the “ Statistician’s Wealth,”
and especially so when restricted to the statistician’s esti-
mates—of the capital value of the private wealth of the
country —he is sure to be misled; for the statistician’s figures
do not embrace any element of wealth which, during the year,
is utilised or devoted to the immediate consumption or satis-
faction of man, nor for the immediate consumption of man’s
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


auxiliary aids and instruments engaged in the work of repro-
duction.
They are confined strictly to those articles of wealth which
are fixed or set apart from consumption as instruments for the
production, transfer, modification, or protection of the cur-
rent year’s consumable goods and satisfactions for man him-
self; and also for the current year’s supply of consumable
goods, required as food, renewals, repairs, and shelter by
man’s instruments, whether animate (as horses, cattle, sheep)
or inanimate (as in the coal, oil, and other materials required
for the production of energy in his engines and machinery,
en g a g e d constantly in the production, transfer, or modification
of the essential utilities of man’s life—-viz., food, transport,
shelter, warmth, clothing comforts, luxuries, ease).
Moreover, the statistician gives the capita] value of these
instruments; and therefore no just comparison between this
personally non-consumable part of a nation’s wealth can be
made until the several parts of the total wealth are stated in
a corresponding measure of monetary or exchange value.
For if we capitalise the value of fixed instruments, we
should also for comparison capitalise the annual production
of wealth—-also annually ;
(1) Distributed and consumed; or
(2) Annually converted into fresh fixed auxiliary pro-
ducing, transporting, modifying, or protecting
instruments.
Thus, although the capital value of fixed instruments in the
Australian Commonwealth is estimated at 912 millions, it
only represents 24’60 per cent, of the corresponding capital
value of its annual production of fresh wealth of consumption;
for although the annual value of the latter only represents
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


185'34 millions, its capital value represents a sum of £3706
millions, or 4‘06 times the value of the statistician’s wealth
of lands, houses, machines, and other fixed forms of the mere
producing agencies.
Even while it is admitted that the element of national
wealth contained in the fixed producing instruments (viz.,
24‘60 per cent.) may be confined to the ownership —not con-
sumption —of a comparatively small number of the community,
this circumstance does not afford the slightest information
as to the distribution of the fruits of the various producing
agencies, among which man’s current directing as well as cur-
rent muscular services play a prominent part; and it must
not be forgotten that the latter, together with the “ anterior
labour ’ ’ and skill of man now currently stored or incorporated
as detached claims in auxiliary producing instruments, con-
stitute the main elements which give price or monetary value
to the current wealth in exchange, produced, whether for
consumption or for fixed uses of future production.
From such obvious considerations we are able to detect the
common fallacy among socialistic writers and others, who
invariably measure the distribution of the wealth created pur-
posely for human consumption and personal satisfaction
among the wage-earning classes by the proportion which the
ownership of fixed or monopolised capital-producting instru-
ments, &c., show among the people generally.
The fallacy, however, is so thoroughly interwoven in the
literature and sayings of the mass of the people that it is
almost impossible to expose its absurdity; but when we con-
sider that man lives by current or annual productions per se,
and not upon fixed capital or their nominal values, whether
annual or capital, and when, moreover, we discern that ser-
vices currently rendered, whether by instrument, skilled mind,
or hand, constitute the base of what forms the purchasing
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


power or claim over wealth being produced for consumption
and personal satisfaction, it is only then we are able to perceive
that the distribution of real wealth, so far as man’s needs
and satisfactions are concerned, is determined, not as falla-
ciously assumed by the proportion of ownership which each
man holds of the statistician’s wealth — i.e., the fixed non-
personally-consumable instruments, and which the owner no
more consumes than the servants who control them —but
strictly by the express measure which services of various
degrees of exchange value have enabled each worker to con-
stitute a claim upon the aggregate of all such services whose
values are contained and incorporated in the current produc-
tion of actual wealth.
It is not here contended that the time of labour of each indi-
vidual labourer or instrument has the power to create equality
of claim in correspondence with time effort; that is too obvi-
ously unequal; but it is contended that every such effort, use-
fully directed, constitutes a definite claim, and therefore the
true distribution of wealth in the community —wealth in con-
sumption being the major factor —can alone be accurately
determined by the average annual earnings or claims upon
wealth. The proportion of fixed wealth owned by individuals
affords no clue to current distribution of total wealth. It can
merely show how the 24'60 per cent, devoted to fixed instru-
ments is distributed.
If the proportion be large it insures probably a claim to
the extent of 4,5, or 6 per cent, of his * capital upon real
wealth, upon which the owner exists, and which may give a
considerable purchasing power to the individual without any
current personal exertion; but it must not be forgotten that
* The State in itself in the Commonwealth of Australia is already in
the possession of its lands unalienated, its railways, telegraphs, roads,
and public buildings; and therefore is now the largest owner of fixed
capital wealth, and would, if extended, become the sole owner, if the
more practicable programme o' collectivists were possible.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


the fixed capital of a manager may be almost nil, while his
skilled directing services may enable him to create a yearly
claim of £lOOO value upon wealth produced for immediate
human uses, while the fixed instrument of a helpless widow,
owner of, say, £lO,OOO capital value, may only afford her a
claim of half the amount (or £500) falling to the manager,
whose fixed capital is reckoned as nil in the usual statistician’s
estimates of the capital wealth of a country.
It will be seen, therefore, that what is termed “ the enor-
mous accumulations of wealth in our times,” “ the riches of
capitalists,” do not consist of fine houses, luxurious equipages,
money, or grand parks, of, if so, it only forms a most insigni-
ficant portion of it. The great bulk of the nominal and real
wealth of capitalists consists of land improvements, mines,
railways, tramways, ships, canals, stores, warehouses, manu-
factories, machines, tools, and instruments, &c., themselves;
and though rightly included in the aggregate fixed wealth of
a country by statisticians, these do not in any sense enter into
the personal consumption of the rich owner any more than they
enter into the personal consumption of the workman engaged
in connection with such forms of national wealth.
The mass of socialist writers wish us to infer that the
“ toil ” of the “ masses,” “ the lower ten millions,” alone
“is the active factor that produces all wealth.” Entertain-
ing such a view, it is not remarkable that they should regard
the riches of the “ upper ten thousand ” as a hoard mysteri-
ously and wrongfully abstracted from the forces actively
engaged in producing wealth.
If by the toil of the masses they mean that all the physical
forces requisite to transport and transform natural materials
to suit the needs of man, they are manifestly wrong; for
(exclusive of the mere gratuitous forces of Nature, such as
natural chemical changes, multiplication by the mysterious
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


forces of life, sunlight, and heat forces, gravitation, the rain,
dew, and the fertile soils, and the animal, vegetable, and
mineral products in their natural state and position) there
are the active forces set in motion, not of the expenditure of
muscular energy, but of mental and moral force, exerted by
men of forethought, of skill, of invention, and of the provi-
dent who designedly saved from immediate personal consump-
tion, and devoted such savings purposely to the construction
of mechanical and other aids devised or discovered by skilled
minds, whereby the forces of Nature, such as gravitation,
chemistry, steam, water, wind, electricity, leverage, lower
animals are so captured, tamed, and drilled, that they now
exert a physical force in the production of man’s wealth—
whether in the way of transporting from place to place, or in
transforming materials from the natural raw state to the
highly finished—compared with which the brute or muscular
force actually exerted by all the working men of the globe
forms the most insignificant fraction.
The brains of man can alone be credited with invention and
discovery, not his muscular power. It is to the accumulations
of savings from personal consumption by the labourers and
others of former times that we are indebted for the necessary
stores devoted to the construction of the powerful and ingenious
mechanical and other labour-saving auxiliaries now engaged
in aiding the current labour of man, and not, as falsely
assumed, to the mere muscular energy and labour-time exerted
and devoted by those who happen to be the labourers or work-
men of the present hour.
Recent estimates of the measure of energy exerted each year
in the production, distribution, and necessary modification of
consumable wealth—the satisfactions of man, by capitalists’
steam power machines alone—are approximately equivalent to
the maximum energy of about 1500 million persons, of whom
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Relative Value of Physical Energy E
xerted hy the
V arious
Agencies Engaged in the Production ■
of Consumable Wealth.
Per cent.
A—Breadwinners under <£150
1,574,000 ..
. 30-70
B—Capitalists and others over £150
135,000 ..
.■ 2-63
C —Capitalists’ energy machines ...
3,418,000 ..
. 66-67
Total energy employed in the
production of consumable
wealth
5,127,000 ..
, 100-00
it is estimated that there are only 600 million breadwinners.
We may be perfectly safe in assuming that the energy exerted
by all classes of capitalists’ auxiliary machines, including those
already in the possession of the State as such, to be equal to
the maximum energy of 1200 million breadwinners, i.e., equal
to twice the physical force of all living breadwinners of the
globe. In the Commonwealth of Australia at present the
number of breadwinners under £l5O income per year num-
ber about 1,709,000 persons. These, for purposes of illustra-
tion, may be safely taken as the wage-earner group. The
breadwinners with £l5O income per year and over, numbered
135,000; and this group, for rough purposes of comparison,
may be taken to represent the capitalist group. Now, if the
capitalists’ energy machines engaged in the production of
consumable wealth be taken to represent no more than twice
all the available force of man, their equivalent in the Aus-
tralian Commonwealth would be represented by about
3,418,000 breadwinners, thus:
From this table we perceive that if we ignore the claims
of intellect and ability, and restrict our attention to the mere
physical forces devoted to the production of consumable and
other forms of wealth, the wage-earner’s contribution only
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


amounts to 30’70 per cent, of the whole of the necessary
energy required to produce that volume of consumable wealth
which would yield each class and individual that standard of
living and comfort to which they have been accustomed.
Now, if it can be shown the wage-earner group (under £150)
receives a larger proportion of the consumable wealth in each
year than the proportion of physical energy contributed
by such in its production, it most effectually disposes of the
sentimental complaint so frequently put forward by the
Fabian school of writers, viz., “ the lower ten millions, whose
toil is the active factor that produces all wealth, not of the
upper ten thousand, who in some mysterious way manage to
get rich upon that toil.”
This inaccurate statement can easily be refuted in a very
simple manner by ascertaining what proportion of consum-
able wealth, per year, is appropriated or absorbed by the three
principal agencies engaged in its production. The best and
surest means to gauge what measure of reward comes to each
separate group is to determine what proportion of the total
annual income is appropriated by each group respectively.
This has been very closely determined by the writer so far
as Australia is concerned, and is shown in the following table
relating to distribution of the national income for the year
1903:
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Share of National Income Appropriated or
Absorbed by the
Various Agencies Employed in the Production of Con-
sumahle Wealth.
Producing Agencies.
Comparative value
of physical and
other energy
exerted in the
production of
consumable wealth.
Approximate share
of title to consum-
able wealth ab ■
sorbed or appropri-
ated by the various
agencies engaged
in its production.
u
OJ
a
bo ,
£ b
P
0) °
bo
o C
i. to average unit.
>ve, * Below.
Energy
Equiva-
lent.
Per
cent.
Amount.
Per
cent.
.t?
§ o
o
CL,
P &
o
Oh
By breadwinners, under £150
per annum
£150 and over (capitalists’ class)
By capitalists’ steam and other
auxiliaries
1.574.000
135,000
3.418.000
30‘70
2-63
66-67
£
124.662.000
23.980.000
36.700.000
67-26
12-94
19-80
s. d.
5 3
11 10
0 9
1119-1
1391-4
•71-3
Total
5,127.000
100
185,340,000
10O
2 5
100
A careful study of this table shows that, so far from the
capitalist class being enriched at the expense of the wage-
earner, the very opposite is the truth; for instead of a reward
being allotted in proportion to his share of physical energy
contributed, it has been increased fully 100 per cent.; physical
energy expended being only 30'70 per cent., while his share
of rewards represents 67’26 per cent.
This improvement of his position is solely due to the fact,
that the more economic physical agent engaged in production
only absorbs 19'80 per cent, of the consumable wealth, while
its share of the necessary energy engaged in production
amounts to 66’67 per cent., or two-thirds, at least, of all physi-
cal forces (human or other) engaged in the production of the
year’s necessary wants and satisfactions. It is true the pri-
vate capitalist receives, relatively, a larger individual share
of the capitalist’s own machine production; but it is impos-
sible for him to personally absorb more than about three times
the amount of the average breadwinner. The higher the per-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


centage of energy contributed, usefully, by the capitalist’s
machines involves, of necessity, a corresponding greater bonus
reward to the ordinary breadwinner, while the proportion
going to the capitalist, as such, must by a like necessity remain
almost stationary in comparison.
It cannot be too strongly asserted, therefore, that the greatly
increased reward of the labourer of the present day in civilised
countries is mainly due to the increasing command which dur-
ing the last century man has obtained over the forces of
Nature.
Steam, electricity, and the ever-increasing improvements in
labour-saving machinery has multiplied the effective force of
man’s mere muscular power in the production, transport, and
manufacture of necessaries and satisfactions, three to four,
and, in some cases, many hundred-fold. In proportion as
these auxiliaries have increased as aids in the production of
any one necessary service or commodity, the amount of physi-
cal human labour engaged has decreased individually, while
the real reward of labour has on the average increased by
about 50 per cent. Nothing can be more conclusive than that
it is to the consequent liberation of the proportion of labour,
formerly necessary to produce the barest primary essentials
of life, that we are indebted now for the vast category of new
comforts and satisfaction, the attainment of which was utterly
impossible to the mass of human beings, when the production
of food alone —the great primary industry —absorbed nearly
the whole of man’s muscular efforts and his time.
Existing Distribution of Share of Products and Services
Regarded from the Democratic Socialist Point of View.
Having thus attempted to clear away some of the confusion
so frequently introduced in discussions bearing upon wealth
and its distribution under the existing democratic individual-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


istic or wage system form of modern society, we come now to
consider how far the distribution of consumable wealth (i.e.,
the annual aggregate of products and services) departs from
the ideals of division or appropriation desired by the leader
of the communistic or collectivist form of socialism.
It is difficult to trace any clearly defined positive programme
among the average persons who espouse the adoption of any
of the forms of communist socialism, or collectivism, as it is
now frequently termed, We may here dismiss from our view
the more extremely visionary, or impossible, forms of com-
munistic ideals, and restrict our attention to the first of the
two most notable sections, viz., the “ Eisenach ” and
“ Gotha” programmes. The one, the “ Eisenach,” pro-
gramme of 1869—according to the learned authority, Dr.
Schafiie —-demanded on the basis of national ownership of all
the means of production that each workman should have
secured to him “ the full product of his labour ” in the
counter-value which accrues to him. This was the collectivism
of an accurate apportionment of income and enjoyment accord-
ing to work performed. But as early as 1875, in the ‘‘ Gotha ”
programme, there came to the front the collectivism of appor-
tionment according to need, on the basis of an equal and uni-
versal obligation to work, that is to say, pure collectivism : for
this demand was literally formulated for “ universal obliga-
tion to work, and the equal right of all to the satisfaction of
their reasonable needs ” ! Both of the ideals have been ably
demonstrated by Dr. Schaffle to be Utopian, and impossible
of achievement, as amongst other things they altogether fail
to cover the circumstances requiring provision for the unity
of the family with its sacred ties; the care of the young, the
aged, the sick or crippled who are unable to work,
and requiring also adequate provision for dealing with the
idle, the dissolute and criminal, who have no desire to perform
work of any social value.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Utopian Schemes of Socialists.
It is not a matter of surprise that the mass of struggling
wage-earners should so readily sympathise with any vague
Utopian scheme of the socialist which, however faulty, holds
out some promise or plan for dealing more effectually with
the difficulties which affect them most nearly, viz., security of
employment; protection from over-competition, shorter hours
of labour, with more adequate remuneration; redistribution
of wealth; old-age pensions, &c.
But it is needless to point out that before redistribution on
the basis of equality, of the aggregate of all forms of wealth
in exchange, can be considered, it must be clear that this
wealth consists of such forms as might effectually satisfy all
the primary wants and comforts of human beings. That exist-
ing wealth in exchange, even if equally distributed, would
fulfil this most desirable end, is a pure assumption.
It has already been shown that a great part of the existing
nominal wealth in exchange largely appropriated by the pri-
vate capitalists, consists of the mere tools and instruments of
production, and that the real wealth, appropriated as con-
sumable wealth or primary satisfactions, is already more
widely and evenly distributed than is generally supposed.
Even under the most thorough socialistic scheme this form of
wealth would be far less generally distributed than at present;
for, according to such a scheme, it would be wholly reserved
in the hands of the executive Government. It is utterly
misleading to reckon upon the existing wealth of capitalists’
instruments of production as a source of raising the quota of
the real consumable and primary satisfactions. The only
distribution possible in this respect would be the empty idea
of part ownership. It is the increase to necessary current
productions designed for actual consumption —material satis-
factions—which alone can raise the average standard of prim-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PEOBLEMS


ary satisfactions, and so dispose of material want, or poverty
and distress. The question therefore arises: Suppose that
such a scheme were practicable, would the producing energies
of men be greater and more effective than under the Scheme
of Competition, Liberty, Right of Inheritance, Property
Right, or Individualism, as it is called ? To be more effective
in one essential it must utterly fail in the other. The workers
must be trained and allocated to specific occupations in strict
conformity to the amount and nature of the labour actually
required to produce the primary satisfactions and comforts
desired. Training for every specific occupation requires con-
siderable time; but for the occupations of skill a large amount
of time must be consumed in acquiring the necessary training,
irrespective of questions with regard to the unequal distribu-
tion of capacity.
Now, on the basis of equality it may be easy to divide pro-
ducts; that according to actual needs is simple enough,
involving no insuperable difficulty. But what about the allo-
cation to different employments ? How can the easy, the
refined, and the skilled occupations be allocated on any scheme
of equality ? The majority must, as heretofore, sweat at the
hard and dirty forms of labour. But what power or what
plan, can be devised which will enable any elective executive
to doom once and for ever the majority of learners and workers
to the hard and irksome occupations, and to fix the minority
in the refined, the easy, and skilled services 1
Suppose it were for a time instituted, how long would the
unfortunate majority be content to submit to their lot before
an irresistible cry for redistribution of occupations arose; and
if it arose, where is the force stronger than the majority of free-
men to prevent the breakdown of the social organisation neces-
sary to produce the supply of primary satisfactions according
to individual needs? What compensation can be given to
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


the masses toiling in th© more wearisome occupations ? Extra
allowance of satisfactions cannot be though of, for that would
destroy the coveted ideal of equality in the distribution of
satisfactions according to needs. Shorter hours cannot be
allowed without trenching upon equality of leisure.
The unequal distribution of natural capacity, and the time
necessary to acquire knowledge of more than one technical
branch of skilled employment, make it impossible to share
in turn for a time all possible forms of labour. In short, the
practical difficulty standing in the way of equality in the
allocation of employments appear to be insuperable, and would
most certainly, if there were no other objection, destroy any
social organisation on a large scale which had been courageous
enough to attempt it. Reference to simple communities —as
in America—following agricultural pursuits mainly, and not
of themselves fulfilling for themselves the whole round of
human wants, are utterly misleading. Such small communi-
ties are composed of a peculiar select class, who voluntarily
bind themselves to a more or less ascetic life, and all such
partial attempts tend to perish from lack of internal vitality
With a large mixed body of men embracing all occupations
and endowed with ordinary passions and desires, the results
would be chaotic and disastrous in the extreme.
One effect, terrible to contemplate, would seem to be inevit-
able, viz., that the indiscriminate distribution of products
among all men would tend to destroy the major source of sav-
ings at present so largely devoted to the creation and mainten-
ance of the powerful and costly auxiliary aids to human labour,
which would be jealously regarded as a grievous tax burden.
The slight individual gain per head in material satisfactions
at the outset would only be of a very temporary character,
for it would soon be lost by the new impulse given to the
improvident to rapidly increase their numbers.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


How the Consumable Wealth oe Production is Dis-
tributed in the United Kingdom and in the Common-
wealth of Australia by the Individualistic and Only
Practical Method of Democratic Socialism.
The difficult problem connected with all ideals as to the
realisation of the best form of social organisation, whether
individualistic or communistic, should not be examined with-
out a clear idea of what is and what promises to be conserved
of that which we hold most dearly under the democratic
system of practical socialism under which we now exist.
It would be impossible to deal with this most important
consideration adequately within the limits possible in a brief
address of this nature, but if it be possible to show that the
actual fruits of production are —notwithstanding the large
monopoly of the auxiliary instruments of production in the
hands of private capitalists—now more widely and evenly
distributed than is generally supposed. I shall have done
something to aid those who have not always the time to study
closely the great socialistic tendency of the present day.
I begin this aspect of the question with the following asser-
tions :
(1) That no matter what may be the monopoly of the
Fixed Instruments of Production, whether in the hands
of private capitalists, or, as in some cases- —State railways,
roads, and a large proportion of the lands—under the
control of the State, the reward absorbed by capitalist
and pure wage-earner alike cannot by any means exceed
the actual effectual yield of commodities and services of
any one year.
(2) That if the whole of the fixed machinery of produc-
tion were now transferred to the State it is doubtful if
the yield of products in the aggregate for distribution,
whether of commodities or service, would be increased;
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


for the reason that the control and efficient maintenance
of the necessary instruments of production would be
wholly excluded from individual consumption, and the
cost of the creation of new instruments, and maintaining
the existing machinery, would have to be taxed or
extracted from the gross yield of the year.
(3) That if we desire to avail ourselves of the disadvan-
tages hitherto gained by society as a whole from intelli-
gent, directing, and inventive skill, from special apti-
tude, from special technical training, and other rarely
distributed qualities engaged in various forms of pro-
duction, we must, as at present, be prepared to bestow,
from the general fund of products and services, some
measure of special inducement to continue these advan-
tageous efforts on behalf of society as a whole.
If we fail to do so there will certainly be introduced
a tendency to lower the quality and effectiveness of all
human effort engaged in the necessary work of produc-
tion, and, in time, would result in a lower average level
of production than is now enjoyed by the average of the
lowest level of the existing social organisation.
With these general observations in view, let us examine,
as closely as we are able, the actual measure of production
available for distribution in the Australian Commonwealth
in the year 1903, and the mode and measure in which it has
been distributed among the various classes of breadwinners—•
rich and poor, capitalist and wage-earner.
For the Commonwealth of Australia for the year 1903 there
were actually engaged in the work of production and other
requisite social services of a personal kind—
(l) Auxiliary fixed instruments, &c., having economically
an effective capital value of £912 millions and an
annual value of £45'60 millions.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


(2) Skilled industrial chiefs, technically trained profes-
sional men, artisans, &c., and common labour,
embracing 1,709,000 breadwinners, representing
the total population, whose capital value in the
work of production is estimated at £3706 millions,
with an annual productive value of £185‘34
millions.
Raw labour, minus directing mind and trained technical
skill, may be considered as on a plane with the useful effective
force of the myriad physical forces incorporated at the pre-
sent day in the various auxiliary instruments the fruit of
many inventive minds, so far as they are concerned as effective
agents towards the necessary aggregate of production. But
it must be borne in mind that those important auxiliary
instruments, alone, at least contribute fully two-thirds of all
mere physical force or energy towards the necessary produc-
tion and services of society. When, on the basis of average
labour time energy, on the Karl Marx theory of distribution,
it is asked : Does the average human instrument of physical
laboui xeceive anything like his fair share of the year’s pro-
duction of commodities and services ? The reply, according
to statistics of distribution is that not only does the actual
labourer of the year, as such, receive his fair reward for his
proportion of 'physical effort expended in the work of produc-
tion, but, owing to the natural limitations to powers of con-
sumption of both capitalists and the auxiliary instruments
owned by them, the reward of labour, as a whole, in propor-
tion to mere physical effort expended, is enhanced by more
than 100 per cent.
It is manifest, notwithstanding these considerations, that
■jiie total productions and services of the Australian Common-
wealth in the year 1903, representing in money £158,340,000,
have not been equally distributed. Upon the whole, the
aggregate of £185,340,000 represents a sum of 6s. lid. per
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Distribution of Consumable Wealth. The Products of
the Year 1903 in Australia.
(Total Products and Services, £185,340,000. Per Bread-
winner per Working Day, 6s. lid.)
INCOMES OF WEALTH.
ABSORBED BY
No. of Bread-
winners.
Per Cent.
Per Breadwinner
Per Working
Day.
Incomes under £100 ...
„ £100 to £125
„ £125 to £150 ...*
„ £150 to £200
„ £200 to £100
„ £400 & over ...
1,399,000
81-86
s. d.
4 8
7 3
9 0
10 4
17 0
113 3
102,000
73.000
46.000
69.000
20,0('0
5-97
4-30
2-71
4-01
1-15
Total ...
310,000
18-14
1,709,000
100
6 11
No. of Breadwinners.
Per Breadwinners
Per Working Day.
Less absorbed by products, &c.,
in the creation of and main-
tenance of necessary auxiliary
instruments of products, with
an estimate physical effective
force of 3,418,000 breadwinners
Total average level of products
and services absorbed by
actual breadwinners
3,418,000
s. d.
1 0
5 11
breadwinner, and was approximately appropriated as fol-
lows :
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Per Working Day.
Above Level of
Below Level of
Equal.
Equal.
s. d.
s. d.
Incomes under £100
—
1 3
£100 to £125
1 4
—
£125 to £150
3 1
—
£150 to £200
4 5
—
£200 to £400
11 1
—
99
£400 and over
107 4
—
From these figures it will be seen that if the whole of the
products and services available for consumption or use were
distributed equally, without regard to the skill or effectiveness
of the individual breadwinner, all persons receiving more than
ss. lid. per working day would, by communists, be regarded
as robbers of a privileged class, and those receiving less as
belonging to the exploited or unprivileged majority. These
classes, so far as groups are concerned, would absorb under
or over the level of equality (ss. lid. per working day) as
follow:
It would appear, therefore, if equality of reward should
come to be regarded as the ideal of the people of the Com-
monwealth of Australia, that the skilled artisans and others
as a body would have to pay into the pool quite as large an
amount in the aggregate as the richer capitalist, to give the
lowest group <£loo per year the necessary Is. 3d. per working
day to raise it to the uniform level of equality of reward, viz.,
ss. lid. per working day.
These conclusions show that wealth available for consump-
tion and enjoyment is more equitably distributed than is
generally supposed, and whatever may be its existing inequal-
ities and defects, it is immeasurably superior to any scheme of
communism or collectivism that has ever been attempted or
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


formulated. The programme of the Trades Unions and the
more intelligent of the Labour Party in the United Kingdom
and Australia, are antagonistic to all the extreme communistic
ideals of socialists. They, of course, advocate an extension of
the idea of State ownership of the more important branches
of industry; but it is upon individualistic lines strictly, not
communistic. Liberty, responsibility, skill, effective labour
and reward, in accordance with ability, has ever been the
ideals of the best representatives of labour in England and in
these colonies.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Section VII.
Observations Regarding the Production and Distribution
of “Consumable Wealth” and “Economic Capital,”
with an Inquiry into the Probable Effect of Arbitrary
Regulation of “Minimum Wage” Standards upon
the “Cost of Living.”
INTRODUCTORY .
T)EE.HAPS there is no other field of inquiry which has
suffered so much from the lack of uniformity, precision,
and proper classification and definition of terms as that branch
of art or science which relates to social economics. These
imperfections were perhaps unavoidable in the early stages of
investigation of matters so complex and variable, and may
have been perpetuated by the idea that the popular apprecia-
tion of important social and economic questions might be aided
by the retention of words in common use.
The terms capital, utility, wealth, value, price, rent, profit,
wages-fund, wages, labour, productive agencies, are of this
class, and are still frequently a source of confusion, because
of the very different meanings which different writers and
speakers loosely attach to them.
In a single address it would be altogether impossible to enter
fully into the many causes of confusion, due to the lack of a
systematic classification, and to a more complete definition of
the more important generic and specific economic terms now
in common use in discussions and in treatises, dealing with


root matters in existing social and economic problems. I have
therefore found it necessary to limit my observations to such
terms as have an immediate and important bearing upon the
various questions touching the human agencies and their
instrumental auxiliaries engaged in the current or annual
production of consumable wealth necessary to supply the
desired standard essentials of living, viz. ;
(1) Wants essential to life itself.
(2) Wants essential to comfort.
(3) Luxurious wants.
Wants of Man.
Wants of man determine the requisite extent and propor-
tion of active productive labour services and of man’s pro-
ductive instrumental auxiliaries.
Services would never become a marketable commodity of
exchange were it not for wants. Kinds of services, therefore,
must be exactly proportionate to kinds of wants. The great
wants —food, clothing, and shelter—are, by far, the greatest
factors in the determination of the aggregate numbersi that
must be employed if the essential wants of the people are to
be satisfied. The same three great wants also determine the
necessary amount and proportions of man’s auxiliary tools,
instruments, and trained and captured physical forces, con-
stantly engaged in the great work of production, modification,
transport, and distribution of the requisite necessaries and
wants of life.
It is not absolutely necessary, however, that the manufac-
turing, agricultural, and other industries of any one country
should preserve the world’s strict average proportions to each
other, so long as it is free to make the necessary exchanges with
other countries for disposing, or making good, their respective
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PEOBLEMS


local surpluses and deficiencies. Nevertheless, countries con-
fined to the production of their own wants, or what is the
same, the world as a whole, must necessarily preserve the
strict average proportion and quantity of labour and auxiliary
machinery in the production of those three great wants which
are the mainsprings of all human activities, both mental and
physical.
Limitations of the Claims of Capital.
It matters not how great or just the claims of economic
capital may be, it is inevitable from the very nature of things
that all rewards for the various services engaged in the pro-
duction of the wants of man (“consumable wealth ”) are
limited and determined, in the aggregate, by the amount of
social consumable wealth —-material and immaterial—that
may be actually produced in any one year, or at any one period
of time.
Any increase in the effective productive forces of any one
year increases the purchasing power of the consumer.
Obversely, any influence (such as wars, failure of seasonal
yields of stocks and crops, or cessation or arrest of important
industries by strikes) which diminishes the annual supply of
consumable wealth, has the immediate effect of increasing the
“ cost of living,” and in a corresponding measure, of lessening
the purchasing power of consumers. In this place it may
be of advantage to take into consideration the important
question —
When and how does the germ of economic price or
exchange value arise ?
Although Ricardo and Adam Smith did not, at first, suffi-
ciently qualify their observations so as to avoid adverse criti-
cism, it is now quite manifest that their ideas regarding the
origin of price, and equivalence of exchange values, require
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


very little modification to be accepted as true by the most
advanced economic thinkers of the present day. If we simply
substitute “ Cost of man’s services,” which embraces vari-
able quality and effectiveness of labour, in place of their
original expression, “ Quantity of labour,” even Gunton,
one of the most recent of thorough exponents of the ‘ ‘ Primary
law of price,” would give assent to Ricardo’s original state-
ment regarding “ The equivalence of exchange values.”
Ricardo clearly expresses his views as to this equivalence of
exchange values in the following words:
“ The rule which determines how much of one (commodity)
shall be given for another depends almost exclusively on the
quantity of labour expended on each.” Substitute “ cost of
man’s service ” for “ quantity of labour,” and we have the
true interpretation of the genesis of economic price, or of the
primary law which regulates and determines the respective
ratios and prices by which commodities and services exchange
with each other.” (See Appendix I.)
Ricardo very clearly' and succinctly establishes this funda-
mental truth, as to the origin of value and ratio of exchange,
in his Principles of Political Economy (McCulloch’s new edi-
tion —1888 —chap. 1, pp., 9, 10) in the following words:
“ There are some commodities, the value of which is
determined by their scarcity alone. No labour can
increase the quantity of such goods, and therefore their
value cannot be lowered by an increased supply. Some
rare pictures, books, and coins, wines of a peculiar
quality, which can be made only from grapes grown on
a particular soil, of which there is a limited quantity,
are all of this description. Their value is wholly inde-
pendent of the quantity of labour originally necessary to
produce them, and varies with the varying wealth and
inclination of those who are desirous to possess them.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


These commodities, however, form a very small
part of the mass of commodities daily exchanged in the
market. By far the greatest part of these goods which
are the objects of desire are procured by labour; and they
may be multiplied, not in one country alone, but in many,
almost without any assignable limit, if we are disposed
to bestow the labour necessary to obtain them.
In speaking, then, of commodities, of their exchange-
able value, and of the laws which regulate their relative
prices, we mean always such commodities, only, as can
be increased, in quantity, by the exertion of human
industry, and on the production of which competition
operates without restraint.”
Elsewhere, Ricardo goes on to say “ ... That this
is really the foundation of the exchangeable value of all things,
excepting those which cannot be increased by human industry,
is a doctrine of the utmost importance in political economy;
for from no source do so many errors and so much difference
of opinion in that science proceed, as from the vague ideas
which are attached to the word ‘ value.’ ”
The most important corollary to be drawn from such a doc-
trine is that all natural elements and their compounds which
form the substance of commodities (whether rare, as gold,
silver, or tin; or common, as coal, iron, ore, salt, or water)
are, of themselves, free gifts of nature, and do not form any
part of value or economic price. Man, by his labour, cannot
create the elements of material substances; but, by his fore-
thought, intelligence, and labour, he can modify and trans-
port, and can provide favourable conditions for the produc-
tion and for the multiplication of the natural increase of the
various specific forms of utility. The latter service of man
and its extent, and cost, alone constitute the measure of the
quality we term value or price, in the particular compounds
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


of natural elements in which, by the laws of social economy, it
has become so closely incorporated as to be confounded with
some supposed intrinsic value, in the natural substance, per se.
The phrase “ free gifts of nature ” by most people is usually
restricted to those things—like pure common air, rain, and
-sunshine, so necessary to man’s life and comfort—which are
obtained, directly, by natural means without the interven-
tion of other men’s services; but the acceptance of the doctrine
of the primary law of economic price or value leads us a step
further, and compels us to concede that, although all monopo-
lised natural substances, in which man’s services have become
incorporated and are inseparably associated with economic
price or value, the natural elements, themselves, do not enter
into economic cost in any degree whatever; and, therefore,
for example, the rare natural element gold, per se, adds as
little to economic price or value as do the more common ele-
ments, carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, silica, sodium, chlorine,
nitrogen, &c., do, to compounds of common commodities such
as coal, common salt, grain, and other food products. It is,
we repeat, the cost of the labour of man, incorporated in any
substance, which alone gives such substance any degree of
what is known as economic price or value.
What is Capital ?
Much illusion is generally caused by the varied and con-
flicting use of the term “ capital ” by different economic
writers when discussing questions concerning the comparative
value of the various agencies (human, and fixed auxiliary
instruments) engaged in the production of “ consumable
wealth ’’; and also when applied to questions concerning the
comparative value of title, share, or reward of consumable
wealth actually distributed and appropriated in each year, by
each and all of the various producing agencies.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Although man’s labour, time, physical energy, forethought,,
and mental and physical skill are generally accepted by all
recognised economic authorities as the chief factors in the
creation of consumable wealth, it must appear somewhat
anomalous, and even illogical, that such authorities, with a few
notable exceptions, should (except man as a slave) exclude
man the chief factor in the creation of and appropriation
of all economic wealth—from forming any element of the value
of capital as generally defined by them. This seems all the
more incomprehensible when we find, notwithstanding the
enormous increase of labour-saving fixed auxiliary instruments
of production during the last 50 years (themselves, also, the
direct product of the anterior labour of man), that such fixed
auxiliary instruments represent not more than about 19 per
cent, of the total capital value of consumable wealth now
annually produced by the combined creative forces of labour
and the auxiliary instrumental aids, and by the captured and
trained natural forces.
Similar confusion also arises from the standpoint taken by
a large number of economists in regarding the income or earn-
ings, by the mode of “ salary or wages,” as holding quite a
different relationship to true economic capital to that held by
other modes of deriving an income (such as income of the
individual, derived in the form of interest, dividend, rent,
business-profit, &c.); whereas, from an actuarial or practical
point of view, the true relationship to capital of all such modes
of deriving an income is in every respect the same.
Capital and Wages Difficulty.
In a paper entitled “ Root Matters in Social and Economic
Problems,” read before the members of the Royal Society of
Tasmania in the year 1889, I dealt very fully with the diffi-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


culties caused by varied and conflicting definitions of the terms
“ capital ” and " wages.” In that paper I stated the opinion
that ‘ ‘ The expansion or limitation of the meaning of the terms
‘' capital ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ wages ’ ’ would not be the source of so much
confusion if it were mor© firmly grasped, by each one, that
these terms properly belong to two important and distinct
categories; the first either wholly or partly related to the
economic agents and forces employed in the creation or pro-
duction of human wants in exchange; the second either wholly
or partly to the reward " titles ” (wages, interest, rent, pro-
fit, &c.), commanding their respective shares in the actual
appropriation of the economic wants of exchange so produced.
Instead, therefore, of dwelling upon the contradictions
involved by the inconsistent use of these terms, it may serve
a good purpose if we discuss ideas rather than terms, and so
avoid a fruitless logomachy regarding unstable definitions.
First, let us bring under each category all the elements that
are necessary to be reckoned with in making them complete.
First Great Category.
Economic Agents and Auxiliary Forces Employed in the
Creation or Production of Human Wants in Exchange.
(a) Current Labour Service Division.
(1) Of highly skilled minds in planning, organising, and
determining the modes in which labour may be most pro-
ductively effective. Labour thus guided may be the means of
adding (by the introduction of steam and other auxiliary
forces) twelve to thirteen times the physical energy of the
maximum physical powers of the whole of human labour.
Types: The inventors of steam-engines, spinning-jenny, elec-
tric traction, sewing-machine, experts in civil, mechanical, and
electrical engineering, organisers and skilled captains of indus-
tries, professional skill of doctors, lawyers, teachers, &c.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


In a tabular illustration shown elsewhere, relating to Tas-
manian experience in the year 1911. I have made a roughly
approximate estimate, exhibiting, in a concrete form, the
great importance of this division of labour services in the
creation of the annual supply of man’s wants and satisfactions.
In the tabular illustration referred to, it is shown that
although only representing about B'B6 per cent, of the human
services engaged in production, this group, together with the
use of labour-saving auxiliary instruments of transport and
manufacture (the greater part of which is the property of
this group) contribute over 92 per cent, of the present physical
energy necessary to be expended in the general processes in the
production of consumable wealth. The physical energy of all
breadwinners (82,441) in Tasmania represents a force of about
6870 horsepower, or only about 7'06 per cent, of the total physi-
cal force required in Tasmania in the work of producing the
necessary supply of consumable wealth, yearly. It is also of
importance to note that, although these powerful mechanical
auxiliaries contribute over 92 per cent, of the physical energy
required in the work of production, they only absorb a little
over 17 per cent, of the year’s productive value. On the other
hand, about 91 per cent, of the breadwinners (75,132), con-
tributing little towards the creation of these fixed auxiliaries,
only exert, at most, about 6‘43 per cent, of the total physical
force utilised. It is evident, therefore, that it is the skill of
the worker, not his exertion of mere muscular strength, which
has enabled this latter group to present a claim of a little
over 60 per cent, of the annual wealth produced in Tasmania
in the year 1911, and representing a total value of £5,273,829.
This amount is assigned to and appropriated by them as a
reward for their skill and energy exerted in the year’s pro-
duction of consumable wealth.
(2) Skilled Labour.—Types: Engineer, blacksmith, car-
penter, mason, bricklayer, baker, tailor, &c. In Tasmania
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


this sub-group is composed of about 12,988 breadwinners,
representing 15'76 per cent, of all human agents engaged in
the production of consumable wealth. The physical energy
possessed by this sub-group is estimated as equal to 1082 horse-
power, or only I’ll per cent, of total physical energy utilised
in the work of production. I heir skilled services, however,
entitle them to command £1,474,037, or 16’85 per cent, of
the year’s total production of consumable wealth.
(3) Unskilled Labour.—Types: Farm-hand, navvy, nurse,
scavenger, housemaid, seamstress, youthful apprentices, mes-
sengers, &c. This sub-group in Tasmania represents the
largest number of breadwinners, numbering 62,144, or as
much as 75‘38 per cent, of all human agents currently engaged
in the production of consumable wealth. They, however,
while only possessing 5’32 per cent, of the total physical energy
engaged, absorb, as their reward for services rendered, con-
sumable wealth of the value of about £3,799,792, representing
as much as 43’43 per cent, of the total amount of consumable
wealth produced by all human agents, and by their powerful
auxiliary instruments, and trained forces, engaged in the work
of production. This demonstrates, unmistakably, that it is
the human intelligence of the breadwinner, and especially
the consumption of his labour, time, and capital, which are
the main factors in determining the economic share of reward
for effective services rendered in the necessary work of pro-
duction of man’s necessary wants and satisfactions.
(6) Services of Man’s Auxiliary Productive Instruments
and Energy Machines.
(All such auxiliaries themselves derived from the creations
of the anterior skill and labour of man.)-
1. Products of anterior labour in the shape of shelter, or
right of habitation, furniture, products of food, clothing,
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


money, &c., the products of anterior labour, on hand, the
result of previous savings.*
2. More or less fixed auxiliary instruments and forces neces-
sarily engaged in supplementing man’s own individual exer-
tions in the production of consumable wealth. Types: Land
improvements, (a) mines machinery and costly equipment,
railways, roads, tramways, bridges, canals, harbours, houses,
buildings, steam, electric, gas, and oil engines, water-power,
works, ships, lighthouses, &c. ■
All such wonderful labour-saving auxiliary producing
agencies certainly owe their origin, and present powerful har-
nessed physical energy to man’s anterior inventive power,
forethought, directing skill, and effective industrial labour.
Among the anterior services of man involved in the creation
of these increasing labour-saving powerful auxiliaries, it is
particularly necessary to note that all such anterior services
of invention and forethought would, of themselves, fail to
* Although the life and energy of man, like all other natural ele-
mentary or primary forces, are, from an economist’s point of view,
regarded in the initial stages as devoid of economic price or value : yet,
like all other elementary substances or forces, as soon as the cost of
man’s labour is incorporated in man (regarded as an economic instru-
ment of production), it becomes an element of economic price or value.
The existing 82,441 breadwinners of Tasmania regarded, from an
economist’s point of view, as the most important as well as the most
costly part of the economist’s instruments of production, both produce,
and expend upon themselves and their dependants, about £7,250,000
sterling per year. Regarded as an interminable annuity, at 4 per cent.,
it represents a present capital value of £179,906,075.
But this capital Value cannot altogether be set down to the credit of
the existing breadwinners, for the following important reasons
In the dependent stage—from birth to the age of the independent or
breadwinner —say on the average at least a, period of 15 years, anterior-
labour services of parents or natural guardians were expended upon
the young future breadwinners, in the form of protection, shelter, food,
clothing, education, &c., which for a period of 15 years, say at £lB
per annum at 4 per cent, interest, would accumulate to a sum of £360
as an element of capital value, which, logically, must be assumed as
being incorporated in the existing 82,441 Tasmanian breadwinners,
regarded in the light of economic productive instruments. In the aggre-
gate this amounts to £29,678,760 of present capital value now incor-
porated in the breadwinner economic instruments of production, which
logically, must be credited to “ The Anterior-labour Service of Man.”
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


bring from an abstract idea to a concrete reality all presently
invaluable auxiliaries, were it not for the providence and pre-
sent sacrifice of some, in saving from their current individual
consumption a portion of their customary comforts and lux-
uries, and thus enabling them to divert some of the now liber-
ated or available productive agencies to the construction or
manufacture of those powerful instrumental auxiliaries which
at the present day, of themselves, perform nearly 92 per cent,
of all the purely physical energy required to supply the whole
of man s material wants and satisfactions.
Although these auxiliaries provide as much as 92 per cent,
of the necessary physical force now required to supply nian’s
wants, their economic value (only absorbing 15’17 per cent.,
or thereabout, of the total consumable wealth produced) enable
human-labour agencies (who at most only possess 7 per cent,
of the total physical productive energy required) to secure and
appropriate as much as 82’24 per cent, of the consumable
wealth produced by all the producing agencies—human and
auxiliary.*
Corollary to First Category.
As a corollary to the preceding “ first category," it must be
obvious that if the term “ capital ” were restricted to Subdi-
vision (6) —Services of man’s auxiliary productive instruments
and energy machines there would be less objection if it were
not assumed, afterwards, that these alone form the whole of
the forces necessary to produce man’s wants in exchange in
sufficiency for all. . Similarly, there would be little objection
to restrict the term capital ’ to Subdivision (a) —Current
labour services if it were not ignored, in after applications,
* With all due respect to those holding a different opinion, I hold that
land, per se, being a free gift of nature, has, in the natural stage, no
economic value whatever. It, of course, posseses utility, but, like all
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


that Subdivision (b) —Services of man’s auxiliary productive
instruments and energy machines—are also absolutely neces-
sary for the supply of the whole range of man’s wants and
satisfactions.
Second Great Category.
Modes of Appropriation of Wants in Exchange, Created or
Produced, or about to be Created or Produced.
Mode (a) —By Wages or Salary.
It is by this mode which the lower group of producers
(mainly artisans and unskilled workers) obtain a “ title ”
commanding a varying share of available consumable wealth,
in respect of labour-time consumed and personal services ren-
dered by them in the wide and varied field of production.
other natural elemental substances, per se, such as gold, silver, or coal,
it is devoid entirely of economic price or value, until such time as some
useful human service happens to he incorporated with it.
The first element of economical value incorporated in the natural
state of land is created by the human services rendered by a stable
Government in securing to a selector, for an equivalent exchange value,
a title to the sole right of ownership of the land deemed to be capable
of yielding a profitable return to effective labour engaged thereon. Addi-
tional value is given to it by the Government, through its executive
officers, in securing to the owner the fruits of his own labour when it
is produced. Repeated doses of capital value, directly or indirectly due
to man’s labour, accrues to the ground, by every work of economic
utility, whether carried out directly by means of private enterprise, or
indirectly by Government labour, in connecting such land with seaboard
harbours and marketable centres for products, by the construction,
maintenance, and repairs to public roads, railways, bridges, harbours,
jetties, schools, building, postal and telegraphic communication, and
such like value-giving advantages. Upon this overlapping of the ele-
ments of accrued value, the owner, by his own capital, organising,
and directing skill, conjoined with the services of paid contractors and
servants, may from time to time add still greater economic value to
the same land by the erection of the necessary buildings, fences, drain-
age, fertilisers, and other costly improvements. In my opinion, therefore,
it is incontrovertible that man’s incorporated labour services alone,
directly or indirectly, are the means by which unimproved virgin land,
or any other elemental substance, come, per se, to possess any
degree of what is termed economic price or value. This view, of course,
is quite apart from, and does not touch, the much-vexed question, as to
the rights of possession of what is usually but erroneously termed “ the
unearned increment.”
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Mode (6)—By Interest, Royalty, Tax, Dividend, Rent,
Income, or Commission.
It is by these modes that a ‘' title ’ ’ to command a share of
available consumable wealth is obtained by owners of auxiliary
instruments of production, improved lands, buildings, houses,
railways, shipping, industrial business undertakings, &c., in
respect of labour-time consumed and skilled management,
adventure-risk, and organising power personally exerted.
These owners, as purchasers or inheritors of the value of
anterior labour and skill, incorporated in the powerful auxil-
iary instruments and forces of production, are enabled to com-
mand a more highly valued “ title ” to consumable wealth
than the “salary ’’ and “ wage” class, who do not possess
such special value-giving accessories.
Corollary to Second Great Category.
The corollary that may be drawn from the preceding analy-
sis, which is sufficiently comprehensive, is that, individually,
the “ salary and wages ” group are relatively poor capitalists,
while owners of auxiliary accessories are, individually, rich
capitalists. As, however, the breadwinners of the “ salary
and wage ” group are fully ten times as numerous as
employers and owners of auxiliary group, the former, in the
aggregate, obtain a much larger proportion of the available
consumable wealth produced in each year, and therefore pos-
sess a correspondingly greater share of effective economic
capital. In support of this view, let us take the experience
of Tasmania as regards the comparative distribution of con-
sumable wealth, in the year 1911, among the two principal
groups referred to, as in the following estimate prepared by
me:
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


—
Salary and
Wages Group
(Mainly).
Owners of
Auxiliary
Force Group
(Mainly),
Both Groups.
Absolute.
Breadwinners
. No,
75,132
7309
82,441
Physical energy, h.p. .
6261
91,058
97,039
Consumable wealth.
appro-
priated net
5,273,829
1,922,414
7,196,243
Consumable wealth present capi-
tal value (true or economic
capital), estimated rate, 4 per
cent.
£
131,845.725
48,060,350
179,906,075
Labour hours expended
No.
180,316,800
17,541,600
197,858,400
Percentage.
Breadwinners
91-14
8-86
100
Physical energy...
6-43
93-57
100
Consumable wealth appropriated
73-29
26-71
100
Economic capital
73-29
26-71
100
Per Breadwinners.
Consumable wealth, per year—
Per average labour hour
7-02d.
2s. 2d.
8-73d.
Per labour day
4s. 8'16d.
17s. 6d.
5s. 9-83d.
Per year (2400 labour hours)
£70-20
£262-90
£87-29
Distribution of Consumable Wealth and Its Capital (Present
Capital Value) in Tasmania, Year 1911.
It is of particular interest in this place to note also that the
auxiliary producing instruments and forces, although con-
tributing 92"94 per cent, of the whole physical energy engaged
in Tasmania in the production of the year’s consumable wealth,
they, in their maintenance, repairs, and renewals, only
absorbed 17"6 per cent, of the £8,750,000 value of total con-
sumable wealth produced by the whole of the combined pro-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


ductive agencies, i.e., human services and auxiliary forces.
The value so absorbed amounted to £1,553,757, which only
represents Is. 3'o4d. per head of total breadwinners per labour-
day-
These illustrations show unmistakably that the economic
advantages secured by man’s improved auxiliary instruments
and forces have been the principal cause of the present much
higher social standard of living of the people, as compared
with that of the period prior to the introduction of steam
and electricity as auxiliary aids to the productive powers of
labour.
Gunton, in his earlier work, “ Wealth and Progress,” states
that—“ In proportion as wealth is produced by human labour,
it is scant and dear, and the masses are poor and barbarous;
and according as it is produced by (auxiliary) natural forces
(steam, &c.) it is abundant and cheap, and the masses are
materially prosperous and socially civilised Thus,
in India, where wealth is produced mainly by human labour,
the annual earnings are about £2 per capita of the population,
as against £33 per capita in this country (United States of
America), where human labour supplies the smallest per cent,
of the productive power of any country in the world.” Mr.
Gunton further observes: “It is thus clear that the labourer
is not robbed by (auxiliary) capital, but that he always gains
by the use of (auxiliary) capital, not because of any generosity
of the greater capitalist {i.e., by the owner of auxiliary steam
and other forces), but by the inexorable operation of economic
law, which prohibits the use of (auxiliary) capital except upon
the condition that it will yield increasing returns. In other
words, that it will give more wealth to the community than
it takes away from it. . • Were it otherwise, social pro-
gress would be impossible, as the productive power of the
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


human hand cannot, to any great extent, be increased. Hence
unless some other forces can be harnessed to the production of
wealth, man would be doomed to eternal barbarism.” Mr.
Gunton also affirms: “ That human labour (except under the
most primitive state of savagery) does not create all wealth,
and that the social condition of the labourer is not necessarily
the best when he gets the whole produce; but, on the contrary,
wealth is produced by the combined effort of labour and
capital, and that, according as the proportion of the total
wealth produced by human labour diminishes, the actual
amount the labourer receives increases. In other words, the
social well-being improves in proportion as nature (meaning
natural harnessed forces) instead of man, is made to do the
work of producing the world’s wealth.”
General Effect of the Rapid Growth of Steam and Other
Natural Auxiliary Forces Since 1840.
Dr. David A. Wells, in his admirable history of “ Recent
Economic Changes, and Their Effect on the Production and
Distribution of Wealth and the Well-being of Society,” pub-
lished in the year 1891, makes the following notable observa-
tion :
When the historian of the future writes the history of
the nineteenth century he will doubtless assign to the
period embraced by the life of the generation terminating
in 1885 a place of importance, considered in its relations
to the interests of humanity, second to but very few, and
perhaps to none, of the many similar epochs of time in
any of the centuries that may have preceded it; inasmuch
as all economists who have specially studied this matter
are substantially agreed, within the period named, man
in general has attained to such a greater control over the
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


forces of nature, and has so far compassed their use, that
he has been able to do far more work in a given time,
produce far more labour, and reduce the effort necessary
to insure a comfortable subsistence in a far greater
measure than it was possible for him to accomplish twenty
or thirty years anterior to the time of the present writing
(1889).
“ In the absence of sufficiently complete data, it is not
easy, and perhaps not possible, to estimate accurately and
specifically state the average saving in time and labour
in the world’s work of production and distribution that
has been achieved.”
Mr. Wells, however, was of the opinion, at that time, that
“ In a few departments of industrial effort the saving in both
of these has certainly amounted to 70 or 80 per cent.” Mr.
Wells, in support of these views, quotes several accepted
authorities. Among these authorities he refers to the report
for 1886 of the United States Bureau of Labour. This report
affirms that “ The gain in the power of production in some of
the leading industries of the United States ‘ during the past
fifteen or twenty years,’ as measured by the displacement of
the muscular labour formerly employed to effect a given result
( i.e ., amount of product) has been as follows: —In the manu-
facture of agricultural implements, from 50 to 70 per cent.;
in the manufacture of shoes, 80 per cent.; in the manufacture
of machines and machinery, 40 per cent.; in the manufacture
of silk, 50 per cent., and so on.”
Mr. Wells further affirms, on the authority of Mr. Atkin-
son, that —
“In a print-cloth factory in New England, in which
the conditions of production were analysed by Mr. Atkin-
son, the product per hand was found by him to have
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


advanced from 26,531 yards, representing 3382 hours’
work, to 32,391 yards representing 2695 hours’ work, in
1884 an increase of 22 per cent, in product, and a
decrease of 20 per cent, in hours of labour. Converted
into cloth of their own product, the wages of the opera-
tives in this same mill would have yielded them 6205 yards
in 1871, as compared with 9737 yards in 1884 —an
increase of 56'92 per cent. During the same period of
time the prices of beef, pork, flour, oats, butter, lard,
cheese, and wool in the United States declined more than
25 per cent. . . . The deductions of Mr. William
Fowler, . . . Fellow of University College, London,
are to the effect that the saving of labour since 1850, in
the production of an article amounts to 40 per cent.; and
that ‘ Wages have greatly increased, but the cost of doing
a given amount of work has decreased, so that five men
can now do the work which would have demanded the
labour of eight men in 1850.’ ”
The following summary table compiled by me, and based
on statistical information compiled by Mulhall and other
authorities, regarding the marvellous growth of steam-power
since the year 1840, in the United Kingdom alone, add addi-
tional weight to Dr. Wells’ conclusions:
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Population
No.
Bread-
winners.
No.
Estimated Energy in Horsepower.
Tear.
Breadwinners.
Steampower.
(1000)
(1000)
(1000)
(1000)
1840
Al
solute.
No.
Per cent.
No.
Per cent.
26,709
11,385
948
60-47
620
39-53
1850
27,369
11,665
972
36-17
1290
63-83
1860
28,927
12,354
1029
29-69
2459
70-41
1870
31,484
13,148
1095
21-35
4040
78-65
18S0
34,800
14,880
1237
14-00
7600
86-00
1888
37,800
16,108
1342
12-72
9200
87-28
1896
39,599
16,878
1406
9-30
13,700
90-70
1911
45,309
19,308
1609
8-43
17,480
91-57
Year.
Human Physical
Power.
Physical Power
of Steam.
1840
1
065
1850
1
1-33
1860
1
2-38
1870
1
3-69
1880
1
6-14
1888
1
6-85
1896
1
9-74
1911
1
10-86
Growth of Steam-power Engaged in the Work of Produc-
tion, Transport, &c., in the United Kingdom between the
Years 1840 and 1911.
Relative Index of Physical Energy Used by Producing Bread-
winners and Auxiliary Steampower, respectively, in each
year.
These figures, showing this marvellous growth of steam-
power in the United Kingdom since the year 1840, though
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


only to be regarded as rough approximates, are of the greatest
importance.
They show that while the natural increase of population has
contributed 7,928,000 additional breadwinners to the stock of
physical agencies engaged in the work of production, steam-
power, in the same time, as an auxiliary force, has added
16,852,000 horsepower, which is estimated to be equivalent to
the total physical energy of as much as 202,224,000 powerful
men.
The Standard of Living.
The chief difficulty of any attempt to determine what may
be acceptable as a fair and reasonable “ minimum living
wage ” is that it altogether depends upon what is the cus-
tomary or socially accepted “ standard of living ”of the
class of workers immediately concerned. This difficulty is
further increased because of the extreme range of variability
of “ the standard of living,” per se. This standard varies
extremely with the following conditions, thus;
The Standard of Living
(1) Varies with the degree of civilisation, whether of dif-
ferent countries or of different periods within the
same region.
(2) Varies with the age and sex of the industrial bread-
winner.
(3) Varies with each one of the innumerable specific
subdivisions of occupations into which the highly
organised divisions of labour are now broken up.
But under a state of freedom of contract, between employer
♦
and employee, the reward for a day’s labour, whether of
money or its equivalent, cannot permanently fall below the
minimum purchasing power of a day’s supply of the wants
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Illustration of Gunton’s Diag
ram (slightly modified).
Individual Breadwinner
of Class.
Standard Nominal
Wages.
(Dollars.)
Actual Cost of
Living.
(Dollars.)
Surplus (Equivalent
to Economic
Wage-rent).
(Cents.)
(A) maximum
2
2
Nil
(B)
2
1-95
5
(C)
2
1-90
10
(I>)
o
1-85
15
(E)
2
1-80
20
(F) least expensive...
2
1-75
25
and comforts essential to maintain the life and that particular
socially accepted standard of living ” to which the par-
ticular class of worker happens to be related. As the bread-
winner of a family must also provide for their wants as well
as his own, it is obvious that the unit of the “ socially
accented standard of living ” must in all cases be based
upon the necessary wants of the families of each class whose
breadwinner, so handicapped, is working at the greatest
disadvantage. This view of the “ Standard of Living ” and
of the “ Law of Wages ” is admirably defined and illustrated
by Gunton (“ Principles of Social Economics,” p. 204), as
follows:
The Law of Wages.
“ The law of wages, then, may be correctly stated thus:
‘ The rate of wages in any country, class, or industry
constantly tends towards the cost of living of the most
expensive families (a) who furnish a necessary paH of
the supply of labour in that country, class, or indus-
try, as shown in the following diagram :
(a) By the most expensive families it is not meant the
most expensive single family, but the most expen-
sive 10 or 20 per cent, of the class whose labour is
required.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


In support of this conception of the true Economic Law of
Wages, Mr. Gunton makes the following observations:
The reason wages in any class or industry are thus
adjusted to the standard of living of the most expensive
families is exactly the same as that which causes the price
of commodities to be adjusted to the cost of producing the
most expensive portion of the supply ... If two
dollars per day is the minimum amount upon which a
certain portion of a given class of labourers can or will
consent peaceably to live; then that amount must be
paid them in order to obtain their labour. What the
most expensive portion of a given class must receive
(adults) the others may and will receive. We know that
the general rate of wages in the same industry and
locality is nearly uniform.
“ We know, for instance, that spinners, shoemakers,
carpenters, bricklayers, &c., working in the same shop
or factory, or the same job, get the same rate of wages
for work at their respective trades, whether they are
single or married, have large or small families, or live
more or less economically than their fellow-labourers.
We also know, for reasons already given, that the most
expensive among them must obtain for his services what
will , supply his family with what they regard as neces-
sities. What will be sufficient to supply the urgent neces-
sities of the most expensive portion of any class of
labourers, to induce them to continue work, will furnish
all those whose cost of living is less, with a margin pro-
portionate to the difference which may be saved or spent
in what to them are luxuries. . . . Thus, through
the law of price uniformity, by which the cost of pro-
ducing the most expensive portion determines the
general price of the commodity in that market, the mini-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


mum amount upon which the most expensive labourers
in any class or industry will consent to live and continue
to work determines the rate of wages in that class.”
Mr. Gun ton briefly summarises his views as follows: “ To
recapitulate them: (1) Wages are the price of labour. (2)
The price of labour is governed by (moves toward) the cost
of its production, i.e., the cost of producing the most expen-
sive of the necessary supply. (3) The cost of producing
labour is determined by the standard of living of the family.
(4) The standard of living is determined by the habitual
wants and customs, or the social character, of the people.”
If we accept these premises it will, of course, follow that
wages will ever be highest where the socially established
standard of living among labourers is the most complex and
expensive; and, conversely, they will be the lowest where
the standard of living is the most simple and inexpensive;
and this precisely is what we find the world over. A com-
parison of the conditions of the Asiatic and European
labourer is alone necessary to establish the truth of these
generalisations.
The Inequalities of Different Wage-earner’s “ Purchas-
ing Power.”
The preceding observations and illustrations are intended to
demonstrate that the price or value of commodities, or the
products of local labour, is mainly determined by the cost of
local labour and its allied auxiliary forces; and that the
aggregate cost of the latter is equivalent to the aggregate
value of all commodities and services, the product of such
labour, and its allied auxiliary forces. It does not follow,
however, that the same quantity of labour, i.e., labour-hours
of the many different classes and subdivisions of existing
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


organised labour forces, exert an equal purchasing power
over the various commodities, even when produced locally.
This, as formerly explained, is mainly owing to the extreme
variation in the standard rates of local wages, not only in
the many distinct classes of occupations generally, but also in
the very different remuneration paid to different individuals
in exactly the same trade. Among the causes of difference
in the rates of pay within the same trade and in the same place
may be cited difference of sex, skill, youth, apprenticeship;
also conditions of locality, as in urban and rural centres
respectively.
It is difficult to present a clear view of all such considera-
tions without reference to some familiar concrete illustrations
relating to the numbers, character, and average earnings of
the different grades of the machinery of productive services
required in the work of producing the necessary wants of any
one country. As an aid in this direction, I have, in the fol-
lowing table, prepared a roughly approximate estimate relat-
ing to Tasmania’s experience in the year 1911, showing some
of the more important factors governing the relative “ pur-
chasing power ” of the various classes of working “ bread-
winners, ’ ’ thus :
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Agents Engaged in Production and
Distribution.
Physical
Energy
Expended.
Composite
Labour. Hours
Expended.
Value of
Consumable
Wealth
Class.
No.
Horsepower,
No.
No.
Appropriated.
(a) Human Agents.
Income Breadwinners.
U)
£80
62,144
5174
149,145,600
£
3,799,792
Under Group (a).
£80 to £100
1966
172,964
725,779
587,035
£100 to £125
6698
£125 to £150
4324
Total Group (b)
12,988
1082
31,171,200
1,474,037
Group (c).
£150 to £250
4534
795,672
320,430
106,965
£250 to £350
1210
£350 to £400
319
Total Group (o)
6063
505
14,551,200
1,222,967
Group (d).
£400 to £700
783
162
338,290
100,481
36,867
£700 to £900
£900 to £1000
55
Total Group (d)
1000
83
2,400,000
475,636
Group (e)
246
21
590,400
223,811
Total Human Agents
82,441
6870
197,858,400 |
7,196,243
Estimated Production, Distribution, and Appropriation of
the Year’s Supply of “Consumable Wealth ” in Tas-
mania (Year 1911); showing also, approximately, the
Proportion and Extent of the Physical Forces Expended
by Human and “ Allied Auxiliary Forces ” in the Work
of Production and Distribution.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Percent-
age of all
Average Rate of Wages per
Breadwinner.
Bread-
winners.
Per Labour
Day.
Per Labour
Hour.
Per Y ear.
(a) Human Agents
ENGAGED IN PRODUCTION.
Class I. - Unskilled Workers
75-38
S.
4
d.
0-91
d.
6-11
£
61-14
,, II. — Skilled workers ...
15-76
7
6-79
11-35
113-5
„ III. — Under middle class
7-35
13
5-37
20-28
202-8
„ IV. — Upper middle class
1-21
31
8-51
47-56
475-6
„ V. — Class with incomes
over £1000 per
annum
0-30
60
7-84
90-98
909-8
All human agents (bread-
winners)
100-00
5
9-83
8-73
87-3
(b) Man’s Allied Auxil-
iary Forces
1
3-04
1-88
18-8
Standard “ Unit” of “ the aver-
age cost ” per “ Composite
Labour-hour ” of all produc-
tive agencies
7
0-88
10-61
106-1
The Law of “ Price ” or “ Economic Value of Com-
modities.”
The previous tabular illustration relating to the experience
of Tasmania tends to prove that the standard rates of wages
of the individual breadwinners of the various divisions and
subdivisions of all productive labour forces in any country
are even more extremely varied than the many degrees of
variation marking “ the socially accepted standards of living ”
by which their various standard rates of wages are actually
determined.
The illustration referred to shows that the average “ pur-
chasing-power of an average labour-hour ” varies from 6'lid.
per labour-hour, in the lowest class, to 7s. 6'9Bd. in the
highest, thus:
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


<A) Human Agents Engaged in Production.
Composite Labour- j
Hour Cost.
” Unit.”
Purchasing Power
Equivalent in No. of
Class “ Labour-
Hours.”
d.
No.
Class I. - Unskilled workers
10-61
1-740
,, II.—Skilled workers ...
10-61
•935
,, III. — Under middle class )
10 61
■521
,, IV. — Upper middle class ......
„ V. — Class with incomes over
10-61
•223
£1000 per annum
10-61
•117
Average of the Five Classes
10-61
1-220
Relative Purchasing Power of each Class over Commodities
whose Value is Most Closely Approximated by the Pro-
portion of Labour-wages of each Class to the Average
Composite Labour-hour Cost of all Productive Agencies,
viz., 10'61d.
From such, illustrations it is clear that the actual cost or
price of any one commodity cannot be gauged or determined
by the average cost of any one of the numerous divisions of
labour.
As neatly ail divisions are more or less employed in the
various processes of the production, modification, and trans-
port of nearly all commodities, and as the larger proportion of
labour-hours (91’14 per cent.) are expended in the work by
the two lowest classes of producers, it follows that these two
classes alone are the chief influences which determine the aver-
age cost of all productive agencies per labour-hour (viz.,
7-02 d.).
It is conclusive, therefore, that the unit, or average cost per
composite labour-hour (10'61d.), is the best measure of the
purchasing power over commodities, generally, by the dif-
ferent classes of labour.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


In the differentiated condition of the modern system of
organised labour, it is rarely the case that the primary raw
material upon which the particular individual worker or fac-
tory is engaged happens to pass directly in a finished condi-
tion to the consumer. On the contrary, the raw material, in
most cases, passes through many hands and many stages of
modification before it attains to the completed condition of
the consumer's marketable commodity. If we try, for
example, to trace the various elements of labour-cost imposed
upon the primary raw material (the seed of wheat) prior to
the sowing of the seed on the farm, and at the principal
stages up to that when it finally leaves the hands of the
baker and distributing shopkeeper in the form of 2-lb. loaves,
we would encounter much difficulty in determining the infi-
nitesimal increment-value at each of the minor successive and
intervening stages of the process, culminating in the com-
pleted form of the commodity when placed actually in the
hands of the consumer. The following simple illustration
may be of some help in affording a clearer conception of the
successive value-increment processes.
First, let us assume that, for the purpose of supplying the
market with loaf-bread, an acre of farm land is to be devoted
to the production of wheat, that the yield therefrom is
assumed to be 21 bushels, and that li bushel of seed will be
used, primarily, in sowing. The principal stages of value-
giving increments are shown as follows:
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Value-Giving Increments.
Stage.
At the Close of Services of—
Incremental
Value.
Equivalence in
No. of “Com-
posite Labour-
hours.”
£ s. d.
No
First
Seedsman
0 5 0
5 -65
Second
Fanner
0 IQ 0
SQ • 35
Third
Miller
0 15 0
17-53
Fourth
The baker and dis-
tributing shopkeepers
2 17 0
64-47
All Stages...
7 17 0
177-
Notes.
The cost at each stage is assumed to include all workers’ services,
including allied auxiliary instruments and forces.
It is estimated that 1 bushel of wheat will yield 42 lb. of flour,
that a 2-lh. loaf contains 1■ 42 lb. of flour. It follows, therefore, that
the 21 bushels of wheat raised from 1 acre of land could he made to
produce 626 2-lh. loaves, which, at the market price of 3d., is equal to
£7 16s. 6d., and equivalent to a value of 177 “Composite Labour-hours.”
In other words, every 2-lb. loaf produced absorbs -283, or fully one-
fourth, of one “ Composite Labour-hour.”
Minimum-wage Standards.
Probable Effect of Enforced Regulation of Minimum-wage
Standards upon the Cost of Living.
The purchasing power of nominal wages over any market-
able commodity or service varies widely with every variation
in the actual rate of pay.
The selling price or commodities, on the other hand, is deter-
mined by the average cost of composite labour-time; that
means the average or composite cost of all industrial agencies
engaged in the production of marketable commodities and
services. Such commodities and services—of the same quality
and in the same market —have, for the time being, a certain
fixed price to purchasers ( e.g ., 3d. per 2-lb. loaf), which is
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


unaffected by any consideration as to the affluence or the
poverty of the purchaser.
If, therefore, by any means the aggregate cost of all labour
and its allied auxiliary services engaged in the production of
all necessary commodities and wants, be raised, say, by
cent., it would then follow, inevitably, that a corresponding
increase would take place in the selling price of commodities,
generally, and the purchasing power of the wage-earner or
consumer would, in this way, be no greater than at first.
The barren result referred to must inevitably happen unless
such increase in cost of labour services be accompanied by a
corresponding increase in the effectiveness of the producers,
and a corresponding increase in the volume of products.
The general “ standard of living ” of the people, as a whole,
can only be raised by cheapening the cost of commodities by
still further improvements in labour-saving machinery, and
allied natural forces. It cannot be too strongly asserted that
the much higher “ standard of living ” which all classes of
labour enjoy at the present time, as compared with the
labourer of 60 years ago, is mainly due to the increasing com-
mand which, during the last century, man has obtained over
the forces of nature. Within the period referred to, steam,
electricity, and other inventions and improvements in man’s
auxiliary labour-saving machinery, which has multiplied
man’s muscular forces in the production, transport, and
manufacture of necessaries and satisfactions, from ten to
twelve times the force, and in some cases many hundred fold.
In proportion as these auxiliaries have increased in the pro-
duction of any one product or service, the amount of physical
labour engaged in its production has decreased individually.
Within the wonderful reign of Queen Victoria the day’s
labour-time, per se, in England, has been reduced about 25
per cent., while the wages of labour has, on the average,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


increased by 50 per cent. It is to the liberation of labour,
formerly necessary to produce the barest essentials of life,
that we are now indebted for the vast category of new com-
forts and satisfactions, the attainment of which was utterly
impossible to the mass of human beings when the production
of food alone —the great primary industry—-absorbed nearly
the whole force of man’s muscular efforts, and his time.
Notwithstanding any former reference to the difficulty
which confronts the raising of either ‘ ‘ the standard of living ’ ’
or of increasing “the purchasing power ” of the wage-earner
by the arbitrary raising of “ nominal wages ” alone, I am
quite ready to admit that an arbitrary increase to nominal
wages, if restricted to a few industries, might increase both
the nominal and the real wages ( i.e ., the purchasing power)
of wage-earners belonging to these trades; but in all such cases
it would be obtained by a proportionate decrease of the pur-
chasing power, or real wages, of every other class in the
community who were obliged to purchase the products, so
enhanced in price, of the various industries which succeeded
in having the nominal wages so raised.
I am also not only ready to admit that if the arbitrary
increase of the “ minimum wage ” be restricted to the more
poorly-paid industiial workers, it would have my fullest
sympathy and support, and I am also of opinion that, in
raising their standard of living thereby, it would not only
be practicable, but, ultimately, by its influence in increasing
the demand for products, it would benefit, and have the effect
of raising still further, the standard of living generally. But
it must be borne in mind that, if this mere raising of the
nominal wage be too widely extended, it would be less advan-
tageous, even to those whom it included, because, as consumers
of portion of their own products, their advantages would be
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


reduced considerably, and it would be obtained by a propor-
tionate decrease of the purchasing power of every other class
in the community who were obliged to purchase the products,
so enhanced in price, of the favoured industries who may have
succeeded in having their nominal wages so raised.
It is the consumers of products or services who would ulti-
mately lose by the advantages gained by the industries whose
nominal wages were so raised, and not the employers, who
directly were obliged to advance the higher nominal rate of
wages.
It is only under such restricted conditions where the
enforced increase of nominal wages —whether by wages boards
or by strikes—could possibly benefit any industry. All arbi-
trary action of this nature would, of necessity, fail to raise
real wages, or purchasing power, if the nominal wages of
every class were raised by the same percentage of increase,
as has already been explained.
Without the aid of some knowledge of the composition,
numbers, productive powers, and relative standards of living
of some typical community, it is difficult to demonstrate, in
a concrete form, the truth of the arguments employed in
relation to the probable effects of any industry.
Conclusion.
At the present day, with its hard and fast divisions of
labour, its fluctuations of demand and supply, and its crushing
competitive rings and interests, the intelligent wage-earner
perceives plainly enough that, as a unit, he is perfectly help-
less, and that he can only succeed in bearing up against
opposing organised interests by a similarly organised action.
No one who has closely followed the struggle of workmen
during the last 40 years can fail to perceive that upon this
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


organisation (solidarity) rests the whole strength of their posi-
tion in the industrial scheme, and that anything which tends
to weaken or demoralise their centres of organisation meets
with their most strenuous resistance; for it is manifest to
them that the breaking or weakening of the heart or centre of
their organisation detaches them again to helpless units, who
are thus rendered unable to enforce any claim whatever.
I am decidedly of opinion, therefore, that such combina-
tions amongst wage-earners have rendered incalculable benefits
to their class in the suppression of oppressive labour laws; in
the reduction of the evils and abuses relating to employment
of women and children; in improvement in the provisions for
the safety and health conditions of those engaged in mines,
factories and workshops; in the limitations of “ sweating,”
abuses and other crying evils. I also regard organised com-
bination and co-operation amongst wage-earners, not only
of paramount necessity to them, but that, when all better
modes of appeal for reasonable and practicable concessions are
unavailing, the last and terrible resort to “ strike ” may,
in very extreme cases, not only be justifiable, but imperative.
But while much has been granted as to the necessities and
advantages of organised labour associations it cannot be over-
looked that many expect by the arbitrary action of wages
boards and “ strikes ” to effect what is plainly an utter impos-
sibility, even if employers submitted at every point.
A “ strike ” e.g., may be the means of successfully raising
the status of some branches of labour that are comparatively
underpaid or overworked; it may raise the real wages or pur-
chasing power of an industry in a particular district which
laboured under the average standard of all other districts; it
may be the means of forcing employers to give a fairer or
larger share of the reward of their joint industry ; but from
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


the very nature of the common source of all reward—viz., the
actual products created by the combined productive forces
of directing skill, labour, and employers’ costly allied aux-
iliary natural forces—-such enforced action of “ strikes,”
unless accompanied by an increased effectiveness of productive
agencies, and an increase in the production of the volume of
consumable wealth,” cannot raise “ the purchasing power
of all wage-earners.
In other words, it may be possible to regulate and alter the
distribution of the existing aggregate wealth of the consum-
able necessaries of life, but so long as this aggregate wealth
fails to be increased, per capita, per year, arbitrary regula-
lations or “ strikes ” cannot increase the real wages, or pur-
chasing power of a day’s labour of all wage-earners. In a
word, such arbitrary action cannot divide more than what
has actually been created or produced, although the nominal
rates of wages and nominal prices of commodities may both
be raised to any extent without real benefit to anyone.
To secure a general rise of nominal wages in all branches of
labour would, further have the immediate effect of lowering
once more the real wages of all those who had previously effected
for themselves an advantage by means of successful combina-
tion.
This may seem hard to believe by many who have not taken
the trouble to discern the fundamental distinction which exists
between real wages —which alone, if raised, can improve the
workman’s condition —and nominal wages, which, if raised
ever so high in all branches of labour, leaves the workman just
in the same condition as at the beginning. It is the failure
to recognise the essential difference between real and nominal
wages that renders futile the schemes of many worthy idealists,
which have for their object the laudable design to improve the
condition and “ the standard of living ” of the people gener-
ally.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Appendix I.
COMMODITY PRICE-SATELLITES.
Reconciliation of Eccentric Variation in the Selling Prices
of the Same Commodity with the Dominating Law of Cost.
Many persons object to the theory that the average Exchange
Value or Orbit-price of Commodities is mainly determined by the
Nominal Cost and Quantity of the “ Composite Labour-hour ”
services incorporated in the said commodities, on the grounds that
in the open market many articles of the same materials, style,
and of equal primary manufacturing cost ( e.g ., ladies’ hats) are
often sold at widely differing prices from each other, and also
differing widely from the original manufacturing cost-price. But
while it is admitted that changes of fashion, differences of taste
as regards style or colour, over-stocking, forced sales, &e., involve
that a certain proportion of a given consignment shall have to be
sacrificed at prices considerably below that of the average or
ruling price, yet it will be found, from a closer investigation of
the matter, that such eccentric reductions in price (Price-
Satellites) and their proporitons are, at the outset, taken care-
fully into consideration by the specially skilled warehousemen,
who from long experience in the particular business are enabled
to fix such counter-balancing prices upon the major proportion of
saleable articles as will safely cover the total cost of the original
consignment, together with the importing warehouseman’s normal
profit and business expenses. The following illustration may
afford a clearer comprehension of this most important matter:
First, let it be assumed that a particular warehouseman has
imported a consignment of 1000 hats for the new season, at a
prime cost of 6s. per hat —£300. Add warehouseman’s expenses
and normal profit, say, £6O. Total amount to be realised from
future sales, £360, or 20 per cent. The average selling-price
should now amount to 7s. 2'4od. per hat. Further, let it be
assumed that from the knowledge gained in former years of the
actual average results of sales of similar consignments that the
skilled warehouseman estimates that of the 1000 hats to be dis-
posed of, 5 per cent, will find no purchaser; towards close of
season 10 per cent, is expected to be sacrificed at a reduction of
20 per cent, below average selling-price; and at the close of the
season, at the final forced sales, 15 per cent, may be expected to
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Group.
Hats.
Price per Hat.
Amount.
No.
Per cent.
s.
d.
£
d.
i.
50
5
Nil
Nil
ii.
100
10
5
9-12
28
16
0
lii.
150
15
3
7-20
27
0
0
iv.
700
70
8
8-30
304
0
0
Total
1000
100
7
2-40
360
0
0
be sacrificed at a reduction of 50 per cent, below selling-price.
The query now is:
At what price must the major proportion (70 per cent.) of
consignment be fixed, so as to counter-balance anticipated loss
from the 30 per cent, forced sales, &c., and yet, on the whole, cover
the total original or prime cost of consignment, including the
proportional share of warehouseman’s profit and business
expenses P The following would likely be the warehouseman’s
answer thereto.—
This illustration shows that the major proportion (Group TV.)
would have to be fixed at Bs. B'3od. per hat, to counteract loss
on Group 1., and on forced reductions on selling prices of Groups
11. and 111. The eccentric prices, Groups 1., 11., and 111., may
simply be regarded as “ satellites ” of the main Group IV., while
as in a planetary system the total, or combined effect, would
represent the average “ Price Orbit ” of the commodity consign-
ment, taken as a whole. This illustration also demonstrates, con-
clusively, that the occurrence of variable or satellite eccentricities
of price, in any commodity, may be perfectly compatible with the
theory “ That the average number of composite labour-hours
absorbed, and the nominal composite cost of producing agencies
(not demand and supply), constitute the primary law which deter-
mines and regulates the current economic price or value in
exchange of each commodity.”
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Section VIII.
Observations Regarding Accumulated Capital Wealth
IMPROPER EXCLUSION OF MAN (THE WAGE-EARNER) AS A
VALUE-EARNING INSTRUMENT OF PRODUCTION, IN ESTI-
MATES, USUALLY MADE, OF ACCUMULATED CAPITAL WEALTH.
T) Y the greater number of writers on economic subjects, the
J—' terms “Capital” and “Accumulated Capital Wealth ”
are usually restricted to man’s auxiliary forces and instru-
ments of production. This unreasonable restriction involves
the introduction of serious difficulties and inconsistencies when
questions arise bearing upon the production, distribution, and
appropriation of the annual supply of consumable wealth
necessary to sustain the life, comfort, and well-being of the
people generally.
The improper restriction of the elements, which should be
embraced under the term “ Wealth ” of a country, is well illus-
trated by Mr. J. A. Jobson, M.A., in his recent treatise, “ The
Science of Wealth.” In describing the meaning attached by
him to the term “ Wealth,” he observes: “ When we think of
‘ a Wealthy Man,’ we reduce to terms of money all his
saleable possessions, including not only the lands, buildings,
machinery, materials, cash, he owns and employs for business
purposes, together with the share certificates and other paper
documents, which give him claim upon the products of the
future, but also his house-furniture, pictures, books, and other


private possessions which he has no intention of selling. All
have their market value, and his ‘ Wealth ’ is the sum of
these values.”
It seems, however, by this restriction that —excepting man
as a Slave Man, himself, the most important of all wealth-
earning instruments of production, has been ignored entirely.
From a true economic point of view there can be no justi-
fication for the exclusion of man, “ The Wage-earner,” from
the category of those things which give (valid) claim upon tin
products of the future.
There cannot be any doubt but that man, free, and owned
by himself, should be a far more effective value-producing
instrument than the average bond-slave owned by another.
Yet those who take a restricted view of the elements which
go to form the aggregate of “ Accumulated Capital Wealth ”
exclude the free wage-earner, who, undoubtedly, is also the
more effective economic producing machine, not because his
life expectation value of average annual earnings would fail
to afford him indisputable “ claim upon the products of the
future ,” but, merely, because he, as a productive machine,
happened not to be owned by another person, as in the case
of a slave, horse, or steam-engine.
The untenability of the standpoint of those who exclude
the free wage-earner as an important instrument of production
is at once obvious if we could conceive of a nation suddenly
overpowered, and reduced to the condition of an enslaved
community. If this occurred, the nation’s nominal accumu-
lated wealth would be at once marvellously increased. At
the same time its real accummlated capital wealth would, in
all probability, have shrunk in value.
The mere expenditure of a year’s labour-time, energy, and
skill by man —the greatest of all economic instruments of pro-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


duction—no more destroys the whole of his life’s capital
energy value, as an economic producing instrument, than
can a single year’s tear and wear wholly destroy the remain-
ing capital value of his, often shorter-lived, inanimate tools
and instruments of production. If the still unexhausted
producing power of the latter be assessed as having a present
capital value based on their estimated year’s life of annual
revenue-yielding power, it is surely reasonable to infer that
Man—the major revenue-yielding instrument of production
(with a life-expectation practically interminable as regards
the evrer-continuous State breadwinner) —'should also be
assessed on the same basis as an element—indeed, the principal
one —of the real accumulated capital wealth of a State at
any point of time.
We may be assured, therefore, that when we regard real
things, and real necessary services—which in the very act of
consumption, compose and satisfy all the needs and satisfac-
tions of human life, the conclusion is surely inevitable —that
man, himself, as the chief element of instrumental production,
must also be regarded as the principal element of accumulated
capital value, man’s auxiliary natural forces and instruments
of production (tRe lesser element of accumulated capital
value generally composing about 19 to 25 per cent, of the
whole) cannot reasonably have a better claim to be included
in any estimate determining the accumulated capital value
of any country.
Whether as a freeman owned by himself, or whether as a
slave owned by some other person, Man, from an economist’s
point of view, in the initial stage —like all other natural ele-
mentary or primary forces —is regarded as devoid of economic
price or value. Yet, like all other elementary substances or
forces, as soon as the cost of man’s labour is incorporated in
man (regarded as an economic instrument of production) he
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


becomes an element of economic price or value like any other
commodity or production machine.
The existing 82,441 breadwinners of Tasmania, regarded
from an economist's point of view, as the most important, as
well as the most costly part of the economist’s instruments of
production, both produce and expend upon themselves and
their dependents about million pounds sterling per year.
Regarded as an interminable annuity, at 4 per cent., it repre-
sents a present value capital of £179,906,075.
But his capital value cannot altogether be set down to the
credit of the existing breadwinners for the following import-
ant reasons:
In the dependent stage (from birth to the average age-limit
of the dependent breadwinner—covering an average at least
a period of 15 years) —anterior-labour services of parents or
natural guardians were expended upon the young future
breadwinners, in the form of protection, shelter, food, cloth-
ing, education, &c., which for a period of 15 years, say, at
£lB per annum, at 4 per cent, interest, would accumulate to
a sum of £360, as an element of capital value, which, logically,
must be assumed as being incorporated in the existing 82,441
Tasmanian breadwinners, regarded in the light of economic
productive instruments. In the aggregate this amounts to
£29,678,760 of present capital value now incorporated in the
breadwinner economic instruments of production, which,
logically, must be credited to “ The Anterior-Labour Service
of Man.”
Adam Smith, in commenting on the “ Errors of M. De
Quesnai’s System,” observes:
“ The capital error of the system seems to lie in repre-
senting the class of artificers, manufacturers, and mer-
chants, as altogether barren and unproductive.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


“ The following observations may serve to show the
impropriety of this representation :
Firstly, this class, it is acknowledged, reproduces
annually the value of its own annual consumption, and
continues, at least, the existence of the stock or capital
which maintains and employs it.
“ Secondly, it seems, upon this, account, altogether
improper to consider artificers, manufacturers, and mer-
chants, in the same light as menial servants. The labour
of menial servants does not continue the existence of the
fund which maintains and employs them. Their main-
tenance and employment is altogether at the expense of
their masters, ( ?) and the work which they perform is not
of a nature to repay that expense.”
It seems strange that an economist, so eminent as the author
of “ The Wealth of Nations,” should have failed to see that
the menial’s personal service referred to was, as a product,
directly absorbed and enjoyed by the masters, not in the
relation of master to servant, but rather as consumers of ser-
vices of a definite economic value. In the differentiated
condition of the modern system of organised labour, it is rarely
the case that the primary raw materials, upon which the par-
ticular worker or factory is engaged, happens to pass directly,
as in the case of the menial’s personal services, in a finished
condition to the consumer. On the contrary, the raw
material in most cases passes through many hands, and many
stages of transport, modification, and improvement, before it
attains to the completed condition of the consumer’s market-
able commodity.
In the latest of all the stages and processes of the com-
modity or personal service, is accumulated the composite cost
of all its previous stages of production, transport, and modi-
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


fication. At this final stage when passing over to the con-
sumer, the latter pays the cost of the services of all the pro-
ductive agencies which, stage by stage, accrued and became
incorporated in the final marketable stage of the specific com-
modity or service.
But it is important to observe that in the act of consump-
tion, whether of a valuable commodity or a valuable personal
service, the consumer destroys or annihilates the commodity,
V er se, with its economic monetary value, transforming a costly
product into one of the necessary satisfactions or enjoyments
by which the life of a man is sustained, and without such
final absorption of costly but necessary wants, life would not
be possible.
By looking at the whole question in this light, it would
seem to be true that the last stage of any completed com-
modity is placed in the same position as the last stage in the
completion of a necessary and valuable personal service , so
far as Adam Smith’s test, of barren and unproductive ser-
vices is concerned. In this aspect of the question, all the
services of primary producers, artificers, manufacturers, and
merchants, do not really differ essentially from that of
menials,” nor from each other, inasmuch as all values of
commodity products, in common with personal service pro-
ducts, cease to exist when absorbed, dissolved, or transformed
into the benefits, satisfactions, and enjoyments involved in
actual consumption. The actual realisation of the enjoyment
of the needs and satisfactions of life, involved in the very
act of consumption of valued products, is, in itself, the Alpha
and Omega of real wealth. All money or other values related
thereto, are mere measurements of this wealth of consump-
tion. It is the instruments of production—human labour and
its auxiliary aids (kept up to pristine value by renewals,
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


repairs, and fresh creations), which permanently continue
to retain monetary value—not the perishable products, per se,
actually appropriated and dissolved in annual or periodical
consumption.
This end is, truly, the great object, as well as the motive,
of all human producing effort.
The annual value of “ Consumable Wealth ” only repre-
sents about 4 per cent, of the nominal capital wealth of a
country.
The former represents the actual wealth produced available
for use or consumption within the current year ; the latter
represents the estimated nominal present capital value of the
future productions of exchange value.
No matter how great may be the estimate of the present
capital value of “ Claim ” on future productions, only about
one-twenty-fifth of the value of actual products can be appro-
priated or absorbed within any one year.
The following tabular extracts from “ The Statesman’s
Pocket Year-book of Tasmania, 1917,” may better indicate
the comparative nominal values of present capital value of
production, as compared with the annual value alone avail-
able for the current year’s consumption. No mere read-
justment of ownership of claim or right to the existing instru-
ments of production can increase the volume or value of the
current year’s wealth of production available for consump-
tion :
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Consumable Wealth Distribution, Year 1914.
Estimates showing approximately, how the Value
of Annual Wealth Produced is Appropriated and
Absorbed by the Various Classes of Breadwinners,
and by Man’s Auxiliary Instruments of Produc-
tion : —
<5
Real Wealth Absorbed.
Description.
C
'%
a
D
"3 O ,
S Q,^
O
c«
Amount
ca ,0 *
a Q
U
ca
O
CL
s- a
<D -rH l—l
CL £
(A) Breadwinners’
Incomes —
No.
(£1000)
%
s. d.
Class—
I. Under £80
6-2,144
3800
43-43
4 1
11. £80— £150 ...
1-2,988
1474
16-84
7 7
III. £150 — £400 ...
606:1
1-223
13-98
13 5
IV. £400 — £1000
1000
47(5
5-43
31 9
V. £1000 & over
246
223
2-56
60 4
Total II. — V.
•20,297
3396
38-81
11 2
Total Breadwinners
82,441
7196
82-24
5 10
(B) Man’s Auxiliary
Instruments of
Production
1554
17-76
1 3
Grand Total ..
82,441
8750
100-00
7 1
Current “Standard op Living.”
Estimate of the Nature and Approximate Annual
Cost of the “Standard of Living” of the People
1914
Description.
Total
Per Head of
Per
Equiva-
lent
Amount
Population.
Cent.
Labour
Days.
(A)--By Human
%
.Vo. t
Agents and De-
(£1000)
£ s. d.
pendents -
33-03
99-1
Food
2890
14 14 11
Clothing ...
79(5
4 1 3
9-10
27-3
Dwellings
1018
5 3 10
11-63
34-9
Fuel and Light ...
283
1 8 10
3-23
9-7
Medical Services...
206
1 I 0
2-35
7-0
Education
166
0 16 11
1-90
5-7
Protection
101
0 10 5
115
3-5
Charities,...
103
0 10 6
1-18
3-5
Spirits & Tobacco
913
4 13 2
19 • 44
31-3
All other ...
720
3 13 6
8-23
24-7
Total
7196
36 14 4
82-24
246-7
B. — By Man’s
Auxiliary In-
struments and
17-76
Forces ...
1554
7 18 7
53 3
8750
44 12 11*
100-00
300• 00
No. of Breadwinners, 82,441. Total No. of Labour Days, 24,732,300.
* Per Breadwinner, £B7 ss. 9d. f Per Average Breadwinner.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Section IX.
Unimproved Value Taxation
EFFECT OF TAXATION ON REAL ESTATE WHEN RESTRICTED
TO WHAT IS USUALLY REGARDED AS ITS “UNIMPROVED
CAPITAL VALUE.”
TAXATION of what is usually termed “ the capital value
of the unimproved land element in real estate ”
according to the popular view—is supposed to distribute more
equitably the burden of that share of the general taxes which
it may be found necessary to draw from industries or invest-
ments directly connected with the occupation of land.
Of course, it is at once obvious that a great advantage
to landowners would be obtained if taxes confined, or mainly
confined, to the “ unimproved land ” element were so
arranged as to take a smaller aggregate amount of taxes from
“ real estate ” than the aggregate raised by taxing the capital
value of land with its “ improvements.” To ascertain the
merits of rival modes of taxing the land, it is absolutely essen-
tial for true comparison that the aggregate amount of tax,
however distributed, must be the same in each case.
We will assume, therefore, that in any comparison of the
rival merits of different methods the aggregate tax to be
obtained must be the same in amount. There are two methods
which are practicable, each having their special advocates and
sympathisers, and which for convenience of reference we may
respectively designate as: —( a ) Taxation on land and its
improvements; ( h ) taxation on the unimproved capital value
of land.


(a) Taxation on Land and Its Imjrrovements.
The ordinary capital value of land (“ real estate ”) the
estimated or assessed current value of land, including such
fixed improvements as are embraced in houses, buildings,
fences, fruit-trees, permanent grass or pasture, drains, arti-
ficial clearing of forest, scrub, or fern, &c. It does not include
essential auxiliary capital employed, the amount of which
widely varies with the particular industry, such as movable
tools, machinery, and implements, capital for labour services,
animal stock, skill of direction, &c.
(b) Taxation on the U nimproved Capital Value of Land.
The same as the preceding, save that it distinguishes the
improvements effected, inherited, or purchased by the present
owner from the so-called “ unemployed capital value,” which
is usually deemed to be that variable residue of land value
after deducting the improvements not yet exhausted, which
have been erected by the present or former owners, consisting
of :—(1) Monopoly of right of possession or tenure originally
purchased from or otherwise granted by the State, plus, (2)
the incremental value arising automatically from the growth
of centres of population, state expenditure on roads, bridges,
and other indirect value-giving accessories.
Seeing that the net income or ability of the user of land
depends upon the intensity as well as the nature of the indus-
try or business carried on upon a given area of land, it is
necessary to inquire whether the unimproved capital value
of land (forming in a young country about 50 per cent, of the
total capital value of real estate) affords a better index of
ability or net income than the total capital value of all real
estate necessarily engaged in the conduct of the particular
business or industry.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Let us examine this matter in a common-sense way by ask-
ing, “ What area of land is necessary to be held to secure a
similar amount of net yearly income ? For it is the net profit
or income derived from any enterprise which is the true test
of ability, purchasing power, or equality of sacrifice, in rela-
tion to taxes; and not the mere number of acres held, or the
absolute amount of the capital value thereof, whether in
regard to land in its improved or unimproved condition.
These conclusions are fully born© out by the knowledge
gained, that net income in relation to area depends on the
form of industry to which the land is devoted.
The percentage net income derivable from any enterprise
may not have a very wide range to invested capital —fixed
and free —essential to successful enterprise, in connection with
the occupation of the land. But it is certain that the pro-
portion of net income varies widely in relation to the fixed
capital (whether “ improved,” “ unimproved,” or general),
according to the nature of the business which local, natural,
or artificial circumstances make it possible to be carried on
with any chance of success.
To illustrate more clearly this matter, let us take four dif-
ferent kinds of business, which require, as a base of opera-
tions, the possession of widely varying areas of land, to earn
a net income of nearly the same amount per year.
The question under this aspect is—What is the proportion
of capital invested in either of the following forms of fixed
capital in relation to a common net income derivable there-
from, viz., improved, unimproved, and general fixed capital,
in the following kinds of business, all of which are necessary
to be carried on in the general interests of the country, viz.
(1) Sheep farming; (2) agricultural (tillage) farming; (3) hop
or orchard industry; (4) investments in the business of the
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


capitalist who derives his income from the purchase or con-
struction of buildings devoted to dwellings, warehouses, shops,
&c.
It is not necessary at this stage to dwell upon the causes,
natural and accidental, lying beyond the control of either
industrial chiefs or legislature, which determines success in
the primary industries and other forms of business engaged in
connection with the lands of the country. For the purpose
of this argument it is sufficient to show that the gross value
of products or services tend to increase in relation to a given
unit of land area as we proceed from the extensive culture of
the stock farm, passing onward through the more intense til-
lage culture of the agriculturist and orchardist, until the
higher stage of the utilisation of land areas in cities is reached
in the form of manufacturing and industrial buildings, and
the dwellings of the various classes of breadwinners connected
with city occupations.
But while this is indisputable, there is one result common
to all forms of enterprise, and that is, that a similar amount
of capital invested in either of the four forms of enterprise
already referred to is certain to entail a similar monetary
loss—not gain—so long as improvements are not added in the
form of —(1) Fixed capital, as in buildings, roads, fences,
drains, &c.; (2) free capital, as workmen's wages, portable
instruments, and tools of trade or industry, sheep, cattle, &c.
If this be admitted, it follows that if we levy a tax upon
capital at the “ dead stage,” i.e., where it is restricted to land
in its “ unimproved stage,” it means that we tax not merely
the man who derives no income therefrom whatever, but it
actually creates an additional item of disadvantage to capital
so unprofitably lying in wasting idleness. It follows, also,
that it is only in proportion to the amount of wisely-invested
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


capital added in the form of “ improvements,” whether fixed
or free, that any income or profit is measurable or possible,
and hence, from a reasoner’s point of view, it is obvious that
“unimproved land ” of whatever capital value is no index
of any ability to pay taxes, except in a negative sense, i.e., it
is rather to be regarded as a measure of the lack of ability, or
of the loss of original capital.
It is only a possible index of ability or income when it is
conjoined, wisely, with the necessary capital in fixed or free
improvements. For, to the latter dose of capital, the first
or unimproved moiety is absolutely dependent upon the
chance of earning any kind of reward or profit. It is indubi-
table that the greater the capital wisely added, in labour,
skill, and other auxiliary improvements, the greater is the
net profit of the entrepreneur, provided always that the stage
where the law of diminishing returns of the economist begins
to operate does not intervene.
The Law of Increasing Returns.
It has been clearly demonstrated by all thoughtful econo-
mists, such as Professor Marshall —(1) “That while the part
which Nature plays in production conforms to the law of
diminishing returns, the part which man plays conforms to
the law of increasing returns, which may be stated thus:
‘An increase of capital and labour leads generally to an
improved organisation, and, therefore, in those industries
which are not engaged in raising raw produce, it generally
gives a return increased more than in proportion; and, fur-
ther, this improved organisation tends to diminish, or even
override, any increased resistance which Nature may offer to
raising increased amounts of raw produce.’ ”
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


On the other hand, the law of diminishing returns draws
its limits more closely for what are often termed extra doses
of improvements from capital as we approach those industries
where the cost for the employment of active labour necessary
for current production is at a minimum in relation to the
actual capital invested in the unimproved value of the land
itself.
It follows, therefore, that a uniform tax on unimproved
capital value would tend to press more heavily on industries
where cost of improvements in relation thereto bears the small-
est proportion : that is, it would bear more heavily on hop-
growing than upon a manufacturing industry; agriculture
would be more heavily burdened than hop-growing, and pas-
toral industry would, in its turn, be more heavily burdened
than tillage agriculture.
In all cases it would relatively bear more heavily on a given
area in the same kind of industry where, as among the smaller
poor capitalists or farmers, the minimum of improvements
had only been introduced owing to lack of skill or means.
It may be taken for granted, therefore, that within certain
limits, proceeding from the lowest unimproved land stage to
the highest, through successive stages of added capital
improvements and equipment, a greater absolute profit may
be obtained within the limits of the “ law of diminishing
returns,” which, as already affirmed, varies greatly, according
to the nature of the industry or business. Thus, for
example:—Five shillings per acre, or less, may be the full
limit of arrest for added capital for certain pastoral lands,
£3 per acre, or less, may similarly arrest agricultural effort,
£4O, or less, may arrest certain horticultural enterprise, while
the house-building landlords’ business, on favourable sites
in towns and cities, may not even be arrested by an added
outlay of £3200 capital per acre.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Effect of Raising a Definite Amount of Tax by Means
of a Uniform Rate from the Capital Value of Unim-
proved or Improved Land Respectively*.
If we assume, broadly, that the average proportion of land
values, known in these Australasian States as 11 unimproved
land value,” represent —as it nearly does in most countries —
about 50 per cent, of the total capital value of all real estate
held by private owners, it follows, in the aggregate, that a
uniform rate of Id. in the £1 on the “ unimproved ” moiety
would be required to realise the same amount of tax that
oould be obtained by one halfpenny uniform rate, based upon
the total capital value of all private owners’ real estate.
But, while this is indubitable as regards the relation of the
tax to the State Treasury, it has a very widely differing effect
on the industries carried on in town and country respectively.
This is due to the circumstance that in a very few indus-
tries is it possible or profitable to arrange matters so that
exactly half the value of capital invested in real estate shall
be devoted to the unimproved portion. In the new under-
takings, where such a proportion obtains, it does not matter
in the slightest degree whether the rate to be fixed at id. per
£1 on unimproved value, or at the rate of Id. on the total
capital value of all real estate.
But it is found in the experience of many civilised coun-
tries that the proportion of capital absorbed in the unim-
proved portion necessary to carry on the more important
industries of the farms in country districts requires more than
50 per cent, of the total capital value of real estate, and
sometimes as much as 67 per rent.
On the other hand, many city and town industries, with
large capital invested yielding profits in proportion, may only
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Industry.
Capital Value—
Unimproved.
Real Estate
including
Improvements,
Taxation—
Unimproved.
Including
Improvements.
Hate Id.
Hale £d.
Country—
£
£
£ s d.
£ s. d.
Pastoral...
600
10U0
2 10 0
2 1 8
Agricultural
50
1000
2 5 10
2 I 8
Horticultural ...
500
1000
2 1 8
2 1 8
Town—
House-building...
450
1000
1 17 6
2 1 8
Manufacturing ...
400
1000
1 13 4
2 1 8
have only 33 per cent, of the total capital value of real estate
represented by the so-called “ unimproved ” portion.
To show how unfairly the country industries would be
effected by a change of the uniform rate of per £1 on the
total capital value to a uniform rate of Id. per £1 on the
unimproved” portion, i.e., in the aggregate tax its exact
equivalent, the following comparative table has been pre-
pared ;
Table Showing the Effect of Raising a Definite Amount of
Taxation in any State on the Basis of Improved or Unim-
proved Capital Value Respectively:
From this illustration it is made clear in a general way that
a tax of a given amount, if levied on the basis of unimproved
capital value, would, compared with the same tax levied on
the total capital value, have the effect of increasing the rela-
tive burden of the tax on all properties whose percentage of
improvements falls short of 50 per cent, of total capital value
of real estate, the burden increasing with every increase in
the proportion of unimproved capital value. The converse
of this effect takes place on all properties whose proportion
of improvements exceed 50 per cent, of total capita] value.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


The industries which would suffer most hy the change
would be in the following order, beginning with those most
adversely affected:
1. Sheep and agricultural farmers.
2. Hop farms, market gardens, orchards.
3. Smaller landlords of houses in suburban districts and
in country towns.
The only property owners who would greatly benefit by the
change would be such of them as own the more costly build-
ings in cities and the larger towns.
Conclusion.
From the previous observation, and from the illustrations
given in the foregoing table, it is made sufficiently obvious
that whatever anomalies and defects exist, arising out of a
tax on land based upon the total capital value of real estate,
a tax, equal in the aggregate amount, based upon its unim-
proved element, would intensify the anomalies, and increase
the defects, instead of removing them. It is further manifest
that the direction of the change, from a tax on the total
capital value of real estate, to a tax confined, or mainly
derived from its unimproved portion, would be in favour of
the wealthy owners, and against the poor owners of land.
That is, it would have the effect of raising the tax of the poor,
or the financially trammelled owners, in proportion to real
income or ability, while it would have the opposite effect as
regards the rich or the financially untrammelled owners.
And finally, so far as the tax on unimproved values might
be supposed to have any influence in forcing owners of idle
lands or non-profit-bearing lands to improve their properties,
as in intense culture in smaller areas; or to force them to
part with their land, or break it into smaller holdings (as
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


regards larger areas speculatively held), it is extremely doubt-
ful whether such results would be produced by such means.
For when we consider that the interest alone on idle lands
represents a loss equivalent to a tax of 240 pence in .the £1
of related income per annum, it is hardly likely that an extra
tax, merely equivalent to 10d., 12d., or even 30d. in the £1
of ordinary incomes, would do much as an extra impulse to
that far more powerfully exerted inducement operating auto-
matically, viz., the inevitable rapid destruction of the capital
principal itself through loss of interest in connection with
money sunk in a non-profit-bearing holding. It should be
obvious, even to those who have no economic or practical
experience in such matters, that even without a tax burden
of any kind, idle investment continued for about eight years
would swallow up half the principal, while a continued idle
investment in “ unimproved land ” for about fourteen years
would completely absorb the whole of the original capital so
foolishly invested.
On the other hand, a mere tax of Id. in the £1 of capital
would take nearly 53 years to absorb the principal, and even
a tax of l|d. in the £1 of capital would take about 45 years
to do so.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


PART VI.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS
Section X.
Taxation: Current Popular Fallacies
PART I.
NOTWITHSTANDING the many elaborate treatises
written on the subject of “The Principles of Taxation ”
since the celebrated four maxims were proposed by the author
of “ The Wealth of Nations,” it is somewhat surprising that
the responsible statesmen, instead of receiving practical help
from these extended lucubrations, is at once burdened and
confused by endless and often trivial objections on every
point raised. Nearly all writers, in commenting on the four
maxims of Adam Smith appear to confine themselves to mat-
ters of detail, for the purpose of showing that the practical
application of any principle whatever is certain to involve
anomalies inconsistent with the ideal sought to be attained;
and because they have been successful in demonstrating the
existence of such anomalies, they think they have made a
good case for discarding the central principles which, con-
ceived as an ideal, may be admirable and unexceptionable.
It has been too much overlooked by the majority of writers
on this vexed subject that not only is every kind of tax —like
all necessary expenditure —objectionable in itself, but owing
to the complexity of conditions among different classes of
breadwinners it is humanly impossible to impose any form
of tax that does not in some instances in a degree transgress


against some standard of right, equity, or relative ability to
contribute. This being so, all arguments which merely show
the existence of certain minor transgressions prove nothing
of any value to the statesman who has to act on broad practic-
able lines that are upon the whole approximately equitable.
The statesman may often be able to hold some broad and
just view as to the general fairness of the manner in which
the burden of taxation may be borne by various classes and
interests; and while he may not be able to reach all classes
by any one method which would of itself be justified by any
of the accepted standards of imposition, he may still see his
way to adopt complementary compensating methods, which,
when combined, as a whole, may approach as closely as is
humanly possible to that broad commonsense view of the fair-
ness of the burden or impost, viz., the financial strain of each
individual in the State should correspond to his financial
power. The statesman knows that, in practice, there will
be exceptional individual cases which will not fit in with the
general principle as exactly as might be idealised, but he,
being practical, must suffer the existence of minor imperfec-
tions which cannot be helped, and be satisfied if the ideal of
“ equality of sacrifice ” has been fairly realised in respect of
the only standard which has any practical relation with a
money sacrifice, viz., the proportion which the tax hears in
relation to the average income of the breadwinner. The
statesman, therefore, says: —All taxation schemes are in a
sense evil, but as one of the evil schemes must be adopted, the
wisdom of selection is disclosed, not by demonstrating its per-
fections, so much, as by demonstration that of the various
imperfect schemes, one of which must be adopted, he has
chosen that which involves “ the lesser evil.” It is useless,
if not misleading, to relate the money tax of the individual
THE E M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


to any other power or possession of a different category. A
money sacrifice can be measured alone by the money power
of the individual. It is only in this strict sense that we can
come to any reasonable conclusion from the “ Equality of
Sacrifice ” point of view.
Monetary value of tax proportioned to monetary income of
the individual, can always be held as a fairly good standard,
even if minor qualifications may be admitted where par-
ticular circumstances may seem to justify them.
The first of the four famous maxims of Adam Smith has for
its leading principle the “ Equality of Sacrifice ” idea, or
more explicitly that the financial strain of the share of national
tax should correspond with the financial -power of the income
of the individual as nearly as practicable.
De. Smith’s Foue Maxims op Taxation.
1- The subjects of every State ought to contribute
towards the support of the Government as nearly as possible
in proportion to their respective abilities—that is, in pro-
portion to the revenue which they respectively enjoy under
the protection of the State.
“2. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought
to be certain, and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the
quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the
contributor and to every other person.
“3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the
manner which is most likely to be convenient for the con-
tributor to pay it.
'"4. Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out
of the pockets of the people as little as possible over and above
what it brings into the public treasury of the State.”
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Equality of Sacrifice Ideal.
If inclined to be hypercritical we might follow the majority
of economists and find many objections to the first of these
maxims by putting a meaning into the phrase in ‘ 1 'proportion
to respective abilities ,” which is opposed to the plain context
and to coramonsense. So also might we confuse the central
principle by subordinating the ability to contribute to the
relative share of protection enjoyed, and thus land us in the
absurdity, that the weak, poor, and helpless, might possibly
be required to pay the larger share of tax !
We might also, with many, endeavour to show that taxes
falling upon capital, trade, or thrift, are in their nature dis-
advantageous; but if the proportion of monetary tax cor-
responds to monetary power of the individual, whatever be
the function, it is obvious that their relative positions to each
other remain undisturbed; and the only harm that would be
of consequence would be to relieve any one interest of its
fair proportional share according to ability, and throw it upon
the remainder because it so happened a special case represent-
ing disadvantages was sought for in the one case, and cor-
responding disadvantages of quite as great a consequence were
ignored, or unsought in the others. Arguments of this kind
in favour of capital or accumulation, under the happy, but
beguiling, misnomer “ Taxes on Thrift,” used to be put for-
ward under the guns of the exploded “ Fixed Wages Fund,”
but it is obvious that all such partial views are the outcome
of the self-interest of the classes concerned, and not the out-
come of altruism, which regards the good of all the individuals
of the State. Indeed, all arguments of a class based upon
ideas which make the amount of Capital or Accumulation in
the State, the measure of the Thrift and Industry of the par-
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


ticnlar possessors, are both false and mischievous; for although
such accumulation may, in a broad sense, be regarded as
the product of Thrift and Industry, it does not follow that
the accidental nominal possessors are themselves the embodi-
ment of the Thrift and Industry of the Country, although
they can prove possession of their fruits.
The largest accumulators of capital at the present day do
not derive their accumulations from the actual production of
wealth. They neither originate the machinery, nor help in
the processes which increase real wealth. They merely specu-
late or gamble for ownership or interest in proceeds. Their
accumulations, sometimes colossal, are for the most part
obtained by shrewd speculations confined to pure transfers
of claim upon realised wealth rather than upon its produc-
tion. It is true that in the same person it is often associated
with actual enterprise in the production of wealth; but it is
also often quite independent of any such association, and
indeed such persons, not infrequently make large fortunes
in the profits and sales of stocks, of which, at the moment of
bargain, they are not themselves the real possessors.
These may be credited with energy in the redistribution of
existing wealth, but it would be altogether false and mis-
leading to confound this form of energy with the thrift,
energy, and skill of those actually employed, in the produc-
tion of wealth, whose contributions to successful ends are
rarely indicated by their individual possession of shares in the
product.
The third maxim of Dr. Smith, however, must also be
reckoned with (viz., the greatest convenience to tax-contribu-
tors, both as regards the time and manner of payment) if we
are ever to attain ideal fairness of “ Equality of Sacrifice ” in
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


the share of taxes paid to the State by different classes of
breadwinners. For it is too often overlooked by many econo-
mists, that even if all persons yielded annually a tax fairly
corresponding in total amount to their respective annual
incomes, it would be no proof of equality of sacrifice if the
total amount of tax from each class was collected in a single
payment on one specified day, yearly. To the masses of the
people, whose current floating capital is small and precarious,
this method would be a grievous and intolerable burden. To
the minority, whose current floating capital is capable of
bearing a greater strain, the inconvenience, however great,
would be trifling in comparison with the strain upon the mass
of wage-earners.
Income Tax.
There is no doubt that a direct Income Tax, if levied in
proportion to ability, would, as a Single Tax, secure arith-
metically an amount of tax from each breadwinner, which
might fairly correspond proportionally to the amounts of the
several incomes. For, suppose A and B are inquired to pay
a tax corresponding to incomes which we may conceive to be
20s. per week for A, and £SOOO per annum for B. The pro-
portional Income Tax, say, of 6 per cent., would require a
sum of £3 2s. sd. at a fixed point of time from A, and a
sum of £3OO from B. The question now arises, would it be as
easy for A to provide at a fixed point of time 6 per cent,
of his small weekly wages, representing weeks’ earnings,
as for B to pay £3OO.
In the majority of cases it would be far less easy for A to
pay the smaller amount, as it would involve constant saving
from the very small margin left after providing for the mini-
mum of necessaries required for the bare support of life.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Whereas in the case of B it could not possibly trench upon
ordinary provision for necessaries, and at most could only
curtail the proportion devoted to comforts, luxuries, and the
accumulation of capital. It is requisite, therefore, before
instituting a strict comparison of equal sacrifice, that the
element of provision lor the minimum of bare necessaries to
suppoit life, should be deducted. Let this amount be, say,
£4O per breadwinner. Thus:
A. £52 - £4O = £lO.
B. £SOOO - £4O = £4960.
But £3 2s. sd. represents as much as 3L20 per cent, of the
margin of £lO left beyond provision of minimum for bare
necessaries of life in the case of A, while in the case of B
the £3OO would only represent 6’05 per cent, of the cor-
responding margin left.
It is not contended here that the margin of £4960 indicated
would be so great, actually, as the circumstances of B would
naturally induce him to enpoy a much higher standard of
living, even in the matter of common necessaries. That is,
the comforts and luxuries would of themselves become by
habit and usage a sort of necessity of living for B ; but this
necessity of living, of caste, or usage, trying as it is in some
cases to curtail, is absurd when placed in contrast with the
curtailment of the hare necessities of food and shelter, whose
limits are determined by a minimum beyond which human
life is not supportable.
Even if we arbitrarily made a much lower provision for the
unencroachable limit of the bare necessaries of life, as an abate-
ment from incomes, say, £25 per breadwinner, it would be
easy to show, as in the following table, that the higher the
nominal income, the smaller becomes the relative monetary
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Income Per Year.
Tax per £ of
Gross Income.
Income Less Abatement.
s.
d.
s.
d.
52
1
2-4<>
o
3-72
75
1
2-40
1
9-60
100
1
2-40
1
7-20
150
1
2-40
1
5-28
200
1
2-40
1
4-46
250
1
2-40
1
4-01
300
1
2-40
1
3 • 72
500
1
2 • 40
1
3-17
1000
1
2-40
1
2-76
5000
1
2 40
1
2-47
strain even while the arithmetical proportion of total tax to
total income remains the same: Thus:
It matters not what allowance we make for the rigid unen-
croachable portion of income necessary to the sustenance of
life, it is clear that equality of monetary strain or ability
can only be measured fairly in the proportion which the tax
bears to surplus of life margin. A tax, or the aggregate of
two or more kinds of tax, which does not make such reason-
able allowance, must of necessity, as in the above table, be
practically a graded tax progressively favourable to the higher
incomes and against the lower. The previous illustration
clearly reveals the fact that even a common rate of tax on
gross income would not strictly effect the “ equality of sac-
rifice ” ideal. On the contrary, it would produce, practically,
the only species of graduated tax, which is utterly indefensible
from whatever point of view it may be regarded, viz., that
graduation whose lowest step begins with the highest income;
increasing each step in succession as incovie decreases-, and
finally reaching its highest grade in the lowest income subject
to the tax. Thus, as shown in previous table, the effect of a
common rate of 6 per cent, on the gross income of different
grades, would effect the following graduation, favourable to
THE K. M. JOHNSTON MEMOKIAL VOLUME


Gross Income...
£
5000
£
1000
£
500
£
300
£
250
£ £ £
2(0 150 100
£ £
75 1 52
Tax Per Cent,
to Gross In-
come
6
6
6
6
6
6 6 6
6 6
Ditto Pence : s,
per £ Ditto . 1
d.
2-40
S.
1
d.
2-40
S. d
1 2-40
s. d.
1 240
s
1
d.
2-40
s. d. s. d. s. d.
1 2-40 1 2-40 1 2-40
s. d. s. d.
1 2-40 1 2-40
Equivalent in ,
rate per £
relative to
Gross In- s.
come in Ex- 1
cess of £25
(Equality of
S a c r i fi c e
Standard) .)
d.
2-47
s
1
d.
2-76
s. d.
1 3-17
s. d.
1 3-72
s.
1
d.
4-01
s. d. s. d. 1 s. d.
1 4-46 i 5-28 1 7-20
s. d. s. d.
1 9-60 2 3-72
higher incomes in respect to the “ Equality of Sacrifice ”
standard:
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


This clearly demonstrates that the plausibly fair common
rate of 6 per cent, of the respective gross income of each grade
is nearly twice as heavy (9T40 per cent.) relatively to an
income of £52 per year as it is to an income of
£5OOO. But suppose we ignore this qualification. Let
us see how far equality of sacrifice in relation to gross
income is attempted to be secured by economists and states-
men. It is curious that the practical statesman has a better
grasp of the effect produced by a tax at a common non-gradu-
ated rate on all incomes, than the average economist or
idealist; for in nearly all countries where a direct tax is
imposed on incomes the statesman invariably, by abatements
made in favour of the lowest incomes, converts the common
rate on gross incomes into a most decided though finely vary-
ing graduation tax, whose tendency is in favour of the lower
incomes, although lacking systematic gradation throughout.
Thus by the provision made by English statesmen for the
year 1890, viz., fid. in the £ on all incomes with abatement of
£l2O on incomes between £l5O and under £4OO, and exemp-
tion on all incomes under £l5O, there is secured a decided
form of graduation in favour of the lower incomes, and whose
only justification can be the vague recognition of something
like the “ Equality of Sacrifice ” principle of taxation. Thus,
in relation to gross income the common rate of fid. in the £
is converted into the following irregularly graduated series:
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Gross Income
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
£
52
75
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
500
Taxable Income
ml
nil
nil
30
80
130
180
230
400
500
Nominal Tax per £ on
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
Taxable Income
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
Actual Tax per £ on Gross
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
Income ...
nil
nil
nil
1*20
2-40
3-12
3-60
3-94
6
6
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Yet, while nothing is more clear that the responsible states-
men in all civilised communities have always in practice,
recognised in some degree, the equity of a graduated scale,
ascending with increase in income, the average idealist and
literary economist still continue to draw inferences or con-
clusions from imperfectly drawn premises, proving to their
own satisfaction at least, that any form of graded tax is both
unjustifiable and inequitable, and indirectly dangerous to
the whole social fabric.
The real cause of difference of opinion between the respon-
sible economist (statesman) and the irresponsible literary
economist probably arises from the fact that the former
faces realities, and is forced to gauge more closely and cer-
tainly the practical effect of his actions upon the various
interests immediately concerned : the latter only faces ideals
which, though correct in some cases, as an elementary con-
ception, are generally inapplicable under the particular con-
ditions in which the statesman has to form his judgment and
to act.
For example, the statesman when making provision for
levying an income tax or property tax, as the case may be,
cannot forget that he is only dealing with a part of the tax
burden of the people, and therefore he does not burden his
mind with such principles of taxation as are only applicable
when testing the aggregate effect of the total taxation of the
country. He is probably too well aware that the principle
of spreading the burden of the major portion of the taxa-
tion of the country in the manner in which it is most easy
for the mass of the people to bear (viz., Customs), has
already fixed two-thirds nearly (58'57 per cent., United King-
dom, year 1891) of the whole taxation, and therefore any
argument which the idealist can urge in respect of taxes as a
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


whole are altogether inapplicable to the third under con-
sideration, unless it can be shown that the two-thirds already
determined as a tax through Customs, are levied on a prin-
ciple which recognised equality of sacrifice, not only as regards
manner, time of payment, but also as regards income or finan-
cial power. If the statesman is aware, as he is likely to be,
that the latter assumption is far from the truth, he will pro-
perly reject the idealist’s generalisations as altogether faist
and inapplicable.
The practical statesman, in determining the principles
which should guide him in fixing the incidence of the remain-
ing third of the necessary taxes, should have for his guiding
principle compensation for any inherent injustice or defect
in the basal system, which already secures two-thirds of the
taxation; and the measure of this compensation should be
determined by the consideration that any inequality involved
in the major scheme—Customs —as regards the individual
should be remedied as far as practicable by another inequality ,
but opposite in kind, which, when combined as a whole, might
then approximate to the two grand principles of taxation,
viz.—(l) regard to the convenience of the mass of the people;
(2) regard to the financial ability of the individual.
PART 11.
The Advantages of Taxes on Consumption (Customs and
Excise).
Why should the mode of levying the major portion of all
taxation by means of Customs and Excise Duties be favoured
so long by so many nations ? It is obviously very defective
when measured by the standard of equality of sacrifice; for
the individual consumption of dutiable goods is its absolute
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


measure; and this individual consumption is altogether incom-
mensurate with the wide and infinitely variable financial
power of the various breadwinners. Tea, sugar, tobacco,
spirits, and beer are the principal sources of tax revenue in
most countries, and the strong healthy worker, working for a
poor salary or wage, on an average, consumes a greater quan-
tity (and therefore pays a greater absolute portion of tax) of
these dutiable commodities than the brain-worried financier
or wealthy millionaire. It follows from these considerations
that in the United Kingdom and in other countries at least
two-thirds of all taxation is levied on the basis of average
consumption of dutiable articles of Customs and excise, and
therefore, on the basis of numbers, irrespective broadly of the
respective financial abilities of the various consumers. Why,
then, should a tax be tolerated by the many, which is levied
in a manner so unfair to the smaller income classes ? There
are two good answers which the statesman may be prepared
to give to such a query. First, he may show that while two-
thirds of taxation is levied nearly equally, it is borne by all;
and although not in accordance with the principle of
“ Equality of Sacrifice,” the amount paid by each one is not
only comparatively within the power of the smallest income,
but it is levied in such a manner as to continuously accom-
modate itself to the varying fortunes of the poorest from day
to day. At any moment a worker can reduce his taxes at
will. By giving up his tobacco and beer, when temporary
difficulties or other necessities demand it, he also reduces his
tax by one-half, to be again increased as his power or will
to expend is increased. He has no difficulty in making pro-
vision for paying an inconveniently large fixed sum at a given
time, for it is really paid by him unconsciously in such small
measure from day to day as not to be felt inconveniently.
Its absolute amount per breadwinner per day in the United
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Kingdom does not exceed Ifd., and per head of population
scarcely Id. per day. The smallness of the amount, there-
fore, conjoined with its flexible, accommodating, and unobtru-
sive character, is far more easily borne by the great mass of
persons with small incomes than would a fixed sum of half
its annual value, if demanded inexorably on one fixed day
in the year. This is the great boon of the Customs’ method
of taxation to the mass of the people. But this is not the
only reason; for after all, though the principle of “ Equality
of Sacrifice ” could not be worked in with the principle of
advantage of convenience and of flexibility, the former prin-
ciple may still be secured approximately by the manner in
which the remaining third is raised. For if the latter be
confined mainly to the persons who have the larger incomes,
and distributed among them in such a manner as when con-
joined with their respective portion paid through Customs
would secure in the aggregate of all taxes a proportion in
harmony with the respective financial powers of each bread-
winner, then would the practical statesman succeed in mak-
ing the taxes, as a whole, conform to the two grand principles
of taxation, viz., Equality of Sacrifice and flexible accommoda-
tion to the needs and fluctuating powers of the poorest. And
it is also apparent that all these desirable results could not
be attained by levying all taxes from all persons by one
method, whether direct or indirect; nor could all the prin-
ciples be secured at the same time by any one of the different
modes taken by itself. But by securing one principle by one
method regarded as a hose it can be shown that it is still
practicable to attain conformity approximately to all the prin-
ciples in the aggregate of all kinds of taxation, provided that
the principle of compensation be the leading feature of the
complementary modes of taxation. The following illustration
shows that this is the practical way of looking at the whole
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


question of taxation, and that comment upon the minor com-
plementary portions of taxation cannot be affected by criti-
cisms which, logically, can only apply to the combined effect
of all taxes, and are either totally, or at best only partially,
applicable to its parts when taken separately.
The principal mode of taxation in the United Kingdom is
Customs and excise, for the amount raised in this way repre-
sents as much as 58'57 per cent.* of all taxes, and represents
a sum of about £2 12s. 7d. per breadwinner per year.
It is reckoned on the whole that this 58’57 per cent, of all
taxes is not adjusted to the financial powers of the different
grades of incomes. Rich and poor pay nearly alike. It
therefore by itself is altogether out of harmony with the lead-
ing principle of taxation, which demands that each person
shall contribute according to his financial abilities. It how-
ever, secures—and perhaps by this method alone could it be
secured—that inestimable boon to the masses, convenience,
and flexible accommodation to the varying fortunes of the
poorest; a boon which is far more important to them than the
payment of a smaller annual sum, rigidly fixed, both as
regards amount, and time of payment. Inasmuch, moreover,
as the remaining great principle “ Equality of Sacrifice ”
may be secured indirectly by raising the remaining 4T43 per
cent, in such a compensatory manner as would effect this end,
it is necessary to compute the extent of burden which should
be distributed among persons of different fortune in order that
when combined with the 58'57 per cent, already distributed
on the basis of mere numbers, it shall approximate to the other
great standard principle of taxation, which also demands con-
tribution according to ability, or equality of monetary sacri-
* In the Australasian colonies Customs and excise represent as much
as 80 43 per cent.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Gross Income
£
50
£
100
£
150
£ £ £
200 250 300
£
350
£
400
£
500
£
1000
£
5000
£
10,000
—Customs and Excise.
Customs and
Excise repre-
senting 58 - 57
of all taxes,
a b s o lute
amount per
breadwinner.
Pence
652
632
632
632 632 632
632
632
632
632
632
632
Basal Tax-
Equivalent in
Pence per £
x oflncome
d.
12-62
d.
6-31
d.
4-21
d d. d.
3-15 2-5212-10
d.
1-80
d.
1-58
d.
1-26
d.
0 63
d.
0-13
d.
0-06
flee. We can only find this out by first computing how far the
basal tax (Customs and Excise) in its incidence, departs from
the equality of sacrifice standard. Thus:
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


It is evident here that a tax which amounts to 12'62d. in the
£ to an income of £5O, and graduates downwards to as low
as o'o6d. in the £ on an income of £lO,OOO transgresses vio-
lently against the fundamental principle of taxation, which
demands from all equality of monetary sacrifice; and before
justice on this principle could be restored to the lowest income
of £5O, the complementary taxes should at least entirely
exempt the £5O income from further contributions until such
time as the very highest was raised to the same rate per £,
viz., 12'62d. But as it so happens in the United Kingdom,
the sum required by the State from Income Tax only demands
a further sacrifice of about 6d. in the £ on the larger incomes,
even while allowing an abatement of £l2O on all incomes
under £4OO, and a total exemption of incomes under £l5O,
it is demonstrated that the statesmen have acted in the right
direction —if they have not gone far enough —in adopting a
compensatory and opposite graduation in levying this portion
of the remainder of the taxes, and helping, if not wholly
restoring, the wrongful inequality produced by the Indirect
Tax through Customs and Excise. Let us see, however, how
far the inequality of sacrifice involved in the Customs and
Excise incidence, has been remedied by the English graded
Income Tax.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


Tax per £ of Income.
Income
£50
100
150
2C0
250
300
350
400
500
1000
5000
10,000
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
I. Customs and
Excise
12-62
6-31
4-21
3-15
2-52
2-10
1-80
1-58
1-26
0-63
013
0-06
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
11. Income Tax
nil
nil
1-20
2-40
3-12
3-60
3-94
6
6
6
6
6
Both
•
12-62
6*31
6*41
5-65
5-64
5-70
5-74
7-58
7-26
6-63
613
6-06
All
16-31
15-50
...
11-02
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Incomes.
A
Under
£100.
B
£100 to
£300.
C
£300 to
£1000.
D
£1000 and
over.
All
Incomes.
Average Income ...
£41-5?
£137-7
£624-5
£4662
£75-63
Tax per £ of Income of Breadwinner.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
I. Customs and
Excise*
15-19
4-58
1-01
014
8-35
II. AU other
Taxesf
0-94
10-92
10-94
10-88
5-95
Total
16-13
15-50
11-95
11-02
14-30
It is here clearly demonstrated that the process of partial
grading upwards with increase of incomes effected by abate-
ments and exemptions on lower incomes is more than justified
by the fact that, although still imperfect, it has largely
restored the inequality of sacrifice necessarily involved in the
Indirect Tax; and it further justifies a similar process of
gradation for other forms of tax, such as Probates, Stamps,
&c., in order to restore more perfectly the initial inequality.
That English statesmen have roughly attempted to so grade
the remaining complementary taxes is most clearly revealed
by limiting the groups for the United Kingdom in the year
1891, as in the following analysis of Taxation of the United
Kingdom for the year 1891; thus —
The above analysis of the incidence of the two great groups
of taxes, shows that the inequality produced by Method I.
was such that the higher Group D was, relative to financial
* Illustrates the involved graduated inequality with gradation in
favour of largfe incomes as “ Relative Sacrifice ” inevitable to any
scheme of taxation which secures flexibility and ease of payment of
tax to the masses with small incomes.
t Illustrates the necessity of opposing inequality of taxation or com-
pensatory portion of taxation in favour of the smaller incomes, in order
to secure equality of sacrifice together with convenience and flexibility in
the aggregate effect of all taxes.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


power, taxed 99'08 per cent, less than A. By Method 11. the
incidence was reversed in a compensatory fashion, causing
Group A to be taxed in relation to financial power
91'34 per cent, less than D. The final result of this
compensatory gradation in Method 11., although ranging by
higher steps than the relative financial powers (respective
incomes) was not sufficient to restore completely the lost
equality involved in Method 1., for the combined effects of I.
and 11. Methods indicate that A pays 16'13d. per £ of
income, whereas D only pays ll'o2d. per cent. —that is, s'lld.
per £ of income less, corresponding to a diminution of rela-
tive sacrifice, amounting to as much as 3P6Bd. per cent., as
compared with the burden on lower-income A. It is clear,
therefore, if the “ Equality of Sacrifice ” principle has been
lost to any extent in the basal Method 1., it cannot be restored
again without introducing a graduated compensatory tax,
whose steps must depart from the ratios of their respective
incomes by exactly the amount of departure in each case
unavoidably involved in the basal Method 1., but in an oppo-
site direction. A graduated compensatory tax of this kind,
such as an income tax, is therefore not merely justifiable, but
it would be utterty impossible to reach the ideal of ‘ ‘ Equality
of Sacrifice,” or relative financial power in the aggregate of
all taxation methods by any other means. Thus, if A and
B (representing, say, man and boy respectively) have to
carry, in two separate lots, a weight of 120 lb. between them,
and that the total weight carried by each shall not fall short
or exceed their relative powers, which are as 2 to 1, i.e., A 2,
81. Then if both carry the same weight of 20 lb. each in the
first trip, it is evident that A has carried 20 lb. under his
equitable share, which must be added to his next load to
restore equality of burden between them. The next and
final trip, B takes another load of 20 lb., making 40 lb. in
all to him. Now, in the aggregate, A must carry double
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


Ratio.
Actual Load.
Per cent, burden to
Relative Power.
First trip
. A1 : Bl, or
A 201b. B 201b.
A 25 B 50
Second trip ..
. A3 ; Bl, or
A 6(Jib. B 201b.
A 75 B 50
Both trips
. A 4 : B2, or
A 801b. B 401b.
A 100 B 100
Ratio ...
. A2 : Bl, or
A 21b. B lib
— —
this load, according to his power, viz., 80 lb., and as in his
first trip he carried 20 lb. under his fair equitable share he
must now carry double B’s last load, viz., 40 lb. plus 20 lb.
carried short in first trip, making a total of 60 lb. to carry
in his final trip.
Now in this last compensatory trip load, as we may term it,
A carries 60 lb. and B 20 lb.; that is in the ratio of 3 to 1,
But some who object to compensatory gradation rates may say
here, as they do in respect of compensatory tax schemes, that
the ratio of 3 to 1 is unfair, as the relative powers are only
2to 1. It is clear, however, that in the first trip the actual
burden carried was 1 to 1, instead of 2 to 1, according to
relative power, and the second trip of burden 3 to 1 merely
restores the lost equality of burden. Thus —
This simple illustration reveals the underlying fallacies in
the arguments of some persons who object to a reasonable
series of gradations in complementary tax methods, when such
gradations have for their object and justification the estab-
lishment of the grand principle of “ Equality of Sacrifice ”
or burden in the aggregate results of all taxes; for it is impos-
sible by any other means to remedy the inequality defect
unavoidably involved in raising revenue by the cheap, con-
venient, and flexibly accommodating Customs and Excise
method of taxation.
The conclusions which we may legitimately draw from such
analyses and illustrations may be advantageously summarised
as follows:
(1) That all the advantages embodied in Dr. Smith’s four
maxims or principles cannot be directly or indirectly attained
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME


approximately by raising the whole of the necessary taxes by
any one method whether direct or indirect.
(2) That only by raising a considerable portion of taxes by
means of Customs and Excise can the bulk of the people, the
poorer classes, secure that which to them is a greater boon
than equality of sacrifice, viz., a tax so accommodating and
flexible that it adjusts itself hour by hour, and day by day
in strict conformity with the accidental or fluctuating fortunes
of the individual, diminishing with his diminishing powers,
increasing or not at the will of the individual, with improve-
ment in his worldly circumstances. A burden so flexible and
unobtrusive, so spread, out, and so much under the control
of the individual, if not too great in amount, can be borne by
the masses with greater comfort and security than one-fourth
of its amount paid in one sum annually, and fixed rigidly
as regards time and amount. It is unfortunate that, directly,
this method of taxation can only in a small degree secure the
principle of “ Equality of Sacrifice ” or burden in propor-
tion to financial power; but by limiting the amount of taxa-
tion to a certain proportion of all taxes, it is possible to attain
equality of sacrifice in the aggregate by levying the remainder
of the taxes by direct methods on the basis of financial power
and with such additional compensatory provisions as will
relieve those hardly dealt with by the Customs and Excise
method, so far as the latter transgressed against any class in
respect of the “ Equality of Sacrifice ” principle.
(3) That the balance of taxes other than Customs and Excise,
if levied strictly on tht basis of the exact ratios of varying
incomes, would not alone suffice to secure, in the aggregate
of all taxes, the principle of equality of sacrifice, unless, by
means of abatements, exemptions or graduated scales of rates
or combinations of these, provision be also made for restoring
or compensating for the loss of equality of sacrifice unavoid-
ably involved in the Customs and Excise method.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS


(4) That the test of the whole of the principles
contained in the four maxims can, therefore, only in part,
be applied to any one division of the Total Taxes of a country,
inasmuch as it may be the function of one division to carry
out some one principle completely, and for the remaining
divisions to compensate for defects in other modes; and
therefore, the strict test by the four maxims or principles of
taxation, is alone valid and applicable when analysing the
combined effect of all the divisions of taxes.
(5) That the test of the justice of the incidence of the com-
bined taxes of any country by accepted principles of taxa-
tion, can only, under such circumstances, be correctly made
by persons skilled in the exact methods of financial investiga-
tions, who are in possession of all the data essential for such
analyses. The method, therefore, if scientifically carried
out, belongs to the exact sciences and its conclusions being
capable of exact demonstration, do not admit of the luxury
of forming biassed or arbitrary opinions as in literary and
other inexact modes of examination.
(6) That it is evident the scope of this review is strictly
confined to the discussion of the principles contained in the
“ four maxims/’ and does not attempt to deal with taxation
as a regulative principle, as in determining the lines of a par-
ticular industry or trade, or as an aid in the repression of some
obnoxious social habit. Taxation as a regulative agent is
quite a separate matter, and must be studied apart from the
questions treated of in this review.
John Vail, Government Printer, Tasmania.
THE R. M. JOHNSTON MEMORIAL VOLUME




















