

[Crown Copyright Reserved.]
C.D.S. 74.
0.8./367.
THE TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT
OF
GRENADIERS.
(Issued by the General Staff at General Headquarters).
General Headquarters,
October, 1915.
Stationery Services Press, P 464, 40/15.


CONTENTS.
Paras.
General Principles - 1 5.
Training ------ 6—B.
Employment of Grenadiers in the Attack - 9 —19.
Employment op Grenadiers in the Defence - - 20 —23.
Appendix 1. —Suggestions for Syllabus op Training.
Appendix 2. —Types op Grenade Carriers.
Appendix 3.—Description op British Grenades.
Appendix 4.—Description op German Grenades.
Appendix 5. —Description op French Grenades.


THE TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT
OF GRENADIERS.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
1. The nature of operations in the present campaign has developed the employment
of rifle and hand grenades both in attack and defence to such an extent that the grenade
has become one of the principal weapons in trench warfare. Every infantry soldier must,
therefore, receive instruction in grenade throwing. It has been found in practice, however,
that some men do not possess the temperament or the qualifications necessary to make a really
efficient grenadier. For this reason in every platoon there should be a nucleus of 1 N.C.O.
and 8 men with a higher degree of training and efficiency as grenadiers than the remainder.
These men will be available either to work with the platoon or to provide a reserve of
grenadiers for any special object. They should be selected from the very best, bravest
and steadiest in emergency. Preference should be given to tall men as height and length
of reach are an advantage. It has been found that men who are fond of outdoor games
are the easiest to train.
2. As grenade fighting will equally play an important part in the dismounted action of
cavalry the foregoing principles are applicable to that arm and at least 1 N.C.O. and 4 men
in each troop should be specially trained as expert grenadiers.
3. The object of grenade training is threefold :
(i) To give the individual a practical knowledge of the mechanism of the
standard types of grenades.
(ii) To teach him how to throw them.
(iii) To make him acquainted with the general principles of the organisation
and execution of a grenade attack either as a separate operation or
as part of a general attack.
4. Responsibility for training rests with battalion and company commanders. In cases,
however, where troops have had no previous experience in this form of warfare, it will be
desirable to form classes for the training of instructors in the first instance.
5. In each battalion one subaltern officer should bo selected as battalion grenadier
officer for instructional purposes. He will also supervise the supply and storage of grenades
and assist company commanders as required.
A N.C.O. should be selected in each company to assist in the training of the grenadiers
in the company. He will be available also to supervise the supply and storage of the
grenades on charge of the company.


TRAINING.
6. The first step in training men as grenadiers is to overcome their natural fear of the
grenade itself. This can he done by explaining how the grenade is used, the method of
lighting and, above all, the time taken for the fuze to burn. It is advisable to light a piece
of fuze of the required length and make the men count until it is burnt out. The men
should then be instructed in lighting dummy grenades themselves and should see how long
it takes for the fuze to burn.
7. The next step is to develop accuracy in throwing. Distance is of great importance in
order to establish superiority over the enemy by outranging him. (See Plates 1-7 below).
The grenade should normally be bowled overhand ; it is rarely possible to bowl it under-
hand. For short distances, it can be lobbed from the shoulder by an action similar to that
employed in “ putting the weight.” Stick grenades can be thrown for short distances like
a dart. In a trench it should not be thrown like a cricket ball, as there is a danger of
knocking the hand against the back of the trench and causing it to explode. The men
should be taught that if a grenade with a time fuze is dropped in the act of throwing
there is ample time to pick it up and throw it out of the trench before it explodes, and that
they must do this immediately.
Men must bo taught to throw from a standing, kneeling and prone position.
PLATE 1.
Correct Method of throwing a Grenade-Standing.


PLATE 2.
Correct Method of throwing a Grenade—Standing.


PLATE 3.
Correct Method of throwing a Grenade-Kneeling.
8. The following precautions against accidents must be taken during practice :
(a) Live grenades should be handled with care. Grenades other than those
which are permanently “ live” (e.g., French pear shaped grenade (percussion),
etc.) should not have the detonator inserted until just before they are
going to be thrown in (See also para. 23.)
{!>) No safety pin should be removed, or other safety arrangements tampered
with, except immediately before throwing the grenade.
(c) As soon as a grenade is “ lit,” by whatever method, it must be thrown at once
even if doubts exist as to whether the fuze is alight.
(d) All joints must be made both damp-proof and flash-proof, both by waxing and
by “crimping” (detonator on to fuze, and lighter on to fuze).


PLATE 4.
Correct Method of throwing a Grenade-Kneeling.
(c) Grenades should always be kept dry (in cupboards, etc., in the trenches).
(/) Hand grenades and rifle grenades, whether of service patterns or localomake,
which have been used as dummies for practice in throwing, or firing, are
liable to become damaged and unreliable, and are therefore not to be used
subsequently as ‘ live ” grenades.
(g) Every box of safety fuze should be tested for time of burning before being
used for grenades.
A syllabus for guidance in elementary and advanced training is given in Appendix 1.


PLATE 5.
Correct Method of throwing a Stick Grenade.
EMPLOYMENT OF GRENADIERS IN THE ATTACK.
9 Preparatory Measures.
Before committing a party to the attack, the following preparatory measures must
be taken; —
(a) A careful study of the enemy’s trenches and communication trenches must be
made by all concerned. Aeroplane photographs arc 1 of great assistance in
this respect.
h) Definite duties and objectives must be allotted to each party, and the size
and composition of the party be arranged accordingly. The numbers
detailed should allow for casualties.
\c) Arrangements must lx 1 mad(> for the supply and replenishment of grenades
{vide, para. 15, et. see/.), and all ranks should bo acquainted with them and
where grenades can he obtained.


PLATE 6.
Correct Method of throwing a Stick Grenade.
( d ) Each party must be provided with coloured flags or other means for marking
its position in the captured trenches. On reaching the objective the flags
should be planted in such a position that they can be seen by the support-
ing troops. The code of colours should bo changed for each attack.
(e) Wherever practicable a rehearsal of the measures to be adopted should take
place beforehand, the enemy trenches being marked out on the ground.
10. Grenadiers may be employed in advance of or with the assaulting lines. By
creeping forward within throwing distance of the hostile trenches they can cover the
bayonet assault with a shower of grenades. As a rule, however, grenadiers should be re-


PLATE 7.
Correct Method of throwing a Stick Grenade.
(For Short Distances only).


served for trench work and parties should move close in rear of the front line of infantry.
A party should he directed on each point at which a communication trench leads hack from
the hostile front line and other parties should he detailed to clear the first line trenches
laterally, in order to join up with the battalions on either flank or if the attack of these
has failed, to assist them and at the same time protect the flanks of their own battalion.
Each grenadier party should understand clearly the main objective of the attack as
well as its own immediate objective and should also know how far beyond or to the flanks
of such objective it is to proceed. Orders should he given in advance with regard to the
fire and communication trenches which are to be stopped and the points at which this is
to be done. As a rule it will he found that one party is sufficient for each communication
trench.
11. Composition of Grenadier Parties.
The following is a suitable composition for a grenadier party :
A N.C.O. in command.
Two bayonet men.
Two grenade throwers.
Two carriers.
Two spare men.
Whenever possible the N.C.O. in command should personally inspect each man of his
party before the attack begins. In clearing a trench he should place himself where he can
best supervise the work of his party and direct its action.
Bayonet men must be selected from those who are quick shots and good bayonet
fighters. The magazines of their rifles must he kept charged and one round in the chamber.
Their duty is to protect the throwers at all costs.
As every class of grenade, whether it has a safety pin or fuze lighter, requires two hands
to fire it, it is essential that grenade throwers should have both hands free for use.
Carriers must keep a close watch on their respective throwers and have a grenade
handy when required. They must be careful not to get too close to the throwers and so
cramp them while they are throwing. They must he thoroughly trained in the duties of
throwers and he ready to take their places in case of casualties.
Spare men should carry the same amount of grenades as the carriers and are respon-
sible for keeping them supplied. , ,
Both spare men and carriers should he trained in passing grenades rapidly from man to
man to the throwers in front (see also para. 12).
12. The Conduct of the Attack.
For carrying out continuous operations, a succession of parties organized as in para.
11 may he arranged, or each of them may be followed by the remainder of the platoon
armed with rifles and carrying sandbags, shovels, etc.; in the latter case the leading men
of the remainder of the platoon should carry two boxes of grenades as a reserve supply,
and two more boxes should be carried by the rear men of the platoon.
The first method has the advantage that if a side lateral communication trench is
encountered during the course of the attack, the second party can work along it without a
check.
The second method enables the platoon to make good the ground gained by its grenadier
party when that party is unable to make further progress; a second platoon preceded by its
grenadier party might then pass through the first and continue the advance with a fresh
supply of grenades.


18. All grenadiers must liavo a knowledge of the best methods of blocking a trench.
In all attacks they should be supported by a party of sandbag men, under an experienced
N.C.0., so that, whilst the grenadiers art* keeping the enemy at bay, a strong barricade can
bo built as quickly as possible.
If possible, it is advisable to bomb along the trench for a distance of 50 yards or so
further than the point to be barricaded. The reason for so doing is to drive the enemy
back out of bombing distance. A second barricade of a temporary nature should then be
erected and constant fire kept up by the grenadiers, so that the sandbag party can pull
down the trench between the two blocks. It is advisable, as a rule, to attach a small
number of Engineers to the party, with a view to blowing down the enemy’s trench by
explosives. As soon as a clear field of fire has been established from the point to be held,
the grenadiers retire from the advanced barricade.
In making a permanent barricade, provision must be made for dug-outs for the
grenadier party and riflemen. The best form of dug-out is one built off the main trench in
a “T” shape. This should be protected from counter grenade attacks by wire netting, and a
grenade depot should also be built.
It is of advantage to dig a sap leading towards the enemy from each side of the trench
which has been blocked, somewhat in the form of a “trident.” Grenades can thus be
thrown into the blocked trench from throe points simultaneously. (Sec diagram below.)
14. The following is an example of the methods of working along an enemy’s trench
which have been found successful in recent attacks (see Plates 8 and 9).


PLATE 8.
Grenadier Party working round a Traverse.


PLATE 9.


On arriving at traverse 2, the bayonet men place themselves in positions B 1 82, tha
first thrower at T 1, behind the traverse, the first carrier immediately behind him at C 1,
the N.C.O. or leader at L in such a position that he can observe the fire and direct his
squad. Behind him are the second thrower, second carrier and spare men. As a rule there
will not be room in a trench for two men to throw grenades at the same time without
crowding. In support further behind are the remainder of the platoon, machine gun
detachments, etc.
As soon as the party jumps into the trench the leader directs the first thrower to open
fire. The first thrower throws grenades as quickly as possible into the next two trenches
(X and Y), and over traverse 3 into trench Z.
The leading bayonet man on receiving the order “ Report ” from the leader then moves
forward so as to be able to see into X and Y. If these are clear he passes back word, and
the whole party, on receiving the order “ Advance,” take up positions at traverse 3 similar
to those taken up at traverse 2. In this way the party work down the trench throwing
grenades into any shelters they may encounter on the way.
In the event of a communication trench being encountered as in Plate 9, a second party
should be brought forward to work along it, the original party proceeding along the
main trench until the objective is reached. If a second party is not available, the leader
must send the second bayonet man, thrower and carrier to work down the trench in
question, followed by sandbag men and if necessary by riflemen from the platoon.
Should an “ island traverse ” (See Plate 10) be encountered, the leading bayonet men
must watch both sides of it whilst the grenadiers are throwing grenades.
PLATE 10.
15. Replenishment of Grenades.
The success of a grenade attack depends largely upon a regular and ample supply of
grenades to the throwers in front; this question is therefore a matter of the greatest import-
ance, particularly after the hostile trenches have been captured.
Prior to the delivery of the attack, depots of grenades should be established along the
whole front system of trenches, and particularly along the communication trenches, in
which a number of grenade stores capable of holding a small number of grenades should be
prepared at frequent intervals and be clearly marked. The further grenades have to be
carried during an attack, the smaller will be the numbers which actually reach the leading
troops. Moreover, communication with the rear may be cut off by hostile artillery fire.
It is preferable to distribute a number of small depots conveniently along the whole front
of attack than to store large numbers in one or two places.


16. The following initial distribution is suggested :
{a) Grenades, on a scale of 3 grenades per man, to be issued in bulk to those units
detailed to open the attack, the issue being made in sufficient time to
enable them to be distributed as required.
(6) Small depots to be established at frequent intervals along the trenches
from which the attacking columns will start. *
(c) Other depots to be established in the support and assembly trenches. These
latter should be close to the junction of these trenches with the communica-
tion trenches.
(d) A central brigade depot to be established still further in rear from which these
advanced depots can be replenished.
Adequate bomb proof cover must he provided for these depots (see para. 23).
17. All bodies of men sent forward in support of the attack should carry grenades.
The issue of these grenades should be made from the rearmost depots if possible, so as not
to deplete those further forward.
18. Additional reserves of grenades will be required and arrangements for replenishing
the depots must be worked out beforehand.
As it will rarely be possible for wheeled transport to approach the trenches, special
parties should be detailed in advance to carry grenades forward from the wagons to the
depots.
19. In the enemy’s trenches supplies of his grenades are usually to be found.
Grenadiers should, therefore, know how to use them. Details of the construction of German
grenades are given in Appendix 4.
EMPLOYMENT OF GRENADIERS IN THE DEFENCE.
20. The ordinary course of normal trench warfare must be considered in addition to
the dispositions to be adopted for meeting an actual attack.
The main Infantry defence of a line of trenches against hostile Infantry will be by
rifle and machine gun fire. Parties of grenadiers, however, should be distributed through-
out the front system of trenches for special purposes. Except in those parts of the line
where the enemy’s trenches are within bombing distance, grenadier parties need not actually
be located in the fire trenches. The best position for them is in the support trenches close
to the main communication trenches leading to the fire trenches, whence they can make
an immediate counter-attack should the enemy succeed in gaining a footing.
Where mine craters, sapheads, hollows, etc., provide ground which neither rifle nor
machine gun fire can cover, grenadier posts should be established so as to deny such points
to the enemy should he be successful in occupying them. Such posts should be sheltered
as far as possible from enemy grenades by wire netting and small traverses.


The action of grenadier parties should be laid down in the scheme of defence of each
section of the line, and each should be practised in carrying out its particular r6le, so that
every member of it may know what he has to do.
21. A “ bombing trench ” dug about 20 yards behind the front trench from which
grenades can he thrown into the front trench is an advantage.
22. Saps forward from the front trench should be covered to beyond bombing distance
from the front trench with a network of overhead wire of about 1 foot mesh. This will
prevent parties of the enemy who may capture the sap from throwing their grenades into
the front trench, hut will not prevent the grenades of the defenders from falling among the
enemy in the sap. The head of the sap should not he wired so that when it is occupied by
the grenadiers of the defence they can throw their missiles from it to both front and flanks.
23. Grenades stored in the trenches should be kept ready fuzed with the detonators
inserted. Bach company in the front line should have a supply on company charge. These
should be distributed in a number of dry and closed bomb-proof depots established at
frequent intervals in the trenches, in the ‘ bombing trench ” referred to in para. 21, and
near the head of communication trenches. These depots should he well marked, easily
accessible and kept distinct from other stores. A good type of grenade depot is one built
in a“ T ” shaped trench off the main trench. The grenades should be enclosed in tin lined
boxes in the depots to prevent deterioration. Old ammunition boxes are suitable for the
purpose.


Appendix 1.
SUGGESTIONS FOR SYLLABUS OF TRAINING.
A.—ELEMENTARY.
The following subjects should be included in the course, the duration of which must
depend on circumstances. As a rule about a week should be sufficient.
1. Lectures on handling grenades. Causes of accident and measures of precaution.
2. Instruction in throwing the various kinds of grenades.
8. Description of grenades and detonators. Methods of detonating and firing.
4. Methods of throwing grenades in attack and defence. Organisation of grenadier
parties.
5. Summary of course, and short test.
B.—ADVANCED.
1. The object of the training is to teach men to throw all types of bombs as accurately
as possible at long and short ranges both in attack and defence.
2. Details of German grenades should be explained as well as of British and French.
3. Physical fitness is essential. Men should be exercised daily in running, marching,
Swedish drill, etc., to keep them fit and supple. They should also throw
dummy grenades.
4. Great attention should be paid to accuracy of length, which is as important as
accuracy of direction.
5. Attack practice should be carried out above ground against a fire trench and while
on the move, also in a trench extending laterally from a' section of captured
trench by traverse to traverse bombing. Men should be taught not merely to
throw over a traverse, but at least into the space beyond the second traverse
from them. They should also be taught to throw into “ dug-outs,” junction of
communication trenches and sap heads.
6. Defence practice should be carried out from a trench against another trench or
area representing a wire entanglement.
7. Various types of trench should be provided for practice; e.g., traversed trenches
with varying distance between traverses, zig-zag communication trenches, etc.


8. During the Course, tests should be held which the man must pass before proceeding
to further instruction. Similarily at the end of the Course a final test should be
held.
Details of suitable tests are given below.
First Test. —Dummy grenades to be used.
(a) Position. Standing in a trench 3 feet wide and 4 feet deep, to throw over a
traverse 5 feet high.
( b ) Distance. Minimum distance 20 yards.
(c) Accuracy. The grenade to fall direct into the trench.
(d) Number of throws. Ten, of which six must fall into the trench.
(e) Dimensions and trace of trench to be used. In accordance with plan on Plate 11
Second Test. —Dummy grenades to be used.
Throwing in the open at measured distances into a trench in 3 positions: —
(i) Standing at 30—35 yards.
(ii) Kneeling at 20 yards.
(iii) Lying at 20 yards. Also lying with wire between the thrower and
the objective.
Ten dummies to be thrown, of which six must be thrown into the trench.
Final Test.
(i a ) As for Ist and 2nd Tests, but “ live ” grenades to be used.
(&) Ten grenades to be thrown, of which five must be thrown into the trench.
(c) Stripping grenades of each type.
(d) Questions on properties of grenades, detonators, fuzes and lighters.
(e) Questions on care and handling of grenades.
(/) Questions on Trench Tactics.
Note.—This syllabus is for guidance only. Tt cun he amplified or modified at discretion.


PLATE 11.


Appendix 2.
SPECIAL EQUIPMENT.
The following types of carriers for grenades have been found useful; —
(a) A basket or box similiar to the machine gun belt-box, with strap handle, and
fitted inside to take the grenades in use.
(b) A leather belt, which goes three-quarters round the body, and has pockets in
front for the grenades. The belt is supported by two straps attached in
front, which are passed under the shoulder straps, then through loops on
the ends of the belt, and finally brought round the waist and tied in front.
(e) A haversack with six pockets with stud, the mouth of the pocket being slightly
smaller than the bottom. Bach pocket will hold two grenades No. 1 with
streamers, or one of other patterns.
PLATE 12.
Waistcoat Grenade Carrier.


The strap is two inches wide and is continued along the whole length of the
carrier for purposes of greater strength.
It is fitted with a buckle in order that the length can be adjusted. It is
coloured khaki (see Plate 15).
(d) A waistcoat which is packed in the boxes containing grenades Nos. 6 and 7.
Each waistcoat can carry ten grenades (see Plates 12 & 13).
PLATE 13.
Waistcoat Grenade Carrier.


(e) A carrier for the stick grenades made of a belt of canvas 3" wide and 3' long,
tied with tapes at the back. Eight loops are made in the belt to take the
grenades, and supporting straps go over the shoulders to take the weight,
(see Plate 14).
PLATE 14.
Stick Grenade Carrier.


PLATE 15.


Appendix 3.
DESCRIPTION OF BRITISH GRENADES
AND
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THEIR USE.
(i.) The following types of Grenades have been issued :
PREVIOUS NOMENCLATURE. NEW NOMENCLATURE.
Service Hand Grenade (R.L. Percussion,) -kt- i
Brass with Cane Handle & Detonator)! Grenade, Hand, No. 1.
Tonite or Mexican Hand Grenade (Hale’s]
Percussion Pattern, Brass with Cane) Grenade, Hand, No. 2.
Handle and Detonator) - - -J
Hale’s Rifle Grenade (J. A. Pattern with] _ n _
Detonator)- - - - - .f Grenade, -303" Short Rifle No. 3.
Mill’s Hand Grenade (Iron Oval Shapedi „ , tvt~ c
with Safety Fuze and Detonator) - I Grenade. Hand, No. 5.
R.L. Grenade 1-lb. (R.L. Light Friction)
Pattern, Tin, with Friction Igniter- Grenade, Hand, No. 6.
and Detonator) - - - - -]
R.L. Grenade 2-lbs. (R.L. Heavy Pattern,]
Tin, with Friction Igniter, Safety Fuze - Grenade, Hand, No. 7.
and Detonato,-) - - - - -j
Double Cylinder Light Pattern Grenade]
(with No. 8 Detonator and Safety) Grenade, Hand, No. 8.
Fuze) ------ -j
Double Cylinder Heavy Pattern Grenade]
(with No. 8 Detonator and Safety) Grenade, Hand, No. 9.
Fuze) j
Hairbrush or Box Pattern Grenade (Tin]
and. Steel with Wood Handle, with _ , ~ j XT -i«
Igniter, Safety Fuze, Percussion and) Grenade, Hand, No, 12.
No. 8 Detonator) - - - -/
Battye Hand Grenade -
Pitcher Hand Grenade -
Oval Hand Grenade -
Ball Hand Grenade - - - -


(ii.) These Grenades are of two kinds.
(a) Those that rely for their effect on fragmentation.
(b) Those that rely for their effect on detonation.
The ignition is either —
1. By percussion or
2. By time fuze.
As regards {a). This type should always be thrown from behind cover as
the fragments are dangerous for a distance greater than that which the
Grenade can be thrown.
The majority of the Grenades are of this type.
As regards (b). These Grenades are sometimes known as “ Assault ”
Grenades. They'can be thrown from the open and are most effective when
thrown into a Trench. They are only effective for a distance of about Bor I
yards from where they fall.
Grenades ignited by percussion.
Only 3 Grenades belong to this category, Nos. 1, 2 & 3.
Grenades ignited by Time Fuze.
The remainder of the Grenades are ignited by some combination of
lighter, time fuze, and detonator.
Time of burning for all these Grenades is about 5 seconds.
DETAILS OF THE VARIOUS GRENADES.
(iii.) Weight Complete 2-lbs,
{See Plate 16.)
DESCRIPTION. —The grenade consists of a brass cylinder encircled by a
narrow cast iron ring serrated to break up into 16 fragments.
The cylinder is mounted on a wood block to which a cane handle 5" long
is attached. Four streamers are nailed to this end of the body. Total length
of grenade 12^".
The brass cylinder or body of the grenade is filled with explosive, and has
its upper end closed by the detonator holder, fixed by three screws. This
holder carries two pins for securing the detonator. The body has two knobs
and two indicating stops fitted above the serrated ring.


The firing needle is carried in the removable cap, which has two grooves
formed on it in which slide the knobs on the body. The cap is centrally
pierced for the safety pin.
“ Remove,” “ Travel,” and “ Fire ” are marked on the outer surface of
the cap. When the knobs on the body are opposite the word “ Remove,” the
cap can be pulled off.
When opposite “ Travel,” cap cannot be moved.
When opposite “ Fire,” the cap can be pushed down so that the firing
needle can pierce the detonator.
When the grenade is thrown, owing to its weighted head and streamer
on handle, it will fall on its head and the firing needle will be forced into the
detonator.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use.
1. Remove the cap (leaving the safety pin in) and insert detonator
by pushing it home and turning it to the left. Special detonators
are provided with the grenades.
2. Replace cap and turn to “ Travel.”
To fire.
1. Turn to “ Fire.”
2. Immediately before throwing pull out the leather strip from the
safety pin and free the becket.
8. Hold the grenade in the right hand, pull the safety pin with the
left and throw.
Special precautions.
Great care should be taken to prevent the grenade from being jarred
during the action of throwing.
Packing.
The grenades are packed 6 in a wooden box. Cylinders containing 10
detonators, No. 1 Hand Grenade. Marks lor II are issued separate!;,.
Note — If the Grenade is not used the detonator can be removed and cap
replaced and turned to “ Travel.”


(iv.) Weight Complete : 1-lb.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 17.)
The grenade consists of :
1. Handle.
2. Body.
3. Special detonator.
Handle.
Cane 7" long, roughened to prevent the grenade slipping out of the hand,
total length 12f" ; a If" tape, 1 yard long, is wound round this end and is kept
in place by a thin binding thread. When the latter is broken, the tape is free
to form a tail and so assist the grenade to fall on its head.
A small steel rod about 2" long, is fixed to the other end of the handle by
means of a brass collar rivetted to the cane. The end of the steel rod screws
into the body of the grenade.
Body.
Consists of a brass cylinder 4f" x If" diameter.
A band of ribbed cast iron is fixed on to the end near the head. This
band :
(a) helps to weight the head of the grenade.
( b ) provides the necessary man killing fragments. There is a small tube
passing down the centre of the large cylinder, and the intervening space is
filled with explosive (Tonite). This tube contains the spring, striker and
detonator (when loaded).
The striker consists of a brass rod If" long with a conical head and steel
needle point. A brass spiral creep spring If" long is fixed round a groove in
the head of the striker. This spring is sufficiently strong to prevent the
needle reaching the detonator without a fairly strong blow.
The striker is held in position by a safety pin passing through the body
of the grenade and the end of the striker.
Detonator.
Consists of a brass tube which can be screwed into the head of the
grenade. The bottom of the detonator tube is closed by a thin brass plate.
During transport the detonators are carried separate from the grenade, and a
wooden plug is screwed in, in place of the detonator to keep out damp and
dirt.


INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use.
1. Untie the tape at handle.
2. Unscrew the wooden plug and insert the detonator. The grenade
should be held head downwards when doing this, in order to make
certain that the needle is secure.
To Throw.
1. Hold the grenade in the right hand.
2. Pull out the safety pin with the left hand.
3. Throw the grenade.
Action.
When the grenade leaves the hand, the weighted head and tape streamers
cause it to fall on its head. On reaching the ground the body of grenade is
stopped by the impact, and the striker being free, flies forward, compressing
the spring sufficiently for the needle to pierce the detonator and thus explode
the grenade.
Special precautions.
1. Great care should be taken to avoid jarring the grenades against any
obstruction when in the act of throwing.
2. The grenade is in a very dangerous condition when once the safety
pin has been removed, and special attention should be drawn to this.
3. The detonators for grenades Nos. 2 and 3 are of slightly different
lengths but are otherwise very similar and care should be taken not
to mix them up, as this will lead to failures of both grenades. The
correct detonators are supplied in the boxes containing the grenades.
Package of Grenades.
The grenades are packed in wooden boxes containing 10 grenades, and a
small box of 10 detonators : wooden partitions preve'nt movement of the
grenades during carriage.
(V.) Weight Complete ; 1 lb. 5 ozs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 18, Fig. 1.)
The grenade consists of a serrated steel body filled with explosive. Down
the centre of the explosive is a brass tube into the forward end of which the
detonator is inserted. The rearward end of the body is closed by the base piece
which carries the needle pellet, two retaining bolts, wind vane and releasing
socket with safety pin. To the base piece is fixed a base plug carrying the
spring clip and a 10" steel rod.


INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use.
1. Remove the ebonite block holding the grenade head down so as to
make certain that the needle is not free.
2. If correct screw in the detonator.
To Fire.
1. Lower the rod into the barrel of the Rifle and clip over the muzzle.
2. Immediately before firing withdraw the safety pin.
Action.
The action of the grenade on being fired is as follows :
The releasing socket sets back from under the wind vane, which is
then revolved by wind pressure as the grenade travels through the air: after
a few turns of the vane the retaining bolts are no longer held in position
by its inner surface : on impact the needle pellet set's forward against the
creep spring, on to. the detonator cap, thus firing the grenade.
If, after the safety pin has been removed, the grenade is not used, the
safety pin may be replaced if the screwed ring has not unscrewed and un-
covered the two retaining bolts, but if these are uncovered the grenade
is in a dangerously sensitive condition, and if so found it should be de-
stroyed. Only the special detonators and cartridges provided should be used.
If by accident a grenade were fired with a bulleted round, the rifle would
probably burst and injure the firer.
This grenade is very safe to handle, as it cannot be fired by knocking or
dropping on the ground ; it must travel through the air some distance before
the retaining bolts fall out.
Special precautions.
1. Safety pin should not be removed before the Grenade has been in-
serted in the rifle.
2. Care should be taken not to mix up the detonators vide special
precaution No. 3 under Grenade Hand No. 2.
3. Care must be taken not to fire the grenade with a bulleted round
which may burst the rifle.
Packing.
The wooden box provided carries 20 grenades in protecting tins with
screw off lids, 20 “ detonators, rifle grenade ” in four tin boxes with lever lids,
and 22 special blank cartridges in a tin box.


(vi.) Weight Complete : H lbs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 18, Pig. 2.)
The body of the grenade is of cast iron, serrated to provide numerous
missiles on detonation. Into one end is screwed a centre piece with separate
recesses for the striker and the detonator.
The striker is kept cocked against its spring by its head catching on the
end of the striker lever, when the latter lies against the body of the grenade.
The lever is retained in this position by the safety pin.
The igniter is a separate unit consisting of cap, cap chamber, safety
fuze, and detonator.
The action of the grenade is as follows :
Withdraw the safety pin: on throwing the grenade, the lever swings out-
ward under the pull of the striker spring, thus releasing the striker which
fires the cap. The safety fuze burns about five seconds and then fires the
detonator.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use.
1. Unscrew the base plug and insert igniter.
2. Screw in the base plug taking care that it is screwed home.
To Fire.
1. Hold the grenade in the right hand in such a position that the lever
is held securely against the body of the grenade by the fingers or thumb.
2. Withdraw the safety pin with the left hand, still keeping a firm grip
on the lever.
8. Throw the grenade.
Special precautions.
It is essential that the lever should be held securely against the body
otherwise the collar which pulls back the striker may release it and so ignite
the fuze.
The precaution against using grenades as “ live ” grenades after they have
been used as dummies for practice is particularly applicable to this type.
Packing.
The grenadessare,packed 12 in a wooden box, together with a cylinder
containing 12 igniters.


(vii.) Weight.
No. 6 or Light Grenade - 1-lb.
No. 7 or Heavy Grenade - 1-lb. 13-ozs.
DESCRIPTION. {See Plate 18, Pigs. 3 and 4.)
The body consists of a tin cylinder with rounded ends 4" long and 2j"
diameter.
The heavy grenade contains an outer layer of scrap iron.
The igniter socket is closed by a wooden plug for transit, and covered
by a papier mache cap.
The light Grenade contains explosive only. On one end of the cylinder
there are two studs by means of which the lighter is fixed.
A cardboard tube runs down the centre of the grenade to take the lighter,
fuze and detonator. When not in use a wooden plug is fitted into the end of
this tube to keep out damp. A papier mache cap is also fitted on to the grenade.
The grenades are always carried with this cap on (whether live or not).
The method of ignition consists of a friction igniter, a length of safety
fuze and a service detonator, combined.
The friction igniter consists of the holder to which is fixed a flange with
two notches and two springs. It also has two horns which form a grip for
turning the igniter into the locked position. The friction bar is fixed to a
button through which the firing becket passes.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use.
1. Insert the igniter and clip the flange under the studs.
2. Replace papier mache cap.
To fire.
1. Hold the gienade in the right hand with the becket towards the wrist,
2. Remove papier mache cap.
8. Pull out the becket sharply with the left hand and throw at once.
Special precautions.
The grenades must always be carried with the papier mache cap on.
Packing.
The grenades are packed 40 in a box. The box also contains 4 haversacks.
Igniters are packed in separate tins each containing 10.
Four of the remaining types of grenades are ignited by the Nobel fuze
lighter attached to if" service safety fuze and detonator No. 8 Mk. VII.,
described in para. (XV.)


Grenade,
Hand, No. 8.
or Double
Cylinder
Light Pattern
Grenade.
(viii.) Weight : lib. 6ozs.
' DESCRIPTION. (See Plates 19 and 20.)
1 The body consists of a small tin cylinder 2f" x lj" diam. filled with
ammonal. This is placed inside a larger cylinder 8f" x 3" diam. The space
between the cylinders is filled with cast iron rings and shrapnel bullets. The
top of the inner cylinder is closed by a tin plug containing a tube to take
the detonator —two copper wires are soldered to this plug, in order to wire
down the fuze.
Method of Ignition.
Nobel Lighter, If" Safety fuze, Detonator No. 8 Mk. VII., (para. XV.)
Special precautions.
Fixing the lighter, fuze & detonator to the Grenade.
These are put together as described in para. (XV.) ; when inserting them
into the grenade, the following points should he looked to.
1. The lip of the detonator should not project above the surface of
the plug so as to avoid damage to the detonator.
2. The fuze and detonator should be well waxed round the joint
where they enter the grenade.
3. The fuze should he wired to the grenade.
(ix.) Weight ; 21bs.
This grenade is exactly similar to the No. 8 except that it has slightly
more shrapnel and less explosive, which brings the weight up to 21hs.
a
(x.) Weight: 31bs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 21, Figs. 1 and 2.)
The body.consists of a tin box 3" xs"x 2" filled with ammonal. A grooved
cast iron plate f" forms the front side. In the end of the box there is a copper
tube, to take No. 8 Mk. VII detonator. Two copper wires are soldered to the
tin in order to tie down the safety fuze.
Handle.
Is similar to the back of an ordinary hairbrush.
Total length IBf".
Grip 6".
The box is fixed to the handle by means of two iron straps which pass
round the box and are secured by nuts at the hack. A small wood block Ais
secured to the handle by screws. This carries the lighter, which is fixed to
it by a steel strap B and screws. This block brings the lighter on a level with
the hole for the detonator.
Grenade,
Hand, No. 9.
or Double
cylinder i
heavy pattern
grenade.
Grenade,
Hand, No. 12
Hairbrush or
Box Pattern
Grenade.


Method of Ignition.
Lighter. The lighter consists of a brass tube containing the following
parts:—
(а) Spring and striker, the former being held normally under com-
pression by a brass safety pin, which passes through the spindle
of the striker.
(б) Cap and fuze. The striker on being released pierces the top of
the cap which lights the fuze.
The fuze (If" long) burns for 5 seconds and the flash then
reaches the detonator and so explodes the grenade.
The following joints must be carefully waxed to render the tube damp
proof and flash proof :
(a) Between detonator and fuze.
(h) Between fuze and cap.
(c) Where tube enters body of grenade.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To fire.
(a) Hold the grenade in the right hand.
( b) Pull out the safety pin with the left hand.
(c) Throw at once.
(xi.) {See Plate 22, Pigs. 1 and 2.)
Weight 11b. 2ozs.
Body.
A cast iron cylinder, 3" x 2" diam. with one end solid. The iron is
grooved, so as to assist it in breaking up into sufficiently large fragments.
The body is filled with about Ijozs. of ammonal, guncotton, or other explosive.
A wooden plug, pierced centrally to take the detonator, is fitted into the
open end of the cylinder. This plug should be well waxed round the edge,
and when not loaded a small wooden plug put in to take the place of the
detonator, to keep out moisture.
Method of ignition.
Instructions and Precautions as for Grenade Hand No. 8, para. (VIII).
Package of Grenades.
During transport the grenades are carried in wooden boxes holding 30,
arranged with removable wooden partitions. These rest on the top of the
grenades, and prevent the lid of the box from coming in contact with the end
of the lighters.


(xii.) This grenade is very similar to the Battye Grenade. It differs in
being slightly heavier and having a different lighter.
Weight ; Ijlbs.
DESCRIPTION. {See Plate 23, Figs. 1 and 2.)
The body is a east iron cylinder 4" x if" diam. filled with explosive. One
end is solid, and the other is closed by a tin plug.
This plug consists of :
(a) a tube to take the fuze and detonator.
(&) a collar on the outside, made with 3 slots to take the 3 flanges on
the lighter. The length of each slot is slightly longer than the
corresponding flange, so that when the flanges have been pressed
home, the extra lengths on the collar, marked “X” on the grenade
itself can be pressed down, so as to prevent the flanges moving.
This is done with the end of the crimping machine provided in
each box of grenades.
Lighter.
This consists of a metal cup containing the friction tube. This cup has
three small flanges on the outside which fit under the collar as already descri-
bed. Inside the cup is the friction lighter with a small tube projecting below
it, into which the safety fuze fits. A piece of thin cord 8" long is fixed to the
lighter inside the cup. The other end of this cord is fixed to the inside of a
metal cover, which fits on to the cup by means of a simple bayonet joint.
Before the fuze is fixed in the lighter, the small tube is kept closed by a
tin cap, waxed on. This prevents any damp reaching the lighting composition.
To assemble.
1. Cut fuze to required length If".
2. Remove small cap A.
3. Fit the fuze into the lighter at one end into a No. 8 detonator
at the other, and crimp both these joints.
This should leave about J" of fuze exposed between the mouth of the
detonator and the lighter. This must be covered with the rubber tape pro-
vided in each box of grenades.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use
1. Insert the lighter, fuze and detonator and turn (right handed) till
the flanges reach the ends of their respective slots.
2. Press down the parts of the collar marked “X,” as already
described. The lighter is then firm.


To fire.
1. Turn the cover to the left and pull it off.
2. Give the tape a sharp pull, thus igniting the friction tube (the
cover and tape come away in the hand). See Special precaution ( b )
below.
3. Throw the grenade at once.
Special precautions.
(a) Unless the parts marked “X” on the grenade are pressed down, the
whole lighter may come out, when it is only intended to remove
the cover.
The grenade can be made safe by removing the detonator. This
should only be done, with this type of grenade, by skilled men as
it is difficult to take out the lighter after the parts “X” have been
pressed down.
( h ) The fuze may be lit without the tape coming apart from the
grenade. For this reason, whether the tape comes apart or not,
the grenade should be thrown as soon as the tape has been pulled.
Package of Grenades.
The grenades are packed in wooden boxes containing 23 grenades—23
lighters—2s detonators. A coil of safety fuze, some rubber tape, two crimping
machines and a card of instructions are also provided.
(xiii.) Weight 11b. 2ozs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 24.)
The body is of T V' cast iron, egg shaped, 3J" long x 2j" diameter at the
middle—filled with ammonal.
It has a screw threaded hole at each end. One is filled by a solid steel
plug, the other by a flanged brass plug bored centrally to which a hollow
copper tube is fixed to take the detonator.
Method of Ignition.
A Brock Lighter is used consisting of a match-head and fuze combined,
fitted into a No. 8 Mk. VII detonator. The lighter consists of a small
cardboard cup filled with friction composition, covered with waterproof paper.
The latter can be torn off by pulling a small tag which is left free. Time of
burning 6 seconds.
The lighter is wired to the grenade and must be w T ell waxed.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To fire.
1. Hold the grenade in the right hand.
2. Pull off the -waterproof paper with the left hand.
8. Strike the lighter against the match composition and throw at
once.
Note— With this type of lighter the man is provided with an armlet
covered with match composition.


Special precautions.
The paper must not be removed from the cap except before throwing, as the
composition will get damp, or the grenade may be accidentally lighted.
(xiv.) Weight of grenade complete 11b. 6ozs.
~ ~ ammonal - - sjozs.
DESCRIPTION. {See Plate 25.)
The body is a cast iron sphere 3" in diameter, filled with ammonal, and
closed by a screwed steel plug If" diam. This plug carries a copper tube to
take the detonator into the centre of the grenade.
There are two holes in the top of the plug to take a key for the plug
which is screwed down flush.
Two copper wires, for tying down the fuze, are attached to a small stud
on the plug.
Lighter, fuze and detonator ; as for No. 8 and 9 Grenades, or Brock Lighter.
Instructions for throwing. ~ ~ ~
The precautions'to be taken are also the same as for Nos. 8 and 9 with
the addition of waxing round the plug.
(XV.) DESCRIPTION.
The lighter is made up of two cardboard tubes, one fitting over the other.
Inside the end of the outer tube, there is a small brass cap containing friction
composition. This can be lighted by a forked brass striker fixed to the end
of the inner tube. In the normal safety position the striker is i" from the
cap, and is held in position by a safety pin, passing through both tubes. In-
side the other end of the inner tube, there is a small copper band into which
the fuze is fitted. The latter is secured by crimping the copper band.
To prevent moisture reaching the cap a narrow tape band with a loose
end is glued to the inner tube at the joint between the two.
The lighter, fuze and detonator are assembled as follows: —
1. The length of fuze (if") is put into the lighter as described. This
leaves about !" fuze exposed. This end is then put into the detonator—the
joint between fuze and lighter being waxed and crimped to render it damp
proof and flashproof.
2. The joint where the fuze enters the body of the grenade must also
be waxed.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR FIRING (when fixed to a grenade).
1. Hold the grenade in the right hand gripping the bottom of the inner
tube between thumb and forefinger.
2. Tear off the tape and pull out safety pin.
B. Press down the outer tube with the left hand and turn it slightly—
thus scratching the points against the composition. This action
produces a flash which passes down the tube and lights the fuze.
4. Throw the grenade at once.
Time of burning 5 seconds.


Appendix 4.
DESCRIPTION OF GERMAN GRENADES
AND
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THEIR USE.
(i.) German hand grenades which have been found are of two types: those-
which have the appearance of Service articles and those which are obviously
improvised. With the latter, great care is invariably taken to protect the-
charge from damp, and to render it flashproof by waxing, etc.
Grenades are ignited either by time or percussion. With the former, the
time of burning is about 6 seconds, and the fuze is ignited by one of the
following methods :
(а) Spring striker and cap.
(б) Friction tube. Attached to fuze and detonator.
(c) Match-head lighter.
(ii.) The following precautions should be taken with any grenades that may
be found or captured :
1. The grenades should be examined at once by a grenadier, in order
to find out whether they are live, how they are fired, etc.
2. The means of firing will probably be immediately apparent to a
trained grenadier, but, during examination, grenades should be
handled with care.
8. No man who does not understand grenades should touch them, but
should report the presence of a store of grenades, to the nearest
grenadier, N.C.0., or Officer.
4. If being used against the enemy, a grenade should be thrown as soon
as it is lit,” even if there is no apparent evidence of the fuze burning.
5. Arrangements for removing, storing or destroying grenades found in
a captured position should be made as soon as possible by Grenadier
Officers.
6. Grenadier Officers will also be responsible that when samples of
grenades are taken back to Headquarters for examination, the grenades,
are not in a dangerous condition, and have the detonators removed.
(iii.) Weight : 1 lb. 10 ozs. Can be thrown about 30 yards.
DESCRIPTION. {See Plate 26,'Pigs. 1 & 2.)
The body is spherical, about 3" in diameter, made of cast iron about i“
thick, and is filled with black powder or other explosive which does not
require a’detonator. The body is coated with varnish inside and out.


Method of Ignition.
Combination of friction tube, lighter and fuze. The friction tube is fired
by pulling out the wire in the direction of the axis of the tube (see Plan P,
fig. 8). A wrist strap, with a swivel hook, is usually provided for this purpose.
Time of burning 7 seconds. A similar lighter which burns for 5 seconds is
also provided. It is distinguishable by the head of the fuze being painted red.
Safety Arrangements.
1. Grenade and fuze kept separate during carriage.
2. The vent for the fuze in the grenade is closed by means of a zinc plug.
8. The holes, A and B (see Pig. 2), in the lighter are covered with water-
proof paper.
4. The wire is bent in order to avoid a direct pull.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use:
1. Take the lighter, remove the oiled paper from A and B and straighten
the wire, taking care not to pull it.
2. Insert the lighter.
3. Put on the wrist strap.
4. Hold the grenade in the right hand, with the igniter towards the wrist.
5. Hook the swivel at the end of the strap on to the wire pull of the grenade.
6. Throw the grenade.
Note.- —lf a strap is not provided, a nail, or a loop of string, should be
passed through the wire pull.
(iv.) Weight : 2\ lbs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 27, Pigs. 1 and 2.)
The body consists of a cylindrical tin of explosive, 2" diameter, placed in
a tin 8" diameter, the space between being filled with nails, scrap-iron, etc.
The bottom is closed by a wooden plug in which a small hole is bored for the
detonator.
The handle is of wood, 8f" long, the head of which forms the wooden
base plug. To secure the body to the handle, the edge of the outer cylinder
of the body is turned down over the base plug.
Method of Ignition.
Consists of a spring, striker and cap, encased in brass tube, fastened to
the handle by a steel band. Fuze and detonator are attached in the usual way.
The spring is compressed by a collar at the end of the striker rod. The
rod is held back by a safety pin passing through it at the end of the case.
As soon as the pin is released, the striker flies forward and fires the cap, thus
lighting the fuze.
Puze about 2" long. Time of burning 6 seconds.


INSTRUCTIONS.
(а) To prepare for use.
1. Hold the grenade in the right hand.
2. Withdraw the safety pin.
3. Throw at once.
(б) To render useless.
1. Remove the handle and base plug by raising the turned down edge of
the cylinder. This must be done very carefully.
2. Empty the contents of the body.
(V.) Weight : 12 ozs.
DESCRIPTION. ( See Plate 27, Pigs. 3 & 4.)
The body is a tin case 4i" x Ixi x ly-J, filled with explosive.
Method of Ignition.
Combined match-head igniter, fuze and detonator. ( See Pig. 3.)
The match-head igniter consists of a small lead tube closed at one end
with a ball of red phosphorus, varnished, and covered with oiled paper.
A piece of safety fuze is pushed home and secured in position by crimping
the tube round it; the detonator is fixed to the other end of the fuze in a
similar manner.
Safety Arrangements.
1. The grenade and igniter are kept separate during carriage, and a
wooden plug is put into the grenade in place of the detonator.
2. The phosphorus head is protected from friction and damp by water-
proof paper.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use.
Take out the wooden plug, if necessary use the rectifier, and insert the
igniter. (This is kept in place by the lead tube fitting tightly into its seating ;
the joint should he waxed.)
Tear off the paper cover from the lighter.
Hold the grenade in the right hand, rub the match-head with some rough
material (side of match-box, etc.) ; a wind-match or pocket lighter
may he used instead.
Throw immediately.
Time of burning: 6 seconds.


To render useless.
Take out igniter and All up hole with mud, etc.
(Vi.) Weight: 2jlbs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 28, Pigs. 1 & 2.)
The body consists of a tin cylinder 4" x 2£" diameter which contains a
cartridge of explosive. This is closed at the top with a lid held in place by
four clips ; at the bottom there is a screw-threaded hole to take the handle.
The bottom of the cartridge is fitted with a paper tube for the detonator. On
the side of the body there is a hook, by means of which the grenade can be
attached to the belt.
The inscription on the body “ Vor Gebrauch Sprengkapsel Einsetzen ”
means before use insert the detonator.”
Handle : Wooden, 9-5" long, has a screw-threaded metal top which fits into
the body. It is bored out axially to take the igniter and wire pull.
Method of Ignition.
Consists of a friction lighter and safety fuze contained in a cardboard
tube. The igniter is actuated by pulling a string loop at the end of the
handle. This loop is attached to the wire pull of the friction tube, and is
fixed to the handle by means of a paper band. The mouth of the detonator
fits into a brass tube at the top of the igniter, and is fired by the flash from
a dab of phosphorus at the end of the safety fuze. Time of burning 5i or 7
seconds as marked on the handle.
Safety Arrangements.
1. The grenade and detonator are kept separate during carriage.
2. The drawing loop is attached to the handle by a paper band, which
must only be removed before firing.
INSTRUCTIONS.
To prepare for use.
1. Unscrew the handle and see if the detonator is in position ; if it is,
refix the handle.
2. Hold the grenade in the right hand.
8. Tear off the paper band with left hand.
4. Pull loop with left hand.
6. Throw immediately.
If the detonator is not in position, search should be made for a supply
of the proper detonators. Pit the mouth of the detonator into the projecting
brass tube, screw in the handle and then proceed as in 2,3, 4, and 5 above.
To render useless.
1. Unscrew handle, remove detonator.
2. Pull drawing loop and throw handle away.


(vii.) Weight : 2i lbs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 29, Figs. 1 and 2.)
The body consists of a tin box 2f" x 2f" x 6" filled with explosive. This
hox is nailed on to a wooden handle. Length complete is 15".
Method of Ignition.
Spring igniter, fuze and detonator, similar to that used in the cylin-
drical grenade, with spring igniter.
The igniter is kept in position by means of a zinc band screwed on to the
handle.
Safety Arrangements and Instructions.
As for cylindrical grenade with spring igniter (see para, vi.), except that
the safest way to destroy this grenade is to fire it in a pit or disused trench.
(viii.) Weight : about lib.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 31, Figs. 2 and 3.)
The body consists of the two iron shells .convex on the outside and with
the edges either turned over or rivetted. It contains two circular bags of
explosive, each containing 2 ozs.
Method of Ignition.
Consists of six metal tubes in the shape of a star, meeting at the centre
of the grenade plug. Four of these tubes carry striker pellets and caps, and
opposite to each cap is one of the four points of a cross. The outer end of
each of these tubes is closed by a screwed plug. One of the remaining two
tubes carries the detonator of which the inner end is open. This tube is
closed by a screwed plug with milled head with the letter “S” on it.
Safety Arrangements.
The sixth tube contains a safety pellet divided into two prongs, one of
which passes on each side of the cross and protects the points. This pellet is
retained in its position by a cap which closes the outer end of this tube. This
cap is secured to the tube either by clips, or by a safety pin with ring.
INSTRUCTIONS:
(«) To prepare or use.
1. Hold the grenade in the right hand, safety pin upwards.
2. Pull out the safety pin with the left hand.
8. Pull off the cap and hold the safety pellet in position with the right
forefinger (if necessary the safety pin can be replaced).
4. Throw the grenade as high as possible, taking care that the edge is
vertical.
Note. —These grenades can also be thrown with the strap provided in each
box, but this requires considerable practice.


C b ) To render useless.
1. Unscrew the plug of the tube, marked S,” opposite to the safety pin.
2. Remove detonator.
Action during Flight.
Owing to the grenade turning over, the safety pellet flies out and the
grenade becomes sensitive. When the edge of the grenade strikes the target
the corresponding striker pellet drives the cap forward on to the point of the
cross. The flash passes into the detonator and explodes the charge. A low
or horizontal throw may cause a failure. On detonation the fragments fly
out laterally, and not to the front or rear.
(ix.) DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 32.)
The body, which is painted black, consists of a tin cylinder of explosive
with hemispherical head of larger diameter containing shrapnel bullets. A
buffer cylinder passes through the body and projects, so as to produce the
explosion slightly above ground. The base of the body is closed by a wooden
plug at the handle. A parachute safety arrangement is attached to the head
of the handle in order to prevent fragments flying to the rear on explosion
and also to cause the grenade to fall on its head.
Method of Ignition consists of: —
1. The detonator in the buffer cylinder supported by the screwed plug at
the end.
2. The percussion pellet with point and spiral spring.
Safety Arrangements consist of the following
1. A cord 7 metres long which normally is coiled up inside the handle, is
attached to a long needle passing down the percussion pellet. A safety
hook retains a ring attached to the end of the percussion pellet and
the needle passes through a hole in this hook. After the first 7 metres
of the flight, the jerk on the cord pulls out the needle, and the safety
hook is thus free to fall out sideways and so allow the percussion
pellet to move forward on concussion.
2. Keep pin and creep spring. The former prevents the percussion pellet
from falling back.
INSTRUCTIONS.
(a) To Prepare for use.
1. Unscrew the plug in the head.
2. Place in the detonator, fulminate downwards.
8. Screw in the plug.
4. Tear off the band.holding the parachute.
5. Holding the loop of the cord firmly with the first and second fingers
of the right hand, take out the plug from the handle unwinding as
short a length as possible of the cord.


6. Hold the grenade in the right hand.
7. Retaining the loop of the cord, throw the grenade so that it will reach
a height of 12 or 18 feet.
(&) To render Useless.
Remove the detonator.
NOTE. —The grenades may he found live,” in which case 1, 2 and 3 have
already been done.
This grenade can be used in attack or defence, but it is particularly
designed for the former, as the fragments are projected in a forward direction
only, and so are not dangerous to the throwers. The safety arrangements,
prevent the grenade from becoming dangerous, until it has flown about 7
metres.
(X.) Weight : about 2 lbs. complete. Charge 3.2 oz. explosive.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 30, Fig. 1.)
The body of steel (12 cm. long and 4 mm. thick) is serrated longitudinally
and transversely, so that on detonation it may split up into fragments of
sufficient size. It is painted grey. The base is closed by a brass base cup,
which has screwed into it a steel tail rod 18" long, with copper gas check to
take the grooves of the rifling. The rod has a thin coating of copper to pro-
tect it from rust, and also to protect the barrel. A tin disc is fastened to
the head of grenade by ignitor plug for short ranges.
Method of Ignition.
Consists of an igniter plug, carrying cap and detonator, which is screwed
into the head of the grenade. A brass tube passing through the centre of the-
grenade contains a striker pellet, with needle and creep spring.
Safety Arrangements.
1. Powder safety arrangements contained in base cup. Screwed into the
striker pellet is a spindle, which passes through into the base cup, and has at
its lower end a small platform with three flash-holes. On this rests a pellet of
compressed powder, the object of which is to keep the striker from moving
forward until a short time after the grenade has left the rifle. This powder is
ignited by means of a small brass pellet with a cap, which sets back on the-
shock of discharge, and, flattening a small spring, is penetrated by a needle on
the screw plug closing the base cup. A vent hole in the base cup allows the
escape of the gases of combustion. This is normally sealed with wax.
2. The powder, having burnt away, the striker is only prevented from
moving forward by a creep spring, the resistance of which is overcome on
concussion.
INSTRUCTIONS.
(a) To Use.
1. Screw in the igniter plug (with tin disc for ranges under 200 yards).
2. Lower the grenade carefully into the barrel.
3. Insert a rifle grenade cartridge in the breach.
4. Fix the rifle at the required elevation.
5. Fire the rifle.


( h) To render useless: Unscrew the igniter plug in the head of the grenade
Precautions.
1. A German rifle only can be used.
2. Care must be taken that the Grenade is not dropped, especially
if falling on the tail rod, as then it is liable to become “ live,” and
will therefore detonate on firing.
3. The special rifle grenade cartridge should be used, and in no case a
ball cartridge.
4. Tail rods which jamb or rub when being placed in the barrel must
not be used, and no force is to be employed.
5. Damp tail rods should be dried before use. All rods should be firmly
screwed in.
(xi.) Weight : about 21bs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 30, Figs. 2& 3, and Plate 31, Fig. 1.)
The body is of cast iron 5 mm. thick and contains the charge (2f ozs.)
made up in a thin cardboard cylinder, which is retained in the grenade by a
shoulder piece screwing on to the body. The nose of the grenade is screw
threaded to take the percussion fuze, and the base to take a nipple for a tin
disc and tail rod with gas check. Up to the time of fuzing it is protected from
dust and damp by a plug and leather washer. The body, which is painted
field grey, is serrated to give fragments of sufficient size on detonation.
Method of Ignition.
The percussion fuze contains an exploding charge with detonator and cap.
The last named is set off by a striker pellet, the needle of which lies flat on
top of the cap when in the safety position. The striker and spring are con-
tained in a percussion pellet screwed into the socket of the fuze.
Safety Arrangements.
1. The percussion pellet is retained in position by a locking ball ( see
Plan H, Fig. 14) which rests in a groove in the socket and percussion
pellet. This ball cannot fall out owing to a locking ring which is held
up by a flat spring with curved ends. On the rifle being fired the
locking ring sets back overcoming the spring, and the locking ball is
driven out of its groove by the percussion pellet which acting under
the pressure of its spring, moves forward together with the nose of
the fuze out of the body. At the same time the needle pellet, owing
to its spring, pulls up the needle into the firing position.
2. The spring of the percussion pellet prevents any tendency to be driven
back into the cap until striking the target.
INSTRUCTIONS.
(a) To use. As for Rifle Grenade 1913.
( b ) To render useless. Unscrew fuze from grenade.
Precautions. As for Rifle Grenade 1913.
The live grenade can be easily recognised, as the nose of the fuze will be
either entirely or partially out of the body.
The live grenade is most sensitive.


Appendix 5.
DESCRIPTION OF FRENCH GRENADES
AND
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THEIR USE.
(i.) The following grenades are in general use by the French Army;—
1. Ball or “ Portress Artillery ” Grenade
2. Hairbrush Grenade—with box body. I <1 p , ~ „
3. „ ~ —with jam tin body. | eai s.
4. Pear-shaped Grenade (percussion).
5. Besozzi Grenade.
The general precautions laid down in the “ Description of British
Grenades ” apply equally to these grenades, and only the special precautions
applicable to each grenade will be given.
(ii.) Weight ; 2 lbs. 9 ozs. Charge 4 ozs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 36, Pig. 1.)
The body is a hollow cast iron sphere BiV‘ diameter, filled with black
powder. Walls, f" thick. A loading hole f" diameter is left in the body, and
is closed by a wooden plug, which takes the fuze.
Method of Ignition.
Consists of a strong friction tube with wire pull let into a wooden fuze.
Time of burning 5 seconds.
Strap for Throwing. ( See Plate 36, Fig. 2.)
A Leather wrist strap, attached to which are 8" of cord ending in a
swivel hook.
Safety Arrangements.
1. The fuzes are stored separate from the grenades.
2. The plug is covered with paper.
8. The wire pull is bent downwards so as to prevent a direct pull on fuze.
INSTRUCTIONS.
1. Place the leather strap round the right wrist.
2. Tear off the paper from the plug as far as the surface of, the grenade.
8. Bend up the wire pull in the direction of the axis of the fuze.
4. Attach the swivel hook to the ring on the wire.
5. Hold the grenade in the right hand, with the fuze towards the rear.
6. Throw the grenade, with the arm fully stretched out, and do not
bring hack the arm until the wire is pulled.
Precautions.
1. Care should be taken to avoid a direct pull when bending the wire
into the firing position.
2. Vide Instructions No. 6 above.


(iii.) Weight 11b. 12 ozs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 33, Figs. 1 & 2.)
The body consists of a tin box, 4i" x 2|" x 2|", filled with 4 cartridges of
cheddite. This box is cut out of a sheet of tin as shown in fig. 1. The sheet
is then bent into the form of a box, and nailed to the handle, which forms the
bottom of the box. The strips marked “x” in the diagram are then bent over
into the positions y ” and those marked z ” are bent round the edges of the
handle. All joints are then well luted.
The handle is of wood, 14" long, total length of grenade 18i". Width at
head 2j". A flat strip of zinc is nailed to the back of the handle. This can
be bent over to form a hook (for attachment to belt, etc.). It is left flat to
facilitate package.
Means of Ignition.
The grenade is fired by means of a friction igniter, safety fuze and
detonator.
The igniter consists of a copper tube, 3" long, covered with blue paper. It
is fired by pulling a ring at the end of a wire passing into the composition in
the friction tube. Fuze 8 cm. long. Time of burning 7 seconds. Joints are
crimped and covered with luting when in position.
The igniter is nailed to the handle by means of a narrow tin strap. A
staple passes over the wire at the end of the tube, and acts as a stop for the
igniter when the wire is pulled.
Safety Arrangements.
A paper band passes over the ring at the end of the wire, and is secured
by a nail which passes through the middle of the ring.
INSTRUCTIONS.
1. Hold the handle in the right hand.
2. Tear off the paper strip with the left hand, and pull the wire.
3. Throw immediately.
Special Precautions.
1. Owing to the fact that this grenade is hand-made, particular attention
must be paid to the luting of the joints.
2, As the grenade is invariably carried “live,” it should be handled care-
fully.
(iv.) Weight : 2 lbs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 34, Pig. 1.)
The body consists of a circular jam-tin, height 3", diameter 3j", contain
ing 12i oz. cheddite. The lid for this can be made either from a second jam
tin, or from a circular piece of tin with the edges bent over.


The handle is of wood, 18" long, similar to that of Box Hairbrush Grenade,
except for the head, which is shaped to take the jam-tin.
Method of Fixing Body to Handle. (See Plate 34, Pig. 2.)
1. Twist up two wires 18" long.
2. Drive four lj" nails through the handle and place the wire between
them.
3. Make a hole in the side of the tin for the detonator, about f" from
the base.
4. Place the base of the tin on to the points of the four nails until it is
in contact with handle.
5. Bend over the points of the nails to secure the tin.
6. Pill the tin with explosive.
7. Put on the lid, and fasten it down by twisting together the four ends
of the wires. These wires should be tightened by making bends at
the sides with a pair of pliers.
8. All joints, including those round the igniter and detonator, should be
well luted.
Method of Ignition. \
Safety Arrangements. [
_ As for Hairbrush Grenade with box body.
Instructions.
Precautions. I
(v.) Weight : 11b. 3ozs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 35, Pigs. 1 & 2.)
The body is made of iron, oast to the shape of a pear, with a hole at each
end. Length Si" —maximum diameter 2". It is grooved on inside to assist
fragmentation, and contains about 1 oz. explosive.
The hole in the base, through which the explosive is loaded, is closed by
a screwed lead plug. The hole in the nock is closed by a steel plug, which
carries a copper tube to take the striker, creep spring and detonator.
Method of Ignition and Percussion Mechanism.
An aluminium lever fits against the side of the body, and is normally
secured in position by means of a string, which passes round the body and is.
fastened by a metal seal.


A streamer, 18" long, with a small metal steadying plate at the end, is
attached to the lever and is normally folded under it. At the narrow end of
the lever are two cams, between which the striker is fixed by means of a pin
passing through them. On this pin, there is a spiral spring, which actuates
the lever.
The object of the cams, which bear against the neck of the grenade, is to
hold back the striker until the grenade has left the hand.
The striker consists of a steel rod, one end of which carries the needle
point. The other end is divided and a pin passes through it and the steel
plug. Thus the striker is prevented from coming out of the grenade, but is
free to move forward against the creep spring as soon as the lever is released.
Action.
As soon as the grenade has left the hand, the lever flies up. As the broad
part of the cams on the lever no longer bear on the neck of the grenade, the
striker is now free, and is only held back by the creep spring.
The grenade is made to fall on its head by means of its shape and the
streamer. When it reaches the ground, the striker, owing to its inertia,
compresses the spring sufficiently to pierce the detonator and thus fire the
grenade.
Safety Arrangements.
1. The cams on the lever prevent any movement of the striker until the
grenade has left the hand.
2. The lever is prevented from moving by the string tied round the body.
INSTRUCTIONS.
1. Hold the grenade in the right hand, with the neck of the grenade
towards the wrist and the lever against the palm of the hand, leaving
the metal seal exposed.
2. Twist off the seal with the left hand.
3. Throw the grenade.
Precautions.
As the grenades are always live, they should not be tampered with in
any way.
Package.
The grenades are packed in boxes of 50, ready for use. Bach is protected
by a roll of corrugated cardboard, and it is usually advisable to leave this on
until immediately before use.


(vi.) Weight ; lib. 7 ozs.
DESCRIPTION. (See Plate 37.)
The body is made of serrated cast iron. A hole is left at one end, through
which the explosive is loaded. It is closed by a plug through which the fuze
passes.
Method of Ignition.
Consists of a detonator and time fuze tipped with red phosphorus. The
fuze projects about 2" from the grenade. This projecting end is bent over and
waxed on to the body. A striking box or ring is also provided.
Safety Arrangements.
1. The grenade is packed in waterproof paper.
2. The joint round the plug is well luted.
INSTRUCTIONS. (See Plate 38.)
1. Hold the grenade, fuze upwards, in the right hand.
2. Hold the striking box, or ring, in the left hand.
3. Strike the phosphorus tip with a downward motion of the left hand.
4. Throw immediately.
Time of burning: 5 seconds.
Precautions.
1. The grenade must be struck with a downward motion, otherwise the
fuze may be dragged away from the body, and fail to ignite.
N.B. The grenade is carried live.


GRENADE, HAND, NO.1.
Plate 16.


Plate 17.
GRENADE, HAND, NO.2.


Plate 18.
GRENADE 303 ” short rifle. No3.


Plate 19.
GRENADE, HAND. NO 8


Plate 20
GRENADE, HAND. NO 8.


Plate 21.
GRENADE, HAND NO 12.


Plate 22.
BATTUE HAND GRENAND


Plate 23.
PITCHER HAND GRENADE


Bate 24.
OVAL HAND GRENADE.


Plate 25.
BALL HAND GRENADE.


Plate 26.
G erma n. Ha nd Grenades


Plate 27.
German Hand Grenades.


Ger man Hand
Grenades.
Plate 28.


German Hand Grenades. Plate 29


Plate 30.
Germa n Grenad es


Plate 31.
Germa n Grenad es


German Grenades.
Plate 32


Plate 33
French Hand Grenades.


Plate 34
French Hand Grenades


French Hand Grenades.
Plate 35.


Plate 36.
French Hand Grenades


Plate. 37.
French Hand Grenade. (Besozzi)


Mehod of Igniting. Plate 36.
