

No. 652.
[MISSIONARY SERIES.]
THE ISLE OF THE DEAD;
OR,
THE BURIAL-PLACE AT PORT-ARTHUR,
VAN-DIEMEN’S LAND.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY JOHN MASON, 14, CITY-ROAD
AND SOLD AT 66, PATERNOSTER'HOW.


London: U. Needham, Printer, Paternoster-How.


THE ISLE OF THE DEAD.
On the 28th of April, 1770, Captain Cook cast
anchor in a beautiful bay on the coast of New-Holland.
Sir Joseph Banks, with his scientific companions, went on
shore; and, observing a great variety of wild flowers grow-
ing in rich profusion on its gentle slopes, gave to it the
appropriate name of Botany-Bay. At that time, neither
the gallant Commander nor his enterprising friends could
possibly have formed the most remote .idea that, in the
course of a few years, that pleasing name would become
terrible to thousands. But where is the individual who has
not heard of the far-famed Botany-Bay, as being the land
of the banished offender ? Frequently has the mention of
this spot caused the deepest melancholy to fall upon the
spirit of the aged, care-worn father, and wrung with
anguish the heart of the widowed mother; while it has
reminded each of beloved though disobedient children,
whose crimes have exiled them to shores distant, from
the land of their birth, more than half the circumference
of the globe. In 1787 the first convicts were sent to
Botany-Bay. From that period, to the year 1803, all
the expatriated were sent to New South Wales, when
Yan-Diemen’s Land was taken up as a penal colony.
In the year 1840 it was determined that all prisoners of
the British Crown should be sent to Tasmania ; so that
the dreaded Botany-Bay exists no more as a land of
banishment. It is a subject which will excite no sur-
prise, that belonging to convict-colonies there should be
established penal settlements, to which those who violate
colonial laws should be sent, for severer punishment than
that which they received under their original sentence :
such a settlement for Yan-Diemen’s Land was formed
at Port-Arthur, about twelve years ago. At first only
twenty-five prisoners were sent; but their number in-


creased considerably ; so that, at the present time, up-
wards of sixteen hundred convicts are there located
under the sentence of the law. During the above
period, many thousands have been removed to other
stations, having finished their probation in this place.
It fell to my lot to be the first Minister of the
Gospel appointed to preach the word of life to these
degraded outcasts. With what success that word has been
declared by the Ministers of the Wesleyan Connexion,
who have laboured among them from year to year, the
great day alone will unfold. Disease and death soon
made their inroads among us ; so that it was necessary
some suitable spot should be selected, where to deposit
the earthly remains of the departed. In the spacious
bay, on the verge of which the settlement is situated, at
the distance of a mile, stands a lovely little island, about
half a mile in circumference at the water’s edge. This,
it appeared to me, would be a secure and undisturbed
resting-place, where the departed prisoners might lie
together until the morning of the resurrection. It was
accordingly fixed upon, and called, “ The Isle of the
Dead.” Since that time, many a sad and melancholy
walk have I taken on this island ; but, perhaps, never
more so than yesterday, when I went to perform the
funeral ceremony over one who, three days before, had
been most barbarously murdered by one of his fellow-
prisoners. No sooner had I set my foot upon the path
which winds along among the humble graves, than the
beautiful words of the afflicted Job struck my mind with
peculiar force : “ There the wicked cease from troubling,
and there the weary be at rest.” Here the prisoners
rest together,—they hear not the voice of the oppressor.
I inquired, how far these delightful lines were applicable
to the circumstances of those whose ashes reposed in
solemn silence around me. If Job referred only to the
grave, they were literally so. The dead had all been
in bondage to men ; they had followed courses which, at
length, threw them into constant contact with those
whose hearts were fully set in them to do evil, so that they


became a source of trouble and annoyance to each other,
and at last life itself became weariness unto them.
My mind ran back to the period when I first visited
the gloomy spot. My eye fixed upon a few well-known
graves ; and such strangely-mingled feelings took pos-
session of my heart, as could only find relief in tears.
At my feet was the grassy mound which covered the re-
mains of Dennis Collins. He had belonged to a
man-of-war, and for many years had served his King,
and often fought for his country •, but like many thou-
sands of British sailors, he had lived utterly regardless
of God. He had baffled the storm, had engaged the
enemy, kept his accustomed watch, sung the merry song,
laughed and joked his years away ; but regarded not the
world to come. At length in an engagement he lost a
leg; and, being thus disabled, he was discharged, and
found an asylum in Greenwich Hospital, where he might
have spent the evening of his days in peace and com-
fort ; but having been long accustomed to do evil, he
found that it was not an easy task to learn to do well:
lie violated the regulations of the establishment, and was
dismissed in disgrace. He applied for a pension, but
was unsuccessful. He attended the races at Ascot, in
the year 1832, evidently for the specific purpose of
embracing an opportunity of manifesting his malicious
feeling upon his Sovereign ; for as soon as William IV.
and Queen Adelaide presented themselves at the window
of the royal stand, he threw a stone at the King,
which struck his hat with such violence as to cause
a deep indentation. The King, in the surprise of
the moment, exclaimed that he had been hit, —thinking
a bullet had been discharged at him. Collins was
seized, tried for high treason, and received the dreadful
sentence of death, which was afterwards commuted to
transportation for life, —a considerable part of which was
to be passed at Port-Arthur. He arrived here in the early
part of the year 1833. The day on which he landed,
lie was clothed in yellow, (the ordinary dress of the pri-
soners on their arrival,) and was required to do some


light work, his age and general decrepitude exempting
him from the more severely worked gangs. Collins, how-
ever, declared his determination not to go through even the
form of labour, saying, that he had worked for the King
long enough; and that he would neither perform the King’s
task, nor eat the King’s food, any longer. He was sent to
a cell, where he remained fourteen days, obstinately refus-
ing either to eat or to work. lie was reasoned with on the
impropriety of his conduct, and urged to abandon his
sinful resolution ; but he exhibited a degree of steadfast-
ness of purpose almost unparalleled. At the end of this
period, being in a state of great exhaustion from his
long abstinence, he was taken to the hospital, where
every medical comfort which that establishment afforded
was set before him ; but all was insufficient to over-
come his resolution : he lingered for seven days longer,
and then died, miserably perishing in his sin. He was
a bigoted Roman Catholic, and did not request my visits;
nevertheless, I saw him frequently, and trust I warned
him faithfully. He died apparently without hope. I
saw him placed in his grave ; and at that grave, after a
lapse of ten years, my mind was sensibly affected by
the recollection of the words of Solomon : “ The per-
verseness of transgressors shall destroy them.”
Near the grave of Dennis Collins was that of one who
died under widely different circumstances: it was the
quiet resting-place of John M'Nannie, a native of
Glasgow. In youth he received good instruction ; but
he commenced in early life a course of folly, which con-
tinued until he was seized with his last illness. When he
arrived at man’s estate, he enlisted as a soldier, and
fought his country’s battle on the plains of Waterloo ; in
which contest he lost an arm. On his restoration to
health he received a discharge, and returned to his native
land. Having risen to the highest rank of non-com-
missioned officers, he was entitled to a pension that
enabled him to live respectably. After a short time he
met with a young woman, for whom he began to enter-
tain an ardent affection : proposals of marriage were


made, and accepted ; and in due time tney were united.
Thinking that it was necessary that he should increase
his means of subsistence by an attention to some busi-
ness, he was induced to become the landlord of an ale-
house. This was a fatal step ; as he was soon surrounded
by those whose hearts were depraved, and whose actions
were flagitious. He became addicted to the nefarious
practice of receiving stolen property, which soon termi-
nated in his ruin. He was apprehended, found guilty,
and was banished for the term of his natural life from
his country and his friends.
For several years he pursued a course of dissipation
among his fellow-prisoners in this colony. At length,
for some misdemeanour, he was sent to the penal settle-
ment at Port-Arthur. Here also he continued the
careless and abandoned sinner, living without God and
without hope. Yet all this time the Holy Spirit was
striving with him. In his very best and brightest days
he was not happy ; and when surrounded by men of the
worst character, (his actions, alas ! too nearly resembling
theirs,) he was thoroughly' miserable. While he was pass-
ing through his probation at this last place of human
banishment, his health forsook him, and it was decreed
that
, “ The rose on his deserted cheek
Should never bloom again.”
He was admitted to the hospital, where many wearisome
days and nights were appointed him. His complaint
was pronounced to be pulmonary consumption. Laid
aside from the activities of life, and from his old asso-
ciates in sin, and passing through the lingering stages
of a wasting disease, with the realities of an eternal
world before him, he began seriously to consider the ne-
cessity of an attention to those things which concerned
the salvation of his soul. Divine light began to
dawn upon his mind : and those convictions which were
experienced in early life were revived and deepened.
Under these circumstances I visited him frequently, and
conversed with him freely on the affairs of eternity.


He appeared to be earnestly inquiring, “ What must I
do to be saved ? ” I lent him books ; and, among
others, Alleine’s “Alarm to unconverted Sinners.’’
The solemn appeals made to the heart and conscience
of the sinner by that holy man, in his powerful writings,
laid fast hold on the mind of the sufferer. Visiting him
the day after I had left the book, I was surprised to find
that he had not only read it, but had committed large
portions of it to memory. He appeared to possess a
very retentive mind ; so that whatever he read was
almost immediately treasured up, and rendered his own.
From the remarks he made on what he read, and his
rapid acquaintance with the knowledge of divine things,
I soon discovered that his intellectual powers were of
no ordinary character. I requested him to inform me
at what period of his life, and under what circumstances,
he first saw the sinfulness of sin, and the need there was
of a personal interest in the Saviour’s blood. I was led
to make this inquiry on account of his frequently re-
peating, in my hearing, verses of hymns, and parts of
the Assembly’s Catechism ; which appeared to indicate
that his early religious training had not been neglected.
He replied, “ O, Sir, my history is but a short one, and
its principal events may soon be narrated. It is now
nearly half a century since I hailed the light of this
sinful world, and considerably more than forty yeafs
since I first heard of these important truths. When I
was a little boy, I was sent to a Sabbath-school in Glas-
gow. My beloved Teacher was a Mr. Dunlop : ” (at
the mention of the name of this friend of his youth the
big tear stood in his eye :) “ he directed my infant mind
to the Saviour, instructed me out of the book of God,
and prayed that those sacred truths might fasten upon
my mind and affect my heart; and so they did : for
through all my sinful courses they have followed, or
rather accompanied me ; they often checked my thought-
lessness ; the remembrance of them reproved me when
I sinned, and especially when I have blasphemously
invoked destruction on myself or lellow-creatures. I


was reminded that in my youth I had been taught to pray
in far different strains. When I became a soldier, I en-
deavoured to outvie my companions in acts of wickedness:
I played, sang, drank to excess; and strove to appear gay for
the sole purpose of impressing the minds of all around me
with the idea that I was a happy man; but, alas! there was
‘ An aching void
The world could never till.’
Something within told me I was the wretched dupe of
Satan and of sin. The Spirit’s two-edged sword often
proved a ‘ discerner of the thoughts and intents of’ my
‘ heart.’ At length the horrid alarm of war was heard, —
the trumpet sounded to arms, the day of battle was at
hand; and while on the blood-reeking plains of Water-
loo, with thousands falling on either hand, I vainly en-
deavoured to prepare for death, by repealing, as I fought,
passages of Scripture I had learned in the Sunday-
school. I thought on my beloved Teacher, Mr. Dunlop ;
and wished that I had at an earlier period prayed
as fervently for salvation as I did in that awful hour.
At length the ball which deprived me of my arm struck
me, and 1 was carried off the field of contest to suffer
within the precincts of a temporary hospital. Here the
groans of the dying, and the ghastly remains of those
who had recently expired, filled my terrified spirit with
guilty dread. While I remained in this place my reso-
lutions of amendment were strong and numerous ; but
no sooner were my health and strength restored, than I
returned to my sinful practices, and for many years
followed a ‘ multitude to do evil.’ Now lam shortly
to enter upon a world of spirits. lam oppressed with
an enormous load of guilt. Is there mercy for a sinner
like me ?” He was assured that there was mercy even
for him ; that his compassionate Saviour had said,
“ Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.”
In the course of my visits, I was delighted to observe
that the heavenly light continued to shine upon his soul


with increased lustre. He w'as deeply convinced of the
depravity of his nature, and of his absolute guiltiness
before God. Now it was that he really benefited by the
instructions he had received in early life. His powerful
memory appeared to retain all that he had ever learned;
and as his body became more and more enfeebled by
the steady progress of disease, in great simplicity he
would sometimes remark, “What should I do now that 1
am so weak as to be unable any longer to read my Bible,
were it not for the precious truths laid up in my memory
while I was in attendance at the Sabbath-school ?”
His days were drawing to a close, and he was called
to contend with the last enemy. I deeply regret that I
was not permitted to witness his peaceful departure ; for
just as his career of suffering approached a termination, I
was called to another part of the colony by the sudden
and alarming illness of my only son. When I returned,
I found that John M‘Nannie had passed away to that
world where the inhabitants shall no more say, “ I am
sick,” —where the days of mourning are ended. I think
it may be said, we laid him in the grave, on the Isle of
the Dead, in “ sure and certain hope of a resurrection to
eternal life.”
On the Isle of the Dead no stone marks whereabouts
he slumbers, as no tombstone or other mark is allowed
to be placed at the head of the graves, —an act of kindness
which would sometimes be performed by the surviving
prisoners. As I passed his grave yesterday, I thought
how many would consider themselves degraded, were
they to be informed, that in a short time, they must
sleep by his side on the Isle of the Dead ; but who
would (if my hopes concerning him are eventually
realized) be happy indeed to stand in his lot in the
decisive day, when the Judge eternal shall pronounce
to all that love and fear him, “ Come, ye blessed ” chil-
dren “ of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world.”
After hearing of John M'Nannie, the heedless youth,
the Waterloo soldier, the degraded prisoner, being en-


lightened by the influence of the ever-blessed Spirit,
saved by the grace of God in Christ, and passing away
to a better world from a penal settlement, —what
Sunday-school Teacher will grow weary in well-doing ?
In all probability the pious instructor above alluded to,
has long ago gone to his reward : if so, he has met his
scholar in happier climes. Mr. Dunlop may have
laboured long and zealously : he may sometimes have
been ready to exclaim, “ I have laboured in vain,
and spent my strength for nought ; ” but if away
from the shadows of earth, and he can view the result
of his labours in the unclouded light of eternity, the
case of the Glasgow scholar will have convinced him to
the contrary : and in how many other instances his
pious efforts may have terminated successfully, the
judgment-day alone can declare.
When a young disciple of Christ engages in Sunday-
school tuition, he should understand, that though he is
authorized to look for and to expect immediate fruit,
yet he is entering upon a task the beneficial results of
which may not presently be seen ; so that in patience he
must possess his soul. “In the morning sow thy seed,
and in the evening withhold not thy hand, because thou
canst not tell which shall prosper, whether this or that,
or whether both shall be alike good.” Many instances
of early conversion are happily taking place, as though
specially designed by a God of grace to cheer the hearts
of those who are employed in the pious toil; but as a
general rule, the full amount of good is not seen until
after-days. In how many instances does the seed lie
long buried, and the toils, and cares, and prayers of the
pious parent or Teacher appear to be lost: the case
seems hopeless ; the youth becomes profligate, wan-
ders into a far country, and at length is found among
felons : still, the day may arrive when the gracious rain
from on high may descend, and cause seed to vege-
tate, and bring forth fruit, to the honour and glory of
God, as in the case of the dying prisoner at Port-Arthur.
Contiguous to the grave of John M'Nannie lies one


whose hands had been stained with blood. His life
was so wicked, and his death so awful, that the fearful
disclosures must be left for a future day. Could
they now be written, they would furnish a striking
warning to young transgressors. The day on which we
conveyed him to the Isle of the Dead was in perfect
keeping with the state of his mind in his last hours : the
fury of the blast, the teeming of the rain, the roar-
ing of the surges upon the iron-stone rocks which
bound the little isle, with the dying groans and sad ex-
clamations of the departed yet fresh upon the memory,
combined to render it one of the most solemn hours of
my existence. I trust the word of warning, advice, and
invitation then given to the few who attend on such
occasions, was not forgotten : from my remembrance the
circumstances will not soon pass away. Peculiar as
were my feelings on the 16th of April, 1834, when at
the grave of John M‘Nannie, —they were not less so
(though of a different character) on the 31st of January,
1843, while I reflected among the graves on the Isle of
the Dead. Many of the prisoners there resting together I
had personally known ; had visited them in their afflic-
tions ; and had pointed them to that Saviour who came
to proclaim liberty to the captive, the opening of the
prison to them that are bound, and to declare the ac-
ceptable year of the Lord. Though truth demands the
admission, that all did not furnish the same grounds of
hope which the case of the Glasgow Sunday-scholar
afforded, yet with adoring gratitude would I record it,
thathewasnot the only one of whom hopes are entertained,
that when this spot of earth, at the sound of the arch-
angel’s trumpet,, shall give up its hundreds, he shall come
forth to the resurrection of life everlasting.
John A. Manton.
Price 3s. per 100. Considerable allowance will be made to
Tract- Societies, Sunday-Schools, and Booksellers.
London: K. Needham, Printer, Paternoster-Row,
662.
