

THE
TOTAL ECLIPSE
OF THE SUN
21st SEPTEMBER, 1922
AUSTRALIA
Issued under the Authority of the
Minister of State for Home and Territories
by
H. A. HUNT.
Commonwealth Meteorologist,
Melbourne.
1922
PRICE: ONE SHILLING
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA
By Authority:
Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne
[Registered by the Postmaster-General for transmission through the post as a book
SECOND IMPRESSION.


SOLAR CORONA. SUNSPOT MINIMUM TYPE, 1889.
SOLAR CORONA. SUNSPOT MAXIMUM TYPE, 1905.


THE
TOTAL ECLIPSE
OF THE SUN
21st SEPTEMBER, 1922
AUSTRALIA
Issued under the Authority of the
Minister of State (or Home and Territories
by
H. A. HUNT.
Commonwealth Meteorologist,
Melbourne.
1922
PRICE: ONE SHILLING
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA
By Authority:
Albert j. Mullett. Government Printer, Melbourne.
tfteptsfrrcd by the Potimagter-General for tranemission through the poet as a book
SECOND IMPRESSION.


WARNING !.
Protect Your Eyes.
Serious and permanent injury to the sight may be incurred by
continued staring at the sun during the partial eclipse, even with the
unaided eye if it is insufficiently protected.
Much more probable are ill effects if optical instruments such as
binoculars or telescopes are used.
Very dark green or neutral tinted glass is suitable, or glass
heavily smoked over a lamp or candle. For naked eye observations a
dense portion of a photographic negative is sometimes suitable, but for
use with optical instruments it is advisable to have the proper solar eye-
piece material, or black glass such as is used by electricians as a
protection against the glare from arc lamps.
If the only glass obtainable is not sufficiently dark, it is an
advantage to attach a larger piece of it to the objective instead of the
eyepiece of the instrument.
During the toted phase of the eclipse, no protection is needed,
and detail is better seen without. Provision should therefore be made
to have the dark glass readily removable.


PREFACE.
Early in the year 1920 inquiries from astronomers led to the issue
of a circular letter, accompanied by climatological data, from the Central
Weather Bureau to the principal observatories of the world.
When it became apparent that several parties wished to visit the
rather inaccessible but otherwise ideal site on the north-west coast at
Wallal, co-ordination of arrangements became necessary. At the instance
of the Meteorological Department, the Prime Minister, in January, 1922,
appointed a committee representative of the Department of Home and
Territories (Meteorological Branch), the Treasury and the Navy to
advise regarding further procedure. A sum of money was allocated to
meet expenses, and the Naval Board undertook the responsibility of
transport and camping details, while the Commonwealth Meteorologist
continued to make all other arrangements for the Government’s guests.
The contents of this brochure consist largely of notes, diagrams and
charts promised by Dr. J. M. Baldwin, Government Astronomer, Vic-
toria, prior to his trip abroad, and supplied in his absence by the Acting
Government Astronomer, C. J. Merfield, Esq., P.R.A.S., who is respon-
sible for both calculation and format of all the illustrations. In
presenting such a wealth of useful data the Government Astronomer
has laid all amateur astronomers under a debt of gratitude.
Enhanced interest also is due to the kindness of Dr. E. J. Trumpler,
the first arrival of the Crocker Expedition of the Lick Observatory, who,
with the concurrence of the Director, Dr. W. W. Campbell, has con-
tributed a note on the eclipse programme of that famous institution.
For a valuable record of the radio-telegraphic signal strength
designed to test the change in the ionization of the atmosphere with the
passage of the moon’s shadow we shall be indebted to Mr. L. A. Hooke,
Melbourne Manager of Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited,
who is most enthusiastically co-operating in the experiments.
The interesting notes on the eastern eclipse observation site are ex-
tracted from Professor W. E. Cooke’s careful summary of conditions.
The compilation of the remaining portions of the booklet and the
duty of seeing it through the press have been intrusted to Mr. H. Barkley,
Meteorologist in the Central Weather Bureau.
H. A. HUNT,
Commonwealth Meteorologist.
Central Weather Bureau,
Melbourne, August, 1922.


HISTORICAL.
B.C.
3102. First recorded total eclipse of the sun in the Brahmin Surra Siddhanta.
2940. First total solar eclipse recorded by the Babylonians.
2226. First total solar eclipse recorded by the Chinese.
2159. Partial eclipse, for the failure to predict which Hi and Ho, the Chinese
Astronomers Royal, lost their lives.
1069. Total eclipse recorded in Babylon by the Chaldseans.
1062 and 762. Total eclipses recorded in Babylon by the Chaldseans, the cunei-
form accounts of which were used by Dr. Cowell to correct modern lunar
tables.
585. Eclipse predicted by Thales of Miletus: apparently first application of the
“ Saros ” by the Greek astronomers.
A.D.
71. Apparently first reference to corona, but winged images of the sun occur
on Egyptian, Hittite, Assyrian, Babylonian, and Persian monuments.
334. Firmicus alluded to the prominences.
418. Comet first noted near eclipsed sun.
538. First total eclipse recorded in Britain, ( Anglo-Saxon Chronicle.)
1140. Last total solar eclipse in Britain for several centuries, only two in 1715
and 1724 having occurred since.
1598. Jessensky remarks on the corona.
1605. Red flames of the chromosphere recorded by Kepler.
1608. First refracting telescope made in Holland.
1609. Galileo constructed a telescope and noted the rotation of the sun as in-
dicated by the sunspots.
1612. First eclipse (partial) viewed through a telescope.
1652. First detailed account of the corona, by Dr. Wyhord.
1666. Newton’s observation of prismatic refraction laid the foundation of
spectroscopy (see 1802). Newton made the first reflecting telescope.
1706. Chromosphere recorded by Capt. Stannyan at Berne, and described by de
Duiller at Geneva.
1715. Halley published in advance a map of the eclipse track over England, and
observed the corona, chromosphere and “ Baily’s Beads.”-
1724. Last total eclipse in Great Britain (the next will be in 1927).
1802. Absorption lines in the solar spectrum were noted by Wollaston, but in-
correctly interpreted as arbitrary boundaries of. the colours.
1817. Fraunhofer used the absorption lines as landmarks in the solar spectrum.
1820. Goldschmidt recorded the observation of the “ shadow-bands.”
1821. Fraunhofer made his first wire diffraction grating.
1836. Baily described the beads (Baily’s Beads) due to irregularities on the
moon’s limb.
1842. First total eclipse to stimulate modern scientific investigation. The track
crossed Southern Europe. Spectrum of helium was detected by Magrini.
Doppler proved the shift of the spectral lines towards the red for recession
and towards the violet for advance of the source of light (see 1868, 1873,
1893, 1898).
1845. First daguerrotype of the sun taken by Foucault.
Faraday observed the magnetic rotation of the plane of polarization (1896,
1908).
1851. Eclipsed sun first photographed by Berkowski at Konigsberg.
1857. Photo-heliograph erected at Kew Observatory by De la Rue.
Kirchhoff demonstrated the Fraunhofer lines to be due to absorption.
1860. First systematic photography of an eclipse by De la Rue and Seechi.
De la Rue used successive photographs of the eclipsed sun as stereoscopic
pairs, and demonstrated that the chromosphere and the prominences
were solar -appendages, and not due to any atmospheric effects on the
moon, which occulted these luminous masses in the same manner as it
did the solar disc.
1861. Sun’s rotation periods determined by Carrington from observation of sun-
spots.


IS6B. Photography of eclipse spectra begun in India. J. Herschell’s observation
ot the helium spectrum m the prominences proved them to be gaseous.
Hydrogen spectrum identified in prominences by Lockyer without an
eclipse. Helium yellow line observed in the sun by Lockyer. (Identified
in terrestrial samples of cleveite by Ramsay, 189 b.)
1868. Huggins first measured motion in the line of sight (see 1842, 1873, 1893
1898). 5
1809. Green line of coronium 5303 noted by Young and Harkness, who also saw
the reversal of the absorption spectrum to bright lines —the “ flash
spectrum.”
1871. Polarization of coronal light proved it to tie partly reflected from' solid
or liquid particles as suggested by Tennant in 1860 (see 1898).
1872. Young noted incomplete nature of chromospheric (flash) spectrum.
Hie enhanced lines have since been shown to be due probably to ioniza-
tion of the elements at higher temperatures (Fowler, Saunders, &e.).
1873. Vogel at Zollner’s suggestion first proved the sun's rotation by the Doppler
effect.
1878. Corona perceptible for some minutes after totality in clear atmosphere
t °f Pike’s Peak at an altitude of 14,000 feet,
Newcomb and Langley described the extensions of the outer corona.
Watson and Swift report the observation of an intra-mercurial planet.
1882. Unknown comet observed near eclipsed sun, and photographed by Schuster.
Langley invented the bolometer.
1883. Fruitless search for the hypothetical intra-Morcurial planet “ Vulcan.”
Einstein’s Theory of Relativity has apparently disposed of the neces-
sity of presuming the existence of such a planet to account for the
precession of the perihelion of Mercury (see 1919).
Janssen adduced reflected light as the source of the Fraunhofer spectrum
in the outer corona.
1887. Miohelson and Morley obtained negative results when attempting to detect
the earth’s movement through the ether.
1889. Boys invented the radiomicrometer.
1891. Spectroheliographs first erected by Hale and Dcslandres.
1893. Deslandres first tested the rotation of the corona with the sun.
1896. The ‘‘flash spectrum”, first photographed by Shackleton.
Zeeman discovered the magnetic resolution of the Fraunhofer lines pre-
dicted by Lorentz.
1898. Coronium identified as an element by Masini. Proves the inner corona
to be partly gaseous (see 1869, 1S71).
Campbell secured evidence of the rotation of the corona but does not
■consider it conclusive.
1905. ‘‘The great sunspot” lasted from 18th January to 12th February.
Einstein formulated the Special Theory of Relativity.
Newall failed to confirm rotation otf corona.
1907. Eambaut observed prominences 324,600 miles in height.
1908. Hale discovered solar, vortices in hydrogen floeculi with speotro-heliograph,
and proved the existence of magnetic fields in the sunspots (1845-1896).
1910. Total eclipse observed from Mt. Lyell, Tasmania. Astronomical expedi-
tion to Bruni Island met with adverse weather-
-1911. Total eclipse over Pacific Ocean observed at Tonga, The shadow cone
passed at considerable altitude over Melbourne after daylight, but before
sunrise, and most of the stars reappeared. The shadow was also viewed
to the southward from Daylesford.
1914. The red line 6374 in the spectrum of coronium first discovered by Carrasco.
1915. Einstein propounded the General Principle of Relativity and three tests,
one of which is the deflection of a star’s light passing close to the sun
and visible during a total eclipse.
1919. 29th May, first satisfactory test for “Einstein effect” by photography ot
stars near the eclipsed sun. Greenwich observers obtained confirma ory
evidence. Variation in ionization of upper atmosphere tested with
reference to the strength of radio-telegraphic signals. „
1922. Present eclipse on 21st September. Further test for Einstein effec .
This eclipse is a “Saros” return of the eclipse of the 9th September,
1904, over the Pacific Ocean in the same latitudes.
1927. Next total eclipse in Great Britain; duration 0.7 minute. This will De
the third since 1140, the others being 1715 and 1724 nroaent
1976. Next total eclipse in Australia. The third Saros return of the present
eclipse —1922.


Solar Eclipse Expeditions, September, 1922.
PERSONNEL.
Wallal, Western Australia.
Crocker Eclipse Expedition of the Lick Observatory —
Dr. W. W. Campbell, Director of the Lick Observatory.
Mrs. W. W. Campbell.
Dr. J. H. Moore, Assistant Astronomer, Lick Observatory.
Dr. E. J. Trumpler, Astronomer, Lick Observatory.
Dr. C. E. Adams, Government Astronomer, Wellington, UST.Z.
Mrs. C. E. Adams.
J. B. O. Hosking, Esq., 8.M.E., Melbourne Observatory.
• Professor A. D. Ross, M.A., E.E.S.E., Perth University.
Toronto University Expedition—
Professor C. A. Chant, Toronto University, Canada.
Mrs. C. A. Chant.
Miss Chant, B.Sc.
Dr. R. K. Young, Dominion Astrophysical Observatory,
Victoria, B.C.
7 •
Indian Expedition—
J. Evershed, Esq., F.E.S., Kodaikanal Observatory, Madras.
Mrs. J. Evershed,
British Expedition (Private) —
‘ J. Hargreaves, Esq., “ Eoyston,” Herts., England.
G. S. Clerk-Maxwell, Esq.
Perth Observatory Expedition—
C. Nossiter, Esq., Perth Observatory.
Messrs. Dwyer, Nunn, and Matthews.
C. S. Yeates, Esq., Perth Observatory.
Royal Australian Wavy—Lieut.-i’Com. H. L. Quick, R.A.H.
Goondiwindi, Queensland.
Melbourne Observatory Expedition. (Funds provided by private
donor) —
Dr. J. M. Baldwin, M.A., Government Astronomer, Melbourne.
W. Russell Grimwade, Esq., B.Sc.
Capt. E. Kidson, 0.8. E., M.A., M.Sc., Central Weather Bureau,
Melbourne.
W. M. Holmes, Esq., M.A., B.Sc., Melbourne University.
Professor T. Parnell, Brisbane University.
E. M. Wellish, Esq., M.A-, Sydney University,
J. G. Mann, Esq.
Z. A. Merfield, Esq;, Melbourne University.
Sydney Observatory Expedition—
Professor W. E. Cooke, M.A., Government Astronomer, Sydney.
Messrs. Raymond, Graham, Cranny, Trigg, Short, Wynne, Shaw,
and B. Cooke.
Messrs. Middleton and Davies (at Grafton).
Mr. Stanley (at Beaudesert).


Sydney University Expedition—•
Professor O. U. Vonwiller, Sydney University.
Rev. Dr. Pigot, S. J., Riverview College Observatory.
Messrs. Booth, Briggs, Esserman, Nangel, Swain, and Rancloud.
Central Weather Bureau, Melbourne—H. Barkley, Esq., Meteorologist.
Coongoola, Queensland.
Carnegie Institution, of Washington—
D- G. Coleman, Esq., Magnetic Observer, Department of
Terrestrial Magnetism.
Stanthorpe, Queensland.
British Astronomical Association (New South Wales Branch) —
Messrs. W. F. Gale, G. H. Hoskins, E. Gardiner, H. Brown,
A. McKerras, L. Melville, R. W. Schuch, H. Rose, A. W.
Britton, E. R. Morris, E. Esdaile, R. H. Bulkeley,
Andrew, E. H. Beattie, and A. W. W. Gale.
Cordillo Downs , South Australia.
South Australian Expedition—
G. F. Dodwell, Esq., BA., Government Astronomer, Adelaide.
A. L. Kennedy, Esq., 8.E., Adelaide Observatory.
Professor Kerr Grant, M.Sc., Adelaide University. '
A. G. Appelby, Esq., Adelaide University.
E. A. Thrum, Esq., Adelaide University.
Data Obtainable during Total Solar Eclipses.
(1) Observation of times of contacts and limits of shadow on the
earth’s surface.
(2) Spectrum of chromosphere—the “flash spectrum.”
(3) Photographs of (a) inner corona, prominences, and flocculi;
( b ) outer oorona.
(4) Drawings of corona, simple and composite.
(5) Spectrum of corona, for composition and rate of rotation.
(6) Polarization of coronal light.
(7) Photographs of comet or intra-Mercurial planet.
(8) “Einstein effect’’—the apparent outward displacement of stare
where light passes close to the sun to twice the extent pre-
dicted in the Newtonian law of gravity.
(9) Variation of actinic value of sun’s light.
(10) Variation of the total insolation at the earth’s surface.
(11) Variation of air temperature.
(12) Variation of air pressure.
(13) Variation of humidity of the atmosphere.
(14) Variation of wind direction and force. (Eclipse cyclone?)
(15) Formation or disappearance of cloud.
(16) Rate and direction of movement of “shadow hands” and their
dimensions.
(17) Variation of magnetic elements.
(18) Psychological and phonological results —effects on men, animals,
birds, insects, and plants.
(19) Coloration of clouds, sky, land, and sea.
(20) Variation of signal strength, atmospherics, and direction ot wave
front in radiotelegraphy;


Definitions.
Limb. —The apparent edge of the sun’s or moon’s disc.
Corona. —Silvery white luminous appendages of considerable extent
around the sun. At periods of sunspot maxima they form an almost
complete circle around the sun, but during sunspot minima very exten-
sive, wing-like streamers project from low latitudes on either side of
solar equator. The inner corona is partly gaseous, having a charac-
teristic bright-line spectrum, but the outer corona shines by reflected
(polarized) light.
Chromosphere. —The ruddy belt, several thousands of miles deep,
surrounding the bright disc of the sun. It consists of helium, hydrogen,
calcium, and other gases, some of which are condensed to form great
clouds or flocculi. Those gases, which are cooler than the bright photo-
sphere below, absorb some of the light of the continuous spectrum
(reversing layer), causing the characteristic Fraunhofer absorption
lines, but when the photospheric light is cut off during a total eclipse
these elevated gases momentarily give their own characteristic bright-
line spectra, collectively known as the chromospheric or “ flash
spectrum.”
Prominences. —Flame-like projections of metallic and other vapours,
which often form beautiful aigrettes above the sun’s polar regions and
elsewhere.
Umbra. —The eonc of shadow within which the solar disc is com-
pletely hidden and the eclipse is total.
Penumbra. —The reg’on of diminished light within which the solar
disc is not all hidden and the eclipse is partial.
Saros. —The Chahhean eclipse cycle of 18 years 111 days after which
.eclipses (41 of the sun and 29 of the moon) recur in the same order hut
fall 120° further west on the earth’s surface. About ten total eclipses
of minutes average duration occur in each period.
Notes on the Programmes of Observations.
The Crocker Eclipse Expedition oe the Lick Observatory.
By Dr. R. J. Trnmpler.
The Lick Observatory, founded by a gift from Mr. James Lick, of
San Francisco, was erected 34 years ago on the summit of Mount
Hamilton (4,200 feet above sea-level), in California, about 70 miles
south-east of San Francisco. This institution, which forms a part of
the University of California, has made a special study of total eclipses
of the sun, and during the last 30 years it has sent numerous expeditions
to all parts of the globe for observing these phenomena. Such expensive
expeditions were made possible by generous gifts from various donors
interested in such researches, especially from W. H. Crocker, of San
Francisco, Regent of the University of California, who also supports
the present expedition for the total eclipse of the sun on 21st September.
1922.
Wallal, a telegraph station on the Ninety-Mile Beach, on the north-
west coast of Western Australia, was selected as observing site. This
place, which is situated about 200 miles south-west of Broome, offers


a very good 'chance for clear sky in September, according to the
meteorological records of the past. The eclipse will be total at Wallal
at 1 hour 30 minutes in the afternoon, when the sun is high up in the
sky, and the totality will last 5 minutes 19 seconds, the longest deration
of any of the observing stations. To these favorable factors has to be
added only one difficulty, that of transportation and the lack of accom-
modation for living at such an isolated place.
The Lick Observatory Expedition is equipped with a photographic
camera 40 feet long, containing an objective of 5 inches aperture, giving
an image of the sun 44 inches in diameter. With this instrument large-
scale photographs of the corona will be secured during totality, following
a programme that has been pursued on numerous former eclipses. -It
is also the intention to photograph the crescent of the sun during the
partial eclipse, shortly before and after totality, and to have the moments
of these exposures recorded on a chronograph, so that they may serve to
obtain the relative positions of the moon and the sun with great accuracy,
and to chock the correctness of the calculated motions of these two
bodies. The 40-foot camera has a square tube covered with canvas,
and it is erected in such a position that, according to calculations, it will
point to the sun during the eclipse. Its upper end, containing the
objective, is supported by a wooden tower. The frame carrying the
photographic plate is movable on rails, and a clockwork makes it follow
the apparent daily motion of the sun.
Several spectrographs will be used for studying the spectrum of
the corona, and numerous minor observations are planned; the most
important part of the eclipse programme, however, is the testing of
Einstein’s theory of relativity. According to this theory, a ray of
light passing near a heavy body like the sun should be deviated from its
normal straight path to a slight curve by the gravitational action of the
sun. Stars situated in the sky close to the sun’s disc should then
appear shifted from their normal places by certain amounts predicted
by the theory. It is, however, only possible to observe or photograph
stars close to the sun’s edge during a total eclipse, when the intense
sunlight is shut off by the moon, and the coming eclipse offers a precious
opportunity for testing this far-reaching theory.
Two twin cameras were specially constructed at the workshop of
the Lick Observatory for the purpose of photographing during totality
the eclipsed sun and the stars around it. One of these instruments is
15 feet long, and has two 5-in. Lfastings-Brashear doublet objectives,
giving good definition over a large field (5 degrees square) ; it is mounted
on a polar axis and provided with a clockwork, which makes the camera
follow the daily motion of the stars. A visual guiding telescope of the
same length is attached to the rectangular tube containing the two
cameras; it will be pointed during the eclipse on the bright star Beta
Virginis, and the observer will have to correct the motion of the clock-
work during the exposures, so that this star remains accurately on the
cross wire of the guiding telescope. A canvas house has to be built
at Wallal around each of the two instruments to protect it against
wind and from the heat of the sun. The photographic plates used are
17 x 17 inches, made of selected plate glass, so as to be perfectly
plane, and i inch thick, so as to have sufficient rigidity. Two plates will
be exposed for 2 4 minutes during the first half of totality, the plate-
holders will then be changed rapidly, and another pair of photographs


of the same exposure time secured. The advantage of a twin camera
is to obtain two photographs at the same time. It is expected that
these photographs will show at least. 70 stars surrounding the sun, some
of them thirty times fainter than the faintest stars visible to the eye on a
clear night.
The second twin camera is only 5 feet long, and has two 4-in.
Ross-Brashear quadruplet objectives of excellent quality; it is quite
similar in construction to the 15-ft. camera, and the same observing
method will be followed. The 17 xl7 inch plates used with this instru-
ment cover a much larger part of the sky (16 degrees square) than
with the longer camera, but the smaller scale will not allow such a high
accuracy of measurement. The combined results of both instruments
should not only give information about the deflection of light for the
stars nearest to the sun!s edge, but they should also indicate at what
rate the deflection is diminished when the stars are situated at larger
angular distances from the sun, and a comparison of this rate with
that predicted by Einstein will form another rigorous test of the theory.
To measure the deflection of light near the sun it is necessary to
compare the photographs taken during the eclipse (on which the star
images are slightly shifted from their normal positions) with photo-
graphs of these same stars taken at a time when the sun was in a different
part of the sky and could not have any influence on the light of these
stars. Such comparison photographs were obtained with the same
instruments in May and June, 1922, on the Island of Tahiti, where the
geographical latitude and meteorological conditions are similar to those
at Wallah
The photographs taken during the eclipse at Wallal will be compared
with those previously taken at Tahiti by very accurate measures made
with the aid of a microscope. Eor none of the stars the shift predicted
by Einstein amounts to more than one-thousandth of an inch. In order
to detect such a small quantity, greatest care must be taken in the
adjustment of the telescopes. The Tahiti plates, as well as those of
the eclipse, are also exposed on another region of the sky, so selected
that it remains practically unchanged at both epochs, and serves for
detecting and eliminating any possible instrumental errors.
The photographs obtained with the 5-ft. camera will at the same
time be used to search for a planet or a comet that might possibly be
situated close to the sun. It is the intention to measure some of the
photographs at Broome or Perth immediately after the eclipse, so as
to get the principal results as rapidly as possible.
The spectrographic work will include the determination of the wave
lengths of the green and red coronium lines with a grating and the dis-
tribution of coronium with an objective-grating spectrograph. The
spectra of the inner and outer portions of the corona will be photo-
graphed with prism spectrographs-
Toronto University.
(2) Professor C. A. Chant, of the University of Toronto, with whom
is associated Dr. E. K. Young, of the Dominion Astrophysical Observa-
tory, Victoria, 8.C., intends to duplicate the test for the “Einstein
effect ” with a camera of 6-in. aperture and 11 feet focal length, with


which lie will make three short and two long exposures. With the shorter
exposures the coronal, detail should not he fogged, and the plates will
possess this additional value. Dr. Campbell courteously arranged for
Dr. Trumpler to expose Professor Chant’s comparison plates with the
Toronto camera at Tahiti, while those for the Lick Observatory were
being made. Professor Chant will also teat the degree of polarization
of the solar corona with a twin camera having lenses of 36 inches and 34
inches focal length. Behind the first lens a Nicol prism will cut out
a portion of the polarized light, while the second lens will transmit the
full illumination. Immediately before the eclipse a photometric scale
will be imprinted upon the sensitive plates. An attempt will also be
made to photograph the shadow bands observable at the beginning and
end of totality.
(3) Mr. J. Evershed, of Kodaikanal Observatory, Madras, will test
for the “ Einstein effect ” with a 12-in. triple lens of 21 feet focal length,
and will endeavour to measure the rotation of the, corona with two
spectrographs of special design photographing the spectra on both limbs
simultaneously. The instruments will bo fed by ccelostats.
Perth Observatory.
(4) Mr. C. Nossiter, of the Perth Observatory, will determine the
longitude of the Wallal site from nadio-telegraphic signals from inter-
national and Australian stations. In addition to photographing the
corona with a camera of 5-in. aperture and 40 feet focal length, he will
photograph the sun during the minute before and after totality as a
check on the relative positions and diameters of the sun and moon.
British Expedition (Private).
(5) Mr. J. Hargreaves, a British amateur, will photograph the
corona with a camera of 19 feet focal length, fed by an 8-in. ccelostat,
and will also obtain a continuous photographic record of the magnetic
declination throughout the eclipse.
Adelaide Observatory.
(6) Mr. G-. F. Dodwell, of the Adelaide Observatory, will photograph
the corona with a duplicate of the Lick Observatory tower telescope, lent
by Dr. Campbell, and will also test for the “ Einstein effect ” and
record magnetic variation on the lines of the Carnegie Institution pro-
gramme. Professor Kerr Grant will measure the actinic value of the sun-
light and corona by photo-electric methods, and will undertake spectro-
scopic determinations.
Melbourne Observatory.
(7) Dr. J. M. Baldwin, of Melbourne Observatory, will confine
his attention chiefly to the investigation of the distr'-bution and intensity
of the light of the solar corona, using photographs on three different
scales, the largest being a 4-in. diameter of the lunar disc given by the
standard photo-heliograph fed from a coelostat. A diffraction grating
is also being prepared for use with a coelostat in photographing the
green and higher regions of the coronal spectrum. The programme of
observations of magnetic declination proposed by the Department of
Terrestrial Magnetism of the Carnegie Institution will be carried out.


Sydney Observatory.
(8) Professor W. E. Cooke, of Sydney Observatory, mil test for
the “Einstein effect,” and also photograph the corona with a photo-
heliograph, in addition to obtaining a nill positional history of the
eclipse. Observations of the shadow bands and photographic record
of the intensity of light during totality will be taken, and the width
of the moon’s shadow along the 153rd meridian determined.
Sydney University.
(9) Professor 0. U. Yonwiller will photograph the “ flash spectrum ”
with a cinematograph camera, in order to obtain the fullest possible data
of this evanescent phenomenon. He_ will also obtain a spectrum of the
corona with a high dispersion. Two types of photo-electric measure-
ments of the total intensity of light during the partial and total phases
will be made. Special attempts will be made to photograph the outer
corona.
Carnegie Institution, Washington D.C., U.S.A.
(10) Mr. D. G. Coleman will observe the magnetic elements at
Coongoola according to the programme of the Carnegie Institution,
Department of Terrestrial Magnetism.
British Astronomical Association (Sydney).
(11) Mr. W. F. Gale and members of the British Astronomical
Association will photograph the “ fhash spectrum ” and corona, and will
observe the shadow bands and coloration of stars near the sun. Two
12-in. mirrors of 10 feet focal length are included in the equipment.
Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited.
(12) Mr. L. A. Hooke, Melbourne Manager of Amalgamated Wire-
less (Australasia) Ltd., will, on behalf of the Commonwealth
Meteorologist, arrange for a programme of signalling from Perth and
Sydney to determine the effect on signal strength of the deionization
of the atmosphere due to the passage of the eclipse shadow. All other
stations will listen for the variation in signals, and the large experi-
mental plant receiving from Bordeaux will measure the strength of tin-
current induced on the aerial in addition to determining any change of
wave front due to the eclipse.
Commonwealth Meteorological Department.
(13) The Commonwealth Meteorologist has supplied the Walla I
and Goondiwindi Expeditions with all necessary meteorological instru-
ments, including special “ quick-run ” barographs and thermographs.
Meteorological observers along the limits of the shadow band will be
asked to report the actual boundary of the umbral cone within which
totality is observed, and to record any meteorological phenomena. At
Goondiwindi, Mr. H. Barkley will measure the total radiation from the
sun and the corona with a pyrometer (lent by Professor T. 11. Laby).
and will photograph the corona in limited red and green regions of the
spectrum.
Notes on the Total Eclipse of the Sun, 21st September, 1922.
By G. J. Merfield, F.R.A.S., Chief Assistant Astronomer, Victoria.
During the afternoon of Thursday, 21st September, a total eclipse
of the sun will take place. The elements of this eclipse are tabulated in
Oppolzer’s Canon der Finsternisse, and numbered 7458.


The eclipse begins on 20th September, at 14 hrs. 4 min. Greenwich
Mean Time, and ends at 19 hrs. 16 mins, for the earth generally.
It will be visible as a partial eclipse for the whole of Australia, Tas-
mania, and many of the islands to the north and for countries bordering
on the Indian Ocean.
The axis of the moon’s shadow first touches the earth’s surface at
15 hrs. Greenwich mean time at a point in longitude 43° 17' east and lati-
tude 5° 13' north. It passes over the northern part of the Indian Ocean,
just to the south of India and the island of Sumatra until it arrives at
Wallal, on the north-west coast of Western Australia, thence towards
Ballina, in New South Wales, on the east coast, ending in longitude 172°
36' east and south latitude 30° 15', just to the north of New Zealand.
Chart 1 shows the position of the line marked out by the axis of the
moon’s shadow as it passes over Australia. This eclipse will he total
as seen from places situated within a zone which extends to a distance
of -66 miles on each side of the centre line, at Wallal, diminishing
gradually to 60 miles at Ballina.
Wallal will be the most important observing station in Australia. At
this station the duration of totality will he 5 m. 19 s., the altitude of the
sun at mid-totality being about 57° 50'.
It is not intended here to outline any programme for the professional
astronomers, who will be well equipped in most cases with instruments
suitable for the several problems for which they desire data.
The information provided in this booklet is intended for the most
part for the amateur astronomer and others who take. an interest in
science. Nevertheless, there is certain information that will be of use
and interest to the professional also.
WoEK WITH ORDINARY CAMERAS.
An ordinary camera provided with a lens of the auastigmatic or
rectilinear type, not less than three-quarters of an inch in aperture, and
of focal length 9 inches or greater, may be successfully used, provided
the back lens of the combination be removed. This procedure gives a
lens of about 16 to 18 inches focal length, and forms an image of the
moon nearly two-tenths of an inch in diameter. The camera, if used
under certain conditions, will give useful negatives of the corona and
streamers that become valuable records. Photographs of the partial
phase are of little scientific value. Lenses of greater focal length are, of
course, much to he preferred. The Bistellar, the Adon, and all telephoto
combinations are useful. It is quite possible to obtain good definition
with this type of lens; the Adon, for example, can be used with an equi-
valent focal length of 40 to 50 inches, giving images of the moon of about
four to five-tenths of an inch. These lenses are highly recommended to
those who desire to obtain negatives of the corona and extensions. The
results from this type of lens are certainly of scientific value if the
camera be mounted on an equatorial stand as used by astronomers, and if
clockwork be provided, to compensate for the motion of the earth on its
axis when exposures of considerable length can be made.
The lens may with advantage be stopped down to an aperture of, say,
F.ll to F. 16, and exposures of half-a-second to a maximum of about two
or three seconds given if the camera is fixed. If the_ camera can be
mounted as explained above, then exposures of any duration can be made
as desired.


Many of the ordinary stands supplied with cameras are almost use-
less; some can, however, be made available. It is better to clamp the
camera to a strong piece of timber about 12 inches wide and 1 inch
thick of the length necessary, so arranged that it can be elevated
to the altitude of the sun at the time of totality. The
direction and altitude of the camera can bo determined the
day prior to the eclipse by arranging the camera to get an image
of the sun on the ground glass screen at the time calculated for
totality on the day, of the eclipse; the camera should then be
carefully protected over night with some suitable waterproof covering.
Such precaution can be avoided, however, if the camera is provided
with a finder which is accurate enough to use with a long focus lens.
The focussing must be carefully done by getting the image of some
very distant object on the viewing screen, and using a magnifying glass
to examine the image to see that it is quite sharp. A more scientific
method is to make several observations some days prior to the eclipse.
If we take several negatives of the moon or other bright object, it is
possible to secure them on the same plate by a small alteration in the
direction towards which the camera is facing between each exposure.
At the same time, we vary the distance between the plate and lens,
making notes and marks on the bedplate of the camera at each exposure,
which can be recovered without difficulty. After the plate has been
developed, fixed, washed, and dried, we carefully examine the several
images of the object adopted for the experiment. Having selected the
image that is sharp and clear we set the camera to the mark correspond-
ing to the exposure. The exposures for this operation may be about
three seconds duration if the moon is photographed.
Another accurate method of determining the focus can be applied
when a box is used in place of the ordinary camera. At the approximate
focal distance insert a plate making an angle of 45° with the axis of
the camera and expose it at night on the south polar region of the sky.
The resulting star trails will be sharply defined only along one line across
the plate, and that position marks the focal plane.
The usual photographic plates on the market may be used; special
plates are not required. The trade emulsions have been tested on many
occasions and found to be, quite good enough. Special rapid, orthochro-
matic, or panchromatic plates will be found quite suitable with speeds,
say, 250 to 400 H &D. An excellent developer can be prepared by
using 240 grains sodium sulphite anhydrous, or twice the weight if in
crystals, 24 grains of amidol dissolved in 20 oz. of water in the order
given. Potassium bromide is not to be used; it is unnecessary, and
tends to delete fine detail and gradation.
Develop for a period of about six to eight minutes, keeping the
plate in the dish covered with a piece of cardboard or any opaque
substance, and avoid handling the negative. The time for development
may be reduced to a period of between four to six minutes if the tempera-
ture exceeds 70° F. If the temperature of the developer much exceeds
70°, it will be wiser to await cooler conditions, or use ice in the
several operations, in order to avoid frilling and other troubles due to
varying temperatures of the liquids necessary for completing the nega-
tive. Fix in hypo. 2 oz. to 10 of water, then wash thoroughly.


The following conditions are important: —
1. The camera should be firmly supported. Ordinary stands as
usually supplied with cameras are generally useless.
2. It may be desirable to have some form of finder attached to the
camera, if it is not already provided with a reliable one,
so that the image, formed by the lens, may be correctly placed
within the area of the plate used. This is especially im-
portant where long focal lengths are used.
3. The correct focus may be obtained (a) by carefully viewing the
image of a distant object on the ground glass; (6) by taking
a series of photographs of some celestial object at varying
distances between plate and lens and marking the camera
base accordingly; or (c) by the sloping plate and star-trail
method.
4. It is important that the true vertical should be known, so that
the orientation of the solar axis may be determined from a
perpendicular line through the image. This may be accom-
plished by taking on a separate plate a photograph of a
plumb line placed some 15 or 20 feet distant without moving
the camera from its position when the negatives of the
eclipsed sun were taken, the lens being stopped down to T 32.
Or the top side of the camera back may be made horizontal
by using a small spirit level.
5. When placing the photographic plates in the carriers, make a
pencil mark on the emulsion side in the top right hand
corner. When the plate is in the carrier this ifiark will be at
the top left-hand corner of the carrier when the emulsion
side of the plate faces the lens. This mark will be readily
seen on the plate after development, and gives an important
piece of information regarding the orientation of the sun’s
image. Holes should be made of the actual time that each
exposure was made, or it should be referred to the duration of
time from the beginning of totality.
Use or a Telescopic Object Glass foe Photogkaphio Pueposes.
An ordinary telescope may be used for obtaining photographs. Tele-
scopes or objectives with 3 to 4 inches and larger apertures, having
focal lengths of from twelve to fifteen times the aperture may be used
if a light box be made and attached to the ocular or eye-piece end in
the case of a telescope, the box to be so constructed that it will support
in position a plate carrier.
Prom a photographic point of view the object glass may be_ taken
as an uncorrected lens, that is, one in which the visual and actinic foci
are not 'coincident. An allowance has to be made after visual focussing
so as to bring the sensitive plate into the plane of the actinic focus. The
amount of this correction varies with the refractive index of the glass
that forms the object glass. As an approximation the plate may be
placed, at a distance of l-30th to l-40th of the focal length of the lens,
nearer to the object glass than the visual focus is. A series of photo-
graphs of sorrle celestial object will now be necessary, as already
explained, using an aperture of F. 16 or less, the telescope tube being
permanently marked to correspond with the sharpest image shown on
the negative.


Another method is to place a weak lens in front of the working lens
while focussing by visual means, and removing it before the exposure.
This correcting lens must temporarily shorten the focal length to the
necessary degree. It is much better and easier, however, to obtain the
actinic focus by the trial and error method explained above. Alter-
natively, if the image on the ground glass is focussed with the object glass
at full aperture and then stopped down to, say, F. 45 or F. 64 when used
to take a photograph, satisfactory results may be obtained; but this
method is not so strongly recommended.
Visual Observations with Small Telescopes.
It is stated by Mr. Maunder, an astronomer of considerable eclipse
experience, “ that valuable work can be done with portable telescopes,
of moderate aperture, on tripods, or with the naked eye.”
Providing the observers haye had some preliminary training or
experience in rapidly delineating natural objects, this may be correct,
but the results obtained at many eclipses seem to be of doubtful value.
However, the instructions and methods of Mr. Maunder are here quoted
(Journal of the British Astronomical Association, vol. XV., Xo. 8,
p. 317+). . .
“ Distinctly the most important observation which the worker with
such a telescope (from 2 to 4 inches aperture) can make is to draw, with
a moderately high power, the structure of the corona in some small and
definite region. He should perfectly prepare himself from the first
to entirely leave on one side the idea of a general delineation of the whole
corona. The attempt to do so would be doomed to failure, and if any
sketch were it would be perfectly valueless. The observer should
have fully made up his mind before the eclipse as to the region in which
he proposes to work. The regions most likely to be fruitful are (1)
round either of the solar poles; (2) in the neighbourhood of a bright
prominence; or (3) at the root of some principal coronal streamer.
“ For the better performance of this kind of work, the eye should not
be fatigued by observing the progress of the eclipse before totality,
through the telescope. This may be , done, if desired, by an assistant
using a proper dark glass before the ocular, and he may also undertake
to announce the time of approaching totality. It is very important
to preserve the sensitiveness of the eye for the observation of the
eclipsed sun.
“ If several observers provided with telescopes could arrange to work
together according to a preconcerted plan, different parts of the corona
could be apportioned among themselves in such a manner as to give,
by their aggregate results, a complete representation of it.”
A suitable subdivision may be effected for this purpose by reference
to the diagram Xo. 4. The sun’s vertex may be determined by observ-
ing a plumb line, and is necessary in order that the drawing may be
properly oriented, i.e., may be subsequently viewed with the true vertical
in the correct position.
Visual Observations with the Unaided Eye.
The observations which can be made without optical instruments may
be grouped in the following divisions;—
(1) Sketches of the “corona.”
(2) Observations of “shadow bands.”
(3) Observations of planets and stars.
(4) Miscellaneous observations.


Sketches of the Cokona.
“ The sketching party should consist of about five persons—four to
draw details of single quadrants, and one to sketch rapidly the general
features.
A convenient scale is a disc 2 inches in diameter, to represent
the black disc of the moon. Observers should be provided with a stiff
piece of bluish-coloured paper about the size of foolscap, with a circle
2 inches in diameter in the middle, the fiducial lines, as shown jn
diagram Xo. 4, being faintly marked thereon for reference if desired.”
On the diagram shown the concentric circles are at a distance from each
other of one-fifth of the moon’s radius, and are intended to be used as
a scale for the drawing. Intervals' of one-quarter the moon’s radius
might be used if that fraction is more readily appreciated by the eye.
The vertical and horizontal lines define the quadrants, so that the top of
the vertical line agrees with the actual apex of the sun as defined by a
plumb lino projected upon it.
A convenient outfit for sketching the corona would be a piece of
white chalk and one of the small blackboards commonly used by school
children, on which the black disc of the moon might be represented by a
C. 13322.—2


circle 4 inches in diameter. These articles give an advantage over
paper and pencil in that the white chalk is a direct and not a reversed
(or negative) indication of the luminous corona. Moreover, a little
manipulation with the fingers easily produces fine gradations of light
and shade. A piece of dark-red chalk might prove handy for marking
in any prominent parts of the chromosphere. The board should be sup-
ported with the greater length vertical.
Observations or Shadow Bauds.
During the progress of the partial phase there is nothing of very
special interest until the sun is almost covered by the moon, although
before that time arrives the shadows cast by foliage begin to have a
peculiar appearance. The sunlight, shining through every small space
among the leaves, instead of forming a little circle of illumination on the
surface of the ground, shows a small crescent, an image of the partly
covered sun.
Some ten minutes or a quarter-of-an-hour prior to totality the
darkness begins to become evident, the remaining light, coming as it
does from the edge of the sun only, appears to be much altered in
quality, producing an effect very like that of calcium light, rather
than sunshine, as stated by Professor Young in his treatise on general
astronomy. Animals become perplexed and unsettled, birds seek a
resting place as if it were nightfall. The temperature of the air falls a
few degrees, and a slight dew has been noted. ■
If the observer has a clear view of the western horizon, he may note
the arrival of the moon’s shadow. It may be seen approaching, much
like a heavy thunderstorm. It advances with great rapidity until it
completely envelops him. The axis of the shadow will approach the
observer situated in Eastern Queensland from a point about 9 degrees
to the northwards of the due west point. Under favorable circumstances
the upper and lower edges of the shadow cone may be seen by an
observer outside the area of total eclipse, and the angular distance of
these boundaries from the zenith and horizon should be noted. Stars
may appear in the shadowed portion of the sky. The sharpness of
the shadow’s edge is wmrthy of comment.
On every white surface bands or fringes appear, alternately light
and dark; these bands are wave-like pulsations of light and shade, and
may be observed for a few seconds, not exceeding about thirty, just before
and after totality; at some eclipses they have not been in evidence.
These bands have been compared to the appearance of sunlight reflected
from the rippled surface of a pond of water on to the surface of a
white wall; they are a few inches wide, and from 1 to 3 feet apart.
They seem to be generally parallel to the edge of the moon’s shadow,
and the rate of movement is something like 12 miles per hour. The
phenomenon has not yet been fully explained; they may be due to
atmospheric refraction of the light coming from the very .narrow strip
of the sun’s limb just at the time of its disappearance, or possibly a
diffraction effect at the edge of the lunar disc.


A convenient method of determining the direet’oll of motion of the
bands consists in placing a white sheet evenly stretched on the ground
and securing it to wooden pegs placed at convenient places. The
observations consist in placing a long straight rod or lath of wood
parallel to the direction of the hands; the azimuths of the rods or
laths (i.e., their relation to the points of the compass) may be deter-
mined after the eclipse. Several rods should be provided and marked
differently, so that they may be identified. The direction of the bands
changes after the time of totality. A foot-rule should be placed on
the sheet at right angles to the bands, so that the distance between
them may be more readily estimated. Further, the number of bands
that cross a fixed point on the sheet in a given time, say ten seconds,
should be counted. Two persons m’ght combine their efforts in this
observation. It is quite worth while looking for these bands a few
minutes before and again after totality.
Even larger parties of four or more may with advantage work
together, each having a single definite duty to perform. In connexion
with these observations of shadow bands, it is important to ascertain
very carefully the direction and force of the wind. An attempt might
be made to photograph the bands, as this has not yet been successfully
achieved.
Observations op Planets and Stars.
During the interval of totality stars of third magnitude and brighter
usually become visible to the naked eye. It is desirable to watch the
sky in the vicinity of the eclipsed sun for the detection of any unknown
object which might be within the region. It may be mentioned that
comets have been seen on such occasions, for instance, in the years 418
and 1882. If an unknown object be seen, the observer should estimate
its position in relation to known objects that are also visible, using the
diameter of the moon as a unit of distance.
Chart 3, which will be found loose in the pocket on the back cover,
has been prepared to assist in this class of observation. Observers
should make themselves well acquainted with the positions of known
bodies which will be visible above the western horizon in the neighbour-
hood of the sun. At Goondiwindi, the altitude of the eclipsed sun will
be about 21° ; at Stanthorjie and Tenterfield, about 20°.
The chart, which should be pinned up before the observer,
shows the positions of Jupiter (7i), Saturn ( h ), Mercury (£), also
the second magnitude star Beta (/?) Leonis, Gamma (y) Virginis of
the third magnitude, and Theta (#) Leonis, a little less in brightness;
other stars are indicated, of about the fourth magnitude, within a con-
siderable area of the sky surrounding the position of the sun. Any of
these stars visible may be marked on the chart during totality. There
can be no doubt that the three planets shown will be readily detected, as
also Beta (/3) Leonis, and probably Gamma (y) Virginis-
Miscellaneous Vaked-eye Observations.
Observers within the zone of totality might watch the approach
and departure of the lunar shadow, making notes of any circumstance
that may appeal to them at the time.


Those situated at elevated stations, and having an extensive view
of the country to the westward and eastward, will have the best oppor-
tunities in this connexion.
It is comparatively easy to detect the approach of the moon’s shadow
in the sky. Many observers speak of its terrible menacing aspect, like
a hurricane rushing onward at a speed really frightful. The detection
of the approach of the shadow on the earth’s surface is more difficult.
The time at which the shadow reaches the observing station, and
again leaves it, should be noted. Even observers outside the zone
of totality may note the shadow cone in the sky as. the withdrawal of
all scattered light renders the stars visible. Suck an observation was
made at Melbourne in April, 1911, immediately prior to the shadow
striking the earth fully 200 , miles further east, on the coast of Hew
South Wales.
Colours also may he looked for on the clouds, possibly due to the
diffraction of light at the edge of the moon.
The colours of the sky, land, or sea furnish another class of obser-
vation especially suitable for those who have had an artistic training.
These observers, and those who are watching the-shadow, will find it to
their advantage to adopt the same precaution; they should mark out
the north-south and east-west lines, further dividing the quadrants into
several equal parts. If many observers are available, they should divide
the horizon according to their number. Three observers to each
quadrant would he a convenient arrangement.
Each observer should record his observations under the three time
divisions—before totality, during totality, and after totality —and under
the four heads—land, sea, sky at horizon, and sky overhead.
Another observation that can he carried out by a party of observers
situated near the boundaries of the zone of totality is to distribute them-
selves about half-a-mile apart on a line approximately at right angles
to the direction of the boundary, and note if the sun is completely
obscured for a few moments or if a thin line of sunlight is visible along
the limb of the sun. From this data it is possible to compare the
calculated position of the boundary with that observed. The position of
the observer should be noted in relation to the land boundaries in the
vicinity, the corner, for instance, of some surveyed block of land or
road. A railway station or post office would also be an easily identified
locality.
Grafton is a suitable place for these operations on the southern
limit. Observers might distribute themselves to the southward at
varying distances. At this town, totality begins at 4 hours 14 minutes
55 seconds, and the calculated duration of totality is about 21 seconds.
Each observer should note the duration in seconds of time if the total
phase be visible. On the northern boundary, some 7 miles to the north
of Clifton, similar observations could be made.
Observations of this nature, if conducted in a systematic manner,
would be of some considerable scientific value, and may be readily
carried out by any one having a timepiece that keeps a fair rate without


a knowledge of accurate time, as it is only necessary to note the duration
of the time of totality, if visible, which can he done very well without
optical means, as the phe'nomena of the beginning and ending of totality
are almost instantaneous.
Photography of the Landscape, Etc.
A series of photographs of the landscape before and after totality
and one at mid-eclipse may be taken, and will serve a useful purpose.
They could be used to test the question as to the difference in rapidity
of the coming on and going off of the darkness before and after totality.
Any ordinary camera will do, provided that the exposure shutter can be
trusted to work accurately at the same speed for each plate. With a
series of exposures of a portion of the landscape, taken at equal and
carefully timed intervals, and subsequently developed under exactly
similar conditions, the difference of density could be measured with a
photometer and any difference readily detected. The more exposures
made the better. It is specially recommended' that two, at least, be
taken in the five minutes immediately preceding and following totality,
say, at five minutes and at three minutes before and after respectively.
It is essential that the plates or films be of the same kind and emulsion
number, and carefully marked in some convenient way for identification.
Those taken at corresponding intervals prior to and after totality should
be developed in pairs in one dish, in order to make the conditions pre-
cisely similar; use fresh developer for each pair for a period of about
six minutes, provided the exposure is just sufficient for a normal
negative with the plate or film and aperture used. A stock of developer
should be prepared sufficient for the batch of plates, and exactly the same
amount taken for each pair. Fix for ten minutes in hypo., 2 ozs. in
10 ozs., then wash in the usual way for about one hour.
The portion of the landscape selected should be in a south-easterly
direction, or away from the sun. It is desirable, if possible, to select
a scene where foliage is projected against the sky, as the negatives
will better indicate the relative density of the plates.
A still more accurate method of testing the varying actinic value
of the light with gn ordinary camera is as follows: —Facing the sun,
place in a vertical position a small square (6 inches x 6 inches) of white
card or paper against a dull black background—a black apron, a photo-
grapher’s head cloth or a piece of velvet would serve the purpose. How,
with the camera focussed on the white square and only a short distance
away, take a series of photographs at regular intervals. In the partial
phase before and after totality give 1-lOOth second exposure with suit-
able small aperture, and during totality the longest exposure for which
the shutter is rated, say, one second, with the most open aperture, as
the coronal light will be of the order of 1-30,000 th part of the intensity
of full sunlight. Data for the comparison of these two series is obtained
by exposing plates alternately for the shorter and longer intervals in
full sunlight with the smaller aperture previously used. Under uniform
conditions of development the relative density of these images
shows the correction necessary to make the complete eclipse series com-
parable.


Observing the Times of the Several Circumstances of the Eclipse.
The best method of doing this is to projecj the sun’s image on to a
white screen attached to the ocular or eyepiece end of a telescope of
3 or 4 inches aperture. '
FIDUCIAL LINES FOR ECLIPSE AT GOONDIWINDI.
The screen will be conveniently placed at such a distance behind
the ocular as to give an image of about 3or 4 inches diameter. The
angle of position at the beginning of the partial phase, as well as that
of the ending of totality, should be marked on the circle of illumination,
so that the attention can be directed to these points at the proper time.
The time should be noted by counting the beats of a chronometer, com-
mencing from some full minute, or by a stopwatch that has been
thoroughly tested and found reliable.
Great accuracy in these observations can be obtained by making
many observations of the tips of the crescent at stated times during
the partial phase; two observers are required, who at stated times mark
on the screen the tips of the crescent at the same instant. These
points, combined with the times, can be used and so arranged as to get
the several times of the circumstances with much greater accuracy'than
can be yione by a single observation.


General Remarks.
BEWARE OF INJURING YOUR EYES. See special warning
opposite the preface.
All persons taking part in the observations should carefully compare
their watches and obtain a good knowledge of the accurate time, in order
to be able to give the correct time of any observed phenomena.
It is recommended that glass coloured green be used in conjunction
with telescopes, opera glasses, or the naked eye for observing the progress
of the partial phase. Neutral tints come next in value.
Reddish tints are unsuitable for eclipse observations. Those who
are unable to obtain coloured glass may prepare a piece of clear glass
by darkening it to any degree of density required by the smoke of an
oil lamp.
It is well to emphasize here again the uselessness of gazing at the
sun during the partial phase of the eclipse. Such action only destroys
the sensitivity of the retina and unfits the eye for observing the total
phase, in addition to incurring the risk of serious injury.
It is interesting to compare the general illumination at mid-totality
with that of twilight at a given time. Observers may obtain suitable
information in this respect by carrying out some simple and easy
experiments. For example, they could determine on the two or three
evenings prior to eclipse day the latest time when they can read certain
sizes of printed matter held at a fixed distance from the eyes, such type
as is found in one of the local newspapers. On the day of the ecl’pse use
the same issue of the journal fixed at the same distance from the eyes.
The diminution of temperature, personal sensations, behaviour of
animals, wild and domestic, and various other phenomena known or
unexpected may attract attention.
In conclusion, I cannot do better than repeat the words quoted by
Mr. P. Baracchi in 1910: —“ It should be borne in mind.by those who
will be favoured by a sight of the eclipse, the grandest of all celestial
phenomena, how extremely rare are such opportunities. It is only
fair to expect that they so favoured should make notes and record at
least something that may be of interest or value to those less fortunate
than themselves.”
For the preparation of these notes I have been much indebted to a
previous writer. I desire to express my appreciation for the help I
have received from consulting the pamphlet issued on the occasion of
the Tasmanian eclipse of 9th May, 1910, by Mr. P. Baracchi, who
was at the time Government. Astronomer of Victoria and in charge
of the operations at Bruni Island.
Explanation of Charts and Diagrams.
Charts 1 and 2 have been prepared for the purpose of assisting
observers and others wdio desire to obtain the times of the several
circumstances and other data of the eclipse without calculation. For
ordinary work, the times can be found with all the accuracy necessary,
and, in general, to within less than ten seconds of time. For a rigorous
computation of the times it will be necessary to solve a system o
equations that may be found in many works on practical astronomy
and in some National Ephemerides. To assist the computer, tne so-
called Besselian Elements will be found in any of the National


Ephemerides. These elements save a large amount of calculation in
the preparation of eclipse data.
Chart I.—This chart gives the outlines of the moon’s shadow on
the surface of Australia at the beginning and ending of the partial phase.
The curves given in full lines indicate the time of the beginning, those
in dotted lines give the ending.
This chart is very easy to use, and to illustrate its application we
take, as an example, the times of beginning and ending of the partial
phase at Sydney. The time of beginning will be at some time between
3 hours 5 minutes and 3 hours 10 minutes, to be exact it will be
3 hours 5 minutes plus (0.4 X 5 minutes) or 3 hours 7 minutes; the
interval of time between the full lines being 5 minutes and the position
of Sydney is 0.4 of the distance from the 3 hours 5 minutes curve, the
fraction being obtained, with any scale at hand. In the same manner,
by using the dotted curves it will be found that the eclipse will end
at 5 hours 10 minutes -f- (0.35 X 5 minutes), equals, say, 5 hours
12 minutes. These times agree with those published in the British
Nautical Almanac. It will be noticed that along the full lines numbers
are shown, these refer to the position angle of the point of contact from
the north point of the sun’s disc at the commencement of the partial
phase. For Sydney it can, by estimation, be determined as 302° between
the positions given for the points.3os° and 300°. It is to be noted
that the times indicated are zone times referred to the meridian 10 hours
east of Greenwich, i.e., standard time for the Eastern States. As a
second example, take Southern Cross, in Western Australia, Ho. 112
on chart, and to the east of Perth. Eclipse begins at 2 hours 18 minutes
and ends at 4 hours 47 minutes, for zone time 10 hours east. To obtain
the times corresponding to 8 hours zone time, we subtract 2 hours
from the above times. For Southern Cross the eclipse will begin at
12 hours 18 minutes and end at 2 hours 47 minutes for the time used
in Western Australia, the angle at first contact being 318°.
If the times of the partial phase are desired for South Australia,
it will be necessary to subtract half-an-hour from the times obtained
from the chart to conform with the zone time adopted in South Australia.
To avoid crowding the chart with the names of towns, they are
tabulated below; they may readily be found by the numbers. It is to
be noted that small crosses indicate the intersection of certain meridians
and parallels of latitude; by means of these points other towns may be
located that are not given in the list.
Names of Towns Cobbesponding to Numbers on Charts.
Town. K, ™ be , r
on Charts.
Albany . . . . 118
Albury . . . . 82a
Ararat . . . . 72
Ardoch . . . . 32
Armidale (N.S.W.) . . 41
Bairnsdale . . . . 89
Ballarat . . . .■ 78
Ballina . . . . . 24
Barraba . . . . 39
Bathurst . . . . 54
Town Number
iown ' on Charts
Bega .. .. 64
Benalla . . . . 81
Blayney . . . . 53
Bourke . . . . 34
Bowen .. . . 8b
Branxholme . . . . 74
Brewarrina . . . . 35
Brinkworth . . . . 99
Broken Hill . , . . 99a
Broome . . . . 103


rp Number
• Lo " a * on Charts.
Bunbury .. .. 115
Bundaberg .. .. 11
Burrundie . . . . 101
Byroek . . . ■ 36
Cairns . . ■ • 8a
Caniperdown . . . . 76
Canberra . . . . 63c
Canbroo . . .• 117
Carnarvon . . . . 103 c
Casino . . . • 19
Casterton . . . . 74a
Charleville . . . . 13c
Chinchilla . . . . 13
Cloncurry . . . . 3
Cobar .. .. 44
Colac . . . . 77
Condobolin . . . . 51
Coolgardie . . . . 113
Coonamble . . . . 37
Coongoola , . . 15
Cootamundra . . . . 57
Cunnamulla . . . . 14
Dareel . . . . 18
Dartmoor . . . . 74b
Darwin .. .. 100
Deniliquin . . . . 60a
Dimboola . . . . 70a
Dirranbandi . . . . 16
Dongarra . . . . 104
Eden . . . . 65
Edillilie . . . . 96
Forbes . . . . 52
Foster . . . . 84
Garah .. . . 30
Geelong . . . . 78a
Gingin . . . . 110
Gladstone (Q.) . . 10
Gladstone (W.A.) . . 103 d
Glen Innes . . ... 40
Glen Thompson . . 73
Grafton , . . . 29
Gundagai . . . . 63b
Gympie . . . . 12a
Heathcote . . .. 79
Hey wood .. . . 75
Hi list on . . . . 50
Hopetoun . . . . 69
Horsham . . . . 70b
Hughenden . . . . 5
Humula . . . . 63
Terilderie . . • . 60
Julia Creek . . . . 4
Kalgoorlie . . . . 114
Town Number
10wn ' on Charts.
Karara . . . . 25
Katanning . . . . 116 a
Katherine . . • ■ 102
Kiniba . . . . 97
Kingston (K.S.W.) . . 62
Kingston (S.A.) . . 93
Kondinin . . . . 116
Korumburra . . . . 83
Laverton (W.A.) . . 106
Lismore . . . . 23
Lithgow . . ... 55
Mackay . . . . 8c
Maitland . . . . 49
Malcolm . . . . 107
Marble Bar . . . . 103 b
Maryborough . . . . 12
Menzies . . . . 108
Merredin . . . . 11l
Mingenew . . .. 105
Mitchell . . . . 13b
Morwell . . . . 86
Mt. Gambier . . . . 94
Murrayville . . . . 67
Murrurundi . . . . 46
Murtoa . . . . 70
Murwillumbah . . 22
Muswellbrook . . . . 47
ATaracoorte . . . . 92
Karrabri . . . . 38a
Karrung . . . . 59
Kerang . . . . 21
Newcastle . . . . 49a
Kyngan . . . . 45
Orbost . . . . 90
Ouyen . . . . 68
Parramatta . . . . 55a
Peebinga .. . . 66
Port Augusta . . . . 98
Port 'Hedland . . . . 103 a
Port Lincoln . . . . 95
Port Macquarie . . 46a
Quilpie . . . . 33
Quirindi . . • • 43
Rockhampton . . . . 9
Roma . . • • 13a
Sale . . ■ • 88
Serviceton . . • • 91
Seymour . . ■ • 80
Singleton . . • • 48
Southern Cross . ■ H 2
Stamford ■ • ■ ■ ®
Stanthorpe .. •• 27
Stawell . . • • 71


Town Number
iown - on Charts.
Tamworth . . . . 42
Taree . . . . 46b
Tenterfield . . . . 28
Thallon . . . . 17
Toobeah . . .. 31
Toowoomba . . . . 20
Townsville . . . . 8
Traralgon . . . . 87
Tumut . . . . 63a
Tirana . . . . 61
Wangaratta . . . . 82
Town Number
‘ on Charts.
Warragul . . . . 85
Warrnambool . . . . 76a
Warwick . . . . 26
Watheroo . . . . 109
Wee Waa . . . . 38
Weiniby . . . . 59
Wentworth . . . . 58
Winton . . . . 7
Wollongong . . . . 56
Woodford . . . . 12b
Chart 2. —This chart shows that portion of the zone of totality of
particular interest to those in the eastern States of Australia. The times
of mid-totality are indicated by sloping lines across the zone, the time
being given on the boundaries of the shadow belt. The duration of
totality at these points is indicated by figures on the centre line. The
dotted curved lines give the outline of the shadow at the beginning
of the partial phase on this chart.
Take an example to illustrate the use of this chart: It is desired
to find the circumstances of the eclipse at Goondiwindi. This town is
situated between the curves 3 hrs. 5 min. and 3 hrs. 10 min., being one-
tenth of the distance between them from the 3 hrs. 5 min. line, the time
of the beginning of the partial phase will therefore be 3 hrs. 5 min. plus
(0.1 X 5 min.) equals 3 hrs. 5 min. 30 sec; this agrees with the calcu-
lated value, using the Besselian elements.
Mid-eclipse will take place between 4 hrs. 13 min. and 4 hrs.
14 min., or more exactly at 4 hrs. 13.42 min., say 4 hrs.
13 min. 25 sec. The duration of totality at the line 4 hrs.
13 min. will be 3 min. 33.5 sec., and at 4 hrs. 14 min. it is 3 min. 29.4
sec., the difference, 4.1 secs, multiplied by 0.4 and subtracted from 3 min.
33.5 sec., gives 3 min. 31.9 sec. as the duration of totality if Goondi-
windi were on the centre line, this duration of time requires to be multi-
plied by a factor which depends on its distance from the centre line, and
which can be found from the following table. Let the distance of the
place from this line be represented by the letter “ b,” and the semi-
width of the zone by “ a,” then the argument to the table is “ b ” divided
by “ a,” in our example it is 0.10 and the factor from the table 0.99,
which, multiplied by 3 min. 31.9 sec., gives 209.8 sec., half this quantity
subtracted from and added to 4 hrs. 13 min. 25 sec. gives the beginning
of totality as 4 hrs. 11 min. 40 sec. and the end 4 hrs. 15 min. 10 sec.,
which agree within a few seconds with the times obtained by a precise
calculation.
As a second example, take Tentorfield (28). Mid-eclipse at 4 hrs.
14 min. 32 sec.; duration, 3 min. 29.4 sec. minus (4.3 -f- 0.53),, then
multiplied by the factor corresponding to 0.5, namely 0.87, gives 3 min.
0.2 sec.
Totality, therefore, commences at 4 hrs. 13 min. 2 sec., and ends at
4 hrs. 16 min. 2 sec. at Tenterfield.


Factors
TABLE.
for Correcting the Duration of Totality when the Place
is within the Zone, but not on the Centre Line.
h/a
0
•01
•02
•03
•04
•05
■06
•07
•08
•09
o-o
1-00
1-00
1-00
1-00
1-00
1-00
1-00
1-00
1-00
1-00
0'1
0-99
0-99
0-99
0-99
0-99
0-99
0-99
0-99
0-98
0-98
0-2
0-98
0-98
0-98
0-97
0-97
0-97
0-97
0-96
0-96
0-96
0-3
095
0-95
0-95
0-94
0-94
0-94
0-93
0-93
0-92
0-92
0-4
0-92
0-91
0-91
0-90
0-90
0-89
0-89
0-88
0-88
0-87
0-5
0-87
0-86
0-85
0-85
0-84
0-84
0-83
0-82
0-81
0-81
0-6
0-80
0-79
0-78
0-78
0-77
0-76
0-75
0-74
0-73
0-72
0-7
0-71
0-70
0-69
0-68
0'67
0-66
0-65
0-64
0-63
0-61
0-8
0-60
0-59
0-57
0-56
0-54
0-53
0-51
0-49
0-47
0-46
0-
1-
0-44
0-00
0-41
0-39
0-37
0-34
0-31
0-28
0-24
0-20
0-14
Place.
Partial Phase.
Total Phase.
Begins.
Ends.
Angle
of First
Contact.
Begins.
Ends.
h.
m.
h
m.
h
m. s.
h. m.
s.
Goondiwindi
3
5-5
o
15-0
293°
4
11 40
4 15
10
Stanthorpe
3
7-5
5
15-2
292°
4
12 57
4 16
24
Grafton
3
8-5
5
15-0
293°
4
14 55
4 15
16
Wallal
12
3-4
2
49-9
299°
1
27 30
1 32
49
Coongoola..
2
59-5
5
13-6
294°
4
8 20
4 12
4
Toobeah ..
3
5-0
5
14-8
294°
4
11 33
4 15
6
Melbourne
3
2
5
6
312°
'I -
Sydney ..
3
7
5
12
302°
1
Brisbane ..
3
•8-7
5
15-5
290°
> Eclipse not total.
Adelaide ..
2
22
4
36
31(5°
1
Perth
12
14
2
40
322°
I
Hobart
3
7
5
1
320°
j
Chart 3 gives the position of the stars and planets which surround the
sun on the date of the eclipse.
By hanging the chart at arms’ length by the top right-hand corner the
orientation will be approximately correct. The horizon line for Goondi-
windi is shown at the left and lower corner for the time, 18 hours
G.M.T., or 4 p.m. standard time, and should be horizontal when the chart
is held as indicated above. This chart is approximately correct for any
place in the eastern States.
Diagram (1) shows the several lines of position used by astronomers
to orient the eclipsed sun at mid-totality. This diagram applies to
Goondiwindi.
Diagram (2) shows the circumstances of the partial eclipse for Mel-
bourne, and indicates by a shaded area that part of the sun obscured
at mid-eclipse. The moon’s apparent path in the. sky is divided into a
scale of times. If it be desired to find the portion of the sun obscured at
any moment, it is only necessary to place one leg of a pair of dividers
on to the time and describe an arc of a circle with a radius equal to that
of the moon; this radius can be found from the diagram.
Diagram (3) is similar to (2), but for Goondiwindi it is used in
a similar way. The hatched disc shows the moon at mid-totality.
Diagram (4) is for use in connexion with sketches of the corona,
and has already been referred to.
The following information has been obtained by direct calculation
for certain places within the zone of totality. The particulars for the
capital cities of the States of Australia are included: —
The times given in this table are standard or zone times, The angles
are measured, from the north point of u sun’s limb, through the east.


CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ECLIPSE AT MELBOURNE.


CIRCUMSTANCES. OF THE ECLIPSE AT GOONDIWINDI.


Climatological Conditions along the Eclipse Track.
At Wallal, Western Australia, where the eclipse path strikes the
north-west coast there will be the happy combination of the best
astronomical and meteorological conditions; the longest duration of
totality and greatest altitude of the sun coinciding with the clearest
skies and the lowest rainfall. Thence eastward for 2,000 miles across
the continent there is but slight increase in normal cloudiness till the
shadow reaches Goondiwindi, on the lower inland plains of the Darling
Downs, in south-eastern Queensland, the whole belt averaging 20 per
cent, of possible cloud. Over the tablelands the cloud increases slightly,
but falls again on the coast. The incidence of the wet season is not
synchronous throughout, but the eclipse track passes through territory
having the minimum of the annual rainfall curve just about the time of
the event. The wet season opens earliest in the eastern tablelands
between Goondiwindi and Stanthorpe towards the end of October and in
November between Goondiwindi and Bollon; westward right through
to Wallal the season opens in December, except for a slightly earlier
incidence on the higher ground of the central region between Alice
Springs and Charlotte Waters. , Nowhere, however, is the probable
rainfall a serious hindrance except on the highlands and coast from
Goondiwindi eastward. The mean diurnal range of temperature is
everywhere considerable, and varies only from 31° in the heart of the
continent to 28° at the extreme coastal termini, with a further fall to
26° on the eastern tablelands about Stanthorpe; on the north-west coast
and in the centre the extreme ranges may be 50 per cent, higher, and
over the eastern half of the track may be nearly double the mean range.
The absolute humidity remains nearly constant, and the relative per-
centage displays the normal diurnal fluctuations with a minimum in the
afternoon except on the north-west coast. Condon is the nearest climato-
logical station to Wallal, and is similarly situated with regard to land
and sea areas. Here the humidity range is abnormal, the dry offshore
wind of the morning keeping the 9 a.m. values, both absolute and relative,
below the 3 p.m., which are raised apparently by the sea breeze.
Christmas Island, the only possible station with a greater altitude
of the sun — : 78^° —compared with 58° at Wallal, suffers in shorter dura-
tion of totality—3| minutes —compared with 5J minutes at Wallal.
The island has also the very serious disadvantage of a heavy and variable
rainfall, ranging in September up to 14.06 inches in 1909, and in October
up to 22.91 inches in 1910, with a 24-hour fall of 6.47 inches in Septem-
ber, 1909. At Wallal, however, rain has only exceeded 0.10 inch twice
in September and once in October in 23 years. Christmas Island, more-
over, exhibits a curious inversion of the absolute humidity lapse rate
even at low altitudes—an unstable condition associated with cloud and
rain—throughout the last six months of the year.
In Central Australia, where the sun’s altitude is 39°, the centre of
the path crosses the overland telegraph line, 90 miles N.N.W. of the
Charlotte Waters telegraph station, but the centre could be more directly
reached about 60 miles N.N.E. from Charlotte Waters, which is on the
southern edge of the belt of totality. In both places, however, a suitable
water supply would have to be determined. Charlotte Waters is about
110 miles from the head of the rail at Oodnadatta.
In Western Queensland the railway is available as far west as Coon-
goola, on the centre of the path where the sun’s altitude will be 26°, and
the duration of totality about 3m. 455. Coongoola is 32 miles north of
Cunnamulla, a town of 3,000 inhabitants.


Notes on Observation Sites.
Wallal, North-west Coast, Western Australia.
Wallal is a telegraph station situated near a Government well and
reserve on the stock route between Roebourne and Broome. It is about
200 miles from the latter port by road, but somewhat less by sea, and
150 miles from Port Hedland. Although these routes have been traversed
by motor cars, they are rather heavy, particularly that to Port Hedland,
which includes long sandy stretches. The usual method of travelling
is by schooner, which in fine weather makes a landing on the open sandy
beach by running in on the high tide and remaining high and dry while
being unloaded by the aid of donkey teams. The spring tide range is
about 20 to 24 feet on this coast, and the water runs out more than 200
yards at low tide.
Mr. J. J. Airey, District Officer, Lighthouse Service, Fremantle,
says :—“ There would be no difficulty in landing anywhere along this
coast during the south-easterly season, April to October, but during the
westerly season, owing to the heavy swell, it is only rarely possible.”
The prevailing winds on this coast vary from morning to afternoon
with the advent of the sea breeze. In August and September, 69 per cent,
blow from the east and south-east (off shore) at 9 a.m., and 68 per cent,
from the west and north-west (sea breeze) at 3 p.m. These data, derived
from the five years 1915-19, indicate the suitability of the morning hours
for unloading. Winds other than south-east cause heavy surf, which
hinders unloading per dinghy and aboriginal carrier, and for this reason
all ordinary stores should be put up in packages of not more than 50 lbs.
The south-east trade wind, the prevailing winter wind, usually blows
itself out early in August, and the north-west monsoon winds take its place
later. In September, light airs and calms may be expected in the early
morning, and westerly breeze usually coming in from seaward about
11 a.m., and freshening in the early afternoon, but dying away after
sunset. Moderate winds may be expected, but from seaward, and the
chance of dust storms is remote.
The Postmaster at Condon writes: —“ Climatic conditions, except for
heavy dew at night, can hardly be improved on from May to September,
inclusive. October is usually very warm, but the cyclone and wet season
does not commence until November or later.”
The month of September is generally fine; light fog may occur in the
early morning, but by 9 a.m. this has usually evaporated, and the Sep-
tember day is fine and cloudless.
Only Mr. E. Hannett, Postmaster, with his wife and child and a
lineman, live at the telegraph station, which is near the well, but about
3 miles distant from the “Wallal ” sheep station.
The country in the Wallal district is undulating, sandhill and plain,
running parallel with the coast, with patches of stunted timber; no
marshy land exists in this vicinity.
Although somewhat inaccessible by ordinary means of transport,
Wallal enjoys a weekly passenger and mail service by aeroplane to Perth,
1,200 miles distant, which can be reached in 334 hours, including a stop
over of 14 hours at night and 34 hours in other breaks of journey.


Local Time of
Duration of
Local Time of
Mid Kclipse.
Totality.
Sunset.
h. in. s.
m. s.
h. - m.
Coongoola ..
3 53 54
3 49
5 58
Goondiwindi
4 15 14
3 30
5 58
Stanthorpe
4 22 26
3 28
5 58
Casino
4 27 32
3 23
5 58
Cobdillo Downs, South Australia.
Cordillo Downs (approx, long. 140° 40' E., latitude 26° 43' S.)
is the site of the proposed South Australian Eclipse Expedition. Il
lies in the north-east of that State, near the borders of Queensland,
about 280 miles W.W.E. from Farina, on the Great Worthern j-ailway.
The journey from the railway occupies four days by motor, or six
weeks by camel waggon.
Cordillo Downs lies about midway between Charlotte Waters in the
east and Thargomindah on the west, and as the climatological data for
these two stations about 570 miles apart are almost identical as regards
temperature, humidity, and cloud, the mean of the values for the two
places, which are entirely favorable, will be a reliable estimate of the
conditions at the eclipse camp site.
Extracts from Local Wotes on Selection of Sites in Australia.
By Prof. IT. K. Cooke, M.A., Government Astronomer, New South
Wales.
The eastern end of the track intersects four railway lines, thus
indicating four localities of comparatively easy access. These are, in
order, west to east —
(1) Coongoola, on the Western railway of Queensland.
(2) Goondiwindi, on the South-western railway.
(3) Stauthorpe, on the main Brisbane-Syduey line.
(4) Casino, on the local Worth Coast railway of Wew South
W ales.
Wos. (1), (2), and (3) are west of the main coastal range (the
Dividing Range), and Casino is between the range and the sea.
Speaking generally, the conditions improve, both meteorologically
and astronomically, from east to west, so at first sight one would
naturally select Coongoola. Other conditions must, however, be taken
into consideration.
As to the astronomical conditions, the differences are not very great.
The following shows them at a glance:—
* N.B. —The above are not standard or zone times.
COONGOOLA.
Wear the terminus (Ounnamulla) of the Western Railway of Queens-
land. There are two trains per week, leaving Brisbane on Tuesday and
Friday at 2.5 p.m., and reaching Coongoola on Wednesday and Satur-
day at 7 p.m. Journeying from Sydney one would leave a day earlier,


at 3.30 p.m., change trains at the border station (Wallangarra) and
reach Toowoomba at 2.20 p.m. Thence join the Western Mail as
above, leaving Toowoomba at 7.5 p.m. In this case one should secure
sleepers from Toowoomba to Charleville well in advance, booking by
post from Brisbane to make certain.
Doongoola itself consists of a very small galvanized-iron railway
station, and a small galvanized-iron hotel. Hothing else is in view
except the Longlands homestead, over 2 miles back along the rails.
Living accommodation of a homely character would be provided by
Mrs. Kruck, landlady of the hotel, if reasonable notice is given. There
are several bedrooms, and other rooms which can be temporarily con-
verted. Altogether, arrangements can be made for 20 to 30 guests.
Goondiwindi.
Can be conveniently reached from Brisbane or Sydney, the former
being the easier journey. , There is only one passenger train weekly.
Leaving Brisbane on Wednesday at 5.5 p.m., Goondiwindi is reached at
7.30 a.m. on Thursday. On the return one leaves Goondiwindi at
11.5 p.m. on Friday, and reaches Brisbane at 12.25 p.m. on Saturday.
This line, called the South-western, branches from the main Sydney-
Brisbane line at Warwick. There are several slow mixed trains
between Warwick and Goodiwindi during the week, and a daily mail
service between either Brisbane or Sydney and Warwick. Journeying
from Sydney one reaches Warwick at 11.55 a.m., and then must either
catch the night train to Goondiwindi at 2.5 a.m. on Thursday or go
on by one of the slow mixed trains. As there is no public warming
place, and the nights are very cold, the latter alternative is recom-
mended.
With regard to this town it should be noted that there is no special
advantage accruing to visitors crowding the locations of scientific parties.
The total eclipse will be visible for 60 miles both north and south of
Goondiwindi.
The environment of Goondiwindi resembles that of Coongoola,
it is not so remarkably flat.
Stanthorpe.
This is on the main line between Brisbane and Sydney, and so is
the most accessible of all four places. It is on a plateau on the western
side of the Dividing Range. The height of the railway station is
2,656 feet. Leaving Sydney on any day except Saturday, at 3.30 p.m.,
one reaches Stanthorpe at 10.27 a.m. next day, changing trains at
Wallangarra at breakfast time. Or leaving Brisbane at 8.5 a.m. one
reaches Stanthorpe at 4.55 p.m. the same day.
The neighbourhood is slightly hilly, and the town itself is very
straggling, the roads running anyhow. It mostly lies on a slope facing
west, the hotels being on a loiver level than the railway. Immediate y
above the railway, and within the town boundary is a rocky knoll w ic i
would afford a few excellent sites for small parties.


Stanthorpe is a favorite summer resort for Queenslanders. Accom-
modation is good at several hotels.. Stanthorpe is a larger town than
Goondiwindi, but not by any means large.
In September, it will be considerably colder than Goondiwindi or
Cunnamulla. The climate during that month is said to be delicious.
Under normal conditions the town is singularly clean and free from
dust or mud, and this, combined with its altitude, ‘gives it an advantage
over the other sites.
On the outskirts of the town is a hill, about 300 feet high, called
Mount Marley. Its summit can be reached easily in 20 to 30 minutes
from the centre of the town. Facing west is an undisturbed view to
a low range of hills about 10 miles distant, which forms the western
horizon. Although difficult of access for heavy instruments, it will be
an ideal spot from which to view the approach of the moon’s shadow
across the tree tops and see the eclipse with the naked eye or field-glasses.
The sight will be truly magnificent, and the professionals hampered
with instruments will doubtless envy those who go to Stanthorpe simply
to “ see ” the eclipse and are able to view the phenomenon from Mount
Marley.
There is another hill, higher than this, on the north-west side of the
town, known as Mount Banca. One would naturally expect- an even finer
view from there, but after climbing both I doubt whether the superiority
is sufficient to warrant the extra climb. There will probably be fewer
people, and hence a greater choice of vantage points on Mount Banca,
so probably the more active ones will select that spot. I wish I could
be there myself.
Casino.
This is in Hew South Wales, and not connected with the main trunk
lino of railway. Two routes are available —either by sea to Byron Bay
or Lisrnore and then a short journey by rail, or by main line from either
Brisbane or Sydney to Tenterfield, thence by motor ’bus. For large
instruments the former route is preferable, for passengers the latter,
though some may prefer the sea trip. Starting from Sydney at 3 hours
30 minutes p.m., Tenterfield is reached at 8 hours 43 minutes a.m.
next day. The station is over half-a-mile outside the town, but numerous
’buses are waiting to convey passengers. Choose the most comfortable
motor ’bus which is going direct to Casino. You will be driven first to
the booking office, and then can obtain breakfast. The ’bus starts about
9.30 or 10 a.m. —time has now ceased to be important. A very beautiful
drive through undulating country will bring you to Casino about 3 or
4 p.m. Casino is a charming township, nestling in a semi-circular
bend of the Richmond River. It is situated on a plain, surrounded
by hills from 3 to 5 miles distant. The streets are straight, wide, and
at right angles, apparently laid out by compass, magnetic north and
south, and bordered by trees. More compact and probably not quite
so large at Stanthorpe.
I suggest that special arrangements be made in advance with one
of the motor ’bus companies, so as to secure places. On my trip, for
instance, two extra passengers would have been impossible, or would
have entailed a re-organization of coaches.


Casino is in the heart of a favorite tourist district. The roads in
every direction are fair to good, and the scenery and climate (in Sep-
tember especially) delightful. Unfortunately, the probability of a clear
day seems to me less than at the other places. This trip, however, is
the most pleasant of all, and for those who want a delightful outing with
a very fair chance of the eclipse can be heartily recommended.
Summary.
Goongoola.
Advantages. —Quietude and freedom from all interference. Longest
duration of totality and best position for sun, hut these are not greatly
different from the others. Slightly better chance of fine day.
Disadvantages. —Long monotonous journey, isolation, no stores,
labour doubtful, two trains per week, swampy if wet, dusty if very dry.
Accommodation doubtful, but probably good, though homely.
Goondiwindi.
Advantages. —ln small town, good accommodation, stores, electric
power, moderately expert and casual assistance, excellent observing site,
second-best astronomical conditions, good chance of fine weather.
Disadvantages. —Poor train service, possible dust.
Sianthorpe.
Advantages. —Height of 2,656 feet, almost certain absence of dust or
mud, granite foundations, township, stores, and assistance, electric power,
good sites for observers, main trunk line, therefore easy access, and
procuring stores or experts from Sydney or Brisbane, excellent view-
point for approach of shadow, delightful climate, picturesque neighbour-
hood, favorite summer health resort.
Disadvantages. —-Very cold in July and August, astronom’cal and
meteorological conditions slightly inferior to those at Goondiwundi and
Goongoola.
Casino.
Advantages. —Interesting trip, centre of tourist region, with drives
in every direction, excellent observing site. Strongly recommended for
those who are only moderately keen on the eclipse itself.
Disadvantages. —Slightly less favorable astronomical and meteoro-
logical conditions.
By Authority: Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
