

F. L. LUCAS
WARTON LECTURE
ONENGLISH POETRY
BRITISH ACADEMY
1933
Price is. net
FROM THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE
BRITISH ACADEMY. VOLUME XIX
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD
AMEN HOUSE, E.G.


THE CRITICISM OF POETRY
F. L. LUCAS
WARTON LECTURE
ON ENGLISH POETRY
BRITISH ACADEMY
1933
FROM THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE
BRITISH ACADEMY. VOLUME XIX
LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD
AMEN HOUSE, E.G.


,
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


\SSt
t6-
WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
THE CRITICISM OF POETRY
F. L. LUCAS
Read June 7, 1933
TWO months ago I was at Thermopylae. The mists
clung low, I remember, on the slopes of Othrys and
Oeta. Under the cold grey of the sky a chime of unseen
goat-bells rose and sank, like a ghostly music, over pastures
pale with asphodel; and a blue smoke of burning crawled
heavily across the swamps of the Spercheios ?the same
Spercheios still to whom the old Peleus vowed the locks of
Achilles, the day he should come safe home from Troy.
Eastward lay the misty strait of Artemision, up which the
Persian came; and, hidden behind Euboea, that rocky
Scyros where rested, once, the dust of Theseus and now of
Rupert Brooke. In Greece the dead past walks so living in
the light of noon, that the present itself seems often more
ghostly by its side. And there at the Gate of Thermopylae
the thought of those quiet lines of Simonides on the most
famous of all forlorn hopes for freedom?
Tell them at Lacedaemon, passer-by,
That here obedient to their laws we lie ?
calls up, as something very faint and far away, the thought
of modern Europe, fast growing too Spartan to be free;
beside the memory of Homer?s Achilles in his eternal youth
there rises like a pale and fretful ghost the memory of that
modern poetry which proclaims itself a whimper of hollow
men, and of the modern critics who applaud it as the true
utterance of a disillusioned age.
What is it that has happened to our poetry, and our
judges of poetry, in the twenty years since Rupert Brooke,
silent now in Scyros, was writing verse which, whatever its
lasting worth, at least quivered with vitality; and prose,
xix a 2


4 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
above all in his letters, that danced with such grace and
gaiety on the threshold of the world? It is easy to reply?
?The War?. More has happened than that ?so much, that
qualities like his are hardly even considered now in the
philosophy of critics. So impossible does it seem for any
two successive generations to agree what they mean by the
simple statement ??This poem is good?. What indeed does
it mean?
To the Greek in his best days good poetry meant, above
all, poetry that bred good men. The Muses were the
daughters of Omniscience. The God of Poetry was the God
also of Prophecy and of Healing, the divine voice that spoke
at the Delphic centre of the earth. How to plough, how to
fight, how to live, how to die the poets taught all these.
The boy who got by heart the great speech of Sarpedon,
the girl who heard recited the farewell of Hector to Andro-
mache, might learn, so the Greek believed, how themselves
to face hereafter the breaking-points of life. And even when
the day of Greece draws to its twilight, reading Plutarch
we might feel that this belief had not been belied by the
lives their greatest led; reading Longinus we shall find
the same faith unrepentantly repeated in that treatise On
Great Writing which rings like a funeral oration over the
literature of his race ??Great writing is the echo of a great
soul?. Now, of course, so naive a view is quite exploded; no
one supposes that art can have to do with ethics, or poetry
be anything so absurd as a sort of morals set to music.
The men of the Middle Ages, however, still believed
something of the kind, though they spun few theories about
it. For, even more than Antiquity, the Middle Ages did
almost wholly without critics; and, by some miracle, did
quite well without. But in Dante?s eyes, for example, the
three great subjects for poetry must still be the three funda-
mental things?Salus, Venus, Virtus?War by which life is
defended, Love by which it is perpetuated, Conduct by
which it is controlled. The Morality Plays, again, only too
conscientiously earn their name. For moral Gower ,as for


Horace, a poem is ?good? that mixes profit with pleasure?
?wisdom to the wise
And pley to hem that lust to pleye.
And for Malory, as for his publisher Caxton, the tale of
Arthur has a purpose to serve, a high and reproachful
example to set before a chivalry grown decadent.
But there is one important change. In Greece, when a
clash occurs, it is the moralist who rebels against the poet?
Xenophanes against Homer, Solon against Thespis, Plato
against all poetry; in the Middle Ages, when Christianity
dominates Europe and the Church has built in the Catholic
West something not wholly unlike the city of Plato?s dream,
it is the poet, now half an outlaw, who turns at times to
kick against the pricks of a tyrannical morality. When the
Wandering Scholars steal for the tavern the rhythms of
the choir, when Aucassin gaily prefers Hell with its harpers
and minstrels to the bleak Heaven of priest and anchorite,
when from brothel or gibbet rings out the wild voice of
Villon, a new race stands on the frontiers of literature?
the Bohemians.
With the Renaissance arrive also, in full force, the Critics.
Their endeavour is double?to save literature from the
ethical attacks of Plato and the Puritans; and to subject it
instead to the aesthetic rules of Aristotle and the Pedants.
To be ?good?, Poetry must now observe the Laws of God
on the one hand and of the Ancients on the other; but
especially of the Ancients.
Then against these Ancients, as the Renaissance in its
turn grows old, the Moderns grow rebellious. The classical
scholar begins to carry less weight than the man of the
world, a Bentley than a Dryden or an Addison. By an easy
compromise it becomes the orthodox creed to believe in a
new Trinity of three things which yet are one?the wisdom
of the Ancients, Nature, and Good Sense ?the three benign
powers that had fashioned this ordered world of neo-classi-
cism out of the benighted chaos of Monk and Goth. Never
had it been so easy to know what was good poetry, and what


6 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
was not; never was it to be so easy again. Critics were
judges administering the law of an enlightened land. They
still disagreed, being human; but about the applications,
not the principles, of the law. Racine voices his delight at
finding by actual experience that Good Sense was indeed
the same in ancient Athens as in modern Paris. Nearly
a century later Thomas Warton can still speak, without
irony, of living ?in the days of writing by rule?, when ?critical
taste is universally diffused?. We amid our critical anarchy
may mingle with our amusement in retrospect a touch,
perhaps, of regret.
Unfortunately, if it had become easy to say what was
good poetry, it had become strangely rare to write it. Upon
this world so comfortably reposing on its false premisses
came the retribution of revolution. Excess became wisdom;
exuberance, beauty. After that romantic riot had passed,
the nineteenth century restored a certain reign of order in
literature; but never the reign of law that the eighteenth
had known. Matthew Arnold, for example, was respected,
not obeyed. He might condemn modern writers as ?fan-
tastic? and ?lacking in sanity?; he might demand that poetry
should be ?criticism of life?. In answer came the shout of
?Art for Art?s sake?, and a new invasion of Bohemians or of
aesthetes seeking not so much the defiant Hell of Aucassin
as an Epicurean Olympus of their own. To-day that war-
cry too has died away; and we hear only, like Virgil?s
doomed warrior out in No Man?s Land:
Confusae sonus urbis et inlaetabile murmur?
The voice of a city?s trouble, and a murmur void of joy.
For Antiquity, in a word, ?good? poetry meant noble
poetry. For the Renaissance it meant learned poetry; the
poetry of scholars, and of wits. For the eighteenth century
it became the poetry of men ?and women ?of the world.
For the Romantics, the poetry of generous rebels. They
still had rules, if only to break them. But now ?! Twenty-
three centuries after the Father of Criticism, Aristotle, is
there a single law of literature, a single principle for writing


poetry, a single canon for criticizing it, about which a con-
gress of our critics would agree? For it is no longer agreed
that poetry should be beautiful, or noble, or civilized, or
well-constructed, or musical, or intelligent, or even intelli-
gible. If criticism be a science, only contrast its progress
with that of any other. We know nothing. Unhappily,
unlike Socrates, we do not seem to know even that. It
would indeed be much to expect. The multiplication of
sects is not apt to multiply tolerance. It is only natural that
criticism, growing more chaotic, should grow more dog-
matic too. To-day we hear with admiration that Hamlet is
?most certainly? ??most certainly an artistic failure?; that
?there may be a good deal to be said for Romanticism in
Life, there is no place for it in letters?; or again, in painting,
that El Greco can be proved a greater painter than Velasquez.
It might seem sometimes as if critics were doomed to remain
the Bourbons of the world of Art ?forgetting nothing,
learning nothing. And while they persist in talking as if
the values they now discover in poetry were the obvious and
only ones, the values themselves grow odder and odder.
Thus a panegyric by a modern critic on Mr. Ezra Pound,
after celebrating the poet?s subtlety in the use of inverted
commas, proceeds: ?His poise, though so varied, and for all
his audacities, is sure; how sure, nothing can show better
than the pun in the last stanza of the third poem:
O bright Apollo,
tiv* dvspa, tiv? rip oo0 * "dya feov, 1
What god, man, or hero
Shall I place a tin wreath upon!
1 The above is printed as in the original, with the usual dose of
solecisms ?not the least characteristic side of Mr. Pound?s passion for
Greek. The curious reader should turn to the Selected Poems of Mr.
Ezra Pound, edited by Mr. T. S. Eliot. Here he will find two
master-minds of our age in conjunction; and, finding also one classical
howler after another, may admire the intuition which enables Mr.
Pound, in a manual of universal culture entitled How to Read , to dismiss
Thucydides as c a journalist?, and to ?chuck out? Pindar ?without the
slightest compunction?.


8 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
Tn what poet, after the seventeenth century?, continues the
critic, ?can we find anything like this contributing to a com-
pletely serious effect (the poem is not only tragically serious
but solemn)!? ?tlv? dvSpa???tin wreath? ?(the sort of very
bad joke made by very small boys beginning Greek) ?
?sureness of poise? ??not only tragically serious but solemn?!
Solemn? ?Yes. A belfry full of owls could not equal it.
But, as wit, surely Slender himself would have found it
a little thin?
Little wonder, in this welter of opinions, if a critic as
honest as Dr. I. A. Richards has given up his earlier attempt
to devise a criterion of values; abjured all principles for
judging poetry, ?however refined and subtle?; and declared
that it is the reader?s business to value works for himself,
while the critic?s sole concern is with interpretation.
That interpretation is by far his most important function
may well be; but is it all? Instead of saying T think this
poem is good? should he really say, like that precise gentle-
man, the Abbe de Saint-Pierre, ?Cela est bon, pour moi,
quant a present??
For a long time, indeed, I thought so ?that calling a
poem ?good? did in fact mean either T value it?; or ?many
educated people have valued it for many years past?; or, if
it was a new work, T think many educated people will value
it for many years to come?. A critical judgement was, in
other words, either autobiography, or history, or a guess
about the future. Thus when Matthew Arnold called
Shelley ?an ineffectual angel?, it was a mistake in critical
history ?Shelley has had far too much effect to be called
that; but it remained a very interesting piece of critical
autobiography, by no means deserving the angry abuse that
has been hurled at it. For to a whole class of men from
Lamb onwards ?men quite as sensitive to poetry as others ?
Shelley has seemed, in Mr. Max Beerbohm?s phrase, ?a
crystal crank?. Any sort of absolute beauty, in other words,
like absolute good, I have always failed to believe in. The
impression a poem gives seems to me like a child begotten


by the poet?s thought on the reader?s, in ?a marriage of true
minds?. Two readers can no more have identical impres-
sions than two mothers could have identical children.
Indeed, to adapt Heraclitus, even the same person cannot
read the same poem twice ?he will have changed in the
interval. A hundred biologists will see essentially the same
caterpillar, because men have essentially the same eyes, and
the same way of reasoning to check their data. But we do
not look at poetry through microscopes. It builds itself a
body next our hearts, out of memories and emotions that
are ours alone. That is why it is so hard to make the Art
of Criticism in any sense a science.
And yet are there no standards? Is there no relation to
be found between these apparent caprices within us and
the laws that seem to govern the world outside? ?no series
of intricate cog-wheels by which our instinctive preferences
may fit ultimately into the mesh of the great wheel of
things? For if the differences between human beings are
extraordinary, so also are the fundamental likenesses, the
experiences that we can and do somehow share; so that
after three thousand years Homer and Sappho still fascinate
remote barbarians like ourselves, who do not even know
how to pronounce the music of their verse. When values
have stood so firm, can we find no foundations beneath
them? And when, on the other hand, we are summoned to
go down on our knees before hollow men or tin wreaths,
can we only agree to differ? Or when a critic, contrasting
Baudelaire with Tennyson, singles out for special praise that
worst poem of Baudelaire?s which describes the swarming
of flies and maggots on a woman?s putrid corpse, and
explains that In Memoriam fails because Tennyson himself
failed to picture Arthur Hallam lying like that in Clevedon
Church-yard, can one only say to this sort of imbecile ?
?Well, if you like that kind of thing, I suppose it?s good for
you? ? Because one knows it isn?t.
Some criterion, in fact, some standard of judgement can,
I think, be found. Often it cannot be applied. It could
xix a 3


very often be misapplied. But even an islet, even a single
plank, is something to cling to in such a chaos.
The fundamental instinct of all life, we may say, is to
extend and multiply itself?to live more abundantly, to live
more complexly. Roots, polyps, philosophers, all stretch
their feelers out and out into the unknown, straining to turn
Not-Me into Me. And as the living organism acquires more
memory and more consciousness, it is as if it planted flowers
along the paths it had found best to follow ?the flowers of
pleasure; and along the paths to destruction, the thorns of
pain. Then the creature may grow too absorbed in gather-
ing roses or primroses to look where it is going?even
though, in an ever-changing world, the primrose path leads
now to a precipice. What was a signal of safety or of danger
warns no longer: the means has become itself an end. So
we eat to please our palates; we love for loving?s sake; we
think for mere curiosity. The savant and the artist are born;
eager to think and know and feel, to see and hear, for no
satisfaction beyond the experience and the activity in
themselves.
But to all this a Greek, I think, might have answered:
?True, there are no fairer flowers than grow on the paths
of the Muses. Yet Time will let no one stand still, and all
paths lead somewhere. Therefore in Greece we always
thought it simple sense to ask where such paths led. These
flowers bear fruit; among them we have found growing the
lotus and the hemlock. The art of men is like the play of
animals; but the play of animals is not only play; it is a
rehearsal of life, a quickening of eye and a strengthening
of sinew for struggles to come. When a human play is over
and the actors doff their masks, life still remains to be lived.
Your cleverest critics will say that a work is ?improbable?
or ?tedious? or ?badly written?; thatitis ?well-constructed?
or ?brilliant? or ?intoxicating?. There they stop. But our
Aristophanes did not question that Euripides was brilliant;
he was concerned because he thought him a brilliant will-
o?-the-wisp?and the more brilliant, the worse. He did not


deny he was intoxicating; he denied that intoxication was
of necessity a good state of mind. He was wrong, you say?
But wrong in principle? He was one-sided? Are you so
sure you are not?
?Do your critics really show much breadth of vision, when
they talk so much of the tricks of the trade?of the heating
of the pastry-cook?s oven and the mixing of the dough; and
never stop to ask if his products are wholesome or poison in
the end? We hear a great deal of the fiddler?s cat-gut and
the skill of his fingering; not whether his music is the sort
that Helots or harlots love.
? You are tolerant ?or indifferent?about these things. But
you, or your posterity, may find that Nature is not.?
Now I confess it does not seem to me altogether easy to
answer this Greek. And yet does this mean that we have
run full circle round the corner into the hands of Plato, once
more, and the arms of Mrs. Grundy? Are we handing over
Poetry to be strait-laced by the Puritans on the one hand,
prostituted for propaganda on the other by Fascist and
Communist? That would be appalling. Yet Greek poetry
escaped. Why?
There are, I think, certain human qualities that we have
learnt spontaneously to value, because life has proved them
valuable. This instinctive admiration is like the instinctive
pleasure we take in other wholesome things; but more
disinterested, more aesthetic. Vitality, strength, courage,
devotion, pity, grace ?these move us, as directly as beauty
moves us. Not, surely, without cause. When a woman loves
a man?s strength or courage, it is only because her dead
ancestors, sitting in council within her, push her with
ghostly hands towards what she will need, for herself and
her children, in the warfare of the world. So with the
instinctive appeal such qualities possess in general ?it is no
mere whimsy or matter of taste. We think courage a fine
and poetic thing, for the excellent, if prosaic, reason that it
has been for ages untold a highly important thing to have.
In other words it is hard to say where exactly aesthetics


12 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
ends and ethics begins. The Greeks felt that truth so intui-
tively that they used one word, which we poorly render
?fine?, to express both the ?good 5 and the ?beautiful 5 . For
the same reason their poetry and their morality closely
overlapped. The root of good living, for them, was to
temper good sense with poetic imagination; the root of good
poetry, to temper poetic imagination with good sense. The
same attitude stands out what seems to me perhaps the
noblest sculpture that I know ?the West Pediment at
Olympia. It is a scene of wild riot and rapine, the attempt
of the Centaurs at the bridal of Peirithous to carry off the
women of the Lapithae. One can imagine the turpitude
and crudity for which such a subject would seem a heaven-
sent occasion now. But there at Olympia even the bestial
Centaurs have acquired instead a touch of that nobility of
suffering, which Shakespeare in his gracious wisdom gave
even to Caliban. And amidst all the heat and dust of that
mad grapple of writhing bodies and clutching hands, of
straining feet and gnashing teeth, the heroes and their
women still keep upon their faces the unearthly calm of
walkers in a dream. One woman, above all, is thrusting
from her with magnificent force a Centaur's encircling
arms; but her countenance, bent earthwards, not on him,
is so still it might have come from some statue of Meditation
or of Solitude. In the centre of all, with one arm stretched
above the tumult, stands the very embodiment of the Greek
spirit, Apollo, with the splendour of his immortal body, the
calm, a little heavy even, of the gods that know no mortal
pain. It is appalling that the Greek genius should ever have
sunk from this to the grimacings of the Laocoon. But here
at its highest at Olympia it recalls the saying of the French
critic Alain: ?Les beaux visages sont comme des preuves de
cette puissance d'oublier et de s'oublier. Je doute qu s on
puisse citer un beau visage ou I 5 on ne lise cette absence de
prejuge, ce pardon a toutes choses et a soi, cette jeunesse
enfin toujours jeune, qui vient de ce qu s on ne joue aucun
personnage. 5 That is too narrow a definition of beauty.


But it is interesting that it might almost be a psycho-analyst?s
definition of mental health ?a state of mind tormented by
no repressions, no worms of conscience, no senses of guilt.
So with Homer. Greek Art at its best seems to me, above
all, and beyond all others, sane. And sanity, I think, is not
a matter of taste.
But the end came ?Plato, Christianity, asceticism, Puri-
tanism. The great flaw in the Greek view of poetry had
been that it was often too crudely didactic. They were
over-simple. Like Ruskin after them, they failed sometimes
to see that Poetry had far better imply things than preach
them ?that in the open pulpit her voice grows hoarse and
fails. And now new moralities arose that considered not
health, but holiness; not sanity, but sin. And as morality
lost its poetry, poetry tended to lose its morale; to the ulti-
mate undoing of both. The revolt of Aucassin may indeed
be stimulating at first; but I doubt if either Bohemia or
Ivory Towers are healthy for poets in the end. Ivory Towers
have Ivory Gates, through which false and vain dreams
come. Such a life divides the poet from his hearers; it
divides him against himself. Even Milton?s Paradise was
all the more lost because its creator was himself half of the
devil?s party. Milton?s indeed is a typical dilemma, like
Spenser?s, like Matthew Arnold?s, torn between the splen-
dour of the Hellene and the Hebrew?s righteousness. It is
good to turn the other cheek; yet it is fine ?never to submit
or yield?.
Martha I paint, and dream of Hera?s brow;
Mary, and think of Aphrodite?s form.
Yet in spite of this recurrent clash, for two thousand
years, between ethic and aesthetic ideals, certain qualities
that we value in real life still affect, more than we often
realize ourselves, the value we attach even to so technical
a thing as style. Mr. Yeats, who writes of poetry like a poet,
not like a pedant or a priest, has spoken on this very point,
of ?that purification from insincerity, vanity, malignity,
arrogance which is the discovery of style . . . style which is


but high breeding in words and in argument.? These
qualities do not figure largely in the pages of critical
treatises; which is perhaps partly why they never yet
taught any one to write. But in the style of the Epic
Masters, for instance, from the Iliad to The Dynasts , amid
all their differences, there seems to me always something
nobly proud and aloof; upon their pages stands imprinted
the shadowy footmark of the lion. Or take a more concrete
example, a familiar pair of parallel passages, the dying
speech of Arcite in Chaucer and in Dryden. 1
Naught may the woful spirit in myn herte
Declare o poynt of alle my sorwes smerte
To yow, my lady, that I love most;
But I biquethe the service of my gost
To yow aboven every creature,
Sin that my lyf may no lenger dure.
Allas, the wo! alias, the peynes stronge,
That I for yow have suffred, and so longe!
Allas, the deeth! alas, myn Emelye!
Allas, departyng of our companye!
Allas, myn hertes quene! alias, my wyf!
Myn hertes lady, endere of my lyf!
What is this world? what asketh men to have?
Now with his love, now in his colde grave
Allone, withouten eny companye.
Farwel, my swete fo! myn Emelye!
And softe tak me in your armes tweye,
For love of God, and herkneth what I seye.
Those eighteen lines Dryden improved to twenty-eight:
No language can express the smallest part
Of what I feel, and suffer in my heart,
For you, whom best I love and value most.
Chaucer?s ?woful spirit? has become, in Dryden, ?language?.
That change is but too symbolical of the rest! Just as
1 This was written before the delivery by Prof. Housman of his Leslie
Stephen Lecture for 1933, in which there occurs a similar comparison
of other passages in the Knight's Tale , by Chaucer and by Dryden, with
a similar conclusion. There indeed the comparison is made from the
point of view of style alone. But it is pleasant to find this measure of
confirmation from such an authority.


Dryden supposes, writing with the cleverness of the head
and not the wisdom of the heart, that c love and value?
means more than Chaucer?s simple ?love?.
But to your service I bequeath my ghost;
Which, from this mortal body when untied,
Unseen, unheard, shall hover at your side;
Nor fright you waking, nor your sleep offend,
But wait officious, and your steps attend.
Dryden has dressed up into a sort of spectral footman that
forlorn hope of the dying Arcite which Chaucer had wisely
left in a sad brevity, vague as the hope itself.
How I have loved, excuse my faltering tongue,
My spirit?s feeble, and my pains are strong;
This I may say, I only grieve to die,
Because I lose my charming Emily.
This Chaucer?s Arcite did not say; with advantage, since
when said we do not believe it.
To die, when Heaven had put you in my power!
Fate could not choose a more malicious hour.
Chaucer?s Arcite did not talk about Heaven putting Emily
?in his power?, as if she were some captured animal; nor
was he small enough to imagine Fate itself so small as to
gratify malice at the expense of any human soul.
What greater curse could envious Fortune give,
Than just to die when I began to live!
Vain men! how vanishing a bliss we crave;
Now warm in love, now withering in the grave!
Here Dryden seems to me to be growing for a moment
more sincere; then he remembers again his audience and
his itch to produce effects; and that fatal falsetto returns.
Never, O never more to see the sun!
Still dark, in a damp vault, and still alone!
One would think he was afraid of catching, like Webster?s
Flamineo, ?an everlasting cold?.
This fate is common; but I lose my breath
Near bliss, and yet not blessed before my death.
Farewell! but take me dying in your arms;
?Tis all I can enjoy of all your charms.


16 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
The anguish of a dying lover at leaving his mistress unpos-
sessed is a touch true enough to life, though Chaucer passed
it by; in the last letters of Keats it becomes terrible; but,
tricked out with these flowers of speech, does it not become
a little rancid, a little crude and vulgar? And, with ten
lines more than Chaucer, how much of Chaucer?s poetry
Dryden has lost!
Dryden was surely an admirable journalist in verse; some-
times a splendid orator; occasionally a great poet. He had
gained, from the poets before him and from his own fluent
career, a greater familiarity than Chaucer could ever have,
with the capacities of the heroic couplet and the English
tongue. He was gifted with all the wit of the Metaphysical
Poets, and with sense enough to abandon their abuse of it.
Yet despite all these technical advantages comparison with
Chaucer, as with Milton, kills him. It is like the contact
of Satan with Ithuriel?s spear ?
for no falsehood can endure
Touch of celestial temper.
Dryden could be sincere; but often he did not choose to be.
There was about his character this touch of the second-rate
which reveals itself as inevitably in the lines of a poem as in
the lines of a face. It is natural enough in an age when
criticism of poetry cares for none of these things, thinking
only of technique and of cleverness, that Dryden should be
idolized and his reputation rise till All for Love is ranked with
or above Antony and Cleopatra . With a similar extravagance
we praise Donne; for, as Dryden salted life with clever wit,
Donne spattered life with clever mud. That vein of cheap-
ness, in spite of which these poets were justly honoured in
the past, tends now to become their special merit in the eyes
of critics who care not for the Donne who can be as direct
as Catullus, as imaginatively lovely as Marvell, but the
human corkscrew; not for the Donne who wrote The
Extasie , but the Donne who wrote The Flea. In the same
way Pope is promoted from his old place as a flashing wit,
with a touch of the tragic intensity of the asp, to rank with


those who seem to me companions for a lifetime, where he
is a companion for half-hours. The man who wrote ?
Yes, I am proud, I must be proud to see
Men not afraid of God, afraid of me?
attains for the moment the daemonic greatness of Shake-
speare?s lago; but that is rather different from being
Shakespeare. And when I hear thin-lipped persons prais-
ing Swift to the Heavens, I am tempted to wish them there,
with their idol for company through eternity. Swift with
his tragic intensity may recall now Lear, now Thersites.
But does one not feel sometimes that if life looks like that,
it would be better to hop over a cliff and be silent, than to
go scolding on for ever? Is there not something a little
petty about such peevishness? Chaucer can smile, even
when the heart of Troilus cracks; Shakespeare can jest, even
when Cleopatra comes to die. Swift had genius; but surely
genius is better when it is not also a disease?
Enough of examples. When one is pleading a case, the
great thing is not to claim too much. All I suggest is this.
We have reached a state of chaos in which all critical
standards of value have broken down. In the past there
have been too many; now there are none. Yet there remain
certain qualities that for three thousand years men have
valued alike in life and in what they have agreed to call
great literature ?qualities which it has become second nature
to most normal minds to find appealing, but which reason
and experience also tell us we do well to like. Nobility, in-
tensity, courage, generosity, pity ?qualities like these cannot
by themselves make a poem good, any more than they can
make a face beautiful. Socrates looked like a Satyr;
though I am sure it was a very charming Satyr. But in a
poem, as in a face, no perfection of form in their absence
can reach the highest beauty. And in a poem, as in a face,
the presence of their opposites ?of vulgarity or morbidity or
poltroonery or meanness or cruelty ?is a flaw for which no
perfection of form can atone.
To a Greek this would have been, I think, obvious. Now it


18 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
is no longer that. So much the worse for us. Unfortunately
the moralists long ago began by picking a quarrel with
poetry. The trouble with most moralists from Plato on-
wards is, I think, that they have been so immoral. Neurotic
themselves, they have bred neurotics to match them among
the poets. For the values common to good living and good
poetry seem to me not so much matters of what used to be
rather repellently called Virtue? as, above all, of sane
vitality.
Not that the same scale of values will hold unchanged
for the realm of the poetic imagination and for the real
world. No doubt Milton or Michael Angelo would have
been ill to live with; Marlowe was no model citizen. Their
vitality was too vigorous for suburbs. But values vary even
with earthly frontiers to some extent, between Paris and
London; that is not to say they can therefore be ignored or
turned topsy-turvy.
Nor need writers like Swift or Baudelaire be denied
greatness, because there was so much about them neither
sane nor sound. On the one hand, they still keep an intensity
of passion however poisoned, an intensity of life however
drunk with death, very different from the lachete and vul-
garity, the whimperings and the clatter of tin wreaths, to
which we have been treated since the War; on the other,
they created nightmare worlds which our curiosity may well
wish to visit, though not to inhabit; just as Odysseus devised
how to hear the Siren?s song and would doubtless have
managed to see also the Venusberg, had it existed in his
day. But he would have managed there too ?and here it is
important to imitate him?not to fall under the fascination,
not to forget his rugged Ithaca, ?brave nursing-mother of
men?.
Nor is there any question of inventing some formula by
which to approach the judgement of poetry. One does not
feel by formula. But this does provide some means of
checking and controlling our feelings about a poem by our
feelings about life at large. Just as in the realm of physical


taste we control our instinctive liking for certain kinds of
food, if we have any sense, in accordance with our other
instinctive liking for good health. For our instincts can be
fallible alone, and one must sometimes check another.
Nor is there any question, either, of trying to lay down
the law for other people. One of those qualities I have
mentioned as valuable alike in life and literature is surely
tolerance. From those who differ, if my view be true, life
itself is likely sooner or later, to exact the penalty. But
I find it something, if only a pleasant illusion, to feel that
judgements of the value of literature can bear some relation
to the real world; and that one is not completely limited to
saying, in effect??ln this sublime form of skittles called
Poetry, you like blue skittles and I like red ?and there ?s
no more to be said.? These are, after all, not matters of such
indifference. ?Let me make the songs of a nation,? said the
seventeenth-century Fletcher of Saltoun, ?and let who will
make its laws.? When we waver undecided between one
sort of poetry and another, our eyes may be opened for a
moment like those of Aeneas, when his mother showed him
the mysterious shapes of the Immortals behind the reek of
burning Troy; we may seem to see Nature casting into one
scale Life itself and into the other Death, as Brennus cast
his sword into the balance on the Capitol, with the cry, like
him ??Vae victis!? For the qualities by which men have
survived are hardly irrelevant to the survival of literature.
One may doubt if it is to hollow men that the future world
belongs.
Perhaps I may add that this theory did not begin as a
theory, but because I have found by spontaneous experience
more and more that even the aesthetic pleasure of a poem
depends for me on the fineness of the personality glimpsed
between its lines; on the spirit of which the body of a book
is inevitably the echo and the mould. Herrick, for instance,
is not heroic; he is, on the contrary, a superb example of the
pure artist; and yet how his work would drop to dust
without the graceful gaiety, the humour, and the humanity


WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
of the man behind! It is not what writers preach that
matters; it is what they themselves are. More and more
decidedly, as against work that is tainted with mania or
cruelty or barbarism, one comes back to the vital and the
sane, to Greek poetry, to Chaucer or the Ballads, to Ron-
sard or Shakespeare, to Keats or Morris or Hardy. And in
moments of doubt about the value of a book, I find myself
referring it in imagination to a ghostly jury, not of profes-
sional critics, but of men and women of this world. To it
are invited Horace and Montaigne; the woman?s wit of
Dorothy Osborne, the sensitive simplicity of Dorothy Words-
worth; the eighteenth-century common sense of Lord Ches-
terfield and Madame Geoffrin; Landor with his stormy
honesty and Hardy with his quiet irony. Of course, like
Owen Glendower, one may call spirits from the vasty deep,
and they may not come. Or I may badly mishear what they
say. Certainly they often disagree. But would not any poet
prefer such a tribunal, could it but be found, to twelve
legions of professors? Do we honestly think Shakespeare
would have left his c Mermaid? for our lecture-rooms?
And at least, if one is wrong in this refusal to put asunder
the values of life and poetry, one is wrong in good company
?with Milton who held that the poet?s life should be a true
poem; with Montaigne for whom the life of ?toute ame bien
nee was in essence that; with Anatole France who, sceptic
though he was, with no literary principles, yet admitted
once that there was one quality common to the great
masters?not style, nor composition, nor taste, but simply
this, that ils n ont pas I?ame basse?. And was not this,
ultimately, what Matthew Arnold intended by poetry being
the criticism of life?? Yet what a dismal definition!?that
poetry should be criticism of anything! Is it not rather
that life itself is the criticism of poetry?
What, then, of the critics ??what can they do, in practice,
most worth doing? Granted that the critic?s main business
is interpretation, he may treat that as a science or as an
art. To scientific critics, from Aristotle to the present day,


the objection remains that poetry is a thing which works
inside us, and we still know so extremely little about our
insides. We may be now beginning to know more. But
psychology is young and green as yet. Hitherto even the
generalizations of an Aristotle have worn threadbare in
the end. And when some modern anatomist of poetry
begins explaining?This poem makes us feel like this, be-
cause . . .? ?I find myself shouting vainly to his deaf page?
?But, to begin with, it doesn?t make me feel like that at all.?
And when he proceeds, unperturbed??So you see, what
people have fondly called poetic magic, was this pretty little
bag of tricks??l cannot muster the profuse gratitude that
seems expected in return for this revelation, even were it true.
Rings in grass were once put down to fairies; science has
proved the fairies to be really a kind of fungus; well, let us
face this truth, if not with shouts of joy. It is no use, like
Keats, drinking confusion to Newton; Einstein confuses us.
Let us face also the day when every leap of the heart that
literature gives us shall be duly charted and analysed in
coloured inks; but that day is not yet in sight. I shall not
pray for it. Its dawn may well be a triumph for science
rather than for art. The more we discover of what we call
the ?unconscious?, the more we may doubt the benefit of
dragging up into the light of consciousness impulses that for
the poets and readers of three thousand years have worked
unconsciously. They were wiser than they knew; we may
not prove so much wiser when we know.
They that in play can do the thing they would,
Having an instinct throned in reason?s place?
And every perfect action hath the grace
Of indolence or thoughtless hardihood?
These are the best.
Further, those who concentrate on these problems seem
quickly to forget the existence in poetry of anything but
technique. The eye grows short-sighted over the micro-
scope; the voice of life calls deadened through a laboratory
door. Scott (characteristically enough) in that great book,


22 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
his Journal , tells of Michael Angelo calling some Pope a
poor creature, because his Holiness turned from the
general effect of a noble figure to criticize the hem of
its robe. So much the worse, I suppose, for Michael
Angelo. Yet one may ask if his form of exaggeration is
not at least healthier than its opposite. In the Aran
Islands, I gather, they believe that to talk too much of
the things of fairy may turn the tongue to stone. It
happens. I have seen it.
The critics who have mattered to me were themselves
artists who turned literary criticism into literature. They
brought to the study of poetry the imagination of poet and
novelist in one. Rasselas and The Vanity of Human Wishes
are not masterpieces of the first order; but they helped to
make Johnson the most vital of English critics. Volupte ,
despite its title, is the dreariest novel I ever groaned
through; in his poems Sainte-Beuve was little better; yet
his criticism was all the better for both. These men had
studied mankind too closely to fall into formulae, or to for-
get life in aestheticism. ?The only end of writing?, says
Johnson, ?is to enable the readers better to enjoy life, or
better to endure it.? ?What I have sought in criticism?,
writes Sainte-Beuve, ?has been to bring into it a certain
charm, and at the same time more reality; in a word, both
poetry and physiology.? This sense of reality in poetry, and
of poetry in reality, is not an idle nor an easy quality.
Taine may serve to show the effect of too much physiology;
Coleridge, of too little reality. As Dryden beside Chaucer,
so Coleridge beside Johnson reveals, I think, a human
inferiority that all his aesthetic sensitiveness cannot always
conceal or redeem. These things will out, in the least
expected ways. If there was anything Coleridge thought
he understood it was Hamlet?like him a martyr of the
intellect. And yet the next moment he calmly tells us
that Ophelia is Shakespeare?s ideal woman, whom every
man would wish to marry! ?Ophelia who seals Hamlet?s
destruction precisely because, like Hamlet?s mother, like


Keats?s Fanny, she is all too human, where he needed
desperately a heroine. What did Coleridge think the play
was about? Into such wells do transcendental critics fall
when they lose touch with life; and it is not Truth they
find at the bottom.
Critical interpretation remains then, I feel, an art ?an
applied art like portrait-painting, or like translation?best
handled by minds at once poetic and practical, like Horace
and Montaigne, Dryden and Johnson, Goethe and Arnold;
or, in our own day, Yeats and Virginia Woolf, Lytton
Strachey and Desmond MacCarthy. It was, above all, the
poetry in the treatment of Greek and Latin literature by
Gilbert Murray and Mackail, that shortened for me at
school, by months and years, the road to the originals. That
this type of imaginative criticism has been badly abused,
I know; that is no reason for abusing it. I know that the
head of Pater?s La Gioconda is ready to be brought in on
a charger and pitched at me; but if we want a kind of criti-
cism that shall be fool-proof, we must look to another world
than this. And if this world is to continue habitable for
civilized people, we surely need more, not less, mixing of
poetry, as no mere aesthetic object stuffed in a glass-case,
with the common ways of life.
That is where modern criticism of poetry, I think, has
failed us. It is vain to expect too much of any criticism; as
Arnold did. Men of the pen overrate the power of the pen.
And where criticism has tried to lead the poets, as at the
Renaissance, it has often only misled them. But if it be true
that artists need a sense of values in life, critics ?as artists
judging artists?need it doubly. Yet the modern reviewer
is usually afraid to say ??This poetry is clever, but its spirit
is that of a rabbit imprisoned in a dust-bin???This satire
shows force, but it shows also a vulgar brutality with no
sense of the dignity of others or its own.? Critics now sup-
pose such things irrelevant; or are afraid of being thought
prigs or snobs. Yet the critic who does not feel the sheer
aesthetic ugliness of such qualities is as incompetent as


24 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
a colour-blind person in a picture-gallery. Poetry is not
a jewel found in the heads of toads. And now in America,
I hear, a school of critics has arisen to declare tragedy ?out
of date?, because it needs heroic characters, and modern
man has lost faith in his own value. As if Ibsen had not
wrung more tragedy out of a wild duck in an attic than out
of the fall of the whole ancient world before Christianity!
But to-day the individual cowers before Communist and
Fascist, before scientist and engineer. Our age is disillu-
sioned, so its intellectual leaders proudly and interminably
tell us. What little worms we all are; and what clever little
worms to know it so well! One modern poet, in verses
peculiarly admired, has lamented that he was not born
a healthy lobster. And this sort of neurotic cant is called
?sincerity??the one moral quality ceaselessly on the lips of
modern critics. This ?vanity of vanities? is supposed to be
the latest thing in daring originality; as if there had never
been a Preacher in Jerusalem, or such evergreen-sickness
were a new thing under the sun! One difference indeed
there is; Ecclesiastes if, like so many poets, he had lost hope,
had not lost also dignity and decency.
The words of Yeats do not apply only to the ?troubles?
of Ireland?
We who seven years ago
Talked of honour and of truth,
Shriek with pleasure if we show
The weasel?s twist, the weasel?s tooth.
And again?
We are but critics, or but half create,
Timid, entangled, empty, and abashed.
And because one extreme breeds another, this feebleness
finds its counterpart in speeches by politicians holding it up
as the highest crown of human life to litter with senseless
carcasses some No Man?s Land; and in a Europe that twenty
years ago seemed civilized, intellectual freedom is perse-
cuted in state after state with a systematic brutality un-
equalled since the religious persecutions of the seventeenth


century ?though there is left to-day no Dante or Milton,
no Wordsworth or Byron, to speak for liberty. They might
not be heard if there were. Modern poets and their critics
between them have cured of ever buying new poetry that
wider public for whose grandfathers a new volume by
Tennyson or Browning or Arnold was an event. We can
guess to-day what it is was like to live in the twilight of the
Roman Empire, with barbarism flooding back across the
Danube and the Rhine; while our poets caress their incom-
prehensible Muses in select seclusion, like the Emperor
Honorius feeding his pet hens in the marshes of Ravenna
as Alaric marched on Rome.
?Consider for instance,? continues meanwhile the voice of
the modern critic, ?the consummate reserve of this:
Unable in the supervening blankness
To sift to agathon from the chaff
Until he found his sieve . . .
Ultimately, his seismograph.?
Alas, the reserve is so ?consummate? that it is like to have to
do without being considered at all by a harassed world like
ours. When Gerard de Nerval promenaded a live lobster
on a pink ribbon through the streets of Paris, it was at least
a novelty. To-day the highway of poetry is blocked with
lobsters and laboriously eccentric gentlemen, begging the
public to stop and overhear them conversing in private code
with the little black egos they trail along our gutters. The
public has ceased to stop. And as if it were not enough that
living poets should be unintelligible, our critics father the
same quality in retrospect upon the dead. In a recent work
with the apocalyptic title, Seven Types of Ambiguity , it has
been revealed to an admiring public that the more ways
a poem can be misunderstood, the better it is. Take, for
example, Herbert?s couplet?
Ah, my dear God, though I be clean forgot,
Let me not love thee, if I love thee not.
This, we are informed, means four different things??lf I
have stopped loving you, let me go? ??Let me not love you


26 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
in achievement, if I do not love you in desire???Damn me
if I don?t stick to the parsonage? ?and c Do not make me
hanker after you, if I would be better under some other
master elsewhere.? For, our guide proceeds, ?it is a very
reasonable deduction from the sexual metaphor used by
devotional poets that God should in most cases be well
scolded as a flirt?. The significant point about this sort of
thing, which was praised to the skies by stupefied reviewers,
is not, I think, that so far from meaning all four things at
once the passage does not mean any of them; nor yet that
one of the explanations is not even English; nor yet that
so much ingenuity is squandered on a Philistine frivolity;
but that the attitude to poetry involved is so curiously
vulgar. And if there is one thing fatal to the writing or the
appreciation of poetry it is surely vulgarity. Men have
written well with, in the ordinary sense, bad enough morals;
but not with bad manners. When Sir Gawayne arrived in
the hall of the Green Knight, every one whispered over-
joyed to his neighbour??Now shall we see courteous con-
duct and blameless speech; now we shall learn noble
manners.? Can we feel they would have been equally
rejoiced by the arrival of a contingent of modern gentlemen
of letters, polished by six centuries of progress? It does not
seem to me a matter of complete indifference that so much
of the criticism that piques itself on being most ?modern?
should?to use the cant of the Communist ?be ?sabotaging?
poetry.
For the qualities that the poets have valued seem to me
what a world hag-ridden with theorists needs?above all
that sense of the importance of the individual against the
collective follies and brutalities of statecraft, which the
poets have seldom forgotten, from the Antigone to Walt
Whitman. We are stupidly afraid of this ferro-concrete
colossus of modern science. The world has grown for the
moment like some savage chief who has just had installed
in his palace an electric-bell; it can think of nothing else,
push nothing else, hear nothing else but this feverish tintin-


nabulation. But the basis of life remains unchanged?we
are born, we love, we die?and nothing matters really but
the states of mind or feeling, of contemplation or excite-
ment, with which we fill our years; in which respect we are
not noticeably better off than Socrates, nor yet noticeably
better at producing more people like him. He had no
electric-bells to listen to. Instead, he had a Demon. In some
respects it worked better. And we have Poetry. The Gods
of Hellas had a very able scientist among them, called
Hephaestus. They did not tremble before him; they found
him useful, but something of a joke; he was lame, for one
thing, and sooty; yet they married him, some say, to Charis,
who is Grace; or, as others tell, to Aphrodite, who is Loveli-
ness. Might we not try to bring them together again?
There is indeed a danger that the progress of science may
make us at once so powerful and so neurotic with the pace
we live at, as to blow our wise selves out of existence alto-
gether. But I believe that a new science may help redress
the balance of the old?that science of psychology, of our-
selves, which though still so raw has already done much to
explain the morbid tangles of the mind and to make easier
that directness and sanity which marks the poetry, above all,
of Greece. For the poets have often seen clearly enough,
since they looked at life as artists, not eaten up with the
greed of possessing things, how absurdly we have over-
complicated existence; until our minds are like those Vic-
torian drawing-rooms we despise, every spare inch crowded
with plush photographs and pincushions and dogs in por-
celain. To clear one?s life of dusty bric-a-brac ?was not
that the heart of the matter with Blake and Wordsworth
and Arnold, with Morris and Meredith and Hardy? But
a neurotic public prefers neurotic poetry. Our own genera-
tion, more overstuffed with impressions and more out of
breath with chasing wild geese than any before, has made
a god of its own likeness out of D. H. Lawrence; for that
typical victim of its own diseases ?of its industrialism, its
barbarism, its brutal love of shouting on the housetops


28 WARTON LECTURE ON ENGLISH POETRY
what sensible people have always known and never said ?
yet felt instinctively what ailed the age, and had the gift of
words to make men listen to the claims of the body, reas-
serted against the bloodless intellect. And in the same way
is it not possible partly to sympathize with another figure
equally fanatical, the leader who is trying to make Ireland
turn her back on the stupid complexities of our civilization,
in a self-sufficing simplicity alone with her Atlantic? In
Germany the same exasperated craving for violent living
and decisive action has found its figure-head in Hitler.
The wages of Decadence are Fascism or Bolshevism. Where
now are the intelligentsias of Russia and of Germany?
Inevitably, the seedy intellectual calls up the noble savage,
not always, alas, very noble; and the modern poet, trying
to go one better than Shelley and be ?an ineffectual devil?
(mainly blue), is the very type that produces in the end,
by scorn and loathing for itself, devils but too effectual.
In a word, the values of real life cannot remain without
interest to poetry if poetry is to be again of interest to the
world, and not the autobiographical abracadabra of indi-
viduals mumbling at themselves in pocket-mirrors. And if
its critics cared for such wider issues, they too might help.
Yet genius is born without midwives. It can outlive their
neglect. Some day we may dare to dream of a new Renais-
sance of understanding for Greek poetry; a new return to
the sanity of Nature, less hysterical than Romanticism was;
a new conviction, less narrow than in the age of Thomas
Warton, that Nature, and sanity, and the wisdom of the
Greek are but three guides in one.
All that I have urged, comes merely to this?that the
criticism of poetry, whether professional or our own, though
true interpretation be its first aim, without a keen sense of
values remains but a blind sloth upon the Tree of Know-
ledge; that those values are not mere matters of subjective
caprice?like the fineness of certain faces, they move us
despite ourselves, because their worth has outlived in the
real world the test of immemorial time; and that criticism


cannot neglect these, to concentrate wholly on technical
subtleties, without becoming a frivolous and shallow thing.
?Good?, in life itself as well as literature, is but the name
we give to qualities that confer the vital power to survive.
What matters in the end, I would repeat, is health, not
holiness; sanity, not sin. And Beauty is not limited to what
can be seen or heard or poked. It is not in anatomical skill
that the Laocoon is inferior to Olympia; not in technical
cleverness that Dryden yields to Chaucer. Neither for
poetry nor for criticism is cleverness enough. We are driven
back to ?Longinus? ?to ?the echo of a great soul?. And indeed
all our explanations of the eternal power of poetry come
lamely to their journey?s end. In the phrase of Vauvenargues
??II faut avoir de I?ame pour avoir du gout?; in the words
of his brother-soldier and fellow-critic, Sir Philip Sidney,
denouncing those who can hear sweet music without ?ravish-
ing delight??
Or if they do delight therein, are yet so closed with wit,
As with sententious lips to set a title vain on it;
Oh let them hear these sacred tunes, and learn in Wonder?s schools
To be, in things past bounds of wit, fools if they be not fools!


PRINTED IN
GREAT BRITAIN
AT THE
UNIVERSITY PRESS
OXFORD
BY
JOHN JOHNSON
PRINTER
TO THE
UNIVERSITY


?
,
?
?


WARTON LECTURES ON ENGLISH POETRY
Paper covers , is. net each {except where otherwise stated)
I. THOMAS WARTON, by W. P. Ker. 1910. Out of print.
11. ANCIENT AND MODERN ROMANCE, by W. J. Courthope. 1911,
Out of print.
111. HISTORICAL CHARACTER OF ENGLISH LYRIC, by
G. Saintsbury. 1912. Out of print.
IV. THE INFLUENCE OF ENGLISH POETRY UPON THE
ROMANTIC REVIVAL ON THE CONTINENT, by
C. Vaughan. 1913. Out of print.
V. POETIC ROMANCERS AFTER 1850, by Oliver Elton. 1914.
Out of print.
VI. TWO PIONEERS OF ROMANTICISM, JOSEPH AND
THOMAS WARTON, by E. Gosse. 1915. Out of print.
VII. IS THERE A POETIC VIEW OF THE WORLD? by C.H.
Herford. 1916. Out of print.
VIII. THE REVELATION OF ENGLAND THROUGH HER
POETRY, by Hugh Walker. 1917. Out of print.
IX. POETRY AND TIME, by Sir Henry Newbolt. 1918. Outofprint.
X. POETRY AND COMMONPLACE, by Johnailey. 1919. Out of
print.
XI. LORD BYRON: ARNOLD AND SWINBURNE, by H. J. C.
Grierson. 1920. Outofprint.
XII. KEATS, by Ernest de Selincourt. 1921. Outofprint.
XIII. SOME CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ENGLISH ANTHO-
LOGY, by John Drinkwater. 1922.
XIV. SHELLEY AND THE OPPRESSORS OF MANKIND, by
George Gordon. 1923.
XV. BENTLEY?S MILTON, by J. W. Mackail. 1924. is. 6d. net.
XVI. THE DRAMATIC MONOLOGUE IN THE VICTORIAN
PERIOD, by M. W. MacCallum. 1925.
XVII. CHAUCER AND THE RHETORICIANS, by J.M.Manly. 1926.
XVIII. THOMAS RANDOLPH, by G. C. Moore Smith. 1927. as. net.
XIX. THE POETRY OF COLLINS, by H.W.Garrod. 1928.
XX. WARTON?S HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY, by David
Nichol Smith. 1929. is. 6d. net.
XXI. CHATTERTON, by W. MacNeile Dixon. 1930. is. 6d. net.
XXII. VIRGIL IN ENGLISH POETRY, by George Gordon. 1931.
XXIII. MATTHEW ARNOLD, by Sir Edmund Chambers 1932.
Published for the BRITISH ACADEMY
By HUMPHREY MILFORD, OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
AMEN HOUSE, E.C.
