

THE
“MURRAY VALLEY VINEYARD”
ALBUKY,
J'JEW £oUTH •V^ALEE,
“ AUSTRALIAN VINES AND WINES.”
s|elbowii>e t
PRINTED BY AEZOPPARDI, HILDRETH & CO.,
10, 12 & 14 POST-OFFICE PLACE.
1874.




THE
“MURRAY YALLEY VINEYARD,”
ALBURY, NEW SOUTH WALES,
AND
“AUSTRALIAN VINES AND WINES.”
Since the great resources of Australia as a Wine-growing country
are Toeing rapidly realised , the annexed few extracts from the Press,
tyc., coupled with a Paper on “Australian Vines and Wines,” read
ly Mr. Jas, T. Fallon at the Society of Arts' Meeting in London,
Dec. 3, 1873, will no doubt be acceptable to all interested.
Melbourne, Feb., 1874.
(Licensed Victuallers' Gazette, August 23, 1873.)
The great and increasing interest taken in our colonial wine
trade, and the progress which has been made within the last few
years, induce us to devote space this week to a description of, we
believe, the first and most extensive vineyard and cellarage on
this continent. It is now beyond doubt that Australia, in point
of soil, climate, and aspect, possesses all the elements necessary to
enable it to rank with the best wine-producing countries of
Europe. It has, moreover, been placed beyond all question that
not alone can we produce wines here of a first-class stamp and of
exquisite bouquet, but we can produce an article which improves
by age, and ripens to a perfection equal to any European vintage.
A practical test has been carried out lately by Mr, J. T. Fallon,
the owner of the famous Murray Valley Vineyard, and the result
has been warmly eulogised by the leading press of this and the
neighboring colonies. In March, 1870, this enterprising vigneron
sent to London ten hogsheads of his wines direct from the vine-
yard, with strict orders to his London agents to store the wine
for three years —not to be touched or manipulated in any way—
and at the expiration of this period the same ten hogsheads to be
returned to Melbourne. This programme has been faithfully
carried out. The wines, consisting of reisling, muscat, shiraz,
and carbinet, returned here per ship Calcutta. We have tasted
them, and have no hesitation in saying they are a credit both to
Mr. Fallon and Australia, being quite equal to any European
vintages. They present at once all the bouquet and finesse of pure
unadulterated wines, and remove from theory to practice the
most important element in wine-making, viz., its keeping quality,
which ever has been the difficult turning point with all viguerons.


In presence of such enterprising activity, and in recognition of
the foremost place Mr. Fallon has perseveringly attained and
maintained for many years as a wine-grower, we think the
moment opportune to place before our readers the annexed sketch
of the Murray Valley Vineyard and cellarage, which we doubt
not will be attentively perused by all having the interest of Aus-
tralian industry at heart.
The Murray Valley Vineyard consists of 640 acres of splendid
land, adjoining the racecourse at Albury, and combines all the
desirable qualities for wine-growing. It was selected in 1861 by
a company of gentlemen, who formed the Murray Valley Vine-
yard Company. After a few seasons the property was purchased
by Mr. Fallon, who not only followed up the improvements
initiated by his predecessors, but furthermore carried out certain
alterations, which have had the effect of making this plantation
one of the model vineyards of Australia. The land extends along
a spur from the Black Eange, perfectly level at the top, and
sloping down north, south, east, and west. In other words, it is
a square mile of country, whose surface confirmation resembles
the roof of a house, the main drainage being at the east and west,
and at the two ends north and south. Tne soil is a rich red loam,
perfectly friable aud calcareous. Here the vine can be grown on
every aspect under the most favorable circumstances; the most
delicate, as well as the hardiest grape flourishes to perfection.
The slopes are sufficiently moderate, on the one hand, to prevent
the washing down of the upper soil to the lower grounds; whilst,
on the other, they are sufficiently steep to ensure natural drain-
age. Both French and German visitors—judges of everything
appertaining to vines—have pronounced the position of this well-
known vineyard as incomparable. Its proximity (three miles) te
the railway which is now open to the Murray, at once places this
vineyard in communication with the world. All the newest appli-
ances have been adopted for pruning, staking, tilling, &c., and
every precaution taken to stave off disease. The greatest care is
likewise observed in the classification of the grape, in order to
keep each wine as clear and distinct representative of its class.
One of the sights of Albury —one possessing as much interest
in its way as the explorers’ monument ou the banks of the river
—is a large plain brick building, of comparatively recent erection,
near the centre of the town. Externally there is little in this
structure to attract the eye of the stranger. A long one-storied
building, with roof of corrugated iron, it has all the appearance
of an ordinary warehouse for the storage of produce. But it is
not in architectural pretensions or huge dimensions that the in-
terest attached to the building centres. It is in the fact that
within its walls are enormous quantities of the rich generons
wines of the Murray maturing for the markets of the world. The
structure at present is 240 ft. in length, by a width of 60 ft., aud
is known far and near as Fallon’s Wine Cellars. On entering
the cellars the visitor is struck with the number and size of


the casks, all full of generous liquid, that meet his view. There
are casks to the right, casks to the left, casks in front, and casks
behind, and all of monster dimensions. Five standing in a row
attract particular attention on account of their size. The term
vat would be more appropriate if applied to these, each having
a capacity of 1400 gallons, and occupying more space than do
many dwellinghouses used in the colonies. Five more of the same
size are being made, so that a mighty pile will be presented of
14000 gallons of wine in 10 casks. Next comes a row of between
40 and 50 casks ranging from 900 to 1000 gallons each, entirely
enclosing two sides and one end of the cellar. The centre of this
vast cave is at present occupied by 500-gallon casks, but those are
being replaced by casks of 900 gallons as fast as the coopers
working on the premises turn them out. The casks are all con-
structed of the best materials, Dantzig and American oak being
chiefly employed. The larger ones, those holding 1400 gallons,
cost about £IOO each when completed; and some idea may be
formed of the capital invested in the business, when it is mentioned
that there is about £17,000 value in casks alone in the cellars. As
regards the wines, there are close on 150,000 gallons in the cellar,
besides several thousand gallons “ representative parcels ” of
vintages previous to 1870. The bulk of the old and matured wine
being stored in the Melbourne cellars, 114 and 126 Collins-street
west, where a stock of from 50,000 to 60,000 gallons is kept, to
supply the metropolitan and export trade. All the varieties—
Enisling, Verdeilho, Tokay, Muscat, Aucarot, Shiraz, Carbinet,
Malbec, Hermitage, Burgundy, and the many other descriptions for
which Mr. Fallon’s Murray Valley Vineyard has become deservedly
famous, are the pure juice of the grape, fortification in no instance
being resorted to.. Under the judicious treatment bestowed by the
gentleman in charge of the cellar, the wines are as clear as crys-
tal, and although none are allowed to be placed on the market
until they have at least attained three years of age, they are more
palatable than nine tenths of what is sold as European wine on this
side of the Murray. Everything in the cellars points to the care
that is taken to put a first-class article in the market, and the
demand that has sprung up for Upper Murray wines—in great
measure owing to Mr. Fallon’s enterprise—shows the wisdom of
the course that is adopted. In many of our large inland
towns it is almost impossible to get a bottle of really good colonial
wine since the enormous demand which has sprung up for really
first-class vintages has had the effect of concentrating those wines
in large cities, to meet the daily increasing metropolitan and
export trade. The rubbish—for, as a rule, it is deserving of no better
title—generally sold under that name has done much to dis-
courage the consumption of pure unadulterated wine. Placed on
the market in an immature state, often not more than three
months old, the colonial wine retailed being in many instances
not only undrinkable, but pernicious, it is thus that one of our
grandest industries is daily being “ stabbed in the dark ; ” but


notwithstanding all these difficulties, first-class colonial wines
continue to meet with increased favor, and through the efforts of
such men as Mr. Fallon, the capabilities of Australia as a wine
growing country are being rapidly realised. The fact is, wine-
making has been handled in many instances by very incompetent
hands, who, failing to realise expectations which incompetency in
such cases never gives, threw up the business in disgust, declaring
that Australia would never be a wine-producing country, never
dreaming that the fault was not the result of Australia’s incapa-
bility, but, rather, the consequence of their own ignorance. Wine-
making is not only a business requiring years of patience and per-
severance, besides the employment of a large capital, but more-
over one in which there is something new to learn every day. It
is now an established fact, that if good colonial wines are placed
before the public they will be duly appreciated. Much has been
said and written as to the vitiated tastes of the public, and the
demand that exists for strong and fiery compounds; but as the
proverb has it, good wine needs no bush. Were Mr. Fallon’s
example generally followed, and none but pure, sound mature
wines placed in the market, the consumption of imported liquors
would materially decrease. The enormous increase in his Mel-
bourne export trade is a guarantee that those splendid vintages
are being duly appreciated at home and in India, &c.
(Sydney Morning Herald , October 9, 1868.)
A large company assembled at about one o’clock on Tuesday,
6th instant, on the first floor of Mr. Mort’s new stores, where a
festive board was provided for them by Mr. J. T. Fallon, the
well-known Albury vigneron, and Mr. James Manning, the mana-
ger of the Panbula Meat Preserving Company. Amongst those
present we observed the following gentlemen:—Mr. Thomas
Holt, Mr. William Macleay, M.L A.; Mr. George King, the
Hon. S. D. Gordon, Mr. Edward S. Hill, M.L.A.; Mr. Charles
Moore (the mayor of Sydney), Professor Smith, Mr. James Man-
ning, Mr. J. T. Fallon, Mr. M. A. Munn, Mr. Frank Hill, Hr.
Foulis, Mr. John Alger, Mr. G. P. Slade, Mr. Arthur Shepherd,
Mr. T. S. Mort, Mr. Henry Mort, Mr. John Todd. Mr. H, Eeed,
Mr. F. T. Brewer, Dr. Boyd, Mr. S. H. Smyth, Mr. Michael Fitz-
patrick, Mr. Davidson (the Surveyor General), Mr. Abraham
Moriarty, the Hon. J. H. Plunkett, Mr. Andrew Garran, Mr. H.
Hall, Mr. Henry Prince, Mr. Cracknell, Mr. George Thornton,
M.L.A.; Mr. E, Vickery, Mr. J. L. Montefiore, Mr. Alexander
M‘Donald, Mr. Laidley, Mr. Joubert, Mr. Johnston, Sir William
Manning, Mr. Barnett, and many others—in all probability not
far short of two hundred persons. The visitors were intent upon
wine-tasting, and for some considerable time—round a sort of
impromptu bar—they assembled in eager knots of connoisseurs,
tasting the wine with wise and critical airs. This was pronounced
to be “ more fruity ” than that, and the wine which the next man


was sipping was declared to have “ a fine body, a very fine body
indeed,” &c. Here, again, the praises of the red wines were loudly
chanted, and there was to be heard the low tones of earnest
approval of that “ Eeisling,” and a discussion upon white wine
generally, which shewed that the subject handled was thoroughly
understood. It was all very pleasant, no doubt, but the din of
conversation, and the frequent experimental changes of some of
the testers did not perhaps furnish the best possible mode of test-
ing the relative flavor of the different vintages. That, however,
is after all, a mere matter of opinion j different people have dif-
ferent ways. There was certainly but one judgment, everywhere
expressed, as to the quality of Mr. Fallon’s wines—and that wasc
that they were excellent, “ the true juice of the grape.” This very
favorable opinion was not only the dictum of persons who evi-
dently knew but little about the matter, but the verdict of “ grave
and reverend seniors ” who took their wine with a solemn and
deliberate air, as men should do Who feel the full importance of
delivering a weighty opinion. If we too might venture to give an
opinion the palm was generally awarded to the “Albury Eeisling,”
a fine wine produced from the same kind of grape as that which
grows at Johannisberg in Germany. This is a true wine of alight
straw color, the tint being paler than that of the ordinary white
wine of that kind. The vintage was that of 1864. But the other
wines also were excellent. There was also the Aucarot, Ver-
deilho, Shiraz, Carbinet, and Bourgogne; all much admired for
their respective purity and flavor. The mode in which these
bottles were each packed in straw, for the market, attracted much
admiring comment. Mr. Fallon stated that he sold his wines
as soon after three years old as he considered them thoroughly
matured. The same gentleman stated (in answer to a question
put to him by one of the guests) that he had a stock
of not less than 150,000 gallons of these wines in his cellars. It
is, by the way, astonishing to note the difference perceptible here,
as in other countries, in the quality of wine made from the same
kind of grape when grown in different places. These Albury wines
are all found to have a much heavier body than those grown from
grapes of a like kind in the Hunter district. This, we believe, is
chiefly attributable to the fact that the grape ripens more
thoroughly at Albury than on the Hunter, notwithstanding that
the Hunter district lies, as we all know, much nearer to the
Equator. Without wishing to prejudice the wines made else-
where, it seems to be quite evident that Albury is destined to be
the Vineyard of Australia, and the king of the Albury wine-
growers is Mr, Fallon, whose premier position has cost him a large
capital and years of patience. From the magnificent position of
the famous Murray Valley Vineyard, and its adaptability for wine-
growing, both in soil and in climate, “ Fallon’s ” wines must top
the market. Moreover, the unrivalled cellarage in Albury is too
well known to need comment.


(Town and Country , November 23, 1872.)
Some eight months ago Mr. J. T. Fallon, the well-known
colonial wine merchant, anxious to obtain the best possible
opinion as to the true character and value of the Albury wines,
wines so much prized here, sent, through his London agents, to a
French house in Havre a sample case of his wines, with a request
that they should pass their opinion upon them. A reply has
been received from a member of the firm —a most excellent prac-
tical judge —in a letter from which we make the following extract.
The letter was received by the mail which arrived last month:—
“ I have tested the wines with the greatest care. I must
frankly tell you that I am more than surprised —astonished, even!
And the more so when I consider—residing in France, the first
wine-growing country in the world, as I have been for so many
years—that such excellent liquids as these samples have been
produced in Australia. I had not the remotest idea that the
Australian climate was at all suited to vintage operations,
besides, though the climate may be fine, the soil —or terroir, as
we say in France—must always be taken into consideration, even
here in France. Thus the north does not produce the same
qualities of wine as the south, nor the south so good wines as the
centre of France, for it is a curious fact that the south produces
the best wines of all, the most healthy, and the most useful. I
think, then, that if this rich local resource in Australia be
properly handled and carefully cultivated, there can be no doubt
whatever but a large consumption awaits those splendid pure
wines in England and other non-producing countries; and even
in Germany I consider the light wines of Australia —from their
rich and fruity character —would be invaluable for blending pur-
purposes in those districts where light poor-bodied wines are pro-
duced in quantity, but decidedly lack the quality to he found in
those Australian vintages. It should, above all, be shipped in
large quantities, as the charges are naturally less when we are
operating on a large scale, and most particularly in the English
and American markets. This, then, is my humble opinion on the
merits of those wines.”
This is strong testimony to the value of the wines of the
Albury district, and should go not a little way to encourage the
vignerons to use their utmost efforts to produce the best article
possible, so as to establish a sound reputation for Australian
wines in the European and American markets.
( Argus , July 31,1873.)
A most interesting experiment for the purpose of testing the
keeping qualities of colonial wine has just been brought to a
highly successful conclusion by Mr. J. T. Fallon, the well-known
vigneron of Albury. In March, 1870, Mr. Fallon sent a ship-


ment of wine vintage 1866, to England, with instructions to his
agents there to store it for three years, during which time it was
not to be interfered with in any way, except by filling-up and
coopering, and at the end of that time the wines were to be sent
back again. The parcel, which consisted of two hogsheads each
of Muscat and Eeisling, and three each Shiraz and Carbinet,
arrived in Melbourne a short time ago by the ship Calcutta.
Yesterday, this wine was tasted by some of the best judges in
Melbourne, and the unanimous decision was that the samples
were equal, if not superior, to anything ever produced in Aus-
tralia. The wines were sampled twice or thrice in England, and
were so much admired that many persons wished to purchase
them, but Mr. Eallon determined that the test should be carried
out thoroughly, and the result has realised his best expectations.
The red wines are remarkably fine; the Carbinet is considered
to be fully equal to the finest Port wine in an unadulterated
state. The Shiraz is also a very fine wine, while the Muscat and
Eeisling are pronounced to be splendid specimens of those wines.
Mr. Eallon is at present on a visit to London for the purpose
of establishing a depot there for the sale of his wines.
{Age, August 5,1873.)
Mr. J. T. Eallon, the well-known vigneron, has during the past
few years been putting his Albury wines to a crucial test, which,
fortunately for him and for the reputation of our colonial wines,
has turned out a very great success. In March, 1870, Mr. Eallon
shipped to his agents in London several hogsheads of wine from
his Murray Yalley vineyard, of the vintage of 1866, with instruc-
tions that they should be bonded, and after the lapse of a year or
two re-shipped to Melbourne without being in the meantime sub-
jected to any treatment. These instructions were carefully
carried out, and the other day the wine was returned to Mel-
bourne by the ship Calcutta, arriving in a condition that in the
most satisfactory manner sets at rest the question as to whether
our local wines will stand the test of time' The descriptions
experimented upon were a Eeisling, two Muscats (a dry and a
fruity), a Shiraz, and a. Carbinet. All of them, in ageing, have
improved in a most remarkable degree, meeting with the approval
of all the many connoisseurs who have been invited to sample
them. The fruity Muscat and the Carbinet especially, if placed
upon the English market in their present condition, would make
a reputation for Australian wines.
{Argus, August 9, 1873.)
Eew of our readers, and certainly none who take an intelligent
and patriotic interest in the development of Australian industries,
will fail to feel proud of a fact which we now propose to submit
for their consideration. In March, 1870, Mr. J, T. Eallon, of


the Murray Yalley Vineyard, and a wine merchant in Albury
and in Melbourne, sent ten hogsheads of his wine to London, in
order to subject it to such a test as would conclusively prove it
to possess good keeping qualities, or to be wanting in those
qualities. These wines were sampled in London, and were then
found to be in excellent condition; so much so that they elicited
the warm commendation of all who tasted them. They could
have been sold at a good price for consumption in England; but
in order to subject the wines to a still further test, Mr. Eallon
had them sent out to Melbourne again. On their arrival in June
last, they Avere stored in bond, ahd after enjoying a reasonable
term of rest, samples were drawn off on July 30, and these have
been submitted to the judgment of gentlemen pretty well
qualified to form a trustworthy opinion in regard to them, and
Avith the most gratifying results. The wines are all of the 1867
vintage, and it must be borne in mind that since they were
shipped for England, in March, 1870, they have not been racked
off or otherAvise manipulated.
So much being premised, it becomes highly important to dis-
cover that they are noAv pronounced to be, all of them, in a
thoroughly sound and healthy condition. The Avhite wines are
of a beautiful amber colour (if the contradiction may be per-
mitted), and the red Avines are of a brilliant ruby tint, Avhile all
of them are as transparent as their tinge of colour will permit.
The Eeisling, though clean and full-bodied, has a little too much
of the peculiar bouquet and gout of the class to which it belongs,
but it is an excellent’ Avine notAvithstanding. The Muscats, too,
are perhaps a little too unmistakeably muscat, but then it is a
matter of taste whether this can really be so. Lovers of the
muscat flavour will probably be of opinion that the emphasis
Avith Avhich Mr. Eallon’s Avines declare their character is their
chief recommendation, and all must admit that permanency of
bouquet is an excellent proof of the genuineness of the wines.
As regards the merits of the Shiraz and Carbinet samples there is
little room for difference of opinion. These Avines, whether dry
or fruity, are of excellent quality, and having been six years in
Avood without showing any change except in the direction of
improvement, their present condition goes far to confirm the
opinion of those who have always expected to see Australian
produce taking a prominent place in the Avorld’s wine market.
Another shipment of Mr. Eallon’s wines was sent home by the
Peninsular and Oriental Company’s steamer Sumatra, which
sailed hence in April last. These wines Avere frequently tasted
on the voyage home, and always elicited high praise from the
passengers on board the mail ship. We are informed that Mr.
Eallon, encouraged by the success which has attended his ship-
ments of wine, intends to open a cellar in Loudon for the storing
and sale of Australian wines only, in which enterprise all must
wish him success. We have now arrived at that stage in the
progress of the Australian wine trade, that nothing more is


required to establish it on a sure and stable foundation than that
the merits of our wine should be properly understood. "When
this is the case, other producers besides Mr. Fallon will have
their reward, and these should do something to back up his
efforts. It is said that “ good wine needs no bush,” and
probably this is so in a general kind of way. Good wine will
force itself into public favour in time, just as truth is always sure
to be accepted in the long run. But truths quite incontrovertible
have been known to take a thousand years to establish themselves,
and it may easily be that the best of new wines will sometimes
take many decades to force themselves upon the attention of the
public, in which case the cultivator of the grapes from which they
are expressed will gain but little by his motion. In the interests
of our vignerons, therefore, as well as in the interests of the
public at large, speculators like Mr. Fallon deserve all the sup-
port and encouragement that can be extended to them.
(Gundagai Times, August 9, 1873.)
To supply the English market with Australian wines is an
object worthy of the ambition of colonial wine-growers. Despite
the efforts of Temperance Societies and Permissive Liquor Law
adherents the British people continue to be somewhat bibulous.
The great increase in the Imperial revenue derived from duties
on wines and spirits shows that such is the case, and the Chancel-
lor of the Exchequer, in his late Budget speech, bore testimony
to the same effect, by the caustic remark that England had drunk
herself out of the Alabama difficulty. Of late years a large pro-
portion of the British public have shown an increasing taste for
lighter and more genuine vintages than the brandied port and
sophisticated sherry of former days ; and if pure, generous Aus-
tralian wines were now properly introduced to their notice it may
fairly be concluded that a large demand for them would speedily
arise, to the great benefit of wine-growers here, and also to the
advantage of British consumers. Our colonial wines have not
hitherto been popular or duly appreciated in England, probably
because supplies of immature vintages of inferior quality have been
sent there, and an idea also prevails there that most Australian
vintages will not keep, and that none willfimprove with age. It
is important that this prejudice, which is -to some extent likewise
entertained here, should be removed, and we are, therefore, glad
to learn that Mr. Fallon, of Albury, has lately fully tested the
keeping qualities of colonial wine, with entirely satisfactory
results. In March, 1870, the Melbourne Argus states he sent a
shipment of his wine, vintage 1866, to England, with instructions
to his agent there to store it for three years, not allow it to be
interfered with, except by filling up and coopering, and at the
end of that period to send it back to Australia. These wines,
which consisted of two hogsheads each of Muscat and Eeisling,
and three each of Carbinet and Shiraz, were sampled several


times in England, and so much admired that many persons
desired in vain to purchase them. At the end of the
appointed time they were re-shipped, and they arrived safely
in Melbourne, per the ship Calcutta, a short time ago. On
the 30th ult., says the same paper we quote from, “this wine was
by some of the best judges in Melbourne, and the unani-
mous decision was that the samples were equal, if not superior, to
anything ever produced in Australia.” Mr. Eallon deserves the
warm thanks of everyone in these colonies connected with th’a
very important industry for his efforts to remove the unfouuded
reproach cast upon our wines. He is, we learn, at present in
London, purpose of establishing a depot there for the sale
of his wines, and we heartily wish him success in his undertaking.
We hope no more assertions as to Australian wines not keeping
or improving by age will be made ; but it would be pleasant to
learn that English dealers cannot long keep the supplies of them
they receive from these colonies, owing to the great demand that
has arisen for our vintages.
(North Eastern Ensign , Tuesday, August 12, 1873.)
So much interest is being taken in the capabilities of Australia,
as a wine-growing country, that it is with pleasure we observe
the efforts of our growers, are being crowned with great success,
foremost amongst those who has identified himself with this im-
portant industry, is Mr. J. T, Eallon, of the famous “ Murray
Valley Vineyard,” Albury, and we need scarcely say that no one
is jealous of the success of this popular and enterprising vigneron.
Through years of patience and heavy expenditure—in the face of
bad seasons—he has brought the wine trade of Australia to the
fore, and has shewn to the world that we can produce wines equal
to any grown in Europe. His recent experiment of sending wines
to London is but a repetition of what has occurred in smaller
cases, as several people who have brought his wines to London
for private use have testified as to the splendid quality they
assume after the voyage. We augur an immense export trade
for the wines to Europe, where their purity is sure to be speedily
recognised in preference to the poisonous mixtures called wines
to-day in Europe.
There are some people who affect to despise colonial wines, but
there can be no doubt that in the course of a few years the vine-
growing interest in this country will become an extremely im-
portant one. We find the manufacture of colonial wines referred
to both in the report of the Secretary for Agriculture and the
proceedings of the Acclimatization Society of Victoria, and some
very instructive remarks are made respecting it. A good deal of
inferior stuff is no doubt sold under the name of colonial wine,
but the same may be said of other alcoholic liquors, and we see
no reason why they should be condemned on account of a bad
sample. There are several vineyards in this colony which have.


already become celebrated, and we believe it will only require a
few more years’ experience in the cultivation of the grape here
and practice in tbe production of wbat is called colonial wine to
establish a large trade with other countries. Englishmen as a
rule do not like wines which are made thus from the juice of the
grape. Their prejudices are in favor of bitter beer and bottled
stout, and in their visits to Erance and Belgium they gaze with
astonishment at the native as he drinks the light wines of his
country. Here, however, these prejudices must in course of time
be overcome; the Australian climate is similar to that of the
south of Erance, and it will no doubt be found here as it has been
elsewhere that those productions flourish best in it which are most
suited to the wants of the inhabitants. The fondness for these
light wines is generally an acquired taste, but should the manu-
facture of them in this colony go on as it has done during the last
few years they are sure to become popular. In that case there
will, it is to be presumed, be less drunkenness; these wines are
not strong, and while they have the same beneficial effects that
other wines and intoxicating liquors have when taken in moder-
ation, it has been observed that where they are generally drank
the people are sober. It is impossible to say whether the present
generation will see the full development of wine-growing interest
in this colony, but some people are of opinion that some day it
will surpass many others as a source of natural wealth. An ex-
perimental farm is about to be laid out in the grounds of the Ac-
climatization Society of Victoria for the systematic study and
cultivation of the vine, and the introduction of those kinds which
are known to be proof against prevailing diseases. In Europe
there are some districts which have attained a world-wide celebrity
for their wines, but it is not certain that the same sort of fruit
will produce an equally good wine if grown in other places. The
character of the European vine changes very much in Victoria,
but probably in course of time it will be found what kinds are
best suited to its various districts. Some of them will deteriorate
after they are acclimatized in a locality, but others will improve,
and we may hope eventually to find the plant grown to perfection.
Before uniformity is attained in the production of the wines, it
will not be easy to secure a market for them. Eminent judges
who have given much attention to this subject, suggests therefore
that associations should be formed among the yignerons with the
view of discovering the grape which is most suited to their par-
ticular districts, and cultivating that and no other. In a few
years then the wines would obtain a good name, and we would
have our colonial hock, claret, and burgundy. It is a frequent
complaint among purchasers that they never can rely on getting
the same wine twice running, for they are told it is all gone; in
Europe they manage matters differently, and if a certain wine
takes ” the manufacture of it can be carried on without limit.
There are several persons both in this colony and New South
Wales who have for a long time been cultivating vines on rational


and scientific principles; it is to them that we must look for an
improvement in the production of colonial wines, and we are cer-
tain that the sooner it is effected the better it will be for the
people of this country.
(Bendigo Independent , August 15, 1873.)
We are glad to learn that one industry of the colony is likely
to become very prosperous, and as it is an industry which has
become acclimatised amongst ourselves, we have, of course, the
more pleasure in alluding to it—we refer to the manufacture of
colonial wine. Year by year the manufacture of colonial wine is
on the increase, and it is gratifying to know that the demand is
equal to the supply, and that, in the colony at all events, the pre-
judice which at one time existed against the pure juice of the
grape is being rapidly overcome. The vigneron gets a good price
for his produce, the retail dealer is able to make a sufficient
profit, while the consumer obtains a good article at a moderate
rate. But, judging from the result of a late experiment, the
vigneron is likely to enjoy better times than ever, because it
has been satisfactorily proved, not only that Australian wine will
stand a sea voyage, but that it may be kept under conditions of
climate foreign to those under which it was manufactured. To
Mr. Fallon, of Albury, New South Wales, belongs the credit of
having undertaken and carried to completion the successful
experiment to which we have referred. In March, 1870, as we
learn from the Argus, Mr. Fallon sent a shipment of wine,
vintage 1866, to England, with instructions to his agents there to
store" it for three years, during which time it was not to be
interfered with in any way, except by filling-up and coopering,
and at the end of that time the wines were to be sent back again.
The parcel, which consisted of three hogsheads each of Carbinet
and Shiraz, and two hogsheads of Muscat and Eeisling, arrived in
Melbourne a short time ago by the ship Calcutta. On Wednes-
day the wine was tasted by some of the best judges in Melbourne,
and the unanimous decision was that the samples were equal, if
not superior, to anything ever produced in Australia. The
wines were sampled twice or thrice in England, and were so
much admired that many persons wished to purchase them, but
Mr. Fallon determined that the test should be carried out
thoroughly, and the result has realised his best expectations.
The red wines are remarkably fine ; the Carbinet is considered to
be fully equal to the finest Port wine in an unadulterated state.
The Shiraz is also a very fine wine; while the Muscat and Beisling
are pronounced to be splendid specimens of those wines. Mr.
Fallon is at present on a visit to London, for the purpose of
establishing a depot there for the sale of his wines. There can
be no doubt but that Mr. Fallon’s course will have an excellent
effect; and the English public, becoming familiarised with the
quality of our wines, will not be slow to purchase them at rates


very favorable to producers. There are acres upon acres of land
in this colony eminently suited for the culture of the vine; and
in this district nature has been especially bountiful, the hills of
Bendigo producing some of the finest grapes which have been
ever gathered in the colony, as has been evidenced over and over
again at our horticultural shows, not to mention the really excel-
lent wines which are annually produced by our local vignerons,
and which have taken prize after prize in the metropolis and
elsewhere. The great requirements of colonial wine—we wish
the term were altered to Australian wine—is age, the vignerons
preferring to sell it quickly rather than be at the expense of
storing it. Consequently much that is drunk is altogether too
new, and the fact is subversive of the reputation of the article.
With such a market as England or India can afford, however,
the grower will be able to produce six or twelve times as much
as is the case at present with the certainty of finding a mart of
which he can dispose of his produce. The wine-growers of Vic-
toria are under a deep obligation to Mr. Eallon for his plucky
action, which, while it will conduce to his own profit, will also
have the effect of enhancing the value of every vineyard in the
colonies, and of giving a fresh impetus to a trade only just now
beginning to hold its own.
(Border Post, August 15,1873 )
It has for many years been a prevailing opinion among the
vignerons of this district that wines manufactured in the colony
would be much improved by a sea voyage —that it would tend
towards their maturity. We remember Dr. Barnett forwarding
a quantity of J. T. Ballon’s wine a few years ago to India, with
the view of testing the experiment, and on its arrival back to this
district it was pronounced to be of splendid character; in fact, so
highly valued that almost any money was offered for it. _ We
notice that Mr. J. T. Eallon has been very-successful in a similar
experiment, which but again corroborates the opinion we have
oft expressed that Australia is destined to become one of the
first wine-producing countries in the world, possessing, as she
does, all the combination of climate, soil, and aspect necessary to
ensure success. This district is especially favored in this respect,
and with such enterprising men as Mr. Eallon we feel certain
this mine of wealth will not be left unworked. His efforts in the
business are an example to all those who have the interest of the
country. He is at present in London, bringing his wines into
more prominent recognition.
Extract from the Australische Deutsche Zeitung, Adelaide,
August 21, 1873.
The well-known vineyard proprietor, Mr. Eallon, of Albury,
has made with his wines the following interesting experiment;
In March, 1870, he sent to England


3 hhds. Carbinet,
3 „ Shiraz,
2 „ Muscat,
2 „ Eeisling,
permitted them to be there for three years without manipulation
of any kind, except filling them up in the usual manner, and
sent them back again to Melbourne. Last week they arrived
by the “ Calcutta,” when they were tasted by the most expert
connoisseurs, who pronounced them the best ever produced in
Australia. Mr. Fallon is at present in London, with a view of
establishing a depot for his wines there.
Copy of Certificate from Messrs. John Davies and Co.’the eminent
wine tasters of Calcutta.
6 Mangoe Lane, Calcutta, September 4, 1873.
Certified that we have, at the request of Messrs. Gillanders,
Arbuthnot and Co., sampled and tasted six musters of J. T.
Fallon’s Australian wines, which we beg to report upon as
follows: —"We have pleasure in saying that the “ Hermitage ” is
not unlike the Hungarian “ Carlvoitz,” though not quite so soft
to the palate. The “ Shiraz ” is after the character of still Bur-
gundy, with fine bouquet; and the “Malbec” of a dry full-
bodied Claret, also with fine bouquet. The “ Eeisling ” partakes
of a fine sauterne character, and is like the Greek “ Keffesia.”
The “Tokay” and “Muscat” are like sweet Hock (still), the
latter having a strong muscatel bouquet. All the wines tasted
we consider pure and of good quality, and will stand fair com-
parison with those of European manufacture.
(Signed) John Davies and Co.
Copy of Certificate from Dr. Druit, the ewinent London Physician
and well-known taster on wins.
Madras, September 11, 1873.
“ I have examined the samples of Fallon’s wines—Eeisling and
Muscat—and consider them good. The Eeisling seems a wine
that ought to take and be popular in Madras, and I can well
believe all said in praise of those wines.”
(Age, September 17,1873.)
Those colonial vignerons who are desirous of testing their
wines hj sending them on a voyage, are not likely to persevere
in their intention after the answer given by Mr. Cohen to Mr.
Jones in the Legislative Assembly last evening. It appeared
that in March, 1870, Mr. Fab on, of Albury, brought ten hogs-
heads of wine across the Eiver Murray for the purpose of
shipping them to England. The wine, upon arrival in London,
was stored, and during the present year was re-shipped for


Melbourne on board the Calcutta, and has since been placed in
bond. It was, therefore, asked that as the shipment had been
made solely for experimental purposes, at considerable expense,
the amount to be paid as duty should be placed on an additional
estimate, and refunded to the shipper. Mr. Cohen has declined
to accede to the request, alleging that he is bound by the law to
collect certain duties, and if he was to make a refund in the pre-
sent case it would open the door to many similar applications
which could not be complied with.
{Argus, September 17, 1878.)
Mr. Jones called the attention of the Commissioner of Trade
and Customs to the circumstances under which a shipment of
colonial wine was made to England and returned to this colony,
and asked whether he would cause a sum of money to be placed
on an additional estimate to countervail the duty which the
shipper—Mr. Eallon—had been compelled to pay ?
Mr. Cohen said that Mr. Fallon had sent to England in March,
1870, 10 hogsheads of wine, brought across the Eiver Murray
from’ Albury, at the time the Border Treaty was in force. The
wine had since been re-imported by the Calcutta, from London,
and placed in bond. He could not accede to the request that
the duty should be remitted, because, if he did so, there would
be a great many applications of a similar character. The law did
not empower him to return duties, and the duties fixed by law he
was bound to collect. There was a mode by which persons
sending articles of this kind could escape the expense of the
charge made in this instance, but it had not been taken, and
consequently nothing could be done.
{Argus, September 17, 1873.)
Mr. Eallon sent ten hogsheads of Albury-wine from Melbourne
to London in 1870, for purposes of experiment, and the wine has
now been re-imported in such a splendid condition as to create
new hope in the mind of the Australian vigneron. But this little
difficulty has occurred in connexion with the re-imported wine—
it cannot be released from bond until duty has been paid upon it
to the amount of about £9O. It is now, in the eye of the law,
foreign wine, and the Government has no power to remit the
duty to which it is legally liable. This was elicited in the Legis-
lative Assembly last night by Mr. Jones, in asking whether the
Commissioner of Customs would cause a sum equal to the
amount of duty chargeable on the wine in question to be
provided by means of an additional estimate, in order that Mr.
Eallon may escape the loss with which he is threatened. This,
however, Mr. Cohen declined to do. It is certainly matter for
regret that the enterprising Albury wine-grower should be fined
for endeavouring, at considerable expense to himself, to bring


Australian wine into favourable notice, and if Mr. Jones can
devise some way of getting back bis money for him, we feel con-
vinced the House will have pleasure in assisting him in so doing.
The case, however, need not occur again, even though the prac-
tice of sending Australian wine on a sea voyage, and bringing it
back again for use in the colony, should come to be extensively
followed, since there are means now available by which this may
be done, and no customs charge arise on its being introduced.
All that is required to secure this immunity is to comply with
certain formal conditions when the wine is exported in the first
instance, and what these are can be readily ascertained by
applying to the department, or to a Custom-house agent’ It will
be well for wine-growers to bear this in mind. As to Mr.
Fallon’s £9O, we hope he will get it back one way or another.
Our Customs revenue does not require to be maintained by the
spoliation of public-spirited producers.
(Murray and Hume Times , October 10, 1873.)
Chief amongst the lions of Albury are Fallon’s wine cellars.
What the London Docks are to country cousins when enjoying a
holiday in the British metropolis, Fallon’s cellars are to strangers
paying a first visit to the border city. Have you seen the cellars ?
is the question generally asked if the visitor has had time to make
himself acquainted with the topography of Albury. The residents
are in fact proud of the cellars, and proud of the gentleman who
has had the enterprise to cause them to be constructed, and has
otherwise done so much to foster the important interest of vini-
culture. The building known as the cellars is a large brick
edifice in Kiewa-street, possessing no architectural beauty, but
certain from its dimensions to attract the eye of a stranger on
entering the town. The ground floor is occupied as a store, and
underneath are the cellars, the largest, to be found in the
colonies. On entering, the first thing that attracts the atten-
tion of the visitor is the rows and tiers of casks with which
the building is crammed, narrow passages being left between,
affording barely sufficient room for a man to pass. Along
each side, and at the west end is a row of fifty oval casks,
each containing one thousand gallons: adjoining are five others
of still larger proportions, their capacity being about fourteen
hundred gallons each. In addition to these, what may be
termed the mammoths of the establishment —although they will
soon have to hide their diminished heads, as several of two
thousand gallons capacity are in course of construction —there
are hundreds of casks, varying in size from one to five hundred
gallons. All are full of the generous liquid; the atmosphere
has a vinous aroma, and as the visitor sees some of the choicest
vintages sparkling in the glass, even if a son of Bechab, and a
believer in the virtues of cold water as a beverage, he cannot
help being of opinion with lago that wine is a good creature, if


only properly used. Most of the larger casks are made of the
wood known as mountain ash, although some of those that have
been longest in use are constructed of oak, and cost as much as
one shilling per gallon. A plentiful supply of water for cleansing
casks and other purposes is furnished by the galvanized roof of
the building, the water being conveyed to a large cemented tank
outside the cellars The enormous quantity of wine Mr. Fallon
has stored away in the cellars only comprises a portion of his
stock. Underneath Fallon’s Commercial Buildings there are also
cellars stored with wine, and a large supply is kept at the depots,
114 and 126 Collins-street west, Melbourne. Not a drop of wine is
allowed to leave Mr. Fallon’s premises unless it be sound and
fully matured; large as the supply is in the cellars, the wine is
disposed of as fast as it reaches maturity, and during the season
of river navigation, casks after casks may be seen in transit from
the cellars to the steamers, en route for Melbourne and Sydney.
Now that Albury has become the terminus of the Great North-
Eastern line, a cask of wine reaches Melbourne in nine hours—
thus placing this important establishment at once in direct
communication with the world. As regards the vineyards
from which the wine is obtained, the largest in the district
is owned by Mr. J. T. Fallon; it is situated on a conical hill,
about four miles north-west from Albury, and contains an
area of about 640 acres, planted with the choicest varieties
of vines. Albury, and indeed the whole of the valley of the
Murray, has become famous for vine cultivation. Large
numbers, besides Mr. Fallon, have gone extensively into vine cul-
tivation ; many of the farmers have likewise plots of vines
attached to their holdings, and dispose of their “must” to Mr,
Fallon and others.
[Argus, Nov. 21, 1873.)
The festivities in connection with the completion of the
North-Eastern Bail way to Wodonga, so largely indulged in on
Wednesday, were continued to some extent to-day. Wodonga
had a very late night of it. It was only the fortunate few who
had the opportunity of devoting any time to sleep, and numerous
were the contentions between the possessors and the legal
claimants of beds towards the small hours. But a determined
effort was made to show that there were no traces of headache
after the unwonted excitement to which the little town of
Wodonga had been given over, and to-day the main street was
full of bustle and activity. Of the thousands of visitors who
came from Melbourne and the Ovens and Murray districts,-a
large proportion remained until to-day, and most of the strangers
were desirous of spending a short time, though ever so brief, in
the town of Albury, across the border, so as to thoroughly
realise the fact that the newly-completed line actually connects
Victoria with New South Wales, the two miles and a half of
road which intervenes between the terminus and Albury being
scarcely worth mentioning.


His Excellency the Governor and suite are the guests of Mr,
Huon during their stay on the border, and every exertion has
been made to render their visit an enjoyable one. In the
afternoon his Excellency, accompanied by nis host, crossed the
Murray, and were entertained at luncheon by Mr. Day, the
mayor of Albury, some of the residents being also invited. His
Excellency and Lady Bowen, accompanied by the Hon. E,
Langton (Treasurer), and George Day, Esq., J.P., mayor of
Albury, visited Mr. Fallon’s wine cellars and vineyards, and
warmly expressed their admiration of both, tasting several of the
vintages, which they highly approved of.
No one visits Albury without inspecting the vineyards and
the wine cellars of Mr. Fallon, for which it is chiefly famed. The
drive from the town to the vineyards is an exceedingly pretty
one, and the view from the vine-clad hills themselves is charming.
On one side of the horizon is bounded by a grand mountain chain
bathed in a light gauze-like mist of blue, among which may be
distinguished during the greater part of the year the white tops
of the snowy mountains; and on the other the landscape is
agreeably diversified by patches of bright green and sudden
breaks in the forest, where farms and pleasant-looking homesteads
are established. The vineyards occupy a block of 640 acres.
Not only is the soil a rich red clay, well adapted to the purposes
of the vigneron, but the conformation of the land itself is an aid.
The vines are planted on mounds with sloping sides, which absorb
the rains too rapidly to allow of the surface soil being washed
away, as is often the case on flat land. The wine cellars situated
in the town are among the best to be found in Australia. They
contain at present 150,000ga1. of colonial wine, all made by Mr.
Fallon. The kinds are—of white wines: Eeisling, Verdeilho,
Tokay, and Aucarot; and of red: Shiraz, Burgundy, Carbinet,
Hermitage, Malbec, and varieties of Muscatel. These vast liquid
stores are contained in casks of l,ooogal. and 1,300ga1. each.
Mountain ash, got within 90 miles of Albury, is found to answer
admirably. It has been put to severe tests by Mr. Fallon, and
fulfilled amply all the requirements. For next year’s vintage
some 2000 gal. casks are being prepared.
AUSTRALIAN VINES AND WINES.
By J. T. Fallon (Melbourne, Victoria).
The following interesting Thper was read by Mr. Fallon, at
the Ordinary Weekly Meeting of the Society of Arts, London, 3rd
December, 1873. There was a crowded attendance, Sir Daniel
Cooper, Bart., in the Chair: —
In having the honor of appearing before this Society, and
reading a paper “ On Australian Vines and Wines,” it is not
my intention to praise the wines of Australia by asserting their


superiority over those of other countries; but, in plain and
straightforward language, to lay before the members, and through
them the public at large, a short history of the advance made in
the cultivation of the vine in the colonies of Australia, and in
connection therewith the growth of the industry of wine-making.
In taking upon mysslf this task, I trust that no one here
present, or any other who may hereafter peruse this paper, will
think that I have been induced to do so by any selfish motive ;
but, on the contrary, give me credit for having a desire to benefit
the vignerons of Australia; and, by so doing, bring under the
notice of the mother country the importance of this growing
colonial industry. ° °
When I left Melbourne a few months since, I had not the
slightest idea of occupying my present position. M then sole
object and intention was to visit all the vineyards of known
celebrity in the wine-growing districts of the continent, with a
view of personally inspecting the several modes and operations
pursued by the various wine-producers, and comparing their
methods with those already in general use in Australia; that, on
my return, I might introduce and recommend those which I
conceived would be an improvement in the mode of wine-making
m my adopted colony. °
, furtherance of this intention I visited, amongst others, the
vineyards of Johannisberg, Steinberg, Rudesheimer, Berg-Berg
situated in the Rhine district of Germany, the Chateau Lafitte’
the Chateau Margaux, and the Grand La Rose in the Medoc
district of France, besides all the distinguished vineyards in the
Burgundy, Charente, and Champagne districts of that country,
and, subsequently, the Vienna International Exhibition, where,
making the wine collection my especial study, I must say that I
was surprised and extremely regretted to see such a poor display
of Australian wines exhibited. In fact, the whole productions of
the colonies were so miserably represented, that a stranger
looking at the display made by the Australias, could form no
idea of the advancement made in the manufactures of those
colonies, and of the importance of that portion of her Majesty’s
possessions. However, what wines were shown, I found were
highly spoken of, especially some “ Reisling,” exhibited by the
Acclimatisation Society of Victoria. Seeing such high merit
awarded to the colonial wines by such competent judges as those
acting at the Vienna Exhibition, and comparing the recent expe-
riences gained on my continental travels, I formed the opinion
that there are millions of acres throughout the Australasian
colonies which, from their situation as regards climate, aspect,
and soil, are especially adapted for the culture of the grape.
There is far less to be apprehended from bad seasons in Australia
than in Europe; the fruit now obtained is equal to any in the
world, and with experience gained year by year, and greater care
and attention shown to the niceties of the cellar management,
and sufficient time being allowed for the wines to mature before


sending them to market, an article can be produced which will
be in no way behind many of the productions of Europe. In
forming this opinion I am proud to say I am confirmed by pro-
fessional wine-tasters of great eminence, persons far more
competent than myself to form a judgment, who, on tasting the
colonial exhibits of wine, have given it as their opinion that these
wines would bear favorable comparison in every respect with the
wines of a similar description produced on the continent of
Europe.
Finding that the merits of good Australian wine were not
recognised in England, and that a prejudice existed in conse-
quence of certain wines manufactured in the colonies by persons
having little or no experience, and over which no proper care had
been taken, and of an immature age. being introduced into the
English market —I have determined, in the interests of those
Australian wine-producers who have embarked their capital in
this new industry, and who have a reputation to maintain in
producing and introducing a good, sound, mature wine lor
consumption, to come forward, and, in a humble manner, state the
qualifications of Australian wines in England, where their merits
and qualities are so little known and recognised. feel assured
that the matter only wants to be properly ventilated to be
appreciated ; and if this end be attained through any remarks of
mine, I shall be amply repaid, and shall in after life feel proud of
the position accorded me this evening in being privileged to come
forward in the interest of the wines of Australia.
Having thus introduced myself and my subject to your notice,
and given my reason for undertaking the task, I shall proceed to
give a brief sketch of the introduction of the vine, and the rise,
advance, and progress of wine-making in Australia. Prefacing
my remarks with the statement that, on account of the great
distance from my adopted home and the limited time of my visit
m England, I have relied entirely on my own resources, and such
official statistics as could be furnished me through the courtesy
of Sir Charles Cowper.the Agent-General of New South Wales ;
the Hon. Archibald Michie, the Agent-General of Victoria; and
the Hon. Francis Dutton, Agent-General for South Australia, to
whom I now take the opportunity of returning my thanks.
To the late Sir William M‘Arthur must, I believe, be accorded
the credit, praise, and thanks of Australians, for first introducing
the vine into that continent. This gentleman, an early settler
in New South Wales, was one of its early benefactors, and spent
large sums of money in introducing many sources of its present
valuable exports. Perceiving that the climate and soil of New
South Wales were peculiarly adapted for the growth of the vine,
he ordered, through his manager, the late Mr. Bushby, a large
selection of the best kinds of plants from the district of the
Rhine. . T
During my late travels in the wine districts of that country, i
learnt from Messrs. Deinhardt, Jordon, and Co., of Coblentz,


that the first parcels of vines was ordered by Sir William
M‘Arthur from their now celebrated firms. These plants, on
their arrival in New South Wales, about the year 1840, were
planted on Sir William M‘Arthur’s Camden Park estate, situate
about forty miles from Sydney. This importation was from time
to time supplemented by various other selections from Europe.
In the course ot time, the first parcel of wine in Australia was
manufactured from grapes grown on the same estate. Prom
that time to the present period Sir Wilham McArthur has
obtained for himself a name in the Australian colonies for the
“ Camden wines.”
The next step was the establishment of vineyards in the
Hunter Eiver District, in the northern division of the colony of
New South Wales, by the late Mr. Wyndham, Dr. Lyndeman,
Messrs. Doyle and Carmichel, all of whom have now large and
extensive vineyards, and are celebrated for their produce. From
the success attending the efforts of the late Mr. Wyndham on
the Hunter Eiver, that gentleman planted and laid down in vines
a fine piece of land, then occupied by him on the MTntyre
Eiver, and established his name for the “ Bakullah wine.” This
wine, both red and white, is well known, and justly renowned
for its excellences.
While the vine was gradually spreading in the north, Mr. John
Smith, an old colonist of Kyamba, also in New South Wales,
seeing that the land of his district was equally suitable for the
culture of the grape, obtained from Sir William M‘Arthur a
small quantity of vines, and planted them on his estate. In
consequence of the success attending the experiment, Mr. Smith
obtained vines direct from Europe, and to him must be accorded
the praise of first introducing German vignerons into the
southern district of New South Wales. At the period of their
arrival in Sydney, travelling into the interior of the colony was
difficult, dangerous, and expensive. Notwithstanding these
obstacles, Mr. Smith determined to brave the difficulties of road
and flood. He started with the Germans from Sydney, over
unformed _ roads, crossing rivers without bridges, and after
encountering all the difficulties of a colonial journey, arrived at
his destination; the time occupied being as long as that now
taken by the postal communication of the colony with England.
When these Germans had completed and served the time
agreed on with Mr. Smith, they proceeded to Albury, a township
situate on the north bank of the Murray Eiver. Finding the
soil and climate well adapted for the growth of the vine, they
made arrangements with the Messrs. Crisp to take a portion of
their freehold land, ten acres in extent, on’an improving lease.
This piece of land they planted with vines in 1851.
These Germans, Messrs. Schubach, Fraunfelder, and Eau, may
justly be called the pioneers of the vine in the valley of the
Murray. This district is considered the garden of the vine, and
the river may be called the Ehine of Australia. When the first


operations were commenced, they had a kind of celebration at
the planting of the first vine in Albury, Fraunfelder produced
a bottle of sherry, and, after partially covering the cutting with
earth, poured a portion of the contents of the bottle upon it; and
on drinking success to the future of the undertaking, made an
effective speech in his native language, wishing good fortune and
prosperity to the extension of the vine on the Murray, which, he
said, so much reminded him of his beloved Rhine and Fatherland.
After enduring and struggling against poverty for two years, the
efforts of these three enterprising men were rewarded by an
abundant crop in the third year. At this period great excite-
ment, arising from the discovery of gold, prevailed, and they were
in consequence enabled to realise high prices for their produce,
and not only surrounded themselves with the comforts of life, but
also laid by money before the termination of their lease with the
Messrs. Crisp. With this money they purchased the sites of
their present well-known vineyards in New South Wales, at
Albury, and erected suitable buildings and appliances for wine
making
I may mention that the plant, the subject of the vinous
baptism before mentioned, was taken up by the late Mr. Fraun-
felder, at the termination of his agreement with Messrs. Crisp,
and is still to be seen hung up under the verandah of his cottage,
where it is kept as an heirloom by his family and a memorial of
the first vine planted in the valley of the Murray.
The success attending the labours of those esteemed and well-
respected colonists induced them to send home to Germany for
their friends and relatives, and on their arrival in Australia they
applied themselves to the culture of the vine on the hills and
slopes bordering on the neighborhood of the Murray river. In a
few years a great change was wrought by their industry ; the wild
bush was cleared and converted into blooming vineyards, orchards,
and gardens. A large influx of German population followed,
their friends settling down about the locality originally fixed upon
by the pioneers.
While the Germans were thus turning their attention to vine
culture, the English settlers were not far behind in taking advan-
tage of this valuable industry. Seeing the advantages derived
from the labors of his German neighbours, Mr. John Mildred
Sanger, an enterprising colonist, put his energies to work, and
planted a vineyard at Corowa, about forty miles below Albury,
on the banks of the Murray.
Then, in about 1858, followed the formation of the well-known
“ Murray Valley Vineyard Company,” an association formed
under the provisions of the Joint Stock Companies Act of the
colony. This company obtained the privilege from the then
Government of selecfing a section of land, 640 acres in extent,
that being the fullest quantity then allowed, and purchased it at
the upset price of £1 per acre. Availing themselves of this
great advantage, the association selected the best position for the


company’s operations within four miles of Albury, and com-
menced work on a large scale, the acreage now in bearing being
about 150 acres. The wine produced from this vineyard is second
to none in the colonial market. That vineyard has since passed,
by purchase, into my possession, and is now worked by myself.
While this company was carrying on operations, Messrs. S. A.
Meyer, lord, Whitehead, and Brown Brothers, of Corowa,
planted large vineyards, as also did Messrs. Eeid and Burrow
Brothers, of Moorwatha, situated about twenty miles below
Albury, on the Murray River. The outlay expended by these
gentlemen has given them profitable returns, and the wines pro-
duced have proved of very superior quality. Many others fol-
lowed their example, and the industry, not known in this portion
of the colony eighteen years ago, now extends a distance of 150
miles along the banks of the Murray River, yielding abundant
crops, and producing various wines now celebrated as “ Murray
wines.”
While the cultivation of the vine was thus rapidly spreading in
the colony of New South Wales, cuttings taken from the original
stock imported by Sir William M‘Arthur, and planted on his
Camden estate, were, at a very early date, introduced into the
Port Phillip district, now familiarly known as the colony of Vic-
toria. These cuttings were, I believe first planted in the Geelong
district, and from the adaptability of the soil and climate of that
locality for the cultivation of the grape, the experiment was
practically tested, and ultimately success crowned the undertaking
and the vine was established. Another portion of the plants was
obtained direct from the wine districts of Spain, Portugal, and
Prance by enterprising settlers in South Australia, Prom these
importations several vineyards were formed in Victoria, by cut-
tings being obtained from that colony. It has been stated that
some of the vineyards on the Barrabool Hills, near Geelong, were
originally planted with cuttings brought direct from Germany
and Switzerland by immigrants from those countries ; but how
far this is correct, and to what extent the produce of such vines
has spread, it would be impossible for me to say. The multiplicity
of names given in different countries, and in some instances in
the same country to a particular kind of vine, renders it difficult
to trace it back to the original introducers. But though the fact
had been proved beyond doubt, that the vine would grow with
the greatest luxuriance in Victoria, yet the efforts to produce
good wine were not very successful a,t the time of its early intro* 1
duction. The Hon. Dr. Hope, of Geelong, as early as the yea"
1851, had fair vineyards in full bearing, and producing a drink r
able wine. *
With the change in colonial society in the year 1852, consequent
on the discovery of gold in the colonies, and the rapid influx of
population attendant thereon, the colonial wine industry wa
nearly destroyed. The enormous prices obtainable for fruit o
all kinds, the comparative cheapness and abundance of importe


•wines, as compared with the demand, and the great scarcity and
high price of labor, rendered it folly to think of converting
grapes into wine, In consequence of these drawbacks, for seve-
ral years little progress was made in forming vineyards, as shown
by the fact that in the year 1856 the Victorian vineyards only
comprised 276 acres, from which 11,000 gallons of wine were
manufactured.
About the year 1858-9, an attempt was made by the late
Mr. Ealph Hutchinson, at that time the Sydney agent for
Sir William M‘Arthur’s “ Camden wine,” to sell a few small
parcels in the Melbourne markets, so as to form the nucleus of a
trade ; but he could hardly get them off his hands, even at a
sacrifice. Notwithstanding this failure, another gentleman ap-
peared in the field, in the person of Mr. Blake, wed known as the
first successful introducer of the New South Wales wines into
the Melbourne market. By perseverance and assiduity that
gentleman succeeded in gradually overcoming the prejudices of
the popular taste, and establishing the well-known brands of
“ Camden Park,” “ Irrewang,” and “Kaludah.” The superiority
of quality and flavor of these wines created a good demand, and
a trade was established. The supply at the time being small,
Mr.. Blake found it impossible to obtain samples of sufficient age
for his purpose.
To the endeavors of this gentleman the vignerons of Victoria
owe no small debt of gratitude. Profiting by the success atten-
ding his attempts, and by the experience of former years, and
recognising more fully the great importance the production of the
vine had already gained in the neighboring colonies, there was a
marked increase of land planted with vines. In the year 1861
there were already 1,188 acres laid down, which, in 1865, fire
years later, had increased nearly fourfold, that is to say, to 4,078
acres, on which 8,199,618 vines had been planted, producing
176,959 gallons of wine and 795 gallons of brandy, as well as
18,063 ewt. of grapes sold for table purposes.
Although the district of Q-eelong may claim to have been the
first to introduce the vine on the south side of the dividing range,
there are other localities where the extension of its cultivation
has been carried on to a far greater extent. The principal one is
Tering, near the township of Lillydale, about forty miles from
Melbourne.
Many fine vineyards are established here. Amongst the prin-
cipal are those of Messrs, Hubert and Paul He Castella, and
Messrs. De Pury and Langdon. The two former have vineyards
of upwards of 100 acres each in extent, all in full bearing, with
first-class cellars and appliances for wine making. The latter
have about sixty acres of vineyard, with the requisite conve-
niences for wine making. These estates produce a first-rate
quality of light wines, which are celebrated for their pleasant
flavor and fine bouquet.
There is in the Sunbury district the vineyard of the Hon. J. Or.


Francis. This vineyard clearly shows care bestowed in the culti-
vation of the vine, and the cellars give evidence of the skill pos-
sessed by the manager in maturing and bringing his wines into a
marketable condition.
From Biddell’s Creek, I have also tasted some fine samples
taken from the estate of Messrs. Knight Brothers.
In the year 18G2 the vine was introduced into the Sandhurst
district, a locality situate on the north side of the dividing range,
thoroughly protected from the chilling blast of the south wind,
and having its natural sun-heat much increased by radiation
from the broad, treeless plains stretching to the banks of the
Murray. This district is one of the largest and best adapted for
the production of generous wine. It enjoys immunity from all
danger of a fall of rain during the vintage season, and conse-
quently the fruit is ripened to perfection, and fermented at an
even temperature. In fact, the climate of Sandhurst differs
widely from any south of the dividing range in most of those
characteristics which distinguish one climate from another. It is
hot and dry, but not too dry for the vine, resembling, in a great
measure, the climate of the Upper Murray ; and consequently
the wines produced are entirely of a different character to those
made in the southern side of the dividing range, and are similar
in quality, in many respects, to the wines of the Murrray
Eiver.
Though mentioned last, the best, and by far the most important
wine-producing locality of Victoria is the Murray and Ovens
district. Here large tracts of country have been converted into
vineyards, for which the soil and climate have been proved to be
well adapted. In those localities every farmer cultivates his
vineyard.
The growers who first introduced the vine into this part of
Victoria were Messrs. Lindsay Brown, whose estate is situated on
the banks of the Murray Eiver, the late Eev. J. Docker, of Bon-
therambo, on the Ovens Eiver, Mr. Curtis Eeid, of Eeidsdale, on
the same river, and Mr. Piper, of Benalla.
Another enterprise is the Barnawatha vineyard, at present the
property of Mr. Philip George Gherig. This undertaking was
originally planted by a joint-stock company under the title of
“The Barnawatha Vineyard Company,” It is situate on the
banks of the Eiver Murray, about fifteen miles from Albury.
Planting was commenced about the year 1859, but, owing to the
high rate of labor, and some mismanagement, the association was
compelled to dispose of its property. The present owner is
working the vineyards profitably, and producing some excellent
wine. The property consists of about fifty acres, and is favor-
ably situated.
Mr. MTlree, of Wodonga, and Dr. Mueller, of Tachandandah,
have also fine vineyards, from which well-known prize wines are
produced. At Brown’s Plains, on the Murray Eiver, twenty-
five miles from Albury, there are a great number of vineyards.


Messrs. Morris and Frazer are the largest growers. The late
Mr. Graham planted a large area of land with vines, which is now
cultivated by his family. Excellent wines are also produced by
several others in this locality. From the nature of the soil and
climate of this part of the colony, situate, as it is, on the banks
of the Murray River, the grapes arrive at great perfection and
produce large returns. During and before the vintage there is
little or no rain. The result is that the fruit arrives at a higher
state of perfection, and a far higher amount of saccharine matter
is obtained than in almost any other part of the colony. This
produces the result that a fuller-bodied and more generous wine
is made, which, from its natural strength, will bear transporting
to any part of the world—a feature, it is needless to say, of
special value.
The few names I have here introduced can give no idea as to
the number of persons immediately interested in this important
product ; but when I say that for one hundred miles along the
banks of the River Murray are to be found thriving vineyards, it
may convey some little idea of the extent to which the industry
has grown, and yet it is only in its infancy, for there are hundreds
of thousands of acres, all adapted for vine culture, waiting the
skill and industry of the vigneron to develop their resources.
In referring to the vine culture in the colony of South Aus-
tralia, I regret extremely that it is not in my power to give a very
distinct history of the rise and progress of this industry in that
colony. Unfortunately, my travels and experiences have been
chiefly confined to the colonies of New South Wales and Victoria,
so that I have no resources within my own knowledge to fall back
upon, and the shortness of time at my disposal has prevented me
from having proper opportunity for reading up the subject.
That this part of my paper is short and meagre, is entirely at-
tributable to my want of knowledge. I therefore trust that the
colonists of South Australia, interested in vine culture, will give
me credit for this, and not think it is done with any intention to
slight or misrepresent their interests, or to exclude their colony
from the leading position it deserves to take in reference to wine
making. It is to South Australia I must give the palm of doing
more than any other of the Australian colonies in the advance of
this industry.
In referring to the first introduction of the vine, I believe I am
correct in saying that South Australia was originally indebted to
the efforts of the late Sir William M‘Arthur. After his experi-
ment had been fully tested in New South Wales,the early settlers
of South Australia became fully alive to the great advantage to be
derived from vine culture ; and, seeing a great future return for
their outlay, embarked largely in the undertaking. They ordered
selections of plants from the wine countries of Germany, Spain,
Portugal, France, and Switzerland, at the same time importing
foreign labor from those countries to superintend and manage
the industry. Among the first who took advantage of this were


Dr. Kelly, who subsequently wrote several interesting and useful
•works upon the management, culture, and treatment of vines j
Mr. P. Auld, of Auldina; Mr. E. J. Peak, of Clarendon; Mr.
David Randall, of Glen Para and Eandallsen ; Messrs. E. and J.
Scott, and Mr. D. Fisher.
Such has been the rapid growth of this industry that vineyards
are now thickly planted around and within a radius of fifty miles
of Adelaide; also on the Barossa range, and in many other parts
of the colony.
The wines produced in South Australia are of much promise.
They show, in many cases, great care and attention in their pre-
paration, and are pure and good. Their variety is striking, and
their range of spirit strength surprising. Their keeping powers
are excellent, but more time should be allowed for the wine to
mature. In character some of the wines of this colony closely
resemble the Ehenish wines, while others approximate more to
the finer descriptions of white Portugal wines and the red wines
of the Ehone. A few present more distinctive features, attribut-
able, no doubt, to the peculiarities of soil and climate. Wherever
these wines are exhibited, they have obtained many first class
medals, and are generally highly and favorably spoken of by com-
petent judges.
It must be borne in mind that although the colonies possess
every variety of climate and soil obtainable in any of the wine-
producing countries, yet they have not been fully prospected as
to their capacities for yielding wines. The vines best suited to
each locality are yet by no means clearly ascertained, and the
system of making wine ipust for some time longer be experimen-
tal rather than fixed. I will now proceed, in a few words, to
point out the advantages of the vine culture in Australia.
I believe that wine will become one of the staple commercial
exports of Australia. This, of course, will be wholly a matter of
time, and it is entirely in the hands of the wine-growers of Aus-
tralia when that time shall arrive. It only requires proper care,
and attention in the selection of plants suitable for the adapta-
bilities of the soil, in keeping the various grapes separate and
distinct in the preparation of must, and allowing proper time for
the maturing of the wine to elapse before bringing it into the
market, to make Australian wines successfully compete with those
of European countries.
Many of the mistakes of the early vignerons have been lately
avoided, and a vast improvement made in the character and flavor
of the wines, so much so, that their productions now command a
ready sale in the colonial market. To such an extent has the
demand increased that the colonial article has now a. prominent
place, and is consumed to a far greater extent than the ordinary
imported wine. It is now a common practice to introduce the
colonial wine bottle instead of the stereotyped port or sherry.
No dinner table in the colonies is complete without there being
two or three different kinds of native wines represented, and these


are generally preferred by the guests. The consumption of co-
lonial wine increases year by year, and in consequence its produc-
tion has become a very profitable branch of business.
The extension of the cultivation of the vine and wine-making
will doubtless have a most salutary effect on the prosperity of the
colonies generally. By acting as a check upon the use of ardent
spirits, the use of wine produces a good effect upon the morality
of the people, particularly in the rising generation. Before the
introduction of Australian wines, the bulk of the people in the
colonies, especially the working classes, drank nothing but strong
rum or brandy, &c., of inferior quality. I need not here state
the demoralising effect the unrestricted consumption of these
liquids produced. But since the introduction of wine, manufac-
tured from the pure juice of the grape, a very sensible change for
the better has taken place in the drinking habits of the people.
The laboring classes now prefer colonial wine, which can be ob-
tained by them at colonial wine-shops in Melbourne, at the cheap
rate of two-pence per glass, instead of bad brandy and worse
“ square gin.” Not only can this be said of spirits, but also of
the stronger fortified wines imported from the continent of
Europe, as will be seen from the following statement taken from
the Melbourne Argus of the 13th of February of the present
year i —
“ The decrease in the import to Yictoria of wines from £213,852 in 1862 to
£64,776 in 1867, is clearly to be traced to the manufacture of wines in the
colony, forced upon us by the extension of our vineyards and by the drinking
habits of our people. Our imports of wine in 1871 were 188,150 gallons, as
against 629,219 gallons of colonial manufacture, which increased to 713,582
gallons in 1872.” ,
These figures, which only relate to the Victorian colony, must be
highly gratifying to the producer.
Among the varieties of grapes to which I have devoted more
than ordinary study in the colonies producing white wines, are
the Eeislmg, the Yerdeilho, the Aucarot, Pedro Ximenes, Chasse-
las, and Brown Muscat.
The Eeisling, in my opinion, is one of the most desirable grapes
to cultivate. Although not a large bearer, the vine is hardy ; the
fruit being in small conical bunches, is far less liable to danger
from wet before vintage than other kinds. The wine produced
from this grape is not to be surpassed in quality by any other
white wine manufactured in the colonies.
Yerdeilho or Madeira produces a generous, rich wine, of fine
bouquet; like the Eeisling, it is a shy bearer, and easily affected
by cold winds during the blossoming season.
The Aucarot grape makes a wine equal to any of the colonial
white wines; but, like the Yerdeilho, it is tender and delicate
while in flower, and a full crop cannot always be relied on.
The Chasselas is a hardy plant, and generally bears a large
crop, and from it pure, light wine of a delicate flavor is made,
which is much liked as a dinner wine.


The Pedro Ximenes is a large bearer ; a good yield may in-
Tariably be relied on, as the vine is hardy, and produces a strong
wine of good keeping qualities, but rather coarse in flavor, not
unlike sherry.
Among the red varieties, I prefer the Shiraz, jMaibec, Carol-
net, Burgundy, andEousillon.
The Shiraz is a hardy vine, a moderate bearer, yielding a fair
crop, and makes a fine strong wine of good quality and flavor ; in
the colony it is highly recommended by the medical faculty for
invalids and persons requiring a strengthening beverage.
The Malbec and Carbinet are both hardy varieties. The plants
yield a larger crop than the Shiraz, and produce wine of excellent
flavor and bouquet. It is also greatly used for hospital purposes,
and recommended as the best wine that can be taken by persons
of a weak constitution.
The Burgundy is a small producer, but an excellent wine is
made from the grape; the bunches are small and conical, like the
Eeisling; a fair average crop may be relied on.
The Rousillon is a prolific bearer, a hardy vine, not subject to
blight, producing a wine of light quality, but of good flavor, and
considered a most agreeable dinner wine.
Another popular and deserving wine is Brown Muscat, a large
bearer, and producing a rich and luxurious wine.
One most special feature in connection with all these wines
deserves the attention of European buyers. The wines can all be
produced in any required quantity, as the demand springs up in
England, and at such prices as to place them within the reach of
all. It should be remembered that only a few years ago the pub-
lic taste in Australia was as much averse to Australian wines as
is that of the majority of the British public of the present day.
Better acquaintance with the wines, however, dispersed the
unfounded prejudice in Australia, and I hope to see in England a
similar degree of appreciation grow up for these magnificent
beverages. ' , .
It is much to be regretted that so little is known ot our Aus*
tralian wines in England. This is due to the taste of the public,
who have been accustomed, not only to wines imported from the
Continent, but also to the strong-brandied and fortified wines of
Spain and Portugal, or spurious articles manufactured to please
the public taste. There can be little doubt that the wines in
general consumption in England, to a very great extent, are of
the latter class. If our Australian wines were better known and
more generally used, the taste would become educated the
something new in flavor in our colonial wines, not to be found in
adulterated wines, which causes them to be condemned, would be
a high recommendation, and in time would be liked and highly
appreciated. The pure wines obtainable from Australia would
take a permanent position among the beverages consumed in this
country, and conduce much to the health and enjoyment of the
public. Many of them will be found to possess the requisite


qualities of strength, flavor, and excellence, to make them in every
respect adapted for consumption in this country. I feel confident
that the wine manufactured in most of the large cellars in Aus-
tralia at the present time, over which great skill and care are
exercised to produce a good article, will bear favorable comparison
with that of European manufacture now in general consumption,
and may be obtained at a reasonable rate if a regular market could
be found. Some samples of Australian wine which have hitherto
been sent to England have been imperfectly made, and can give
but a very inadequate idea of the wine now produced.
I am of opinion that many of the judges who are called upon
to pronounce upon the merits of Australian wines find a some-
thing new they had not before discovered in the wines of other
countries, and this leads them to form an adverse judgment.
Upon further acquaintance they would arrive at a different de-
cision. As a matter of fact the wines of every country have-
something in flavor peculiar to themselves.
It is owing, I believe, to the great demand from high sources
for continental wines, and the enormous prices which they com-
mand, that scarcely a single bottle of it is ever allowed to come
within the reach of the general consumer, as the quantity of wine
sold in one year as the produce of these vineyards would far ex-
ceed what they could produce in ten years. The natural conclu-
sion, therefore, must be that an imitation, in every way inferior,
is daily made to supply its place; A little reflection will show
consumers that it would be quite a matter of impossibility to sup-
ply the demand, from the small quantities produced in the cellars
of these celebrated vignerons, and in consequence another wine
is substituted. In making this statement Ido not mean to in-
sinuate that the substitute is a bad article, for it may possess fine
qualities: but I maintain it cannot be the article it is represented
to be, and if known in its true name would not be of the same
value. This being so, lam clearly of opinion that an article in
the shape of a pure unadulterated wine can be supplied from the
Australian Colonies, not only equal, but superior to the wines
now in general consumption imported into this country from the
continent of Europe.
Having, to the best of my ability, given a short historical
summary of the rise and progress of this infant industry, I will
endeavor to show the rapid strides taken in its advancement.
These returns are taken from such Government papers as I can
find so far away from home, and are taken up to the 31st day of
March in each year referred to, I place those of South Australia
first, as that colony is the largest producer.
The year 1850 shows that 282 acres were under cultivation,
1854 shows 408 acres, 1858 shows 1,055 acres, 1860 shows 3,180
acres, on which 1,874,751 vines were bearing, and 1,948,510
unbearing, and from which 182,087 gallons of wine were produced,
and 23,398 cwts. of grapes sold. In 1861 the planting of the
vine progressed vigorously in that colony.


The year 1864-5 shows 6,364 acres under cultivation, on which
6,586,009 vines which were bearing, and 2,831,971 unbearing, and
from which 798,647 gallons of wine were produced, and 30,627
cwts. of grapes sold for table use.
In this year one-tenth more land had been planted. Nine
years ago only 753 acres of land were cultivated with vines.
During the then past five years the area had been doubled. Tip
to the last season the proportion of bearing vines to those not
productive was nearly equal.
The year 1871 shows 6,131 acres under cultivation, on which
5,783,674 vines were bearing, and 385,084 unbearing, and from
which 801,694 gallons of wine were produced, and 85,847 cwt. of
grapes sold.
The acreage given represents well-established vineyards. The
quantity of wine made shows 801,694 gallons, as compared with
182,007 gallons in 1860.
Next in order come the statistics of Victoria:—The year 1855
shows 274 acres under cultivation, producing only 11,000 gallons
of wine.
The year 1855 shows 4,078 acres under cultivation, on which
8,199,618 vines were planted, from which 176,959 gallons of wine
were produced, and 18,063 cwts. of grapes sold.
The year 1872 shows 5,523 acres under cultivation, on which
were planted 9,671,292 vines, producing 713,609 gallons of wine,
and 30,896 cwts. of grapes sold.
During sixteen years the acreage increased 5,344 acres, and the
quantity of wine increased 702,609 gallons.
The next in order are the New South Wales statistics:—
The year 1863 shows 1,459 acres under cultivation, producing
144,888 gallons of wine, and 420 tons of grapes sold.
The year 1867 shows 2,281 acres under cultivation, producing
242,183 gallons of wine, and 668 tons of grapes sold.
The year 1872 shows 4,152 acres under cultivation, producing
413,321 galldfis of wine, and 508 tons of grapes sold Besides
this quantity, there were 607 acres of vines unproductive.
In the above statement is included a portion of the Murray
district, in which there is at Albany, 614 acres producing 140,638
gallons of wine, and 10| tons of grapes sold, besides 363 acres of
vines unproductive.
During the nine years shown, the acreage increased 2,673 acres,
and the quantity of wine increased to 268,433 gallons.
On comparison of the various figures, it will be found that the
colonies of South Australia and Victoria far outstrip the older
colony of New South Wales. It is also shown that the colony of
South Australia stands first and foremost as the fosterer of the
vine and wine-making.
Taking the various returns for the year 1872 of the several
colonies, it will be seen that South Australia has 1,372 acres in
excess of New South Wales, and produced 388,373 gallons more
of wine. Likewise, it has 608 acres in excess of Victoria, and


produced 88,055 gallons more wine; while Victoria exceeds New
South Wales by 764 acres, and 299,288 gallons of wine.
The importation of wine into Great Britain has been regulated
as much by the duties as by the taste of the consumer, and this goes
to prove the great disadvantage in which the Australian producer
is placed, as compared with those of France, Germany, and Hun-
gary. Australian wines, as a rule, range above the maximum
strength fixed by the Customs’ tariff, by from one-half to three
per cent., and, therefore, have to pay 2s. 6d. per gallon duty,
whereas Continental wines generally range under 26 per cent.,
and, therefore, come within the lower range of duty, and are
admitted at Is. per gallon. The effect of this difference in duty
is to exclude almost entirely the Australian produce from the
English market. It appears to me that the Australian vignerons,
as I will endeavor to show, have a right to ask the Government
of this country for a change of tariff, whereby their wines may
be admitted at such a rate of duty that they may compete with
Continental wines on an equal footing, or, at all events, on such
a scale as will allow of a pro rata advance upon the extra
strength.
I have looked through the statistics of the Board of Trade of
England for the last ten years, and I cannot find, amongst all the
dependencies of the British Crown (British India excepted) any
trade that approaches in extent to that of Australia. It may
be interesting here to show what rank the Australian colonies
take amongst the British possessions in their trade with the
mother country. To prove this I will take leave to quote the
following figures from the statistical abstract for 1871:
Imports into Great Britain in 1870
British India £25,090,163
Australia 14,075,264
North American Colonies 8,515,364
West India Islands and Guiana,.. 5,949,199
Ceylon 3,450,974
Cape of Good Hope 2,873,910
The Straits Settlements 2,547,320
All other possessions 2,330,219
Total £64,832,413
The total value of imports from British possessions, in the year
1871, is set down at £73,267,156, but the value of the exports
had not been ascertained.
Exports from Great Britain in the year 1870 :
British India £20,093,749
Australia 10,735,481
North American Colonies 7,548,427
West India Islands and Guiana... 3,639,011
Hong Kong 3,570,733
The Straits Settlements 2,407,577


Malta
All other possessions
1,156,982
4,240,995
Total
55,391,332
It will be seen from the above figures that the imports from
Australia were 22 per cent, of the whole, and the exports of
Australia 19 per cent, of the whole. You will, perhaps, excuse
this digression, but it occurred to me that the information might
be interesting to many who have never realised the important
commercial position her Majesty’s Australian possessions occupy,
second only to British India, with its teeming millions of inhabi-
tants, and far in advance of the North American Colonies, with
a population three times that of Australia.
The people of the Australian colonies are either originally
inhabitants of this country or their descendants, with purely
British feelings. Large sums are expended annually by the
several Australian colonies for the introduction of the surplus
labor of Great Britain, thereby opening up new fields for those
of her Majesty’s subjects who choose to avail themselves of the
opportunity. Our public institutions, our educational establish-
ments, and our commerce, are all founded on the institutions of
Great Britain; our laws are based on those of this country, and
passed subject to the approval of the Home Government. In
fact, we are as entirely British subjects as the residents of the
counties of Middlesex, Surrey, or Kent; and, as such, have a
right to great consideration at the hands of the Government.
Further, on account of the commercial relations between the
Australian colonies and the mother country, in my opiniou these
matters should be taken into consideration, and every encourage-
ment afforded to the extension of the growth of this new and
important industry. If this were acceded to, it would only be
reciprocating the feeling and desire of the colonists generally
towards the mother country, as will be seen from the fact that
Australia has sent, since the year 1851, not only large quantities
of gold and other minerals, but also supplied wool, tallow, and
other important productions, and in return taken as payment
goods manufactured in England, thereby supporting and encou-
raging the working manufactures of this country.
DISCUSSION.
Mr. P. L. SiMMONns said this subject had come considerably
under his notice during the charge he had had of colonial products
at various exhibitions, and was one both of colonial and imperial
importance. It was pretty well known, although not in detail, to
the public at large, that Australia was a country flowing with
corn, wine, and oil, and produced the finest wheat in the world,
and its wines had received high commendation at every exhibition.
At Paris he had put them to very severe tests in competition
with the products of other large wine-producing districts, and


they carried off many medals, which must have been very satis-
factory to the colonists, especially as they had to contend against
many difficulties, the wines not being really in first-class condition.
Notwithstanding that, the red wine of Wyndham had carried off
the silver medal. Again, four bronze medals were given to South
Australia, and four to New South Wales, and the wines of the
Chairman had also received favorable notice. Besides this official
recognition, he himself gave a dinner at which these wines alone
were used; and although the wines were not in good condition,
having been exposed for many months to the sun, still they
universally obtained a high opinion, and the Academie Nationale
awarded a silver medal on their recommendation. He had already
had them at Dublin, London, and other exhibitions, and there the
same character was given to them. He had not been officially
connected with the Vienna Exhibition, and therefore could not
speak so positively with respect to it, but he believed that there
they were not quite so successful. He had with him a very favor-
able report of Dr. Bleasdale, on the Colonial Exhibition at
Melbourne, which he would recommend to the perusal of those
who had not yet seen it. It was interesting to know that great
and rapid progress had been made in these colonies, and it
appeared that the greater part of the continent of Australia was
well suited for the culture of the vine. In Queensland some
300 acres were now under cultivation, and South and Western
Australia were also making rapid strides. What had been done,
therefore, might be looked upon as an augury of still greater
success in the future ; and now that the gold mania, which had
given a check to the culture for some time, had ceased, and that
the character of the wines had been elevated and maintained, the
only requisite being that an export trade should be obtained and
encouraged, he thought there was no doubt as to the future
prospect of the industry
Mr. D. Tallbrmak said he could corroborate what had been
mentioned by the last speaker, and having recently visited
Vienna, he was able to say that the Australian wines there took
a larger percentage of prizes in proportion to the number of
exhibits than any other, and that notwithstanding the great
amount of deterioration done to the wine by travel and being
exposed for months to a climate to which they were not accus-
tomed. So high was their character, in fact, that one of the
jurors in the French department asserted most distinctly that
they were French wines, which had been taken out to Australia
and brought back again. It was very gratifying to find that
after the efforts made by the Society many years ago, although
the prize they then offered for importation of wine from Australia
had not been taken, still something was now being done in this
Avay, and no doubt the efforts then made had stimulated the
efforts of the colonists to rhis subject. He hoped the Council
would still devote their attention to the development of this
trade, especially considering that the difficulties attending the


production and the introduction of wine were far greater than
in the case of any other subject. There were difficulties in the
selection of the soil, the kind of grape, the mode of planting, of
making the wine, of treatment, and of transport; and the success
already obtained he thought spoke very highly for the enterprise
of the colonists, who, although knowing little or nothing of the
trade at first, had succeeded so well. If some means were now
taken for collecting the best technical information from the con-
tinent of Europe, and transmitting it, he thought very good re-
sults would be obtained. With regard to the Customs tariff,
that was hardly a subject with which the society could deal, but
it would be taken up independently, and no doubt if they could
assist in any way they would do so.
Mr. Edward Wilson said there were one or two points on
which he had the misfortune to differ from Mr. Eallon. In the
first place he thought he was not quite right as to the time when
the vine was introduced, because he recollected the vineyard
planted on the Murray by Mr. Ogilvie, which was in a good
fruity condition in 1842, so that it must have been planted before
1840. There was another point which was of considerable im-
portance. He had himself grown the vine on a small scale, and
knew something about it, and he had always felt that the time
must come at which wine would become a very large product, and
eventually one of exportation. In some of the dry seasons, when
the hot wind blew so that even indigenous trees showed signs of
drooping under its influence, he had seen the vine holding out its
leaves to the heat, and really appearing to enjoy it. Whenever
you saw a plant accept so readily as that the site into which it
was introduced, you might be pretty sure that plant meant busi-
ness. Now they had seen what had been done with the vine by
the French, by the Germans, and other nations, but hitherto they
had not seen what could be done with it by the Anglo-Saxons;
but remembering what had been done by this race with all natural
products with which they had an opportunity of dealing —what
they had done with the short-horn oxen and the Southdown
sheep, it was most interesting to look forward, and see what they
would do with the vine. In Australia there was a territory
available for it, extending to hundreds of thousands of miles, of
every conceivable variety of soil, climate, and aspect, everything,
in fact, that could be wished ; and if out of all that, and all those
varieties of vines, they could not produce, not merely a good
drinkable wine, but something really exceptionally excellent, he,
for one, should be very much surprised. His own belief was that
some day something very remarkable would be produced in the
way of wine, perhaps almost accidentally, as had been the case
with Johannisberg, and some of the other great vineyards of the
continent. With regard, however, to the strength of the wine,
and the duty which it ought to pay, he could not quite agree
with the statements in the paper, though no doubt Mr. Eallon
had taken great care in the preparation of his facts. A short


38 Australian
time ago an exhibition was held in Melbourne, at which a very
large collection of colonial wines was shown, and he had seen a
statement issuing from the Government Board of Agriculture, in
which it was reported that out of 300 samples exhibited on that
occasion only four were above the strength which would enable
them to come to England at the Is. duty. He considered it very
important that wine should be produced wholesome, drinkable,
and not too strong. He had been in the habit for a long time ot
drinking this colonial wine, and he never paid more than a Is.
duty upon it It would come in that duty up to 26 per cent, of al-
cohol, and he believed that a wine, honestly made, containing that
per-centage, unless it were exposed to some very curious treat-
ment during the voyage, would stand the transit perfectly well,
and would be fit for any one to drink. It had been stated over
and over again in the Times, that even in Spain the natural pro-
duction of sherry only showed a per-centage of 25, 26, or 27 ot
alcohol though it was raised much higher by the addition ol cer-
tain compounds for the purpose of tickling the English palate.
They did not want, however, the Australian wines to be above
that standard, and he thought it would be a great mistake, for the
sake of the four samples he had referred to as being stronger, to
deprive the other 296 of the advantage of coming in at the cheap
rate It would be a great pity if the idea got abroad that there
was any difficulty in their wines coming to England at the
lowered duty, and for his own part he should be very glad to see
the 2s. 6d. duty continued to be imposed upon the more highly
hrandied article. ,
Dr. Thudichtjm had listened with great pleasure to the inte-
resting paper, Mr. Ballon’s name being well known as that ot
the most important producer of Australian wine, and he also was
pleased to add that those wines which bore his name were un-
questionably the best. If, therefore, he felt bound to make some
observations antagonistic to what had been already stated, he
hoped no one would suppose that he did so in anything but the
very best feelings towards Australian producers, because lor many
years he had held those kind of feelings, as he had stated in print
on more than one occasion. As regards the introduction oi the
vine into Australia, Mr Fallon was not quite correct. The gen-
tleman who first introduced the plant was Mr. Busby, who brought
wines from New South Wales before the year 1830. He travelled
a good deal in Europe, and took over 20,000 vine cuttings ; and
inlß3l he again undertook a similar journey, and collected irom
the Botanical Gardens, Montpelier, 437 varieties, and also
another collection from the Jardin de Luxembourg, which were
planted in the Botanical Gardens at Sydney. From these vines
most of those now in Australia had been No doubt
both Sir William and Mr. James M‘Arthur bad taken a great
interest in the cultivation of the vine, and there was little doubt
that the varieties which had been mentioned in the paper were
about the best which could be selected. The Aucarot grape.


however, was an unknown name to him, but probably it was a
well-known variety under another name. The Chasselas gave a
light wine of delicate flavor, and he found from Dr. Bleasdale s
report that he thought, in the future, that it would be the best
wine for Australia. He must say, however, he entertained some
doubt on that point. As to the Pedro Ximenes, it was a very
sweet grape, and the Australians must not expect to get any very
good wine from it. At Xeres it was only grown as a subsidiary
variety for producing those sweet liqueurs which were mixed with
wine for flavoring purposes. The other vines suitable for red
wines, he thought, were well calculated to produce a thoroughly
good article. The Tintella was a grape grown in Dr. Kellys
vineyard, and it was the same grape which prevailed on the
eastern Mediterranean coast of Spain. The selection of grapes
had therefore been made with the greatest scientific care, and it
they were well adapted to the climate they must produce some-
thing good. With all that, they must remember they had still a
great deal to learn in the cultivation. He had gathered what in-
formation he could from those who had visited the districts, and
he had also seen some photographs in the Exhibition, from which
it appeared there were two classes of vineyards in Australia—
one the vineyard of the rich man, splendidly cultivated, and kept
in most excellent trim, in which no doubt a good wine could be
produced, though there might be some doubt as to the price at
which it could be sold. On the other hand, there were vineyards
planted simply for production and sale, and he was sorry to say
that some of them were very badly kept, being full of weeds two
feet high, the grapes being to a great extent hidden by these
weeds, which would destroy some of the best fruit. He should,
therefore, strongly urge the Australians to thoroughly weed the
vineyards, to keep the vines as closely cut to the ground as pos-
sible, and to adopt some of those cheap systems which prevailed
in Spain, where there were no stakes or anything to keep up,
except a short stump from which the branches grew, the grapes
hanging very nearly to the ground. As regards the proposition
that Australian wine was produced from a must which would
yield a larger per-centage of alcohol than twenty-six per cent., he
must enter his polite protest. The musts had been measured by
one of the Australian companies, and the results had been Pub-
lished in the Australian Mercury for May 6th, 1865. from the
density there given, by simple calculations, it was easy to be seen
there was no grape in Australia—as there was none anywhere
else —which, by the ordinary method of vinification, gave wine of
the strength mentioned. That led directly to the question of the
alcoholicity of the wine, and he could confirm what had already
been said, that of the wines exhibited at Melbourne very few only
were above 26, and the great majority were very low indeed,
ranging from 17 to 20 or 24. Very few passed that standard,
and one of 32 was a muscat wine, which had evidently been bran-
died. What was proved, therefore, by the density of the must


was also proved by the analysis of Dr. Bleasdale. He must
differ with some of the statements made as to the results at the
Exhibitions, and particularly of that at Vienna. Statements had
been published in the Times that the Australian wines had taken
the diploma of honor at that exhibition, but he did not find that
statement verified by a reference to the official records. The fact
was, that no single diploma of honor of any kind was given to any
one single wine whatsoever. There were six different classes of
prizes, viz., diplomas of honor, medals of progress, merit, and other
recognitions, and the result as regards Australian wines was that
they came just where any one acquainted with them would have
placed them, about eighth or ninth at the utmost, reckoning
Hungary, Styria, and Austria as one only. But if these countries
were divided into different districts, then the Australians would
come about the 17th, and that was a very honorable position. It
was, above all things, necessary to be accurate in making state-
ments of such a character, and that was the only way to push the
Australian wines properly, because if they were set up as being
the best of all the wines in the world, and were brought to Eng-
land with that character, and people who knew anything about
wines bought them, they would see they had been deceived, and.
the trade would be more damaged by that than anything he could,
conceive of. He had examined, on the part of the society, a great
many of the wines at South Kensington, and had published a re-
port in the Journal. To that report he had added a statement
that the wines were not in good condition, having been left
standing for a long time in the Exhibition upright, and some badly
corked, and therefore many, or all of them, had much deteriorated.
At the same time he had been bound to state what their quality
was at the time of his examination, and in this he had been con-
firmed by a report made at Mayeuce by a committee of gentlemen
whose opinion with regard to white wines was of the very highest
value possible. At the same time, no doubt the wines they
examined had also been exposed to some deteriorating influences.
As to the prices, he must say that some few samples he had pur-
chased bore a very high price ; in fact, at the present prices, he
did not think they could be consumed by the middle classes of
this country. He would therefore say to the Australian pro-
ducers, that they ought to use their best endeavors to make the
wines much cheaper, and to import them under the 26 per cent,
standard, and then there was no doubt England would take hun-
dreds of thousands of pipes of wine every year. As to the duty,
he could not assume that the Australian wines were ever above
26; for though no doubt there was wine imported and advertised
as at the standard of 29 per cent. —wine of Dr. Kelly’s —to which
he was assured no alcohol had been added, still he had insisted,
and must again strongly insist, that if that were the fact, and
if in Australia there were grapes which, by a natural course of
fermentation, produced the wine with 29 per cent of proot spirit,
that ought to be established by a scientific commissioner, and


thoroughly authenticated, because it would simply upset the
whole scientific facts hitherto established throughout the world.
He had no objection to accept the fact when it was proved, but
as yet it had not been so, and when it was remembered that the
British Parliament in 1858 appointed a committee, which inquired
into this subject, and sent its emissaries into all the wine-pro-
ducing countries of the world, the result being that nowhere was
any wine made which naturally had above 26 per cent, of proof
spirit, and very many had not anything like it, he might be ex-
cused for insisting upon strict proof of so extraordinary a state-
ment. If Australians could only produce a good wine, not too
dear, there would be no fear of the British public not drinking it,
and he was happy to add his testimony to that which had been
already said, that nothing was so good for the public health as a
cheap and plentiful supply of good wine, which would no doubt
remove a great deal of those horrible distilled poisons which were
now sold. He had already shown in the Cantor Lectures he
had delivered, that there were cogent reasons why some of the
producers in the south of Spain should be allowed to brandy
their wines up to the extent of 29, or even 32 per cent., in order
to destroy certain diseases in the wine, and therefore he thought
if the duty were kept as at present, Is. up to 26 per cent., Is. 6d.
up to 32, and 2s. 6d. from 32 to 42, every end would be accom-
plished.
Mr. Dutton (Agent-General for South Australia), with re-
gard to the wine duties, said he believed it was about three years
since the subject was brought to the notice of the Chancellor of
the Exchequer by a [deputation. That gentleman then took a
very fair view of the matter, say tug that there was a principle in
the figures of 26, but that there was a principle in the protection
of the spirit duties in England which he was bound to look after,
and he asked for some evidence that 26 was not the right figure.
He understood the deputation promised to furnish the evidence,
but, so far as he could learn, it had not yet been forthcoming;
at any rate the duties remained the same as before. Last year a
conference was held at Sydney, attended by delegates from all the
Australian colonies, and amongst other things, the important
question of the wine trade was brought under discussion, and a
memorial was adopted to the Secretary of State, pointing out that
Australian wines ranged considerably above 26 per cent, of natural
alcoholic strength, and praying that steps might betaken to raise
the standard at which wines would be admitted at Is. a gallon
duty. This memorial he had been asked to support, but he must
say he felt some alarm at the statements he had just heard from
Dr. Thudichum, which seemed to show that it was impossible for
any natural wine to be above the 26 per cent, standard. He
thought, therefore, that one of the first things necessary on the
part of those who were urging the alteration of the duty should
be to collect evidence to lay before the Treasury on the subject;
and he asked all those interested in the wine trade to be so good


as to furnish him with any evidence they had of the Custom-
house tests of alcoholic strength of the wines they imported. It
was no use going to the Treasury without evidence of that kind,
and he must say at present he utterly despaired of producing evi-
dence in support of this memorial that the limit for alcoholic
strength of Australian wines should be raised as high as 35 per
cent.
Mr. Michie said Mr. Fallon had been altogether silent on the
important point just referred to, of the strength of the wines, and
he should like him to enlighten the meeting upon it. He must
say there was a discrepancy in the report which had reached him
from Vienna, and the rather depreciatory report of Dr. Thudi-
chum, which he had read with some interest and more dismay,
because, although he only brought to the subject the limited ex-
perience of a wine drinker, still he thought in future they would
have to resort to the judgment of the public palate in preference
to any scientific tests. He had been consuming colonial wine for
something like twenty years in blissful ignorance that it was of the
extraordinary objectionable character so circumstantially set forth
by Dr. Thudichum. At the same time he received that gentle-
man’s opinion with the highest respect, or otherwise he should
not feel so uncomfortable about it. It seemed to him somewhat
difficult to reconcile the extraordinary statements which reached
him from Vienna, that certain diplomas of honor had been given,
of very high character indeed, to the Australian wines, with the
account given of the same wines by Dr. Thudichum. No doubt
his difference was to some extent accounted for by the circum*
stance that the wines had been exposed to unfavorable conditions,
but even making allowance for all this, it appeared to him very
difficult to explain. At any rate, he did not know how to recon-
cile the scieniific results he had referred to with his own expe-
rience for so many years in drinking this wine with great satis-
faction to himself. For instance, Dr. Thudichum concluded his
remarks on one of these wines in these words—“ It stinks.”
Possibly that might be a paraphrase for a bouquet, but it cer-
tainly was an expression which took him aback, and had lodged
rather tenaciously in his memory. He hoped, however, it was the
result of being exposed to the sun, and there was no doubt that
many of the wines were very delicate, and possibly that would
account for a extra spirit being added to them for the
voyage. He, however, was disposed to place considerable con-
fidence in large human experience, particularly in the face of the
strong prejudice of which all were conscious, and which for along
time existed against any colonial wine, yet, year by year, the con-
sumption had continued to increase, until it was now so great in
the colonies of Victoria and New South Wales that there was no
dinner at any club or private table at which these wines were not
brought out, and frequently preferred to those imported from
Europe.
Mr. E. C. Booth remarked that he had had personal experience


of Australian vineyards, and did not base his knowledge on pho-
tographs, which might easily mislead, as they seemed to have
misled Dr. Thudichum. With reference to the diploma of honor
awarded to wines at Yienna, he had been there when the award
was made. It could not be made to any individual, or to an ex-
hibitor, and it was given to the Acclimatisation Society ®f Vic-
toria —not because it had made wine, but because by its influence it
had conduced more to the excellence of the wine than any
individual or body. Besides that, the wines of Australia obtained
prizes to the extent of 321 per cent, of the whole exhibits at
Yienna. He could also corroborate what had been already stated
by Mr. Tallerman, that one man turned round and said—“ Ido
not believe this wine ever came from Australia; these are very
fine Drench wines that have been sent abroad and brought back
again, and so matured.” That showed the effect they produced,
and they were not tried under favorable circumstances, having
been exposed for a long time to a broiling sun in the height of
summer. Mr. Wilson had referred to the peculiar excellence
which characterised the Australian wines, and in this he quite
concurred. There was a long strip of country called the Mallee,
about 1,500 miles long, by an average breadth of 100, a long
stretch of scrub, but he believed it would produce a fine grape,
from which a wine would be produced eminently characteristic of
Victoria. Some day that tract would be all planted with vines,
and would send wine to England which even Dr. Thudichum
would pass a very different opinion upon to that which had been
referred to.
Mr. Dayid Randall said he knew personally the character of
the Australian vineyards, having himself produced wine which
had gained medals at the London and Paris exhibitions, and,
though here and there one might be found in which the weeds
were allowed to grow, it was not generally the case, for on the
contrary, they were well attended to and kept clear. As to the
remark that the vines should be kept as nea'r the ground as pos-
sible, it was found by experienee in South Australia that the
plan did not answer, because the sun was often so hot that the
fruit got scorched and dried up. As to the alcoholic strength, he
felt pretty sure that many of the finest lands would, in good sea-
sons, produce wine of a higher strength than 26 per cent., and
he should be very glad if steps were taken to ascertain the density
of the saccharine matter when expressed from the must, for this
had not yet been done. At the Melbourne Exhibition there were
many vineyards unrepresented, and possibly some of those might
produce wine of greater strength. Dr. Kelly he knew personally,
and so satisfied was he of his high integrity and honor, that if he
stated that the wine from his vineyard was of the strength of 29,
he was quite sure that statement was true. In view of these
facts it would only be fair that Australian wines of a higher
strength than 26 should be admitted at the Is. duty, for it seemed
rather hard that because nature had done more for Australia than


for Europe she should he placed at a disadvantage by fiscal regu-
lations. If her wines were naturally of a greater strength, they
ought to be admitted on equal terms. At the same time he
thought it a mistake to attempt to raise the standard so high as
35 per cent., but he thought 29 would be a fair and just figure,
which would cover all natural wines.
The Chairman, in proposing a vote of thanks to Mr. Eallon
for his able paper, said he w T as himself probably one of the oldest
colonists in the room, and remembered grapes id Sydney in 1829.
He believed there w y ere five or six persons, amongst whom were
Sir William M‘Arthur, Mr. James M'Arthur, Mr. Busby,
Mr. Blaxland, and several others, who were all aiming at the
establishment of the vine and the production of wine in South
Australia at a very early period. Sir William, however, was still
alive ; and, as he had devoted much time and money to the sub-
ject, his name stood out more prominently than some others who
had died earlier. In 1861, he (the chairman) came to England
and brought ten or twelve kinds of wine, which he exhibited from
time to time, but he must say he did not think much of these
exhibition testimonials. He much preferred to go by the public
taste, or by the opinion of those qualified to judge, and not by
that of a jury just brought together to pronounce upon a wine,
no matter in what condition the wine might be. In 1862, when
he had some authority over the wines, he insisted on their being
locked up for four or five weeks in a cool place before they were
tried, instead of being tasted just as they came from the docks in
the hot weather, and when they were sick. They were thus tried
properly, and the experts gave a very high opinion of some of
the wines. Of course, they did not say they were better than any
other wines in the world, but they said some were very fine wines,
and that in the course of years, if properly treated, they would
become still better. He was glad to see that the wine was rapidly
improving in public estimation, for when last in Australia, in 1870,
he scarcely saw any European wine in use at all.
The vote of thanks having been passed unanimously,
Mr. Fallon, in reply, said he had not any statistics as to the
date when the vine was introduced into Australia, but he still
thought he was not far wrong in his statement. No doubt vines
had been introduced at a much earlier period, but they were con-
fined for a long time to a few grown simply for table use, and he
believed Sir William M‘Arthur was the first who really formed
vineyards in New South Wales. He had no figures or statistics
to prove that Australian wine exceeded a strength of 26 per
cent., but nevertheless he asserted most strongly that he had pro-
duced grapes from his own vineyard which, in favorable seasons,
gave a higher strength of alcohol than that mentioned. The grapes
he had mentioned in the paper, the Eeisling, Yerdeilho, Aucarot,
Shiraz, Burgundy, and Carbinet, gave wines which he had tested,
and had found to yield from 26 to 29 per cent, of proof spirit in
good seasons. He was not at all surprised to find this was not


the case with the majority of the wines exhibited at Melbourne,
because most of them came from the southern side of the range,
which did not produce wine with so high a per-centage of
alcohol. He might add that although he was one of the exhibi-
tors, and his name appeared in the list given by Dr. Bleasdale,
and thought his wines were placed there at a lower rate than 26,
yet when he brought them to England he was compelled to pay
2s. 6d. a gallon duty upon them. He had endeavored to furnish
the true tests of the Australian wines sent to the Exhibition, but
from the delay experienced in obtaining the particulars asked for,
his paper was deficient in that respect. He had no doubt, how-
ever, that many gentlemen from South Australia would bear him
out that the climate there being very similar to that on the
Murray, in good seasons their wine would show a higher per-
centage of proof spirit than 26. The style of cultivation had been
referred to, and it had been said this was sometimes conducted in
a slovenly manner, but after visiting nearly all the principal vine-
yards in Europe he was able to say that he had seen vineyards in
Australia as nicely cultivated as any. The man who went into
the culture of the vine largely, and as a special industry, took
•care not to allow the weeds to grow; and whoever had been
footish enough to send over the photograph which had been
referred to, he did not think it could be taken as a fair repre-
sentation.
( Australasian, February 21, 1874.)
AUSTRALIAN WINES AND THE ENGLISH TARIFF.
On several occasions during the last three years the eftect of
the English tariff on the vineyard interest of the Australian
colonies has been discussed by the several vineyard associations
of Victoria, New South Wales, and South Australia. The
Vignerons’ Club of Adelaide has, perhaps, evinced more anxiety
to obtain a change in the tariff than any other body of wine-
producers, and it has unquestionably the most reason to do so,
because the wines generally of that colony possess a higher
alcoholic strength than those of Victoria, and because South
Australia can spare more of such wines for export than both of
the other colonies together. At the instance of the Adelaide
Club, the Melbourne Vinegrowers’ Association considered the
expediency of addressing the Home Government with a view to
obtain an alteration of the duty, which was then, as now, fixed at
one shilling per gallon for wines containing not over 26 per cent,
of proof spirit; half-a-crown being charged for wines over that
strength. The latter body evinced indifference with regard to
the matter, because the wines grown by the members were chiefly
of low alcoholic strength, and would, with few exceptions, be
admitted at the one shilling duty. The fact of several of the
wines grown by one of the members (Mr. Andrew Murray)
showing in good years a percentage of alcohol which would


virtually exclude them from the English market appears for the
time to have been forgotten. Ultimately, however, steps were
taken to support the movement in favor of a lowering of the
tariff, and, through the Governments of the several colonies,
representations to the Imperial Government were duly made.
From the replies (informal only) it has been elicited that the
proposed alteration would cost the revenue of England some
£700,000 a year, and it was rather pertinently asked whether
such a concession could justly be claimed by a colony which had
imposed prohibitive duties upon English goods, or whether,
setting that point aside, it would be right to give away so large
an amount of revenue for the purpose of accommodating the
wines of perhaps some half dozen growers. This may be regarded
as the Imperial view of the case, but it was not urged by any of
the speakers at the meeting of the Society of Arts on the 3rd
December, when Mr. Fallon read his paper on “ Australian Vines
and Wines.” The change sought for was opposed on sanitary
grounds. Light wines, it was said, were more wholesome than
strong ones, and it was desirable to specially encourage the
consumption of the former. Mr. Edward Wilson, who on these
grounds was opposed to any change in the duty, fell into the
error (very common with non-experts) of confounding “ alcohol ”
with “ proof spiritmoreover, he assumed that wines containing
about 26 per cent, of “ alcohol ” (proof spirit) owed their strength
to added brandy. It is well-known to Victorian and New South
Wales growers that the only brandied wines in those colonies are
liqueur or ladies’ wines, of which only the most trivial quantities
are made, the demand for them being insignificant. It is also
equally well known that a large proportion of the wines now
grown in Victoria contain more than 26 per cent, of proof spirit
in seasons of average temperature and dryness. The aridity of
our atmosphere during the summer months, which was once
regarded by vine-growers as inimical to the success of their
special industry, is found to augment the secretion of saccharine
in an extraordinary degree At Albury, on the New South Wales
bank of the Murray, musts of Verdeilho, Muscat, and other
varieties have commonly marked from T 145 to ’ll4B, and within
the borders of Victoria, in various choice spots, musts of equal
density are produced. As long ago as the year 1867, a large
number of Victorian wines were tested at the Government
distilleries, and the results duly reported by Mr. Moody, chief
inspector of distilleries. His report showed that though in
scarcely any instance they were more than a year old, several even
of our southern wines would not gain admission at the Is. duty.
Thus, of the wines grown in the neighborhood of Melbourne: —
Verdeilho gave 27 per cent, of proof spirit; Eoussilon, 27 do ;
Mataro, 25 do; Grenache, 30 do ; Hermitage, 28 do ; Eeisling,
27 do; Gouais, 20 do ; Chasselas, 18 do. Wines grown beyond
the Dividing Eange, Murray and Goulburn district: —Mixed red,
20 per cent.; Pedro Ximenes, 30 do ; Verdeilho, 27 do ; Shiraz,.


Vines and Wines.
31 do; Eeisling, 26 to 29 do ; Brown Muscat, 81 do ; Carbinet
Sauvignon, 28 do; Tokay, 29 do; Shiraz and Malbec, 31 do;
Mataro and Carignan, 27 do. Mr. Moody adds—-I was assured
that none of these wines was fortified,” and those who are
acquainted with the growers and the capabilities of their vine-
yards will have no hesitation in accepting the assurance. Wit
regard to the trans-Murray wines further information is to hand.
Mr J. Cosmo Newberry, of the Technological Museum has fur-
nished Mr. Ballon with a report dated 13th February, 1874, on
nine samples from his Melbourne cellars, in the following
* ermS ’ Industrial and Technological Museum,
Melbourne, 13th February, 1874.
J. T. Fallon, Esq.,
114 Collins-street west. . . *
Dear Sib, -I beg to hand you my report on the nmc’sample® of v
received from you. I can detect in them no traces of adulteration. IBe
St obtained was pure wine spirit. The following shows the percentage of
proof spSt in each" sample :-Muscat. No 1, 29*1 proof spirit;
29-2 do ; Shiraz, A, 27'5 do ; Shiraz, B, 26 do ; Shiraz C,
A 306 do- Eeisling, A, 210 do; Eeisling, B, 24-3 do; Verdeilho, A, 23 U
do’ These determinations were all made with Saleron s still and Sykes
hydrometer.
J Yours faithfully,
(Signed) J. COSMO NEWBEEEY,
v 8 ’ Superintendent of Industrial Museum.
Well might Mr. Fallon in his lecture speak with pride of the
illimitable territory in Australia capable of yielding wines of
surpaesing excellence. The change of tariff which he advocated
would affect the destinies of an extent of territory of which few
except Australians have any conception. The e / eS , °V
growers are beginning to open to the fact that Australia can
produce wines of the highest purity and strength and that her
export trade in wines will eventually consist chiefly of wines of
that character rather than of the lighter kinds The latter, it is
now clearly seen, must find (and they will always command) a
market on the spot. The principle for which our
are contending is that all natural wines should be admitted into
the English market upon equal terms ; it would be, as Mr.
Bandall observed, but an act of simple justice to place Australian
growers on a fair and equal footing with their European compe-
titors, and that point, if proof be given of its justice, the
English Government will, without doubt, eventually concede
In a letter to the Adelaide Observer, Mr. D. Eandall, of bouth
Australia, writes from London on the alcoholic strength of Aus-
tralian wines. He has cited briefly the remarks of the severed
speakers at the recent meetings, and as they serve to confirm
the reports already to hand, there -remains no doubt whatever
that the speakers (excepting Mr. Fallon) were guilty of co -
founding “ proof spirit ” with “alcohol.” Mr. ballon express y
said “Australian wines as a rule range above the maximum
strength fixed by the Customs’ tariff, viz., 26 per cent, of proo


spirit, under which degree of strength only wines are admitted at
Is. per gallon duty.” Dr. Thudichum, a comparatively new
aspirant to fame in the chemical world, contended that “as
regards the proposition that Australian w'ine was produced from
a must which would yield a larger percentage of alcohol than 26
per cent., he must enter his most polite protest, and there was no
grape in Australia, as there was none anywhere else, which by
the ordinary method of vinification gave wine of the strength
mentioned.” It is difficult to understand how Dr. Thudichum
fell into so vulgar an error as is evinced in the italicised words *
it is far more hard to discover why Mr. Fallon allowed the
blunder to stand uncorrected. With a view to settle the question
whether any considerable number of the wines of Houth Australia
do or do not contain more than 26 per cent, of proof spirit, Mr.
Hand all will ask the Adelaide Yignerons’ Club to take steps to
ascertain the strength in saccharine matter of the must of grapes
in that colony, at the forthcoming vintage; the result of such
trial will of course determine the natural strength of the win©
they will be capable of producing. The Observer also contains a
further suggestion from Mr. A. Thomas, F.C.S., to the Vignerons’
Club, with reference to Dr. Thudichum’s report on the wines of
Australia. Mr Thomas asks, “ could not the club, in concert
with the societies in the other colonies, combine and instruct
their agents to send samples of the different wines to M. Pasteur*
of Paris, the first authority in the world for analysing wine. It
would not cost much, and would more than counterbalance Dr.
T.’s verdict, as he is comparatively a new member of the Chemical
Society. It would be well to have the standard strength fixed
here by some competent authority before samples were sent
home.” There can be no obstacle to the fulfilment of both plans,
and a better opportunity than the forthcoming vintage is not
likely to offer for carrying into effect that of Mr. Randall. W©
hope Victorian growers in every locality will carefully note the
strength of their musts immediately after gathering —before time
has been given for fermentation to commence.
THE ALCOHOLIC STRENGTH OF WINES.
To the Editor of the Argus.
Sir, —With reference to the discussion that has taken place in
London and in this colony on the above subject, I have been
requested to state my experience, and I have pleasure in men*
tioning a few facts which may possibly assist in elucidating the
important question at issue.
In order, however, to protect myself from a charge of apparent
presumption, permit me to remark that chemists are totally at
variance as to the alcoholic strength of natural wine, and that this
evidently arises from their ignorance of the mode and conditions
of wine making. They are in general only acquainted with the
manufactured article.


It is agreed on all hands that the amount of spirit mainly
depends on the saccharine strength of the must. By fermentation
the sugar is converted into spirit, and as a hot climate produces
most sugar, it would apparently follow that north of our Dividing
the wines would be greatly more spirituous than those to
the south. This is the fact, but the amount of spirit produced is
greatly modified by circumstances. Dor example, in order to
complete fermentation and the conversion of sugar into spirit, it
is necessary that the temperature should be comparatively low.
But in the northern parts of this colony, in South Australia and
in New South Wales, the grapes ripen in the hottest season, the
fermentation is necessarily tumultuous, and consequently imper-
fect, and a great portion of the saccharine matter remains
unconverted. This will explain the difficulties encountered by
the chemists in their experiments, and it will explain the remark-
able fact shown by Mr. Moody, inspector of distilleries, in his
letter to me published in your columns, that the wines of the
Murray were only about 1 per cent stronger than these pro-
duced in the Melbourne district. If Mr. Moody'were asked, he
would say that the wines of the Murray were still sweet, while
those of' Melbourne were perfectly dry. I may remark that in
the very hottest day we have experienced for many years, the
temperature of my cellar was 68 deg. (in January), and as my
grapes do not ripen till March and April, the temperature at the
vintage is greatly lower, and we have scarely such a thing as
tumultuous fermentation. I can further state, with reference to
some of the wines mentioned by Mr. Moody, that the amount of
spirit was exactly in proportion to the saccharine strength of the
must. Dor example, the Grenache reached a specific gravity oj.
l,llodeg., and gave 80 per cent, proof spirit, while the Mataro
must was only about l,loodeg., and gave 25 per cent, proof
spirit, I am, &c., ANDREW MURRAY,
j Economist Office, Deb. 19, 1874.
There is no doubt whatever that a large proportion of Australian
wines will show a proof spirit strength {natural and unfortified ) of
over 2Qdeg., hence the demands of the Australian vignerons for a
revision of the tariff is ([uite gust , since the best of Australian
vintages are shut out from the {English marlcet through the imposition
of the 2s. Qd. duty , which prevents competition with European wines
in the London marlcet. The European vignerons are allowed a
monopoly, and, apart from the claims of Australia on the mother
country , it would only he common justice to raise the standard to a
figure which would enable them to bring forward their pure sound
wines in the home marlcets.
Azzoppardi, Hildreth & Co., Printers, Melbourne.


