

THE
GRASSES & FODDER PLANTS
WHICH MAY BE
BENEFICIAL
TO THE
Squatter and Agriculturist
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
A PAPER
READ BEFORE A SPECIAL MEETING OF THE CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES BY
DR. SCHOMBURGK,
CURATOR OF THE BOTANIC GARDEN,
ON MONDAY EVENING, DECEMBER 16, 1873.
ADELAIDE:
WILLIAM KYFFIN THOMAS, PRINTER, GRENFELL STREET.
1874


The Grasses and Fodder Plants
which may be Beneficial to
the Squatter and Agricul-
turist in South Australia.
No doubt you will agree with mo that in tho
household of nature there is not a move im-
portant tribe of plants than that of the grasses,
as upon tho seeds of tho cereal division move
than two-thirds of the population of tho globe
subsists.
Tho same remark is also applicable in regard
to tho animal world. To the gramnivorous
animals, which are the most numerous amongst
tho mammalia, the value of grasses as fodder is
hardly second to that of their corn for human
food, and a considerable portion of the feathered
tribe live also upon tho seeds of grasses.
Without wheat, rye, barley, oats, maize,
Guinea corn, rice, what would become of us?
It is said that rice alone forms tho food of throe-
fourths of the human race; in other words of
between six and seven hundred millions of the
population of tho world,
As nothing can be uninteresting which is
connected with tho habits of a tribe of such
vast importance to man and beast, I will, before
proceeding to the real object of this evening’s
lecture, mention a few more illustrative facts.
Professor Lindloy says in his work, “The
Vegetable Kingdom,” the use of this most
important tribe of plants for food, fodder,
clothing, &c., requires little illustration. Tho
abundance of wholesome ftecula contained in
their seeds renders them peculiarly well adapted
for the sustenance of man, and if .tho cereal
grasses only, suoh as wheat, barley, rye, oats,
maize, Guinea corn, rice, are tho kinds com-
monly employed, it is because of tho large size
of their grain compared with that of other
grasses, for none aro unwholesome in their
natural state, only one kind being known
amongst the whole tribe, namoly, the drake
(Lolium temuleutum—Lin.), tho effects of which
aro undoubtedly deleterious.
Sugar is a general product of grasses. For
economical purposes grasses are often of much
importance. I will only mention tho bamboo,
which in some parts of the world, especially in
Asia, is employed as timber and cordage.
Plants of a grass, called in South America
“ Taquarussa,” are living fountains. They grow
from 30 to 40 foot high, with a diameter of six
inches, form thorny imponotrablethickots, and aro
oxoodmgly grateful to travellers and hunters; tor
on cutting such a reed below a joint tho skin of
tho younger shoots is found to be full of a cool
liquid, which quenches the most burning thirst.
To this I can testify, as during our travels in
South America we hailed with delight suoh a
copse of roods to quench our thirst. Besides
those properties of the grasses I may also men-
tion then- uso for paper, cordage, straw plat-
ting, &o. In fact, the value of, this order to
mankind is boundless, and I should trespass too
much on your patience if I ventured to toll you
all of the economical purposes to which tho
products of tho dilforont grasses are applied.
Besides those properties of tho graminaoom
their inorganic products ai-o also remarkable.
The cuticle contains a largo proportion of
silox, as is proved, according to Professor
Bindley, by its hardness and by masses of
vitrified matter being found whenever a hay-
stack or heap of corn is accidentally consumed
by flro.
With the exception of tho genus hamhusa
(bamboo) nature has not lavished on tho repre-
sentatives of this most important and interesting
order of the vegetable world much outward
hoauty, nor has tho enthusiasm of ancient and
modern bards been excited by them, as is tho
case so frequently in praise of other plants,
which have been endowed by nature with every
hoauty to please tho eyo, hut without tho
slightest uso to mankind. I think we all, indeed,
are apt to look on the grasses with too much
indifference, considering that they constitute in 1
a groat degree tho staff of our life.
Professor Bindley says further " Tho great
mass of herbage known by the name of sedges
and grasses constitutes, perhaps, a twelfth part
of tho described species of flowering plants, and
at least nine-tenths of tho number of individuals
composing the vegetation of tho world; for it
is tho chief source of that verdure whioh covers
the earth, especially of northern countries, with
a gay carpet during tho year.”
I extract tho following account of tho
geographical distribution of grasses by Pro-
fessor Shaw; —" The family is very numerous.
In the system of Koemer and Sohublea there
are 1,800; and since this work, wore it brought
to aconolusion, would probably contain 40,000 in
all, it may ha assumed that the grasses form a
twenty-second part. It is more than probable,
however, that in future tho grasses will increase
in a larger ratio than the other phaneroganio


plants, and that perhaps the just proportion will
be as 1 to 20, or as 1 to 16.”
Greater still will bo their proportion to vege-
tation in general when tho number of indi-
viduals is taken into account, for in this respect
most, if not all, of tho classes are inferior.
With regard to locality in such a large family
very little can he advanced. There are, how-
ever, both land and water grasses, but no
marine plants. They occur in every soil, in
society with others and alone; tho last
to such a degree as entirely to occupy
considerable districts. Sand appears to bo
less favourable to this class ; but even this has
species nearly peculiar to itself. Grasses
exist under the equator, on tho mountains of tho
south of Europe, where tboy ascend almost to
the snow lino, and on tho Andos.
Tho greatest difference between tropical
and oxtra-tropioal grasses appears to bo the
following:— Tho tropical grasses acquire a
much greater height, and occasionally assume
tho appearance of trees. Some species of
bambusn are from 50 to 60 foot high. The
leaves of the tropical grasses are broader, and
approach more in form those of other families of
plants. Separate sexes are more frequent in the
tropical grasses, the flowers are softer, more
downy and elegant. Tho extra-trop'oal grasses,
on the contrary, far surpass the tropical in
respect of tho number of individuals. That
compact grassy turf which, especially in tho
colder parts of the temperate zones, in spring
and summer composes the green meadows
and pastures, is almost entirely wanting
in tho torrid zone. Tho grasses thoro do not
grow crowded together, but, like other plants,
more dispersed,
Tho contribution of tho cultivated grasses is
one of tho most interesting of all subjects, and
X bog you will indulge and not grudge mo if I
go into lengthened details of this so interesting
point. It is determined, not merely by climate,
but depends on tho cultivation, industry, and
trafflo of tho people, and often on historical
events. Within tho northern polar oirolo agri-
culture is found only in a fow places. In Siberia
grain reaches at tho utmost only to 60°, in tho
eastern parts scarcely above 55°, and in Kami;-
solmtka there is no agriculture oven in the most
southern parts (51°). Tho polar limit of agri-
culture on tho north-west coast of America
appears to bo somewhat higher, far in the
mere Southern Russian possessions (57° to 52°),
barley and ryo oome to maturity. On tho oast
boast of America it is scarcely above 50° or 52°.
Only in Europe, namely, in' Lapland, does the
polar limit an unusually high latitude—7U°.
Beyond this dried fish, and hero and there
potatoes, supply the place of grain.
Tho grains which extend furthest to the north
in Europe aro harloy and oats. Those, which
in tho milder climates aro not usod for broad,
afford to tho inhabitants of the northern parts of
Norway and Sweden, of a part of Siberia, and
Scotland their chief vegetable nourishment.
Ryo is tho next, which is substituted for the
inferior kinds of grain. This is tho prevailing
grain in a groat part of tho northern temperate
zone, namely, in the south of Sweden and
Norway, Denmark, and in all tho lands bor-
dering on the Baltic, tho north of Germany, and
part of Siberia.
It is a very remarkable circumstance that the
native country of wheat, oats, barley, and rye
should bo entirely unknown, for although oats
and barley wore found by Colonel Ohesnoy
apparently wild on the banks of the Euphrates,
it is doubtful whether they were not tho remains
of cultivation. This has lad to an opinion on
the part of some persons that all our cereal
grasses are artificial productions, obtained aooi*
dentally, but retaining their habits, Which have
become fixed in the course of ages.
Having attempted to impress on your mind
the importance of this most valuable and in-
teresting order of the vegetable world, upon
which the existence of tho human race mainly
depends, I will now go over to the subject of
this evening’s leoture, namely—“ Tho Grosses
and Redder Plants which may bo beneficial to
the Squatter and Agriculturist in South Aus-
tralia,"
No doubt you will agree with mo that there
aro fow circumstances to which tho agriculturist
and squatter of this colony have bean so in-
attentive as to tho nature and produce of their
pasture lauds—namely, the grasses and fodder
plants.
It is also true that tho cultivation of artificial
grasses and fodder plants will and can never bo
so general hero as at homo on account of tha
largo extent of pasture land in the possession of
the squatter, and on account of the insuperable
difficulty arising from olimato and tho droughts
to which some parts of tho oolonj are olten
subjected, which is against the cultivation of
most of tho artificial grasses; and there aro not
many European and foreign grasses which would
live throughout tho year and will renew them-
selves annually.
I will say first a fow words regarding our native
grosses, of which I am sorry to say many species
have already died out from cultivation and
depasturing since possession has boon taken by
Europeans.
It is a historical fact whenever man settles in
a now country ho exercises a potent influence
over the indigenous vegetation and animals,
especially if the intruders are of an agricultural
and pastoral pursuit. Tho plough, tho axe, the
herds aro enemies to vegetation, end as cultiva-
tion advances ouo representative after tho other
succumbs to the foreign influence. Tho herbage
suffers first, the native animals second, and even
man succumbs, of which many countries, espe-
cially America, have given us examples.
But the plough, tho axo, tho hards are not tha
solo destroyers of tho native herbage. No;
with cultivation are introduced noxious woods of
other countries, which if they have taken ground
spread with alarming rapidity and become
possessors of the ground, growing often more
luxuriantly in their new abode.
As an oxaihample, I will call your attention
only to seven of suoh noxious intruders in
South Australia, viz.;—The so-oallod dande-
lion (Oryptostomma oalandulaooa, R. _Br.), the
cockspur (Oentanroa 'molitensis, Lin.), the
Scotch thistles (Carduus marianus, Lin., and
Onopordon aoanthium, Lin,), the Bathurst burr
(Xanthium spinosum, Lin.), tho French oatohfly
(Silone gallioa, Lin.), and the stinknslor,
(Anthemis ootula, Lin.), natives of the Cape and
Europe, which already cover large tracks of
pasture land, and will extend further and
further to tho destruction of the native herbage.
You will agree with me, especially tho
squatter, of tho seaming failure of tho native
grasses, and that the feeding properties of our
native pastures have seriously declined of late
years.


Many close observers will hove missed already
several kinds of herbage, especially annuals
or summer grasses, in our neighbourhood,
aud the representatives of other _ kinds are
becoming less every year. But this is not alone
the case with the annual, but also with the
perennial .herbage. X will only cull your
attention to the well-known and so useful
kangaroo grass (Anthistiria ciliata, Lin., lit),
which in the early days of tho colony wo found
everywhere, and formed a groat part of the
pasture grass. It has now disappeared oven
from localities which it formally almost monopo-
lized. It has been relished so muoh by the
stock that it has boon fairly eaten out of tho
ground, and I feat- will soon disappear entirely;
and a good many other grasses will follow.
But not alono in South Australia, but also in
South Africa, vegetation changes are going on
through the introduction of sheep. In a paper
by Mr. J. Sha.v, of South Africa, road tho other
day by Professor Th. Dyor before tho Royal
Botanical Society, London, Mr. Shaw re-
marks:—“Civilization and sheep have intro-
duced tho Bathurst burr. In . Orange
State wool has become so filled with those
burrs that its value has been deteriorated nearly
GO per cent., and tho Government have legis-
lated for its compulsory destruction. Tho
sheep in connection with overstocking of farms
are doing very serious injury directly to the
vegetation by eating down the bettor mid more
agreeable plants, giving range to poisonous and
bitter ones. Since sheep have boon introduced
the grasses have very fast disappeared; tho
ground, by tho hurried march of tho sheep
for food amongst a scattered bush, has
become beaten and hardened, and tho
seasonable rains, which do come occasionally
during tho summer, are accordingly allowed to
run off tho surface without soaking in tho
ground to tho extent formerly the case. Tho
grasses and herbage disappear, the country is
drying up, and becoming a semi-desert.” The
author further refers to tho great increase of
poisonous aud bitter herbage, so that it was
dangerous to have stook on many farms which
formerly wore free from any injurious herbs.
We see from the above that the South
African squatters have tho same cause of com-
plaint regarding tho introduction of noxious and
poisonous' and the extirpating of tho indigenous
nutritious plants as tho South Australian
squatters have.
You will ask, “ What is the cause of this ?”
Nothing is more easily answered—tho constant
pasturing on the runs throughout the year. Tho
grasses and other herbs are prevented to ensure
their reproduction from seed, and as tho sheep
crop very closely the plants soon succumb,
having no chance whatever of their being repro-
duced from seed.
From this fact and from those relating to tho
disappearance of choice grasses, it is known that
especially tho sheep devote their attention
to kinds of grasses which they most like
and leave the inferior grasses untouched.
Most of our better kinds of native grasses
have no tendency to form a close turf, and
growing mostly tussocky are more easily eaten
by the sheep out of the ground aud destroyed.
Tho perennial grasses suffer also from the
constant trampling upon them by tho stock.
I saw tho other day a letter in one of the
volumes of tho “ Farm and Garden,” which will
illustrate to you tho state in which tho native
grassoa wore found hore in tho first days of the
colony. Tho writer of tho letter, who signs
himself “ M-ualinga,” says;—“Tho first sur-
veyors coming down to Yaukalilla pitched their
tents in a lino open valloy or plain, where they
found tho grass so luxuriant and tall that it
could bo tied over a horse’s back. This tho
mowed and made into hay, and from the circum-
stance of tho stacks beingnooidontally burnt they
called the place ‘Hay Flat.’ This lume, the
writer says further, it has continued to boar un-
deservedly up to tho present time; although I
think it high time for it to bo altered to a lees
pretending one, for its present aspect reminds
one no more of the above narrative than does
a fairy tale or ghost story of real life. Indeed
a modern explorer visiting tho spot now would
call it rush or atony valloy.”
As I have mentioned before, I fear very few
artificial grasses can bo grown with profit and
advantage on tho runs, and so tho squatters
must bo dependent upon the native grasses.
Tho only 'resource will be to encourage the
growth of those. No doubt, if properly culti-
vated, native grasses would be tho most suitable
for pasturage on the runs.
Their seeds should bo collected, and care
should be taken to procure those sorts of which
cattle and sheep ore fondest, and on which thoy
thrive best. Of such grasses several acres
should bo sown in woll-propavod soil, and
fenced in for tho sake of procuring annually a
quantity of seed, which should bo sown on such
spots which are deficient of herbage. Those
spots should bo ploughed and tho seed properly
sown and harrowed in. No doubt those seeds,
sown before the rains set in will grow after-
wards without any further trouble.
Or tho runs should bo divided into sub-
divisions. Annually one of those divisions
should not bo grazed, for tho purpose of re-
placing tho pasturage. The grasses should grow
unmolested, flower, ripen, and scatter their
seeds, so as to ensure their reproduction.
Undoubtedly such a system of rotation would
be very beneficial, and improve tho growth of
tho pasture materially.
I think we know all, and especially the
farmer, that to farm profitably grazing should
go hand in baud with corn-growing, and that
the farmer as well as tho squatter will
find it advantageous to have a paddock of
artificial grassoa near his homestead in some
suitable and confined spot ; for the purpose of
keeping stock, which requires to bo kept in good
condition during the summer months; butte keep
such a paddock during this time in a growing
condition, I fear some difficulty will bo found in
South Australia.
Even with irrigation wo could not oxpoot to
produce such a lino turf as that with which wo
wore so familiar at homo, and every farmer will
agree with mo that this is not only raised by
manuring and irrigation, but by the humid
climate aud tho mild aumnfbr showers that fall
at homo. But with our dry climate, tho ther-
mometer ranging frequently from 80° to 100° at
this season of summer, I think it improbable that
wo over will realize that fine turf which a
humid climate will produce.
I have found that there are not many kinds of
foreign grasses which will stand our arid
droughts. My seven years’ experience and ex-
periments with the acclimatization of grassoa
from all parte of tho globe have, I am sorry to


say, not resulted with such favourable success as
I should have wished the case to be.
I have sown every year 60 or 80 kinds of
grasses, which during the winter months have
mostly grown luxuriantly, but as soon as tho dry
weather set in began to Buffer and perish.
I will give you now the results of my experi-
ments, not alone with grasses, but also other
fodder plants, and will call to your attention
those ’kinds which for years have stood well
the test of our arid climate; and I am confident
that they are permanent in their duration, and
well worthy a trial, if only a little attention and
care are paid to their culture; but it is generally
thought that any treatment will do for grasses.
_ With the exception of lucerne I think very
little trouble has yet been bestowed on tho
culture of artificial grasses by tho farmer and
tho squatter, because, as the phrase goes, “ they
will not pay for the trouble ;” hut I think,
instead of moralizing on this theme, X will bring
facts before you.
I shall only dwell at any length on those
grasses and fodder plants which from my own
practical experience I have found suited to our
climate, and which, as before mentioned, most
of them I have cultivated for the last seven
years in tho experimental ground in the Botanic
Garden. I must remark at tho same time that
I have bestowed on them not the slightest oars
in regard to watering during tho summer, only
that they have boon kept clean from weeds and
tho soil has been yearly once dug.
I will begin with tho famous bunch grass of
British Columbia (Blymus oondonsatus, Pros!.),
of wliioh His Excellency the Governor speaks so
highly from his own experience.
Before going to the description of this so
esteemed grass, I must remark that my atten-
tion to this plant was called by an English
agricultural paper, the Farmer, I resolved
immediately to introduce this grass, and suc-
ceeded in receiving from my friend in Edinburgh
—Mr. J. Anderson Henry—a little seed, which
was sown in a seed-pan. The young seedlings
wore planted July last in tho experimental
ground. From tho samples before you, you will
observe tho progress the plants have made. I
must observe they have not bean watered, and
I am glad to assure you that tho last week’s
unusually hot and dry weather has had not the
slightest effect on the plants; and I am hopeful
that tho bunch grass will stand our climate, and
that it will become one of our best artificial
grasses.
I will road now ,tho interesting extract from
tho Farmer, to show you how highly tho bunch
grass is thought of at home, especially in Scot-
land ;
“Mr. Robert Brown, Collector for tho British
Columbia Botanical Association of Edinburgh,
was enabled in 1833 to send home a supply of
seeds of the bunch grass, and thus first intro-
duced it into Britain. To most of the members
of this Association grass seeds, however, pre-
sented little or no attraction, and with the
exception of what fell to the share of tho
Botanic Gardens and J. Anderson Henry, Esq.,
Hay Lodge, together with a few plants m our
own collection, the bunch grass of British
Columbia was so utterly neglected that it might
have been lost to the country, notwithstanding
that its merits, both as early forage and an
abundantly productive hay grass, are likely yet
to secure for it a highly prominent place among
the cultivated agricultural plants of Britain.
“With us the hunch grass has gone on increasing
annually in stature, and although grown in the
post dry summer on rather poor uumanured soil,
a plant was nearly eight feet three inches in
height. It surpassed in bulk of crop the grass
then growing in the neighbouring famed sewago-
irrigatod meadows of Edinburgh. So that as a
highly-produotivo oarly-outtiug grass it ranks
far before any other known kind.
“ In cultivating the British Columbia bunch,
grass wo would, recommend sowing it in drills
or beds, allowing it to grow there for at least
one season, and then transplanting it in well-
cleaned land at a distance of 12 to 15 inches
apart. The seedlings make but little growth,
and never run to seed in tho first season.
Hoeing or weeding will therefore bo required
throughout the first summer and autumn after
transplantation, but afterwards the plants will be
sufficiently strong to overpower most kinds of
woods, and they will seemingly grow on in fall
vigour for a long series of years.
“ Subsequent to our foromontionod notice of
this bunch grass, we have received the following
particulars regarding it in its native habitat.
In a paper on the Flora of Alaska, formerly
known as Hussion America, Dr. Kothrook
states that tho high grounds in the vicinity of
Fort St. Jamas (lat. 54° 1' N.) afford tho
bunch grass of tho packers. So nutritious is
this that even when apparently dead and dry
stock will become fat on it, and remain so under
hard work for long periods if this bo plentifully
supplied.
“ In a recent Californian newspaper a correspon-
dent mentions that in the vicinity of tho Boise
Basin, in Idaho Territory, ‘ tho blue top bunch
grass’ covers tho hills, and is as good as hay,
some even considering it as approaching in its
nutritive qualities to grain. There may, however,
bo some doubt whether one of the other bunch
grasses, and not the Elymua oondonsatus, may bo
that here noticed. But the moat recent reliable
and important information regarding it is con-
tained in tho following letter to Mr. Eoboi-t
Brown, _of tho British Columbian Botanical
Expedition, from a friend who lived for several
years in tho bunohgrass country;—
“ ‘ Lynoal, Ellesmere, Sept. 9, 1889.
“' Dear Sir—-You ask my opinion of tho bunch
grass of the central plateau, or table lands of
British Columbia—Elymus oondonsatus, as I
believe you botanists call it. After a five years’
experience of that country I oau bear testimony
to tho nutritious and fattening properties of
this grass, far surpassing, I believe, those of any
other known herb. A few facts will abundantly
illustrate this.
‘“ln the early years of tho colony, before oats
or barley had been imported, this bunoh grass
was tho only (as it is still the principal) food of
the.trains of mules and horses whioh, heavily
ladon with provisions and goods, followed the
gold-diggers into the mines, over the roughest
possible trails. I have ridden hundreds of
miles on horses whoso sole support was this
bunoh grass. Turned loose at sunset, when tho
oampiug-ground was reached, to food, they were
found next morning as fresh and gay as over.
Indeed, on such a journey, if not ridden too
hard, they would rather gain flesh than lose it.
“ ‘ In my Essay on British Columbia, page 40,
I have spoken of tho marvellous increase of stock
in that part of tho country—an increase owing,
I believe, mainly to the amount of! vital energy
imparted by this grass.


t{t Then, as you are aware, the droves of cattle
which supplied beef to the mines of Cariboo, had
boon driven 000 miles from Oregon, yet they
wore in excellent condition on tboir arrival,
owing to the excellent pasturage which refreshed
them each night after the journey of the day.
" ‘ Finally, both horses and cattlo used to sur-
vive winters of great severity; so long as there
was not too much snow for them to push aside,
they would subsist on what tufts of bunch
grass they could reach. It must have been hard
times for thorn, but they managed to survive.
i( * I am rejoiced to hoar that the experiment
of trying this grass near Edinburgh has suc-
ceeded so admirably, and I trust agriculturists
may be induced to try on a largo scale, as I am
convinced farmers and cattle-breeders would
soon learn to appreciate its muscle-making and
fattening properties.
“ * Believe mo, Dear Sir,
“ ‘ B. 0. Lundik Brown,
“ ‘Vicar of Lyneal, Salop.’ ”
The second grass on my list is the so famous
guinea grass—(Panicum maximum, Jacq.)—a
native of tropical Africa, from where it has boon
Introduced to South America and the Wes
Indies. Ilia Excellency the Governor on several
occasions has spoken highly of this valuable
grass, in regard to its nutritious qualities, having
become acquainted with it during his stay in the
West Indies. My personal -observations of a few
years’ residence in South America confirm His
Excellency’s experience in every respect.
I can assure you in Demorara I have seen it
attain a height of six to eight foot. One acre of
Guinea grass will keep two cows or a horso
throughout the year, as it will give under
cultivation at least four or live crops a
year. X have seen people cutting from
one acre every day so much as they wanted
for their horso or cows, and when they came
to tho end of the acre, the first portion out had
grown sufficient to cut again, and could bo re-
peated four or five times throughout the year.
It is not to bo expected that wo could do tho
same thing bore, as the growth in South Aus-
tralia can never be compared with that of South
America. If it is out there four or five times
a year wo can scarcely expect that it can bo done
more than twice hero.
I believe tho Guinea grass will be a useful
paying grass with us, especially in favourable
localities; it requires a deep moist soil.
- According to my five years’ observation on the
plants in the garden it is capable of enduring
during the summer, when it grows most rapidly,
a degree of heat and drought which Ims proved
destructive to almost any other kind of grass
growing in tho experimental ground.
But I must remind all who intend to plant,
and will secure a luxuriant growth of guinea
grass, that it must not be thought, as it is gene-
rally tho case, that any treatment will do for
grasses. It must bo planted on prepared
ground, tho plants 18 or 20 inches apart, and
the land kept clear from weeds.
I will also mention that it will not boar being
fed down nor trampled upon by cattle or sheep,
but must be out.
The next grass is the well-known prairie grass
(Broraus unioloides, Humboldt), a native of
Central America, which I think has been so
early as 1858 introduced into tho colony. Not-
withstanding that it has turned out one of
the host and nutritious fodder grasses, which is
littlo afioctod by our dry seasons, it has not
received that attention from tho farmers which
it deserves.
I consider tho prairie grass one of our best
acquisitions of the foreign grasses, and it
deserves to take tho lead as one of the most
permanent and paying. I find there is no grass
bettor suited for green fodder, and none is
superior to any grass for haymaking than tho
prairie grass. It thrives just as well on tho
plains as in the hills.
It surpasses any grass in regard to seed-
bearing qualities. Mr. T. Goode, Goolwa, who
is an extensive grower of tho prairie grass, and
who commenced growing it from a few seeds
which he received from the Garden, has assured
mo that ho has raised as much as 20 bushels of
seed per acre, and ho finds it. also superior to
any grass for haymaking.
There is not the slightest doubt, if early sown,
say April, about 50 to CO lbs. seed to the
acre, it will give two or three crops. It is one
of tho most productive grasses during tho
winter. The result of often mowing is that tho
plants spread more and grow thicker than if
allowed to go to seeding.
But there is one fault to be mentioned—it will
not boar feeding off. Cattlo and sheep arc so
fond of the grass that they will oat tho roots
ont of the ground, which is facilitated by their
peculiar growth. Thus a good many plants are
destroyed by the cattle. Notwithstanding I
would recommend every farmer to give this
valuable grass a fair trial,
In 'confirmation of what I have said of tho
prairio grass I will road Mr, Goode’s letter
treating on tho subject :
“Goolwa, December 12, 1873.
“ Dear Sir—As I see by tho papers you aro
about to give a lecture on grasses, and being in
receipt of your telegram enquiring about prairio
grass, I thought probably a few facta detailing
my experience with that grass might bo accept-
able. If it is of the slightest use to yon, 1 shall
bo pleased to have rendered ever ao slight a
return for tho many acts of kindness I have re-
ceived at your hands.
“ In the first place I would observe that of all
tho many seeds I have received from you,
prairio grass is tho only one that has really dono
well on my sandy soil of tho seeds of this grass,
whiohlgotfromyou some years since,only fowg'er-
minated; tho following year (1808). I had a place
in my garden, and 1869 I had a larger one, and
some roots outside now liavo a few bushels of
seed again, and intend to plant it properly. I
should now stato that I am living on a sandy
hill, my house has a foundation of 17 feet of
sand, and tho seed I grow this year was on sand
from six to nine feet deep.
“ If I have an opportunity I will forward yon
ono of tho tussocks from which this year’s seed
has been out, which, thoutrh as coarse as wheat
straw, tho cattlo and horses will eat to tho very
root, for tho sake of tho green blade springing
up in it. It is now tho only green grass I have.
I should not have so far lost it, but my manager
took it into his head to leave me and go up
North in tho end of 1871, and my own stato of
health preventing my looking after my farming,
and not meeting with a man capable of managing
with farms, accounts for such bad results. In
1870 the man I now have in my employ planted
about two acres in a small paddock, from which
I got about 10 bushels prime seed from a nice
stack of hay. Tho hay not being thoroughly
reaped, I cut it into ohalf; and thoro being so


much seed in it, wo used it partly as corn to
improve other chaff.
“ I had a flue aftermath coming on; but
hearing such bad accounts of the destructive
power of the locusts travelling south, and ex
footing them to roach me, I turned all my stock
(four horses and two oowa) in, and graaed it
very short.
“ Consequently in 71 having sold all my good
seed I had a very poor crop, and saved no seed,
but threw the grass to tlio cattle, hoping they
would carry the sood about tho land, but very
little of it grow. In 72 I found my paddock of
praino grass completely smothered with tho
barley grass, and only saved a few bunches in
my garden for seed.
“ This seed I throw about last spring amongst
sown barley, and have had a line crop in 1873.
“ From my experience I am convinced it is
tho best grass I have tried, and even the lucerne
hassufforod this summer here.
“ My opinion is it should bo managed hero
much as rod clovor or Italian rye grass is in
England, then I oan ma_e sure of a profitable
crop.
“I bog to subscribe mysolf, dear Sir, yours
vory truly, “Thos, aoODE.”
■ For the introduction of the following splendid
summer glass wo have to thank Mr. H. W.
Phillips, North Adelaide. No doubt it is a
rival of tho prairie grass, and stands our summer
bettor than any other kind. It is also a panic
grass (Panioum speetabilo, Neos ?).
Mr. Phillips has kindly given mo the following
notes regarding this most valuable grass, which
I will now road :
"This grass oamo up in my garden near tho
aviary, and no doubt cams with tho canary seed
whioh I bought from Messrs. Haokott. It is
vory prolific, sooding abundantly; it also oan ho
propagated from tho largo oouoh roots, which
run a trroat distance under ground, any joint of
whioh will grow. The sood should ho gathered
as it ripened, for it sheds easily. It will grow
in tho driest places; one plant came up between
tho_ wood and cement at the ond of tho verandah
whioh is so covered with passion iiowora'that it
nover got any water; still it grows notwithstand-
ing all tho traffio.
/‘Tho growth is vory luxuriant, shooting
vigorously about October, and continues to do
so until tho cold web woathor sets in; it grows
throe or four foot high, with tall spikes of sood
which are vory pretty, and tho roots aro of tona
yard long, and as largo as a little finger. Instead
of fooling the late extremely hot weather,
noticed it had grown much during the week.
It is vory sweet and succulent, and cattle oatit
greedily; but it must not bo sown in arable land,
as it would be difficult to eradicate it. It would
be usoful on runs, not only for food, but also for
stopping bush Bros. If a plough was run across
and across tho run, and either seed or roots
planted, it would form a bolt of gresn no firo
would pass; or if oaton down, whioh it moat
likely would bo, there would bo a bare space ,to
stop tho firo. A single lino would soon spread a
yard wide. A soedling will cover a square foot
the first year, and tho roots can bo taken up and
planted without auy fear of clearing tho ground.
It will oamo up again quite thioklj, every root-
lot growing. The roots also mat togothor, so
that it is usoful to plant to provout watercourses
washing away tho soil, for whioh purpose I
have given a largo quantity of roots to
Mr. Maid for the waterworks. In stony
places, if a stone is raised and a joint of root
placed under it, it will shoot up all round, and
never wants resowing. You will be able to give
the best information about time and mode of
sowing; if too early the slugs eat it off, and I
think it should bo_ pretty deep or the ants and
birds oat it; it will sometimes lay two or three
years in the ground.
“ I lla va circulated the seed far and wide. I
have distributed more than 1,000 packets;
through Mr, Todd it has boon sent to every
telegraph station between Port Augusta and
Port Darwin—a friend going homo overland
took nearly 100 packets for distribution on the
route; another friend who travelled through
Western Australia distributed and planted it
wherever he went, and I am now sending a parcel
to the Cape, I gave half the original plant,
when about four years old, to a sheepfarmor;
it filled a corn sack, and the man had to make
two trips to carry it away.
“It does not thrive sio well in the hills, for
although it will grow it is never so luxuriant as
n the warmer plains.”
The Cutstail Grass (Phleum pratense, Lin). —
A native of Europe. Probably bearing this name
from the seed panicle, which has some resem-
blance to a oat’s tail. This is a first-class grass,
and one of the beat and most valuable of all
perennial foddor grasses, It stands our climate
well, and seems not particular regarding the
soil, as ifc thrives well in sandy or heavy soils.
It is worthy for recommendation, especially for
pasture.
Oat Grass (Avena olalior, Lin) Also of
European origin. This is an excellent grass.
It is nutritious, and seems to grow and produce
wall on every kind of soil. This valuable grass
suffers little from the droughts, and can bo
recommended as a superior grass for hay.
Groat recommendation deserve the two
Falling Awn grasses—(Piptatherum Thomasii,
Knth, and Piptatherum multiflorum Boauv.)
Xho first is a native of Corsica; the
second from the southern parts of Europe.
Both are first-class grasses, and these kinds
are some of my first importations, and
have stood their ground well. They hear
our climate uncommonly well, and will pay
the cultivation, as they are throughout the
year iu a growing state; and I can recommend
them as some of the boat of the collection.
Cattlo are very fond of both.
The next grass, oallod the Millet grass (Milium
multiflorum, Oav.), a native of Europe. This
grass is also worth the cultivation for summer
and winter fodder. It stands our droughts well,
and could bo also used for hay. Tho produoo
of tho millet grass is superior to many kinds of
grasses. It nourishes, 1 may say, in every soil
if not too poor, and the cattle like it very much,
I introduce now to you throe other kinds of
Panic grasses, namely, Panioum tomeutoaum.
Roxb. jPamoum Tomoriffao, B, Br., a native of tho
Canary Islands; and Panioum crus galli, Lin.
Nearly all the panioum species, of which are
known nearly 300 kinds, are nutritious and
fattening grasses, and worth tho cultivation.
They are chiefly tropical and subtropical,
and endure the influence of our scorching heat
and droughts well. All three are worth tho
recommendation, Pauicuni Tonerilfao is only an
annual or. summer grass, but well worth tho
cultivation, as it thrives well in, sandy and poor
soil, A


Tho following grass is tho Pennisotum grass
(Ponnisotum villosum, R. Br.), a native of
Abyssinia. It is not a tall-growing grass, but a
capital grass pasture.
I bring now to your notice the Fescue grass
(Pestuca duriusoula, Liu,), of European origin,
and well adapted for permanent pasture; it
thrives even well on sandy soil, and resists the
drought. Cattle are very fond of it. There are
soma other kinds of fescue grasses, namely,
Festuoa elatior and F. ovir.a, which aro all worth
tho reoommendatisn for rural purposes.
The next grass is called Cocksfoot (Dactilays
glommorata, Lin.), a native of Europe. This
is also a valuable grass, adapted as well to dry
as to moist soils. Its yields of fodder is abun-
dant, so also its nutritious qualities. It endures
our droughts well.
Tho Buffalo grass (Stenotaphrum glabrum, Jrin.),
a native of tho warmer countries of America,
■which I cannot sufficiently recommend. It is a
perennial, mid every farmer and squatter should
not be without some of this valuable grass. It
is a creeping grass like tho oouoh or dub grass,
and is capable of standing any drought. Its
fattening qualities I think are not so groat as
tho before-mentioned grasses; bub the cattle
and sheep like it very much. It thrives well on
sandy soil, and is easily propagated from
cuttings, as every little piooo will grow, and
after taking root it spreads very rapidly. It is
also well adapted for binding, river hanks or
sandy spots. It can advantageously bo used for
permanent pasture. Tho buffalo grass is entitled
to a general introduction to our pasture. It is.
also very suitable for garden lawns. Every one
who has visited Sydney no doubt has been
struck with the fine lawns, especially those of
tho Botanic Gardens. Since the last two
years I have used it also for this pur-
pose instead of tho couch grass. The
buffalo grass keeps its verdant freshness
winter and summer—a great contrast regarding
tho dulness of tho colour which tho couch grass
has during tho winter. Notwithstanding, ns
already mentioned, that in appearance the
buffalo grass seems to be coarse, cattle readily
feed on it.
Tho Oouoh grass (Oynodon Daotylon, Pors.)
which has boon introduced, it is said, from India
to Sydney, deserves also mentioning. It pos-
sesses all tho qualities of the buffalo grass, and
lam told that tho sheep are very fond of it. I
know that tho oattlo, if they can got on other
grass, will not touch it; but if tho green food
becomes scarce they relish it also. The squatters
would do well to introduce this grass on thoir
runs, as it spreads as rapidly as tho buffalo
grass.
Another grass which I can also recommend
highly is n kind of Canary grass (Phalaris Ameri-
cana, Elliot). I received the seed from America,
with tho recommendation of its boing a very
useful fodder grass. I have had it only two
years, but it seems to stand our climate, and
promises to be a great acquisition.
Tho Love grass (Eragroatis oylindrioa, Steud.),
a native of China, seems to bo also a good grass
tor pasture.
The next grass is called tho Bent grass
Agrostis oapillaris, Lin.); also this is a grass
well worth a trial for pasture.
Tho following two kinds of Job’s tears (Ooix
aoryma, Lin,, and Ooix oxaltata, Jacq.) are
worth a trial, especially tho last. They stand
the summer pretty well, and produce abundance
of nutritious food.
Not to tax your patience too much, I will
only mention the names of the following grasses
—The Hair grass) (Aira oaespitosarn, Lin.) and
tho Blue Kentucky grass, which I consider
both good for pasture.
Tho Rye grasses (Lolium porenne, Lin., and
Lolium Italioum, A. Br.), although very good
grasses for their nutritious powers, seem to
maintain their ground with us only one or two
years; after tho plants die off, consequently they
are not well suited for this country, where we
require a more permanent pasture. It is also
said, when tho plants begin seeding, the cattle
will not relish the grass, and neglect it. It
appears that both kinds of rye grass do not
thrive so well with us as is the ease in the
neighbouring colonies, especially in Victoria,
whore they are spoken of most highly as good
fodder and grazing grasses. All the seeds of
tho above-mentioned grasses should bo sown in
May or June in well-prepared ground.
I will now go over to the fodder plants, o
which I have not many on my list, and begin
with tho sheep bush of tho Capo of Good Hope
(Pentzia virgata, Loss.), of which His Excellency
has given us also such a good account. I re-
ceived a small parcel of seed of this valuable
shrub in 1869 from Dr. Hooker, Kow Gardens,
of which he remarks that tho plant is tho most
valuable sheep fodder for dry climates, and that
the sheep at tho Capo during tho summer
depend mostly upon this shrub. What tho salt-
bush is to the South Australian squatter so tho
shoopbush is to tho Capo squatter.
I raised about 20 plants, which have done
remarkably well, and prove that our olimuto is
well adapted for their growth. It is, as you see,
a much branched rigid little bush one or two
foot high. Tho leaves and branches contain an
aromatic bitterness, which I understand is
liked very much by shoop, which gives the
mutton a very lino peculiar flavour.
The plant is easily propagated from cuttings,
of which ovary one will grow if planted when
tho first rains begin to fall.
The nest two fodder plants aro known under
the names of Bib grass or Plantain (Plantago
major, Lin., and Plantago lanoeolata, Lin.), both
natives of Europe. No doubt both excellent
fodder plants; cattle and shoop aro very fond of
it. Tho plants thrive well on every soil all tho
year through it the season is not too severe.
It seems tho Rib grass is not generally known,
or it would have been more extensively grown.
I recommend it as a great acquisition on pasture
ground, especially for squatters, on the low lauds
of thoir runs, where it would supply a plentiful
pasture. If onoo established it spreads rapidly,
which I find in the experimental ground, where
the seedling plants spring up everywhere.
Another plant for shoop fodder to be re-
commended is the small Burnet (Poterinra
satguisorba, Lin), a perennial plant, which
will grow in every soil, stands our drought, and
fs readily eaten by the sheep. As it is easy pro-
pagated from seeds and auokors tho squatter
should introduce it on his ran.
Not much attention, 1 think, has been paid
yet to the different kinds of Clovers, of which I
find several do well in tho Garden. Melitotus
alba, Dosz., M. officinalis, Lin., and M. lupulina,
Lam. do well, Tho clovers are known as nutritious
herbs. It is true many kinds of clovers dio
away in tho second year) hut tho above mon


tioned kinds seem to stand longer. I will also
mention that clovers thrive best in damp soil,
or on clay subsoils, which retain the moisture,
wore thoy will spread very rapidly. Lucerne
has been extensively cultivated, and therefore
I find it not necessary to mention more parti-
cularly hero, I would mention several other
fodder plants which flourish during the winter
months, but as during this time the food is abun-
dant I think it not necessary to apeak further of
thorn. This, your Excellency and gentlemen, are
the results of a seven years’ trial regarding the
capabilities of several foreign grasses and fodder
plants in this colony. X prefer not coming
earlier before the publio with my experience
until I had tested their durability. Thinking
this period sufficient for such a tost, the more so
as the plants withstood tho severest droughts we
have had, I can recommend these grasses with
confidence.
It depends now on tho farmer and squatter to
give them a fair trial, and call at the same time
to their mind tho old saying, and a very true one
it is, “ that the man who makes two blades of
grass grow whore one grow before is a publio
benefactor.” One remark more. It is now four
years since I read in tho same room a paper
<f on the Influence of Forests on the Climate,”
in which I pointed out tho necessity for laying
out forest reserves and planting trees on rail-
ways and main roads. Tho next year a report
of mine on tho same subject was laid before
Parliament. I know my scheme was then
criticised and ridiculed. Not minding this, on
tho contrary I persevered in giving a practical
impulse to the scheme, by raising forest trees at
the Garden for tho purpose of planting roads and
railways with.
Mr. Mais, the Engineor-m-Chiof, actuated hy
tho same desire, and a similar enthusiast in tho
matter, used the trees for planting around the
new and old reservoir and along the railways;
so that the Government has since the last throe
years received 14,967 forest trees for the pur-
pose, and for tho next planting season my stock
amounts to 12,000 more, for tho purpose of
planting the Burra Railway.
Mr. Krichauff, M.P., a well-known enthusiast
of planting forest trees, with his laudable energy
has now called to life my favourite scheme, and
so forest culture will bo introduced into this
colony, and it is now my sinoereat wish that it
may bo earned out most practically.
Should this evening’s lecture be also tbo means
of inducing the squatter and farmer to try the
growth of artificial grasses, I shall fool gratified
beyond my power to express.
Your .Excellency and gentlemen, accept my
best, thanks for the patient hearing of this
rather long paper, which I fear has rather
trespassed too much on your pationce; but
it is, I believe, unnecessary to assure you I
am only actuated by a very sincere dosiro to
benefit our agriculturists ; and I have the hope
for tho persons concerned and tho colony that
their labours may bo crownod with success; and
thou, I repeat once move, I shall fool gratified
beyond my power to express.
William Kyfliu Thomas, Printer, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
