

CP*1 P^3
\f
(r Tie.. Si
South Coast
. Of.
New South Wales.
Issued by the
Government Tourist Bureau,
Challls House,
Sydney.
Tel. 2321 Central.
| U> \ 1303.
j
°ll Of. IfLf


The South Coast ,
New South Wales.
* *
THE South Coast District ’of New South Wales, extending from
Sydney to the Victorian border, embraces some of the most
beautiful scenic resorts to be found within the whole Australian
continent. Much of the choicest scenery is traversed by the South
Coast railway line, running from Sydney to Nowra, a distance of
92 miles, and the traveller by this route passes a continuous series
of magnificent panoramas of ocean and rugged coastline, for which
it would be hard to find a paral'el. After skirting the western
boundary of the great National Park, and traversing the Otford
tunnel, the traveller is swept into the heart of the beautiful Illawarra
district, which has been aptly termed “ The Garden of New South
V\ ales,” famous for the marvellous wealth of its lovely vegetation.
Its eastern boundary is fringed with golden beaches and foam-crested
rollers, and on its western boundary is a sheltering wall of mountains,
round whose spurs the railway threads its way, which for the most
part lies close by the margin of the sea. Ideal nooks for holiday-
makers are to be found in the various watering-places of this
favoured district. The tourist resorts to the south of the railway
terminus at Nowra are reached by an excellent steamer service, a,nd
at the various holiday places the tourist can enjoy first-class fishing
and boating, and fine shooting over picturesque country.
The tourist proceeding to any of the nearer resorts between Sydney
and Nowra travels by the South Coast railway.
Tempe, 4 miles, is the nearest station for Cook’s River, where boats
are obtainable, and pleasant pulls may be taken up the river to
delightful picnic spots.
At Rockdale, 6 miles, passengers change into the tram which runs
to Brighton-le-Sands, fare 2d., where there are commodious baths,
pleasure grounds, and boat-sheds, on the shores of Botany Bay.
Steamers serve Kurnell, the landing-place of Captain Cook, during
the summer on Sundays and holidays from this wharf.
Erom Kogarah, 7 miles, a loop tram runs to Sans Souci and
Sandringham, Botany Bay, fare 2d., both pleasant picnic grounds,
with the usual holiday attractions. Steamer service to Kurnell
similarly to Brighton-le-Sands. Coaches leave at frequent intervals
for Sylvania, Blakehurst, and Tom Ugly’s Point.
Kurnell, the landing-place of Captain Cook, is situated just inside
the entrance of Botany Bay, on the southern shore, and contains
many points of historical interest, such as, the landing rock, Captain
Cook’s wells, Porby Sutherland’s grave, the monument and dam,
and inscription plate. Steamers leave Sans Souci, Sandringham,
Brighton-le-Sands, Botany, and La Perouse on Sundays and holidays
at frequent intervals for Kurnell, fare Is. return. Fireplaces and
summer-houses are available for the use of visitors.
Como, 12 miles, on the banks of the George’s River, a tidal-stream
which empties into Botany Bay, and which is crossed by a fine
bridge, 900 feet in length, is a very popular watering-place, and is
extensively patronised by Sydney people, who take advantage of
the quiet river for fishing and boating excursions. Parkesvale
Picnic Grounds are 8 miles up the river. A round trip can be made
to Fairfield, returning thence by rail.
Sutherland, 16 miles, is the nearest station to Cronulla Beach and
Port Hacking. Cronulla Beach is about 6J miles distant, with a
fine beach, fish hatcheries, furnished cottages, and hotel and boarding-
house accommodation.
Port Hacking is a famous fishing ground, and contains many
beauty spots, amongst which are Hungry Point, where the fish
hatcheries are situated, Gunnamatta and Burraneer Bays, Turriell
Bay and Lilli Pilli, also Yowie Bay (4 miles), with its pleasure-grounds
and furnished tents, and Gymea Bay; all of which are served by a
coach three times a week from Sutherland. Jibbon Point, Bundeena,
National Park, and Warumbul are on the opposite shores of the
port.
National Park, 18 miles.—Shortly after passing Sutherland, the
line touches the western boundary of the National Park, which
comprises an area of 33,719 acres. The Park has a frontage of 9
miles to the railway and oi 7i miles to the Pacific Ocean. This
immense national reserve consists mostly of high tablelands, which
vary in altitude from 350 to 500 feet above sea level, and from many


of them extensive, superb, and never wearying views of the ocean
and the surrounding country are obtainable. Summer or winter —
in fact, the whole year round —the air of these uplands is pure and
invigorating. Deep glens and gorges intersect the high tablelands,
and these valleys, scooped out by natural forces through the ages,
possess a wealth of quiet beauty. Some of the gorges are thickly
studded with majestic trees, which for centuries have stood in
solemn silence, unbroken by man’s footfall, like “ green-robed
senators of mighty woods ”; flats of rich soil produce vegetation
and foliage, semi-tropical in variety, profusion, and loveliness;
and the perpetual streamlets of pure fresh water trickle down the
gullies, keeping ever verdant the overhanging vegetation, and finally
swell in volume the principal watercourses within the park boundaries.
Several rest-houses are provided in the park, and extensive boatsheds
stand near the railway terminus, from which point visitors may
make boat excursions along the Port Hacking River, either on the
fresh-water side or along the tidal stream of salt water towards the
ocean. A day can be very pleasantly passed within the boundaries
of the park, as it offers such a plethora of charming views and beauty
spots, falls, and caves; or, if the visitor has more time to spare,
several days can be spent with advantage at the Park Settlement
at Audley, or at the branch establishments in the Port. The park
traffic is catered for directly by a branch line, which runs into the
park, but may also be reached from Sutherland. The line running
through the park attains considerable elevation, reaching near
Heathcote 626 feet, and at Waterfall 733 feet, and commanding
excellent views most varied and interesting, the country on either
side breaking away by a series of rolling hills and alternate gorges,
resembling, in some degree, the rugged grandeur of the Blue Moun-
tains.
At Audley, in the National Park, a Government Accommodation
House is conducted on first-class lines, and refreshments and accom-
modation may be obtained there.* Picnic hampers are also supplied,
and if visitors will telephone their requirements to the caterer from
Sydney, their wants will be promptly supplied on the arrival of the
train.
At Warumbul similar accommodation is also provided for visitors,
and there are also furnished cottages available both here and at
Gundamain. Launches leave the dam, Audley, on Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays 11.16 a.m., other days at 10 a.m., for Port
Hacking, fare Is. return, with a minumum of 55., and they may
also be hired by the day, returning from Warumbul at 3.45 p.m.
Buses meet all trains at Loftus and National Park platforms. Drives
are arranged by the coach proprietor, Loftus.
At Helensburgh, 27 miles, situated between two tunnels, an
extensive colliery exists. The train for several miles winds its way
in and out of alternate rugged cuttings and tunnels, with an occasional
glimpse of valleys, densely covered with a rich wealth of fern-trees
and palms.
A magnificent panorama of ocean, mountain, and forest —the gate-
way to the Garden of the South —bursts suddenly on the gaze of
the traveller as he emerges from the darkness of the longest of the
tunnels beyond Otford. No stage transformation scene ever appealed
to the bewildered mind of childhood more strongly than the revela-
tion that follows the clearing away of the smoke at the mouth of
Otford Tunnel appeals to the imagination of the travelled tourist.
The picture comes with dramatic force. One moment you cannot
see your hand before your face. All is darkness. The next moment
you are swinging round a curve, with the sunlit ocean at your feet,
taking in breaths of strong sea air, perhaps he -mg the boom of
the breakers on the rocks beneath louder than the rattle of the
train. Ranges tower high above the railway to the right; to the
left, the coast-line stretches southward as far as the eye can see
in a succession of noble headlands, linked by crescent-shaped beaches
of golden sands. The gullies are overgrown with palms and tree
ferns, the hillsides with forest trees. The ocean is frequently lost
sight of and picked up again. These ranges and the ocean are kept
in view all along. In reality the hills form a long, natural wall,
shutting the Illawarra district out from the rest of the State, and,
at the same time, contributing very largely to its romance and beauty.
Stanwell Park, 32 miles, an ideal tourist resort, is much sought
after by those in search of a quiet holiday. Delightful mountain
scenery, waterfalls, ocean beaches, and lagoons add new charms to
a locality famous for its even climate, bracing atmosphere, and good
accommodation.
Between Stanwell Park and Clifton the South Coast road hugs the
edge of the cliffs, bordering the ocean, while the mountains round
which the railway passes tower overhead. This section of the road
is one of the most interesting along a naturally picturesque route.
After passing Stanwell Park, Clifton, 35 miles, and Scarborough,
36 miles, are reached, and the district is noteworthy as being the
place where coal was first discovered in New South Wales. The
first discovery is attributed to Flinders and Bass, who did so much
in the early exploration of the New South Wales coast-line. On
from Clifton to Dapto, the line runs through an extensive coalfield
in which twelve collieries are operating.


Thirroul, 40 miles, with an ample supply of furnished cottages and
boarding-houses, has sprung into popularity owing to its fine beaches,
healthy atmosphere, and proximity to Bulli Pass. It is a pretty
township, nestling at the foot of the mountain, with several orchards,
the crops of blackberries in the vicinity finding employment for
many during the gathering season. Coaches leave daily for Bulli
Pass,_3_miles.
Bulli, 42 miles, is surrounded by magnificent mountain scenery,
fern glades, and sandy beaches. The public park and baths are close
to the railway station, and the town is well catered for by hotels
and boarding-houses.
Bulli Pass. —While this district has rich mining resources, it is
also exceptionally favoured in its grand scenery, and in the wealth
of vegetation that lies under the shelter of the hills. One of the
most interesting of journeys is to leave the train either at Thirroul
or Bulli (42 miles), and take a drive of about 3 miles by fairly well-
graded roads to the hilltops, where magnificent views of the under-
lying country and the ocean are to be had. A well-known writer
has said:—“ It is one of the most magnificent sights near Sydney.
Webber’s Lookout, a platform fixed on the edge of the Bulli
Mountain, fully a thousand feet above the waves, which lash the
rugged rocks beneath, is a spot which tourists who look upon the
view for the first time are loth to quit. Prom the platform, which
is on the outermost edge of a tall precipice, a varied and extensive
view is obtained of many miles of southern coast-line, and of rich
and fertile farms as far south as Kiama. The white sandy bays,
guarded by bold headlands, appear as a fringe to emerald-clad
ridges and rich, grassy flats, down which silver-glistening streams
glide onward to the sea. The jetties run out for shipping coal look
like slender frameworks stretching into the ocean, and, dwarfed
by distance : along them move what seem to be toy freight trains
bearing miniature loads to model vessels.”
Vehicles meet all trains at Bulli and convey visitors to the Pass,
fares, from 2s. 6d. per head return, according to number in party.
Woonoona and Bellambi, 44 miles, the former having no platform,
is reached from either Bulli or Bellambi. Both places are equally
handy to Bulli Pass, while Tourodgl Creek and beach are within
easy access, and afford safe bathing and good fishing. The bowling
green and tennis courts attract many visitors, while their wants
are well provided for by comfortable hotels and boarding-houses.
There are a number of large coal mines in the vicinity as well as
extensive and up-to-date coke works, which are well worth inspecting.
Wollongong, 48 miles from Sydney, is the principal centre of the
district, although Bulli, 6 miles on the north, and Dapto, 8 miles
on the south, are important towns. Wollongong can conveniently
be made the headquarters for a few days in the lovely Illawarra
district. The scenery about the town is charming, and many
enjoyable drives can be taken. Mount Keira, which rises to a height
of over 1,500 feet, overlooks the town, which is built on the edge
of the sea, a small harbour giving it, in addition to railway communi-
cation, the facility of sea communication also. Wollongong has a
number of comfortable hotels, with many well-constructed buildings,
and is the centre of considerable business activity, the mining
industry bringing a good deal of trade; while adjoining it on the
south is a district celebrated for its dairy farms, and although the
greater part of the business is dealt with by towns south of Wollon-
gong, the latter has some share of the trade that is associated with
it. Wollongong also offers excellent sea bathing, being furnished
with ladies’ and gentlemen’s baths; and frequently parties are
made up from the town for the purpose of fishing on the grounds
in the locality. After leaving Wollongong, the line takes a southerly
direction, passing Tom Thumb Lagoon, lying between the line and
the sea, the whole forming a pretty picture, as the ocean view is
broken by the group of islands known as Five Islands. Adjoining
them on the mainland is Port Kembla, which is to be the principal
shipping port for the South Coast mining business, the evidence of
coal-mining also being shown by the crossing of two private lines,
which carry coal from the mines to Port Kembla.
Mount Kembla and the Bordeaux River and Falls are reached
by delightful drives, and the golf links are claimed, locally, to be
unsurpassed in Australia.
Lake Illawarra is 8 miles by road from Wollongong, 2 miles from
Unanderra and Dapto, and adjoins Albion Park station. Visitors
may proceed to any of these stations, and drive to the lake, where
boats may be secured and a good day’s fishing enjoyed on its waters.
Several islands are dotted about the lake, some of which are provided
with shelter sheds and tanks; picnic parties and campers making
them a frequent rendezvous. A certain amount of shooting is also
to be obtained on the lake.
Unanderra, 52 miles, receives a large trade in milk for the metro-
politan market, the line passing through rich grasslands, and from
here to the terminus the country is chiefly devoted to dairying.
The country is exceptionally well watered and fertile, droughts
being practically unknown in this favoured region.


Dapto, 56 miles, is built on the shores of Lake Illawarra, a sheet
of water with a length of about 7 miles, connecting with the sea
opposite Windang Island. Brownsville is about 1 mile distant, and
is the nearest township to Lake Illawarra. Good hotel accom-
modation. The railway skirts Lake Illawarra between Dapto and
Abion Park, an excellent view of the lake being given from the
latter station.
Albion Park, 61 miles, Is one of the nearest Illawarra stations to
the Southern Railway line, via the road up the Macquarie Pass on
the way to Moss Yale, a trip which will well repay the tourist, as
the route passes through delightful and beautiful scenery. The
town is 2 miles from the station.
At Shellharbour station, 66 miles, the line is about 2 miles from
the coast, and at the waterside, 2 miles distant, is the village of the
same name, which is becoming very popular with tourists on account
of the beautiful beaches that lie close to it, aid the sea bathing
and fishing so easily obtainable. Lying back as it does from the
railway, it also affords a most restful place for a few days’ stay;
and plenty of occupation may be found in visiting its pretty beaches,
in driving about the district, or picnicking on Lake Illawarra, about
2 miles distant.
Among the places of interest are Little Lake, Long Point with
its succession of beautiful beaches, Minnamurra River, on which good
boating and fishing is obtainable, and Whispering Gallery, with its
peculiar cave-like formations.
Kiama, 71 miles. —After leaving Shellharbour the line once again
cuts on to the sea, practically running along the edge of the sea beach,
first crossing a pretty, stream, the Minnamurra, and later entering
finally into the heart of the town of Kiama, the station being within
a stone’s throw of the boat-harbour, to which coastal steamers ply.
Kiama offers good hotel accommodation, and is very popular with
excursionists, many families spending a pleasant vacation here. The
town is sheltered by a continuation of the Illawarra Range—the
Saddleback Mountain —which forms a shield against the westerly
winds. On the small promontory running out from the town
is the famous Blowhole, an extensive subterranean channel in the
rough volcanic rocks. In rough weather the noise of the sea driving
through the opening is heard some distance before reaching the
Blowhole, and the sight as the volume of spray is forced upwards
is grand.
The Cathedral rocks, amongst the many interesting rock forma-
tions of this district, may be seen from the railway carriage window
as visitors approach North Kiama. The rock is so called from its
remarkable resemblance to the tower of a cathedral.
Westward of Kiama lies the lovely fertile valley of Jamberoo, a
home of quiet rural beauty; the Minnamurra Falls are in the neigh-
bourhood, and other pleasant drives over good roads lead to Saddle-
back Mountain and numerous local sights.
Gerringong, 77 miles, is prolific in places of interest to the tourist,
situated on the edge of the ocean. The beaches with their bathing
and fishing afford the first attraction, but Mount Pleasant, Omega
Hills, Rose Valley, Mount Curry, the Crooked River, and others
embrace spots of fascinating charms to all lovers of the beautiful in
nature.
Berry, 84 miles, nearly midway between Kiama and Nowra, is a
thriving town, with a population of over 1,000, is splendidly laid
out, and named after the late David Berry, who practically owned
the whole country-side. Originally the estate embraced 70,000 acres,
but much of it has been cut up and sold to the industrious farmers;
so that, in addition to the tenantry, there is a considerable number
of landed proprietors settled in the district. From Berry to the
terminus the land is devoted to dairying.
Berry may be also reached by sea, by means of one of the Illawarra
steamers which pass through the Canal, Shoalhaven River, and
Broughton Creek, which is navigable up to the town. Good roads
also lead to Kangaroo Valley over the Cambewarra and Barrengarry
Mountains, or by way of Bellawangarah Mountain. A road over
Cambewarra leads to Nowra, and the round trip may be completed
direct back along the South Coast road, or following the course of
the Shoalhaven to the mouth, returning via Coolangatta. Splendid
fishing and good shooting.
Nowra. — Bomaderry, the railway station and terminus of the
Illawarra line, is close to the Shoalhaven River, and 3 miles outside
the town of Nowra, the river flowing in between; and the great
cost of carrying the railway over the river prevented it being taken
into the town. A splendid iron bridge for vehicle traffic crosses the
stream and both up and down the river the scenery is magnificent.
The river at Nowra is tidal, as it is only a few miles from the mouth.
Its total length is about 260 miles, and while in Its lower parts
evidence of cultivation is apparent owing to the very fertile flats,
on the upper reaches the scenery is wildly romantic, the Shoalhaven
Gorges, approachable from Goulburn, being remarkable for their


rugged grandeur, the river in places flowing 1,500 feet below the
cliffs which tower above it. Nowra has a population of about
2,500, and is a quiet but thriving town, being the depot for the
South Coast business lying beyond the railway. It possesses good
hotels, and is convenient for tourists who are making a journey to
Jervis Bay or Sussex Inlet (George’s Basin). Hotel accommodation
is available also opposite the station, and boats or launches at the
bridge. Coaches run daily from Nowra to Moss Yale via Kangaroo
Valley, through the famous Cambewarra and Barrengarry Passes and
Fitzroy Gorge, rail tickets from Sydney to Nowra being available
for return from Moss Vale. Ideal launch trips may be made to
Greenwell Point, Crookhaven River, or the higher reaches of the
Shoalhaven.
Jervis Bay, 15 miles from Nowra; conveyances may be had by
arrangement with the coach proprietors at Nowra. Splendid fishing
ground, safe bathing, and shooting in the surrounding country.
Hotel and boarding-house accommodation, launches and boats for
hire. The bay is extensively used for shot practice by the Austra-
lian naval squadron. Hotel proprietor will meet visitors at Nowra,
ss. each way.
George’s Basin (Sussex Inlet), 17 miles beyond Nowra, a large and
picturesque salt-water lake connected with the ocean at Wreck Bay
by a narrow inlet. Comfortable boarding-houses cater for the wants
of the visitor, while the lake affords plenty of sport, such as
shooting, fishing, sailing, rowing, and bathing. Visitors conveyed
from Nowra at the shortest notice, at reasonable rates according to
number. Telephone communication connects Nowra with Sussex
Inlet.
Wandandian, on the coach road to Milton, has comfortable hotel
and boarding-house accommodation, and affords good sport in the
creek of the same name.
Milton is in the centre of a fertile agricultural district, and is a
thriving township lying between the mountains, 7 miles away, and
the ocean, 4 miles. Lake Congola to the north, and Lake Burrill
on the south, afford good sport with line and gun. “ The Pigeon
House,” the first land sighted by Captain Cook, is 7 miles to the
back of Milton. Mail coach runs from Nowra, daily, Sundays ex-
cepted, at 2 p.m. and 11-30 p.m., and arrives at 8-30 p.m. and
6-40 a.m. (next day), calling at Wandandian and Congola en route.
returning at 6.30 a.m. and 9-40 p.m. Pares, 10s. single, 15s. return,
Ulladulla, a pretty seaport town 4 miles from Milton, is served
by coach from Nowra, and steamer from Sydney. There is good
snapper fishing, while Burrill River and Lake, in the neighbourhood,
are favourite fishing grounds; oysters being also plentiful on Lake
Tebourie. Wild duck, swan, and quail are obtained in season,
Coach leaves Milton for Ulladulla at 7-20 a.m. daily (Monday ex-
cepted), and arrives 7-50, returning at 8-55 p.m. (Saturday excepted),
fare, 25.; continuing to Bateman’s Bay, daily, 8 a.m. (Monday
excepted), arriving at 3 p.m., through fare, 11s. single, 15s. return
Nelligen, on the Clyde River, is 6 miles by road and 9 miles by
water from Bateman’s Bay. The district is an ideal tourist resort,
many beautiful scenes being within easy reach by land or water,
such as the mangrove creeks, dotted with picturesque islands, the
fern gullies and waterfalls of Sugarloaf Mountain. Boating, fishing,
and shooting afford splendid sport for enthusiasts, while the
roads are magnificent for driving, cycling, walking, or motoring,
Among the drives more particularly recommended is one to top of
Sugarloaf Mountain, Bolaro Mountain, and Pigeon House Mountain,
the top of the latter being reached by ladders used only by the more
venturesome spirits. Coaches run to and from Bateman’s Bay,
2s. 6d. each way.
Bateman’s Bay, an important seaport town, 38 miles from Milton,
is really an estuary of the Clyde River, which latter for fully 20
miles up contains excellent fishing grounds. Snapper Island, just
outside the bar, is a popular picnic and sporting ground, and
possesses a peculiar cave extending its entire length. Toll-gate
Island is close by. Bateman’s Bay is the seaport for an extensive
gold-mining district, which includes Araluen and Braidwood, and the
coach journey to either place via Nelligen passes through beautiful
mountain scenery and discloses panoramic views of the coast.
Coaches leave for Milton at 2 p.m. daily (Saturday excepted), lls.
single, 16s. return; for Moruya daily, at 3-30 p.m. (Monday excepted),
fare 55.; and for Braidwood and Tarago via Nelligen, on Sunday,
Wednesday, and Friday, at 3-30 p.m., fare 2s. 6d.
Mogo, an inland village lying between Bateman’s Bay, 9 miles,
and Moruya, 11 miles, dairying, mining, and timber cutting being
the main industries. Coaches leave daily (Sunday excepted) for
Bateman’s Bay at 12-30 p.m., fare 2s. 6d., and for Moruya at 4.30 p.m.,
fare, 2s. 6d.
Moruya, 11 miles from Mogo, and 20 from Bateman’s Bay, is
situated 5 miles from the heads, on the Dina or Moruya River, which
latter provides excellent fishing and boating. Fine snapper are
caught off the heads, while Lakes Coila and Tuross, 8 and 10 miles
south, are favourite fishing grounds. The climate is healthy, and


trips on the river, or drives through the surrounding country, afford
abundant amusement for the visitor, who is also assured of ample
hotel accommodation. A popular tourist route is that from Moruya
to Araluen, a prosperous gold-mining centre. Majestic mountains,
unfolding glorious views of the coast, and deep fern gullies are
features of this trip. Coaches leave for Bateman’s Bay at 10 a.m.
fare 55.; for Bodalla, at 4.30 a.m., fare 55.; for Wagonga, on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, at 5 a.m., and Noorooma on Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday, at 5 a.m., fare 10s. in either case. The
Araluen and Braidwood coach leaves daily, except Sunday, at
4-30 a.m., fares 7s. 6d. and 155., respectively.
Bodalla, 15 miles from Moruya, is the centre of a busy cheese-
making and bacon-curing community, the industry being established
on a very extensive scale- by Mr. T. S. Mort, the Bodalla Estate
now working four up-to-date cheese and bacon factories. Coaches
leave for Moruya daily, except Sunday, at 6 p.m., fare 55.; and
for Tilba at 8 a.m., travelling via Wagonga on Monday, Wednesday,
and Friday, and via Noorooma on Tuesday, Thursday, and Satur-
day, Fares to Wagonga or Noorooma, 55., and Central Tilba, or
Tilba Tilba, 10s.
Noorooma is a little village 9 miles from Bodalla, situated at the
mouth of the Wagonga Eiver. The district has an equable climate,
while in addition to pretty scenery there is a fair amount of swan,
duck, and pigeon shooting. Oysters are plentiful and fishing good.
Coaches leave for Bodalla on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, at
3.40 p.m., fares ss. single, and 7s. 6d. return; and for Tilba Tilba on
Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, at 10 a.m., ss. single, and 7s. 6d.
return.
Central Tilba and Tilba Tilba are passed through en route to
Bermagui; close to the former is the peculiar eminence known as
Mount Dromedary, with its two humps. Tilba Tilba Lake lies
between the coast and the township. Coaches leave for Cobargo
(ss. single, and 7s. 6d. return), and Bega (15s. single and 255.
return) dally, Sunday excepted, at 11.30 a.m.
Bermagui is the seaport town for Cobargo (13 miles distant).
The principal industry is agriculture, although a certain amount of
gold-washing was done on the sands some years ago. There are
good snapper grounds off shore, and during the season duck, swan,
and pigeons are obtainable. Coaches leave for Cobargo daily at
noon, fare ss.
Cobargo is situated at the junction of the Wandelia and Murrabine
Creeks, on the road from Moruya to Bega, being about 25 miles
north of the latter. Mimosa, bark once formed the chief article of
export, and large quantities are still furnished annually. The
harbour is Bermagui, with which there is steam and road commu-
nication. Doomsday Mountain and Wallaga Lakes are in the
vicinity. Quaama is 7 miles from Cobargo, the district being mainly
devoted to dairying, butter and cheese making.
Tathra, the port of Bega, from which it is distant 11 miles, is a
healthy and picturesque spot, occupying a commanding position on
a bluff at the mouth oi the Bega Biver. As a beautiful, secluded,
and healthy resort, with boating, oystering, and shooting, Tathra
has few rivals. Coaches leave for Bega after the arrival of the
steamer on Tuesday and Friday, fare ss. single, 7s. 6d. return.
Bega ranks next to Wollongong in point of size amongst South Coast
towns. The principal industries are butter and cheese making, maize-
growing, and pig-raising. Among the places which visitors should
see during their stay, which are either within easy walking distance
or are accessible by comfortable vehicles, are the Bega Biver which
winds its picturesque way to the ocean, between banks lined with
native oaks. It affords good fishing and boating. The Wallagoot,
Boumda, Nelson, and Woppengu Lakes offer splendid fishing attrac-
tions. Pleasant walks and drives to picturesque spots abound.
Good sport with gun and rod. Coaches to Tathra, Tuesday and
Friday at 10 a.m., fare ss.
Candelo is 14 miles from Bega by a good road over fine undulating
country, and along the banks of the creek of the same name. The
town is situated on both sides of the creek, which is spanned by a
footbridge. Coaches run to and from Bega daily.
Wolumla is situated on Shannon’s Creek, at the junction of the
Monaro and South Coast Beads, 30 miles from Eden, and 10 from
Candelo. Cooma is the nearest railway station, 84 miles away. It
is the centre of a large fertile agricultural and pastoral district,
with butter and cheese factories, which are the principal support.
Bock-gold is worked within a mile of the town. Massy Peak (2,226
feet) is in the vicinity. Coaches daily to Eden and Bega.
Merimbula, the port of Panbula, from which it is 4 miles distant,
is located on the lake of the same name. The town is celebrated
for the manufacture of maizena and cornflour, the works being
situated on the shores of the lake. The port is served by the
Illawarra Company’s steamers twice a week, and coaches meet all
steamers, and leave daily for Panbula at 1 p.m., fare 2s. 6d.


Panbula, on a picturesque stream of that name, which discharges
into the southern end of the bay forming the outlet from Panbula
Lake. Boating and fishing are both good, and oysters are plentiful,
and there is good shooting. The district is principally devoted to
dairying. Panbula Beach, 7 miles in extent, is a favourite surf-
bathing spot, while 2 miles distant is Broadwater, a popular picnic
ground. Coach to Merimbula daily, fare 35.; and Eden, ss. single,
7s. 6d. return.
Eden is 350 miles S.W. from Sydney, on the shores of Twofold Bay,
which latter being easy of access and well sheltered is valuable as a
harbour of refuge. In size and security it is second only to Port
Jackson. The larger bay is 3 miles broad by 6 miles in length.
A certain amount of whaling in open boats is carried out at Eden.
Pishing, boating, and yachting are popular pastimes. The historic
settlement of Boyd Town is well worth a visit. Here may be seen
the Boyd Town house, the ancient church, the quaint old buildings
at East Boyd, which, in 1843, was the residence of Mr. (afterwards
Sir) Oswald Brierly, who in his later years was marine painter to
Queen Victoria, and the old and massive tower on South Head, its
coping stones bearing the name of its founder, Ben Boyd, afterwards
killed in the Solomon Islands. Within the entrance of the Kiah
River is the “ trying-out ” station, in connection with the whaling
industry, which is carried on here to a considerable extent. A day
trip may be made through lovely mountain scenery to Towamba,
or to Mallacoota Lakes, and Genoa River, with good shooting and
fishing. Oil launches and boats are available for the use of visitors
on Twofold Bay. Coaches run to Panbula (and northwards) daily,
fare 55., and via Bega and Nimitybelle, or via Bombala to Cooma
railway station, 108 miles distant, fare 455.
STEAMER FARES FROM SYDNEY.
Steerage.
Saloon.
Single. Return.
Single.
Wollongong
Shellharbour.
Kiama..
Nowra
Ulladulla
Bateman’s Bay
Moruya (including coach to Bate-
man’s Bay).
„ direct
Nelligen.
Narooma, Wagonga.
Bermagui.
Tathra.
Merimbula.
Eden Illawarra S.N.Co.
„ Union S.S. Co
„ Melbourne S.S. Co.
£ s. d.
0 4 0
0 5 0
0 6 0
0 15 0
10 0
1 1 6
0 17 6
10 0
0 17 6
15 0
1 10 0
1 10 0
1 10 0
1 11 6
1 11 6
£ s. d.
0 10 0
12 6
1 10 0
1 12 6
15 0
1 10 0
17 6
1 15 0
2 0 0
2 0 0
2 5 0
2 7 3
2 7 3
Arrangements are being made for rail tickets to Cooma to be
available for return from Eden and vice versa, and for a rail, motor.
and steamer coupon ticket to be issued.
Further information on application at the—
NEW SOUTH WALES
GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU,
Challis House, Martin Place, Sydney.
Tel. 2321 Central.
(gs) (sj
49455 Sydney : W. A. Gullick, Government Printer.—l9o9.


f5 ' (J * /: J =
OH \—n q
y I -< $
