

'p' -w , • . ■;'• . ... •'
J& £c. J SA ><*■ "
t //l d V
v?G /%c^cs
“THE DANGER CONTROLLED.”
A SERMON
EOR THE
Sunday after the Attempted Murder
PRINCE ALFRED,
PREACHED IN
St. Ink's, AUuifilxiirU.
BY THE
Rev. ZACHARY BARRY, M.A.
SgDneg:
JOSEPH COOK & CO,, PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
1868.
i' •
i


This Sermon, 'preached in the ordinary course to
a small country congregation, would not by the preacher have
been deemed worthy of general notice, —had not the wishes
of others, whose opinion he values more than his own,
pointed to its publication as a duty.
The preacher having no notes whatever, or
memorandum of the discourse, his friends who heard it will
excuse if they should find any variations in the manner or
expression.


A SERMON.
“Be of good cheer ; it is I; he not afraid .” St. Matthew xiv. 17.
A storm upon the sea of G-alilee ! Terror and despair with the
disciples of Jesus! The place, the persons, the circumstances all
are alike striking. If any men ever bore a charmed life, surely
they were these ; if ever there was in our fallen world a paradise
of beauty and of repose, it was there in the lake and its surround-
ings. Nestled deeply amid surrounding hills, secure from the ruder
winds, save only where Jordan found a passage for its waters ;
The deep, sunlit, cloudless blue so familiar in yonder Austral sea,
intensified by the burning reflections of the surrounding rocks,
by the contrast of the snowy hills of Hermon and the arid cliffs
of Peroea —the usually still, placid surface broken only by the
leaping of the fish that swarmed beneath, or by the boats employed
in their capture : at evening giving back with a double twinkling
the stars of eastern skies —and all this set in a frame of luxuriant
vegetation such as Josephus describes as a very miracle of variety
and culture, now alas ! blasted by the curse of Islam. These are
not the scenes in which one naturally looks for “ the toiling in
rowing,” the “ contrary winds,” the raging billows that lash the
fishers’ boat beyond the control of the helm ; the blank pallor of
despair : nor are these chosen ones of Jesus the persons upon
whom this danger might be expected to fall while their Master
“holds the winds in the hollow of His hand” —aye, and in such a
scene, and to such persons to fall, under circumstances to which
His own commandment led.


His own commandment. During the day, He had fed a multi-
tude with a few loaves and fishes, and the impetuous mob wished
to mate Him their king, and although knowing that they only fol-
lowed Him for the loaves, He wall not commit Himself to them.
Hollow r -hearted, carnal, and fickle as they were, He pities them,
deals gently with them, sends away His disciples across the lake
that He may be alone to dismiss the people the more delicately,
and retires to the mountain to pray. He continues until long
past midnight praying. Does He forget that, although He has
sent back the unbelieving to their peaceful homes after having-
fed them and healed their sick, He has committed to the boister-
ous waves His own —His chosen from the world ? —that those long
hours from evening until near dawn, while He prays alone, they
vainly toil, and are ready to sink P
They may have thought so : or, if they did not quite believe He
had forgotten them, they may have looked at the storm, and the
foaming sea, and the white angry tops of the waves between them
and Bethsaida, the live-long night, and said, “ The Master cannot
join us over these. Oh ! if He were but here.”
Faith succumbs to mortal dread; —the panic of the hour con-
fuses the lessons wdiich He had given them of the eternal
superiority of the Spirit to mere material force—yea, even of
Himself, the Son of Man, to nature and its laws ; and when faith
ebbs, then flows mere superstitious alarm. Behold a figure
serenely advancing through the storm, His way in the sea, his
path in the mighty waters, his footsteps upon those crested
billows! Even yet faith will not revive, and as He passes they
cry out in terror, “ An apparition!” Yet, even so,
in a state so abject, are they not His ? He wall reveal Himself.
They are His sheep : they know His voice. “Be of good cheer.
It is I. Be not afraid.” A slight hesitation even to believe this.
“Ifit be thou, bid me come to thee on the water.” And what if
he sinks awhile when faith again trembles! —when it revives, the
fisher walks, he treads the waves in which the boat could scarcely
live. The Master enters, and they are already at land.
Trouble, fear, sorrowq infirmity, bereavement, sickness, bitter
discipline of trial, must not be looked on as only evils —they are


only such to those who fail in their darkest hour to listen to that
voice—“ It is I.” When He comes to us in the storm, we are at
the land. It is not in vain that He saith, “ Blessed are they that
mourn for they shall he comforted.” Many a time has the soul
taken its ease, eat, drunk and been merry, gliding without an
effort over peaceful waters, —the sun of prosperity reflected from
the flapping sails, no thought, no care upon the faces of the
voyagers, —and the end only tended to death—hut out of the mer-
ciful tempest of trouble that strains the hark, and arrests the
progress, and makes the mariners tremble —and brings helpless
man face to face with his GIod —has come the one only voice that
is mighty to save —“ It is I, be not afraid.”
The many intricate cares and chances of speculation or of trade
gather and entangle around the man of money, or of position or
power —of you who have been so engrossed by these that the very
living seed is “ choked ” by unwholesome weeds —these mischances
multiply, overwhelm you. You ar q ruined, you say ; nay, it may
be, it is only now, if you will receive it, that you may be saved—
for not only in this storm Jesus may come —but He has brought
the storm that He may come and say, “ Be of good cheer, it is I.”
If you but listen for, and recognize it, and welcome it, yours has
been a happy loss.
How often, unknown before, has He been found in a time of
restless pain, or lingering sickness —how often has He been seen
through tears shed beside the dying and the dead —tears which
flow still at intervals, but have lost half their bitterness and all
their despair, since He has so blessed them to salvation. It is
the very true end of every trouble —to bring Jesus to you —to
bring you to Jesus, aye, even walking upon the tempestuous sea,
to find Him and be found in Him.
And chiefly in that hour, the darkest and most terrible of all,
when your “ sins have gone before to judgment,” self-convicted,
polluted, your soul now at length awakened to the dread account,
and the awful depth of your ruin—your life having unmasked it-
self to you, all disguises gone, the fearful looking for of judg-
ment and fiery indignation, this only looming everywhere you
turn. Toil, work, do penance, lo ! the waves are angry still,


Will you call this a merciful trouble, £ where the spirit itself is
broken ? Tes, look for Jesus then, a broken and a contrite
heart He will not despise—godly sorrow worketh repentance
unto salvation, then more than in all other troubles, the Sun of
Righteousness will beam —the Saviour’s voice be heard “ It is I,
be not afraid,” “ come unto me, I will give you rest.”
But you must remember, my brethren in Christ, that the
persons in the tempest on the lake, were the very apostles of
the Lord —if then He pleases to turn troubles into blessings for
the yet unconverted and thoughtless —what shall we think of the
troubles He brings upon His own F “ Every branch in me that
beareth fruit He purgeth it that it may bring forth more fruit.”
He deliberately sends these disciples into the storm, but still He
calmly holds it in the hollow of His hand, and controls it; it
must not be suffered to overwhelm them, but it is suffered to try
their faith, to convince them of their own inability to help them-
selves, to show them Himself more intimately than ever, their
defence and for their sakes the omnipotent master of all things.
Eor you who are already His cannot safely be left always in the
calm sunshine, the trial will descend and perhaps without our
being able to assign any immediate cause —why this time rather
than at some other ? Our Lord however it is, that brings it, and
see, it is He that comes through it. We do not recognize Him at
first—we are terrified. Ah! but it is He, we know His voice,
no trouble but yields to that word “Be of good cheer, it is I; be
not afraid.”
The lesson, then, as I read it, is in all trouble to recognize His
hand and purpose bringing it on us, and controlling it; and His
voice and presence comforting and relieving us. And as such was
to be the state, and has actually been the state of the Church, as
well as of every portion of it: and as the fortunes of the Church
and of Con’s people were in that little vessel then tossed on the
Sea of Galilee —so came this scene —a ship tossed upon the waves,
to be from the earliest times the emblem of the Church of Christ.
In an hour of public calamity, which indeed has become to each
of us a private one, through the intensity of sympathy for the
sufferer, and of abhorrence of the crime—l feel it would be


impossible to avoid the subject to which our minds are turned by
a voice of Providence —and indeed this trouble is but one of the
many to which onr lesson applies, and one that has fallen on us
unexpectedly in a festive day, like that sudden squall that lashed
the smooth waters of Grab Ice into fury.
We have read from month to month of the conspiracy first
begun among American malcontents, which after miserably and
ridiculously failing in open fight with a few scattered Irish police,
is just enabled to startle the world with the atrocity of cowardly
murder of unarmed men, and the wanton explosion of gunpowder
in the midst of women and children, and innocent room-keepers.
This conspiracy has extended here —here where there is not
the pretence of a grievance, and has produced as its first overt
act, the attempted assassination of the son of our unrivalled
Queen —of the noblest, the gentlest, the purest, the most
sympathetic monarch that ever adorned a throne.
The Prince who was the messenger of Her Majesty’s love to us,
her distant children, now lies upon a bed of suffering—that it
was not a bed of death is almost a miracle —and I am bold to
say, that there are few indeed who do not suffer with him.
But what evil spirit is it that actuates men to such fiendish guilt!
It is absurd to pretend that they are influenced by any idea of
destorted patriotism. The name of Ireland is taken as a mere
stalking horse. I who speak to you am an Irishman inheriting
the name and the blood through many generations, and there are
multitudes of my countrymen who feel with me. It is our sorrow
and shame to read the pretence of those traitors to Ireland as well
as to the Queen, to the sacred name of patriot. Were Ireland
left alone to-morrow there might ensue a civil war there, but of
this be sure, that in six months Irishmen would have crushed
Penianism. And if this conspiracy were really patriotic, still of
what avail to stain it with blood, to no purpose whatever. If
there were wrongs to be righted, how could the death of Alfred
affect them ? Tidings might indeed have gone to England which
would have caused the world to shudder at the name of Irishmen ;
they might have broken the heart of the widowed Queen already
bearing the heavy burden which can only be finally eased when
she shall have eternally rejoined the husband of her love. But


for any political purpose the deed were absolutely futile, neither
the succession, the throne, nor the courage of the people would
he affected.
I cannot doubt that the instinctive conclusion of the people
has been correct, that it is sectarian hate which actuates the
conclave which allotted this office of murderer. It has ever dis-
played itself, in a thousand ways, against the Protestant Crown of
England. Ido not fear to say that the guardianship of the faith
purified from the additions and abuses of ages, brought to Great
Britain as to the storm tossed disciples, through a thousand difficul-
ties, of insidious plotting and of open wars, the special Protection
of her Lord. The ocean that wasthebosdm of her repose became the
bulwark of her safety. The winds of Heaven waited upon the
argosies of her commerce, and upon the fleets of her wars : her in-
domitable armies went forth conquering and to conquer when the
huge continental monarchies melted away before the Destroyer,
the G-on of the armies of Israel becoming the Hon of the armies
of Britain. British justice in law, British honour in diplomacy,
British honesty in commerce, British solvency in negotiations,
British liberty at home, British freedom for the negro. The
English language and race filling half the world with their vigour.
The state passing through tempests which threatenedto overwhelm
her, yet preserving always that purified faith, in her darkest hours,
came ever to her relief the Lord of peace and victory. But there
has ever been as there is now, jealous, watchful, insidious, un-
scrupulous, the adverse influence of a Foreigner.
Because the subjects of that foreigner in the British Isles iden-
tified themselves with rebellion, because said Eoreigner # claimed
* Pope Pius Y., in the year 1570, fulminated his Bull “ Gena Domini,”
entitled “ The Damnation and Excommunication of Elizabeth, Queen of
England, and her adherents, with an addition of other punishments.” From
this Bull these sentences are extracted. “We do, out of the fullness of our
apostolic power, declare the aforesaid Elizabeth, being a heretic and a favourer
of heretics, and her adherents in the matter aforesaid, to have incurred the
sentence of anathema.” “And moreover we do declare her to be deposed of
her pretended title to the kingdom aforesaid, and of all dominion, dignity, and
privilege whatsoever.” “ And also the nobility, subjects, and people of the


and exercised the right to absolve them from allegiance to their
sovereign, andthey were therefore treated as dangerous to the throne,
they called this necessary treatment a religious disability, and now
after these things have passed away, they make their ghosts subserve
the purposes of agitation, nay they have carried their memories
across 16,000 miles of ocean, and hatch their plots, and arm their
assassins here on this virgin soil, which ought surely to inherit
none of the bitter passions of European strife.
That the Eenian spirit exists here, and is organized here, some
have affected to deny, but no one who does not willingly shut his
eyes and ears, really doubts. Its fiercest Irish newspapers are
publicly vended in the shops, must there not be buyers P It has
had a local organ not concealing its principles, can it exist
without supporters ? Is nobody to blame that existing so openly
no one disturbed it: yea, that any one who dared to breathe a
word of warning was set down as intolerant, until the plot was
succeeded by the act which has chilled our blood with horror.
Nobody to blame —nobody. —That print has just now been
denounced in Parliament as seditious —yet it had been laid regu-
larly on the reading room table for the legislators to read—and
so far patronized by Parliament.
Nobody to blame—it had been laid on the table of the Library
of the School of Arts for our mechanics and the general subscri-
bers to the Institute, which received public money.
People were not at all thought unfashionable who refused the
Queen’s health in public toasts —and the reason we were given
said kingdom, and all others which have in any sort sworn to her, to be for
ever absolved from any such oath, and from all manner of duty of dominion,
fidelity, and of obedience; as we also do by the authority of these presents
absolve them, and deprive the same Elizabeth of her pretended title to the
kingdom and all other things above-mentioned. And we do command and
interdict all and every the noblemen, subjects, people, and others aforesaid
that they presume not to obey her or her monstrous mandates and laws, and
those who shall act contrary we involve in the same sentence of anathema.”
Pope Gregory XIII. renewed and confirmed the same Bull for deposing the
Queen of England and absolving her subjects from their allegiance. Sixtus V.
confirmed the damnatory sentences of his predecessors, and published a cru-
sade against England, giving a plenary indulgence to all who assisted in the
war.


for passing these things by was —that we must respect the amiable
weakness of one sensitive denomination.
Are the heads of that denomination blameless ? Certainly not.
I am sure they contemplate with horror the event which has
occurred —Gron forbid that T should think so ill of them as to
doubt this—but men may not fling about lighted matches in a
magazine, and then wash their hands of responsibility, when men
stand aghast at the explosion.
The books* which they haveused in their Schools, and which they
agitate to be allowed still to use at public expense, have been in Par-
liament proved to contain partizan, political readings, calculated to
foster disaffection : andattheirfirstmeetinginaugnratinganew agi-
tation for the continuance of those books, one rev. gentlemen was
permitted to hint broadly at the alternative of bloodshed , and he
was promoted to honour in the movement. They did at their own
episcopal dinner at Groulburn put the Queen’s health second to
# Some of the very titles of the subjects chosen for lessons for youth in the
hoots of the Christian Brothers, as hitherto used in Romish schools in this
colony, and now contended for, are suggestive of political strife. For
instance, in Book IY. we have, p. 389 —“ The State Trials of 1844,” introduc-
ing the children to the most violent conflicts of the Repeal agitation, during
which the agitator is glorified as “ the Liberator.” There are other chapters
in the same book devoted to him and his agitation, at 363 and 391, while at
p. 252, Sir Jonah Barrington is quoted to excuse “ an innate spirit of insubor-
dination to the laws” in the character of the Irish peasantry, “because the
punishment of crimes appears rather a sacrifice to revenge than a measure of
precaution ;” this being assumed to be the spirit of English law.
In the same series, the good Fathers have a book on “ Christian
Politeness,” which among other things gives a list of hooks which
ought to be read. Among these is “ Cobbett’s History of the Protestant
Reformation,” a strange volume to illustrate “politeness,” Christian or pagan.
Any educated man must at once see that it is a foul, false, coarse, vulgar,
spiteful and ignorant lampoon, calculated for one end —to abuse the Crown,
(except in the cases of Mary and of James II.), and shake the allegiance of the
fools -who believe it. To call it “ a history” is absurd, it is a series of inflam-
matory harangues, and its character for truth may be estimated without
opening it—by the lying illustration on its cover which represents “ Queen
Elizabeth consecrating an Archbishop !” “ Christian Politeness,” as under-
stood by the “ brothers, - ’ suggests to the gentlemanly “ historian” the use of
the name “Betsy” for this Queen. The hook is introduced herein a cheap
form, and widely circulated as recommended, and one often hears its words
quoted even by the school-boys as if it were Gfospel ?


that of the Pope —let no one say “ oh ! that was merely acknow-
ledging his spiritual supremacy; there can he no pretence
of spirituals in toasts and “ flowing hnmpers ” (I use the words
of the chief dignitary of the occasion.)
One priest at least did, without open rebuke, publish
two letters accounting for, if not extenuating Penianism, and
reviving the spirit of grievances long defunct. And finally, the
Bishops and others did suffer that well-known journal of which I
have spoken, to be taken and accepted as the organ of the denom-
ination in the country. Did you want an episcopal charge ?it
was there you found it. Did you want an appeal for a Romish
charity ? there you must search for it. Did you desire to learn
what you might eat and what not in Lent? there again side by
side with articles of unquestionable disloyalty. So that the poor
murderer might learn what he practised —that it was wrong to
eat a little bacon, on the morning of the day in which he had no
scruple about shooting our Prince.
Parents and children who used a public school were refused the
sacraments ; but that journal has been patronized, and there is
no denunciation of its writers.
Aye, and this was the cause of its continuance. It never
would have found its way into the libraries of Parliament or the
School of Arts, as a Penian organ. But it did as a # Eoman Catho-
lic organ. Now somebody was to blame that the Roman Catholic
organ should not have been different. There are many loyal
Roman Catholics,! but they do not seem to have influenced their
* The Yicar-General has since endeavoured to shake off the odium of this con-
nection on the ground that the journal was not “under the censorship of the
Church.” If this is all he has to say, then judgment goes against him by default.
The Homan Catholic journals in Great Britain and the Colonies are not under
censorship, and the Vicar-General will not, I presume, assert that the journal
in question circulated amongst the members of any other denomination, or
contained their contributions, appeals, reports, &c. And as his denomination
alone supported it, and as it was their reputed organ, and as this notorious
connection was never authoritatively disclaimed, the conclusion is necessary.
If the Bishops hated the paper’s principles, why choose it for their pastorals ?
f Nobody doubts the personal loyalty of such men as Mr. W. A. Duncan,
Mr. Fitzpatrick, and Mr. O’Connor, who spoke at the Civil Service Meeting, and
the mass of educated Eomanists; hut when they go so far as to allege that


priesthood. May God grant that their influence may at length
prevail, that we who are free may not fail to help what is good
and true within that Church, by honestly speaking the truth, and
not hiding it by a spurious liberalism, more akin to fear than
to charity. True charity rejoiceth in The Truth.
I said that the text taught, that the hand of the Saviour, for a
purpose, launched us on a sea of troubles, and through them will
“ there is nothing in the teaching of their Church that could tend to disloyalty”
—or when Mr. Duncan “ defies any man to produce any work of note —any
work that was regarded as an authority by Roman Catholics which did not
preach up loyalty”—then they only say what they wish, not what really is-
We do not look, of course, for disloyalty in “ the Creed but short of that there
is no author of greater note in the Church than Bellarmine, and Dr. Peter Dens
has had his theology approved in Ireland so lately as by Archbishop Murray.
Now the latter adopts the views of Bellarmine, and quotes a host of great
authorities, who likewise agreed in such sentiments as I here quote out of
many of like effect: —
“ The thing is certain and thoroughly examined that the Pope for just tem-
poral causes can also sometimes depose temporal princes.”—Bellarmine, Bk.
vii. De Excusat. Barclair, chap. iii. “ The existence of this power in the
Pope concerning temporals is not a matter of opinion among Catholics, but a
certainty.”— ld. “ The Church would sin grievously if she allowed any king
to tolerate heresy without punishment.” —Bk. 1. De Rom. Pontif., lib. v.,
ch. vii. “It is not right for Christians to tolerate an heretical Icing, if he
endeavour to draw away his subjects to his heresy.”— ldem.
Bellarmine enumerates twenty-one Italian authors, fourteen French, nine
German, seven English and Scotch, nineteen Spanish, and these not common
but eminent authors who are of this opinion. Peter Dens (Bk. ii. De Ecclesia)
says “Bellarmine, Sylvius, and others assert that the Pope hath not by divine
right direct power over temporal kingdoms, but indirect: that is, when the
spiritual power cannot be freely exercised, and cannot obtain its end by spiritual
means, then it can recur to the temporal, according to Aquinas, who teaches
that princes can sometimes be deprived of their dominions, and subjects libe-
rated from their oaths of allegiance, and this was done more than once by the
Popes.”
Even these opinions Bailly, who is more moderate, says “ soften down the
matter a little,” as compared with the views of the Transalpine doctors.
It is quite true that the gallican party in the Church of Rome do not hold
those sentiments, and the voice of this party comprising some of the holiest
men and the noblest intellects of the world, did once exercise a commanding
influence. But that voice no longer speaks above a whisper. In Ireland and
here it does not speak at all — all the Bishops aee IJiteamontane oe
Teahsaipine.


benefit us —so it may be now, if it only issue in this, that loyal
men no longer toy and dally with treason; but as bad men con-
spire, so those may associate to suppress it. Even out of this
evil, good may come. It may unite with, us as brethren,
those Roman Catholics who are better than the bulls of Popes,
and better than the articles of their papers and the speeches of
their agitators—may unite all voices in the patriarchal denuncia-
tion “ Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my
soul, come not thou into their secret: unto their assembly, mine
honour, be thou not united; for in their auger they slew a
man, and in their self-will they digged down a wall-cursed
be their anger for it was fierce; and their wrath for it was
cruel.” Glenesis xlix. 5-7.
But again let us turn to our Prince, and in the gratitude of
our hearts include him in the comforts and consolations of the
text. Now that we are relieved from apprehension by the mercy
of Gron, we can look upon don’s dealings with him calmly and, as
Christians, trustfully. The mortal danger, the couch of suffering
as well as the storm of deunessaret, are fore-known, are per-
mitted, but are over-ruled by Jesus, that is by Incarnate love.
The Royal mother, scarcely even now beginning to show herself
to her people from the seclusion of one sorrow, shall not have her
heart broken by another; but the mail that brings this news,
however sad, will bend her knees in thankful adoration. Well
did the Unerring will and purpose work. No less than
this saved the Prince. A hand steadied by practice in firing,
an excellent weapon, four feet distance, a true aim, but
the Hand that for its own purpose once guided the ran-
dom arrow to the joint of Ahab’s mail, its one vulnerable
point—turned aside the bullet from its deadly intent, to serve an
end higher than the assassin’s. A purpose which designs a special
blessing—for whatever the difference of earthly rank —to
the fishermen in their storm-tossed boat, or to the Prince sorely
tried with pain, the consolation is one, the Helper is one. “It is
I, be not afraid.”
May it be, that that blessed Jesus may there reveal Himself
more and more clearly to the sufferer. To us henceforth more


endeared than ever, may he be more endeared to the
Saviour, and Jesus to him. That the momentary trial may issue in
an eternal blessing. That those words of his address to us which
set his great and good father as an example for his life, may find
a new impulse for their fulfilment in this hour of danger, and that
so all of us, prince and peasant, alike wanting and alike receiving
the Christ, may meet “at the land where we would be ” all
distinctions obliterated, for all shall be Eoyal there.
14




