

THE AUSTRALIANS AT BULLECOURT.
Scot and Australian Join Hands.
KEITH MURDOCH, Special Representative of the “Sun,” writes:
I STOOD for an hour before dawn on a commanding
position some distance behind our forward line, which
here consisted of a series of strong posts. Suddenly
the shriek of the guns arose. Fast-fleeting and in-
stantly recurring flashes set the countryside for
thirty miles dancing with light, as though a raging tempest of
flaming metal covered the earth.
This tremendous barrage, which never wavered for
hours, though it changed according to time-table, was a signal
for the infantry attack. We knew that in the dark, dusty
inferno beneath, our men were advancing. They found the
extraordinary wide and stout entanglements of the Hinden-
burg line cut to shreds, but immediately they encountered
the strongest enemy barrage met since Pozieres. While dawn
came our men fought their way steadily with bomb and bay-
onet through the enemy lines, gaining objective after objec-
tive, with the exception of some delay on the right. A truly
Australian sun, red through smoke and dust, rose over them.
Our men fought heroically, with supreme endurance.
The wounded reported that the German trenches were full
of dead. Certainly the accuracy and extent of our artillery
fire was unique in the history of the Australian force. One
of the most stirring sights was the slow steadiness with which
fvdly-equipped reserves advanced over fields ablaze under
German shells.
After bitter fighting some sturdy Scottish troops, whose
homes are the tenement houses, and the farm dwellings and
fishing villages of Aberdeen—moved with swirling kilts along
this road, and to-day (May Tth) we have an important section
of Bullecourt, and our Australian left is no longer in the air,
but is linked up with a fine Scottish line round and through
the village.
After a bitter struggle, the precarious position of the
Australians near Bullecourt was improved by a Scottish regi-
ment, which bombed its way down the trenches and joined
hands with them.
Now, there are many nations that fly the British flag
(There is no corner of the sea but bears our banner of the
O’er hill and plain and forest, on castle, camp, and crag.
They sent their splendid children to face the task of war.
And all of them will feel to-day that in that splendid story
Like Scotland and Australia, joined hands at Bullecourt.
The attack was at dawn. Having finally convinced them-
selves that no British troops were isolated at Bullecourt, and
that it must be taken by heavy charges with bomb and bay-
onet, the British systematically bombarded the position. We
saw the ruins changing shape beneath the shelling. The
Scottish troops encountered the stiffest opposition, especially
from hidden machine-gunners in the concrete posts, and from
snipers in the ruins. The troops of the Australian division
The Anzac onrush was the
launched bombing attacks synchronously with the advance.
The other troops effected a junction after seventy-five minutes
heavy fighting through the trenches. This makes most secure
the gaping wound in the Hindenburg line which the Austra-
lians had made, and had been heroically holding open await-
ing support on the left. The Germans throughout the night
were jumpy, but did not attempt any further counter-attack.
Through four days’ battle the Australians, including
many of the famous brigades, withstood thirteen counter-
attacks and the heaviest shelling. Our losses were consider-
able, but very much less than during the first battle of
Pozieres. No praise is too high for the infantry, which has
shown great fighting spirit.
The magnificent spirit of our men is shown in a hundred
ways. Company commanders say that numerous slightly
wounded men refused to leave the battlefield. A Victorian
officer continued bombing for five hours after he was wounded
in the right arm. Another officer in the same battalion,
though struck by shrapnel, remained and fought throughout
the day.
During the most severe counter-attack, when our flanks
were pushed in by strong bombing parties supported by a
fusillade from trench mortars, word reached our men to
retire.
They replied: “Who said retire? We will wait till our
officers say “‘retire’!”
The men stuck it out when encirclement seemed certain,
officers and men having agreed to fight their way back to-
gether if surrounded.
There is but one retirement that we know;
Breast-rvounded, prone We fall towards the foe:
We dice with Death, and, if Death wins the throw,
A deathless lyre
Turns to the winds of history its strings.
And evermore to all the world it sings
The question that Australia’s army flings:
Who said “Retire”?
Field-Marshal Sir Douglas Haig reported: “We re-
pulsed two counter-attacks upon our positions in the Hinden-
burg line east of Bullecourt. The Australians during the past
ten days having gallantly maintained their positions in this
sector, repelling at least twelve determined counter-attacks.
We hold the greater part of Bullecourt.”
M. Tudesq, writing in the Paris “Journal,” pays one of
the most striking of the French tributes to the bravery of the
Australians who captured Bullecourt. South-westward the
“Australian man-hunters,” as they call themselves, attacked
with hand-grenades. Advancing with great, kangaroo-like
bounds, they smashed magnificently through the front line
of machine-gunners, and, running to the communication
trenches, started to smoke out the dug-outs.
decisive point of the attach
William Brooks & Co.. Ltd., Printers, Sydney.
