

l—l.
1) the g
f PRODUCTS AND RESOURCES |?
TASMANIA,
AS ILLUSTRATED IN THE
lI N T EITN AT 10 NAL E X HIBITKO N,
Si 1862.
GEOBGE ’WHITIITGr,
SECRETARY TO THE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION COMMISSIONERS
FOR TASMANIA.
11 SECOND EDITION, ENLARGED AND CORRECTED.
I WITH AN APPENDIX, CONTAINING PAPERS ON
THE VEGETABLE PRODUCTS EXHIBITED BY TASMANIA, j
by the HON. W. ARCHER, ESQ., M.H.A., F.L.S.,
AND ON
THE CLIMATE OF TASMANIA, bt Dr. E. S. HALL. .
%zuz : J,
31 / PRINTED AT THE DAIf.T “ADVERTISER” STKAAI PRESS. (j W*
7?) 1862. (PS




PRODUCTS AND RESOURCES
TASMANIA,
AS ILLUSTRATED IN THE
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
1862.
GKEOIR/O-E WHITIITa,
SECRETARY TO THE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION COMMISSIONERS
FOR TASMANIA :
SECOND EDITI ENLARGED AND CORRECTED.
With an APPENDIX, containing papers on
THE VEGETABLE PRODUCTS EXHIBITED BY TASMANIA, bt XffiC
HON. W. ARCHER, F.L.S.,
ON THE CLIMATE OF TASMANIA bt Dr. E. S. HALL.
Unharl tan:
PRINTED AT THE DAIET “ ADVERTISER-” 81’3AM FBBS3,
1862


INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION COMMISSION.
ta. frmtont Sir Henry Edward Fox Young., K.C.8., &c., &c
for :
The Hon. P. H. Gell, M.L.C.
Charles Gould, Esquire, 8.A., & E. G. S,
James Grant, junior, Esquire, M.ILA,
Ronald C. Gunn, Esquire.
The Hon. Robert Quayle KebMODE,
William L. Crowther, Esquire, (Chair-
man.)
Morton Allport, Esquire.
The Hon. William Archer, M.H.A.
James Boyd, Esquire.
Richard W. Butler, Esquire.
James Erskine Calder, Esquire.
The Hon. Thomas D.Chapman, M.H.A.
Henry Cook, Esquire, Mayor of Hobart
Town.
Henry Dowling, Esquire, Mayor of
Launceston.
M.H.A.
Charles Meredith, Esquire, M.H.A.
H. T. A. Murray, Esquire, Circular Head.
Hon. Robert Officer M.H.A.
James Scott, Esquire, Launceston .
J. E. Sharland, Esquire.
W. Allcock Tully, Esquire.
Sir Richard Dry,
IN LONDON
COMMISSIONERS
APPOINTED
|J. A. Youl, Esquire,
F, A Ducroz, Esquire,
Joseph Milligan, Esquire, F. L, S.
Esquire, Secretary.
GEORGE WHITING,
18, Murray-street, Hobart Town,
Office,


LOCAL EXHIBITION
HOBART TOWN.
The Products collected by this Commission, to illustrate the Resources cfC
Tasmania in the International Exhibition in London in 1862, were opened’
for local exhibition in Hobart Town, December 3rd, 1861. The follomsgr
report of the ceremonial is taken from the Hobart Toiun Daily Mercury t —-
“The Exhibition was formally opened yesterday by His Excellency that
Governor Sir H. E. F. Young, Honorary President of the Commission.
“ Amongst those present were Sir Valentine Fleming, Chief Justice, the
Hon. T. D. Chapman, Premier, the Hon. W. Henty, Colonial Secretary, the
Hon. F. M. Innes, Colonial Treasurer, W. L. Dobson, Esq., Attorney-
General, R. Byron Miller, Esq., Solicitor-General, the Hon. W. Nairn,
President of the Legislative Council, Hon. W. Archer, M.L.C., the RigM
Worshipful the Mayor of Hobart Town, the Yen. Archdeacon Davies*
Lieutenant-Colonel Russell, J. Allport, Esq., M. Allport, Esq., with othe.«
gentlemen. Several Ladies graced the ceremony with their presence.
“ His Excellency and Lady Young, accompanied by Colonel Gore
Browne and Mrs. Browne, arrived at half-past two o’clock, and were received
by the Chairman and members of the Commission.
“ The Chairman (Dr. Crowther) addressing His Excellency said,
Sir Henry Young,—
“ The Commissioners have done themselves the honor of requesting thaS
you would favour them by formally opening the Exhibition of Tasmania®-
products, intended for the International Exhibition. They have done
not only from a desire to give all possible prominence and eclat to
event so important in all its bearings on the future of Tasmania, but because
they feel that the object of the Commissioners has bad your cordial sanction.


and responsible aid from the beginning, and, moreover, because the
ceremonial of proclaiming that this first stage of their labours has attained
a practical maturity, would form a graceful termination of a long official
connection with this colony, which has been distinguished by a marked
desire to develops our material resources.
“ Your compliance with their request would also leave, with many of
the advocates of scientific progress in Tasmania, a pleasing memento of a
valued friend and coadjutor.
“ The Commissioners whom your Excellency appointed to represent the
interests of Tasmania, feel some gratification in soliciting your inspection
of the results of their labours, which have at length reached a stage in
which success appears no longer doubtful.
“ This point has not been readied without considerable difficulty and
anxiety. The public appeals of the Commissioners, copiously advertised
and addressed in circulars to almost every official and professional person in
Tasmania, met with no adequate individual response, excepting in some few
honourable instances. The Commissioners soon learned that if Tasmania
were to be fairly represented in the Great Exhibition this important result
must be brought about rather by the purchase of suitable products as a
matter of business, than by reliance on the uncertain exercise of individual
patriotism and liberality.
‘‘ The co-operation of every individual who had taken an active interest
ill former exhibitions was solicited, and in many cases this aid was
cheerfully accorded. Individual Commissioners, each according to his
facilities, have exerted themselves to carry out the objects of the commission,
and amongst these gentlemen the name of Mr Boyd, of Tasman's Peninsula,
stands pre-eminently conspicuous. The main part, however, of the products
now displayed before the public have had to be sought for under circum-
stances of no ordinary difficulty, and to be purchased by public money,
«Among those products the timber of Tasmania occupies the most
conspicuous position. H.M. Commissioners in England have granted per-
mission for a Trophy of Tasmanian Timber to be erected in the Central
Avenue of the Great Exhibition Building, the Commissioners have felt
bound to respond to this act of consideration by endeavouring to occupy so
prominent a position in the world s view, in a vay ci editable to Tasmania.
Every portion of this structure now before your Excellency, for the design
of which we are indebted to our Secretary, Mr. George Whiting, (who has
been ably seconded in the mechanical arrangements by Mr. Kipling, builder,)
will serve some purpose of illustration. Our spars, railway sleepers, joists,
quartering, flooring boards, ship’s knees, planking, etc., together with our
valuable splitting timber, will be shown in every variety of kind and
condition. New specimens will be seen fresh from the bush, others which have
been felled in proper time and fairly seasoned, together with specimens,
which have sustained the severest tests to which timber can be subjected,
and have stood the wear and tear of a term exceeding that of a human
generation. Piles and planks which have experienced the alternations of
exposure to salt-water, fresh-water, and dry air, in our wharves ; planks,
timbers^ and trenails, which have been exposed to all sorts of destructive
agencies, in our stranded ships ; posts which have remained in the earth


almost intact for thirty-five years’ duration, and many other such illus-
trations, will offer incontestable evidence that Tasmanian timber, if
j udiciously selected and prepared, is unsurpassed by the timber of any other
country —in durability, and stubborn resistance to the ordinary vicissitudes
to which wooden fabrics are liable. Much labour has been required, in this
most unfavourable time of the year, in procuring the timber of which
the trophy is constructed, the main portion of which was growing
green in the forests when the Tasmanian Exhibition Commission was
appointed.
“All these specimens will bear their Tasmanian and botanical names.
They will be accompanied by an Herbarium (prepared by Mr. Boyd) of their
leaves and blossoms, and will, it is believed, convey to the world a fair
notion of what our woods really are.
“Of our ornamental woods, which are now coming into general request
in the neighbouring colonies for cabinet work, a more varied and beautiful
collection has never been exhibited. Many of the specimens will equal, if
not surpass, for furniture, the finest samples of walnut, rose-wood or
mahogany. The timber-buyers of Europe will find in this trophy a great
variety of our fresh-felled timber. In close proximity to these will be seen
specimens of similar kinds of woods cut in Autumn, and carefully seasoned
under cover. Near to these a department of durability will arrest the
attention by displaying the specimens which have been so long in use, and
to which I have already alluded. ' ,
“ The structure of the trophy itself will serve to display our Blue Gum,
Stringy-bark, Peppermint, Blackwood,Myrtle,andßuonPine;whilst around
its base and in every available foot of surface will be disposed our most
handsome cabinet woods, some in neat packing cases, and more in the
varied and grotesque forms of their original growth. Our ship planking,
measuring 80 and 90 feet in length without a defect, cannot fail to attract
the notice of those wdio are searching the world for a substitute for the now
no longer easily procurable British oak. Prices will be attached to those
sorts of timber which form so large an item in our exports to other
colonies
“ The Trophy will also be made subservient to the illustration of another
of our main branches of industrial production—namely, our sea-whaling.
Two-whaleboats by the best boat builders of Hobart Town (Chandler and
Miller) will be suspended from the sides of the pedestal. These boats are
made of Colonial wood, —and the harpoons, and all other gear connected
witli them fitted up by colonial workmen.
“ The octagonal column of the trophy will be surmounted by two jaws of
the sperm whale. Whalebone as taken from the black whale, will be open
to inspection. At each corner of the pedestal will be placed oil-casks,
water-casks, and flour casks, for whalers, of colonial manufacture, on which
will be suitably displayed, the Oil and Head matter which command so sure
a market in other countries. Tasmanian Wool, choice brands of which
fetch the highest price in foreign markets of the wool of all these colonies,
will be adequately represented, as the clip of the present season becomes
secured. Already piomises have reached the Commissioners of a large
number of specimens on their way for exhibition, and it is gratifying . to


t. Sieve that in this our chief export Tasmania will still maintain the high
skaracter which she so honorably achieved in 1851.
M The mineral resources of Tasmania suggest hopes of great advantages
it so very distant period, more especially as regards our coal, of which
h >ur Excellency will perceive a varied and valuable collection from numer-
m localities selected by Mr. Gould, whilst other samples have been exhibi-
ted by private proprietors. Indeed coal is found to exist in nearly all parts
of the Island, and it is hoped that before long some practicable mode of
dering our unquestionably valuable coal beds available, will induce capi-
tehsfis to enter largely into this important branch of industry.
'• Our metalliferous collection comprises gold, which metal exists in
p' enter or less quantities in various parts of Tasmania —particularly of the
Msgal district. We cannot as yet claim to be considered a richly producing
y-hi colony, but it has been deemed desirable that the small portion collec-
ted by a few hands in one district during the few months in which the com-
.asission has been in operation, should be shown, in order to prove that
■Bfisongst our prospects of latent mineral wealth the discovery of gold in
payable quantities is a contingency to be constantly kept in view. A
’much larger quantity of Tasmanian gold might have been purchased, but
like sample exhibited is sufficient to show the characteristics of our gold.
'“ Our I ron Ores have representative samples, from various localities, some
the specimens being of great richness, and may possibly yet be profitably
worked.
*■' Our Building Stone, which has been extensively used in constructing
the public edifices of other colonies, is fairly illustrated. The valuable
collection of Ur. Calder. who has taken an active interest in this branch of
mr indu try, contains specimens from numerous quarries ; yet so abun-
fcasi is th.' s valuable material that this ample collection represents only a
jcr ilon o. the quarries now in work. A church font, worked in stone from
cKmt Yentciet, illustrates in a striking manner the admirable adaptability
f f ibis stone to this and various other purposes to which it has not pre-
vicasly been applied. Amongst these latter may be mentioned some grind-
if. t-nes, exhibited, of great size and fine quality, and also some smaller ones
■isacl to be eminently suitable for glass-cutting. Some of our Marbles, which
..■have hitherto been used only for the making of lime, and which cover a
csmlderablo portion of Tasmania, have been discovered, when properly
p'dished, to be eminently beautiful and suitable for internal decoration.
W&ilsfc on this subject, I cannot refrain from directing your Excellency’s
attention to some specimens of Flinder’s Island topazes, the splendid
appearance of which, when suitably mounted in articles of jewellery, as they
»r. *■ now exhibited, cannot fail to strike every spectator. The products of
•Ear fields, our orchards, and our gardens, deserve a passing notice. Our
atctamnal fruits are represented in admirably executed wax models from
a.n.i of last year’s fruit in plaster of Paris. English Horticulturists will
ind amongst them many well known superior sorts, which have been greatly
improved since their introduction into this country. Indeed, our climate
peculiarly calculated for the growth of English fruits, which are ex-
Ifc-orted hence to other colonies in vast quantities.
* The skins of the opossum and other Tasmanian animals will be sent to


England in considerable quantity and variety. When it shall become
known to European furriers that skins so well adapted for railway travel-
ling as those of the opossum may be purchased in almost unlimited number
at five shillings per dozen, this circumstance can scarcely fail to ensure
their general use. Among the novelties of our exhibition will be found
an extensive collection of the barks of Tasmanian trees. Some of these —
as the bark of the blue gum and stringy bark trees —have been reduced to
fibre by a process with which Your Excellency is familiar, ready for ex-
perimental trials of their suitability for paper-making, Ac. Should they be
found to answer that purpose, a vast demand may be created for a material
which Tasmania could supply at a moderate cost in any quantity.
44 I cannot venture to detain Your Excellency by a particular reference to
many objects of interest which this collection comprises. A desire to
conform as closely as possible to the directions of Her Majesty’s Com-
missioners in England has induced the Commissioners here to confine this
selection to articles which directly represent our material resources ; and
those which either have, or possibly soon may have, a positive commercial
value in the world’s market. Had they chosen to have converted the exhi-
bition into a collection of mere curiosities, these might have added to its
varied attractions, but such a collection would not have harmonized with
the objects of the forthcoming international exhibition. Although many
of our colonial manufactures form important items of our exports, such as
carts, furniture, colonial axes, splitting knives, Ac., yet these are not such
articles (excepting cabinet furniture for the purpose of showing our orna-
mental woods) as would excite much attention in England. It is mainly on
our capacity for supplying valuable and abundant raw produce, to be moul-
ded to their varied purposes of elegance and utility, by the manufacturing
industry and artistic skill of older communities, that Tasmania must for the
present be content to rest her celebrity.
“ In conclusion, the Commissioners would beg to impress on your Excel-
lency the fact, that in the hurried collection which they have been able to
make, they have included no article of an exceptional character, but have
kept the one object in view, of giving a faithful and honest exemplification
of what Tasmania can really furnish out of her ordinary resorirces, and
what she can immediately reproduce should the occasion require it.
“ X Pave the honour to request that your Excellency will now be pleased
to declare the Exhibition to be opened.
“ His Excellency replied-
Dr. Crowther, — , .
44 The interesting details which are set forth in your comprehensive Ad-
dress as Chairman of the local International Exhibition Commissioners, es-
tablish for you, for them and for your indefatigable and intelligent
Secretary, a claim not only to my thanks, but to the thanks of the whole
community.
44 The difficulties you have overcome, with comparatively speaking, so
little of the aid which was expected from the general body of the colonists,
greatly enhance the merit of the success of the Commission.
41 1 desire too, to observe, that had the indiscriminate zeal and profuse-
ness of voluntary contributors made the collection as universal in its


character as the contents of an Economic Museum, the unique, definite
and most appropriate Exhibition, now before us, would be less strikingly 5
conspicuous and suitable.
“ The direct faithful representation of Tasmania’s material resources, of
commercial value, actual or prospective, as raw produce ; and deserving of
the attention of British and Foreign Manufactories ; is truly a fulfilment,
so far as this island is concerned, of the special design of an International
Exhibition.
“ The sight before us, is a very gratifying one. In common with others,
I am desirous of allowing no further delay to take place in its exami-
nation.
“ I thank you for the flattering consideration which has induced the
Commissioners to give me opportunity, amongst the closing acts of my ad-
ministration, to take part in this pleasing ceremonial.
“ I now declare the Exhibition to be open.
“The Vice-regal party accompanied by the Chairman then proceeded
round the building, and spent a considerable time in examining the various
productions. The Exhibition will be open gratuitously to the public
during the remainder of the week.”
During the five remaining days of the “ Carnival Week,” the Exhibition
remained open from 9 a.m. till 5 p.m. Nothwithstanding the counter
attractions of the Intercolonial Champion Horse Race and Regatta, the
Exhibition was visited by upwards of six thousand persons, whose names
are recorded in the Visitors’ Book.


PRODUCTS AND RESOURCES
TASMANIA,
ILLUSTRATED IN THE INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION, 1862.
GEORGE WHITING.
Although the International Exhibition of 18G2 will probably form a
more complete collection of the World's produce than either of its
progenitors of 1851 and 1855—the occasion seems to have been generally
recognised, by new and consequently little known communities, as a
legitimate opportunity for supplementing its educational utility—by the
publication, for presentation with their contributions, of a condensed
epitome of well authenticated, statistical, and descriptive informa-
tion, which no collection of illustrative products can supply. The
Tasmanian International Exhibition Commissioners have (in common with
the other Australian Colonies) directed their Secretary to prepare such an
epitome.
The visitor to the Great Exhibition, who, like Layard at the
ruins of Nineveh, may, in idea, stand face to face with a people of whom
he knows little—but who nave acre reproduced themselves to a great
extent in their works—may desire further information respecting them ;
but his inquiries will be greatly modified by his personal interest, objects,
and predilections. The Statesman and Politician may inquire into the
genius of the people who have produced these works. Are they still
identical in blood, in language, and in religion, with the energetic race from
whom they sprung 1 Have they struggled for, won, and do they really
appreciate the privilege of Constitutional Government'? Is their liberty
of speech and action tempered only by the decent restraints of self
moderation, mutual forbearance, and abstinence from infringement on the
freedom of thought, word, and deed of their fellow man ] Do they carry
out the system of local self-government in Municipal and Parochial
organization, which has formed the nursery as it forms the safe-guard of
English rational liberty ? Will they stand by “ Old England” in the event
of a possibly impending war 1 Do they volunteer ? Are they learning to
handle great guns ? Did they subscribe liberally to the Patriotic Fund
for the relief of the wives and families of our brave fellows who fell in the
Crimea ? Do they take readily to the Englishman's natural accessories—


the ship, the steam engine, the horse, and (now) the rifle ? Are the
Cricket Match, the Horse Race, the Regatta, the Rifle Match, the Ploughing
Match, the Cattle Show, accepted amongst them as established Institutions?
Are they “sailors to the manner born” in matters of whale fishing,
boating, and yachting? Do they appreciate the value of intelligent
co-operation in forming Companies for Gas, Steam Boats, Mining, Railway,
and other purposes ? —lf they can answer these questions satisfactorily, and
if the sterling character of their contributions offers a fair illustration of
their country’s capabilities and their own energy and enterprise, an
honorable future lies before such a country and such a people ; whose
“ manifest destiny” it may be —to work out an original phase of social, moral,
or material progress —from the new conditions of race, climate, position, and
productiveness in which they fortuitously find themselves combined.
But (the Man of Business will more briefly demand) do they give us any
practical proof of this capability ? Do they offer us new raw material —
for our mill-board or our paper mills—timber superior to oak, or equal to
oak at a lower price, for building our ships and constructing our railways ?
Can they coal, provision, and refit our long-voyaged steamers, and merchant
ships ?
Very different still may be the range of inquiry of the man into whose
mind the project of emigration has perchance constantly obtruded itself
amidst the cares and enlbarrassments of old world competition. He may
possibly anticipate increased anxiety as age creeps over him, and his
children advance in turn to fight the Battle of Life in fields of employment
already over crowded—and in contests requiring, day by day, a higher
standard of physical energy and intellectual qualification. Heart-sick with
the weary up-hill struggle, he may sigh for some new home, where his
family, now sorely perplexing, may prove a source of happiness, where he
may rear “ an independent shed” on his own land, and pass his remaining
years under the shade of his own vine and his own fig tree. In- his
earnest examination of the evidences of material prosperity which he will find
in the English Colonial Department, he may be arrested by the Wheat, or the
Wool, or the Timber Trophy of Tasmania, and will ask himself —is the
country where these came from the place where an honest and industrious
man, with little capital, save the labour of his thews and sinews, and the
skill of his hands, may hope to better his own condition, and that of his
family ? Does it contain or produce the main necessaries of life —
abundance of wood and coal for timber or for fuel—plenty of good water
for irrigation, manufactures, machine power, and domestic use—animals for
labour and for food —corn, oil, English crops, and English fruits —wool and
furs, for clothing and for export ? Is its climate suitable to the English-
man’s constitution —and will it keep “the English rose” on the fair faces of
his children ? Is it English in its population, its laws, and its habits ?
Does it offer land worth the buying suitable for an English home, in
lots to suit purchasers of moderate means, which may be selected without
auction, and paid for by easy instalments —out of which he and his
children can work out a present livelihood, and future competence ?Is
the country exempt from peculiar diseases—from dangerous wild beasts —
from hostile Aborigines—from the unnatural and appalling contingencies of


civil war 1
These suggestive queries combine so many of the essential elements of
human happiness and progress, that a writer may fairly apprehend a charge
of exaggeration who should venture to claim them for any one country.
Yet, it will be found, on referring to official statistics and notorious fact, —
that there are very few of these queries which may not unhesitatingly be
answered in the affirmative —on the part of Tasmania.
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY.
Tasmania, formerly known as Van Diemen’s Land, is a somewhat escut-
cheon-shaped island, nearly as large as Ireland, lying about 120 miles south
of the south-eastern corner of the Australian Continent. Its area com-
prises about 1G millions of acres, or about 25,000 square miles. It is of
165 miles average length, and 155 miles average breadth, —and has 700 miles
of coast line, exclusive of small islands and indentations. The central part
of the Island consists of a table land, averaging at least 3,000 feet above
the level of the sea —on which are seven lakes, varying in size from
2,500 acres to 50,000 acres, and containing an aggregate of nearly 112,000
acres of freshwater. These lakes form the sources of many considerable
rivers. The Derwent runs 120 miles, and its estuary is navigable to and
above Hobart Town, where it is two miles wide, for forty miles from the
open sea. The Tamar is navigable 40 miles to Launceston from the North
Coast. The Huon, running a course of 110 miles, is navigable for
steamers nearly 30 miles. These, and eleven other rivers, meander,
summer and winter, through the mountain ranges, (some of them 5,000
feet high) and gently undulating hills, which intersect the Island —giving
an aggregate course of ever-flowing water of 900 miles. Thirty-one smaller
rivers run for considerable portions of every year, whilst thousands of
creeks, rivulets, streams, and springs glide, leap, and dash through
the wild ravines aid rocky cascades of the country in romantic
variety, forming a plentiful and continuous supply of the great essential
of life and health —pure water, which frequently serves to keep the face
of the country fresh and green, long after those of the neighbouring
colonies have been parched with drought—and affording an amount of
constant motive power for mills or for irrigation, perhaps unequalled,
within the same distance from the sea, in any country in the world.
The bold green-stone and basaltic mountains of Tasmania —their heads
for many months of the year capped with snow —form striking objects,
from whatever quarter the Island is approached. Its undulating inter-
vening surface, mostly covered with forests of gigantic trees extending
from the hill-tops down to the water’s edge, its singular intersections of
land and sea, particularly about the south-eastern coast, —offer to the
admirer of Nature’s works, scenery of the most wild and picturesque
beauty ;in lake-like bays and estuaries, fertile islands, rugged cliffs,
romantic head-lands, and curious peninsulas. Here and there the crop of
a settler reach down almost to the water’s edge, and the waves carry the
tidal pulses of the vast Pacific Ocean to within fifty yards of the
farm-house door.


POLITICAL.
The political institutions of Tasmania secure the utmost latitude of
rational freedom. By the Constitutional Act of 1854 the colony is-
governed by two elective bodies —the Legislative Council (15 members), and
the House of Assembly (30 members). The members of the Legislative
Council, who bear the prefix “Honorable” ex officio, are elected for six
years. This Chamber is indissoluble. Its constituency consists of £SO
freeholders, graduates of universities, barristers and solicitors on the roll
of the Supreme Court, legally qualified medical practitioners, officiating
ministers of religion, and retired military and naval officers. The House
of Assembly is elected for five years, and is dissoluble at the will of the
Governor. Every Money Bill must originate in this House. No member of
either House must be a judge of the Supreme Court, nor a minister of
religion. Those who elect the House of Assembly are £lO householders
in town and country, £lO pastoral licensees and lessees, persons receiving
annual salary of £IOO, and all the classes entitled to elect the Legisla-
tive Councillors. At elections—nominations are not made openly on the
hustings, but are addressed, signed by the prescribed number of voters, to
the Returning Officer, so as to be published by him some time before the
election. Every man votes by ballot, striking out of a list tbe names he
opposes, in a room by himself, and depositing his folded paper openly in
the ballot-box. Further to secure every man in the secrecy of his vote,
all distinguishing party badges, colors, flags, end bands of music are pro-
hibited. Any person “ giving or providing, receiving, or wearing cockades,
ribbons, or other mark of distinction” is sabject to a penalty of £SO.
Severe penalties are also prescribed for bribery, treating, and “ undue
influence.” The results of this system of election are most satisfactory.
In Tasmania there is no “ putting on the screw.” An “ election riot” is
unknown. The excitement and turmoil of an election are almost forgotten
in a week. A more quiet, practicable, and business-like system of collect-
ing the real political opinions of a constituency probably no-where exists.
The Tasmanians have not derived this system from Imperial or foreign
legislation, but have framed it for themselves. So far, the political con-
stitution of Tasmania has worked well, whilst those of some of the sister
colonies have had to be constantly altered from their original form. The
Tasmanian Statute Book, under Representative Government, may bear com-
parison with that of any other colony. Few changes of Ministry, and no
violent changes of policy, have yet impeded the political progress of
Tasmania, since she has possessed the inestimable privilege of self-govern-
ment, In any country translated within a few years from a form of
Government essentially despotic to one comparatively free, an excess of
party feeling may be expected to show itself occasionally—but such
ebullitions, if not permitted to impede public business or to disturb the
public peace —may be taken as healthful indications of the interest taken
in public affairs. With a very few exceptional cases (which have been
made the most of in disparagement of Tasmania) nothing has hitherto
occurred to disturb the harmonious progress of her Legislation ; and those


few cases have served the useful purpose of showing that the political
power of the colony is really in the hands of the intelligent and orderly
portion of the community, of whatever class—whenever they choose to
exercise it. Of the loyalty and good feeling of the population, generally,
many proofs might be adduced. It has more than once happened that
nearly all the Queen’s troops have been suddenly taken away to quell
disturbances elsewhere. At present there are scarcely regular soldiers
enough in Tasmania to mount guard at Government House, and the
Imperial establishment of Port Arthur, yet in no country does there
exist a more confident sense of security for person and property.
THE TASMANIAN TIMBER AND WHALING TROPHY.
This structure, which was designed by the writer of this essay
’to illustrate two of the most important branches of Tasmanian
industry, will, it is believed, furnish information as to the abundance,
variety, and lasting qualities of Tasmanian timber, which may prove
-acceptable to all peisons interested in Ship-building, Railways, Public-
Buildings, and other purposes to which timber is applied. It
will, probably, not less clearly illustrate the peculiar adaptability
of Tasmanian Cabinet Woods, from their beauty of colour and marking, for
Ornamental Furniture and other requirements of modern elegance and
refinement. The fact ought to be mentioned, however, that the greater pro-
portion of the Woods now exhibited was growing in the Tasmanian Forests
but a few months since, and consequently may be found to be affected by
“ shakes,” “ sun-cracks,” Ac., which will not be discovered, in the
same sorts of timber which may have been cut in the Autumn and seasoned
under cover. In juxtaposition with the “ green” specimens will, however,
be seen—specimens wliich have been fully seasoned ; and again, specimens
which have undergone the severest tests to which timber is ever subjected
during periods approaching to half a century.
To render this Trophy a temporary Museum of the more useful
Tasmanian Woods, specimens have been procured from the oldest
Public Buildings of the Colony, each of which is fully labelled, and
will tell its own tale. The Old Gaol and the Old Court House
of Hobart Town, have furnished sleepers, door-posts, flooring-joists,
boards, window-lintels, and architraves —of Huon Pine, Blue Gum, and
Stringy-Bark, which are as sound as when built in forty years ago. These
relics of the past, had they power of utterance, might relate legends of
human trial, suffering, and adventure of early Colonial days, which would
now be deemed incredible. But the evidence which they offer of their own
durability must be taken as incontestible and complete. Nearly all the
of the Old Hobart Town Court House has been found to be sound,
and has been used in the exaction of the New Post Office just completed on
the same site. But the Builder and the Railway Engineer may ask, “ Will
Tasmanian Timber resist equally well the atmospheric influences of the
open air 1 ” The Naval Architect will inquire into its “ behavior” under
water. Let the old piles, and planks, and posts, in the Trophy supply the
answer. Some of these old piles, which have been split down longitudinally


in order to facilitate inspection, have been partly submerged daily, as the tide
rose and fell, for periods up to Twenty-one years, whilst forming part of the
Wharves of Hobart Town. Blue Gum and other planks from theV hart Hat
form will shew their power of resistance,for the same period, of copious show eis,
hot sunshine, dry winds, and heavy traffic. Other material wimesses to the
durability of Tasmanian Wood have been summoned from a Colonial-built
vessel, which has been stranded for Fourteen 1 ears, m the shape of plank-
ing timbers, trenails, etc., which also fully attest this fact A Tasmanian
schooner, built of Blue Gum—the “Flying Squirrel 9, tons—has twice
been thrown by the surf above high-water xnark-and on being got off did
not exhibit the slightest defection in her lines, or a sprung trenail, and has
never even required to be pumped since undergoing this severe ordoal
Veteran posts from the earliest fences of the Colony, of Peppermint c
other Woods, which have stood faithful sentinels over the crops and heids ot
the settlers of the last generation, here invite inspection of their almost unim-
paired condition. What further proof can be required of the lasting and
useful properties of Tasmanian Woods 1 , ~
That these Woods, particularly the Blue Gum, may be seen m all con -
tions—the Ship-yards and Coach-factories of Hobart Town have furnished
specimens as usually seasoned imperfectly, and as seasoned carefiu y. i
specimens of Ship-timber, from Mr. Macgregor, have been ten years, and that
from Mr. Ross has been twelve years, lying in an open Ship-yard, exposed to
all weathers. With these specimens of rough seasoning may be compare
the Blue Gum plank of Mr. Burdon, Coach-maker, which has been carefully
seasoned under cover for seven years; and other specimens of Dr. C rowthei s,
which have been seasoning for ten years. This comparison will serve to
shew that much depends on the seasoning of the Blue Gum , that it is a
most valuable Wood when fairly seasoned, and that even when roughly
prepared, this Wood is unsurpassed for all out-door purposes requiring
strength and stability. Another variety of the Eucalypti—the Gum-topped
Stringy Bark—nearly, if not quite equal, to Blue Gum, and procurable i
greater abundance, of a straighter grain, and of more free working charactei, has
more recently become an object of considerable
and general quality are well illustrated by a plank, which, with the old piles,
have been exhibited by Mr. Oldham—that has been in use twenty years in
the Platform of the Hobart Town Wharf. n , • i
In inviting all persons interested in the supply of the best Colonial
Timber for the Dock-yards and Railways of the United Kingdom to examine
these well-authenticated and varied specimens, it may be well to Jay betore
them the result of scientific experiments which were tried ten years since,
with a view to test the qualities of the Woods of Tasmania with the best
Woods of India,of Europe, and of British America. K
It is well known in engineering circles that Professor Barlow, in his _ Essay
on the Strength and Stress of Timber,” gives the details of an experiment in Eng-
land on the English and Indian Woods. These experiments as also those of
Captain H. C. Baker, on the Indian Woods, will be found in the article
“Timber,” in the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Mr. Mitchell, D.A.C. General,
made some similar experiments on the Woods of Tasmania, and (in 18 )
detailed the results in a paper read before the Royal Society of Tasmania,


MR. MITCHELL’S
EXPERIMENTS.
15
Blue Gum
10311
492
1.650
1031
6.301
29.743
3
Ash or Swamp Gum J
97?
366
1.50
784
5.91
17.954
9
Stringy Bark
991J
417
1.625
867
5.0/1
23.443
which is published in the Society’s Transactions, (Yol. 2, P. l,)the object
beingto institute animpartial comparison between the Woods of Tasmania and
those of India and Europe—as given in the tables of Captain Hall and Pro-
fessor Barlow. The experiments had been thus performed :
A piece of scantling of each Wood, two inches square, was laid with its ends
resting on supports, seven feet apart. Weights were gradually increased in
a scale, suspended from the centre of the piece of wood so placed. Its
elasticity was ascertained by increasing the weights till the wood would
no longer recover its straightness after they were removed. Its strength
was proved by increasing the weights till it broke asunder, and by observing
its amount of deflection immediately before it broke. A portion of the
broken wood then had a cross bolt passed through each end, and was
suspended, to try what weight it would bear before it could be pulled
asunder length-wise. To facilitate the experiment, a portion of the middle
of this two-inch piece was turned down in a lathe, and afterwards filed to
a quarter of an inch square. It was by estimate determined, after it
broke—what was its direct cohesion on the square inch.
The trials were made on Blue Gum, Swamp Gum, and Stringy Bark—on
green specimens, and on others which had been seasoned under varied cir-
cumstances, and for different periods. The following is a condensed synopsis
of the mean of all these experiments :
No. I.]
[Table
Break-1 Ulti-
Direct
Cohe-
sion on
sq. inch
lbs.
Weight and.
Deflection. *
No.
of
Expts.
Spc.
Gra-
vity.
ing mate
Woods.
weight Deflec-
tion.
Ills. inches.
fhs. Indies
Morung Saul 947
349 1.09
300 ! 1.151
150 .822
Teak 745
15.550
Boon 579
14.787
English Oak 969
150 ! 1.590
Ditto 934
200 1.280
10.853
Canadian Oak 872
225 1.080
11.428
Dantzig Oak 756
200 1.590
Adriatic Oak 993
150 1.430
Ash 760
225 1.266
17.337
Beech 696
150 1.026
Elm ... 533
125 1.685
Pitch Pine 660
150 1.134
10.415
Red Pine 657
150 .jft>s
150 .931
10.000
New England Fir j 553
Riga Fir ' 753
125 .870
10.707
* Whilst elasticity remained perf( ct.
J Only used for Splitting r J imber.


By this table it will be seen that Blue Gum will sustain about
double the weight of English Oak before it breaks, and will even recover its
elasticity after bearing a weight at which Oak will break. Its
mean cohesive power beyond Oak is nearly, but not quite, in
the proportion of 3to 1. Mr. Mitchell states in his paper that, “ The speci-
mens experimented upon, were chosen because their ages were vouched by
the Gentlemen supplying them, and not on account of their being specially
calculated to sustain great weights. Pieces could I have no doubt be
found capable of bearing greater weights than any I have recorded and
adds as the result of his experiments, “ The strength and elasticity of the
Blue Gum exceeds generally those of all woods hitherto tested.” There
are probably many such superior pieces to be found in the Exhibition
collection. . .
The result of these carefully conducted experiments has been completely
borne out by observation in these colonies, whenever that wood has been
severely tried, which fact the used and seasoned specimens now in the
Trophy will go far to demonstrate. It is to be regretted that the same
tests have never been applied to some other Tasmanian woods, such as She
Oak the light and tough Huon Pine, (of which the Whaleboats are built)
and ’the Peppermint wood, both of which latter appear to be nearly imper-
vious to atmospheric influences. The British Government possesses in the
International Exhibition ample means of testing practically the Blue Gum,
and comparing it in various shapes and conditions with other woods of first-
class character. It may not, perhaps, be improper here to suggest that the
appointment of a Commission of Enquiry to examine and report on the
various woods in the Exhibition, might possibly eliminate results of even
National importance, now that a supply of British Oak can no longer be
relied on. In another quality for which British Oak is distinguished, it
is believed that Blue Gum excels. It has been said that Oak is “ less likely
to rend, to break across, to splinter with common shot, than any other
wood.” Blue Gum is essentially a tough wood, the maul-heads, wheel-
fellies, and boat-keels made of it, appear to be almost indestructible,
and it is believed that it would stand the shot test well. In the possession
of the Tasmanian Commissioners in London, is part of the head of a Blue Gum
pile, of which about two inches deep of the bruised head was sawn off after the
pile had been driven into the earth. This portion of the pile had received
200 blows from a driving ram weighing 21 cwt, 27 feet drop; and the
toughness of the small portion which had to be cut off will fully attest its
suitability for such purposes. A wood so tough and elastic, which
splinters so little, must be valuable for constructing railway carriages, it
is constantly used for making ordinary carriages and other vehicles in
Tasmania
The superiority of Tasmanian woods, particularly the Blue Gum, haying
thus been carefully demonstrated by experiment, and amply corroborated by the
experience of their durability ; it remains to be determined whether they
can be supplied of the large size, and shapes required—say for ship-build-
ing 1 The structure of the Trophy, which is mostly formed of ordinary
market timber, or of such sample timber as can be supplied in almost
quantity—will afford an answer to this question.


The Octagonal column, is formed of eight spars of Blue Gum, Stringy
Bark, White Gum, Silver Wattle, Blackwood, and Sassafras.'" The eigh t
sides of this column are formed, at the base, by eight
large planks set on end, of Blue Gum and Stringy
Bark, from Dr. Crowthor s Timber Establishment, at Oyster Cove.
The thickness of the Trees from which these planks have
been taken will be seen at once by persons conversant with timber. The
heart of Tasmanian trees is nearly always unsound. In these planks, as in
all planks used in the Colony for ship-building, the heart is cut oft and
the width of the plank shows the size of the tree —outside of the hear’.
To show the length of which Ship timber can be obtained, planks have been
sent horns of Blue Gum, measuring 00ft., and of Stringy Bark, measuring
tSOft. in length, of equal width and soundness throughout.
Samples of other ship timber form the base of the Trophy—which is thus
constructed : —Five planks, (20ft. long) of Blue Gum, Stringy Bark, Black-
wood, and Myrtle, the two former being fitted for ship-building, and the two
latter for cabinet work, arc first laid down. Placed across these, arc
ship's keel-pieces (10ft. long, squared,) of Blue Gum, arid Stringy Bari:,
immediately on these lie, transversely, joists of Stringy Park, covered with
ordinary flooring boards of the same wood. The frame-work of the
Pedestal placed on this floor is composed of Blue Gum, White Gum, and
Stringy Bark. The joists, quartering, and flooring boards of the Pedestal
platform arc also of Stringy Park. The centre piece of the spiral staircase
is formed of a spar of plain Huon Pine, the stairs being made of this free-
working and almost imperishable wood. These samples will show what
Tasmania can supply of plain timbers. Of large ship’s knees—the want
■of which has even caused a modification of British naval architecture—arc
unlimited supply can he obtained from Tasmania, where the stumps of the
large trees which might supply them arc left to rot after the tree has been
cut up. These are also shown, in the angles of the Pedestal frame, of.
various conditions as to seasoning.' A large Blue Gum knee, and also a
Blue Gum crook have been exposed to the open air nearly ten years, in lire
ship-yard of Mr. McGregor. In other angles of the frame ar e three very
fine ship’s knees from Tasman’s Peninsula, exhibited by Mr. Boyd. There-
are also three smaller knees, a Blackwood crook (for curved bannister
work), and a line Huon Pine knee, in other angles of the Trophy. In the
interior of the Pedestal arc also some railway sleepers of Bine Gum ai d
Stringy Bark, and pieces of White Gum, or Gum-topped Stringy Bar k, 12 xO,
! 2 feet in length, contributed by Dr. Growlher, from Oyster Cove, and by Mr.
•lames Boyd, from Tasman’s Peninsula—together with some sleepers of Blue
Gum and Peppermint wood shown by the Commissioners. The split palings and
r oofing shingles hero displayed are also fine specimens, varying in length fn rn ■
5 feet to 15 feet, and in breadth from 6 inches to 24 inches. The e tre/
* The Botanic names of these woods, which arc here omitted for tire sate of
brevity, will be found in the Appendix, in a paper on the Vegetable products
exhibited by Tasmania, by the Hoa. \V. Archer. M.H.A., F.L.S. Specimens of the
h aves and blossoms, &c.. can be referred to in an Herbarium in the E xbih 'tion
prepared by James Boyd, Esq., Civil Commandant, Pert Arthur. *


Specimens.
NIuskwood ( Evryhia a rgophylla)
30
Silver Wattle (Acacia dealbata)
24
Slie-oak {Casunnna quadnvalvU) ... ...
25
Native Cherry ( Exocarpus cupressifwmis)...
4
Iron-wood ( Aofelea ligustrina)
Dogwood (Bedfordia salicina)
8
Sassafras root {Atherosperma moschdta) ...
10
Native Laurel {Anopterus glaudulosa) ...
15
Native Box (Bursaria spinosa )
6 5
Specimens of the ordinary Splitting qualities of Stfatap Gum, which Wood is
valuable for this purpose, but is never used fur any other. A longitudinal
section of the Swamp Gum plank, from Port Arthur, exhibited by Mr,
Boyd, will serve to show the extraordinary length and size of Tasmanian
imber. The plank from which this section was taken measured 230 feet
| a length. No available ship could be got to take it to London, whole.
The section has consequently been divided into 20 feet lengths, in such a
v,*ay that the brand cut across shall in each case bear evidence of
the former connection of the pieces severed. These large specimens, and
some others which could not be sent iu time, prove that Tasmah s Penin-
sula with its tram-way and excellent harbour at Port Arthur, and its larger
forests of these valuable timbers —is well calculated for a timber supply
station to the Imperial Dockyards iu England. The finest specimens of
ship’s knees are all from Port Arthur, which, together with Dr. CrowtheP»
establishment at Oyster Cove, have supplied nearly all the best shipping
aud railway timber now exhibited.
The attention of Railway Engineers is particularly invited to theser
durable woods, which it is believed can be supplied at a price which
would render their use much more economical than the softer woods
which have so frequently to be renewed. By the estimate (in 1854) of
the late Robert Stephenson 2,800,000 railway sleepers required renewing
every year, out of the 30 millions of sleepers in use in Great Biitain, A
Blue Gum, or Stringy Bark, or Gum-topped Stringy Bark, or Peppermint
wood sleeper, would, under the most trying circumstances, last from fifteen Ur
twenty years, and under ordinary or favourable circumstances might last-
three times that period. The sleepers now in use require renewing, accord-
t.o Mr. Stephenson, every twelve or fourteen years. It is estimated that
this quantity requires the wood of 7,000 acres of English forest land
annually, whilst better woods are growing iuthe wild lands of Tasmania as
Opmmon as weeds. _ .
O: Ornamental Woods the Trophy furnishes a great variety suited for
cabinet work. The Myrtle tree (so-called) of which Tasmania contains
immense forests, from its richness of tint and varied venation is well suited
to this purpose. Other woods, as Blackwood, Muskwood, Hu on Pine,
Dogwood, Sassafras, Pinkwood, Native Laurel, She-oak, &c ; , offer a variety
of selection in tint and figure, in which the ingenious cabinet-maker will
find ample scope for tasteful innovation. The specimens of these woods
exhibited by the Commissioners are the following :


Stringy Baric Root ( Eucalyptus gigantea)
5
Blackwood (Acacia melanoxylon)
30
Gum Root (Eucalyptus globulus)
10
[Native Pear (Hakea lissoperma)
o
Honeysuckle tree (Banlcsia Australis)
G
Pittosporum ( Pittosporum bicola)
10
Prickly Wattle (Acacia verticillata)
10
He-pak {Casuarina suberosa)
3
Hnon Pine (Dacrydium Franlcliaii) (planks in cases).. 4
The export of Timber from Tasmania in 1860, principally to the
iColonies, amounted to £73,726. The demand lias generally fluctuated
with the success of gold mining in Australia. In 1853 this item of export
amounted to £443,000, when a pair of sawyers were known to earn nearly
£4O iu one week.
WHALE FISHERY.
'Phis branch of Colonial Industry, which the Trophy is also intended to
illustrate, has nearly regained the prominence in Tasmanian estimation
which it occupied before the derangement of all industrial pursuits by the
Gold Discoveries. The Fishing Ground of the Tasmanians reaches from
their own shores to the Antarctic Regions—and is sufficiently well stocked
to attract a large number of American Whale-ships, wdio frequently
discharge, provision, and refit, at Hobart Town. There are now 25
vessels, with an aggregate tonnage of 5,746 tons, engaged in Whaling, from
the Port of Hobart Town. The quantity of Sperm Oil and Head
Matter from the Southern Whale Fishery exported in 1861
amounted to 710 tuns, worth about £BS per tun, or £60,350. The
greater portion of Tasmanian-caught Oil is sent to England
via Melbourne, and thus appears amongst the Victorian exports.
The number of whale-boats attached to these* 25 vessels is 81 in use, and
131 including spare boats. The boats suspended from the Trophy are two
of such boats—perfectly fitted with all gear, except line and oars, as when
starting to capture a whale. Nobody who has not experienced the capa-
bilities of the Tasmanian Whale-boats, manned with a good crew, can form
any just conception of their behaviour in a rough sea. Each boat, such as
those exhibited, when fitted with line, oars, Ac., complete, costs about £7O.
The 131 boats of the little Tasmanian Whaling fleet represent a capital of
£1,750, and find employment for about 700 men.
Specimens of the Oil of the Sperm Whale, Black Whale, Black Fish,
Porjioise, Ac., together with the Head Matter of the Whale, and the
Whalebone of the Black Whale, will be found in the Trophy. The jaws of
the Sperm Whale forming the apex of the Trophy (from two of Dr.
•Grow tuer’s ships) will give some notion of the size of the fish which the
crews of these boats have to capture. One of the Whales to which those
jaws belonged, produced £1,150 worth of Oil and head matter, and the
other £9OO worth. It is not a very unfrequent occurrence for a whale to
.bite asunder one of these boats, when it is approaching to harjioon him—<


Share of Captain
... 290
10
0
First Mate
... 187
8
0
Second Mate
80
0
0
Ship-keeper
... 31
0
0
Cook
31
0
0
Steward
0
0
3 Boat-steerers, £31 each
... 93
0
0
18 Men, £25 each
... 450
0
0
1,193
18
0
Outfit, provisions, &c
Owner’s risk, and wear and tear of ship ...
0
0
... 1,300
2
0
Total
... 4,000
0
0
an operation requiring considerable nerve, strength, and skill in boat manage-
ment. Dr. Crowther recently had two boats destroyed in this way, by the
same fish.
Whaling ships are usually fitted out on what is called the “ lay” or share
system —by which every man connected with the venture profits in pro-
portion to the extent of his risk, and his more or less onerous position
among the crew. The owner risks the ship and the outfit for a cruise of
twelve or thirteen months. The officers and crew risk their lives, their
rime, and their labour. A ship of 250 tons register, with three boats in
will be worth when fitted for sea, about £5,000. Should tins vessel
obtain 50 tuns of Sperm Oil, worth say £4,000, at £BO per tun, this sum of
£4,000 would be thus divided :
£ s. d.
This pursuit is not probably more remunerative to able seamen on the
average than the common rate of wages, but to “ordinary” and “ green”
hands it is a good naval school, and offers the chance of something much
better. Sixteen whales, yielding an aggregate of 1,400 barrels, or 140 tuns
of Sperm Oil, value £11,200 —were recently taken in one day (December
7th, 1861), in the vicinity of the Chatham Islands, by American and
Colonial Whalers. This single day’s work, which is not unfrequently the
product of an eighteen months’ cruise by one vessel, gave a handsome
profit to all engaged in the capture. On the other hand, in
adverse seasons, Whalers occasionally (but very seldom) come borne “ clean,”
or altogether destitute of oil. Whale-fishing is sometimes attended with
great hardship —but being looked on as a colossal aquatic sport, and
combining the excitement of bold and perilous adventure with the contin-
gency of a good prize, and promotion according to merit, it has always been
a favourite pursuit with the young Tasmanians —from whom might be
selected some of the smartest boatmen in the world. It may not improperly
perhaps be mentioned, as an instance of the occasional demand in the
emergencies of new communities, for business habits and self-reliance —
that nine of the above twenty-five whalers belong to a lady,—who, having
some years since succeeded to the Whaling business of her late husband,
has subsequently conducted it with consummate skill—and it is gratifying
to add, with commensurate success.
It would seem that the Southern Whale Fishery, now that the Whales
have become more wild and shy, is destined to fall into the hands of the


Tasmanians, from the favorable position of this island as regards
the bout hern Ocean. No Whaling ships now hail from Adelaide, Mel-
bourne, oi Nov Zealand. In 1800 twelve Whaling ships belonged to Sydney,
of which only three are now engaged in the trade. The Americans have
to incur the increased expenditure of provisions, &c., of six unprofitable
months out of the voyage—three months in reaching the Whaling Ground
and three months in returning, and are consequently at great disadvantage
as compared with Tasmania.
THE COAL-FIELDS OF TASMANIA.
Coal exists in nearly every part of Tasmania, of which a valuable
collection has been made by Mr. C. Gould, Government Geologist,
which will be found amongst the Tasmanian products. The main
portion of the fuel used in Hobart Town is derived from Mines at
New Town, in the close vicinity of the Capital, and from Tasman’s
I eninsula \ but it is generally believed that Coal Beds of far greater
value than those which have been worked, principally on account of their
easy accessibility, exist in other parts of the Island. The series of speci-
mens from Mount Nicholas will illustrate the Coal Bed to which public
attention has recently been more particularly directed. The seam of Coal
which crops out at various points on the side of Mount Nicholas, locally
known as the Killymoon Seam, overhanging Break o’ Day Plains, at a
height of about 500 feet—can be worked at an adit level, is distant nine
miles from the Port of Falmouth, is highly bituminous, and it is believed
is well suited for steam, gas, and domestic purposes. The same Seam
crops out near Fingal and at various other parts, but the main Seam is
that now illustrated, by samples from different portions of it. This Coal
Bed is estimated to occupy an area of about 14 square miles, on the Northern
side of the Break o’ Day Plains. \ arious other portions of the Bed are equally
accessible, but although they are mostly bituminous, they are inferior in
thickness to the Killymoon Seam. Bituminous Coal samples are also fur-
nished from the Coal Bed of the Douglas River and from Long Point,
both on the Last Coast. The Coal from both these Districts is good,
the Coal Bed from which they are taken is said to extend over an area
of about 15 miles, and the seam at the Douglas River to be above eight
feet thick. At Long Point it is 6 ft. 10 inches thick, very bituminous,
and within an easy distance of the shipping place. This Coal is rapidly
rising in public estimation, and a Company has just been formed
to work it. Beds in the Mersey River have also been found,
and, although limited in quantity, have been profitably worked, as they are
easy of access. The coal is very bituminous, is used by the coasting
steamers and in Launceston, and has been recently exported to
Victoria.
The Bituminous Coal from Hamilton is said to be very good. It lies
about 40 feet deep, in a seam 4 ft. 6 in. thick, and has been used, and
favourably reported on, by the Derwent steamers, from the shipping place
of which, at New Norfolk, it is about 20 miles distant.


The Anthracite Coal is abundant on the southern side of the Island and
(specimens are exhibited from New Town, Tasman’s Peninsula. Adventure
Bay (Bruni Island), and Three Hut Point in D'Entrecasteaux Channel lour
collieries are represented in the specimens from New Town, near Hobart
Town The Coal at Tasman’s Peninsula has been worked for *5 years
and largely used in Hobart Town. The seam is from 3 ft. (> in. to 4tt
6 in. thick, k worked by a shaft 25 yards deep, and within abou. 100
yards of the water’s edge. A new seam has just been struck here, w bit
is said to be of the highest quality. , •.
The Coal formation on the South side of the Island extends round the
mouth of the Huon to S. W. Cape, within which range many deposits
have been discovered. With a supply so varied and extensive, some loca-
lities will probably be soon found to- possess coal of first-rate character,
easy of access. Private capital is seldom sufficiently in excess in the
colonies to admit of its being relied on as the source of development of the
mineral wealth which Tasmania doubtless possesses. The matter is one ci
national as well as colonial importance, now that steam vessels may bo
expected to take a very prominent part in any future maritime war, and
the attention of the Colonial Government has of late been specially
directed to it. The labours of Mr. Gould, the Government Geologist,
have been almost concentrated on this matter recently, the parliament
have voted a sum of money for its investigation, and a Commission has
just been gazetted (March, 1802) to take charge of experiments on, and
the selection of some of the best specimens, easily and abundantly procur-
able, to be tested in bulk by the Admiralty authorities in England.
MINERALS AND METALS.
The general character of the building stone of Tasmania may he ascer-
tained from inspection of the series of illustrative specimens from different
parts of the Island—which J. E. Calder, Esq., Surveyor-General of Tasmania,
has been at great pains to collect. Tasmanian stone has been used in the
erection of Public Buildings in Melbourne, as the best and most available
in this part of the Globe. The church-font, grindstones, etc., ot the stone
of Point Yentenet, Taylor’s Bay, Bruni Island, will shew the qualities of
the stone which was exported in 1860 to the value of £5,090, principally
to Melbourne. Amongst the mineralogical collection, some black and.
white marble from the Florentine Valley and from Chudlcigh, where iMs-
burned for the common purposes of lime—show by their texture rue
polish that Tasmania is not without the means of ornamental architecture..
The Topazes from the Islands in Bass’s Straits, when properly mounted,,
show great clearness and brilliancy. Some specimens of Serpentine-
veined with Asbestos from the Asbestos Hills, are found to bear a high
polish.
GOLD.
The small portion of Tasmanian Gold exhibited has been collected by
James Grant, Esq., of Tullochgorum, within afew months, from the few diggers
who are surfacing and prospecting about Fingal More Gold from that


District is in the Hobart Town Banks, and might have been purchase:! for
exhibition, but although, according to geographical and geological analogies,
Tasmania ought to possess the precious metal in abundance —it has not yet
Been discovered in paying quantities, and the portion exhibited will give ;j.
fair notion of all tbe gold hitherto found. To stimulate exploration the Colo-
nial Government lias just offered a reward of £20,000 for the discovery
/>f a payable Gold Field. Gold has been found, principally of the character
of that exhibited, in many parts of the Island which are widely distant
from each other. There arc abundance of Quartz Reefs in the Fingal
district more or less auriferous, some of which will probably eventually be
found to pay for the crushing. Even if Gold should never be found ire.
paying quantities in Tasmania she need entertain no mean jealousy of the*
superior auriferous productions of the neighbouring Colonies, as a fair
portion of their Gold will probably ever find its way to Tasmania i»
-exchange for products which Australia canrot raFe. The prosperity of the
Colonies must be indirectly, if not directly, reflected on Tasman A,
who is thus bound up in her material interests with their continued
progress and success.
Judging by the rate of production which has latterly pro-
vailed, and the enormous extent of surface yet untried in the auri-
ferous regions of Australia, it will be long before the supply of Gold shailite
exhausted. But even Gold may be purchased too dearly. The
discovery of a Gold Field attracts ..population only in proportion
to the facility by which individuals may become rich ; but xf
new Gold Fields are not continuously discovered —to keep up
this standard of easy acquirement —the Gold-mining population soon
jover-ruu the average remunerating point, and the possession of a God
Field may, in such case, prove rather “ a mockery, a delusion, and
snare,” than an element of solid and enduring prosperity ; —necessitating:
heavy taxes and extravagant expenditure—and entailing individual loss
and public debt. Happily, both Australia and Tasmania possess, in un-
settled Districts and undeveloped resources, ample means of employment,
more profitable than Gold-digging—to which the surplus population of the
Gold Fields may advantageously apply themselves. The Gold-miner, ever
on the move, now at Ballarat, now at Port Curtis, now at Dunedin, feels
.little interest in anything beyond the canvas of his tent, or the bounds os:
his “ claim” —which does not relate to Gold.
A gold digging population wholly or greatly dependent on the yield of
the precious metal, must always be a restless, irresponsible, and unsettled
one. Some years since (1857) in Victoria no less than 140.892 persons
out of a population of 410,766, or upwards of one-third, were living in
tents. In the election of 1860 in New South Wales, 3300 Gold-miners
were qualified to vote for the Western Gold District, of whom 398 only went
to the poll. Within 25 years 543,261 persons (rather more than her pre-
sent population) came into Victoria, and during the same period 264,390
persons, more than one-half the immigrants, went out of that Colony. That
Victoria has managed to retain one-half of her visitors speaks well for the
•colony, which has given them, profitable employment more lasting than
gold-mining, and which can advantageously set to work any further mua-


Year.
Miners.
Gold
Exported.
Value at
73s. 6d. per
Each Miner’s
Share.
Ounces.
Ounce.
1853
1857
I860
1m» 1
18t 2 )
First ten ■
WpeVs. 1
75.626
132,167
144,396
165,463
96,682
3,150,020
2,761,528
3,156,660
1,939079
300,476
£
11,497,573
1U. 148,615
7,925.723
7.131,153
1,104,249
£ s. d.
153 I 3d
78 15
54 3 11
70 9 8
(Estimated)
60 6 5
The result of the above table, as to the individual yield of gold,
will hereafter be compared with the result of a a equal amount of laoour
a > plied to Agriculture, Stock-keeping, and Horticulture.
OTHER METALS.
l;cr of diggers who may find themselves “redundant in the more settl ’d
wcuuatwus of rural industry, which have recently experienced a healthful
•uipnl.se in Victoria. That most important Colony seems to have a
hooter chance of sound progress, now that the population is rapidly nnder-
£,nug the process of sifting and settling, than it had probably at any former
p.riocl, , . „
The average profit of Gold-mining will shewn by the following com-
parison of the number of Miners employed, with the Exports of Gold at
different periods, from Victoria, the most productive Gold Country in the
Wm-id, and the amount which fell to the share of each individual Miner.
These returns are taken from the Official Statistics of \ ictoria, but the
p m-e fixed on is £3 13s. Od. per oz., the price paid by the Melbourne
j.aaks per oz. for standard Gold :
[Table 2.]
Galena and Copper Ore have been found iu different parts of Tasmania,
but not hitheHo in any considerable quantity. Iron ore abounds all o\ci
the Colony, At Ilfracombe, eight miles from the Tamar, there are im-
mense masses of rich ore, similar to that now exhibited, which will doubt-
less, some clay, prove highly advantageous to the colony, in connection with
the vast coal-fields of the East Coast. It is said to be nearly identical
with the Brown Hematite of Mittigong, in New South Wales, the working
of which has recently been discontinued in consequence of the great ex-
pense of transporting it over some seventy miles of land caniage to t io
s*a. A Tramway is already in operation at Ilfracombe from the vicinity
of the ore to the water’s edge, which circumstance may possibly enable
these “ hills of iron,” as they have been called, to be profitably worked,
wW the same description of ore, less favourably situated could not be
made to pay. , ..,
v oiumissioner Bigg", who was deputed to report on theresourcca of tLete


Colonics in 1823, and whose report was printed by the House of Com-
mons, thus writes on the Iron ore of Ilfracombe :
“ At the distance of eight miles from Port Dalrymple (the Tamar) in
“ Van Dicman's Land, considerable quantities of iron ore have been dis-
““ covered on the surface, which upon analysis in this country, have been
■“ found to consist of pure protoxide of iron (similar to the black iron ore
* l of Sweden) and furnishing a very pure and malleable metal.”
ATI [CULT URAL, PASTORAL, AND HORTICULTURAL
PRODUCTS.
Count Strzelecki in his excellent work on New South Wales and Van
Dicman's Laud, draws a comparison between the Agricultural capabilities
of the two countries on scientific data, founded on the origin of
their respective soils. Exploration and analysis had shown that
the crystalline rocks (such as granite) as compared with the
sedimentary rocks formed in the area of N, S. Wales a proportion of 3 to
1, whilst in Tasmania they were as 7to 1. Of rocks containing more than
60 per cent, of Silica as compared with rocks having less than GO per cent.,
N, S. Wales has a proportion of 4T to 1, whilst in Tasmania the case is
reversed—the sixty-per-cent, rocks forming a proportion of only 1 to 3.
Strzelccki traces this difference to volcanic agencies, which have been
more prevalent in Tasmania than on the Australian Continent. He adds ;
“ Indeed, the torn, rugged, furrowed, and contorted surface of the former
colony bears ample witness to the formidable revolutions produced
by the eruptive greenstone and basalt, overwhelming in succession different
members of the series, which then composed the consolidated crust, and
sweeping away and burying a vegetation, of which no living traces are
now left on the island.
“ But these changes have served only to render this island one of the most
eligible spots on the face of the globe for the pursuits of agriculture :
the irrupted greenstone yields an excellent soil, and the zigzag course of
the chain of mountains forms naturally flat-bottomed valleys, between
which rises a table-land about 3800 feet, enclosing in crateriform lakes five
reservoirs of water, covering, if the surface were united, an area of 300
square miles, aud capable of irrigating all the adjacent lands available to
cultivation.”
This pains-taking and indefatigable explorer itifers, as the result of his
examinations, that Tasmania is destined to become chiefly an Agricultural
Country—and Australia a Pastoral one.
After describing the Pastoral character of Hew South Wales, Strzelecki
thus estimates :
“In Van Diemen’s Land, the agricultural districts are superior in ap-
pearance to those of New South Wales. The details of farms and farming
are better understood and defined, aud the practical results are such, that
no country reminds the traveller so much of the old one as Van Diemen’s
Land. There, the tasteful and comfortable mansions and cottages, sur-
rounded by pleasure-grounds, gardens and orchards, the neat villages, and


prominently placed churches, forming as it were the centres of crißfwif&fJj
plains, divided and subdivided by hedgerows, clipped or brusML awfl
through which an admirably constructed road winds across the iska.fti. csv
all objects which forcibly carry back the mind to similar scenes* «'>;
beauty in England and Scotland.”
Those observations, have been very much corroborated by -
perience in respect to Agriculture. Tasmania was for many years.-
quent to the settlement of South Australia “the Granary of the
and she has continued to export grain in considerable quantities. !#*&•&
Victoria and New South Wales.
Unquestionably the great forte of these latter Colonies
Pastoral capabilities. __ ~
That Tasmania has great agricultural capabilities is- a fact
/disputable proof can be given. The increase of cultivated ':h*»
steadily kept pace with the increase of the population. The?
tabular comparison (Table 3) shows that at two points in our- Uisttajr r -*
from each other nineteen years, the proportion of cultivated landi per* h>m. < <‘3
the population was almost precisely the same —namely, tmv jWfo
acres. It must not be forgotten that this period comprised the
the Gold discoveries, which caused for a time a disruption of all imlssHfeCfcA
pursuits.
[Table 3.]
LAND CULTIVATED.
j Quantity ys ’■Wswa-
Ar. 3kvt r.
The increase of acres has been accompanied by a corresponding jßWtviwo;? t
yield per acre. The two first items of the following table (Table 4 } tdtt *»/
the comparative yield of Tasmania for the two years above named., ih sss??/
prove useful also, by way of comparison, to add the yield,. forlß;L?,ss
Victoria and New South Wales. __ .
As in all new countries, much rough and imperfect farming'
Tasmania —hut improvement has proceeded rapidly, and
numerous farms in this Island which would reflect no discredit
herself. Guario has been extensively applied, tbe use of the
Machine has become universal, the Reaping Machine has* beer?
used in the Northern District, and a spirit of progressive enterprise
where visible. The Northern and the Midland Agricultural Sodc&wl&wtflSJ
annual Cattle Shows and matches which form great centres ef
and their prizes and exertions have no doubt effected great good- J?
contemplation to establish an Agricultural Society also in the
District, where the want of one has been long felt.


[Table 4.]
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE,
COMPARATIVE YIELD
PER
ACRE, IN
TASMANIA, VICTORIA, AND N E W
SOUTH W ALE S-
-O F W HEAT,
BARLEY, OATS,
AND
POTATOES.
Wheat.
Barley.
Oats.
8
Potatoes,
Per Acre.
Tons. Cwt.
Year.
Acres.
Bushels.
Ter Acre
Acres.
Bushels.
Per Acre
Acres.
Bushels.
Per Acre
Acres.
Tons.
Tasmania.
1841
03,734
881,318
13
9,010
167,458
18
16,471
230,786
14
4,185
14,138
3 7
1860
66,450
1,415,896
21
6,238
126, GOG
20
30,303
926,418
30
7,621
33.589
4 8
Victoria.
1 8G0
107,093
2,290,157
2 1
4,102
98,433
24
90,1 C7
2,553,627
28
27,022
48,907
1 1
N.S. Wales.
1860
128,829
1,581,597
12
2,860
39,801
13
6,534
98,814
15
9,228
23,127
3 1
'1


1,415,896
126,605
926,418
19,313
3,183
33,589 tns
5,829 tns
69,1301)11.
3,866 bu.
2,593 tns
1,279 tns
62,318 tns
11,262 tns
299,358 lbs.
26,260,000 lbs
2,645,500 lbs
It will be here seen—that in 18G0 Tasmania grew nearly double
the quantity from a less number of acres than she produced in 181!.
It is difficult to give a notion of the profits of Husbandry, but
the following estimate (Table 5) may convey a rough idea of its
results in Tasmania. The value of the year’s crop for 1860
may be first taken. The next item will be the value of Meat consumed
by the population, allowing lOlbs. weekly (at 3d. per lb.) to every man,
Gibs, to every woman, and half these quantities for Juveniles under 20.
Then must be added the estimated consumption of Butter, at the rate of
lib. weekly (at Is.) for every man, Mb. for every woman, and |ib. for each
minor, together with one-tenth of these quantities of Cheese. If we add
the amount of rural products exported, we shall get at nearly the value
which is raised by the “ Farmers’ (who number4,6ss),the “Stockholders,
(137), and the “ Farm Labourers” (8853) in the last census. No account is
here taken of the consumption of veal, pork, bacon, eggs, milk, fruit, and ve-
getables—as these maybeleft to balance ourimportof meat from Gipps’ Land.
[Table 5.]
Acres. Bushels. Price.
Value.
Crops grown.
1860.
Wheat.
Barley.
Oats,...
60,450
495,563
31,401
162,123
5,472
1,193
30,303
5 8
7 6
Beans
Potatoes
Turnips
English Grasses
Tares
201,534
21,567
29,380
10,372
14,069
280,431
53,495
Carrots
Onions
Hay
31,837
1,256
Mangold.
Tobacco .
328,250
132,275
Meat(estd. consnip.)
Butter & Cheese do.
EXPORTS.
Butter and Cheese..
Tallow (say)
Fruit and Preserves.
Hides and . kins
52,988
Hops .
Cattle
Horses (No.)
Sheep
Poultry
Trees, Plants,icSeeds
42,065
Vegetables
Wools
370,427
Total.
£2,272,991


How oughtthis sum to be divided ? Let the 8855 Farm Labourers be first
paid £1 10s. per week each, namely, £690,690, out of this total sum.
There will still remain a surplus of £1,683,502, which divided amongst
the 4,792 Farmers and Stockholders, will give to each man a share of
£330 3s. lid. Dividing the total produce between master and man, all round,
each individual’s share would amount to £IGG 11s. 1 |d. It will be
recollected that the average yield from Gold-digging in Victoria has, daring
the last four years, never reached that sum for each miner. (Table 2.)
There is nothing dazzling in the state of things revealed in the above table
—but it demonstates a sound, permanent, and remunerative measure of
success, if not a brilliant one. It comprises the most favorable conditions
for the establishment and progress of a Yeoman population, and, moreover,
with our* liberal land regulations, and vast unsettled country, the same
system is susceptible of almost unlimited extension.
In Victoria, where Native Agriculture is greatly fostered, (£B,OOO having
lately been voted for a Model Farm,) and has recently much increased,
the very best lands only are yet cultivated. , New South Wales, in
Agricultural yield, appears to be about equal to the point reached by
Tasmania in 1841. (Tabic 4.) There is,indeed,stillscopefortheindustryof the
corn-exporting Colonies —South Australia, and Tasmania. In 1860
neither New South Wales nor Victoria grew half enough bread-stuffs for
her own consumption.
The fact must not be forgotten in this comparison, that in some respects
the Australian Colonies have considerable advantages over Tasmania. They
can grow to greater perfection the semi-tropical Maize, the Orange, the
Grape, and the Olive ; and may afford to be excelled by Tasmania in pro-
viding the Cereals, the Potato, the Gooseberry, the Easpberry, the Straw-
berry, the Apple, and other similar indigenous products of more temperate
climes.
The Grain and Flour of Tasmania in the Exhibition, will best speak for
themselves. In the Great Exhibition of 1851 the Tasmanian Wheat was
declared by the judges to be, after that of South Australia, the best in the
world. It was equally commended at the Paris Exhibition in 1855.
A sample of Tasmanian Wheat which weighed 701bs. to the bushel, and
one of Oats which weighed 491b5., are to be seen at the Crystal Palace,
Sydenham, Every other description of British agricultural produce suc-
ceeds in Tasmania almost equally well.


1860.
Victoria.
N. S. Wales.
Tasmania.
Horses
69,288
251.479
21,034
683.534
2,408,586
83,366
Sheep
4.794,127
, 6,119.163
1,700,930
LIVE STOCK
, TO EVERY
HEAD OF THE
POPULATIONS
PASTORAL.
That Tasmania does not compare badly with the neighbouring
Colonies in Pastoral capabilities, will be seen by the following tables,
showing their respective number of Horses, Cattle, and Sheep, per head of
Population.
Victoria.
N. S. Wales. Tasmania.
Popl. Live Stock. Popl. Live Stock. Popl. Live Stock.
7 1 I O.i 4{ 1
1 1i 1 61 1 Of
1 10. V 1 17 1
Horses.
Cattle .
Sheep .
If the official returns are correct, New South Wales stands first in
Horse-flesh, Tasmania second, and Victoria third.
In Cattle, New South Wales again stands first, Victoria second, and
Tasmania third.
In Sheep, Tasmania stands first, New South Wales second, and Victoria
third.
Amongst the herds and flocks of Tasmania may be seen every superior
known breed, which have been spiritedly imported, regardless of expense, from
Great Britain, Germany, Spain, and (the Brittany and Normandy dairy
cattle) from France.
The Tasmanian cart horses are famed throughout Australasia. 1079
horses were exported in 1860, of £39 average value.
Amongst Tasmania’s Staple Exports the raising of Wool is unquestionably
ber most productive industrial pursuit. Wool-growing has greatly bene-
fitted the Colony, and has directly or indirectly created many large private
fortunes. Tasmanian Wools have produced the highest price of any Colonial
Wools which have reached the English market ; and gained many prizes
and commendations in 1851 and 1855. The fine samples exhibited will
tell their own tale.


HORTICULTURE.
* lunate and Sail of Tasmania are admirably calculated
!:*' *>*'**' aild to, improve all the best fruits of the Temperate
Experienced Horticulturists who come out from England are as-
trf kfcfl to see six years gained in the maturity of Pear-trees, three years
m i* -trees, and other fruit trees, whilst the Raspberry, Strawberry,
< :i -d Gooseberry flourish like indigenous plants. Specimens of a year’s
Rose, Apple, and Plum-trees, (exhibited by Mr, John Abbott,) will
£feeir great rapidity of growth. It is no uncommon occurrence to see
ywm Apple-trees in the Huon District the grafts of which have grown six
if* «- e year of grafting. The Apple and Pear far surpass those of Great
BW&ci* size and colour, and are very little inferior in flavour. This
fafaiv&T will probably disappear—as the lands of the Country become as
tSfJO'-tf-gi iy impregnated with phosphates, alkalis, and organic matter
{SA> oi England and the inferior sorts become superseded by the
4&if Jtxf&t. 3 he botanic Gardens of the Royal Society of Tasmania, extending
(ji’wr fcsveuty acres of ground, (Mr. Abbott Superintendent,) have done
Awards the introduction and propagation of the best sorts of Fruit-
t&mzfUi mauy intelligent English Gardeners and Horticulturists who have
iis. Tasmania, have done much more. There are from 100 to
t'M wari<fciea of known Apples now in Tasmania, including most of the best
sxxr&t tsadtivated in England, America, France, Germany, and Italy. A few
s«grii u U facts will convey to English Horticulturists an idea of Tasmania’s
e-ims iEtiea in Fruit-growing. All the sorts described in English Cata-
fyp** « " kelow medium” size, have grown far above “ medium and
iisyc c® Aescrioed as medium here attain the catalogue designation of
The models exhibited of the different TosmanianApples iu
»■ M afford Horticulturists the means of satisfying themselves on this
The Autumn bruits, from which these models were taken, were first
.c'.afS.fer. Plaster of Paris, and the wax models are made from these casts.
jpf| r.sS't.'ii’.ls are, therefore, perfect facsimiles of the specimens as regards
size ; although it is feared that the injurious effects of a sea
will defeat the attempt to give a fair representation of their colour.
WixJkegt %* Spitze.nbenj, and the delicate Italian Apple Male Carle, will
ripen their fruit here without the protection of a wall. Many of
t k*- Wi *p.ld sorts which are dying out in England thrive well here. The
G Pippin seems to have taken a new lease of life. The Scarlet Non-
| jyrftiSj! greatly improved.
v-i i& Tasmania exported 118,810 bushels of Apples, at prices ranging
fh»cr. Ji, G II! s, per bushel. Some of the Golden Harvey, Pearson’s Plate,
aajJ-.i&esAk.t Nonpareil, from this Island, have sold at the Mauritius at from
to Is. per pound.
£s&&&■ sixty good sorts of Pears are cultivated in Tasmania—where many
kf- ftendercst kinds, such as the Beurre Bretonne.au, ripen their fruit in
pesfitcasß, without shelter, and have the most delicious flavor. Tasmanian
Mmms Bid Pears have sold in Sydney at 2s. 6d. each. Indeed, there is
fitely to be a demand for Tasmanian fruit in Australia—where the
And hot winds sometimes affect the fruits of temperate climates, and


although tlieir-growth bo rapid and their size large the flavor auu keeping
qualities are generally inferior to those of the more favoured sister Island.
The Pear Tree grows here to a large size. A Bon Chretien .Pear Irec m
the warden of Government Cottage, Launceston, is thus described by Mr.
Wade* “It is as near as I can learn about 40 years old, 1A) feet in eu-
cumference, 86 feet in height, and 8 feet in girth, U feet from the ground.
It is a handsome shapely tree, and has produced over oO bushels oi inut
in a season.” , TT i *. m
A Bon Chretien Pear Tree belonging to Mrs. Luckman, of Hobiuv i ov. n,
has also produced fifty bushels of fruit in a season. The models of the
Uvedale St. Germain Pear exhibited will serve to show the suitability
of Tasmania for these productions. The largest of these pears wneu
gathered weighed 31b. sozs. They were grown by Mr. Walker, Pittwator.
22,049 bushels of Pears were exported in 1860 at prices varying from ss. to
15 s. per bushel. , ,
All the choicest sorts of Plums which require shelter in England, ripen freely
as standards in Tasmania. Cherry Trees grow from stones as freely as Oaks
from acorns in the Weald of Kent. All such are called here Kentish ('hemes,
and were sold last season at Franklin, Huon, at one shilling per pail-fiu. About
twelve of the best known varieties of the Cherry are cultivated here. Inc
best strawberries attain an enormous size. Raspberries bid fair to become
wild fruit. The Fig-tree bearing well without shelter. 4he Mulberry is
hardy and prolific. About 40 varieties of Lancashire Gooseberries are
in cultivation, and produce most abundantly. _
The Walnut gains eight or ten years in bearing maturity. Ibe nlbcrc
grows and produces well. Peaches, Grapes, Apricots, Nectarines, Almonds,
%c. although not equal to those of Australia —thrive and fruit largely,
without unusual care, particularly on the Northern side of the
Island, of the capabilities of which district specimens of Maize, Sorghum,
&c.. grown by Mr. Wade in the Launceston Botanic Gardens, are exhibited.
The total value of Fresh-Fruits and Preserves exported from Tasmania in
1860 was £56,203, being nearly 12s. Gd. per head on the population.
Many fine Seedlings have been raised in the Colony, which all have the
quality of Prolific bearing. Two Black Cherries, one of remarkable size and
flavour the “ Claremont” and the “ Heart of Mid-Lothian,” and a Pear,
having’ the qualities of the “ Winter Needs,” but of superior size, have
been raised by Mr. T. Giblin, and Seedling Apples by Mr. Beaumont, Mr.
Stanfield and other Amateurs. The Horticultural Shows in Hobart I own
even excel those of the County Town of Kent. In the Grounds of the
Hobart Town Botanic Gardens, and of enterprising Tasmanian Nursery-
men may be found nearly every sort of known European Fruit. A
Bouquet of above twenty different sorts of Rose, in full bloom, was gathered
in June, (the Tasmanian Winter,) and presented to the Commissioners by
Mr J Abbott. The Fuchsia and Geranium become large Shrubs in
Tasmania,


One-fifth added for credit, 100 + 20
100 0 0
120 0 0
Deposit at sale, one-fifth of the whole : one-fifth of
24 0 0
Balance by eight instalments
96 0 0
Amount of each instalment
12 0 0
The small capitalist may in such case employ the larg
er portion of his
capital in clearing and cropping his land and thus making it repay its own
THE LAND SELLING SYSTEM.
The Tasmanian system of Land selling and granting is perhaps the most
liberal of that of any British Colony. The Island is divided into the Settled
District, which comprises about two-thirds of the Island, and the Unsettled
District, which embraces about five millions of acres of tiie South Western
and Western Coasts, including Port Davey and Macquarie Harbour. In
the settled portion the buyer has his free choice of all unsold land at £ 1
per acre, the Town Lands only being invariably sold by auction. If he
buy Town Lands he may pay off the amount by three yearly instalments—
but if he should select Country Land, he is allowed to pay the price (if above
£4O) by eight annual instalments, one-fifth of the amount being added for
interest. The account for the purchase of 100 acres would stand thus :
£ s. d.
The system is still more liberal as regards the Unsettled Lands District.
The country was originally settled by persons of consideration, military
and naval officers and others, who received free grants, in proportion to
their capital, and many of whose descendants now possess princely estates
and incomes. The Legislature on the principle that it is better for the
community to give laud to those who will render it profitable than to let it
lie waste, have wisely recurred to the free grant system in the Unsettled
District. Any man may here select land, between 50 and 640 acres in
extent and will receive a free grant of one acre for every pound sterling
that he may possess (in money, farming implements, sawing machinery, or
stock), on the following conditions, namely .-—That he reside on it for five
years and that within that time he shall have cleared, fenced, and cultivated
five acres out of everv fifty selected, or have erected buildings or machinery
of £250 value for every fifty acres. The Governor may give more time, or
errant a part of the land where the conditions have been partially fulfilled.
Gratuitous leases in this district fornot exceeding 10,000 acres, willbegranted
for ten years, on condition that the land be kept stocked with 100 sheep,
or 20 head of cattle for every 1,000 acres. Any portion of such leased lot
notexceeding 640 acres (which may contain a farmstead or other improve-
ments) may be purchased at the rate of ten shillings per acre—payable by
ehdit annual instalments, as in the Settled District. So much eligible
land still remains surveyed, and ready for selection, however, within the
Settled District—that only 1,804,520 acres have been yet taken up under
this very liberal arrangement. . . *
The progress of settlement since the existing Land selling Acts passed
in 1858 has been more rapid as compared with the population than in the
neighbouring colonies (Table 9); but there can be no question that the
improved Land system has also even exercised a beneficial social influence


in Tasmania. The discovery of Gold attracted a large number of the
floating labouring population to Australia, of whom the least eligible
portion never returned. Those who did, earned high wages, and
squandered much of their money in drunkenness, the fruitful source of
crime. No man could buy a few acres of land except at public auction,
and the sale of public lands fell to zero. No sooner was the system of
free private selection and credit payments adopted (in 1858) than a more
salutary system began to develope itself—the consumption of spirits
gradually decreased as the sale of Land steadily increased. This progress,
as shown in the following table, will interest alike the Statesman and the
Philanthropist.
[Table B.]
SOLD.
SPIRITS AND TEA CONSUMED, AND PUBLIC LAND SOLD.
Year. Populaton. Spirits consumd. Per head of Land sold. Tea consumd. Per head of
population. population.
Gallons. gals, pints. £ lbs. lbs.
1857 82,997 141,102 1 5 11,196
1858 84,080 127,431 1 4 52,364 268,358 ,3£
1859 85,968 122,094 1 3£ 72,792 388,538 4‘
1860 87,775 111,208 1 2 105,309 793,342 9*
1861 89,977 106,619 1 100.962 357.341 3f
* Enough was taken out of bond this year to partly supply the next. The
average of the two years is 6lb. 6ozs. per head.
This diversion of expenditure from Spirits to Land and Tea, which has
This diversion of expenditure from Spirits to Land and Tea, which has
been quietly and steadily progressing during the last four years, is no
doubt partly attributable to the improved morality of the people. The
Temperance Societies have doubtless done much good, but the improvement
has, probably, been mainly owing to the facility with which the provident
labourer can settle on his own land. About 500 new homesteads,
a large proportion which belong to newly-arrived immigrants,
have been founded within the last four years. The money thus expended
in Land was not diverted from the Savings Banks, for it will be seen
(Table 9), that the individual deposits for 1860 greatly exceeded those of
both Victoria and New South Wales.
The consumption of 9 ] pints of spirits for every man, woman, and child
of the population must still be deprecated as enormous, but tins amount is
below the consumption in other Colonies. During the gold excitement
(1854), each individual in Victoria consumed on an average six gallons of
spirits, and twelve gallons of beer, wine, and cider, within the year. Even
in 1860 the average of Victoria was two gallons of spirits, and six gallons
of wine, beer, and cider per head. The average for New South Wales was one
gallon, 6| pints of spirits, with four gallons, pints of wine, beer, and
cider.
POPULATION.
The totals of Population are given in Table 8. By the last Census
(April, 1861), there were Males, 49,593; Females, 40,384. The Females
preponderated at ages from one to two years, five to ten years, fifteen U>


twenty years, and twenty to thirty years. The Males were in excess at all-
ages above forty. The married Males and Females were nearly equal, t»e
single Males, 33,700 ; Females, 24,700. Five districts have decreased, and
nineteen Districts (Agricultural), have increased. The total Population has.
increased one-ninth within the last four years, and one-fifth within tic ask
ten years. Deducting children below about eight years old, there weie on v
one-eighteenth part of the whole who could not write or read. In omy one-
year (1858) out of the last four—the “Departures” have exceeded the
“ Arrivals.”
COLONIAL STATISTICS.
The following table compiled from Official Public Dccumen s
shew the position of Tasmania, in some important particulai s, as compare
with t!ie two neighbouring Colonies.
O I
'"S Ip .05 05 tO C,® Ji*
® 3 . .04
K& c M - ao n <N « *« «
o o >-h
£ C ~ =+t w ' 1 ~ « -
O ‘ «-
_ ; ; 05_
•i Ss o i- oo £ 2 o
2 to *o O r? s=; tn
2 •' >ft ~ *t, "I a, Tt ci
g I-T «*i 05 tO to (N 00 £
2 oo os 'jj w ~ 00 ,
« <m . <n <m t+j 2
r -1 - o
—' ' ' ■■!■■■— "■■ ■ 1.1.1.. ■' "" (JJ
*6 ° 2 °° ° p.g s ~
ffi |§ M o 05 o -■ <n 'C
ssr s = « - - ° 2
o o }
to oco O O CO O *w O p
• tH CO O <M O C7i •—< tr.
I “ « .. ®t « " C- «o) g
Cl C/2 I? CO oo_ to ‘-'5 •“ 1 I—I a>
D CtT —* O) -~
25 ■
« ’Si r- 00 PS
2 04 -0 r~ 05
- op, C 4
I—l aJ <N eo 50 to <M «
rt
<S ' M o <n o to o • o o £j
CLi’g « < g. ■
. 7-1 o JO N ' H
rt 1- 1- • <N * r- t;
*£ -* O o *o <n ° l
O «" H « oo O -t <» « a® C
CO »0 *0 OO 5t4 05 o
• S o 05 ■"t C 5 tj<
t> ot cT n ~ rt
!■* i 3-
I • i • • S' • £
C s C _ to ”
. . . cd 2 " . 'jS oo a> ' 5*
JB U 2 a i
C ts H
o•••S es ' >
to ° j m *£ r o * j
m. cj ** QQ ci 22 *—*< ti
2 S Q § .« 5 c 2 &
I 5 ‘is .s| g s g,
§• •§ 3 | a I J f


CLIMATE, PUBLIC HEALTH,
Vu elaborate Article on the Meteorology and Sanatory Condition of las*
mania, by Dr. E. S. Hall, will be found in the Appendix.
NATIONAL SPOUTS —THE CARNIVAL WEEK.
The oreuius of a people may generally be judged of by their public sports.
The Tasmanians, in December last, offered a prize of £5OO lor a Champion
Horse-race. To this attraction wai added a £2OO prize lor a \acht
race an( j £lOO for a whale-boat race. Various minor prizes brought up
the sum total raised by public subscription to about £2,000 which prizes
were thrown open to all competitors, and the public sports lasted a whole
week durum which nearly all business was suspended. The interest in
the contests of this “ Carnival Week” was intense, for Tasmania possesses
some of the best English racing blood; a little flotilla of pneate laeh.s
may ■ mac-rally be seen moored off Hobart Town, and the whale-boat in
roughwater is to the young Tasmanian as the Desert Horse to the Arab.
A clever Tasmanian journalist did no more than give expression to the
genuine enthusiasm of the people when he thus wrote. “ Horse-racing is
Additionally, and by inveteracy of habit, an English sport a national pas-
time ■ and we are ashamed of the Englishman who is ashamed of it. it
has always been a popular sport amongst heroic people, but has never
taken root so thoroughly in any national soil as in our own Old Home.
* * •* * There is another pastime quite as national, and quite as
congenial to our habits. If au Englishman is at home on the back of a
horse, he is equally so when floating on the waves, dashed by the spray
and tossed about by the rough winds of ocean. We came from a hue ot
old Sea Kings ; we are essentially a people of maritime enterprise ; we
arc prouder of Britannia with her trident, than of the Lion and Unicom.
There is no air so pleasant to the nostrils of an Englishman as that laden
with the odours of the sea. _ . v , ~
The result of these spirited intercolonial contests was not discreditable
to Tasmania. The Champion Turf Prize was won by Mr. Henderson s
■“ Mormon ” a Victorian horse, hut two Tasmanian horses “ Shclalag i am
•“IViic” both owned by Mr. Blackwell, ran second and third—beating the
horses of New South Wales, South Australia, and Western Australia.
In the Champion Sailing Match (prize £200,) for Yachts nuclei-35 tons,
I two Tasmanian vessels, the “Maggie Lamie” (Ross), and the _
c /Chandler), came in first and second—the “ Surprise Sr v Hal
Sydney Yacht Club) being third. Tlie lasmaman Prize (£100), fox whale-
boats—similar to those suspended from the Tasmanian Trophy-was earned
off by a fine picked crew from the Sydney boatmen (having a ms
manian coxswain) who pulled with light, broad, smooth-water paddles,
'redead of the heavy oars generally used in rough sea whaling. The
following comments on these exciting contests deserve a. wider promulgation
i 0 “ The reaction that has set in, in favor of open air and gymnastic
exercises, which is a curious and interesting phase of _ the present-age
civilization of the mother country, is still more marked in these colonies.
*Mr. Bright, Uohart Town Mercury.


There is surely some significance in the fact that the people of Australia*,
as a general rule, have the leisure and the means to take frequent holidays.
Talk as we may about depression and poverty, it is impossible to witness,
the spectacle of a people wholly given up to enjoyment, not for a day, bu«
durlncr a week : not on one occasion, but on many throughout the year;,
without feeling that there is an essential difference between their condition
and that of the classes corresponding to them in either of the three king-
doms What impression must have been produced upon the mind ot a
stranger just arrived from one of the manufacturing or agricultural districts
of .England as he saw yesterday from a steamer on the Derwent, the
thousands of persons of all degrees who crowded the Domain, on no care
intent but to enjoy fine weather and witness pleasant sights ; who talked
through the deserted streets of the city and saw warehouses and shops
closed, and all the operations of industry suspended ; and who learnt that
it was the Friday of a week almost every previous day of which had been
in some way devoted to the same task of pleasure seeking ! He would
surely conclude that he had come amongst a people with whom the condi-
tions of life were easier, than with the struggling mechanics and laborers
of lands where a half-holiday, enjoyed once or twice a year, has to be pur-
chased by long pinching and over-work. No thoughtful mind can doubt
that even in this colony, which is held to compare unfavorably with others
in point of material prosperity, the severity of toil which leaves little
opportunity of recreation is comparatively unknown.
“The time dedicated to public pastimes is a satisfactory proof of our
practical interest in that physical education, which tend* so much to the
development of a true manliness of character. _
Cricket has ever been a favourite game in Tasmania, winch contains
many settlers from the South of England, who talk warmly ot the halcyon
days of English pastime,
When the good old Kent Eleven, full of hope and pluck, began
The battle with All England—single-handed—man to man.
On the recent visit of the “ All England Eleven’’ to Australia .that in-
stiuctive desire to try their mettle against superior odds which is alike the
most healthful attribute of competitive emulation, and the best guarantee
for future excellence, urged the cricketers of Tasmania to invite them to a
friendly match. They “ came, saw, and conquered as they
case, save one; but the Tasmanian Twenty-two made a higher score> (-50) than
had been made by any other twenty-two of any other colony. One ot _ iejr
batsmen—Mr. Whitesides—made the highest score (50) ot any sm 6 ie
Australasian against All England, and a Tasmanian bowler (Mr. bpicer)
brought down the wicket of the celebrated Caffyn, who is said not to have
been "previously bowled out for several years. The Englishmen expies.se
themselves pleased with their frank and hearty reception, witn the truly
English character of the Colony, with its resuscitating climate, and u i
the fair and manly play of their aspiring competitors. ,
Enough has been said of Tasmanian manly sports. A word is due to
the amusements of the move retiring sex. The Whaling enterprise of 1 Ds.
[Seal has been noticed as illustrative of the more stern occasional require-
ments of Colonial life —but a reference to the drawings of Mrs. Charles


Meredith and Mrs. Allport, the embroidery of Mrs. Burgess, the bouquet*
of sea-weed and shell-work of Miss Collins and of Mrs. Cook, the wax
fruit models of Mrs. Luckman, and the ornamental feather-work of Mrs.
Crowther, senr., all on purely Tasmanian subjects—will amply prove that
whilst cultivating business habits of practical utility, the fair Tasma-
nians by no means undervalue those pleasing and elegant accomplishments
which diffuse an atmosphere of cheerfulness around the enjoyments of
home, and elevate and purify the graceful amenities of social life. On the
point of personal attractions the evidence of numerous, trustworthy, though
not perhaps impartial, witnesses might be adduced. Colonel Munday
thus writes (“ The Antipodes,” vol. 2) of a ball which he attended here at
Government House; —“ For an hour or two dancing was kept up exciu sively
by children, amongst whom were many beautiful specimens of rising
Anglo-Saxons, for the rearing of whom the climate is evidently very
favourable. The same must be said of human plants of more advanced
■growth. I saw in five minutes , this night , more fair faces tinged with the
English rose than I had seen in New South Wales in as mang gears."
An apology is due for the brevity with which many interesting points
have necessarily been treated in this brochure. Had the occasion permitted
a volume might have been written on many matters yet untouched. It is
hoped, however, that this rapid sketch may convey some idea of the phy-
sical characteristics, the material resources, and the moving life and manners
of Tasmania. Taken with the collection of Tasmanian Products,
it will at least serve to show what a comparative handful of
earnest and self-reliant men, with a fine climate and fine countiy
can manage to do, in blending the free and lasting institutions of their
forefathers with the energetic habits and improvements of a riper age.
GEORGE WHITING,
Secretary to the International Exhibition Commission for Tasmania.


APPENDIX
NOTES ON THE VEGETABLE PRODUCTS OF TASMANIA,
AT THE
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION FOR 1862,
BY WILLIAM ARCHER, FX.S.
TIMBER.
The principal timber trees of Tasmania, such as the Blue Gum, Stringy Bark,
White Gum, or Gum-topped Stringy Bark, Swamp Gum, and Peppermint Tree,
—furnish a har l, close-grained, and strong timber, whicli is used in ship-building and
house-building, and generally for all the purposes to which Oak is applied in England.
Huon Pine is very durable, and is employed for boat-building, for which it is pecu-
liarly adapted, and for house-fittings, &c. Blackwood makes excellent naves and
spokes, cask staves, &c. Native Myrtle is valuable for house-fittings. Swamp Gum
yields the finest palings and other split-stuff in the world. Sassafras affords timber
for house fittings, bench-screws, lasts, &c. Celery-topped Pine is chiefly used for
masts and ship’s spars. The different kinds of timber in the following list are
arranged according to their value. The diameter of the trees is measured at the
height of 4 feet from the ground.
Blue Gum. — {Eucalyptus Globulus, Lab.) —The common name is derived from
the bluish-grey color of the young plants. Diameter, sto 30 feet ; average of those
felled for use, 6 feet. Height, 150 to 350 feet ; sp. grav. about -945 to .1.055.
Abundant in the southern and south-western parts of the Island. Cut for house-
building it sells at Bs. to 10s. per 100 superficial feet—for ship-building at 12s.
to 14s.
Stringy-Baek. —( Eucalyptus gigantca, Hook. Jils.) —Common name taken from
the coarse fibrous bark. Diameter, 4 to 24 feet ; average of those sawn about 5A
feet. Height, 150 to 300 feet. Sp. grav. about -905. Abundant everywhere upon
hilly ground. Price, the same as that of Blue Gum.
Swamp Gum. — White Gum. —( Eucalyptus viminalis, Lab.) —Common names
from its growing to perfection in humid situations—and from its gigantic white trunk,
Diameter, 4to 18 feet; average about 5* feet. Height, 150 to 300 feet ; sp. grav.
about ’BBS. Growing in forests with other kinds of Eucalyptus, in rather humid
localities. A small variety called the Manna Tree, grows abundantly about Hobart
Town and in other places, on dry ground. Price, for general purposes the same as
that of Blue Gum : 5-feet palings, 6s. to Bs. per 100.
Gum-topped Stringy Bark, sometimes called White Gum .—(Eucalyptus
gigantea, ran)—A tree resembling the Blue Gum in foliage, with rough bark
similar to Stringy Bark towards the stem. It has been found recently that this
wood possesses nearly all the properties of strength, solidity, and durability of the
Blue Gum—whilst being straight-grained, it is much easier to work. It is very
abundant about D’Entrecasteaux Channel. An old plank from the Hobart Town
Wharf, which has been twenty years in use, may be seen in the Trophy. Price,
about the same as Blue Gum.
Peppermint T nKii.~(Euca lyptus amygdalina, Lab.)—Common name from the odor
of the leaves. Diameter, 3 to 8 feet ; average about 4 feet. Height, 100 to 150
feet; sp. grav.about -895. The Peppermint Tree abounds throughout the Island,
on gravelly and other poor soil. Price, about the same as that of Swamp Gum.
Hi on Pine. —( Dacrydium FrankUnii, Hook, til.)—So-called because it was first
discovered on the banks of the Huou River. Diameter, 3to 8 feet ; average about
4£ f ee t. Height, 50 to 120 feet; sp. grav. about -650. Abundant in portions of the
south-western part of the Island. Price, about 16s. per 100 superficial feet, in the
log.
Blackwood. — (Acacia melanoxyhn, BrJ—So called from tlie dark-brown color
of the mature wood which becomes black when washed with lime-water. In moist


shaded localities the tree grows more rapidly, and the wood is of a much lighter
color. Hence this variety is called “ Lightwood,'” (in Hobart Town), to distinguish
it from the other. Diameter, I£to 4 feet: average, about 2| feet. Height, 60 to
130 feet. Sp. grav., about - 885. Found throughout the island, but not abundantly
in any one locality. Price, about 12s. to 14s. per 100 feet super., in the log.
Native Myrtle. — {Fagus Cunningham!i, Hook.) —Common name irom the
fancied resemblance of its dark-green leaves to those of the myrtle. Diameter, 2to
9 feet ; average, about 3£ feet. Height, 60 to 180 feet. Sp. grav. about -795. The
Native Myrtle exists in great abundance throughout the western half of the island,
growing in forests to a great size, in humid situations. Price, about IGs. per 100
feet super., in the log.
Celery-topped Pine. —( Phillocladus rhomhoidalis, Rich.) — So called from the
fancied similarity in form of the upper part of the branchlets to celery. Diameter,
14to 2 feet: average, about 1J feet. Height, 60 to 150 feet. Sp. grav about -655.
Rather common in damp forests in the southern parts of the island, and in some
sub-alpine localities.
ORNAMENTAL WOODS.
The different kinds of wood included in the following list are all in constant
use for cabinet and fancy work. They are arranged according to their value.
The finest specimens of Native Myrtle, Musk-wood, Huon Pine, and Black-wood,
exhibit qualities of the highest excellence, both in tint and variety of venation.
Native Myrtle. —(Fagus Cunningham!!, Hook.)
Musk-wood. —( Furybia argophylla, Cass.) —Named from the musky odor of the
plant. Diameter, 6to 15 inches—the butt enlarging towards the ground to 1), and
even 2£ feet. Height, 15 to 30 feet. Spec. grav. about '685. Abundant throughout
the island in damp localities.
Huon Pine. —(Dacrydium Franklin!!, Hook, fils.)
Black-wood. —(Acacia melanoxylon, Br.)
She-oak. —( Casuarina quadrivalvis. Lab.) —A portion of the common name is
evidently derived from the resemblance of the markings to those of oak. Diameter,
Ito 1£ foot. Height, 20 to 30 feet. Spec. grav. about - 845. Very common on dry
stony hills, excepting in the north-western districts.
He-oak. — {Casuarina suherosa, Otto.) —Diameter, 9to 15 inches. Height, 20 to
25 feet. Spec. grav. about - 855. Common on stony hills.
Honeysuckle Tree. —( Banksia Australis, Br.) —Named from the large quantity
of honey in the flowers. Diameter, 1) to 2\ feet. Height, 20 to 40 feet. Sp. grav.
about *645, Abundant on sandy soil.
Dogwood. —( Bedfordia salicina, D.C. ). —Diameter, 6to 16 inches. Height, 15
to 25 feet. Sp. grav. about '985. Common of small size, but rare of large propor-
tions.
Native Laurel. — (Anoptems glandulosus, Lab.). —So named from its laurel-like
leaves. Diameter 6to 10 inches. Height, 15 to 22 feet. Sp. grav. about 675.
Tolerably abundant in some sub-alpine localities.
Blue Gum. —( Eucalyptus globulus. Lab..) —Curly-grained variety.
Peppermint. —( Eucalyptus amygdalina, Lab.). —Some specimens of this timber
have a fine wavy marking.
USEFUL WOODS.
Silver Wattle. —( Acacia dealbata, Lindl.) —So called from the whiteness of
the trunk, and the silvery green of the foliage. Used for cask staves and treenails.
Diameter, 1) to 2) feet. Height, 60 to 120 feet. Sp. grav. about -965. Very
common.
Iron Wood (Tasmanian). —( Notelcea ligustrina, Vent.') — An exceedingly hard
close-grained wood, used for mallets, sheaves of blocks, turnery, &c. Diameter, 9
to 18 inches. Height, 20 to 35 feet. Sp. grav. about - 965. Not uncommon.
Swamp Tea-tree. —( Melaleuca ericoefolia, Sm.) —So called, probably, because
the leaves of an allied plant ( Leptospermum lanigerum, Sm.) with similar bark, are
said to have been used as a substitute for tea. Diameter, 9to 20 inches. Height,
20 to 60 feet, Sp. grav. about -824. Used for turnery chiefly. r
Native Cherry. —( Exocarpus cupressiformis, Lab.) —So named because the colo
of the fruit is similar to that of a Kentish Cherry, Diameter, 9 to 15 inches-


Height 20 to 30 feet. Sp. grav. about 785. Used for tool handles, spokes, gun-
stocks Sc c*
White-wood. —( Pittosporuni bicolor , Hook.). — Wood white. Diameter, Bto 13
inches. Height, 20 to 35 feet. Sp. grav. about 875. Used in turnery. Probably
fit for wood engraving. ,
Native Box.— {Bursaria spinosa, Cav.).—'The leaves are somewhat like those of
the English Box. Diameter, 8 to 12 inches. Height, 15 to 25 feet. Sp. grav,
about 825. Used for turnery.
Pink-wood. — (Beyeria viscosa.—t'l'oton viscosuw, Dub.) —Diameter, 6 to 10 inches.
Height, 15 to 25 feet. Sp. grav. about 815. Used for sheaves of blocks, and for
turnery.
Native Pear.— {Hakea lissosperma, Br.)—The woody seed-vessel is somewhat
pear-shaped. Diameter, Bto 12 inches. Height, 29 to 30 feet. Sp. gravity about
♦375. Fit for turnery.
SCENTED WOODS.
Tonga Bean Wood.— {Alyxia buxifolia , Br.)—The odor is similar to that of the
Tonga Bean (Dipteryx odorata ). A straggling sea-side shrub, 3to 5 inches in dia-
meter.
Native Kox.—(Bursaria spinosa , Cav.) The scent is pleasant but fleeting.
TANNING BARK.
Wattle Bark. —The bark of the Black Wattle {Acacia mollissima, Willd), the
Silver Wattle {Acacia dealbata, Lindl.). and the Blackwood Tree {Acacia mdanoxylotu
Br.). The first named yields the most valuable bark, and is common on dry stony
hills.
F I B R E S.
C I'REAJONO. — (PlagiantHuS sidnides, Hook.)—The fibres of the bark are very
strong. It is a large shrub, found chiefly on the southern side of the Island, in
ravines and shady places, and grows rapidly.
Lyonsia. — (Lyonsia straminea, Br.) —Fibres of the bark fine and strong. Ihe
Lyonsia is met with, rather sparingly, in dense thickets with its stems hanging like
ropes among the trees. . .
Blue Gum .—{Eucalyptus globulus , Lab.)—The bark of this immense tree yields
a fibre which may, probably, be found available for making the coarser kinds of
V^Vtringy-Bark.— {Eucalyptus gigantea, Hook, fil.)—The fibres of the bark are
similar to those of the Blue-Gum bark, but are not so strong, or so fine.
Fibrous Grass.— {Stipa semi-barbata, Br.)—After the seed has ripened the
upper part of the stem breaks up into fibre, which curls loosely and hangs down
waving in the wind. The condition of the fibre at this time is undoubtedly far in-
ferior to what it would be if rightly prepared. Common in some localities.
G U M.
Kino. This gum, which seems to have similar properties to those of the East
Indian “ kino,” exudes from the woods of all the Tasmanian species of Eucalyptus.
Wattle Gum, the gum of the Silver Wattle. —{Acacia dealbata, Lindl), is ex-
ceedingly viscous, and, probably, quite as useful as Gum Arabic. The gum of the
Black Wattle {Acacia mollissima, Willd,), which is often mixed with the other, is
very inferior to it, being far less viscous.
SUNDRY FRODUCTS.
Trickit Fern Tree.— {Alsophila Australis, 'Ey.)—' This very handsome Fern Tree
occasionally attains a height of 30 feet. It is not, by any means, so common a
Fern Tree as Dicksonia antarctica (Lab).


Pith of Rushes —This is the pithis made up in Hobart Town into head-
vaginatus, Br.) It is not rare. This pith is of the largest Tasraaniain rush ( Jitncvs
dresses.
Gelatinous Seaweed.— (Gracilaria sp .) —This Alga, which may, perhaps, he
regarded as a variety of G. confervoides (Grev.), is occasionally used for making
jelly. It abounds on the shores of Sloping (or Slopen) Islands, in Frederick
Hendrick Bay.
Native Bkead. — (Mylitta Australis. Berk.) —An insipid, under-ground fungus,
which sends up no stem, and is generally met with by accident. When growing
rapidly it sometimes causes the ground to crack, and may thus be discovered by a
careful observer, as it probably was by the Aborigines, who used it as food.
CLIMATE AND HEALTH OF TASMANIA.
E. SWAKBRECK HALL,
Licentiate in the Science and Practice of Medicine, Member of the Royal College
of Surgeons of England, Honorary Member of the Medical Society of Victoria,
Honorary Corresponding Member of the Statistical Society of London, &c., &c.
“ A sound body is better than immense revenues.”
“ There are no riches above the riches of the health of the body ; and there is
no pleasure above the joy of the heart.”
“ Better is a poor man who is sound and strong of constitution, than a rich man
wlio is weak and afflicted with evils.— Ecclesiasticus.”
The space allotted to the elucidation of this subject in the Tasmanian Exhibition
Pamphlet is too limited to permit me to do more than briefly allude to the edeavour
of Medical Philosophers from the earliest ages—beginning with the father of
Medicine himself, Hippocrates,—to establish on sound data, the intimate connection
between climate and health. In all subsequent times the labourers in this interesting
and important research have been many, but only within the last quarter of a
century have the enquiries culminated in any remarkable success. From the date of
the application of the science of numbers —statistics—to cosmical variations, and
vital phenomena and disease, are the grand triumphs of modern hygiene to be dated.
The facts and figures collected, arranged, expounded, and disseminated by the
Registrar-General of England, and his numerous coadjutors of the medical profession,
were the great levers which enabled sanitary reformers to effect their brave and
bloodless victories. -Dr. William Farr has been the “ thaumaturgus”—the wonder-
worker—of the age we live in ; and the figures he has arrayed, and the centres of
disease-breeding he has indicated, with the unsparing exposure of their origin hi the
neglect of Nature's own sanitary teachings, has opened an entirely new sphere for
medical practice. The master-minds of the profession are now assuming the first
duty of medical skill to be to prevent disease. The curative department is rapidly
becoming a secondary branch in the exercise of medical science. Wherever these
new principles— new' at least comparatively to any extent in practice—have been
fairly acted upon, human lives have been saved by thousands. We now scrutinize


suspiciously every mortuary record where the deaths exceed a certain assumed
normal standard. No longer can the unphilosophical oi-polhi safely mask their
ignorance and attribute excessive mortality to recondite causes, or take shelter in
vague generalities, and the untangible mystic influences of the weather.
Meteorologists, by the use of improved instruments and carefully conducted
observations, with accurate long continued records scientifically tabulated, have
given invaluable data for sanitarians to reason from, and to aid them in constructing
their reforming operations.
Tasmania has had peculiar advantages over most other Colonies, from having been
selected as one of the localities for a Magnetical and Meteorological Observatory, at
the suggestion of the British Association. From 1841, when the observations were
commenced in the immediate vicinity of Hobart Town by Sir James Ross, up to
1854, a continuous series of meteorological facts were registered. For eight years,
cut of the fourteen, hourly observations both by night and day were made
by instruments and observers entitled to the lushest confidence. Two large volumes
of the records then made, have been edited by General Sabine, and printed, published
and circulated. The third volume, nowunany years overdue, in which the peculiari-
ties and advantages of the Tasmanian climate were promised to be elaborated by
Professor Dove of Berlin, is yet wanting to complete this desideratum to meteorological
science. To those in Tasmania who have long yearned for its appearance, the delay
of publication has been a constant source of regret.
When the Boss-bank Observatory was closed, observations were continued by Sir.
Francis Abbott at his private Observatory in an open garden in the central Valley be
Hobart City, 37 feet above the sea level, and about quarter of a mile above tidal
influence. The best instruments that the most esteemed London makers could fur-
nish, have been used, and the results every month tabulated, and presented to the
Royal Society and printed. When 1860 had completed a twenty years’ continuous
series of Meteorological records, Mr. Abbott zealously devoted much time in com-
piling and combining all the data into “40 Tables,” which, under the patronage of
the Governor Sir H. E. F. Young, and the Council of the Royal Society, have been
printed and published at the Government Printing Office, in a manner highly credit-
able to Tasmanian typography. Having lent my assistance in the preparation of
this work, and being familiar with the subject from my twenty-eight years’ resi-
dence in the Island, and constant study of meteorology in many parts of it, I shall,
in this article, make use of Mr. Abbott’s Tables as the ground work of my observa-
tions on the climatological division of my essay. Sir Thomas Maclear, in charge of
the Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope, and so deservedly eminent as an
Astronomer and a Meteorologist, in acknowledging the receipt of a copy of Mr.
Abbott’s work, pronounces it to be:—“A,standard of reference, leaving nothing to
be desired for the climate of Tasmania.”
Situated as Tasmania is in the temperate zone, between the 40th and 44th degrees
of latitude, in the Southern Pacific, with an almost boundless extent of ocean on its
Southern, Western, and Eastern aspects, and separated from the Australian Conti-
nent by a wide Strait; had not the Island enjoyed a highly salubrious climate, it
must have arisen from local causes. On the contrary, its local topograph}' tends
much to enhance its geographical advantages. The Island has an undulated surface
throughout; its highest mountains only attain a height exceeding 5,000 feet in two
instances; the Country rises from all its shores gradually to its central water-shed,
along which is arrayed a chain of lakes that give origin to the principal rivers of the
Island. These rivers generally have a rapid fall, and marshes are entirely excep-
tional. Nevertheless, as in all Islands of this configuration, there is considerable
variety in the meteorological phenomena in different localities. The Northern side
of the Colony has a warmer and moister climate than the Southern, and the West-
ern has a more stormy and rainy character than the Eastern shores. But allowing
for these, and differences in altitude, Hobart Town exhibits a fair climatic type for
the whole of Tasmania. There are no volcanoes, and I have never noted any
symptoms of earthquakes, though others have observed slight shocks which they
believed to originate in these causes.
The mean atmospheric pressure of the 20 years’ records, is 29-808 inches. tThe
height of the Ross-bank Observatory above the sea level differing only a few feet
from Mr. Abbott's). The extremes of annual means, were :—Lowest, 29-696 for
1856; highest, 29 - 944 for 1860, Apr lof all the mouths has the highest mean.


-29-885 ; January the lowest, 29*715. The greatest pressure ever note ! was 30.812
in July 1846; the smallest 28-518 in July 1857 ; the extreme divergence in the 20
years, being therefore 2 302 inches. The widest range in any twenty-four hours,
*1 p.m., to 1 p.m., within the last years, frpm the present month of March 1868,
was a rise of the barometer of 1-014 inches in January 1856. The extreme range
during any month in the same period was 1-649 inches in Maj 1855.
As every variation of one inch in the Barometer indicates a difference of nearly
half a ton of pressure on the adult human body, it is easy to understand that rapid
and extensive fluctuations of pressure must have a marked influence on health. In
my monthly “ Health Reports” I have frequently demonstrated this influence, iu its
effects upon diseases of the brain, and the organs of circulation and respiration. A
continued high atmospheric pressure when accompanied with a stagnant state of
the air, is characteristic in this island, as Mr. Glaisher lias shown it to be in England,
of an epidemic constitution of the air. It is a very unusual occurrence, nevertheless,
in Tasmania, but was signally exemplified in June and July 1860. when an epidemic -
influenza ravaged all the Australasian Colonies, and proved so destructive to aged
and infirm people.
The mean temperature, deduced from the 20 years’ observations, is 54 92 degrees.
For the 14 years at Ross-bank Observatory only, the mean was 53*09. “ The mean
annual temperature from the result of eight years hourly observations, 1841 to
1848,” Captain Kay, R.N., F.R.S., who had charge of the Observatory, states to be
“53-48,” and the “Mean Annual Temperature from observations with the max. and
min. thermometers in 1849, ’50,’51, ’52—53 32 degrees.” So close an approximation of
results have not been noticed at Mr. Abbott’s Observatory, The means of the
maxima and minima thermometers average about one degree higher than those of the
observations, at 7 a.m., p.m., and sunset. Sometimes, as in last month, they
correspond within a few hundredths of a degree. Some observers here, and Mr.
Abbott amongst them, are inclined to attribute the higher means since 1854 to the
place of observation being within the influence of the warmer air of the City. Ido
not agree in this opinion, for I have remarked a similar increase iu the temperature
in places, not subject to such influences ; and Sir Thomas Maclear’s Tables for the
Cape of Good Hope, support my view, that we are now subjected to of the cycles of
higher temperature which has been spoken of by Sir John Herschel. January has
the hottest mean of any mouth in the year;—63.s7. July has the coldest mean:
—45.82. 1855 was the hottest year: —58.58, and the coldest was the very unusually
wet year 1849, the mean temperature of which was only 50.98. The 20 years’ range
consequently was 7.60 degrees. The greatest mean for any month was 71.10 for
January, 1856; the smallest was 42.57 for July 1841. The highest temperature in
the shade for any dav ever recorded was 105 degrees in January, 1849. In
February, 1847, 100 was noted; in December of the same year, 103; in December,
1859, 102 was recorded. No other registers of 100 or upwards have been made. In
the whole period of now 21 years, the thermometer has only risen to 90 and above
44 times. These have all occurred with North and North West winds, coining from
the arid continent of Australia, called hot-winds, hut much mitigated in their force
and heat by the happy insular position of Tasmania. Hot winds have been known
to endure for three days in succession, but with a diminution of 20 to 30 degrees
during the night. The usual duration, however, in this island seldom exceeds Gto 12
hours, and is succeeded by cool refreshing showers, with electrical discharges and
thunder. The lowest shade temperature ever registered was singularly enough in the
same year as the highest, 1849—it was in themonth of July, and 29.4 degrees. But in
the past 21 years the Thermometer sank to freezing point or below it, only 31 times.
In 1861, the Minimum self-registering Thermometer never fell below 34. In England
the cold of Winter is the most fatal to human life. In Tasmania the Winter season
is the most genial and salubrious. Snow rarely falls in Hobart Town, and was never
known to remain on the ground for 24 hours. In a small township on the summit of
the Water-shed, where it intersects the Main-road of the Island, I have known it to
remain three days, and nearly a foot in depth, but it was in the cold, wet, exceptional
year of 1849. In Hobarton ice rarely attains the thickness of a penny-piece, and
only once do I remember it to have been thick enough in any of the settled districts
of the interior to bear my weight. Agricultural operations, therefore, are scarcely
ever suspended by the inclemency of the weather from this or other causes. The
daily range of temperature is the only weak point, in the every other respect, gene-


rally delight ful and salubrious climate of Tasmania. The 20 years'mean of daily
ralK 18.16 degrees, which, of course, greatly exceeds that of England. January
the hottest month, has also the widest daily range, 20., 5 degrees
ruarv and March have all, also, a mean above 20 degrees. Maj, June, and -lull
have nearly the same mean, 15.30 to 15.35 degrees. The year of greatest range was
1855—22.15 degrees. 1852 had the smallest mean—l 4.9 degrees. Of months,
January exhibits the extreme mean of daily ranges. 1841 had 25.5, and 18.>6 and
1862 nearly the same. July 1849 had the smallest mean of any month on record,
8.7 degrees! The greatest range of the Thermometer that a'dav
hours was 51.9 degrees in January, 1849; and in February, 1856, there wasag
that had a raime of 51 degrees. Of course the extremes of heat and cold are recorded
from maxima and minima Thermometers in the shade m the
“ en air Solar heat has only been registered since the commencement of 85b
The instrument used is self-registering, with the black-bulb Themometer mclosed
in a class tube. The mean for the six years is 93 degrees. 1856 had 104, and 1858
only*B9. January’s mean is the highest—lll. July the lowest ,0. January, K».,
mean was 127, being much higher than any other on record June and Julj 185 J.
had the lowest —73. The greatest Solar intensity ever Tmted ou any da> was m
February 1857, 143, and the next 133, was one day in December, 18.>9 llic day
in February 1857, referred to, was marked by many sudden deaths. It is remark-
able th&t diseases of the “Drain and nervous system ” give more deaths, m propor-
tion-to the total from all causes, in Tasmania, than in either \
Wales Count Slrzelecki long since drew attention to the fact of the Sokr-mtcnsUj
heiii'r "reatcr in this Island than even in New South M ales, owing to the grealt
diaphaneity of the atmosphere in Tasmania. The haze which usually accompanies
the intense heat on the continent of Australia very rarely exists in Tasmania. Pin*
unimpeded transmission of the Solar rays is beneficial in every way, and onh be-
comes hurtful bv the folly of people exposing the head to its direct infiuenco, with-
out covering. or with such as are ill calculated to afford the requisite protec on.
Terrestrial radiation has been noted for the same period as
mean of the six years is 43.05. 1861 had a much higher mean, 43.81, than any ot
the five preceding years. The month of January has the highest mean
52.52, and July the lowest of five years, 34.59, which is also that of An„ .
for the six only in July 1859 and 1860 was the mean lowei than in August,
1861 In eve™- other month of 1861, except November, radi-
ation was considerably above the previous five years means Mi Abbott has
this thermometer placed .on grass in his garden, clear of ail reflected hurt f °
buildings The lowest reading for any night of the six years was 23 .> degree
September 1857. The Mean of the 20 years for the Wet-bulb thermometer is 49 9.
1855 had the greatest mean 51'75, 1844 the lowest 48-14 ; Jaueury \ t j *
Julv 43-12 ; Dew-Point mean for the 20 years is 45 34 ; 1861 had 4/ : ‘
opposite extreme, 43 83, was in 1844 ; January mean is aQ-69, and
the highest and lowest means of months. The 20 years’ mean Jor Elastoc force ot
Vanour is 317 • 1856, mean 347 was the highest ; 1849, 288 was the lowest , • -
is*3Bo • July 259 ; Humidity mean of 20 years is 74'75 ; the greatest mean o
vear"i, 79 in 1849, 1853, 1854. Ot month, June ha» the
December the lowest, 67. The Rain-fall mean ot the 20 years is 21 a 2 uiches, tie
greatest extreme being 1849 when 33;51 inches fell j and the lowest; yea
in 1843, when only 13 43 inches of ram was precipitated. Ihe if-rges * 1 .
any month was 1016 inches in August 1858 ; February had 9 1 o inU,
November 1840, 8-94 inches ; March 1854, 7-60 inches ; • May
1849, 5-99 ; October, 5 04 in 1861 ; April, s'ol in 1806 ; January 1859,4 61 .May
■o .o <- t o . Timp 1345 4-07 . December 1861, 3 - 29. Ihe minima falls have ranged
from’ 0-02 in March 1843 to 0 53, in November 1853. The means for the mont is
beginning with the highest arc as follows : —November 2-, 6 August 2 06, June 1 8.,
Sente her 187 May 185 April 1-78, October 1-77, (but the heavy fall in 1861.
now puts it on a par with August) July 1-73 IMarch I-SS I, January I’so, Febmarj
i -47 fhut raised by the heavy fall in 1851 to V6B), December 1 32. ihe order ana
the averages differ greatly from those published by Captain Ivay m the Koya
Society’s Journal of papers and proceedings, January !803, as the means of t
twelve years, 1841, 1852, in fact every years additional records has tended
approximate the means for the respective months.


For the last seven years the number of days on which rain fell in each month has
been recorded. The mean of the six years is 137*63, but 1861 had 167 rainy days,
being eight days more than 1859 previously the highest. The mean for September
is the greatest, 1566 days ; February the lowest 7 - 50 days. The rate at which rain
falls is of the utmost importance both in the sanitary and agricultural aspect. For
instance, in 1861 28 - 19 inches of rain fell on 167 days. All the months means,
except March, June, August and November, were above the average. The rain
never fell so heavily as to cause floods, and yet heavy enough to flush all drains and
cleanse the surface. In other years more has fallen, but with less beneficial cflect
In 1858 there fell an aggregate of 33 07 inches, but restricted to 129 days, and four
months out of the twelve had 22J inches of the total fall. Much of this caused
heavy and destructive floods. 1858 was one of our most unhealthy years, 1861 one
of the least so ; not however that the rains only was the cause of this disparity.
Nevertheless in my monthly analyses of health, I have always had to comment upon
the beneficial effects of frequent moderate rain-falls, when such have occurred. In
a climate like this their influence on health is much more marked than in England.
Ere long, Hobart City will have the means of artificially imitating Nature’s sanitary
operations in this respect. Mr. Joseph N. Gale’s engineering skill will soon supply
us with an unlimited amount of the purest water from one of the finest “ gathering-
grounds” in the world, and then most of the evil effects of long
continued droughts on a city population can be easily averted. The
northern capital, Launceston, has been for some time reaping the benefit of a good
and copious supply of water. The heaviest fall of rain ever noted in Hobart Town
was on the 26th and 27th of February, 1854, when within thirty-four hours, 863
inches fell, doing great injury to life and property, 6 4 inches of this rain was pre-
cipitated in thirteen out of the thirty-four hours ; or at the rate of nearly half an
inch per hour. I have however, recorded, short sharp showers, where it fell for a
quarter of an hour, at the rate of one inch per hour. In the great rain-fall of
August 1858, the rain was continuous from the afternoon of the 9th until that of the
13th, and there was measured from the rain-guage 896 inches. Hail-storms are
unfrequent in Tasmania. Snow rarely shows more in Hobart Town than as a
coating on Mount Wellington (upwards of 4000 feet above us,) during the winter
months, and adding variety to the charming scenery by which this young city is
encircled. In the midst of summer too, occasionally the mountain for a few hours
puts on its wintry garment of snow.
Spontaneous evaporation has been recorded for five years past, but I do not feel
confident in the accuracy of the means adopted to measure its amount. Of course
in a climate with the air ever in motion, and plenty of sunshine and warmth,
evaporation must, as the records show, greatly exceed condensation and precipi-
tation.
The extent of cloudy sky has been registered for 21 years, and the mean is 5 - 65.
The mid-winter month of July is the least cloudy. Often in the months of April,
May, June, July, August, we have a week at a time, with a bright cloudless sky.
This is the pleasantest season of the year, and a delightful contrast to the bleak
pinching winters of the north. Ozonometrical records have been kept since April
1859. The annual mean is 6.87 by Schoubein’s chromatic scale, and by far exceeds
any records for the adjoining Colonies, or those at home, which have fallen under
my observation. Those months which have the greatest rain-fall, and the largest
number and force of ocean winds, exhibit the greatest amount of free Ozone.
Atmospheric-Electricity has been registered for the last three years, but I am not
altogether satisfied with the Electrometers. Negative electricity greatly prepon-
derates, both in tension and frequency, and so far, I am inclined to think it is
mostly associated with, winds from the Australian Continent (N. and N.W.), deficiency
of ozone, and an asthenic or typhoid type of disease. On the other hand, when the
pure ozonised breezes from the sea prevail; health is at the highest, and the type of
disease is sthenic or inflammatory, and positive electricity is in the ascendant
Though I treat of winds the last, I feel assured that scarcely any other atmospheric
phenomena, more powerfully influence health. The prevailing character of ajrial
changes is that of moderate but almost iimogsant movement. I have contributed to
Mr. Abbott’s work, a four years calculation of averages, as to number and force of
winds. The observations from which I compiled them, were recorded by Mr.
Abbott daily at 7 a.rn., 1 p.m., and sun-set. The annual average force of all tl e


winds is, 703 , 69.’ ! lbs. (on Lind’s wind-guage scale), pressure to the square foot.
October is the windiest month, and in succession follow December, November,
September, January, February, March and April, May, August, July, June. Out of
the 1095 observations annually, the four years means show, N.W., to prevail 279
times, with 207T1-J lbs. of force ; N., times, with 112.08 lbs. of force ; S.E.
199£ times, with 90,90{ lbs. of force ; S.W., 97| times with 76'22-| lbs. of force ; S.,
times, with 57'74 lbs. of force; W. 79£ times, with 12267* of force, being
therefore much the strongest winds we have ; N. E., 67* tinies, with 23.54j1b5. of
force; and B. 60 times with the small force of 13.40* lbs. All but N. and N. W. are
ocean winds, and come well charged with Ozone ; saturated with it, if accompanied
bv rain from the S.E., S., and S.W. During the summer months a cool South-East
sea-breeze may be expected to set in about 11 a.m., and is very bracing and refresh-
ing. Sometimes it is chilling, when it suddenly overpowers an oppressive wind from
the N.W., and those people grumble hard at the variable climate who do not dress
judiciously. Light coloured woollen tweeds are the safest kind of garments here
for all seasons. Such violent storms as I have seen in England, I have never noticed
here. In the 1095 Wind Records, Calms were noticed at the hour of observation
291 - times, but such an event as a day of continuous calm is exceptional, and almost
unknown. This Climate is a decidedly breezy and invigorating one, for after the
hottest day we may calculate on having a cool night, as the daily range I have be-
fore alluded to testifies.
Invalids from India, China, and the hotter Colonies of Ausralia, if not past
recovery, speedily rally in Tasmania, and the increased appetite for food is the
first and most surprising change. With such clear skies, abundance of ozone,
bracing sea breezes, the lamp of life burns quickly, as well as brightly,
and demands a much more abundant and nutritious supply of food than suffices
elsewhere. Food of the best and most varied kind is plentiful, and the actual
consumption per individual greatly exceeds the highest European calculations.
Tasmanians spend much of their time in the open air, and many of the diseases
which afflict European communities are unknown. Others have a minimum of
intensity. Over-crowded, ill ventilated, and badly victualled ships have at different
times brought to this port dangerous types of fever, but the contagious emanations
arising have speedily been neutralized by the disinfecting power of our
highly ozonised air. and beyond a few who came directly in contact with the first
sufferers landed, the disease has not spread. Even eruptive fevers, scarlatina, and
measles, though frequently imported, and at times severe, have speedily worn them-
selves out, only re-appearing at long intervals and in mild type.
In 1854 measles were epidemic. At the beginning of last year we had another
visitation, but so much was it mitigated in this island, that out of a population of
alnjut 25,000 persons in the Registration District of Hobart Town only 55 persons of
all ages died of it. The children under seven years of age, alone, and therefore all
liable to the infection, amount to nearly 6000—but many above that age and adults
were attacked, and some of the deaths were of these. The zymotic proportion of
the deaths in Tasmania is greatly below that of the neighbouring Colonies and
England. The Tasmanian born are comparatively little subject to pulmonary con-
sumption, except where the hereditary tendency is strong. The colony is not yet
old enough to show what age the native born may attain to, but there is reason to
think it will be high. Numerous instances of centenarians who have resided in the
island from its first colonization, or other very long periods, have come under my notice.
Though adult males have always so much exceeded adult females in number, the
increase of population, by excess of births over deaths, has been at a rate much
greater than prevails in Europe. Last year the increase was about 2000 in a popu-
lation of less than 90,000. The children of Tasmania are as plump and rosy as the
finest specimens in England, anp the rosy check does not disappear in adult life..


At the Census of 7th April, 1861,
there were enumerated for all Tasmania
Males.
Females.
Total.
Under 1 year of age...
Above Ito 5 ~
3,117 ")
11,882
11,108
o o a n
6,027 ! 5,855
1 5,545 I 5,563
„ sto 10 „
„ 10 to 15 „
8,240 y- 41,649
34,347
7,302 j
17,36(5
16,981
„ 15 to 20 „
„ 20 to 30 „
13,122 ]
13,620 (
11,091 (
6,329 ]
„ 30 to 40 „
„ 40 to 50 „
44,162
50 to 60 „
„ 60 to 70 „
„ 70 to 80 „
„ 80 to 90
„ 90 to 100 and above
3,092 )
857 (
193 (
24 j
49,593
40,384
89,977
89,977
Married 15,893 15,616 I 31,509
Single 33,700 24,768 | 58,468
A slight examination of the foregoing table will show that one-half of the popula-
tion is under 24 years of age. The total registered births in 1861 were 3,207, but
the probable number of living births would be about 3,530. Still-births are not
registered. The mortuary tables for 1861 record died
1479 deaths out of a population of 89,977 persons is at the rate of 16’43, or less than
16j per 1000 j so that the mortality rate of all Tasmania is less than that of the 63
healthiest registration districts of England and Wales—l 7 per thousand—which the
Registrar-General of England adopts as a normal standard for death rates. In the
purely rural population of Tasmania, counting exclusive of those associated with the
urban districts of Hobart Town and Launceston—s3,667 —the deaths in 1861
amounted only to 619—being at the rate of 11.53, or 11£ per 1000. Glendale, in
Northumberland, which has the smallest death rate in the English returns, has 15 per
1000. But even this contrast, favourable as it is to Tasmania, does not exliibit the


■whole superiority. For, though our population table when compared with that of
England, has not as large a proportion of persons above 60 years of age, it has a very
much larger proportion of those under 15 years of age. Again, the smallest rate last
year in any district of Tasmania was in that of Oatlands, which in a population of 2,333
had only 17 deaths, being at the rate of only 7 - 28 per thousand, or less than half of
the healthiest district in England, Oatlands is in the centre of the island, and 1308
feet above the sea level. It is an axiom now in sanitary science that the rate of
mortality in children, under five years of age, gives the most delicate and surest test
of the salubsjousness of jiny climate. In England the death-rate under this age is
65T8 per 1000. In Tasmania not quite 38 per 1000, or 37 93. Did my limits permit
I could for every disease in our mortuary records give the rate as compared with
those in the English Tables. In an elaborate article on the Vital Statistics of
Tasmania, published in the April number, 1858, of the Australian Medical Journal.
I made such a contrast for 1855 between Hobart Town and London. The additional
facts I have stored. since that report have fully confirmed, and in many respects
strengthened the very favourable report I then made of the natural salubrity of this
Island. Iby no means wish to convey the impression that the lows of hygiene may,
in this auspicious climate, be trifled with with impunity any more than in other
countries. Indeed, I have frequently published indubitable proofs to the contrary.
In this picturesque island and genial climate, it must be man’s own fault if the best
health, and the highest “ chances of long life” are not attained. The meteorological,
statistical, and sanitary facts I have compiled in this paper, briefly condensed as they
necessarily are, give convincing proof of the correctness of the statement which
concluded a paper of mine to the London Statistical Society some years ago, that
few countries in the world, whose medico-vital statistics have been published, can
equal this beautiful isle of the south-sea —young Tasmania—as an abode where the
human race may dwell comfortably, healthily, and to a ripe old age, without
deteriorating'either physically or morally from the elevated position their British
progenitors held among the nations of the earth.
E. S. H.
Hobarton, Tasmania,
March, 1862.






OPINIONS OF THE PRESS
ON THE FIRST EDITION.
(.HOBART TO \VN ADVERTISER.)
(Bur readers will have already been informed (by advertisement) that a “ Reper
upon the Products and Resources of Tasmania, as illustrated in the National Exhi-
bition of 1862,” will be ready to be transmitted by the English Mail on Saturday,
the 22nd instant. This valuable Compilation and Essay upon the Resources and
Products of Tasmania has been prepared by the indefatigable and intelligent
Secretary, George Whiting, Esq. We have carefully perused the Pamphlet, and we
do not exaggerate when we give it as our opinion that a more truthful or reliable
exposition of the Resources and Products of any country has never been published.
Its great merit is that it studiously avoids all exaggerated representations as to the
peculiar advantages and resources of the Colony. Very unlike some Essays we
remember to have heard read before admiring and enthusiastic audiences in reference
to the same topics, the Compiler confines himself strictly, perhaps too much so, for
readers of warm and imaginative temperaments, to an unadorned narrative of indis-
putable facts, and to the statement of conclusions drawn from them, by so legitimate
a process of reasoning as to impress the reader at once with their truth and justice.
Every topic which can interest the Colonist or intending Immigrant is treated
with masterly precision and no mean ability. The Publication will be an invaluable
exponent of the \arious uses to which the great natural resources of Tasmania may
be applied, and cannot fail to attract universal attention among all interested in the
welfare of the. Colony.
{HOBART TOWN MERCURY.)
The Tasmanian Exhibition Commissioners have caused a Pamphlet to be issued
for distribution in England, by Mr. George Whiting, their Secretary. It embrace*
a report, extracted from the Hobart Town Mercury, of the proceedings connected
with the inauguration of the Local Exhibition in Hobart Town in the month of
December last, a series of papers on the physical geography, political institutions
and the natural products of Tasmania, the fields it offers for commerce and
enterprise ; and the attractions it presents to the emigrant. Appended are memoirs
on the Timber of the Colony, by W. Archer, Esquire, M.H.A., F.L.S., and on its
Climatology, by Dr. Swarbreck Hall. Mr. Whiting has brought to the discharge of
a difficult task a large amount of knowledge, research, and intelligence, and ha*
exhibited a ‘‘case” on the part of Tasmania,more complete than has yet been presented
in any publication of a similar kind. If the contents of this brochure are carefully
examined by home readers, they will, we think, come to the conclusion that amongst
the many colonies that are now competing for the favour of the emigrant class, this
Island presents a preponderance of attractions to those who are content to seek a
home with its foundations laid in the stable pursuits of industry, and who_ prefer a
life of safe and successful enterprise to the gambling conditions of life in many
other lands.
(.CORNWALL CHRONICLE.)
We have received a ccpy of a valuable Pamphlet, compiled by George Whiting,
Esq., Secretary to the International Exhibition for this Colony, and intended for
distribution at the Great Exhibition for 1862. The contents comprise a Report of
the Local Exhibition in Hobart Town ; remarks on the Products and Resources of
Tasmania, its Physical Geography, sketch of its present Political Position, its
Climate, and its National Sports as exhibited during the Carnival Week. To this is
added an Appendix containing notes on the Vegetable Products of Tasmania at the
International Exhibition for 1862, by William Archer, F.L.S., and a paper by Dr.
E. S, Hall, on the Climate and Health of Tasmania. The whole is a neat publicatio*.
which while it will bo read with interest by our friends in the Mother Country, will
furnish them with a greater number and variety of valuable facts connected with
the progress of the Colony, than could by any other means be so widely disseminated,
amongst those whose attention we are naturally desirous of attracting. The
Pamphlet gives a pleasing, though perfectly truthful and unexaggerated, view of the
position of this Colony, and must tend to prove beneficial to those who may be
induced to patronise oar numerous raw products as well as to Tasmania.
