

MELANESIAN MISSION.
OCCASIONAL PAPERS
(No. 1).
“THE ATTITUDE OF THE
CHURCH TO THE SUQE”
by the
Reverend WALTER JOHN HURRAH, B.A.
NORFOLK ISLAND:
Printed at the Melanesian Mission Pross.
1920.




THE ATTITUDE OF THE CHURCH
TO THE SUQE.
The question of the Snqe has agitated the Church in the
Banks Islands for a good many years. It has had defenders
and adversai’ies, and the criticisms on both sides have often
. ma rhed by a confession of ignorance of the subject
criticised. A critic has often acknowledged that he really
knows nothing, and is not competent to judge, but he still goes
on criticising. The reason is not because the Snqe is difficult
to understand, or because it is hard to get information about,
but, probably, because it consists of a great number of
small details which seem to have no particular meaning or
connection with one another, and which are almost impossible
to remember accurately without committing them to paper.
That is why, when information about the Snqe is asked for, it
is difficult to give it off-hand. There is an idea that there are
certain broad, fundamental and mysterious ceremonies governing
the whole question of Suqe. This is not so, so far as lam
aware.
I.—BISTORT OF THE MISSION'S DEALINGS WITH
THE SUQE.
I would first briefly trace the history of our dealings with
the Snqe. It was not condemned by the earlier missionaries.
Some say they did not know anything about it. I feel sure
they must have known as much about it, and certainly must
have seen more of it than we. But they did not stay for any long


consecutive period In the Islands, and did not perhaps realize
what an enormous place native ceremonies and customs of
every kind take in their lives. They perhaps thought of the
people as mainly engaged in horticulture, with an occasional
halt for a dance nr a feast and some merry-making.
The first to become a hostile critic of the Suqe was Mr.
Adams. He became an enemy of almost all native ceremonies,
for he found how serious was the dislocation of ordinary life
by the various tapum and periods of seclusion. He was a Free-
mason and professed to have discovered such close similarities
between Freemasonry and the Suqe that he would never speak
freely about it. Perhaps lam wrong, but I doubt whether he
knew much more than we all know. It always surprised me
that while he was so enthusiastic a Mason, he was so bitter to
the kindred society of the Suqe. If it be so similar, why be an
enemy ? An attitude the very reverse of this was that of Bishop
Wilson after he had left the Mission and had become a Mason.
But it does not say much for Freemasonry if what Bishop
Wilson has branded as Satanic, is so much like it. Mr. Adams
found that when Suqe ceremonies were in full swing, school
and church life were in abeyance ; so he set his face like a flint
against it, and preached a crusade of extermination.
Bishop Wilson followed hard after. I dare say yon remem-
ber some years ago how, during one of his stays in the Banks,
he made the Suqe the great object of attack. He preached a
crusade against the Suqe up and down the district for mouths.
But his objections, which I will allude to by and bye, became
rather different from those which moved Mr. Adams. Back
numbers of the ‘ Log ’ contain all the sentiments of both Bishop
Wilson and Mr. Adams. Bishop Wilson condemned Suqe out
and out. It was ualinaH Satan, —a vile thing, from which the
faithful were exhorted to withdraw completely.
Another Banks Islands missionary, Mr. John Palmer, became
more and more opposed to the Suqe as time went on. It was
the apathy shown in Church matters contrasted with the
enthusiasm shown for the Suqe which influenced him.
Another Banks Islands missionary, Mr. Freeth, became an
ardent disciple of Bishop Wilson in his dealings with the Suqe.
While they were together once on Mota, they held a large


meeting at which all the young men, who probably owed money
to the chiefs, were opposed to the Suqe ; and all the old men,
who were probably owed money, opposed its abolition. The
voices of the young men prevailed so far as to secure its
suppression for two years as a trial. The Bishop promised
that, if this rule were faithfully kept, he would reconsider the
matter when the time expired. Soon afterwards Bishop
Wilson resigned, and Mr. Freeth found that his presence was
more needed elsewhere, and the Banks Islanders, in this critical
period of their Church’s history, were left like sheep without
a shepherd. The two years during which the Suqe was to
remain dormant passed, and the people of Mota became restive.
More than two years passed, and still no authoritative voice
came from the Church as to what was to be done. We must
give the Mota people and the other Banks Islanders (for all
followed the Mota lead) all honour for loyally abiding by the
Bishop’s decision, —and more than abiding by it.
Bishop Wood then came. Miss Coombe was then at Mota, a
thorough admirer of the people’s loyalty to Bishop Wilson’s
decision, and a thorough believer in the Suqe as a necessary
part of the native life. Early in his episcopate the Bishop
took me to Mota for a conference on the Suqe question. It
was an important meeting but held under disagreeable circum-
stances, —the house was being painted at the time. Miss
Coombe, the Bishop and I met in one of the rooms. As wo
took our stand on the sheets of newspaper spread to catch the
drops of paint, I said we must remember we were engaged in
an oecumenical council which w r as perhaps to decide finally on
the fate of the Mota Church. We discussed the subject of
Suqe. Miss Coombe was ‘ pro ’ and 1 was ‘ anti ’, and the. Bishop
knew nothing at all either way. So far as I understood, Miss
Coombe’s attitude was governed by her conviction of the im-
portance of the Suqe, in contributing to the vitality and interest
in the life of the community. It was the feeling that sup-
pression of the Suqe meant the killing out of the very joy of
life almost, that made her so eager to have it allow'ed, —also
her admiration for the loyalty with which the people had stuck
to their promise to Bishop Wilson. After the conference
Bishop Wood wrote out his judgment in English. Miss
Coombe translated it and the Bishop read it to the chiefs and


teachers. To prevent any misunderstanding on their part, the
address was read over a second time by Mr. Drew. The judg-
ment was an indefinite one. The Suqe was not condemned,
but was allowed with reservations, qualifications and safeguards.
The Suqe was to be governed by Christian principles. The
speech contained, I think, too many qualifying sentences, —
the full importance of which escaped the audience. The fact
that the Bishop, who had been expected to curse the Suqe, had
seemed to bless it altogether, was enough for them.
I should like to state here my own attitude to the matter.
From my early days I found great interest in the purely native
life and customs of the people, and I was in favour of the Suqe
for the very reason that Miss Coombe was. Bishop Wilson
often tried to shake my convictions. He used to say to me
that if I knew and had seen as much, of the evil effects of Suqe
as he had, that 1 should be as keen an opponent of it as he was
himself. But I never backed him up. I used to urge him not
to be eager for too rapid an advance of Christianity, but to be'
contented with the slowest progress: that Suqe was accom-
panied by some evil had to be borne. We cannot christianize
a whole community in a generation. We must take long views.
Uue quoted of course the argument of the slow growth of
Christianity among the people of Iturope, However, my views
had no effect, and the two years suppression of the Suqe was
decided on. After it was suppressed, I threw in my lot with
Bishop Wilson, for I felt that in a case of discipline of this
kind, it was essential that the Church should be united. This
was the reason I opposed Miss Coombe. 1 maintained, that as
the people had been taught most consistently and impressively
by Bishop Wilson, that Suqe was wrong, we should put our-
selves in a false position if we reversed this opinion, and allowed
it to be revived. The people would loose confidence in their
chief pastors, if one deliberately cancelled the judgement of his
predecessor.
You may say ; What vile thing A the Suqe that it merits
such a condemnation as Bishop Wilson, Mr. Adams, Mr. Palmer
and Mr. Freeth passed on it; or what good thing is it that you
and Miss Coombe feel it to be a vital force in the lives of the
people ? At this point it will be best to give an outline of
some Suqe customs.


II.— OUTITNK OF THE SUQE, AND SOME SUQE
CUSTOMS.
1. Kerepne. The Saqe consists of a series of ranks, of which
the lowest is called Kerepne. A child can become, and often
does become, a member of this before he is weaned. The lather,
father’s brother, or mother’s brother, acts as the introducer.
In this early stage the ceremony is a family affair. Later on,
when the boy advances to the higher ranks, it becomes a com-
munal affair—the whole village, and even all the villages
round, taking part in it. The mother’s brothers will probably
provide the money lor the preliminary initiation. They will
give about 10 fathoms of shell money each. This is a gift pure
and simple—it is not lent out to gain interest. They will also
give o qoe ire mtr, a tusked pig, to the introducer. The pig is
not for him, but for the child. The introducer kills it by
stamping on it, saying, lloke. wujnma u qne, rmuinol’, ape Kerepne.
The child’s father cuts up the pig, but hires a man to scrape
and clean it, the hair scraped off being burnt in the fire in the
gamal in the Kerepne division. He pays the cleaner a couple
of fathoms of money with the remark, Hoke, erpe l.n rue snrali o
qoe tmg an natnli. This man covers over the door of the gamal
with cycas leaves. The father with his infant son remain
secluded in the gamal for 50 days, though some will extend
the time to double that number. The mother goes to the
gamal to feed her child. She herself lives a secluded life, and
takes no part in the village festivities. Her food is cooked for her
separately, preferably by her own sister if she has one? Of
the flesh of the pig that was killed, a feast is made in the
gamal. The father dips his palm into the blood and smears
his chest with it. To mis golne —to smear the chest with
blood—is a coveted privilege to bo purchased with money.
This is said to represent the honour and power which will be
his son’s. The blond is the blood of the food of his son.
While remaining in seclusion, he does not wash, and if he goes
out at all, he carries an umbrella palm leaf with which to
shelter his head from the sun. On the tenth day he makes a
feast. A conch shell trumpet is blown twice, a drum is beaten
and the musical instruments known as the mcrefan and the
1 rereirere, to the knowledge of which expensive initiation is
required, are sounded in the gamal. Every tenth day a feast


1r made,' —the final one which is either on the fiftieth or one
hundredth day being' a bigger one. The father has a ceremonial
bath. He makes a ■pitlako, a decorated pole, which he sets up
on the beach where he went to bathe. This is a tapu mark,
and may remain for as long as two years. He may not even
yet mix freely with the people, or take part in any feast, but
remains in his semi-prison for another 50 days or more. Then
he gives 5 fathoms of money to a chief (probably a relation) to
get his freedom. This request is not likely to be refused.
2. Mele. The next rank in the Suqe is called Mele. The
boy will probably advance to this when he has become a grown
youth. The whole community is interested in it as it involves
a much greater expense than most individuals can afford,
The mother’s brother is the most likely person to act as the
introducer. His first business is to collect a large sum of
monej r —He hie o som, as it is called. He borrows from a
number of wealthy men a sum amounting in all to from 200
to 400 fathoms of money, for the temporary use of which he
gives them a commission of 5 fathoms. The money is not lent
by them to bring in cent, per cent, interest as in the case of
most financial transactions. The borrower distributes it among
the men who are members of the Mele rank. An early date is
fixed for the Wol Titjutg, which is the ceremony of buying the
Suqe rank, and which is marked by a big feast. The evening
before, which is known as a srrvmj qe-tn, is given up to preparing
for the feast. Everybody contributes to this, but the mother
of the candidate and her brothers give the largest amount.
The food is cooked either in different ovens in the various
houses of the village or in one large oven. The members of
the Mele give presents of money to the youth who is about to
join them. This money is a present and is not merely lent.
It is part of the ceremony known as Matigae. We meitii/ne is
to give the Suqe candidate presents of money, some of them,
perhaps most of them, in return for any present he has given
them in days past, or in return for any deed of kindness or
help he has done. Suppose he has given a fish to any one.
The skeleton of the fish will have been kept, and now a piece
of money is threaded through the head and handed to the boy.
.So it will be with everything he has given. Many of these
gifts he has probably forgotten all about. When all the


hare been given, the boy’s father says to bis any or,
“ There is a debt on us.” They will agree and undertake to pay
back the money borrowed by che mother’s brother, who is acting
as the introducer. The next day is the day of the Wnl Tiqvtri.
The boy’s father requests someone to catch some of his pigs.
Five or more will be caught according to the amount of his
wealth. The animals are tied near the door of the ijtimul
where a cycas has just been planted. Near the cycas tree is
erected a carved image, a irnUnnnrar/ae, a grotesque image of an
old man carved out of a tree-fern trunk. A. very rich man
who can hire many workmen, will put up as many as ten of
these figures. The images are named after the names of spirits —■
Jjtmdimhevan, T) muhmherin , Tavinteyanr/atir/n , (Jnr/itjnrhrrn,
Wometeloa, etc. When the pigs are tied up, the ovens are
opened for the feast. The boy’s father goes into the house to
his sister, to receive from her two fathoms of money with
which to pay those who will beat the drum for the dancing.
“he via o rova nin/.n : ko te. qll o here ” he says. When the
drumming begins he and his son dance in the tiuesara. Then
a decorated pole, called a palako, is carried in. It may be very
heavy, consisting sometimes of the trunk of a coconut tree, so
that many men are required to lift it. When it is laid down in
the huesara , the bearers on either side cross over and take up
their station on opposite sides ; they are said to kale n palako.
There now take place some dancing and speechifying, the
father, the mother’s brother and various important and wealthy
men delivering orations. The father says to his brother-in-law,
“ To-day our son will compensate you,” a remark which refers
to the money given to the drummers. ■ He gives four fathoms
to his son. While the boy is dancing in the finozara, his father’s
sister comes out of the house, and bowing down before him,
receives the strings of money which he lays over her neck.
The drumming and dancing stop at this point, and the pigs are
handed over by the father to his son’s maternal uncle. If he
can afford it he will give twenty or even thirty ordinary pigs,
and one tusked pig, in payment for the palako. This distri-
bution is called vlleiuhpiihii. The present is not in payment
for any particular item, but for the whole gift of the Suqe, for
the whole privilege of membership now being accorded to his
son. It will be remembered that it was the maternal uncle


who collected a temporary loan of several hundreds of fathoms
of money in the earliest stages. He now repays them the exact
amount he borrowed, a sum sufficient for doing this having been
collected when the ceremony of ma.tigae was gone through.
If the presents then given do not amount to enough, the sum
must be made up. The actual handing over of the money is
performed during the sounding of trumpets. The money is
placed in baskets—one hundred fathoms in each. The boy’s
father hands him the baskets of money to pass on, and in
delivering them over to his son, he says of each, “ Norn o tapera
pvlam o sum alolnua, gama o tapia lot, vm o rjeta sun avid tol."
During this paying off the loan the people stand watching.
They see there is no debt being contracted : it is n Suqe ve ii'ia.
A short dance recommences, the maternal uncle being the
performer. At its conclusion he shoots with bow and arrows
two or three pigs. They are for the candidate’s feast and are
•cooked next day. The boy has been fasting all this time. The
members of the Mele rank contribute food for this feast, and in
the evening they gather for a speech which is delivered in the
gamal to the new member, by some man of position, in the
following terms ; “ Exercise hospitality to visitors ; hate no one
who comes into this gamal : sweep the gamal well : prepare
food and draw water for visitors who come here : do not pay
much attention to your wife, lest you be reckoned a man of no
account. Oau ln° n mmujn —i.e., play the part of food taster,
whether it be pudding or fish. If you hear people chattering,
do not go near ; remain in the gamal lest any evil happen, and
those who see you in the path, charge you with the wrong
doing. My brother, to-day the sun will speak of us two. He
will set, and the spirit lluuunigter dwelling in the place of the
sunset will ask, ‘ What happened to-day p ’ ‘Oh nothing ;
someone ate the fapttg Mele, and then I came down here.’ ”
3. Lana. The rank above Mde is Laao. For entrance to
this the same preliminaries are gone through as for the Mele.
At the ceremony known as Vilepnlal the candidate will give
about ten ordinary pigs and two tusked ones in addition. It is
the object of the payer of all this wealth to keep it, if possible,
in the family, so it is to his advantage if his own father or some
near relation will act as his introducer. At the sight of so
much wealth the envy of some will be stirred. “Why did not


I make the Suqe for your son, so that I might have got all
those pigs ? ” says some envious neighbour to the candidate’s
father. “Why” replies the man addressed, “did you not
speak to me and my son about it ? ” The same dancing and
speech-making that took place for the Mela are repeated now
for the Lano. But in this case a general tapu is announced
during one of the speeches. “ Let no canoe pass to and fro in
the sea : let no one shout and let the drum be silent. Anyone
shouting to be heard by us here, must pay a tusked pig or ten
fathoms of money.” This tapa is removed on the fifth day.
The new member breaks his fast late in the night following
the dancing and speeches, and ho does so in a ceremonial
manner. The members of the Lauu sit in a circle each holding
a little food in his hand. To the counting of one, two, three,
four, they raise their hands to their mouths and eat. In
Vauualava this solemn eating is known as Dureei. While it is
proceeding trumpets are blown, and a chief makes a speech.
When a man arrives at the rank of Lauu he becomes a Tacimaelo
or chief, a word more commonly used than inanuui.'ji.i. Before
the speech is begun, the new member’s father brings in the
family Vui, the household Lares and Penates, in the form of a
sacred stone called Tamanujui. The stone is laid in a dish,.
The bearer locking his fingers together, lays his hands palm
.downwards over the stone and clasps it against his body, while
a Tavusmele addresses the new member thus “ May your
days be many in this world, may your pigs be numerous and
your money abundant, may your food be plentiful and your
children multiply : may you be famous so that people will
recognise you as a Tavmiuele. Do not go about from house to
house : stay in your own home. You are a chief.” Another
Tavusmde then addresses him ;—Attend, my brother, I will
speak briefly to you. You are a man of position ; you are a
Taousmele. Your food cannot fail, nor your money, nor your
pigs, nor anything that is in your hands. Toil are powerful,
not as a shooter of men, but powerful in possessions, in money,
in wealth. You are au object of admiration, o Behave
well till you reach old age. I have finished. Let the sun
speak of us to lloconujter that a man ate Lauu to-day. It is
fitting that you tell of his glory in the other world.


4. Qorogorulaca. The usual preliminaries of introduction
are gone through for the rank of Qoroqorolava. For the use of
the money borrowed by the introducer he gives a present of as
many fathoms as he likes. The sum is unfixed, and the lenders
may not demand a large gift or even anything at all for its use.
The number of men borrowed from will not probably exceed
five. The candidate is required to kole o palako at the same
time, and directions are given to some of the young men of the
village to prepare twenty of these poles and four cycas trees.
Two of the latter are planted beforehand near the gamal, and
are smeared with red pigment like the palako, and are decorated
with plaited fringes of coconut leaves. The other two trees
are reserved for the occasion of the dance. The preparation,
0 strvag qeta, for the mil tapug, are similar to the ceremonies
observed for other ranks. During his dancing' next day the
candidate proclaims his own high estate. “ I am powerful,”
he shouts, “I am powerful. There is no debt on me because
lam powerful with my possessions. No one is equal to me.”
The people are said to listen with wonder, we mamakei, at
these expressions of disdain for lesser men.
Among the dancing ceremonies comes a procession of several
men carrying the two cycas trees and a very large palako with
branches. Behind them comes the candidate followed by an
old Tavasmde, who carries in his hand a wand in the form of a
long blunt arrow, o tupi. The ceremony of crossing over the
palako and dancing is gone through, together with a speech
from the old chief. “Ah, my brother,” says he, “you have
celebrated a fine Suqe, for you have much wealth, many pigs
and tusked pigs, money and food. Because of all these things
you have Suqe’d. Do not be ill-natured to any one, nipea
Ijoljol gap. Be hospitable to any strangers that visit you.
Bid them welcome to the gamal.” “ You have performed a
good Suqe,” says another speaker. “ There is no debt on yon.
Upon some who Suqe a debt rests, and those who return to
their villages blame them, saying, ‘ You have not performed a
good Suqe.’ But this of yours is good, because your possessions
are many.”
The introducer bids the candidate bring out his money and
pay olt thl debt of the borrowed sum. It is placed in a few
bagg, each of which is touched and handed over to the sounding


of trumpets. The pigs, twenty of which have been tethered in
two rows along one side of the dancing ground, are handed over
next. Two of them are shot for the jiahilio, and two more fur
the tapuj, that is to say, the Suqe. “My brother,” says a
chief, ‘‘ the people made fun of you and me because of the
Suqe, saying that I could not shoot four pigs for your food.
But now 1 have done so. I have shot these four for you. You
have contributed much for me in the way of pigs. This that
I have shot is but a mere morsel of food for you. Do not cook
it in the oven : just fry it, for it is but a trifle.” These depre-
catory remarks are made, so it is said, to avoid appearing-
ostentatious in the eyes of the people.
5. Wometeloa. Next above (loroqorolam is the rank called
Wometeloa. It is Wo mu fun o loa the Eyeball of the Sun ; it is
the Sun spirit. For this rank the business preliminaries are
the same as for other ranks. But the candidate may probably
ask the introducer to provide the whole sum needed. This
may be done for other ranks too, but apparently is not.
The candidate for Wometeloa pays a preliminary gift of forty
fathoms of money to each member of that rank, the men
bringing to him their bags for the gift to be put into. This is
a ceremonial payment and is carried on to the sounding of
twenty conch shell trumpets. A variety of shells being used,
some being small and some large, the sound has been described
by a native who has heard a brass band, as being somewhat
similar to that of an orchestra among ourselves. At the pay-
ment of the money the members of the Wometeloa congratulate
■the giver on his wealth and power. The evening of the day
when this money is paid is the Sir-vug i[eta. For the decorations
of the vanua about five large palal-o with many branches are
prepared by men hired for the purpose. At the Wol tapiuj
the candidate dances to the accompaniment of the drum, and
carries in each hand the jaw-bone of a tusked pig. As he
dances he holds these up and shouts to the onlookers to see the
jaws of fine pigs that he has killed for former feasts. Their
silence in the face of this challenge is the homage he receives
from them. Later on he dances again after smearing himself
with mea, a red pigment, the colour being symbolical of the
sun. He also wears the dancing dress known as the r mulo sura.
The introducer shoots four pigs, two for the pulaku and two for


the Suqe, and addresses tiie candidate tlius : “My brother,
people made fun of us that you would not be able to Suqe.
But behold ! you hare succeeded. You are a T<ivnxmele, a man
admired, o iroiru.t : you have renown. Numerous will your
children and your wives be.”
The remaining yalako are dedicated by a formal dance.
Many small jjalaku will have been put up round the dancing
ground, and olio, a very large one, will bo carried in by bearers
iu the usual style. In a speech to the people before they dis-
perse, the new member will, in a grand manner, give them
leave to take anything they like of his on their way home.
Pigs and fowls of his found near the path are taken, and if not
taken can be destroyed, as also can his gardens and fruit trees.
No doubt some old scores will be paid off in this way, under
cover of the Suqe law. Indeed, the man who aims at high
rank needs some courage to face all that it entails in the way
of loss of wealth. But with the sagacity that might be expected
of him, he will remove far off some of the best of his livestock,
and penning them up iu a distant garden, will leave some
youthful relative to keep guard over them.
After the dancing and feasting ceremonies, the village is
tiijm for five days to all except the men of high rank. No
voice or shout is heard there, and no canoe is seen upon the sea.
The daily life of the village is at a temporary stand-still. After
the five days the ordinary people return and a feast is made,
VK jmui V qon, and they make their choicest puddings, o lot,
till the hundredth day.
6. Wcl'jnn. The rank above Wonictrlna is Wei gun. Wch/an
is the name of a male spirit whoso rock homo is on the shore
close to the Vureas school landing place.
r l he candidate’s preliminary gift to the members of this rank
consists of fifty fathoms of money to each one. At the dancing
only the candidate and Ids introducer perform. Both are
smeared with the red pigment, and wear on the left forearm
six pig tusk bracelets, ami a main san.i with four fringes.
All desire for personal decoration has to be subordinate to
the Suqe and other ceremonies. Love of display and decoration
is innate to the native, but it has to be restrained till it can be
lawfully indulged in by the payment of large sums of money


The wearing of bangles, for instance, is governed by tbe laws
of Suqe. The member of tbe Kerejim may wear one ; tl e
member of the Alele, two ; tbe member of (Inrinpinil.uut, three ;
and the member of Wometeloa, four. For a man of humble
rank to put on what he is not entitled to, would cause as great
a scandal, as for a Second-Lieutenant to wear the badges of a
Colonel.
In addition to the decorations already mentioned, the two
dancers wear a belt of plaited cord into which, at the back, are
stuck a sprig of the casuarina tree, red and white hibiscus
blossoms and red dracaena leaves. Round the neck they wear
necklets of very small shell money, called mainmuwsono. The
candidate carries a club with a peculiar shaped head. As he
dances he shouts, “ Behold me ! Behold me ! No one is my
equal.” Four pigs are shot for the feast, and he eats the tupuj
in the evening. At that time the introducer addresses him in
these terms : —“ You are a fine man, you are a man admired, a
man of renown. When the people are passing to and fro they
think of you, saying, ‘ Presently we shall come to his place and
will rest there.’ Such is your fame. The people know you
for you are a Taaismele, and you entertain the stranger hospi-
tably. Oh ! rny brother, yon are a great man in this Suqe.
When the sun went down it told of our fame, and Buvorujter
rejoiced at it.”
7. Wotauriimelih. The rank above Wehjnn is Wotmrumclik.
The name is that of a male spirit. When an image of his is
carved, he is represented as holding his hands as if to support
something. His name signifies “to hold up the sky,” which
he is said to do on his hands and head.
The preliminary gift from the candidate to each member of
this rank is one hundred fathoms of money. The payment is
large, but there are not likely to be many members of it. For
the dedication of the palnl-a he will pay forty fathoms to each
workman. As many as fifty of these poles will be set up for
this rank. On account of his wealth he will provide pigs and
food for the feast. As before, the people are given leave to
take or destroy the property of his they find on their way
home. A member of this rank is called either Tavusmele or
Ywgoluli, The usual boastful speechifying is indulged in at


the time of dancing. “ f will not grant this privilege to any
one haphazard,” he says, “ bnt should it be my brother or a
relation of mine, that is a different matter, for we are one
family. Should any one else want it, he must pay me a high
price, twenty pigs and two tusked boars.”
For his feast in the yairud the cooking is a small affair, as
the partakers of it are so few.
8. Wetulai. The highest rank in the Suqe is known as
Wetulca. The title WesJcut is an alternative one. It is the
name of a female spirit. Legend says it was found among the
village offal in the form of a young eagle. The preliminary
gift for entry to the rank is one hundred fathoms of money.
At the dancing the candidate wears the malo saru with five
fringes back and front. He is heavily decorated, smeared
with red pigment, wears hibiscus blossoms, casnariua leaves,
dracaena leaves, and carries a togu i/ataj, a kind of reed with a
decorated stem. He girds around his loins a white cycas leaf.
Un his upper arm he wears a pan, an armlet. Around his legs
he binds white anklets, viluiluir, and wears one white hibiscus
in his hair. In his oration he says, “ I have reached the sky.
No one is my peer. I have distributed forty pigs and five
hundred fathoms of money. No one equals this. My father
did so, and I have followed him. If my brother wishes to, I
can help him. It is not hard for me. You see it is difficult
for you. But as for me it is not hard ; it is the easiest possible
matter. Ah, my brothers and friends, none of you can do this,
bnt you will be able to if you go the proper way about it. He
will be able whose possessions are many as mine are. To-day
the sun setting will speak of my glory to Eovoruyter, that a
man made Suqe to-day. He will say that he is a fine man :
that he is a Tavusmele of renown.”
Some three generations ago there lived in the village of
Saul a//, a man of the name of (jasagale. This man had reached
the highest rank in the Suqe. To enhance his greatness and
the greatness of the Suqe customs, he determined to offer a
human sacrifice as a substitute for the customary pigs. His
choice of a victim settled on his nephew, a youth named
Youowe, the son of his sister. No opposition was offered by
the people to this, for Vonowe being so close a relation was
Qasagale’s property to do what he liked with, The youth


Seems to have submitted to his fate with the stoicism of the
fatalist. At the gathering for the sacrifice he was laid on the
ground, his extended hands being held by two men, while the
terrible uncle stamped in his chest till life was extinct. His
body was buried in the vauuu, and his weeping mother planted
a memorial, a cycas tree which till lately stood in the present
school grounds. As an atonement for the murder of Yonowe,
his uncle paid money to his relations.
III.—CONSIDERATION OF THE EVIDENCE.
Such are some Suqe customs. We notice at once that they
are not as a whole at all evil. On the other hand they seem
(at least some of them) to be distinctly good. Let us attempt
to balance them.
It is obvious that the whole matter rests on money. Suqe
is founded on and sustained by finance. In fact it is one of the
chief means by which money is kept in circulation. As Arch-
deacon Cullwick used to phrase it, “ Suqe is to make the money
jump.” It is this which gives it so vivid an interest to the
people. There is nothing wrong in this. Suqe is the Melanesian
Stock Exchange, but a Stock Exchange enlarged so as to be
coterminous with the community. Anyone who has the
smallest piece of money can invest it with the certainty of
getting at least 100% profit in due course. When we see the
keen interest that money has for most of our own countrymen,
we can sympathise with the Banks Islanders. Is it not tine
that when the post arrives the first packet to be opened is the
Pass Book r 1 But the minds of ttie Melanesians embrace some-
thing more than a mere Pass Book. They reach out to what
we might term an Investment Book, an elaborate record of
money put out at interest here and there in scores of places,
and all retained and conned in their wonderful memories. To
see the little one become a thousand, to see his half fathom of
shell money grow and grow under his hand as Ids investments
succeed, till he sees himself on the w r ay to wealth, honour and
pivilego, is indeed enough to fire a man with a love for the
Suqe. And when all this exciting exchange of money is accom-
panied by feasting and picturesque dances, with decorated
villages, with songs, laughter, banter and jesting, who can
blame them for not wanting to see them all banished to the


missionary’s limbo of forbidden things ? To many a man who
has no grasp of what the Christian religion really is, beyond
the fact that it seems a kill-joy, the light of life almost dies
out when Suqe and its kindred customs go.
Another note about the Suqe has been alluded to in the
course of describing the ceremonies. The man wishing to rise
goes through the ceremony known as Mutigae, and receives
then a recompense for all the kind deeds he has ever done.
Any present of whatever kind he has ever given is then recog-
nised by a gift of money of corresponding worth. Many of
these gifts he may have himself forgotten, and it is said he will
weep as his friends press upon him their money in payment
for his kindness to them. He did not always give a present
with an eye on his investment book. This is a point to note.
The Suqe may be said to cultivate generosity, for the more
generous a man is the better will it be for him. The miserly
man, gaining a temporary advantage, is the loser in the
long run.
It is to be noted in the Suqe that while the desire for gaining
wealth is stimulated, the spirit of the miser is discouraged.
Rich men high up in the Suqe would be despised and disliked
if they did not distribute their wealth. This they do by paying
people to work for them. Also, when they give a feast they
can do things on a handsome scale, so that a large amount of
money is distributed and returns to the humbler folk, who in
their turn gain the means to climb in the social scale.
Yet another note is the perseverance that a man must exer-
cise in order to rise in the Suqe. It is no easy thing to reach
the higher ranks, though it is much easier now than formerly.
Young men in recent times can reach ranks which would take
many more years and much more money to rise to in the days
of their fathers. It is said that if a young man were to have
tried to rise as often as lie does now, he would have caused so
much ill feeling and jealousy that he would have been put to
death. Only old men ever reached high rank. Some of the
customs of the Suqe seem a contest, as it were, between the
community and the candidate. It is his effort to rise ; it is
their’s to make it as difficult as possible for him to do so.
Custom will even allow his property to be injured, but other


customs will enable him to recoup himself at the spoilers’
expense. It is obvious that a man must have physical strength,
good health, patience, tenacity and resource, and a cheerful
power of recover)' from the buifettings of fortune.
There are from some points of view great advantages in
having a coterie of chiefs in a community. The people are in
a primitive stage of development, so that a monarchy is more
suited to their needs than a democratic government. A strong
autocratic rule is not at all distasteful to them. The power of
the chiefs being based on many heathen ideas and practices,
the introduction of Christianity has a disintegrating effect,
unless the Christian teacher is a man of strong personality.
This is why pioneer work, when once the chiefs are interested,
is so easy. The Church is backed up by all the heathen power
of the chief men, A vigorous Snqe would in certain cases
strengthen the outer Church life of the people. Whether this
would be of any value is another question.
I have painted perhaps too bright a picture. We must not
be blind to its reverse side. “ What, in your opinion, is the
root of the evil, the really vile thing in the Snqe that the
Church should condemn the whole thing?” is the sort of
question one often asks intelligent teachers. The answers are
very much alike, but the chief evil mentioned is not what to
us would appear to be the greatest. Almostthe first objection
to it that they put forward is that it prevents peonle going to
prayers. I think that they mean by this the daily Mattins and
Evensong. What prevent church going are the occupations of
the people in preparing for the Suqe ceremonies, the seclusion
practised by candidates and the general excitement of everyone,
which makes a sober church service and the discipline of school
almost distasteful. In judging this it is well to look at home
at the disregard for organised religious worship shown by onr
own countrymen. To walk down a city thoroughfare on a,
Sunday, when the bells are ringing to Evensong, would not
suggest that we are the people to condemn others for abstaining
from the prescribed prayers of the church.
Another reason advanced is that Suqe ceremonies lead io
immorality. lam sure this is true, and is one of the biggest
counts we can bring against it. Those big festivities of dancing,
' L - ~ & *


feasting 1 , interchange of money, personal decoration and broad
jesting, are the occasions when people let themselves go, and
no one is inclined to be at all strict, or to judge others too
strict!}'. People lose their heads for a time. They lose their
balance, and though not really at heart wishing for a low
standard of'morals and for loose living as a permanent practice,
see no great harm in people having a fling at those times. At
such times a little money will fqnare up any indiscretions.
But granted all this, we should have to decide how much looser
the moral standard is at big Suqe ceremonies than it is in
normal times. Even in normal times it is not high.
Another count against the Suqe where it is carried out in its
completeness, as in heathen places, is its anti-social character.
It is antagonistic to the Christian idea that the family is the
unit of society, and that family life is the best and highest
kind of life. The Suqe takes no account of women otherwise
than to secure their exclusion. A man and his wife do not
share a common meal. This is anti-Christian.
Another point against the Suqe is that it does prevent people
from concentrating on other things. It is the dominant subject.
Mr, Adams, in speaking of the great influence of George
Sarawia the Mota Priest, used to say he received far more
honour for his high place in the Suqe, than for his office as
priest. Again and again one will hear a critic of the Suqe
condemning it on the ground of its abso'rbing interest. The
people cannot properly balance the claims of Suqe and the
claims of Christ. The missionar}' sees that where the Suqe is
strong, the Church is weak, and where Suqe does not flourish,
the people can and do give more attention to the Christian
teaching. But it is a debatable point how far we are justified
in condemning Suqe outright, because it distracts attention
from the message of the Gospel.
The chief count against Suqe, to my mind, is one which
dominated Bishop Wilson towards the end. It is the strange
fact that there seems that in it which inevitably draws people
back into heathenish ways of thinking. Many, perhaps most,
think in heathen ways to a very large extent always, but the
power of heathen ideas gains the ascendency when ithe Suqe is
strong. I believe this is owing to the belief that to be rich


and prosperous yon must have mrwn. To got rich is the
inevitable trend of men’s minds, so that the getting 1 of mnna is
the dominant ambition. Now the viand is not that associated
with God. It is the maun of their vuis, the spirits their fathers
worshipped. So we find that Snqe will inevitably lead back to
the recrudescence and the strengthening of all heathen ideas.
To sacrifice for money was the recognised custom then. It is
Bo still, but owing to the growth of Christian influence this
belief is not carried out into practice, except by some of the
older people who have never got a grasp of what Christianity
really involves. But the power of heathen ideas is enormous,
and were Suqe to become once more powerful, we should see a
recrudescence of heathenism permeating all thought, and
issuing at last in what I spoke of lately, —the actual sacrifice
of a beloved human life as the final and fittest offering a man
can give to the spirits to whom his soul bows down in worship.
I received recently a letter from a Banks Istands teacher,
and in it he Bays, touching this subject :
“Na te valni roro//o muniko si we wia wun site ge pea
o lu/e Suqe talo Banks. Tuan vanna wun o Suqe gate ge
lepa o turiai, pa o Suqe talo Banks we ge lepa ran o
turiai, tamaike :
(1) mun o vavae, wa te vargol wa te vava tatas.
(2) mnn o png, ape ni gate gagapalag mun naturpulana,
pa mun napulansei we sea.
(3) mun o pal. I Tavnsmele ti sagarag napulansei, o qoe
si o som, ni qara ararike apena, ti sogo galegale o
Suqe munia sin wosag qet napalana nania, ni qara
toga masara kel.
(4) mnn o togara. Ape alo tur qnn tete vug tuwale
taniniga, pa o nonomia te leralera ran alo qojt ilone.
Nau me iloraka gap o tnaniu si na gaganag at, pa ko
we gilala raka sage ape liuai wa n ta iake. Wa, nipea
nonom si na we vava at mun o sotaliva. Tagai nan, pa
o manigiu o varleasag apena, tnaniu we vet si o Suqe we
wia wa tnaniu was we tatas, pa gate gilala o nonomia
apena was we wia mun o sava wa we tatas mnn o sava.
Sown, o Suqe talo Banks we maun tatas mnn ilone nan.”


IV.— THE WRITER'S OPINION AND JUDGEMENT.
If, as a Banks Islands missionary, I am asked to give my own
opinion and judgement, I do so as follows ;
1. It is useless to give a qualified permission of, or a qualified
condemnation of, the Suqe. The people will understand only
a direct and definite statement. It must either be permitted
or forbidden. The people interested will welcome a cautious
permission, and would in the fervour of their hearts promise
that no evil shall be allowed ever again to mar the innocence
of the Suqe ceremonies. This they have done before, but the
old habits of the people are too strong, and they transgress
the rules that the best men among them would gladly see kept.
2. The Suqe has come under the bin of so many mission-
aries and has from time to time been anathematised so
unsparingly for its accompanying evils, which the people
themselves are candid in acknowledging, that it can never be
whitewashed again. The most Christian among the people
know in their secret souls, that Suqe must be counted among
the things which do not hasten but rather retard the coming of
the Kingdom of God.
3. The population of the Banks Islands has decreased so
much that the glory and interest of the Suqe have dwindled to
a large extent. Its educative power is now diminished. Mere
youths eager for glory and position bid for ranks far higher
than their fathers would have dared to aim at. There is not
now required the patience and self-restraint that were once
needed. The decrease of the population is owing largely to
the recruiting by traders, so that the people have begun to
find many of their interests altogether outside their homes.
It cannot now be argued, ns it might once have been, that by
taking away the Suqe the Church deprives the people of their
chief interest. There is something almost incongruous in an
old returned labourer taking up the Suqe again. With him it
becomes just a money grubbing business. The dignity and
pictnresqneness of the proceedings have largely passed away.
One feels that the Snqe is no longer an educational force. The
people need now to have their attention turned elsewhere if
they are to continue to exist. While they are pathetically
occupied over the petty details of a Suqe “ deal,” the white


trader is at their doors clamouring for the possession of their
laud and their wealth. The need is for the people to bestir
themselves in the face of the new order of things : to leave
the past and grapple with the present and the future.
4. I would suggest that while the Church adopts as its
attitude one of disapproval of the Suqe, the followers of the
old time customs should be dealt with leniently. It is too
severe a condemnation to say that Suqe is ualiwan Satan. I
have been forced to take that attitude before now, but I can
testify that it is not the most effective. The natives know too
much of the ways of white men to think that worldly customs
put us altogether outside the pale of respectability. You can
be a money grubbing trader and yet be entertained hospitably
by the missionary. Let -us show the same tolerance to the
followers of the Suqe. This is quite a different thing from the
Church extending its blessing to the worldly customs and
methods the trader adopts. We dislike his ways but we need
not dislike the man. But we should protest if we found he
claimed unashamedly the highest privileges of Church mem-
bership. So we can be hostile to the Suqe, but not so to the
members of it. I think this attitude of quiet persistent dis-
approval will have more effect than severe denunciation and
excommunication, which only irritate some and raise up, as I
have found, a spirit of rebellion and blasphemy in some of the
more hardened. Defiance is met with defiance : contempt with
contempt, and the whole atmosphere is charged with elements
of anger and dislike. The delicate plant of Christian culture
and love cannot grow up in it. It is impossible to put a
permanent dividing line between those who Suqe and those who
do not, so that those who Suqe become excommunicate. This
plan may be carried out for a little while, but the effect is bad
on the characters of both parties. We should lot the two sides
merge into one another. But I would suggest the rule that
no one who remains in the Suqe and assists others to rise, be
chosen as a sponsor in Baptism, or bo admitted to the Holy
Communion. To adapt a phrase of Holy Writ, “ You cannot
drink the Cup of the Lord and the cup of toffs.” As no one
would become a teacher without being a communicant, this
puts it out of the power of teachers and religious leaders of the
people to Suqe,—and this is the main point.
Printed at the Melanesian Mission Press, Island. I'jjJ.
