

THE DUTY
OF THE
CHRISTIAN MINISTRY.
A SERMON
PREACHED ON SUNDAY MORNING, JULY 12, 1874,
AT
St. John's Presbyterian Church,
ORANGE,
BY THE
Rev. JOHN R. WARDROP, M.A.
PRICE ONE SHILLING
ORANGE:
PRINTED AT THE “ADVOCATE” OFFICE,
SUMMER STREET.




THE DUTY
OF THE
CHRISTIAN MINISTRY.
.A. SERMON
Preached on Sunday Morning, July 12, 1874,
AT
£t. Jofm’s sm<bgtman fflf)ttrcf),
ORANGE,
BY THE
Rev. JOHN R. WARDROP, M.A.
vp KICE O;NE
ORANGE:
PRINTED AT THE “ADVOCATE” OFFICE,
SUMMER STREET.


TO THE MEMBERS AND ADHERENTS
OP
ST. JOHN’S PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH,
ORANG E , N.S.W.,
THIS SERMON IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED.


SERMON.
Second Timothy, II chap., 24th ver.—“ And the
Servant of, the Lord must not strive ; but be
gentle unto all men, apt to teach—patient.”
There are few more interesting passages of
Holy Writ tlmn this charge of the Apostle Paul
to Timothy—containing as it dees the gathered
experience of the veteran—of one who had
borne the brunt and heat of the day- —written
down for the encouragement and help of a young
soldier of the cross—who had all his experience
to gather, and his victories still to achieve. We
natural !y pay deference to the words which fall
from those who have had a long and eventful
life ; we feel that we shall he all the better of
their sage advice to temper the impetuosity of
youth, and to restrain those feelings of over-
hopefulness which are apt to animate those who
have still their experience to learn. And espe-
cially is this the case in regard to those whose
vocation in life it is to be the spiritual guides of
men. There is no profession in which there is
needed more delicacy and tact than that of the
Christian Ministry ; no profession which .so
urgently needs men, who, while not shutting
their eyes to the plain facts of the present, nor
forgetting that progress is an unchanging law,
are yet prepared to benefit by the experience of
the past, and imitate the example of the wise
and good who served their day and generation
faithfully, and have now entered into the joy of


their Lord. And my brethren, if there ever was
a man fitted by long and faithful service—by a
consistent adherence to the call of duty: by
noble self-sacrifice in a good and holy cause —to
give advice to others who intended to adopt the
profession he adorned—that man was, beyond all
doubt, the Apostle Paul. His experience was
large and wide : if Was gathered in many lands.
From the day that he embraced “ the truth as it
is in Jesus,” he had fearlessly proclaimed the
doctrines of the Cross. He met with opposition,
no doubt : so does every good ' and honest man :
that is part of the discipline that God requires
His faithful people to undergo. But amid oppo-
sition, cruelty, and neglect, this brave and ardent
soul persevered in his glorious work ; and when
the trials and struggles of life were over,
knowing that he had finished his course and
kept the faith —he met the martyr’s death,
buoyed up by the assurance that henceforth
there was laid up for him “ a crown of glory that
would never fade away.”
He had doubtless engaged in many a con-
troversy : it was a time when it must have been
difficult for a man like Paul to keep silent when
the most momentous questions that can engage
the attention of the human mind were on all
sides freely discussed. Perhaps he had discov-
ered by a long and deep experience that religious
controversy had been productive of evil rather
than of good; that men had wasted much
valuable time in debating questions of minor
importance, leaving many things that, were
essential entirely out of sight; and thinking
over the past struggles and the past failures—
with a mind enlarged and a heart softened by
the experience of years, he gives expression to
a truth of great importance —he utters an
exhortation which the world has been slow to
learn—“ A servant of the Lord must not strive.
1. Let us enquire what the expression means.
It does not mean that a servant of the Lord is to


be exempted from the responsibility which
attaches to every man who has embraced certain
principles, and is prepared on all occasions to
defend them. There are times when to strive
becomes essentially a Christian duty—when the
true disciple would prove craven-hearted if he
did not take up a bold position—if he did not
make a valiant stand against those who would
ridicule or trample under foot the principles
which he holds dear. There is a sense in which
every Christian must strive —and strive right
earnestly. But our Lord means something
different here—“ A servant of the Lord must not
strive ” —that- is, must not be of a quarrelsome
disposition—must not take up a certain hobby,
and ride it to the death—must not from pre-
judice adopt certain views, and treat all who do
not coincide with him either as fools or knaves
—must not assert that he is right and all the
world wrong —that they only who think as he
does are the favoured of the Almighty, and that
all who differ from him will never enjoy His
presence, or share in that love which He bears to
His own. My brethren, look back upon the
religious controversies which have agitated the
church and the world during these nineteen cen-
turies ; and, while fully admitting that there
were times when, in a certain sense, it was
absolutely necessary to strive, I think you will
admit that many a striving was unnecessary—
many a struggle vain. Servants of the Lord—
or those who call themselves so—-have often
striven for place and power, ambition, fame,
and have sacrified the better feelings of their
nature in order to secure the applause of men.
How many churches have been rent! how many
dearly-cherished friendships severed! how many
noble natures crushed ! because servants of the
Lord have forgotten that it was not their
business to strive. How eagerly has the church
clung to exclusive privileges, which were will-
ingly granted to her in other days, but which


the more enlightened spirit of modern times has
seen fit to sweep away. How tenaciously have
servants of the Lord retained positions for which
they were altogether unfit, and thus brought
discredit on a profession the honour of which
they ought to have considered it their pride,
and their privilege to maintain ! How many
men have looked for homage—not from any
qualities which they personally might possess,
but as a just tribute to the office which they
assert has descended to them, in unbroken
succession, from apostolic times. They have
striven long and loudly to prove that they are
the true descendants of the Apostles, and there-
fore entitled to the reverence of men. They
have often left out of sight the teachings of the
Master they profess to serve ; and have trifled
away a lifetime in the miserable attempt to
obtain a greatness to which (if judged by any
reasonable standard) they could lay no claim.
How many men have there been, who forget-
ting the solemn duties and high responsibilities
of the ministerial office, have spent their time in
fighting about trifles—in taking part in every
petty dispute which ignorance or bigotry might
raise. How many have in all ages fought for a
shadow, when all their strength was needed to
secure the substance ! how many men have been
found eagerly contending with each other how
best to ward off the fee, when that foe, in the
shape of a numerous and well-disciplined army,
was marching, proudly and unopposed, to
besiege their city, and ruthlessly destroy the
friends they loved. Yes ! that has been true in
every age ;it is painfully true in ours. And so
it is fitting that we should be reminded, as the
Apostle does in the words of the text, that every
man who claims to be a servant of the Lord
must not strive. If striving has to be done,
let it be done by others. A servant of the Lord
has other duties to discharge : his life should be
regulated by a nobler aim. There may be many


things which he sees around him of which he
cannot approve : if his nerves are sensitive, he
may rest assured that, amid the jarring interests of
sects and parties, they will oftentimes experience a
shock. Many things will be said to wound him :
rude and unfeeling natures will sometimes take
advantage of his sensitiveness, and drop poison
into the ears of those whose good opinion he
highly values. But if he is a true servant of
the Lord—loyally devoted to his Master, and
determined to advance his Master’s cause—these
things will never move him; but amid the
sternest opposition—the greatest provocation—
the bitterest hate—he will preserve the calm
and Christ-like spirit, and weary of the world’s
wrangling—in the secrecy of his chamber—he
will distinctly hear the still small voice so fitted
to soothe, to cheer, and console : “ A servant
of the Lord must not strive.”
2. But now let us see what is the positive
duty laid upon all who claim to be true servants
of the Lord. “ A servant of the Lord must be
GENTLE UNTO ALL MEN.” It is difficult to find a
word which will accurately express all that is
implied in the word gentle. We all know that
the name of gentleman is very often misapplied
—that it is frequently given to those who have
birth or wealth to recommend them and nothing
more. Now the Gospel recognizes no such dis-
tinctions ; it makes personal merit and not the
adventitious circumstances of having inherited
a fortune or a name—the ground on which the
favour of God and the respect of man is based.
“ Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren ; ye have done it unto
me.” Such was the language of the Master
whom we profess to serve—and whose teaching
we profess to follow. And if there is one quality
more than another brought prominently forward
alike in Ilis teaching and His life, as an example
for His followers in every age to imitate, it is
this very quality of gentleness. What does it


imply V It implies a delicate consideration for
the feelings of others, a wide human sympathy,
a large-hearted charity ; in one word it implies
the spirit of Jesus Christ. How many there are
—who call themselves Christians—and who
very often from want of thought, say things
and do things which are calculated to irritate
and annoy. In language taken from a living
poet, they “hurt whom they would soothe—and
harm where they would heal.” How many
animosities are raised; how many evil passions
fomented; how many jealousies prolonged;
simply because Christians do not cultivate this
quality of gentleness which the Apostle lavs
down as a duty especially incumbent on a
servant of the Lord. Every true disciple of
Jesus ought to cultivate this noble quality;
every Christian should be gentle ; but especially
must every Christian Minister be “ gentle unto
all men.” Not always an easy matter ; but not
on that account less binding. To be gentle
unto all men is not by any means an injunction
which a Christian Minister in all circumstances
will find it easy to follow ; but even when re-
ceiving the greatest provocation—when on all
sides he is misrepresented and misunderstood,
he must try to preserve the calm, equal temper—
which will show itself by his being “gentle unto
all men.” He must make allowances for in-
herited disposition ; he must make allowances
for early training : he must make allowances for
present surroundings. And if he finds among
his flock those who are never satisfied—whose
life is one perpetual complaint, even to those he
must be gentle ; he may bestow upon them a
quiet sigh of regret, but never an angry frown.
If Christianity has any hold upon us at all; if
we have come in any degree to realise its power
over the life —it must of necessity tend to soften
and refine our manners—to make us tolerant of
the views of others—nay, even of their pre-
judices ; and remembering the cares and the


sorrows of life which some men and women
around us have to bear—the oft-recurring annoy-
ances to which they are often liable, it becomes
the Christian Minister to deal gently with them
all, and to treat them ever with that “ cliarity
which thinketh no evil and is not easily pro-
voked.”
Difficult as the injunction is to keep ; trying
often as it must be to certain natures —■“ a
servant of the Lord must be gentle unto all
MEN.”
3. But still further :—“ a servant of the Lord
must be apt to teach.”—he must be trained
specially for the work of the Christian Ministry ;
he must be fitted by education, culture, and ex-
perience, to be a leader among those to whom he
is appointed to minister. It is not for me to
depreciate the spiritual good which has been
accomplished by the instrumentality of unlettered
men. On the contrary, I believe that such men,
in certain positions, are absolutely necessary, and
have on many occasions been the means of doing
incalculable good to the souls of men. But in
an age like ours —when educational advantages
are great, and becoming more and more widely
diffused ; when literature of every sort is dis-
seminated far and near ; when not only political
and social, but also religious questions are freely
and fully discussed; it is above all things
necessary and desirable that we should have an
educated clergy, to guide men’s views into the
proper channel, and to influence their minds for
good amid the perplexing problems which, during
this mysterious life, the thoughtful have to face.
A Christian Minister ought to be a man, who has
read many books, and studied human character,
with an observant eye. He ought to be a man
who has gathered information from many a
different source, and who is fitted to convey that
information in an intelligible form to other minds.
He ought to be a man of a liberal tone of mind
—not warped by narrow prejudices, nor steeped


m sectarian bigotry ; a man who can take a wide
and compiehensive view of those questions
which happen at the time to engage the atten-
tion of his age and country ; a man who can see
good in other churches besides his own • who
can see the suitability of Gospel truth to the
wants of humanity, and bring it to bear in all
its fulness upon the age in which he lives, and
the. people whom it is his duty and his privilege
to instruct; ..who is prepared to clear away the
dust which, m the course of many centuries, has
gathered. round the Christian Faith, and yet
preserve m all its beauty the noble work of art
which that dust has for so long a time obscured,
li he is a man of this sort, he will be apt to
teach. A man who is not himself well
instructed can hardly be expected to make any
deep or lasting impression upon the minds of
those whom he is appointed to instruct; before
he can be said to be apt to teach, he must have
himself been taught; and especially must he
have been taught in the best of all schools—the
school of experience. Ee can go back to
apostolic times, and read of the successes and the
failures of the men who, amid opposition, hard-
ship and wrong, proclaimed to a benighted
world, the glorious doctrines of their ascended
P Can God, and take courage
from their success ; he can also, if a prudent
man, profit by their failures. And travelling
down those long centuries, he can see for himself
the mistakes into which even good men have
sometimes fallen, and can avoid those rocks and
quicksands upon which, even noble natures have
been often wrecked. Profiting by the experience
of the past, he will be apt to teach the present,
and influence for good all future times. He will
feel the force of words such as these
“ ie n °i se °f life shall ne’er so dull our ear
'\° r P as f °n’s waves, tho’ in the wildest mood,
That oft above the surge, we should not hear
Ihe solemn voices_of Jhe L great andjjood.”


To these solemn voices, it becomes a servant
of the Lord’s duty, above all men, reverently
and attentively to listen ; and if he does so,
he will truly be apt to teach his teaching
will not be a dry, dreary, barren theology-
incapable of influencing the minds of men ;
but it will be a teaching which, acquired in the
school of human experience, will be best fitted
to move and elevate human hearts—a teaching
which will remind men that they cannot trample
under foot with impunity God’s holy laws; a
teaching which will remind them that they are
not their own, but have been bought with a
price ; and that therefore it is an imperative
duty on their part to glorify God in their bodies
and in their spirits which are His.
Animated by a spirit such as this, the servant
of the Lord will find that he is well-fitted to
teach others those important lessons which he
himself has learnt; lessons which, if rightly
apprehended—will elevate the human mind and
purify the human heart.
4. And lastly ; the servant of the Lord must
be patient. We often use the word patient to
signify a waiting for something that is to come.
A patient man is one who is not exacting—who
is prepared to wait for results ; who does not
expect all things to turn out exactly as he would
like. And viewed even in this light, the word
might be found eminently appropriate to the
position of a Christian Minister ; for very often
he has to wait long and anxiously before he can
see the results of his ministerial labour. But
the word in the text means more than that : It
means FORBEARING —FORGIVING —LONG-SUFFERING.
And surely you will all admit that if there is
any class of men, who more than others ought
to be influenced by the character which this
word denotes —it is that of the Christian
Ministry. . If a Minister of Religion is not
patient ; if he cannot bear with the annoyances
and trials to which his position very often


exposes him, it is difficult to see how he can
preach with consistency the religion of his
Master. “ Behold,” the Master said—“ I send
you faith as sheep in the midst of wolves. Be
ye therefore wise as serpents and harmless as
doves ;” and the man who begins Ministerial
life with the idea that all will be plain sailing—
that his life will be a calm unruffled one—is
building on a foundation as hollow as the sand,
is fondly cherishing a delusion- which must one
day be ruthlessly dispelled. To him many
difficult questions will be presented for solution ;
many jarring interests it will be his to adjust ;
his preaching will be often criticised, and his
life subjected to a rigid scrutiny ; but true to
the example and teaching of his Lord, he must
not let these things interfere with the prosecu-
tion of his Master’s work ; but must show to
those around him in the world, that whatever
others may .be, he at least is patient— willing to
bear many injuries—ready to forgive a wrong.
Such then, my brethren, is the high
standard of duty laid down in the Word of
God for the guidance of those whose calling is
to care for the souls of men. It is a character
full. of beauty—and every man who has ever
attained to it must have left the world better
than he found it, must have exercised a quiet
influence for good among all who moved within
his sphere. How best to attain it is an
important question, and can only be satisfactorily
answered by studying carefully the life, and
trying earnestly to imbibe the spirit of the
heavenly Teacher sent from God. He fulfilled
in a pre-eminent degree—in a way that feeble
man can never hope to equal—all the require-
ments of the text.
He did not strive.
Often was he surrounded by men who were
fond of controversy, and who were eager to
dr aw him into it.. Many things were said about
Him —even in His hearing— which were utterly


untrue ; and which, if applied to other men,
would have called forth their righteous indig-
nation. But the Lord of glory was raised far
above the calumnies and jealousies of earth ;
He lived in a region that was pure —high above
the dust and smoke of this lower world ; and
while others eagerly rushed into controversy,
and ranged themselves on one of the contending
sides, the Saviour of the world stood aloof from
the petty quarrels which were taking place
around ; and knowing well how vain the attempt
would be to reconcile the contending foes— He
DID NOT STRIVE.
And yet, “He was gentle unto all men.”
How considerate He was of the feelings of
others ! How tenderly did He enter into their
plans. How warmly did He sympathize with
their undertakings ! If prosperity was shining
upon them—none more ready than He to rejoice
with them and wish them well j and if sorrow
entered their dwellings, He was there to weep
with them, and to impart consolation such as no
other source could supply. For the unfortunate
and the fallen He had ever a kind and tender
word ; and many sought and obtained sympathy
from him who failed to secure it from their
nearest earthly friends. Those who slandered
Him He treated kindly, and would gladly have
received them into His fold. Wherever suffering
existed—there was he present to relieve it : and
when loved ones were removed by death, He
cheered those who were left behind by the ever-
hopeful words—“ I am the resurrection and
the life.”
Ana still to carry ©ut the text as applicable in
a peculiar sense to the Master whom we serve.
Was He not apt to teach? Yes. None more
so than He—He declared homely truths in
homely language : truths suited to benefit and
cheer humanity in every age. He drew his
illustrations from familiar objects; He pointed
His disciples to the lilies of the field and the


fowls of the air. He taught them often in
parables a mode of teaching best adapted to
the mi instructed mind. ]Ete used wliich
the youngest among His hearers could °not fail
to understand—language which has been handed
down to us in all its undying beauty—
which we love to lisp in childhood—language
which cheers us amid the perplexities and cares of
lire—language which sustains and comforts us
wuen we come to die. Truly when we think of all
this—his pure and sublime, yet simple teaching' •
the influence which it had over the minds of
THOSE who heard it, and which it still wields over
the test spirits of humanity in every land—we
inaj ./ell say and draw encouragement from the
thought—that flesus Christ was “ att to teach.”
And surely He was patient. Sorely tried He
was in many ways. Wicked men opposed His
good and holy work : it was not suited to their
grovelling tastes—their vicious inclinations
their unholy desires. Their envy and their spite
often tracked him, and if it had been in their
power to do so, they might have wounded him
in the most tender point. But lie knew what
was in man. He knew the influences in the
world that were opposed to Him ; the hatred
and the malice and the envy that would be
raised among those who could not appreciate the
beautiful and heavenly truths which He came
to impersonate and recommend. lie knew that
He would be called an enthusiast: and a fanatic ;
that His divinity would be called in question •
that many harsh and cruel things would be said
concerning him ; that evqp His devoted fol-
lowers would come to regard Him with suspicion
and distrust; and when danger threatened
them, as He had often warned them that it
would—they would flee for their own safety
and leave Him alone ! All that the Redeemer
of the world knew full well. And yet we know
that He was ever charitable ; that He always
looked upon human conduct with the most


favourable eye ; and was ever willing to accord
to others a gentle and a kindly treatment which
an unthinking and unfriendly world refused to
give to Him. Yes: of the world’s Saviour—it
was truly said : “ When He was reviled, He
reviled not again: when He suffered—-He
threatened not.” He was patient to the bad :
He forgave injuries that were directed against
Himself: and His noble and transcendant
qualities have been recorded in Holy Writ, in
order that His servants in all succeeding ages
might follow in His footsteps—-and try ever to
exhibit in the world the same kind and charitable
spirit which dwelt so fully and shone so brightly
in Him.
Thus, then, I have tried to show the spirit of
our Lord—that spirit by which all His faithful
servants are bound, now as of old, to regulate
their own life, and diffuse its blessed influence
among those who come under their teaching.
And although I have left little time for any
remarks of a strictly personal nature, I cannot
help saying that it is in something of this spirit,
animated by the feelings which pervade the
text, that I now begin my ministerial labours in
this place.
The office of the Holy Ministry is one of the
highest offices in this life that any man can
aspire to ; and I begin my work here—conscious
of many imperfections, but trusting to a power
that is higher than we are, that my labours may
be blessed. I cannot forget that many of us
are far from home —far from the scenes of our
youth—far from the friends whom we loved.
And yet it is pleasing to know that in this new
land, growing daily in worldly prosperity, we
are helping to disseminate the precious truths of
the Gospel—that we are doing what we can to
procure for this colony the religious privileges
which we enjoyed in our Fatherland. Far
removed as we are from those early ties, we
cannot forget the holy lessons which we learnt


in other days ; we cannot forget that in many a
quiet church-yard the remains of beloved parents
—of brothers, sisters, and of friends—are now
reposing. Such feelings as these are not without
their weight in binding us to the religion which
our forefathers struggled to make national, and
which I trust we, their descendants in this
distant colony, are even now not ashamed to
profess. How we have been brought together
as Minister and people, I cannot explain, save
upon the principle that God shapes our destiny,
and not we' ourselves. I have come here on
your invitation. The call that you have
presented to me has been numerously and
respectably signed ; I believe there has not
been a dissentient voice. I trust that this is a
happy omen ; that the same harmony that exists
between us just now may continue unbroken
till the tie which joins us shall be severed. For
myself, I believe I have come to a district and a
climate which forcibly remind me of old
associations—of that country in which many of
us spent our early days. I believe that I will
be happy here. I trust, also, that you will
profit in some measure by my ministrations ;
and that all of us, as time passes quickly away,
may be drawing nearer and nearer to our God,
and preparing for the land of everlasting
blessedness and rest.
I begin my duties here, conscious, as I have
said, of many imperfections, but with a firm
resolve to do my duty faithfully, “ not with eye-
service as unto men,” but so far as my ability
will allow, “ with singleness of heart,” as unto
Him who has appointed me to guide your
devotions in this place, and train your souls for
immortality. I trust to your hearty co-operation
in all schemes of Christian usefulness with
which our Church is identified ; and I also trust
that on my behalf your prayers will sometimes
be offered up to Him who has blessed us hitherto,
and who we feel persuaded will bless us still.


Remembering the way by which we have been
led ; the dangers from which a gracious hand
has preserved us, may you and I be able to utter
from the heart the trustful language of that
beautiful hymn :
*• Lead kindly light amid the encircling
gloom,
Lead Thou me on ;
The night is dark and I
Am far from home—-
Lead Thou me on ; * ■
Keep Thou my feet, .•
I do not wish to see
The distant scene-?? •
One step enough for me.
So long Thy power has blest me
Sure it still
Will lead me on
O’er moor and fen,
O’er crag and torrent till
The night is gone,
And with the morn those angel faces smile,
Which I have loved long since,
And lost awhile.”
And now may the peace of God which passeth
all understanding keep your hearts and minds
through Christ Jesus.— Amen.
ORANGE:
PRINTED AT THE “ADVOCATE” OFFICE,
SUMMER STREET.






