

THE
WAR IN THE CRIMEA.
BEING A SERIES OF LETTERS FROM OFFICERS, NON-COMMISSIONED
OFFICERS, AND PRIVATES ENGAGED IN THE
SIEGE OF SEVASTQPOL,
CONTAINING FULL DETAILS OF THE
Battles of Alma, Balaklaba,
AND
INKERMANN,
WITH CAREFULLY PREPARED CHART, SHOWING THE POSITION OF
THE DIFFERENT ARMIES.
N.B.—THE PROFITS OF THIS WORK WILL BE DEVOTED TO THE
PATRIOTIC FUND.
SYDNEY:
WAUGH AND COX, 111, GEORGE STREET;
AND SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS AND STOREKEEPERS THROUGHOUT THE
COUNTRY.
1855.




PREFACE
The object of the following compilation is to present residents in
the interior, and the colonists generally, with a striking and faithful
account of the War in the East, as delineated in the published cor-
respondence of officers and soldiers attached to the army before Sebas-
topol. To this end the English papers have been ransacked, and with
especial care to give to the reader much matter hitherto unpublished in
the colonial papers. The profits of the publication, if any, will be de-
voted to the Patriotic Fund, and it is hoped and believed that sub-
*scriptions to it will be contributed by many to whom this pamphlet will
first make known the sufferings and the sacrifices of oui fellow
countrymen in the great struggle between Freedom and Despotism.
It is also not improbable that some who may have given sparingly
will be induced, by the affecting details here presented, to repeat sub-
scriptions not adequate to the occasion. With these views the Pub-
lishers earnestly trust that Proprietors of Stations, Householders, and
others, will aid the good work, by encouraging the distribution of this
compilation among their neighbours and servants. No expense has
been spared to produce it in a form that shall excite general interest,
which the carefully executed and Coloured Map, showing not only the
nature of the ground, but also the position of the troops in their
various engagements with the enemy, is confidently submitted to the
approbation of tho Public.


Plan
of
SEVASTOPOL
and
BALAKLAVA.
Allan & Wrgley. Lrthog
Published by Waugh & Cox. George. Street Sydney.
Shaw-vn-g
szZtoTU o~f


THE BATTLE OF ALMA.
Tiie scheme of operations concorted between the generals, and chiefly sug-
gested to Lord Raglan, it was said, by Marshal St. Arnaud and General Canrobert,
was, that the French and Turks on our right were to forcb the passage of the
river, a rivulet of the Alma, and establish themselves on the heights over the
stream on the opposite side, so that they could enfilade the position to our right
and opposite to our left and centre. The Alma is a tortuous little stream, which
has worked its way down through a red clay soil, deepening its course as it pro-
ceeds seawards, an'd which drains the steppe-like lands on its right bank, making at
times pools and eddies too deep to be forded, though it can generally be crossed bv
waders who do not fear to wet their knees. It need not be said that the high
banks formed by the action of the stream in cutting through the soil are sometimes
on one side, sometimes at another, according to tne sweep of the stream.
. At the place where the bulk of the British army crossed, the banks are gene-
rallv at the right side, and vary from two and three to six or eight feet in depth
to the water; where the French attacked, the banks are generally formed by the
unvaried curve of the river on the left hand side. Along the right or north bank
of the Alma are a number of Tartar houses, at times numerous and close enough
to form a cluster of habitations deserving the name of a hamlet, at times scattered
wide apart, amid little vineyards, surrounded by walls of mud and stone three feet
in height. The bridge over which the post road passes from Bouljanak to
Sebastopol runs close to one of these hamlets—a village, in fact, of some 50 houses.
This village is approached from the north by a road winding through a plain nearly
level till it comes near to the village, where the ground dips, so that at the distance
of 300 yards a man on horseback can hardly see the tons of the nearer and moie
elevated houses, and can only aeertain the position of the stream by the willows
and verdure along its bank. At the left or south side of the Alma the ground
assumes a very different character: smooth where the bank is deep, and gently
elevated where the shelve of the bank occurs, it recedes for a few yards at a mo-
derate height above the stream, pierced here and there by the course of the winter’s
torrents, so as to form small ravines, commanded, however, by the heights above.
It w’as in these upper heights that the strength of the Russians consisted. A
remarkable ridge of mountains, varying in height from 500 to 700 feet, runs
alono 1 the course of the Alnxa on the left or south side, with the course, of the
stream, and assuming the form of cliffs when close to the sea. . a his ridge is
marked all along its course by deep gullies, that run towards the river at various
angles, and serve, no doubt, to carry off the floods produced by the rains and the
melting of the winter snows on the hills and table lands above. .If the reader
will place himself on the top of Richmond Hill, dwarf the Thames, in imagination,
to the size of a Hampshire rivulet, and imagine the lovely hill itself to be deprived
of all vegetation, and protracted for about four miles along the stream, lie may
form some notion of the position occupied by the Russians; while the plains on
the north or left bank of the Thames will bear no inapt similitude to the land
over which the British and French armies advanced, barring only the verdure and
freshness At the top of the ridges, between the gullies, the Russians had
erected earthwork batteries, mounted with 321 b. and 241 b. brass guns, supported
by numerous field pieces and howitzers. Ihese guns enfiladed the tops of the
ravines parallel to them, or swept them to the base, while the whole oi the sides


up which an enemy, unable to stand the direct fire of the batteries, would be
to ascend, were fdled with masses of skirmishers armed with an excellent two-
groove rifle, throwing a large, solid, conical ball with force at 700 and 800 yards,-
as the French learnt to their cost. The principal battery consisted of an earthwork
of the form of two sides of a triangle, with the apex pointed towards the bridge,
and the sides covering both sides of the stream, corresponding with the bend in
the river below it, at the distance of one thousand yards, while, with a fair elevation,
the 32-pounders threw, as we saw very often, beyond the houses of the village to the-
distance of 1400 and 1500 yards. This was constructed on the brow of a hill about
600 feet above the river, but the hill rose behind it for another 50 feet, before it dip-
-I>ed away towards the road. The ascent of this hill was enfiladed by the fire of three
>atteries of earthwork on the right, and by another on the left, and these batteries
were equally capable'of covering the village, the stream, and the slopes which led
up the hill to tneir position. In the first battery were 13 32-pounder brass guns,
of exquisite workmanship, which told only too well. In the other batteries were
some 25 guns in all. It was said the Russians had 100 guns on the hills and
40,000 men (forty battalions of infantry, 1000 strong each, of the 16th, 31st,.
32nd, and 52nd Regiments). We were opposed principally to the 16th and 32nd
Regiments, judging by the number of-dead in front of us. I have not been able
to ascertain by whom they were commanded, but there is a general report that
Menschikoff commanded the army in chief, that the left was under GortschakofF,
a relative of the diplomatist, and that the right was under Bodahoff, the military
Governor of Sebastopoh It seems strange that an Admiral should be appointed to
command an army, but strange things do happen in Russia. It is also affirmed
that the carriage of Menschikoff was taken, and in it was found a copy of a despatch
addressed to the Emperor, in winch the Prince stated that 40,000 men might take
Sebastopol, but that 80;000 men could be held in check for weeks by the position
of the Alma. Large masses of cavalry, principally Lancers and Heavy Dragoons,
manoeuvred on the hills on the right of the Russians, and at last descended the hills,
crossed the stream, and threatened our left and rear. As we came near the river
our left wing was thrown back, in order to support our small force of cavalry, sold
a portion of our artillery was pushed forward in the same direction. Our danger in
this respect was detected by the quick eye of Sir George Brown, and I heard him
give the order for the movement of the artillery almost as soon as he caught sight
of the enemy’s cavalry, and just as we were coming to the village. As I have
already said, our plan of operation was, that the French should establish themselves
under the fire of the guns on the heights on the extreme of the enemy’s left.
When that attack was sufficiently developed, and had met with success, the British
army was to force the right and part of the centre of the Russian position, and the
day was gained. When we were about three miles from the village, the French
steamers ran in as close as they could to the bluff of the shore at the south side
of the Alma, and presently we saw them shelling the heights in splendid styles; the
shells bursting over the enemy’s squares and batteries, and finally driving them
from their position on the right, within 3000 yards of the sea.
The French practice commenced about half-past twelve o’clock, and lasted
for about an hour and a half We could see the shells falling, over the batteries
of the enemy, and bursting right over them ; and then the black masses inside the
works broke into little specks which flew about in all directions, and when the
smoke cleared away these were to be seen strewed over the ground. The Russians
answered the ships from the heights, but without effect. A powder tumbril was
blown lip by a French shell; another shell, by accident, fell into an ambuscade
which the ltussians had prepared for the advancing. French, and at last they drew
off from the sea-side, amt confined their efforts to tne defence of the gullies and
heights beyond the fire of the heavy guns of’ the steamers. At one o’clock we
saw the French columns struggling up the hills, covered by a cloud of skirmishers,
whose fire seemed most deadly. Once, at sight of a threatening mass of Russian
infantry, in a commanding position above them, who fired rapid volleys among them,-
the French passed, but it was only to collect their skirmishers, for as soon as they
had formed they ran up the hSI at the pas de charge, and at once broke the


Russians, who fled in disorder, with loss, up the hill. We could see men dropping
on both sides, and the wounded rolling down the steep. At I'so our line ot skir-
mishers o-ot within range of the battery on the hill, and immediately the Russians;
opened fire atl2oo yards with effect, the shot ploughing through the open lines of
the riflemen, and falling into the advancing columns behind. Shortly before this
time dense columns of smoke rose from the river, and drifted along to the eastward,
rather interfering with the view of the enemy on the left of our position. The
Russians had setjhe village on fire. It was a fair exercise of military skill—well
executed—took place at the right time, and succeeded in occasioning a good deal
of annoyance. Our troops halted when they neared this village, their left extending
bevond'it by the verge of the stream, our right behind the burning cottages, and
within range of the batteries. It is said that the Russians had taken the range
of all the principal points in their front, and placed twigs and sticks to mark
them. In this they were assisted by the post signboards on the road-. The
Russians opened a furious fire on the whole of our line, but the French had not yet
made progress enough to justify us in advancing The round shot whizzed in every
up the dirt and sand into the faces of the staff of Lord Raglan,
who were also shelled severely, and attracted much of the enemy’s fire. Still Lord
Rao-lan waited patiently for the development of the French attack. At length
an aide-de-camp came to him and reported that the French had crossed the Alma,-
but they had not established themselves sufficiently to justify us in an attack. The
infantry were therefore ordered to'lie down, and the army for a short time Was
quite passive, only that our artillery poured forth an unceasing fire of shell, rockets,
and round shot, which ploughed through the Russians, and caused them great loss
They did not waver, however, and replied to our artillery manfully, their shot fall-
mo- among our men as they lav, and carrying off legs and arms at every round.
Lord Raglan at last became weary of this inactivity—his spirit was up—he locked
around, and saw men on whom he knew he might stake the honour and fate of
Great Britain by his side, and, anticipating a little in a military point of view*
the crisis of action, lie gave orders for our whole line to advance, tip rose these
serried masses, and, passing through a fearful shower of round, case shot, and shell,
they dashed into the Alma, and floundered through its waters, which were literally
torn into foam with the deadly hail. At the other side of the river were a number
of vineyards, and, to our surprise, they were occupied by Russian riflemen. Three
of the staff were here shot down, but,'led by Lord Raglan in person, the rest ad-
vanced cheering on the men. And now came the turning point of the battle, in*
which Lord Rao-lan, by his sagacity and military skill, probably secured the victory
at a smaller sacrifice than would have been otherwise the case. He dashed over
the bridge followed by his staff. From the road over it, under the Russian guns,
lie saw tfie state of the action. The British line, which he had ordered to advance,-
Was strug<ding through the river and up the heights in masses, firm, indeed, hut
mowed down by the murderous fire of the batteries, and by grape, round shot, shell,
canister, case shot, and musketry, from some of the guns in the central battery,
and from an immense and compact mass of Russian infantry. Then commenced
one of the most bloody and determined struggles in the annals of war. The 2nd
Division lod by Sir 11. L. Evans, in the most dashing manner crossed the stream
on the right. The 7th Fusileers, led by Colonel Yea, were swept down by fifties.
The 55th, 30th, and 95th, led by Brigadier Pennefatber, who was in the thickest
of the fight, cheering on his men, again and again were checked indeed, but never
drew back in their onward progress, which was marked with a roll of Millie mus-
ketrv ; and Brigadier Adams, with the 41st, 47th, and 49th, bravely charged up
the hill, and aided them in the battle. Sir G. Brown, conspicuous on a grey
horse, rode in front of his Light Divsion, urging them with voice and gesture.,
Gallant fellows ! they were worthy of such a gallant chief. The 7th, diminished s
Lv one-half, fell back to re-form their columns lost for the time ; the 23rd, w ith eight
officers dead and four wounded, were still rushing to the front, aided by the 19th,-
33rd. 77th, and 88th. Down went Sir George in a cloud of dust in front of the
battery. He was soon up, and shouted, “Twenty-third, I’m all right. Be sure I’ll
this dav,” and led them on again,-but in the shock ].induced by tlie-fall o
.• 2 B


their chief the gallant regiment suffered terribly, while paralysed for a moment.
Meantime the Guards on the right of the Light Division, and" the Brigade of High-
landers were storming the heights on the let t. Their line was almost as regular as
though they were in Hyde Park. Suddenly a tornado of round and grape rushed
through from the terrible battery, and a roar of musketry from behind thinned
their front ranks by dozens. It was evident that we were just able to contend
against the Russians, favoured as they were by a great position. At this very
time an immense mass of Russian infantry were seen moving towards the batterv.
They halted. It was the crisis of the day. Sharp, angular, and solid, they
looked as if they were cut out.of the solid rock. It was beyond all doubt that if
our infantry, harrassed and thinned as they were, got into the battery they w'oukl
have to encounter again a formidable fire, * which they were but ill calculated to
bear. Lord Raglan saw the difficulties of the situation. He asked if it w ould be
possible to get a couple of guns to bear upon these masses. The reply was, “Yes,”
and an artillery officer—Captain Turner—brought up two guns to "fire on the
Russian squares. The first shot missed, but the next, and the next, and the next
out through the ranks so cleanly, and so keenly, that a clear lane could be seen for
a moment through the square. After a few rounds the square became broken,
traversed to and fro, broke, and fled over the brow of the hill, leaving behind
it six.or seven distinct lines of dead, lying as close as possible to each other,
marking the passage of the fatal messengers. This act relieved our infantry of
a deadly incubus, and they continued their magnificent and fearful progress up
the hill. The Duke encouraged his men by voice and example, and proved him-
seff worthy of his proud command and of the royal race from which he comes.
“ Highlanders,” said Sir C. Campbell, ere they came to the charge, “Don’t pull a
trigger till. you’re within a yard of the Russians !” They charged, and well they
obeyed their chieftain’s wish ; Sir Colin had his horse shot under him, but his meii
took the battery at a bound. The Russians rushed out, and left multitudes of
dead behind them. The Guards had stormed the right of the battery ere the
Highlanders got into the left, and it is said that the Scots Fusilier Guards w'ere
the first to enter. The Second and Light Division crowned the heights. The
french turned the guns on the hill against the flying masses, which the cavalry
in vain tried to cover. A few faint struggles from the scattered infantry, a few
rounds of cannon and musketry, and the enemy fled to the south-east, leaving
* generals, 3 guns, 700 prisoners, and 4000 wounded behind them. The
battle of the Alma was won. It was won with a loss of nearly 3000 killed and
wounded on our side. The list will appear in a few days. The Russians’ retreat
was covered by their cavalry, but if we had had an adequate force we could have
captured many guns and multitudes of prisoners.
Heights of Aema, September 21.
The victory gained by our arms yesterday is better understood as the nature
of this most formidable position is examined more closely. The brunt of the dav
fell on the Light Division, more especially on the 7th, 23rd, and 33rd Regiments,
and on the left brigade of the 2nd division, so far as heavy loss is concerned ; but
the Guards and Highlanders crowned the labours of their fellow-soldiers by a
grand charge, which appalled the Russian reserves, already shaken by the fire of
the guns of Captain Turner’s battery, and ploughed up by the shot of the French
guns which enfiladed them from the heights. 'The Guards lost many men; inanv
officers are wounded in the three battalions, and there is scarcely one of them who
has not had escapes perfectly miraculous.
In the hurry and confusion of my last letter I may not have mentioned exactly
the order of the battle. The co-operation which w r as intended between Prince
Najioleon’s division and Sir De L. Evans’ division did not take place, for it was


found the French would have had to take ground too much to our right toi allow a
combined action. It so happened that twice or thrice during the action the I rench
were so hardly pressed that they sent urgent messages to us for aid, and our guns
were such good effect on a mass of infantry which threatened their
left that they were relieved from all embarrasment, and enabled to gam a position
from which they rendered us material aid in return, by directing their guns against
the Russian reserves above the battery. The battle of the Alma was .
resnects except one—the cavalry arm was inoperative. Ibe Russian cavalry
covered itself with disgrace. It never gave our horse a chance of a charge, and
tluTnatureof the ground forbade our attempting a demonstration against a very
superior^orcemanoeuvring in a higher position. The Russians indeed barely
covered the retreat, and our squadrons were too weak to try a dash at them. As
an exemplification of the several uses of light infantry skirmishers, heavy infantn,
and of horse and field artillery, the battle was complete. There is this very pecu-
liar feature about the action—that we had the very thing to do which we alone
could have done, and that the French had to do work for which they were particu-
larly suited. Ours it was to face steadily the fire of tremendous battenes ; to
advance with a rush, steady and sure, and resistless as the swell of the ocean,
against a wall of fire and solid masses of infantry ; to struggle on, at one time over-
whelmed by crashing volleys of grape and musketry, at another time disorganised
byround shot, winning the ground‘from death at every pace; to form tranquilly
and readily when thrown into momentary disorder, and.at last to nail victoi} to
...... colours bv the never-failing British bayonet. It is said that several 1 rench
officers have declared, since they viewed the ground, that they thought their men
-would not have been able to carry the position as we did. .^"^ i J“ ro^ e " lg a
moment of enthusiasm, at the close of the day, exclaimed to one of our Generals,
“ All I would now ask of fortune is that I might command a corps of English
trwtps for three short weeks. I could then die happy f’ On the other hand, the
French had to scale the sides of steep ravines covered with dense masses of infantry,
supported by clouds of skirmishers; they had to clamber up rocky steeps de-
fended by swarms of sharpshooters? they had to gam a most difficult position
with quickness and alacrity. Delay would have been fatal; slowness of movement
would have lost us the battle; for, without the French on the heights oiourngh,
we must have been driven across the Alma, as they would have been swept into the
valley had we failed in carrying our batteries. _ Their energetic movements the
rapid flame-like spread from crag to crag, their ceaseless lusilade of the ieuUy
rifle, were all astonishing, and paralysed the enemy completely. We, Perhaps,
could never have made such a rapid advance, or got over so much ground in the
wiU be observed that the loss fell principally on the 7th, 23rd, and 33 rd
Regiments, forming the brigade of the Light Division; and on the 30th, 55th, and
95th. Regiments, which formed the right brigade of the 2nd Division. In tact,
these regiments were directly exposed to the tremendous fire of the principal earth-
work battery, and came under range almost the moment the advance was sounded.
The Rifles got over the stream in such loose order that they were wonderfully pre-
served, in spite of the tremendous storm of shot which rattled over them, (colonel
Lawrence had his horse killed under him. Major Norcott's charger received no
less than five mortal wounds. When the 7th got out of the stream, Colonel lea
found himself and his men at once under range of the battery before they could
form, and were obliged to advance pell-mell against the guns. 1 oor JMonck am
Hare soon fell! The colours were lost for a time, for thrice did the enemy s shot
strike down the officer who carried them ! but Captain Pearson, aide-de-camp to
Sir G Brown, passed the last poor fellow who bore them, and lie was enabled to
restore them to the gallant Colonel. They are tom to nieces with shot. Hie 33rd,
which crossed the stream first, headed by Colonel Blake, were mowed down by
round after round of shot and case. The Major (Gough), Captain Fitzgerald
Lieutenants Wallis and Worthington, Ensigns Siree and Greenwood, fell wounded
in a few moments. Lieutenant Montagu was killed on the spot. Toung Worth-
ington has since died, on board ship. The 23rd, which was between the 7th and


-33rd, pushed on in advance, and were received bj a fearful fire of rifle 3 and mus-
ketry, grape and canister. Encouraged by the example of their Brigadier, Cod'
rington, and headed by their gallant old General, Sir George Brown, the noble bri-
gade rushed up the steep, every moment diminishing their numbers and strewing
the ground with dead and dying. It was right in front of the battery that the
23rd received their severest losses. While the Ist brigade of the Light Division
was charging up the hill on one side of it, the left or 2nd brigade of the 2nd (Sir
De L. Evans’s) division was charging the enemy close to them, and was exposed to
a similar fire, and met with similar losses. The 30th, 55th and 95th left long
lines of dead behind them, and just as they came to the battery a sheet of lead
passed through them like a sword. They were utterly broken up. It was neces-
sary to retire them to re-form ; and the Russians, seeing their retreat, leaped out
of the embrasures and breastworks, and actually charged them down the hill with
the bayonet. But few exchanges of the steel were made, probably not more than
half-a-dozen bayonet wounds were inflicted, and bitterly did the enemy repent his
temerity. The shattered regiment re-formed, and cheered on ,by their indefatiga-
ble Brigadier, Pennefather, whose courage never shone more conspicuously than on
this day, they drove the enemy like a herd of sheen up the hill to the shelter of
their earthworks, and then sent them flying beyond the hill pursued by remorse-
less volleys of Minie ball; while Brigadier-General Codrington’s noble brigade
ilealt the same vengeance on their opponents. The advance of the Guards was as
grand in its calm and order as any sight ever witnessed on the battle-field. I
should have said, perhaps, that looking south— i. e., towards Sebastopol, and
towards the enemy on the ridge above us—the order of the divisions from right to
left was as follows: —On the extreme right were the brigades of Sir De L. Evans’s
division ; next came Sir George Brown’s division ; and on the left of all were the
Guards. The 3rd division was in support. The 4th division was in reserve. It
will thus be seen that little more than 14,000 of our infantry were actually en-
gaged with the enemy ! Two divisions never fired a shot. The victory was won
by the Guards, Highlanders, Light and 2nd divisions, opposed to at least 20,000
Russians, and the number of French who disposed of the other 20,000 of the Rus-
sian army was in like proportion with the bulk of their army. The critical
moment was at the advance of the Ist division, and that advance was a sight never
to be forgotten. As they marched up the hill the lines of the black bear-skins were
barely wavering; they were nearly as straight as if on parade, and the light
division complained that the men of the Guards were losing time in dressing up
as if on paracle ground, when they should have been supporting the regiments exposed
to such crushing fire.
While the Guards were running up they fell fast, and at last the Duke,
anxious at the loss of one regiment, seemed inclined to retire his men only for a
moment to re-fprm, but was diverted from doing so by the advice of Sir Colin
Campbell. They continued their advance, therefore, swallowed up in smoke, and
rent through every instant by shot, and, after a momentary check, rushed into the
battery. The Grenadiers and Scots Fusiliers contended eagerly for the honour of
being first in, and still more eagerly for the honour of capturing the beautiful
brass gun ; and I confess I am not able to decide the controversy, which will, no
doubt, be settled by the Generals. I have already mentioned the fire of the High-
landers and its effect (in my former letter), and their appearance at the other side
of the hill, coupled with their deadly volley, caused the instantaneous rout of the
enemy. No doubt the official despatches will give a much clearer view than I can
of the operations of this great day, of which I was an excited and not always intel-
ligent eye-witness; for, simple as the one straight forward movement of the day
was, much of it was obscured by smoke and by the irregularities of the ground, nor
could the position ef one regiment be ascertained by a person who happened to be
in the rear or front of the very one next to it.
It was a terrible and sickening sight to go over the battle-field. Till
deprived of my horse by a chance shot, I rode about to ascertain, as far as
possible, the loss of our friends, and in doing so I was often brought to a
stand-still by the difficulty of getting through the piles of wounded Russians,


min "led too often with our own poor soldiers. The lulls of Greenwich Parkin
-fair"time are not more densely covered with human beings than were the beig ,
•of the Alma with dead and dying. On these bloody mounds fell 2,19> Eftgt sh
officers and men, and upwards of 3,000 Russians, while their western extiemity
was,covered with the bodies of 1,400 gallant Irenebman and of more than 3,000
of th « r J° n e8 Lord Raglan and his Btaff and tbe I) uke of Cambridge rode round
to the top of the hill, the troops cheered them with a thrilling eilect—a shout
of victory, which never can be forgotten. The enemy, wh °'^ ei , e . ]lß Jin f )
distance, might have heard its echoes as it rolled among the hills. Our mei
had, indeed, done their work well, for the action, which commenced at 1M on
our part, was over about 4 p.m. In fact, the actual close continuous fighting
did not last four hours ! , „
The Russian regiments engaged against us, judging from the numbers o
the caps and buttons of the dead and wounded, were the 11th, 12th, 16tb, 17th,
18th, 31st, 32nd, 33rd, and some of the Imperial Guard. The Russian regiment
consists of four battalions, and each battalion may be said to be 650 strong.
The soldiers were mostly stout, strong men. Several of the regiments 32ncl
and 16th for example —wore a black leather helmet, handsomely mounted
brass, and having a brass cone on the top, with a hole for the reception of a
tuft feather, or plume; others wore simply a white linen foraging cap. I hey
were all dressed in long drab coat?, with brass buttons, bearing the number
of the regiment. These coats fitted closely, were gathered in at the back by
a small strap and button, descend to the ankles, and seemed stout comfortable
garments, though the cloth was coarse in’ texture; the trousers, of coarse
blue stuff, "were thrust inside a pair of Wellington boots, open at the ton,
to admit of their being comfortably tucked down ; the boots were stout, well
made, and serviceable. Their knapsacks astonished our soldiers. On
them, each was found to contain the dress uniform coatee of the man, blue or
<>‘reen, with white facings, and slashes like our own, a pair of clean drawers
a clean shirt, a pair of clean socks, a pair of stout mits, a case containing a
good pair of scissors marked “Sarun,” an excellent penknife with one large
blade, of Russian manufacture, a ball of twine, a roll of leather, wax, thread,
needles and pins, a hair-brush and comb, a small looking-glass, razor, strop anc
soap, shoe-brushes and blacking. The general remark of o ur men was that
the Russians were very “ clean soldiers and certainlv the men on the field^ha 1
white fair skins to justify the expression. Each man had a loaf of dark brown
bread, of sour taste, and disagreeable odour, in his knapsack, and a linen roll,
containing a quantity of coarse brown stuff broken up into lumps and large
"rains, winch is crushed biscuit or hard granulated bread prepared with oil.
This, we were told by the prisoners, was the sole food of the men. They eat
the bread with onions and oil; the'powder is “ reserve” ration ; and it they
march they may be for days without tood, and remain hungry till they can get
fresh loaves and more “ bread stuff.” It is perfectly astoundin" to think they
can keep together on such diet—and yet they are strong muscular men enough.
The surgeons remarked that their tenacity of life was very remarkable. Many
of them lived with wounds calculated to destroy two or three ordinary men,
I saw one of the 32nd regiment on the field just after the fight. He was shot
i-jobt through the head, and the brain protruded in large masses at the back
of the head and from the front of the skull. I saw with my own eyes the
wounded man raise his hand, wipe the horrible mass from his brow, and proceed
to struggle down the hill towards the wa'er ! Many of the Russians were shot
in three or four places; few of them had only one wound. They seemed to have
a "eneral idea that they would be murdered: possibly, they had been told no
ouarter would be given, and several deplorable events took place in consequence.
As our men were passing by two or three of them were shot or stabbed by men
lyin" on the ground, ant the cry was raised that “ the wounded Russians were
firiii" on our men. There is a story, indeed, that one officer was severely injured
by a’nmu to whom ho was in the very act of administering succour as he lay in


agony on the field : be this as it may, there was at one time a near chance of a
massacre taking place, but the men were soon controlled, and confined themselvee
to the pillage which always takes place on a battle-field. One villain with a red
coat on his back, I regret to say, I saw go up to a wounded Russian who was
rolling on the earth in the rear of the 7th regiment, and before he could say a
word he discharged his rifle through the wretched creature’s brains. Colonel Yea
rode at him to cut him down, but the fellow excused himself by declaring the
Kussian was going to shoot him. This was the single act of inhumanity I saw
perpetrated by this army, flushed with victory and animated by angry passions,
although the wounded enemy had unquestionably endangered their lives by acts
of ferocious folly. Many of the Russians had small crosses and chains hanging
round their necks. Several were found with Korans in their knapsacks—most
probably recruits from the Kasan Tartars. Many of the officers had portraits
of wives or mistresses, of mothers or sisters, inside their coats. The nrivates
wore the little money they possessed in purses fastened below their left knees,
and the men, in their eager search after the money, often caused the wounded’
painful apprehensions that they were about to destroy them. Last night all
these poor wretches lay in their agony ; nothing could be done to help them.
Ihe groans, the yells, the cries of despair and suffering, were a mournful com-
mentary on the exultation of the victors, and on the joy w hich reigned along the
bivouac fires of our men. As many of our wounded as eould possibly be picked up
ere darkness set in were conveyed on stretchers to the hospital tents. Many
of the others were provided with blankets, and covered as they lay in their
blood. The bandsmen of the regiments worked in the most cheerful and indefa-
tigable manner, hour after hour, searching out and carrying off our wounded.
Long after nig'ht had closed, taint lights might be seen moving over the
frightful field, marking the spots where friendship directed the steps of some
officer in search of a wounded comrade, or where the pillager yet stalked about
on his horrid errand. The attitudes of some of the dead were awful. One man
might be seen resting on one knee, with the arms extended in the form of taking
aim, the brow compressed, the lips clinched, the very expression of firing at an
enemy stamped on the face, and fixed there by death : a ball had struck this man
in the neck. Physiologists or anatomists must settle the rest. Another was
lying on his back with the same expression, and his arms raised in a similar
attitude, the Minie musket still grasped in his hands undischarged. Another
lay a perfect arch, his head resting on one part of the ground, and his feet on
the other, but the back raised high above it. Many men without legs or arms
were trying to crawl down to the waterside. Some of the dead lay with a calm,
placid smile on the face, as though they w'ere in some delicious dream.
Of the Russians one thing was remarkable: the prisoners are generally
coarse, sullen, and unintelligent-looking men. Death had ennobled those who fell
for the expression of their faces was altogether different. The wounded mmht
have envied those who seemed to have passed away so peacefully.
The soldiers are all shaven cleanly on the ehin and cheek; only the mous-
tache is left, and the hair is cropped as close to the head as possible. The latter
is a very convenient mode of wearing the hair in these parts of the world. The
officers (those of superior rank excepted) are barely cfistinguishable from the
men, so far as uniform is concerned, but the generals wore sashes and gold
epaulettes. The subalterns wore merely a lace shoulder-strap, instead of the
cloth one of the privates. Most of them spoke French, and the entreaties of
the wounded to be taken along with as as the officers moved up the hill were
touching in the extreme. The poor fellows had a notion that our men would
murder them if the eye of the officer was removed from them. An old General,
who sat smiling and bowing on a bank with his leg broken by a round shot,
seemed principally concerned for the loss of his gold "snuff-box. This, I believe,’
has since been restored to him. The men say they were badly handled, and had
no General to direct them. Menschikoff ost his head in a figurative sense. The
officers displayed <>reat gallantry, and the men fought with a dogged courage
characteristic of the Russian infantry, but they were utterly deficient in elan


and dash. Our loss is 2,196 killed and wounded ; of the French, between 1,300
and 1,400. The enemy have lost upwards of 6,000. Had we had hut a little
brigade of cavalry more, we might have converted the retreat into an utter rout,
and taken some 5,000 prisoners, guns, and standards, as trophies of. our victory.
The troops bivouacked on the field, not far from the scene of their triumphs.
The Kifles (2nd battalion) were sent in front as usual. The cavalry videttes
scoured the country, and fell back at nightfall on their main bodies in advance
of the Rifles. The tents of Lord Raglan’s head-quarters were pitched on a flat
close to the bridge, and to the left of the hill on which were lying the bulk of the
killed and wounded.
The army halted the whole of this day. They were busy collecting the
wounded, bringing in prisoners, and burying the dead. The wounded who were
able to bear the journey were sent down on arabas to the shore, about three miles
distant, and sent on board ships. Nothing could exceed tl,ie. zeal and kindness
of the sailors, officers, and men, in attending to them and taking them on board.
The arrangements were under the charge of Captain Mends. Mr. Powell, Com-
mander, R.N., Her Majesty’s Steamer Vesuvius, acted as beach-master. All the
naval surgeons were in attendance, and did everything that skill and kindnesss
could suggest to relieve the sufferings of the poor fellows after their painful
journey. .
MORE DETAILS OF THE BATTLE OF ALMA.
FREsn details of this terrible conflict are still coming to hand. Several inci-
dents which have not been before noticed, are recorded by the intelligent corres-
pondent of the Morning Herald, along with some others, which, though previously
noted, are here pleasingly told :
Two days after the battle, the regiments were formed up in square, and the
general order of Lord Raglan, praising them for the undaunted courage they had
displayed on the bloody field of the 20th, read to them. At the same time the
French army began moving along our front, to take up a position to the left, and
the vivas and cheers which were exchanged between the armies were beyond
description. It was a moment of general enthusiasm, and the two aimies looked
like great masses of waving caps and shakos. Afterwards the Duke called all the
officers of his division together, and speaking in a warm, straightforward manner,
thanked them for the support he had received while storming the redoubt at Alma.
As the Fusilier Guards had suffered most, and as the colours had been an especial
mark, he thanked and mentioned by name the ensigns who carried them the
Honourable Mr. Lindsey and Mr. Thistlethwaite. Mr. Lindsey bore the Queen's
colours, which received twenty-one shots through it, and the staff was broken in
his hand by a grape-shot. The regimental colour carried by Mr. Thislethwaite
had twenty-four rifle and musket balls through it. How the bearers escaped
uninjured appears almost miraculous. So deadly and so concentrated was the fire to
which the brigade of Guards was exposed, that at one time it seemed impossible
that they could deploy under it from open column into line. Yet the officers were
perfectly cool, ordered the movement, and the men obeyed as if on parade. The
Guards carried the redoubt, and lost seventeen officers killed and wounded. Only
three officers in the whole brigade escaped entirely untouched. All the others
were either wounded, slightly contused by spent bullets, or shot through their
bearskin caps and clothes. .... ip. ~ »
The colours of the 7th regiment were, for a short time, left jipon the held
under the batteries. This was by no means the fault of the gallant 7th. Literally
there was no one to bring them oft. Every one who acn anced for the purpose


cither fell dead or mortally wounded beside them. The 7th having lost half its
strength from the fire of the battery oo its flank, was compelled to fall back to re-
form. There for a time the colours remained upon the field until the arrival of the
Guards made a diversion, when Captain Pearson, Sir George Brown’s aide-de-camp,
rode in and took the standard from the hands of a serjeant who was mortally
wounded. No enemy’s hand had touched them, though they had a very narrow
escape.
The Guards and Highlanders suffered most in coming through the vineyard,
yet they would never have broken their ranks—but for one temptation—the
large clusters of ripe grapes. These, to men parched with thirst, and who had not
even seen vegetables for three weeks, were irresistable ; so for that, and for that
only, the men turned slightly aside to pull them as they passed. It appears ridi-
culous, but it is literally true, that our men charged up the heights under a most
murderous fire, with their Minies in one hand, and a huge bunch of grapes which
they were stuffing into their mouths with the other. The officers were similarly
employed. As the Duke led on his division for a moment all thought he was
killed. He was completely hidden in the smoke of some cannon, and one 24-
pounder passed close by his head. Sir Colin Campbell, much to their dissatisfac-
tion, would not let the Highlanders fire a single shot until they had arrived within
thirty feet of the enemy. Then their murderous discharges carried all before them.
By not firing, the bonnie Scots were enabled to advance with such rapidity that
the enemy’s cannon had hardly time to get their range before they were out of it
again. Consequently their loss was but slight compared with that of the other
brigades. Lord Raglan was so .pleased at this proof of Sir Colin’s experience and
generalship in saving his men, that he rode up on the field of battle, and shaking
him warmly by the hand, asked him what he could do for him ? Sir Colin acknow-
ledged the thanks, and asked his Lordship’s permission to wear the Highland
feather bonnet for the rest of the campaign, instead of the General’s cocked hat.
Of course the permission was instantly given, and Sir Colin appeared the next
morning in the bonnet of waving plumes, to the intense delight of the Highlanders,
who went into ecstacies of cheers whenever he came among them.
Dr. Mackenzie, one of the best operators in Edinburgh, who came out for the
purpose of studying gun-shot wounds, was with the Highlanders, foremost in the
field. So unremitting was his attention to the Highlanders, to which, though a
civillian, by a general order of Lord Raglan acknowledging bis services, he had
been attached, that after the battle, the brigade, with -one voice, asked permission
to give him three cheers as he came up the hill. I mention this circumstance for
two reasons: —first, because there are few gentlemen who stood so high in their
profession as Dr. Mackenzie who would have given up a lucrative practice for the
purpose of devoting their services unpaid to the relief of their countrymen during
an arduous campaign ; and next, because I wish to pay a slight tribute of respect to
the memory of one who has fallen a victim to his exertions to relieve the sufferings
of others. He died of cholera at Belbek, after a few hours illness, and his loss was
more sincerely lamented than that of any man that fell at Alma.
The following is a letter from Serjeant James Murray, 42nd regiment:—
My Dear Friend—l write to tell you that lam alive and in health. Of the
important action which took place two days ago, I can only state a few particulars.
We commenced to march from Lake Jouzla, Crimea, on the 19th, and about 6
o’clock in the evening met the advanced guard of the Russian army, posted in a
very conspicuous place. We crossed a small river, and then marched up a long
hill to meet them, but they retired at our advance, and formed their lines in a
large plain on the other side. Our lines had no sooner appeal ed on the brow of
the hill than they again retired to the top of the next, but, being late, we deemed
it prudent to follow them no farther. Next morning our whole force was under


arms an hour before day-break: we commenced the march at sunrise, and con-
tinued till about noon, when we came in sight of the main body of the Russian
army, advantageously posted on the top of a high hill, with their great guns
placed ready for us. We formed lines, and lay down to rest ourselves, but half an
hour had not elapsed till the Russians commenced firing upon us with their long
cannon. This did not disconcert us in the least, as their snot generally fell short
of us : 'one man was, however, killed, and another wounded. At length we got up,
and marched nearer the enemy, in order to accomplish which we had literally to
pass through a burning village, set on fire by the Russians, their guns playing on
all the time. The 77th regiment, which marched in front of us at this critical
moment, awed by the terrific fire of the enemy’s artillery, took momentary shelter
behind a bank, whence they were thrice ordered to march forward, but without
effect; they would not move. Our General seeing their confusion, cried out :
“ Higldanders, forward !” That word was all they wanted, iOn rushed the 42nd,
79tb, and 93rd regiments of Highlanders like madmen, gave three tremendous
cheers, and ran with surprising alacrity up the hill, charged the masses of Russian
infantry, at the first shock clearing the hill-top of their redoubtable foes, and
sending the rest like sheep scampering down the hill. Within the space of a
quarter of an hour that fearfully strong position of the Russian army, bristling
with life and military array, was changed to one of frightful carnage and confu-
sion ; heaps of dead and wounded Muscovites and Poles, knapsacks, guns, swords,
belts, and all the paraphernalia of war. The battle over, a different occupation
engaged the attention of our men ; each strove to quench the burning thirst of his
wounded foe, whom he had perhaps smitten to the earth with a mortal wound an
hour before. After attending to the wants of the wounded and the dying we
marched about the distance of a mile from the scene of our engagement, and halted
for the night. The following merning Serjeants Scott, Watson, and myself took
a walk over the plain to see our work of last night. I hope I never will see the
like again. The Russians were lying in every possible shape and position, com-
pletely covering the whole plain; dead and dying men and horses lying in
neaps of five or six together. I sickened at the scene. The Russian loss is
estimated at 5000, and that of the allies at 1700. The force which the Russians
actually engaged w r as reckoned at about 17,000, while we only employed ten or
twelve regiments, so that we fought with about three men to every five of the
enemy. Our regiment took three or four brass guns, and a number of prisoners,
three of whom I had the pleasure of capturing, and marching to Lord Raglan, our
commander.
Yours truly.
James Murray.
A Soldier’s Receipt fo.r Procuring Sleep. —“ The following,” says the
Bath Journal, is an extract from the letter of a youth, son of an ancient Wilts
family, to his parents: “As soon as our division (the Ist) was formed on landing,
and the light division had marched off) we started and marched five miles over a
large flat plain, with a ridge of high rugged-looking hills facing us, and encamped
at half-past 4 p.m. in a large ploughed field, with a quantity of bushy weeds on it,
which luckily made very good bedding when pulled up and heaped together, so a
general rush took place as soon as we had piled arms, and not a weed was left in
half an hour ! So we had our chip of cold pork, and buiscuit, and go-down of
whisky, put our cloaks over us, and with our bearskin caps for a pillow, lay down
on our ‘ bed of rushes,’ and slept like a top, though it rained a good part of the
ftight pretty sharpish. Now 1 will give you a receipt for sleeping under any cir-
cumstances. Have all the excitement of landing on an enemy’s snore, mixed with
as many havresacks, cloaks, cold pork, pistols, telescopes, hatchets, &c., as you can
carry, and a bearskin cap and epaulettes on top of all. Lie down with your con-
science at ease from a sense of doing your duty, and put the cape of your coat bang
all over your head, so that you can t feel the rain or dew fall, or be dazzled by fho
moon or stars, and then commend yourself to Gcd. If you don’t sleep then there
■must be something wrong in the inside.”


Preparations for the Spring Campaign.— The armament now building
to operate against the Eussians in the Baltic at the opening of the sprint cam-
paign, includes thirty-five vessels ; namely, five floating batteries, the° decks
covered with iron plates, eight inches thick, and their exterior with 100 plates,
four inches thick, rendering them perfectly ball and bomb proof (these vessels
will be armed with- six of the long range guns on the Lancaster principle); ten
bomb vessels, to be armed with from two to three mortars of the most powerful
description ; and twenty gun boats, drawing about four feet of water, the latter
being specially intended for service in the Kiver Neva.
The I bench Loss at Alma. —The Moniteur of Monday contains the
general list of officers of all arms killed or wounded in the battle of Alma,
and also a statement of the gross Trench loss on that occasion. One hundred
and thirty-six Trench were killed, of whom four were officers. The wounded
numbered one thousand two hundred, including sixty-one officers.
Orphans of Scotch Soldiers, &c., Killed in the War.—A meeting of
the members of the Caledonian Society was held in London on Monday, for the
purpose of taking measures to admit to the benefits of the charity the orphan
children of Scotch soldiers, sailors, and marines, killed or disabled in the war
The chair was filled by Sir John H. Maxwell. The Eev. Dr. Cummin moved
a resolution, to the effect, that at the next election twenty-five children, the
orphans of Scotch soldiers, sailors, or marines, who may have fallen in the war,
should be elected to the benefits of the asylum. The resolution was unanimously
adopted. The Earl of Kinnaird then proposed that the meeting should authorise
1 v Court of Directors to admit to the benefits of tne institution the
children of Scotch soldiers, sailors, and marines, at £75 per head, in lieu of £lO5,
the usual charge. After a short discussion, the sum of £5O was substituted for
£75 in the resolution, and in that amended shape it was adopted, ahe Chairman
desired that his name should be put down for*£loo.
The Edssian Wounded on the Plains of the Alma.—What is that grav
mass on the plains, which seems settled down upon it almost without life or
motion ? now and then, indeed, an arm may be seen waved aloft; or a man
raises himself for a moment-, looks around and then lies down attain. Alas *
that plain is covered with the wounded Eussians still. Nearly 60 lorn* hours
have they passed in agony on the ground; and now, with but little lope of
help or succour more, we must leave them as they lie. All this nameless,
inconceivable misery—this cureless pain—to be caused by the caprice of one
man. Seven hundred and fifty wounded men are still upon the ground anil
we can do nothing with them. Their wounds have been bound and dressed—
we have done all we can for them ; • and now, unable as we are to take them
along with us, or to send them away, we must depart. Ere our troops marched
however, General Estcourt, by order of Lord Eaglan, sent into the Tartar village
up the valley, into which the inhabitants were just returning, and having pro-
cured the attendance of the head men, he proceeded to explain to them that
the wounded Eussians would be confided to their charge, and that they were
to feed and maintain them, and when they were well they were to let tliem go
their ways. In order to look after their wounds an English surgeon was left
behind with these 750 men. This most painful and desolate duty devolved on
Dr. Thomson, of the 44th regiment. He was told his mission * would be his
protection in case the Cossacks came, and that he was to hoist a flao- of truce
should the enemy appear in sight, and. then, provided with some rum, biscuit,
and salt meat, he was left alone with his charge. Ere the army went, however
one ot the Eussian officers addressed the wounded, and explained the position
in which they were placed, and they promised to obey Dr. Thomson’s orders,
to. protect him as tar as they could, and to acquaint any Eussian force which
might arrive with the peculiar circumstances under which he was among them.
Special Correspondent of the Times.
The Sailors on Shore. — A correspondent of the Times, writing from
Balaklava on.the 2nd instant, says—“ There has been for several days a talk
ot a naval division being formed to act on shore, but, in consequence of the


dislike to violent measures imputed to Admiral Dundas, no one gave credit to
the report. This morning, however, the Firebrand steamed into Balaklava with
1000 sailors. They are draughts from the different sailing vessels, and are put
under the orders of Captain Lushington of the Albion. They were immediately
disembarked, and began dragging up the guns of the Diamond, with which they
are going to act during the siege. I never saw men doing hard work more
merrily. It reminded one of schoolboys during play time. They seemed to he
delighted at having escaped the paralysing influence afloat, which had condemned
them hitherto to inactivity, and appeared elated by the idea that they would
have something to do with the taking of Sebastopol—an idea which most of the
crews of the sailing vessels had nearly given up. The commanding officer of the
fleet appears to be the only person who is not eager to win laurels.”
Prince Menschikoff’s Carriage.—We have heard a great deal (says the
Constitutionnel) about Prince Menschikoff’s carriage after the battle of the
Alma. A Russian general who was in it, seeing the Zouaves approach, though
the battle was over, fired a pistol at fifty paces, and shot one of them dead.
The fire was immediately returned by his comrades, when the general was
wounded severely, though not mortally, by a ball which passed through both
cheeks. The carriage has been exhibited publicly as a tropuy at Constantinople,
and, by a singular coincidence, it was in the same that Prince Menschikoff drove
through the streets of that city when he went there on his insolent embassy last
year.
Cavalry Sabre Strokes.—A correspondent of the Edinburgh Courcmt,
writing from Balaklava, says in an account of the charge of the heavy brigade:
“ Some fearful sabre cuts were delivered. I saw one man with his head cloven
to the chin, through helmet and all, so that the head appeared in two flaps ;
another with his arm lopped off, as if it had been done by a butcher’s cleaver ;
and a third having a deep gash in the brain from behind—severing the head
nearly in two; and yet this unfortunate man was alive, and several times sat up
in great agony, actually holding his head together with both hands.”
Lord George Paget on the Battle-Field.—A Staffordshire man in a
letter dated October 30, referring to the slaughter among the cavalry on the
25th, says.-—“ Lord George’s regiment is cut up terribly; but ho has escaped.
He proved himself worthy of being called tfce Marquis of Anglesea’s son. He
fought at the head of his regiment like a hero. I was told by an old soldier
who got wounded by his side, that Lord George waved his sword, saying, ‘ Now,
my lads, for old England ! Fight, conquer, or die!’ and led his men on gallantly.
The major and one lieutenant were killed.”
Divine Service amid Shot and Shell.—At 3 p.m. on the Bth, the troops
of the light division were formed in squares for prayer, in front of the camp
of the 2nd brigade. There had been a cessation of firing for upwards of tw'o
hours previously. Just, however, before the commencement of the Service, the
discharge of a heavy gun booms in our ears, the usual whiz follows in its wake,
and down drops a 68 by the side of the quarter-/piard tent, immediately on our
right. The warning hint is taken, and the division is moved to the rear, close
upon the tents of the first division. Scarcely had the Service commenced, when
a shell burst almost over the place just quitted : it is scarcely possible but some
must have been struck by the fragments had the troops remained there. The
discharge of shot and shell continues, but Divine Service is not again interrupted.
An Awkward Mistake.—Sir George Brown narrowly escaped being shot
on the night of the 7th October. About 11 p.m. he was giving some instructions
to an officer of the 88th regiment in charge of one of the picquets covering a
working party'. Lieutenant-Colonel Egerton, commanding the 77th regiment,
was at the time with him, together w’ith Lieutenant the Honourable H. Clifford,
aide-de-camp to Brigadier-General Buller. General Brown and Mr. Clifford were
on foot, Colonel Egerton on horseback. The group was suddenly perceived by some
men belonging to a picquet of the 19th regiment, from whom they were distant
in advance about 400 yards. Imagining that the General and his party were
Russians who had come out to reconnoitre, they at once fired; and eighteen


or twenty shots were discharged before the mistake* was discovered, fortunately
no one was hurt, but one of the balls passed through the sleeve of Mr. Clifford’s
coat, who was standing by the side of the General. The firing would very probably
have attracted the notice of the Eussian sentries had it not happened, at the
time this occurred, that rather a sharp skirmish was going on to the left, where
the French were throwing up some works, and where the Russians were trying to
imjiede them.
British Gallantry and Russian Gunnery.— The Herald's corresjiondent
says, “ We »ot an excellent illustration on the 11th instant of the formidable effects
of the Russian gunnery. An Austrian barque, laden with hay for the use of the
commissariat, in coming down from Eupatoria to Balaklava, when close off
Sebastopol, the wind fell light, and the current setting in, took her so close
that, to avoid going on shore, she had to sail past all the forts, at about
1500 yards. Of course, as she came along, every gun pointed to seaward from
Sebastopol was brought to bear upon her. Barely moving through the water
at one-and-a-half knots an hour, this unfortunate'vessel began her course with*
a probability of being sunk in about five minutes ; yet, to the utter astonishment
of every one—and there were hundreds, both English and French, watching the
occurence from the heights—not a sliot struck her—they were either too high
or too low, too far forward or to far aft. I presume the Austrian pilot got
nervous when he had conducted his vessel to a point where the fire of the Russian
batteries could be concentrated on her—so he ran her aground. Here she lay for
an hour and a half, when the crew abandoned her, and the vessel was apparently
left to its fate, for it seemed impossible but that the Russians should sink her ;
yet your readers will scarcely credit it, out of some 400 or 500 cannon balls fired
by the enemy only four struck her. Seeing the state of affairs, the Beagle (late
carrying two Lancaster guns) went coolly in, protected by the Firebrand, and
made preparations for towing the Austrian barque out. The instant the attempt
was seen the Russians redoubled their fire, but the Beagle went alongside the
barque and managed to get her in tow. While doing so two Russian frigates came
out of Sebastopol; yet, though under fire of their guns, and though the little
Beagle and Austrian barque were not 200 yards from the walls, they did not
dare even to advance that far, for the Firebrand was sticking close to the Beagle,-
the Firebrand only carrying six guns; the Beagle, having landed hers for the*
siege train, had not one on board. But the enemy’s vessels declined even this
contest, and contented themselves with firing at a distance. T'he Firebrand was
hit in four places—the Beagle not touched at all. This exploit of the Beagle
has been the talk of the navy since it occurred. By those competent to judge
such matters, it is thought one of the most daring and well conducted coups
which has been done in the Black Sea. For a small screw-steamer, without guns,,
to cut a vessel out from under the very walls of Sebastopol, is certainly an exploit
of no light character. The name of the officer commanding the Beagle is, I
believe, Sir. Boter, second master. The commander had landed, with many of his
crew, to work the Lancaster guus in the trenches.”
The Sailors on Shore. —Jack has been of essential service in this hard
work. The only thing against him is that he is too strong. He pulls strong
carts to pieces as if they were toys. He piles up shot-cases in the ammunition
wagons till the horses fall under the weight, tor he cannot understand “ the
ship starting till the hold is full.” He takes long pulls and strong pulls at tow
ropes till they give like sewing silk, and he is indefatigable in “rousing” crazy
old vehicles up hill, and running full speed with them dov\ n hill till they fall
to pieces. Many a heap of shot or shell by the roadside marks the scenes of such
disasters ; but Jack’s good humour during this “ spree on shore” is inexhaustible,
and he comes back for the massive cargo from the camp with the greatest willing-
ness when he is told it must be got up ere nightfall. It is most cheering to meet
» set of these jolly fellows “ working up a gun to the camp.” From a distance
you hear some rough hearty English chorus borne on the breeze over the hill
side. As you approach the strains of an unmistakeable Gosport fiddle, mingled
with the squeaks of a marine fife, rise up through the unaccustomed vales of the


Crimea. A cloud of dust on the ascent marks their coming and tugging up the
monster gun in its cradle with “ a stamp and go,” strange cries, and oaths sworn
by some thirty tars, all flushed with honest exercise, while the officer in charge
tries to moderate their excessive energies, and to induce the two or three hairy
Hercules’, who are sitting astride on the gun, or on the few horses in front, with
vine leaves in their hats or flowers in their hair, to dismount and leave off' the
music. The astonishment of the stupid fur-capped Crim Tartars, as they stare
at this wondrous apparition on its way, is ludicrous to a degree ; but Turk, Crim,
Russian, or Greek, are all the same to Jack, and he is certain to salute every
foreigner who goes by, while in this state, with the universal shibboleth of “Bono*!
Bowno ! Johnny!”
Carrying off a Shell. —“ A shell suddenly fell right amongst us the other
night,” says a writer from the camp; “in an instant every body was flat on his
belly; in some parts three or four human beings were piled upon one another,
and all were shouting out, ‘ Shove it out, shove it out!’ A young rifleman had
the pluck to take the shell in his hands, and rolled it over the parapet. Some-
thing had gone wrong with the fusee, for the shell did not burst; but of this,
the man who courageously took it up in his arms was not aware, and his conduct
merits reward.”
FIRST DAY OF THE SIEGE.
{From, the Correspondent of the Morning Herald.
Comparative Strength «f the Allies and Enemy’s Works.—The first volley
(on the 17th) showed us what no soul in either army had hitherto been certain about,
viz., the precise nature, both of our works and the enemy’s, and I am sorry to
say it also showed us that, even in earth-work batteries, thrown up since we came
here, the Russians immensely out-numbered the allied lines. Not only were there
extensive entrenchments, mounting 25 and .‘3o,heavy cannon, but on every height
and ridge guns of heavy calibre were placed in battery. I have been informed
that the extensive nature of their works completely astonished our generals, and
we are by no means sure that we have seen them all yet, for during yesterday
fresh ones were frequently unmasked in places totally unexpected. On the extreme
right of our position, on a hill commanding the back of the inlet, and near Inker-
mann Light, was our first battery (called the Six Gun) of six 68-pounders. Next
to this came two of the Terrible’s long 84-pounders, and one gun battery mount-
ing a Lancaster. More to our centre, and on the other side of the house which I
have spoken of as commanding a fine view, is another loDg range Lancaster gun,
in a valley beueath which, and considerably advanced, is the Crown Batttery, one
of our largest. It is three-sided, mounting eight guns on each face, with a' bank
for two 13-inch mortars. The guns are either 32, 68, or 84-pounders, and between
the breastwork are placed co-horns for throwing small 4£ inch shell ameng troops.
This battery is manned‘with the sailors from the fleet. On its left, toward the
French, is a four-gun battery of heavy ordnance, and on our left of all is the Green
Mound Battery, of the same size and description as the Crown. Beyond these,
towards Kertcb,-and enclosing the whole of the south of the fortress, are the
french entrenchments. Unfortunately our allies have no heavier guns in their
siege train than 24-pounders, so that their lines of necessity are of a lighter
description than ours, and less calculated to resist the enemy’s concentrated and
heavy fire. The French discovered these facts to their cost in the course of the
day. To meet these guns the enemy had opposed to our Six-gun Battery on the
right, a tremendous entrenchment thrown up on the top of the hills to the north of
Sebastopol. It was, however, nearly 4000 yards distant, so its shot and shell all
fell short, in such a manner that firing from it was soon discontinued. As we


•pproAttis.battery witt provea J*”“tn£euU K
las not only been com-
already mentioned. _ .. . . mounting 15 large guns, thrown out at
p .\t d ’i fc the cScto the right of tnis tower, hut so placed and covered as
either side, /nthe cieek wu e the centre, was the famous three-decker, the
to command our Crown Battery on a nd facing the Green Mound Battery,
*"*», A P“>ftJKdE?ft. tTSrt &&&. K bristles noth guna,
three-sided redoubt, carrying about 4 »c®i . the right is in
6,8, and 10-gun batteries, the main f of the Buuu on the r
some entrenchments called the 1 8 , . 0 f guns, each about
ing the French lines perfe C tly,andentenc.ecltortwo S >
25 in number. Ont£e summit-of ge to have been
otHbe bartonr, such as my Jiu could plainly heard
Hi. Lancaster pmß. Heir VSthe ‘it!
EfoV srsw
oven those are only fired once in eight■ “* nutes * o’clock the firing was deafen-
Tiieik effect upon the Bound 1 south which Seared away
ing, and about that time a breeze up from the south, w h the
* he ST ? < 'fower then blel "recognizable, the delicate attentions of the Lancas-
of strength. Isjot a soldjer ie ma * Huo , e ’ lloles were also visible in its
overthrown, and iay about like ere dislodged. The earthworks round
side, were masses of the solid m . Y the” other batteries, but beyond
the tower were torn up works and the redan wall and the
this remained much the Crown and Green Mound batteries on
Twelve Apostles on the but moat of the enemy’s
which’completely Hanked our allies, it was
evident they were fighting at the view cleared, the Lancaster gun
:; gsijof 1 Mlt wSg^
suddenly there came an exp one of the French batteries,
sorrow, we saw f majstf ™'o ° he flank fire of tlie 10-gun battery
£“Vdld ta blowSg up one of the msgaMnes, tilling several men, and doing
■» ri 7^7rv«^ to nos.o» os anoturr Fm»ch tan-
Ahoutthfs time nine o’clock, we could see the fleet in the offing, making prepara-
for an attack. All the steamers were being lashed alongside &e line-of-


battle ships, though more than this it was impossible to sco, as the wind fell, and
the sinoko again collected in dense masses over the whole scene. Through the
smoke over the harbour we could plainly perceive the masts and tunnel of a large
screw line-of-battlc ship, which, without firing a shot, stood in until her broadside
was within 200 yards of one of the principal fortresses at the north of the harbour.
Then her guns began to roar loud above the hellish din which seemed to rend the
very sky. The vessel which performed this gallant exploit was French, and, I
believe, the Montebello, 120, the crew of which suffered so dreadfully from cholera
while at Varna. From the moment she arrived alongside the fort, her sides
seemed literally on fire ; so rapid, so incessant, were her tiers of guns discharged.
At tho same moment all our batteries, to effect a diversion in her favour, redoubled
their fire ; while the Russian Flag-Staff Battery began again upon the abandoned
French lines. This time, unfortunately, the enemy assailed the latter with dreadful
effect. One Russian shell, by ill luck, dropjicd and exploded full upon tho reserve
magazine of the princifwd French battery. The effect was instantancons and awful.
About twenty tons of powder, with shell and rockets in projtortion, instantly
ignited, and the earth seemed to heave as the greater part of the battery, with
sixteen guns, and nearly all tho men, were hurled into the air. Hardly had tho
stunning rejwrt which the last catastroplio produced ceased to vibrato iqion tho
car, when, following the Montebello, four more French screw liners, each having
another in tow, dashed up to the forts. Wherever the fire was most awful and
incessant, wherever it appeared to deal tho greatest amount of death and destruc-
tion among the enemy, there was sure to be seen the French tri-colour flying
conspicuous above all. At no time during the day, in consequence of intercepting
objects, did we ever catch a glimpse of an English flag. As each French liner
came in, she added her incessant broadsides to the continuous roar of cannon which
prevailed on all sides. The scene was perfectly hellish, 'flic atmosphere was
only a thick lurid smoke, which seemed to suffocate, and through its heavy folds
the scream of shot and shell was enough to make one’s hair stand on end. No
words of mine could do justice to such a pandemonium. Let your readers imagine
at least 4000 pieces of the heaviest ordinance in the world firing shell and rockets
without a second’s intermission. The air seemed one jierpetual explosion ; but in
the midst of which, singularly enough, the peculiar jerking scream of tlio Lancaster
shell could bo plainly heard.
Utter Demolition of a Grand Redoubt by a Shell from a Lancaster
Gun.—Our batteries were in full play, and appeared to engage more than a duo
amount of tho enemy’s attention : for tho Twelve Apostles, which was completely
sheltered by the land from the attack of tin) French sliqis, and quite as completely
sheltered from everything but one of the Lancaster guns, begun to drop red-hot
hollow shot into the Grown Battery. Tho effect of this was soon ap|>arent.
Before a dozen bad been fired, one of them bounded and struck a spare ammunition
wagon full of powder, which it instantly exploded. The shock was not so severe
as it might have been, for tlie powder was comparatively unconfined. It of course
killed a few of our men, but the works of tho battery were uninjured. The Russians
set up tremendous cheers when they saw the explosion, as they did when the
batteries of our allies blew up, imagining they had done us the same mischief.
Their mirth, however, Mas but short-lived. While in tho act of cheering, a shell
from tho Lancaster lodged (I presume so) in the magazine of the redoubt in front
of the redan wall. The explosion which followed was appalling. It made tho
stoutest man’s blood run cold. At first it seemed as if the whole of Sebastopol was
envelo[ied in the ruin ; five minutes after, alien the loose earth and smoke cleared
away, and allowed us to see the extent of the mischief, we saw that only a black
hole remained where the grand redoubt had stood, and that the greater part of tho
redan wall Mas blown away: so stunning appeared the effects of the terrible blow
to the enemy, that it was some minutes before they fired a single gun. When
they did, they concentrated their M’liole fire upon the battery where the fatal
Lancaster gun was placed, but in vain, it u - as quite out of range, and their shot
stopped rolling nearly 200 yards in advanco of the battery. Seeing this, the
Russians wisely gave up the attempt, to reach it, and turned their attention to tho
French fleet, which indeed required it. During all this time thei fire, instead of
c


slackening, had rather increased ; and it was evident, from the perpetual thunders
thev sentforth, that one or the other party must soon give in, for it was impossible
for both to go <m at that rate any longer. Which was actually the victor we could
•mess though we could not see, for the smoke was now more dense than ever,
ft was near four o’clock, the fleet were still volleying forth tlieir thunders, but the
Are of the Russians had slackened considerably. Just at this moment the s
cleared away,and both forts and fleets could distinctly see each other The French
vessels lay off the forts to the south of the harbour. Another detachment of line
of battle ships were attacking those to the north, lhe smoke was still too thick
to Sew us to make out the fags of these latter, but we had no doubt they were
English The batteries at the mouth of the harbour mount three tiers ot gun ,
the^uppermost one on the roof being own like ordinary batteries ; the two lo e
tiers are casemated, one being almost level with the water s edge, lhe ene
had completely abandoned the guns on the roof, many ot which were dismounted,
■ind the Works much cut up ; but the casemated guns seemed little injured, and as
the smoke cleared away thev attacked the fleets with redoubled vigour. We could
vt see that some earth works had been thrown up to flank the torts, which were
wurin-a destructive fire upon the fleet. The smoke soon hid all again, and the
liattle raged with as much fury as before until dusk. The
to slacken, and before night had almost entirely ceased. Ihe English
ments never ceased their fire, though, as a matter of course, it slackened much
the darkness increased.
( From the Correspondent of the Morning Chronicle.)
The most obstinate fire on the part of the enemy, on the 17th, proceeded from
a redan fort, mounting twenty-seven guns, which formed the centre ot bis position.
Bv the cessation of tire from the French guns, our two principal batteries were
enfiladed by the heavy works opposed to the Irench. lhe fire ot one of our
batteries that on “ Frenchman’s Hill,” mounting twenty-one guns, nobly worked
bv blue pickets now slackened from want of ammunition. The supply, however,
to work they went. A five-gun battery on Green
Hill” was magnificently worked by foot artillerymen, lhe one-gun battery, a
Lancaster, commanded a three decker, supposed to be the Vveiv e
did no execution. The Lancaster gun may nearly be pronounced a failure. At
ten minutes past three a fearful explosion took place. * the
of the redan fort, which suffered immensely. A shout of ti mmph issued tiom tne
English lines, and animated our gunners, if possible, with increased vigour. Only
three or four of the fort’s guns were uninjured, and these re-commenced their hre
some short time after. A volunteer party-ten men. rom , each Went-skir-
mished during the cannonade, and 500 Zouaves and other light French infantry,
attempted though with no great success, to pick off the Russian gunners. At
, 3to tour, °an English ammunition wagon, the horses of winch had been
killed, exploded without injuring anybody. Tlie cart had been left exposed, thrui gh
some neglect, and fortunately was far from any of our batteries. lvvo ™ ll
later a small explosion occurred in the Russian earthworks surrounding the lound
white tower.ami dismounting. . nun. About seven, the ™"
sides The result of the day’s labour may be thus summed up the white round
tower has been silenced, and severely battered. In the earthworks around it three
guns have been dismounted, and the parapets considerably injured. Ini the redan
fort the works have been completely destroyed, and above 20 guns silenced. 1 lie
Russians throughout the day displayed the greatest pluck and s ui .
Second Hay.—Sebastopol, October 18.—The firing ceased on both sides
last nio'ht, and re-commenced with great vigour this morning a tay irea - . . ‘
French' s batteries will be unable to re-open lefore to-morrow. The Russian, had
well employed their night, for the redan fort is again in play. \\ e had expected
Bjrtie in the night, but were agreeably disappointed, lhe redoubts and town will,


it is feared, have to be carried by assault, and the loss of life will be very •'•reat
Had the opinion of Sir G. Cathcart prevailed, an assault would have"been
attempted the day after the arrival of the army before the town. The formidable
works were not then constructed, and the enemy would have been more easily
beaten back. A siege Lancaster gun burst yesterday, whilst doing good work,
but the one-gun battery, which commands the dockyard, and is mounted bv a ship
Lancaster gun, gave much disappointment by its bad execution. This morning
the Russian armv to our rear made a move forward, and a body of Cossacks came
within range of the batteries we have erected beyond Ralaklava. The firing
continues at this moment. The Russians can scarcely meditate an attack in that
direction, which would be easily repulsed. The positions occupied by. the allies
have been rendered almost impregnable by the various redoubts now established
on the heights. The report brought by the Caradoc respecting the taking of
hupatoria has been denied. Our casualties vesterday were 17 killed and 73
wounded. The loss of the French has not yet been ascertained. We are looking
forward with anxiety to the assault which “must take place, and will decide the
fate of Sebastopol. 4 r.ii.—The firing continues heavy. The Russians to our
rear retired without engaging. The loss in the trendies has been rather heavy
this morning. J
The following is an extract of a letter from an officer in the 20th regiment
dated heights of Sebastopol, Tuesday morning, Oct. 17 :
“I am most anxious to write to you, as the mail goes out to-morrow • but it
is very doubtful if I shall be able to get through a dozen lines. This morning—
as bright a one as ever shone—at half-past 6, the French gave the pre-concerted
signal—three consecutive shots—and away went our batteries at this much talked
of stronghold Sebastopol.
“ Since I wrote last we literally slaved in the trenches, and, had it not been
for the hope of almost every day commencing operations, many, I am sure, must
have given in. For myself, I have been ip the trenches or on outlying picket
five nights out of the last eight; but I thank God I never was better in mv life.
I assure you that our work for the last ten days has been anything but a trifk*-.
Ot course, all the time we were at work iii the trenches, either day or night, the
enemy amused themselves throwing shot and shell to keep us lively..
“ I think our fellows have become indifferent to them, but grape shot I defy
any one to receive with satisfaction. Our regiment has been most fortunate-
only one officer as yet wounded. Other regiments have caught it more. Poor
Rowley, of the Grenatlier Guards, was yesterday killed while lying, I believe,
asleep. A round shot hit him in the back, and of course it was all over. There
is one valley we had to go up and down to the works which is entirely covered
with heavy shots and splints of shell. Yesterday the Russians kept up a tremen-
dous cannonade for half an hour, in the hope, I think, of finding out our line of
fire ; but, as we were not ready, not a shot was returned. This morning we have
let them know it to their cost. We have at work about 60 siege guns (four of
them Lancasters), and I think the Irench have about the same number. As
the Russian batteries are very powerful, you may imagine the row that is
going on.
“ I was out with my company hard at work the whole of last night, and onlv
got into camp in time to have a cup of chocolate and go on to the hill to see the
opening of the ball, which was grand in the extreme. In about an hour and a
quarter the smoke lifted, and we found we had silenced a white tower on their
extreme leftbut there is. a great deal more to be done yet, and I shall not be at
all surprised if we are obliged to carry it by assault after all.
“I cannot tell you how tired I am, and it is only the excitement that keeps
me going. We have just got orders to be ready to turn out in a moment, as they
may perhaps attempt a sortie. I only wish they would.
“3 P.M.
“Since I left off wo have paraded, and every precaution has of course been;
taken. Loud cheers from our men; I must be off. I found the cheering was,
caused by our having set fire to a magazine near a redan, which has been pushinr
us hard ; consequently their guns in that direction are silenced for a time.
2c


“ In spite of the heavy work, I believe our loss this morning has not been so
very great, but we have not as yet been able to get the wounded up. We hope
for the best. lam for tho trenches again to-night, but since I got your letter and
K *a I feel all right. Tell K I will write a long letter as soon as I pos-
sibly can. lam really now thankful when I get safe into camp and have a sleep.
“ Send me some papers : they require 2d. on each. 4 British Army, Turkey,’
is sufficient, and, wherever the head quarters of the army may be, Mr. Smith, the
postmaster, is present, and the bags come direct to him, so we get our
letters quite regularly. I went down to Balaklava on Sunday, and stopped to boo
the Grays.
« This certainly is a most curious life, and men little know what they can go
through till they have tried. We are now living in comparative luxury, for wo
have part of our tents —a great change, I can tell yon, after being for 18 nighta
sleeping in tie open air. Wo have to thank Providence for almost unheard-of
favourable weather, although the dew at night is very heavy ; still we have had
no rain since we have been here. We have also in our little mess of six a capital
cook, and, managing to make interest with the stewards of some of the ships, wo
get on in the kitchen department pretty well. ...
“ The people in harbour are the most unconscionable set of beings in existence,
and charge exactly what they like, but that is of little consequence. You would
bo rather amused if you could sometimes see one or two ot us on a foraging
expedition. The other day I was down with another fellow, and got scent of some
onions (famons'in soup with rations). Searching for them, I missed him and the
p>ny with the panniers, so you might have seen me going through the place in
uniform, carrying ropes of onions over my shoulders. But that is nothing, ns
overy-one has to look out for himself, and when a forager arrives at home there is
the greatest anxiety to discover what he has got. What a haul we should make if
if we could get half-an-hour in an English pantry ! I fear it will ho long before
wo get accustomed to a tablo cloth, or sit properly on a chair. Tho grass is now
our table cloth and chair. We chat and laugh away our meals, thaukiul that wc
arc all safe, and hopeful for the future.
.** It will be three weeks to-morrow since we took up our position. To day wo
opened fire —a long and wearying time to be spent in preparation ; but, if we
attempted to storm it at once, the loss might have been great. As it is, with tlio
lime the Russians have had for defending themselves, we shall suffer 1 rightfully;
and I, for one, am convinced that it will be some time before we plant our flag on
their walls. ... * .
“ One of our Lancaster gnns exploded this afternoon, most unfortunately.
“Wc have no idea where wc shall winter. The Russians, I hear, are most con-
fident of victory ; and yesterday, when they commenced their heavy fire at us, wo
could plainly distinguish with our glasses a great many ladies looking on.
“ Last night 1 was on an advanced picket, and wont to reconnoitre with a
sergeant and 12 men, within 200 or 300 yards of the town. Wc could plainly
distinguish cverv sound—music, dogs barking, and everything.”
The Late Honourable Colonel ITood.— The following is an extract of a
letter from an oflicer of the Grenadier Guards, in the Crimea, October 18 : ‘ I
hope ere long to be able to give you some good news to counterbalance tbe groat
loss we have experienced. Colonel Hood, wlio went on duty this morning, com-
manding the Guards in tbe trenches, was killed by a round shot while moving
from a battery along the trench, which in that part was not above two feet
high. I cannot tell you how much he is regretted by us all. He bad led us
to victory at the Alma, and I am quite certain tlioro was not a man, officer or
soldier, who had not the most perfect confidence in him ; for on that occasion
ho had shown the greatest coolness imaginable under fire, which be communicated
to every man under his.command, and which contributed so much to the gallant
conduct of the regiment in that action. Ilia loss cast a gloom over us all.”


(From another oflicer.)
“ Camp above Sebastopol, October 22.
“I hope you got my last letter, which I wrote, if I remember right, on
the first day of the bombardment. It has been going on now for six days,
and we are not much more advanced than wo were—at least, to all appearances.
****** The French magazines were all blown up by the Russian
fire at starting; the consequence was, that for two days we had to keep np the
whole of the fire. We find it impossible to batter down the forts, so we have
tried to burn the town ; but this we find impossible to do also, as the town is
built of stone. Several houses have been set on fire, but the fire would not
spread. Deserters come in to the camp daily, and they say there have been
a great many people killed in the town ; that they are very badly off for
provisions ; that a great many people would desert to us if they could; and
that the inhabitants are forced to work at the trenches, carry shot, and so forth.
The Governor of Sebastopol was killed yesterday. ‘ Servo him righthe was
the butcher of Sinope. Lord Dunkellin was taken prisoner last night by the
Russians. lie was out with an escort with ammunition, and lost his way ;
they found themselves near a body of men, and the escort warned him that they
were the enemy; however, he did not think so, and he said he would go anil
inquire the way from them ; as you may imagine, he did not return, and the
escort very wisely bolted. They say the Russians have lost a great many men
in Sebastopol, but it is wonderful how few wo have lost. The tremendous fire
commences a little before sunrise, and continues incessantly until after sunset,
when the thing is diversified by a feu d’artifice of rockets and mortars. lam
sorry to say wo lost one of our assistant-surgeons the other day, and Morant was
wounded in the arm yesterday, but he is going on all right. * * * * *
“I am beginning to think now that it will take some time before wo can
enter this place, and that we shall have to winter in the Crimea; nobody knows,
but this is the prevailing idea in the army. I must say we have had a first-rate
specimen of the climate ; it still continues perfect. Our steamer, tho Cambria,
came into Balaklava the other day, and I got out my two small portmanteaus,
with my war kit in them, so that lam now very comfortable ; before that I was
living on the contents of two small saddle-bags. We can also now get potted
meat, soap, salt, and little luxuries of that kind, which we were totally without
before, and I assure vou we are not to l»e pitied in the eating line, although we
have to pay most exorbitant prices for things brought from the ships. We never
see bread, but the biscuit they serve out is excellent. I wish the London tailors
who turn out such gaudy uniforms could have a glimpse of them here. You
may imagine what mine is, when I tell you that I have not slept with it off
since we landed; in fact, I have got so accustomed to it, that I think tho
next time I go on leave I shall take my red coat with mo to sleep in, it is so
comfortable, especially about tho collar! * * * Write often, and continue
to direct in the same way; you have no idea' what a treat it is getting letters
here.”
BATTLE OF BALAKLAVA.
Lookino to tlio left towards tlie gorge, wo behold six compact masses of
Russian infantry, which had just delxmched from the mountain passes near the
Tchernaya, and were slowly advancing with solemn stateliness up the valley.
Immediately in their front was a regular lino of artillery, of at least 20 pieces
strong. Two batteries of light guns were already a mile in advance of them,


find were playing with energy on the redoubts, from which feeble puffs of smote
came at long intervals. Behind these guns, in front of the infantry, were
enormous bodies of cavalry. They were in six compact squares, three on each
flank, moving down en echelen towards us, and the valley was lit up with the
blaze of their sabres, and lance points, and gay accoutrements. In their front,
and extending along the intervals between each battery of guns, were clouds
of mounted skirmishers, wheeling and whirling in the front of their march like
autumn leaves tossed by the wind. The Zouaves close to us were lving like
tigers at the spring, with ready rifles in hand, hidden chin deep by the earth-
works which run along the line of these ridges on our rear, but the quick-eyed
Russians were manoeuvring on the other side of the valley, and did not expose
their columns to attack. Below the Zouaves we could see the Turkish gunners
in the redoubts, all in confusion as the shells burst over them. Just as I came
up the Russians had carried No. 1 redoubt, the farthest and most elevated of all,
and their horsemen were chasing the Turks across the interval which lay between
it and redoubt No. 2. At that moment the cavalry, under Lord Lucan, were
formed in glittering masses—the light brigade, under Lord Cardigan, in advance;
the heavy brigade, under Brigadier-General Scarlett, in reserve. They were
drawn up just in front of their encampment, and were concealed from the view
of the enemy by a slight “ wave” in the plain. Considerably to the rear of their
right, the 93rd Highlanders were drawn up in line, in front of the approach to
Balaklava. Above and behind them, on the heights, the marines were visible
through the glass, drawn up under arms, and the gunners could be see* ready-
in the earthworks, in which were placed the heavy ships’ guns. The 93rd hail
originally been advanced somewhat more into the plain, but the instant the
Russians got possession of the first redoubt they opened fire on them from our
own guns, which inflicted some injury, and Sir Colin Campbell “retired” his
men to a better position. Meantime the enemy advanced liis cavalry rapidly.
To our inexpressible disgust we saw the Turks in redoubt No. 2 fly at their
approach. They ran in scattered groups across to redoubt No. 3, and towards
Balaklava, but the horse-hoof of the Cossack was too quick for them, and sword
and lance were busily plied among the retreating herd. The yells of the pursuers
apd. pursued were plainly audible. As the Lancers and light cavalry of the
Russians advanced, they gathered up their skirmishers with great speed and
in excellent order—the shifting trails of men, which played all over the valley,
like moonlight on the water, contracted, gathered up, and the little peloton m
a few moments became a solid column. Then up came their guns, in rushed
their gunners to the abandoned redoubt, and the guns of No. 2 redoubt soon
played with deadly effect upon the dispirited defenders of No. 3 redoubt. Two
or three shots in return from the earthworks, and all is silent. The Turks
swarm over the earthworks, and run in confusion towards the town, firing their
muskets at the enemy as they run. Again the solid column of cavalry opens
like a fan, and resolves itself into a “ long spray” of skirmishers. It laps the
flying Turks, steel flashes in the air, and down go the poor Moslem quivering
on the plain, split through fez and musket-guard to the chin and breast-belt.
There is no support for them. It is evident the Russians have been too quick
for us. The Turks have been too quick also, for they have not held their
redoubts long enough to enable us to hring them help. In vain the naval guns
on the heights fire on the Russian cavalry ; the distance is too great for shot
or shell to reach. In vain the Turkish gunners in the earthen batteries which
are placed along the French entrenchments strive to protect their flying country-
men : their shot fly wide and short of the swarming masses. The Turks betake
themselves towards the Highlanders, where they check their flight and form
themsejves into companies on the flanks of the Highlanders. As the Russian
cavalry on the left of their line crown hill across the valley, they perceive
the Highlanders drawn up at the distance of some half a mile, calmly waiting
their approach. They halt, and squadron after squadron flies up from the rear,
till they have a body of some 1500 men along the ridge —Lancers, and Dragoons,
and Hussars. Then they move en echelon in two bodies, with another in reserve.
The cavalry who have been pursuing the Turks on the right are coming up to


the ridge beneath us, which conceals our cavalry from view. The heavy brigade
in advance is drawn up in two lines. The first line consists of the Scotch Greys
and of their old companions in glory, the Enniskillens ; the second of the 4th
Roval Irish, of the sth Dragoon Guards, and of the Ist Royal Dragoons. The
liglit cavalry brigade is on the left, in two lines also. The silence is oppressive ;
!>etween the cannon bursts one can hear the champing of bits and the clink
of sabres in the valley below. The Russians on their left drew breath for a
moment, and then in one grand line dashed at the Highlanders. The ground
flies beneath their horses’ feet; gathering speed at every stride, they dash on
toward that thin red streak topped with steel. The Turks fire a volley at 800
yards and run. As the Russians come within 600 yards, down goes that line
of steel in front, and out rings a rolling volley of Minie musketry. The distance
is too great; the Russians are not checked, but still sweep onwards with the
whole force of horse and man, through the smoke, here and there knocked over
by the shot of our batteries above. With breathless suspense every one awaits
the bursting of the wave upon the line of Gaelic rock ; but ere they come within
150 yards, another deadly volley flashes from the levelled rifle, and carries death
and terror into the Russians. They wheel about, open files right and left, and
fly back faster than they came. “ Bravo, Highlanders, well done,” shouted the
excited spectators ; but events thicken. The Highlanders and their splendid
front are soon forgotten—men scarcely have a moment to think of this fact, that
the 93rd never altered their formation to receive that tide of horsemen. “ No,”
said Sir Colin Campbell, “ I did not think it worth while to form them even four
deep !” The ordinary British line, two deep, was quite sufficient to repel the attack
of these Muscovite cavaliers. Our eyes were, however, turned in a moment on our
own cavalry. We saw Brigadier-General Scarlett ride along in front of his massive
squadrons. The Russians —evidently corps cTelite —their light blue jackets
embroidered with silver lace, were advancing on their left, at an easy gallop,
towards the brow of the hill. A forest of lances glistened in their rear, and
several squadrons of gray-coated Dragoons moved up quickly, to support them
as they reached the summit. The instant they came in sight, the trumpets of
our cavalry gave out the warning'-blast, which told us all that in another moment
we should' see the shock of battle beneath our very eyes. Lord Raglan, all his
staff and escort, and "groups of officers, the Zouaves, French generals and officers,
and bodies of French infantry on the height, were spectators of the scene, as
though they were looking on the stage from the boxes of a theatre. Nearly
every one dismounted and sat down, and not a word was said. The Russians
advanced down the hill at a slow canter, which they changed to a trot, and at
last nearly halted. Their first line was at least double the amount of ours—it
was three'times as deep. Behind them was a similar line, equally strong and
compact. They evidently despised their insignificant-looking enemy ; but their
time was come. The trumpets rang out again through the valley, and the Greys
and Enniskilleners went right at the centre of the Russian cavalry. The space
1 ret ween them was only a few hundred yards ; it was scarce enough to let the
horses “ gather way ;” nor had the men quite space sufficient for the full play
of their sword arms. The Russian line brings forward each wing as our cavalry
advance, and threatens to annihilate them as they pass on. Turning a little to
their left, so as to meet the Russian right, the Greys rush on with a cheer that
thrills to every heart—the wild shout of the Enniskilleners rises through the
air at the same instant. As lightning flashes through a cloud, the Greys and
Enniskilleners pierced through the dark masses of Russians. The shock was but
for a moment. There was a clash of steel and a light play of sword blades in
the air, and the Greys and red coats disappear in the midst of the shaken and
quiverin'’ 1 columns. In another moment we see them emerging and dashing
onwards 'with diminished numbers, and in broken order, against the second line,
which is advancing against them as fast as it can to retrieve the fortune of the
charge. It was a terrible moment. “ God help them ! they are lost!” was
the exclamation of more than one man, and the thought of many. With unabated
fire the noble hearts dashed at their enemy. It was a fight of heroes. The
first line of the Russians, which had been smashed utterly by our charge, and


had fled off at one flank, and towards tho centre, were coming back to swallow
up our handful of men. By sheer steel and sheer courage, Enniskillener and
Scot were winning their desperate way right through the enemy’s squadrons,
and already gray horses and red coats had appeared right at the rear of tho
second mass, when, with irresistible force, like one bolt from a bow, the Ist
Royals, the 4th Dragoon Guards, and the sth Dragoon Guards, rushed at the
remnants of the first line of the enemy, went through it as if it were made
of pasteboard, and, dashing on the second body of Russians as they were still
disordered by the terrible assault of the Greys and their conqtanions, put them
to utter rout. This Russian horse in less than five minutes after it met our
Dragoons was flying with all its speed before a force certainly not half its
strength. A cheer burst from every lip—in the enthusiasm officers and men
took off their caps, and shouted with delight, ami thus keeping up the Bcenic
character of their position, they clapped their hands again and again. Lord
Raglan at once despatched Lieutenant Curzon, Aide-de-Camp, to convey his
congratulations to Brigadier-General Scarlett, and to say, “ Well done.” Tho
gallant old officer’s face beamed with pleasure when he received the message.
“ I beg to thank his Lordship very sincerely,” was his reply. The cavalry did
not long pursue their enemy. Their loss was very slight, about 35 killed and
wounded in both affairs.
After the charge, Captain the Honourable Arthur Hardinge came galloping
up to Lord Raglan, with the news of what the cavalry had done. He had been
sent with orders to Lord Lucan, and at the moment of the charge he had joined
the Greys and dashed with them into the Russian column.
At ten o’clock tire Guards and Higltlanders of the first division were seen
moving towards the plains from their camp. The Duke of Cambridge came up
to Lord Raglan for orders, and his Lordship, ready to give the honour of the
day to Sir Colin Campbell, who commands at Balaklava, told his Royal Highness
to place himself under the direction of the Brigadier. At 10-40 the fourth
division also took up their position in advance of Balaklava. The cavalry were
then on tho left front of our position, facing tho enemy; the light cavalry brigade
was on the left flank forward ; the heavy cavalry brigade en echelon, in reserve,
with guns on the right; the 4th Dragoons and sth Dragoons and Greys on the
left of the brigade, the Enniskillens and 3rd Dragoons on the right. The fourth
division took up ground in the centre; the Guards and Highlanders filed off
towards the extreme right, and faced the redoubts, from which the Russians
opened on them with such guns as had not been spiked.
In carrying an order early in tho day, Mr. Blunt, Lord Lucan’s interpreter,
and son of our Consul in Thessaly, hail a narrow escape. His horse was killed :
he seized a Russian charger as it galloped past riderless, but the horse carried him
almost into the Russian cavalry, and ho only saved himself by*leaping into a
redoubt among a number of frightened Turks who were praying to Allah on
their bellies. I should mention here that the Turks who bad been collected
on the flanks of the l*3rd, fled at the approach of the Russians without firing a
shot.
(From the Correspondent of the Morning Herald.)
When the bugle sounded the advance for our men, they moved forward at a
canter, and as they apporached the enemy, and began to ascend tlio hill, the can -
ter merged into a charge, and the pace was terrific. The 17th Lancers and Scots
Greys led; the Ist Royal Dragoons and 6th Enniskillens thundered after in support
For a moment it was a glorious sight. The glittering helmets and weapons, and
varied uniforms of our fellows as they pressed forward to the charge, with sabres
raised and lances levelled, made the mere spectacle beautiful; but accompanied
with all its terrors, it was one of the most awful grandeur. The solid earth shook
and reverberated with a sound like thunder, as a thousand horses, spurred to.


their utmost speed, wont tearing up the hill, scattering the turf and grass like a
cloud of sand behind them. The enemy were nothing loath to accept the challenge,
and, indeed, they had little reason, for their numbers were as nearly three to one.
In a lino of two-thirds of a mile, they swept down from the hill upon our men,
meeting them about half way up, the dull heavy noise with which they closed could,
be heard at a mile, and made the listener’s blood run cold.
It is almost impossible to give any but a very general idea of the strugglo
which followed, though I saw it well and closely, for, much to my annoyance, the
tide of battle had flowed to within a few yards of where, two minutes before,
I had thought myself perfectly safe. With the first shock altout 100 men and
horses on both sides instantly fell, and both sides seemed to recoil and clutch
their weapons closer for adeadly hand to hand combat. In another moment there was
nothing to be seen but a confused crowd of Hussars, Cossack's, Scots Greys, and
lancers, who were shooting, cutting, and stabbing at one another in all directions.
It was impossible to say which did best, for the dust, smoke, and confusion were
too great to jiermit anything like accuracy of observation, but it was quite evident
both fought well, for neither gave way, though tho bodies of men and horses
cumbered the ground. After a few minutes’ contest, part of the Grays drew off
for a few yards, and turning at a gallop made a desperate attempt to break the
.Russian line ; they were almost successful at the first onset, and the 17th, imitating
the example, levelled their lances, and charging foy a few yards made an awful
gap in the enemy’s ranks. To crush these attempts before they had time to be
successful, tho Russian line, which, from their immense superiority of numbers,
outflanked ours on both sides, tried by wheeling round to enclose our gallant Grcvs
and Lancers ; but before the manoeuvre could be effected, the supporting regiments
of the heavy brigade, the Ist Dragoon Guards, and 6th Enniskillens came down
like a thunder bolt upon the Russian flanks. The charge was well timed, and
well executed, and attended with complete success. Tho light wheeling Cossacks
disapi»eared like snow before the charge of our Dragoons; the Hussars broke up in
disorder, and in another instant the Dragoon Guards, Greys, and Lancers, were among
them sabreing and pistolling right and left. Unlike our regiments, the Russians, whilo
disordered, made no attempt to rally. The instant their line was broken they
scattered and fled like hares, to the top of tho hill and across the high road, closely
harrassed in tho rear by our men. Unfortunately they were unable to continue
the pursuit, from the proximity of tho Russian batteries, and tho instant our
cavalry halted, the Russians halted also, and commenced re-forming their lino
(still twice as numerous as ours), in order to renew the contest; our men in tho
meantime wero compelled to withdraw under cover of tho hill, as, while exposed
on the heights and nigh road, the cannonade told severely among them. After
an interval of ten minutes, during which the Russians poured a perfect shower of
shot and shell into our lines, and during which also tho long wished for reinforce-
ments from our entrenched camp were discerned coming up to our assistance,
the enemy’s cavalry again advanco to the attack. This time they came in with a
battery of horse artillery, and, after a severe canonnado of a few minutes upon our
men, again descended the valley, and advanced to tho charge. The whole of our
heavy cavalry in ono strong lino met them on this occasion. Tliero was tho same
desjierate charge, tho same shock, but not the same fighting. After a minute’s
resistance, the enemy’s whole line gave way, and retired in confusion towards tho
heights. On this tho Russian cavalry general, who, to do him but bare justice,
conducted himself with undoubted skill and bravery, throughout the day, halted
the flying squadrons, and persuaded them to stand again and face our men, who
wero within ten yards in hot pursuit. Tho contest was, therefore for a moment
renewed upon the heights. Rut tho struggle lasted only for a few minutes—tho
remnants of tho light cavalry came up in proper time, and tho ferocity with which
they dashed into the enemy’s flanks carried all before them. The Russians again
broke and fled, bHt this time our men were among them, strewing the plain with
carcasses. To save themselves from a slaughterous attack, the Russians sought
shelter under the batteries in that fatal valley where our light cavalry have
suffered so severely. Two or three troops of our horse imprudently followed in
pursuit close up, and wore terribly mauled by the batteries as they retired.


After these signal triumphs, our men again returned to the shelter of their
hill, watching the movements of a body of the enemy’s horse on our right, which
was moving near the front of our linos, as if seeking fora point on which to chaige
our infantry. I need hardly say our fellows were prepared. The 93rd Highlanders,
as the enemy passed them at 700 yards distance, fired a volley of musketry which
even at that long range brought some thirty or forty to the ground. After this
their cavalry retired, and, sheltering themselves under the redoubts, took no further
part in the events of the day. .
The fire of artillery was now renewed on both sides, the enemy having rather
the advantage, from their superior position. Under cover of their fire, a powerful
body of Russian infantry moved round to the heights from which their cavalry
had'twice unsuccessfully attacked. The aspect of affairs was now getting most
critical for the English; while our small force was compelled, by the actual efforts of
the enemv in the redoubts on our right, to concentrate their forces in that ouaiter,
the new movement threatened them with a simultaneous attack in front and rear.
Fortunately, at this anxious moment, when, if the Russians had attacked,
we must either have abandoned Balaklava, with all its stores and shipping, or been
driven into the sea, the reinforcements commanded by Lord Raglan, Sir George
Cathcart, and the Duke of Cambridge, came into play. As they poured fast along
the road from Sebastopol, they in turn menaced the Russian right flank, which
rested on it, and which, if advanced further to attack us, would risk being entirely
cut oil' from the main body. The enemy were therefore compelled to fall bade,
and even to close in upon their centre, in order to prevent their position on the
right from being turned. Lord Raglan, w T ho had come up with the Ist and 4th
divisions of infantry, one French division under General Forey, and all the French
cavalrv, prepared to extend his advantages by sending out skirmishers to recon-
lioitre'for an attack ; but the attempt was found useless. The Russians held the
whole of the rbriit of our position, which we had strongly entrenched for the Turks,
and this was far too strong to permit our storming it, especially as the Russian army
still outnumbered ours by about 16,000 men. After a short pause the enemy
advanced a little, and seemed as if they were offering battle to 11s. Our troops
replied with a heavy fire of artillery., They then in turn brought their artillery
into plav, and a smart cannonade ensued, which lasted for about half an hour. In
this the*Russians decidedly got the worst. Our shot and shell pitched full in the
centre of their artillerymen, knocking them about to such an extent that the whole
of their batteries were at last withdrawn under cover of a hill. As it was then
drawing towards evening, the aetion ceased, beyond an occasional shot or so, and
both armies rested on their arms for the night within 1200 yards of each other.
Towards night the Ist division returned to the trenches at Sebastopol, where
they were much needed, as a sortie upon our lines was hourly expected from the
garrison of that town. . , , , ~, , T ,
Thus ended the battle of Balaklava, having lasted about eight hours. Iby no
means wish your readers to infer that for these eight hours we were fighting.
God forbid, ‘it was a battle of manoeuvres, during which frequently for an hour,
or half an hour not a shot would be fired on either side. Its advantages, such as
they are, most decidedly remain with the enemy, as they have succeeded in turning
the right of our position l —capturing three Turkish redoubts and 12 pieces ot
cannon. All this we owe to the cowardice and treachery of our Mohammedan
allies, most probably both. Every one is confident that we shall drive the Russians
from their positions to-morrow, but I utterly disbelieve the conjecture first,
liecause their position is too strong ; and, secondly, because we cannot spare enough
men for the purpose from our trenches. I own I think rather uneasily of the
lxjsition which the enemy have secured, for I am certain that while they are there
we can only maintain Balaklava at an enormous sacrifice of life. Its retention, also,
I imagine, extends our line of operations too much, and therefore, as a matter ot
course” weakens them to an attacking enemy. , ~ ~
Though the advantages of the day remained with the enemy, 1 should think
that theirdoss exceeded ours, as many might have expected who had seen the fight.
From our artillery they suffered heavily. On the whole, judging from the dead
that remained on the field, I should estimate their loss at between 500 and 600.


i have always imagined that split skulls and cloven heads were figures of
speech siitil to-day, when I have, indeed, been terribly convinced of the reality of
such horrors. Some of the dead to-day had their heads as completely cloven as if
the operation was performed by a surgeon with a saw. Nearly all the Russians
were so killed. Our fellows had been principally slain with lance thrusts; I saw
one body with 13 such wounds through the chest and stomach. Another man bad
six, winch all were mere flesh wounds, and not dangerous. The same man (in the
17th Lancers), extraordinary and incredible as it may appear, had two horses killed
under him, one or two sabre and bullet wounds in his cap, his sword bent double in
its sheath by a Minnie bullet, five bullets in his saddle, one in his lance staff, and
sword cuts innumerable. ’
Strength of the Garrison of Sebastopol.—A Russian officer, who was
slightly wounded, informed me that he was certain we should never take Sebastopol
either by sea or land. The Russians had‘thrown up so many additional works,
that the place was even stronger than when we first set down before it. Our fire
on the town, however, had done a good deal of mischief, especially in setting fire to
a Russian hospital, in which were 1000 sick and wounded, the majority of whom
perished in the flames. He laid the blame of this awful accident on the Russian
commanders, who declined to hoist any distinguishing flag by which the allies
might know and respect the building. ° S y wincn me allies
A Pitiable Sight.—An unfortunate young Russian officer, who had a despe-
rate cut across the abdomen, through which his intestines were protruding and
seemed in dreadful agony, was imploring one man to kill him, saying it was a
mercy, as he could not live. J 8
The Craven-Hearted Turks.—After the fight was quite done, I saw our
men beating out with the butts of their muskets the wretched Turks who were
hiding away under the trees and bushes in all directions. One of our marines was
literally kicking back into the field nearly 100 of these cravens. Until I saw the
conduct of these fellows, 1 could never have believed that even the most effeminate
race would have behaved so with arms in their hands. The few men they had
wounded were all hit by their own artillery as they ran from the batteries. '
• c - Kerortkd Treachery of a Turkish Taciia. October 26.—1 have been
informed on very good authority that the pacha in command of the Turkish
l edoubts was shot by order of the allied generals this afternoon. Actual treachery
is said to have been clearly proved against him. Ido not vouch for the truth of
this fact, though it was given me by one who ought to be a very good authoritv.
Second Battle. During to-day (26th) they made a desperate sortie against
our lines, in which they met with a most signal defeat by the division of General
JJe Lacy Evans. Fortunately, the enemy were observed by the outlving picouet
and coyenng party, mustering in large numbers in rear of their works ; and notice
of this important fact was immediately sent back to the camp, in order that our
troops might be prepared to support the batteries. Hardly had the message been
sent, when a powerful force of Russian light infantry, about 12,000 strong" sallied
from behind the circular earthwork and redan battery. As they filed out into the
plain, all our lines of batteries opened into the columns with a discharge of shot
and shell, which positively seemed to make the dense mass of men stagger : but in
the course ol a minute they re-formed and advanced rapidly up the °hill in the
direction of the green mound and Lancaster gun batteries. At the first alarm all
our outlying picquets and covering parties had collected together, and, lying under
coyer of the loose stones, they commenoed an irregular file fire, which seemed to
tell with great effect among the enemy. Literally, for five minutes these
skirmishers, who were not 200 strong, kept off the advance of a bodv of 12 000
light infantry. All this time our batteries seemed to be roaring, so incessant' was'
their fire, full into the Russian ranks. Suddenly the enemy made a rush at the
si)ot where our skirmishers lay, who then, of course, could do nothing but retire
VV ith one parting volley they began their retreat, and then fell back before their
assailant, fighting and disputing every step of the way. As our skirmishers
retired, the enemy quickened their pace, and began to charge up to our trenches
Our men, however, stood firm to their guns, firing them with deadly precision into
tlie advancing masses. In this manner the advance and defence continued until


the enemy wag within 100 yard? of ourgyEn towivCT and fall
the plain. Then, lor the first time, they g su tof the threatened post,
same moment, our second division came up t 11?® . soldiers, but in
The Euasian officer, dhl their to to £»»££ I„h* force retired in
vain ; and, alter moving or thrie regiments of tlio second
confusion on Sebastopol. As they c ’ retreating foe, who immedi-
division peered in a Uj the mv.r of their
ately lost all command, and rushed back like additional man during
trenches. As far as I oonbl *s?£! betneen 1000
the sally. The ejmm, left np.ard.of 600
never attempted to rally when once they fell into contusion.
NECESSITY OF ABANDONING BALAKLAVA.
Ir.no give unßaiahava, «■ cntencW = StfSt
lopol will bo literally impregnab . , , j gay that our entrenchments
us! Your readers will fed convmced of this when i say are de .
are nearly as strong as those on the Alma, and a a 3 ifc
up two or three redoubts m advance. comman d the marino batteries and
token possession o these heights of five guns
harbour of Balaklava. v\e n All tho English have been compelled
The enemy hevto ttrown ™ «ne of I thn AMU ftc Mlcmy command
to abandon the plains of Balaklava, as t 1 ” t ho heights, and are busily
it in every port. We have, mud dUier
engaged in entrenching oumlvos tj a Jf hnme nse cost, by storming its
abandon Balaklava or secure 1 ‘ ith t ] lo two armies entrenching
heights. We cannot remain as w ® ®° w , Thc capta in of a merchantman
themselves within 1200 yards^ ‘ ju t hc rear of tho Russian position,
anchored outside Balaklava, abo a ged in carrying earth and ir<?sh
says tho troops are being | strong Vedoubts. A prisoner
wood tor some pui pose or ©the intended upon tho garrison and slapping,
taken this evening says a night attack is lutenutu i b
ut when he did not know.
(From the Correspondent of Morning Post.)
THE general commanders of the allied l^ntre?
Ifadaklavafnnd .Lifting the point ng rf'the *rsdp. *
Sebastopol, and immediately opposite the o h K hot undcr him;
“ Jemmy Macdonald”has nine lives. .ftA n fio lma a tLo
at Balaklava he had another shot; and his cocked hat was
enontv without doim? him serious linurv.


LORD CARDIGAN’S LIGHT CAVALRY CHARGE.
(From the Correspondent of Morning Chronicle.)
A written order was sent by Lord Raglan to Lord Lucan, to charge the
enemy with the light cavalry brigade, if practicable. The unfortunate officer (he
was killed), the bearer of this order, delivered it verbally as a positive command
to charge immediately. lam assured that Lord Cardigan remonstrated against
the impracticability of executing such an order, and charging in the face of the
throe batteries which had been abandoned in the morning by the Turks, and were
now in the hands of the Russians. No time was, however, to be lost, and he led
on his men in gallant style, dashing down the valley, exposed Jo a cross-fire from
the throe batteries, into one of which ho literally rode, capturing nine of the guns.
This unfortunate charge, however, fearfully decimated the light brigade of Dritish
cavalry. They were mowed down by the grape and canister from our own brass
Woolwich guns, which had been left unspiked in the entrenchments by the
cowardly Turks who fled in the morning. The 17th Lancers and Bth Hussars
were almost completely cut up. The 11th Hussars and the 4th and 13th Light
Dragoons have also suffered dreadfully. The Scots Greys again charged, but it
was to late to remedy the fatal error, and they lost many men in tho attempt.
They lost forty-two men killod and wounded, amongst whom arc the colonel ana a
lieutenant (Prendcrgast) wounded. Altogether tho British cavalry have, I regret
to say, 620 men hors de combat —a most lamentable proportion out of the small
cavalry force in the Crimea. Lord Raglan sent to compliment the Scots Greys on
their splendid chargo. This victory has cost us dear. The Russians have not
shown their faces in that direction since. It is a sad affair, however. Our small
cavalry force, which ought only bo used on extreme occasions, has thus been mauled
by artillery for little or no purpose. The ground was strewed with dead and dying,
whilst the loose horses galloixxl about at random in every direction. Numerous
instances of personal courage and bravery were remarked during tho engagement.
A serjeant of the Scots Greys killed six Russians with his own hand. Our
soldiers say the Russians do not know how to use their swords. All our losses
were occasioned by the terrible cross-fire from the batteries. Major Clarke, of
tho Scots Greys, much distinguished himself; and Lieutenant Hanley, who
was knocked off his horse, on being attacked, shot two Russians with his revolver;
the third, astonished at tho rapidity of tho fire, and not knowing when it
would stop, turned and fled.
FRENCH RIFLE PRACTICE.
Letters from the French camp before Sebastopol frequently speak of a small
l>ody of skilled riflemen called francs-tireurs. A recent letter contains the fol-
lowing details resjiecting them: —
“ I must tell you what the francs-tireurs are. There are two companies of
them, each composed of 150 men, chosen from amongst the liest marksmen of tho
Chasseurs de Vincennes. In the night they creep in front of tho entrenchment*?,
dig holes, and place themselves in them as well as they can. Then they fire at
the Russian artillerymen. They have already killed so many, that the Russians now
close their embrasures with a sort of double door, which is ball proof. But they
are obliged to open it to jioint their gun and fire, and no sooner is this done than
20 balls whistle through it. The Russians have sustained such losses that thev
were at times seized with despair—raising their guns from behind, they fired
volleys of grape at their disagreeable visitors. Nevertheless, the latter have
succeeded in extinguishing all tho first lino of their batteries. I say first line,
because there are several others iu tho rear, the part of the town which faces us


being an inclined plain, on which batteries have been raised in lines one above the
other That our jrancs-tireurs have done good execution is evident trom the tact
that, in the evening of the 26th, General de Martimpre, chief of the general stall,
received a note informing him that the Russian fire had become uncertain, and
that atillervmen were so scarce that the guns had to be served by the intantiy.
Express no surprise at the word uncertain; for, from the 6th to the 17th, the
Russian gentlemen did not cease to point their guns at us as at a target, whilst we
did not deign to answer them even by a musket shot. They consequently attained
such precision that the day on which we unmasked our batteries, their balls enterec
our embrasures as if cast by the hand. One ball went into the very mouth o a
cannon, but was too large to penetrate more than a third. It, however, stuck last.
This was considered so curious that the gun was canned to the General s tent to be
shown to him.”
ONE OF THE HEROES OF BALAKLAVA.
The following letter, by a dragoon of the heavy brigade, gives a graphic
picture of the memorable charge made by that body upon the Russian cavalry, it
possesses a peculiar interest, as being written by one who was himself engaged m
the heat of the conflict: —
“Camp, BalaklavA, near Sebastopol, Oct. 27.—You say you hear
nothin o' of our regiment; well, I will tell you something about it. In the first
place, m coming from Varna, across the Black Sea, we were overtaken by a most
awful storm and gale of wind. Our vessel, the Wilson Kennedy, went on her
beam ends, and the stabling gave way, all the horses were thrown over to one side
of the ship, and, in one horrid night, 100 of them kicked and worried each other
to death ; and there we were for two nights and two days fastened down with 100
dead and dying horses ; we only saved 11 out of our ship, and on the third day
we threw 101 overboard. We were eight days all but a wreck, beating aoont the
Black Sea, and had to go back to Constantinople after all, at which place they put
us on board a steamer, and landed us in the Crimea ; and now, indeed, our work
has beo'un We are protecting the rear, while the besiegers are attacking the
town. The whole of the cavalry are encamped on an open plain surrounded by
hills and mountains, and we have indeed plenty cut out for us. Over these hills
there are thousands of Cossacks and a large Russian army, who are trying to get
up to Sebastopol, and it is our duty to keep them back ; they are constantly coming
down uixm us, and we have had some severe straggles, but they have not the
< ~iu cp > of Englishmen, for, though we are far inferior in numbers, we always beat
them back. We are in the saddle night and day. I can’t tell how long it is
since I was undressed ; I only know that it has been so W that I have forgotten
it. The worst affair we had was the day before yesterday At daybreak the
enemy appeared, and advanced, and in such numbers that they took trom tne links
two of tneir batteries, and turned the guns upon 11s. We were obliged to retieat
emt of range of the guns ; and this so elated the enemy that they actually had
corn-age enough to come into the open field with us. Three regiments 01 their
cavalry tried to gain possession of the Highlanders’ (93rd) position, and charged
them, but they had not time to repent, for they went down like cut corn ; what were
left of them turned and lied, and we pursued them over their own bills: here they
were reinforced by three more regiments of cavalry, including Nicholas s crack
Imperial Guards. There were the Greys and First Royals up at this time, and we
charged them—they had nothing else for it, so they charged at the same time.
Oh God ! 1 cannot describe it; they were so superior in number, that they out-
flanked’ us, and we were in the middle of them. I never certainly telt less tear
in my life than I did at that time, and I hope God will forgive me, for I felt more
like a devil than a man. We fought our w r ay out ot them as only Englishmen can


tight; and tha 4th, sth, and 6th, were there up with us. I escaped without a
scratch, thank God, though I was covered with blood: my horse was not even
wounded ; but, oh ! the work of slaughter that then began was truly awful, but I
suppose it was necessary ; we cut them down like sheep, and they did not seem to
have power to resist. The plain is covered with dead Russians, and of course
we left some of our poor comrades on the field. We only lost two, and about
seven wounded. Well, when we had finished this lot, we thought of going home
to breakfast; but, no; they (the enemy) had some guns over the bills that Lord
Raglan sent word were to be charged and captured at any cost. So off we went
again. They received us very quietly into their ground—Lord Lucan leading the
heavies, and Lord Cardigan the light brigade. The light charged first this °time,
took the guns, cut down the gunners, and then, when we thought all was right,
they were met by thousands of Cossacks, who had been in ambush. The Royals’
the Greys, the 4th, 4th, and 6th now charged again. The butchering was re-
peated ; when, suddenly, a cross front and rear fire opened upon us from the hills
cannon, rifles, and file firing. I cannot attempt to describe to you the scene that
ensued—balls, shells, and rockets whizzing about our ears. The men on the right
and left of me were both killed on the spot. We. hacked our way out of it as well
as we could, but were obliged to leave the guns. Colonel Yorke had his leg broken,
and all the officers in the front rank were wounded. The heavy brigade'have not
lost many men, but, sad to tell, out of about 800 of the light brigade that went
into -the field only 400 came out; but this is nothing to what the enemy suffered.”
.Progress of the Siege. —A private gentleman on board the Cambria,
visiting the seat of war, writes on the 27th as follows Little, indeed, if anv
impression had been made either upon the fortifications or the buildings of Sebas-
topol during the 22ud, 23rd, and 24th, yet it seemed utterly impossible that so
regular and continuous a fire from the monster Lancaster guns, down to guns of
the smallest calibre, of shells, rockets, &c,, could be kept up for eight or nine days
successively, without producing some visible effect; and so it turned out, on the
25th, the battery or mud fort at the base of the round tower was silenced, with
the exception of one.gun. The tower itself, which had been put hors de combat
some days previously, now appeared with a large chasm on one side, the embra-
sures. having been knocked into one capacious hole. The handsome white stone
buildings within the town, which up to this time bore no marks of damage, but
appeared as neat, smooth, and perfect as any crescent at Bath, or palace in Belgrave
square, now plainly showed sundry shot-holes and fissures, whilst large fires were
frequently seen breaking out in different parts of the town—and, above all, as our
bombardment seemed gradually to increase, so the return fire of the Russians
appeared to diminish. Of course, it is impossible for us to say what amount of
loss the Russians have incurred; but this we know—that our own losses in the
tienches and before the city since the siege began have been comparatively trifling,
perhaps not two hundred men, whilst deserters, prisoners, and one or two English-
men who have escaped from, the town, assures us that thousands are now lying
there dead fiom the destructive effects of our fire. But still a heavy cannonade
fas been kept up from some of their batteries, particularly from one called the
Garden Battery, on the left of our line, and opposite the Trench entrenchments.
Their fleet has hitherto evaded our shot, and a large ship, piously called the
Twelve Apostles, has managed to keep up a continuous, if not a very destructive
fire, always shifting its position whenever we have brought a battery to bear upon
it. And, lastly, it is stated that all their houses are. not only constructed to resist
a heavy weight of shell and shot, but are pierced with loop-holes for musketry and
crowned with small guns, ready to sweep the streets in case of an assault by our
troops. This may be called the actual state of things as far as can be told up to
the 25th.”
Sir Colin Campbell and the Highland Brigade.— The journal of a High-
land soldier, which is being published in the columns of the Inverness Courier,
gives the following interesting notice of Sir Colin Campbell’s address to the
Highland Brigade after the battle of the Alma, and of his request to be allowed
to wear the Highlander’s plumed bonnet instead of the cocked hat:—“After the
army formed to-day (23rd September) to march to Sebastopol, the general orders


were read in tlic contro of each regiment. But be,tore each division or
brigade” left its ground, they were addressed by their generals ; and, as 1 know you
would like to hear of your countrymen, and their brave leader, Sir Colin Camp-
bell, I shall tell you, as well as I remember, what he said. Ho addressed the brigade
in eloquent and “highly complimentary terms, and dwelt upon tho advantage of dis-
cipline. He said that the conduct of the Highland Brigade on the 20th had not
only been admired by 11. R. H. the Duke of Cambridge and Lord Raglan, but that
it was applauded by the whole army, and that several friends of his in. the navy
had come from the shipping to compliment and congratulate him on his success.
He told them all, however, that the praise was not due to him, but to the gallant
soldiers whom he was so proud of having the honour of leading into action- (At
this point his voice began to falter, and his eves to moisten, aud it could be per-
ceived how tho gallant veteran’s bosom moved within : however, he excused himself
by saying that he was now turning old, and that with old age came softer feelings),
lie then'went on to sav that this was the lirst time on which a Highland brigade
had been formed, and that the attention of all Scotsmen, in whatever part of the
world, was turned upon them, and watched with a careful eye how they should up-
hold the honour of Scotland in the present day. All Scotsmen were proud of their
country, and when they heard that their soldiers had added fresh laurels to their
chaplet of national honour, and given fresh lustre to their proverbially gallant
name, thev would feel still prouder of old Scotland. f lhe deeds ot the 20th would
resound through the whole earth. He then spoke of the favour he had received
from Lord Raglan in being allowed to wear a Highlander’s feather bonnet. Ter-
Imps you have not heard of that incident. After taking the hill from the cnemv,
Sir Colin rode over to his lordship, and sought tho above favour: it was granted,
and back he came laughing, and telling it to every officer of the brigade be met.
Next day lie set a man to work, got a bonnet made, and now he wears it instead of
the cocked bat. The hackle is one half red, and tho other half white. Just at
the conclusion of Sir Colin’s speech, the Duke entered their square, evidently with
the intention of addressing the brigade; hut, observing Sir Colin’s flushed face, ami
the state of his feelings, he stood still until Sir Colin was done, and havjng passed
tho salutes of the morning, walked out of the square again, and ordered its advance
towards Sebastopol.”
Important Consequences of the Bravery of the 93rd Highlanders.
The same writer, in referring to the affair of tho 25th ult., at Balaklava,
says, “ The Russians w r ore within half a mile of the village.and port of Balaklava,
in which all our transports were at anchor with their munitions, their stores, and
two ships laden with powder. It was hero that a large troop of their cavalry
attempted to charge past one of our regiments into tho village. Ibe 93rd High-
landers rose from the ground and poured in such a volley as made them reel again
in their saddles, they again laid down, reloaded, fired another volley, and the
whole troop, turning to the right about, gallojied off. lam assured that Balaklava
would have been in possession of the Russians had it not been for the cool bravery
of these men : had they given an inch all would have been up for the day. One
amongst them seized a Turkish soldier in his flight, threw him ground, and
put his foot on the gentleman’s neck whilst he reloaded his piece.” .
Doings of TnE Rifle Corps.—One of the most wonderful things, I think, is to
to see the way in which our riflemen go about in small detached parties, crawling
along on tho ground up the side of a hill, till they appear to be within 300 yaids
of the enemy, and thus they lie on thoir bellies till a chance offers, when crack
goes a Minie, and down falls a Russian. 1 was informed most credibly that (meot
these brave fellows a few days since thought ho would go and do a little business
on bis own account, got away from his company, and crawled up close to a battery
under shelter of a hill, lay on his back and loaded, and turned over and fired, when,
after killing 11 men, a party rushed out, and he took to his heels, hut, sad to say,
a volley, fired after him by this party, levelled him with tbe earth, and he was
subsequently picked up with 32 balls in his body.
The Turkish Cowards. —Whenever during the day you saw any of the
Turkish soldiers, you saw the people hooting them and calling them cowards and
runaways. I witnessed two Irish women actually driving four of these chivalious


I gentry before them, making them carry some things for them, probably to th
own wounded husbands, and saying, “Eh ! ye cowardly divils, this is all you
fit for, to be our servants; sure, you are afraid to fight;” and, on our return
saw a young middy drawn up before some 50 of them, abusing them mo
heartily for having run away. One of them made a sign, as if he was going
draw his sword, when master middy sang out, “ Oh,” said he, “ I’m not afra
of you, such a set of cowards as you are,” set his arms akimbo, and then stoo
the picture of a young lien, and, I should say, about as brave. Had ourTurkis
friends only spiked the guns before deserting them, it would have been less di
astrous; but that our own guns should be made use of, with our own ammunitio
against us, and that through the cowardly conduct of men, for whom
are sacrificing England’s best blood and treasure, is too provoking and discredi
able to write about; and, lam sorry to say that, not content with desertii
their post they plundered everything they could lay their hands on, even
tiie very breakfasts which some men of the Greys were preparing for the
officers, who were then out in face of the enemy. The universal feeling
that a very severe example should be made of this flagrant act ofcowardic
the probable results of which will be another hard-fought battle, with a pos
sffiihty of evacuating Balaklava ! Another writer says, “Our sailo
could be seen beating the Turkish soldiers with sticks on the 25th, an
be-calling them lustily for running away. The word now is, ‘No Bono Turk
with Jack. The lazy rascals might be seen in troops smoking by the roadside
Khile English lives were being sacrificed. So premeditated did it appear to b
with some of them, that they brought away all their cooking utensils ; they ar
low, in great numbers, occupied in removing commissariat stores.”
Hair-Breadth Escapes at Bal aklava.— Mr. Wombwell of the 17t
Lancers, had a most extraordinary escape, showing a monstrous deal of pluck
iis horse was—it is said two were—shot under him, and he was taken prisoner
alloned b b a ck gm - ai;C^ ed 0ff ’ hes °PP ort »nity, mounted a Russian’s horse and
uiKthorn’/ J , nmg Tf °L hIS ., briga de wh ° had re-formed, and charging
Is life / Tic Mr \ C r k ’ 0f the llth > had a regular run fo
an , m)/ r/ %/i d a ha!f ’ P ursued by the Russian cavalry, to avoid whom lie
’l«rl-p d o7il g r- Cf the j? nn ® ® f . one of their batteries, and finally escaped. Majo
i * ie^s ’ 111 Edition to a bad- cut in the neck, had his horse’s tai
hnost cut off by a sabre cut; and I hear the gallant Adjutant Miller, an unusually
Ith them man ’ extraordlnary exeeuti <>n when he got to close quarters
An Effective Shot.— Lieutenant-Commander Joliffe has been for some
me in his gun-boat, the Arrow, at Eupatoria, which place is kept constantly on
! V hG Cossacks wh " hover round ; a large party of them were pointed
ut to the Arrow, and though they considered themselves well out of range,
rrr:k lfle man r ged \° p um , p a Shot at 34 ' 00 y» rds ri g h t in among them,
e ett !, n y re f “ lfo ™ ed *7 a Turk, some Ib/and so astonishing
p 4 ™ e them t 0 holt from the proximity of such terribly long shots.
1 our Iraitors.—l suppose you heard that a bluejacket of the ,
0 and °J le l y larine - a rtilleryman deserted and joined the Rus-
iiis. I lie captain, on hearing this, had the magazines shifted immediately ;
,d it was lucky that he did for on the next day the shot and shell came
tclung on the place where the magazine had been, like so many hailstones,
am happy to say that the fellow was a Yankee. By this time he has got his
serts, 1 think, for two days ago he ventured out at the head of a party of
ussians as leader, and when these were driven back he was taken by us When
ptured he was in Russian uniform, cross-belted and all.
The Dead and Wounded in Sebastopol.— Several deserters have
me over from the enemj r , and have given themselves up. They told most
tier tales of the state of the place. One says that at least 7000 were lying dead
one spot, and the wounded are all over the town, with no one to look after
;m, or do anything for them, so they lie down and die of their wounds
Russ!an Tyranny in Sebastopol.-A I rench officer who had’escaped
,ra Sebastopol, after having been taken prisoner states that he saw several
j)


persons h.,nging-he thought Poles who had been
let Into Sebastopol, observed this o#o , 1 showed the least Miff-
and children were employed, and forced to worK.
erence were immediately hung. following is the account of casual-
Casualties of the Batt • , , „j V g n by the correspondent of
ties to officers in the fatal light cava y g. S £ d ashe rode j n ad-
the Nolan wm Wled by tte^ can glightly wounded
vance of the Hussars, c h through his clothes. Major Halkett, of
Lord Cardigan received a lance T ord Fitzgibbon, of the Bth Hussars, was
the 4th Light Dragoons, was killed. ‘ Cornet Hughton, of the 11th
desperately wounded, and has since, I > Cornet Montgomery, of the
Hussars, is killed. Ca P*»!” wIkM Lieutenant Thomson, of.he
13th Light Dragoons are kl !“' 92 nd foot, aide-de-camp to Lord
17th Lancers, are killed. Captain Char , command of the 17t h Lancers,
Lucan, is killed. Captain M°rr ’ d „ ood SWO rdsman is known to the
and whose reputation as a gaHant office ™ h been carr i e d on board ship*
army, has received several affie de-camp, slightly , Cap-
The other wounded officers are P » v 4th Light Dragoons; Cap-
tain Hutton, 4th Light Dragoons; C.pt«S Lockwood,
tainCook, 11th Hussars; LietUenwtTrevely^^ > 1 MhH P n escape,
of the cavalry staff, is missing. • , taken prisoner by some Cossacks.
H, was dragged off hi. h “f Jjl || “ t |idhfm not Wbe afraidffor that he would
A Russian officer addressed him, and tomm rou , rh in their manners.
treve 1 ; My C we.el Id ft“oS.e of guarding him, for in the la., charge he
writing from Balaklava, says, an account o g his head cloven
“ Some fearful sabre cuts were delivered -saw on d flaps
to the chin, through hel^ et /^. f a done by a Etcher’, cleaver; and
agony, 'actually 1 holding his head togeOier with
the 25 th, says -.-“ There was Lor f' Xut to pieces. Lord George •
the 11th Hussars, 13th, 17th, and h as escaped as yet. He has proved himselt
regiment is cut up terribly ; but he h P g * n He f oug ht at the head
worthy of being called the M ? r^ S g an o l d soldier that got wounded by
Mr Jolliffe is supposed to be shot, the,
can’t find him.”
• /
the cavalry charge at balaklava.
THE followingremarkableo{d2to?hi
s Camp near Balaklava, Nov. 2, 1854.
... T am vou see, alive at this date, but God
Dear Jack- * • \ pre sume, devoured all the accounts
knows for how long alter. You nave, 1


MS.f
SSISr^S
me such an amount of glorious indifference as to and ga
to be master of. It would do your Celtic heart Jn !l f l th ° Ught U lm P ossib
ficent cheer with which we dashed into what hear * be m ° Bt magn
scrimmage.” Forward—dash—bang— clank and thpw m Ca . s tbe gul
such smoke, cheer and clatter as n L w’ * the f we were, in the midst
fell many a hero with a warm Celtic heart or, i Down, too, ala
loud for victory. I couldSnanse It ’u T one fell wreamin
down, down, down, they went ? Twice rTa a ? Ush ’ J heel .> P h renzy, strike, an
the^luscov^. 6 ranks—nowlM^F^h^^ 6^^^^
rhrspot^plimged e into^fonning obody 0 body of the eneiny’
* Ne r d * id r n *
hausted and unablft™ deadTy
a :“, h e isui £?£ a
that peaceful exit by the same excellent weapon Sn P „1 th passa & e t&
What , thing to reflect on ! I have , alf.?Yh? M \““
most probably will one of these days if the hnlletf v u Philosopher, and
abundantly give me time to brush up’. which are flying about sc
Gallantry a'htm ] not ,| arnisbt ' d their fame in the
-never! Oh, that I could have patiencet S °, f the Celtic b^ds
dual heroism as have come within my notice ' Fiction SU ° h of Jndivi-
true bravery. No novel ever had ,I, T * blctlonists ar e shabby judges of
have witnessed One ol m i *° the realit > es 1
in the melee. “Bloody wars” he roared »t’i^ ad hlB borse shot under him
Russian he ran, pulled him from his horse bv h d °/-’ a ? d right at a
ordinary manner; then deliberately emtin/ if l- r( ba ”d m the most extra-
vaulted into the saddle, and tumhuMhe Rufsian “ °, ame llo ' ,n ’
fought hi, way. This took less time to do S I KuT”? * **“ «"*-
our fellows, unhorsed and wounded creen undpr p • \ saw an °ther ot
sword up his belly. *.• wf take S T and run the
O’Grady says, if we be doomed who take it. Any one of °our 6Ven ’ 38
for three Russians. * * * The light cavalrv cW ° ° Urfe l ,ows
grand affair. Lord Raglan is blamed. 1 ' The ‘tSS, *
his orders literally. Lucan is a regular fire-ball but not ir .a’i olan gave
done that without strict commands. * * * \\r e . to bave
ady Th.l t^ Utthe 7 " e C - n ” ot co " ,in “ e to contend against fSrfuHdds"
The following letter Iron, a Maidstone man, Sergfan, Leaney. of Jhe 13th
D 2


f ub
Light Dragoons,
“ B— Oct. » «*
.■We had, on the 26th, ‘‘“t u^tad'»
leave them again in the hands ot n J a 8 they expectedwewe
eopport thought *«S^S»■
up. I galloped up t horse in the head. He c for R time in-
moment a cannon ball j[ ot fell upo n me, and there had t 0 run
with three other horses, hor&es ro n e d off, when I goA &]f a m ile, with
sensible, until s « nl 1 . t id and shell. I ran Hussars on my
about a mile arid a halt am r ight, and two of the W five men
three men of the 17th Lanee«^ burst over our heads,.when
left. Just at that moi h was t h row n up mmy faee o wa& gomg .
with me fell dead and t ■ t 0 enable me to see - m Oldham,
I had to pull the dirt out of <mly a few bruises ;** W th wer e shot,
I ran got o'! tgomery! I 'poor’ Weston, aho-
Ca ?T ?half om regiment besides; m about poor Jack,
and about halt our g ful how you tell " lrs * \. , e an d it was seen
the'enemy^^o^^^ster°the t of 3l our
fact, we shall not m t . sick) and we have Th /only sergeant-majors-
seedily removed. and Chamberlain, g # We may
and Tremayne, Mr. Si > and Gardner is sick. an d the remam-
left are G T a S e for a E A ng l h‘nd P , for there is no light bngad send us home,
leave this place tor l>i g ****** T \w n v God for saving me
ing few of us are no g numbers are so few. I ‘ are i e f t of us are
for we are of ."Ve children's sate. I think what few th letter*
M JSinkletcan h. /o ,note for rgS a» h V» „ troop a, pre-
ira?u»» — • 1 sh "; ££«.
.< 13th Light Dragoons.
There are a tew eignihcan. h, ..
U Another battle. All right thank G . and Horses,
..Poor Weston U the son « m udstone.
High-street. He was a rema'brMy Ane Roclty H.U.
Chamberlain U the nephew ot Capt. informatron, h».
A iater letter--»Z?JL received tor 1» weeks,
reiterates a complaint that no


HORSE MARINES AT EUPATORIA.
The following curious and amusing incident of the war in the Crimea is
related in the Dublin Evening Post :
It is not often that a popular myth is converted by any process into a
reality, and the innocent joke of the “ Horse Marines” is one of the last that
we could expect to see worked out into a practical one; yet such an event is
amongst the occurrences of the present war in the Crimea, whence we have
recently heard of a strong body of Russian cavalry being put to flight, panic-
-stricken and in great disorder, by an inconsiderable force of mounted marines.
The route was effected in the following manner :
Our readers are aware that Captain Brock, when the allies landed jn the
Crimea, was appointed governor of the town of Eupatoria; the possession of
that place being of much importance, as affording facilities for deriving supplies
■of provisions from the town and neighbouring villages. The Russians could
not be expeeted to suffer our enjoyment, unmolested, of the advantages
of the plaee; and, accordingly, several attempts were made by the
Cossacks to render our quarters there uncomfortable, if not to drive us out of
them altogether. Some short time since, the enemy were observed to make an
unusual demonstration on the adjoining plains. Cossack horsemen swarmed all
over the neighbourhood, though at a civil distance from the English guns.
They ventured not, it is true, upon an attack, but their military manoeuvres
and rapid evolutions presented an unpleasant prospect to the eyes of the
British garrison, and how to get rid of their inconvenient and disagreeable pre-
sence greatly puzzled the governor and his subalterns. Captain Brock felt con-
fident that if he had had with him a few troops of bold British Dragoons, the
Cossacks would very soon disappear. A counter demonstration of cavalry
would disperse them without delay ; but he had none, unfortunately, and so the
Cossacks continued to play their frantic tricks without interruption before the
eyes of the British force. Necessity, being the mother of invention, suggested
an effectual expedient in this extremity. Captain Brock had Marines in plenty,
but no horses. Possessed, however, of the most material branch of cavalry
service, he was determined that the less important should not be long wanting.
He accordingly paid the Tartar population a liberal sum for every horse they
should bring into the camp, and having in this way obtained a sufficient niimber
for his purpose, he mounted them at once with his brave and trusty marines.
But the captain’s difficulties had not yet terminated. The marines felt by no
means at their ease on horseback. They could traverse the quarter-deck with-
out inconvenience in a gale, even in the “ devil of sea” that rolls in the Bay
of Biscay; but to sit in the saddle was not amongst their accomplishments, nor
the management of an untrained Tartar steed a feat which they could at all per-
form with ease or satisfaction. Here again the genius Of the governor came to
his relief. At the head of each horse he placed a Crim-Tartar, holding by the
bridle, and in this formidable manner the “Marine Cavalry” were organized
for the charge, and they set out with a bold front towards the Russian encamp-
ment. On they came, with a resolution and grace highly creditable to their
national character. They looked very models of discipline, as they approached
the enemy’s lines, who were rather puzzled to make out the meaning of the
double character of the force. To resolve this knotty point they sent a shell or
two whizzing into the midst of the advancing squadron. The bold British
marines did not mind a shell much, but not so with the Tartars, who no sooner
witnessed this significant sample of the reception they were to meet than they
quickly turned and fled towards the city. The horses, now finding themselves
free from restraint, or at best but governed by an unskilful hand, followed the*'
example of their truant owners, and strewed the wayside with their riders, who
came tumbling to the ground in most picturesque confusion, not a little to .the
mortification, though very much to the amusement, of the spectators near the
town. Captain Brock, who awaited with much interest the result of the cavalry
demonstration, was not a little surprised to see the Cossacks, on the retreat of


mmmm
mmtmrni
future.
MONSTROUS INHUMANITY OF THE RUSSIANS.
The Paris correspondent of the Times, says :
hl ° sp w*V '\ hem and everything which the most tender care could suggest was
more abundant, and altogether our wou The soldiers generally, are fear-
j&^'iysrsss
wUI be taken iKure. As Colonel Haygarth lay wounded on the field of the
lima. wooded Russian, who was within a few £
musket at his head, blowing off a great portion of his bear-skm cap, ana
flioli Wh e r , «h r e e b fl S h ,d"Tf <I 'Gua,d 8 were drawn back from .heir redoubts at
brutal manner in which the Russian troops are carrying: on the jjr. Theje
officers, as all others whom I have seen, speak in terms of the taghest ad
tion of the French troops. Nothing, they declare, could surpass the gaUan
manner in which General Bosquet brought his division into th held and
them there at Inkermann, and Englishmen will not soon lorget now >


French blood was poured forth by the side of their countrymen on that terrible
but glorious day. General Bentinck has arrived. It appears that his wound,
in the lower part of the arm, is not likely to prove serious. General'Torrens is
at Malta, and doing well, though his wound is very severe.
It would be difficult to give a just idea of the admiration excited on all
hands, and among all classes of the people of Paris, by the heroic conduct of
the English at the battle of the sth ; and, when lauding them, they in some
measure seem to forget the gallantry of their own soldiers, in their enthusiastic
praise of their allies. Isay “among all classes,” because one paltry and
selfish faction, which would, if it dared, express its affliction at the triumphs of
the allied armies, is forced by shame to unwilling silence, it is but just to say
that none are louder in their praise than the Republicans, and none more eager
to do justice to the fine qualities of the British troops than those who were,
until this noble fellowship of danger and of victory, believed to be animated
only by animosity against us. The Charivari itself contributes to swell the
general enthusiasm, and the British soldier, quite as often as the French,
figures in the foreground as the leading personage in its daily sketches.
THE BATTLE OF INKERMANN.
DETAILED ACCOUNT OF THE BATTLE, FROM THE SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT OF “THE TIMES.”
Balaklava, Nov. 5.
It had rained almost incessantly the night before, and the early morning
gave no promise of any cessation of the heavy showers which had fallen for the
previous four-and-twenty hours. Towards dawn a heavy fog settled down on the
heights and on the valley of the Inkermann. The picquets and men on out-
lying posts were thoroughly saturated, and their arms were wet, despite their
precautions; and it is scarcely to be wondered at if there were some of them
who were not quite as alert as sentries shoud be in the face of an enemy ; for it
must be remembered that our small army is almost worn out by its incessant
labours, and that men on picquet are frequently men who have had but a short
respite from work in the trenches or from regimental duties. The fog and
vapours of drifting rain were so thick as morning broke, that one could scarcely
see two yards before him. At four o’clock the bells of the churches in Sebastopol
were heard ringing drearily through the cold night air, but the occurrence has
been so usual that it excited no particular attention. During the night, however,
a sharp-eared serjeant, on an outlying picquet of the light division, heard the sound
of wheels in the valley below, as though they were approaching the position up
the hill. He reported the circumstance to Major Bunbury, but it was supposed
that the sound arose from ammunition carts or arabas going into Sebastopol by
the Inkermann road. No one suspected for a moment that enormous masses of
Russians were creeping up the nigged sides of the heights over the valley of
Inkermann on the undefended flank of the second division. There all was secu-
rity and repose. Little did the slumbering troops in camp imagine that a subtile
and indefatigable enemy were bringing into position an overwhelming artillery,
ready to play upon their tents at the first glimpse of daylight. It must be ob-
served that Sir De Lacy Evans had long been aware of the insecurity of this
portion of our position, and had repeatedly pointed it out to those whose duty
it was to guard against the dangers which threatened us. It was the only ground
•where we were exposed to surprise, for a number of ravines and unequal curves
ip the slope of the hill towards the the valley lead up to the crest and summit,


against the adverse side of which our right flank was resting, without guns, en-
trenchments, abattis, or outlying defence of any kind. Every one admitted the
truth of the representations addressed to the authorities on this subject; but in-
dolence, or a sense of false security, and an overweening confidence, led to in-
difference and procrastination. A battery was thrown up with sandbags, gabions,
and fascines, on the slope of the hill over Inkermann on the east, but no guns
were mounted there, for Sir De Lacy Evans thought that two guns in such a
position, without any works to support them, would only invite attack and cap-
ture In the action of the 26th of October, the enemy tried their strength
almost on the very spot selected by them this morning, but it may now oe con-
sidered that they merely made a reeonnaasance in force on that occasion, and
that they were waiting for reinforcements to-assault the position where it was /
most vulnerable, and where they might speculate with some certainty the-
effects of a surprise of a sleeping camp on a winter's morning. Although the
arrangements of Sir De Lacy Evans, on repulsing the sortie, were, as Lord
Raglan declared, “so perfect that they could not fail to ensure success, it was
evident that a larger force than the Russians employed would have forced him to
retire from his ground, or to fight a battle m defence of it with the aid of the
other divisions of the army ; and yet nothing was done. No effort was made to
entrench the lines, to cast up a single shovel of earth, to cut dow-n the brushwood,
or form an abattis. It was thought “ not to- be necessary.” A heavy responsi-
bility rests on those whose neglect enabled the enemy to, attack us where we
were least prepared for it, and whose indifference led them todesp.se precautions
which, taken in time, might have saved us many valuable lives, and have treked
the loss of the enemy, had they been bold enough to have assaulted us behind
entrenchments. We have nothing to rejoice over in the battle of Inkermann,
We have defeated the enemy, indeed, but have not advanced a step nearer towards
the citadel of Sebastopol. We have abashed, humiliated, and utterly routed an
enemy strong in number, in fanaticism, and in dogged resolute courage, and
animated by the presence of a son of him whom they believe to be God s vice-
gerent on earth ; but we have suffered a fearful loss, and we are not m a position
to part with one man. England must give us men. She must be prodigal of
her sons, as she is of her money and of her ships, and as they have been of their
lives m her sorwee, fiyfj o , doc£ this morning, when Brigadier-General
Codrington, in accordance with his usual habit, visited the outlying picquets of
his own brigade of the light division. It was reported to him that all was-
well,” and the general entered into some conversation with Captain I rettyman,
of the 33rd regiment, who was on duty on the ground, m the course of which it
was remarked that it would not beat all surprismgiftheßusswßS availed
themselves of the gloom of the morning to make an attack on oar position,, cal-
culating on the effects of the rain in disarming our vigilance and spoiling our
wemons. The brigadier, who has proved a most excellent, cool, and brave
officer turned his pony round at last, and retraced his steps through the brush-
wood towards his lines. He had only proceeded a few paces, when a sharp
rattle of musketry was heard down the hill and on the left of the picquets of the
light division. It was here that the picquets of the second division were
stationed. General Codrington at once turned his horse s heac The
of the firing, and in a few moments galloped hack to turn out has division. T
Russians were advancing in force upon us. Their grey greatcoats rendered them
almost invisible even when close at hand. The picquets of the second division
had scarcely made out the advancing lines of infantry who were up
the steep sides of the hill through a drizzling shower of ram,J ite thy were
forced to retreat by a close sharp volley of musketry, an as Eas
towards the brow of the hill, contesting every step of * "of the liht
they had any ammunition, on the Russian advance. The P^ U retr eat and fall
division were assailed soon afterwards, and were also, obliged to retrea <1
back on their main body, and it was evident that av.erj obi e otof
made unon the right of the position of the allied armies, with the object ot
forchigThem to rafse the siegf, .ml. if possible, of <l,i,.ng them into, .he sea.


About the same time that the advance of the Russians on our right flank took
place, a demonstration was made by the cavalry, artillery, and a few infantry, in
the valley against Balaklava, to divert the attention of the French on the
heights above, and to occupy the Highland Brigade and marines, but only an
interchange of a few harmless rounds of cannon and musketry took place, and
the enemy contented themselves with drawing up their cavalry in order of battle,
supported by field artillery, at the neck of the valley, in readiness to sweep over
the heights, and cut our retreating troops to pieces, should the assault on our
right be successful. A Semaphore post had been erected on the heights over
Inkermann, in communication with another on the hill over their position, from
which the intelligence of our defeat was to be conveyed to the cavalry general,
and the news would have been made known in Sebastopol by similar means,
m order to encourage the garrison to a general sortie along their front. A
steamer, with very heavy shell guns and mortars, was sent up by night to the
head of the creek at Inkermann, and caused much injury throughout the
day by the enormous shells she pitched right over the hill upon our men.
Everything that could be done to bind victory to their eagles—if they have
any—was done by the Russian generals. The presence of their Grand
Duke Michael Nicholavitch, who told them that the Czar had issued
orders that every Frenchman and Englishman was to be driven into the sea
ere the year closed, cheered the common soldiers, who regarded the son of
the Emperor as an incarnation of the Divine presence. They had abun-
dance of a coarser and more material stimulant, which was found in their
canteens and flasks ; and, above all, the priests of the Greek Catholic Church
“blessed” them ere they went forth upon their mission, and assured them of
the aid and protection of the Most High. A mass was said for the army, and
the joys of Heaven were freely offered to those who might fall in the holy fight,
and the favours of the Emperor were largely promised to those who might
survive the bullets of a heretical enemy.
The men in our camps had just begun a struggle with the rain, in endea-
vouring to light their fires for breakfast, when the alarm was given that the
Russians were advancing in force. Brigadier-General Pennefather, to whom
the illness of Sir De Lacy Evans had given for the time the command of the
2nd division, at once got the troops under arms. One brigade under Brigadies-
General Adams, consisting of the 41st, 47th, and 49th regiments, was pushed
on to the brow of the hill, to check the advance of the enemy by the road
through the brushwood from the valley. The other brigade (Pennefather’s own),
consisting of the 30th, 55th, and 95th regiments, were led to operate on their
flank. They were at once met with a tremendous fire of shell and round shot,
from the guns which the enemy had posted on the high grounds, in advance of
our right, and it was soon found that the Russians had brought up at least forty
pieces of heavy artillery to bear upon us. Meantime the alarm had spread
through the camps. Sir George Cathcart, with the greatest promptitude, turned
out as many of his division as were not employed in the trenches, and led the
portions of the 20th, 21st, 4(ith, 57th, 63rd, and 68th regiments, which were
available, against the enemy, directing them to the left of the ground occupied
by the columns of the 2nd division. It was intended that one brigade, under
Brigadier-General Torrens, should move in support of the brigade under Briga-
dier-General Goldie ; but it was soon found that the enemy were in such
strength, that the whole force of the division, which consisted of only 2000
men, must be vigorously used to repel them. Sir George Brown had rushed
up to the front with his brave fellows of the light division—the remnants of the
7th Fusiliers, of the 19th regiment, of the 23rd regiment, of the 33rd regiment,
and the 77th and 88th regiments, under Brigadiers Codrington and Buller. As
they began to move across the ground of the 2nd division, they were at once
brought under fire by an unseen enemy. The gloomy character of the morn-
ing was unchanged. Showers of rain fell through the fogs, and turned the
ground into a clammy soil, like a freshly-ploughed field; and the Russians,
who had, no doubt, taken the bearings of the ground ere they placed their
guns, fired at random indeed, but with too much effect, on our advancing


columns. Whß. all. *> f»»„~«£o£*££ BrigS S 3
was not behind hand in brmgi g P Highlanders are under Sir Colin Carnp-
of his division now left with him, - ® J ith the greatest rapidity and ardour,
bell, at Balaklava. These the lnd division. and gained the summit of
rushed to the front on the ngl the Russians were struggling in the
the hills, towards which two column J d would admit . The 3rd divi-
closest order of which the nature of g &rms as a reser ve, and one
sion, under Sir R- Englan , wa g an d of the Rh regiments,
portion of it, comprising the 50th, part ox rn .
were engaged with the enem' diest struggle ever witnessed since war cursed
And now commenced the bloodiest sir 08 enemy have ever
the earth. It has been doubted by null ary li y ag often the on l y
stood a charge with the bayonet ’ f b the most obstinate and deadly character,
weapon employed in the conflic cou ld ever withstand the British
We have been prone to believe that at Ma ida alone did the enemy
soldier wielding his favouri e "® a P’ , tt j 0 f Inkermann not only did we
ever cross bayonet, with him; b^ p "“ate encounters between masses of men
charge in vain—not only were P but we were obliged to resist, bayonet to
maintained with the bayonet abol • d aga i n> as they charged us with
bayonet, the Russian mfan ry g battle of Inkermann admits of no de-
incredible fury and determination. The battle sanguinary hand-to-
scription. It was a series of J glens and valleys, m
hand fights, of despairing rallies, of desp t huma n eyes, and from which
brushwood glades and remote dells—hidder t fres h foes, till our old
the conquerors, Russian or British, issued o y S 8 and the battalions of
supremacy, so rudely assailed as 11 P and the chivalrous fire of France,
the Czar gave way before our steady g even & Bma ]j portion of the
No one, however placed, could have wit ddzzling mist obscured
doings of this eventful day ;or „i ace to such an extent as to render it
the ground where the strugg P > . tance 0 f a f ew yards. Besides
impossible to see what was going on at the of the hill toward*
this, the irregular nature of the g V tb lace) P wou ld have prevented one
Inkermann, where the deadliest figh P than a very insignificant
under the most favourable circumstance, se g six o , clock w hen all the
and detailed piece of the tern e w jj of mus ketry on the right, and by
head-quarter camp was roused by ro « informed that the enemy were
the sharp report of field gun . o’clock he rode towards the scene of
advancing in force, and soon af er . d b sir John Burgoyne, Brigadier-
action, followed by his staff, and accon de camp. As they approached the
General Strangways, R.A and several an d rifle,"and musket,
volume of sound, the steady unceasing tliun of the llussian s, thrown
told that the engagement was at its g • t that the noise resembled
with great precision, burst so tlncldyam g * fragments inflicted death on
Continuous discharges of cannon, th « a break in the fog
every side. One of the first was to open flre'on the
enabled them to see the camp nn d tent after tent was blown down, torn
tents with round shot and large sie , engaged in camp duties, and the
to pieces, or sent into the air, w were killed or mutilated. Colonel
unhappy horses tethered up m the lm° gung (18 _p o unders) on the
Gambier was at once ordered g P light guns were utterly J^ade-
rising ground, and to reply to a fire which ou 8 8 . himself with
quate fo meet As he wasengagGambier was severely but not
Captain Daguilar to urge them > retsre His place was taken by
dangerously wounded, and was oblig officer, in directing the
Lieutenant-Colonel Dickson ; and ' h ‘ “"fmJkefeffecfS deciding the fate
five of those two pieces, which had the , an( l as to deserve
of the day, was such as to eli cit the a 4 fray> But long ere these guns
the thanks of every man engaged in t oAy , J . of the enemy, and a
KXW r IS. n ß ot see whese to go. The,


could not tell where the enemy were, from what side they were coming, and
where going to. In darkness, gloom, and rain, they had to lead our lines
through 'thick scrubby bushes and thorny brakes, which broke our ranks and
irritated the men, while every pace was maked by a corpse or man wounded
from an enemy whose position was only indicated by the rattle of musketry and
the rush of ball and shell.
Sir George Cathcart, seeing his men disordered by the fire of a large
column of Russian infantry, which was outflanking them, while portions of the
various regiments composing his division were maintaining an unequal struggle
with an overwhelming force, rode down into the ravine in which they were engaged,
to rally them. He perceived, at the same time, that the Russians had actually
gained possession of a portion of the hill in the rear of one flank of his division,
but still his stout heart never failed him for a moment. He rode at their head
encouraging them; and when a cry arose that the ammunition was failing, he
said coolly, “ Have you not got your bayonets ?” As he led on his men, it was
observed that another body of men had gained the top of the hill behind them
on the right, but it was impossible to tell whether they were friends or foes. A
deadly volley was poured into our scattered regiments. Sir George cheered
them and led them back up the hill, but a flight of bullets passed where he rode,
and he fell from his horse close to the Russian columns. The men had to fight
their way through a host of enemies, and lost fearfully. They were surrounded
and bayoneted on all sides, and won their desperate way up the hill with dimin-
ished ranks, and the loss of nearly 500 men. Sir George Cathcart’s body was
afterwards recovered with a bullet wound in the head, and three bayonet wounds
in the body. In this struggle, where the Russians fought with the greatest
ferocity, and bayoneted the wounded as they fell, Colonel Swiny, of the 63rd, a
most gallant officer, Lieutenant Dowling, 20th, Major Wynne, 68th, and other
officers, whose names will be found in the Gazette, met their death, and Brigadier
Goldie (of the 57th regiment) received the wounds of which he has since died.
The conflict on the right was equally uncertain, and equally bloody. In the
light division, the 88th got so far into the front, that they were surrounded, and
put into utter confusion, when four companies of the 77th, under Major Straton,
charged the Russians, broke them, and relieved their comrades. The fight had
not long commenced, ere it was evident that the Russians had received orders to
fire at all mounted officers. Sir George Browne was struck by a shot, which
went through his arm, and struck his side. I saw with regret his pale and
sternly composed face, as his body was borne past me on a litter early in the day,
his white hair flickering in the breeze, for I knew we had lost the services of a
good soldier that day. Further to the right, a contest, the like of which, perhaps,
never took place before, was going on between the Guards and dense columns of
Russian infantry of five times their number. The Guards had charged them
and driven them back, when they perceived that the Russians had outflanked
them. They were out of ammunition, too. They were uncertain whether there
were friends or foes in the rear. They had no support, no reserve, and they were
fighting with the bayonet against an enemy who stoutly contested every inch of
ground, when the corps of another Russian column appeared on their right far
in the rear. Then a fearful mitraille was poured into them, and vollies of rifle
and musketry. The Guards were broken ; they had lost twelve officers, who fell
in the field ; they had left one-half of their number on the ground, and they retired
along the lower road of the valley. They were soon reinforced, however, and
speedily avenged their loss. The French advanced about ten o’clock, and
turned the flank of the enemy.
The second division, in the centre of the line, were hardly pressed. The 41st
regiment in particular were exposed to a terrible fire, and the 95th were in the
middle of such disorganising volleys that they only mustered sixty-four men
when paraded at two o’clock. Tn fact the whole of the division numbered only
360 men, when assembled by Major Email in the rear of their camp after the
fight was over. The regiments did not take their colours into the battle, but
the officers nevertheless, were picked off wherever they went, and it did not re-
quire the colour staff to indicate their presence. I have heard, by the bye, that


I. regimen, did .eke i„ .STgS.‘dSim
ler among our men, unquestion y. pretence of carrying the
ne few of the men to “ tail off the rear unae articles of war .
unded, although such pretence is s r y . P of his men to restrain
,e officer »M killed by . shot .fter c , rryingoff
em from getting away. I > ulanC es were soon filled, and ere nine
load, of men, ail covered w.th
ood, and groaning, to the rear o t e 111L '- sta ff assembled on a
About half-past 9 o’clock W RagUnand 1m was raging
1011, in the vain hope of getting a g P wounded, and I am told
■low them. Here General Strang A sbe n came right in among the
at he met his death in the following him open ; a portion
aff —it exploded on Captain rGntain Somerset’s trousers; it then
■ the shell .ore off the leather »' C “SS“ h to 't M.C., »d then blew
ruck down Captain Gordon s , by a shred of flesh and a bit of
vay General Strangways leg, so that it hung; y muscle of his face,
loth from the skin. The poo, old general never moved a m»sc off
le said merely in a gentle '“' ' " ’j i j, while his life blood
bu ever be held dear by every
ffiCe il g T.b°. f n^be r S,e,y, to ““ 2
,y letter, wa, most sangnrnajj. j„ upo „ ,he enemy. The
tand upon, and that the . , » r.«t as one column nas
lussians advanced mass after massiof t £ee !ong hourß about 8500
irqjcen and repulsed another took its P • their number . No wonder
iritish infantry contended against at least t t 0 t he charge
hat at times they were compelled Jo retire. ■“J* h were special
gain. The admirable devotion of the officers, who knew
ibjects of attack, can never e this sanguinary assault on the
less of the fewmen who were left Russians succeeded in getting
»nemy be sufficiently admired. of Captain Turner’s batteries,
rp close .0 the guns of CapU.n J» d^” h Sh e f “re Vnd, o, foe,,
n the gloom of the morning. Russians charged them suddenly, bore
iur artillerymen hesitated to fire. bayoneted the gunners, and suc-
ill resistance down before .them,drove gaine(l t ß he hill, and for a
ceeded in spiking some of the g • balance 1 but Adam’s brigade,
few instants the fate of the day “'™ b dfvilm made anoiher^desperate charge
Pennefather’s brigade, and :h gi , dth Guar ds, with undimmished
while Dickson’s guns swept *«“ “® d front, pushed on again to
valour and steadiness, with a sadly decreased
meet their bitter enemies. The rolling of mu y as th charged up
pounding of the guns, were cea enmg, d d halted, advanced again,
the heights yelled like demons M We is the king of
received and returned 0 f the 4th division, and the
weapons—lnkermann proved • .Glided u rown Bess, could do nothing
marines, armed with the old the Muscovite
with their thin line of cle “them like the hand of the Destroy-
infantry, but the: voUeys ofM before them About ten o’clock
were accompanied by a battalion of battle, and when we watched
Algiers. Their trumpets sounded above the am oi oan ,


their eager advance right on the flank of the enemy, we knew the day was won.
Assailed in front by our men, broken in several places by the impetuosity of our
charge, renewed again and again, attacked by the French infantry on the right,
and by artillery all along the line, the Russians began to retire, and at twelve
o’clock they were driven pell mell down the hill towards the valley, where pur-
suit would have been madness, as the roads were all covered by their artillery.
They left mounds of dead behind them. Long ere they fled, the Chasseurs
d’Afrique charged them most brilliantly over the ground, difficult and broken
as it was, and inflicted great loss on them, while the effect of this rapid attack,
aided by the advance of our troops, secured our guns, which were only spiked
with wood, and were soon rendered fit for service.. Our own cavalry, the
remnant of the light brigade, were moved into a position where it was hoped
they might be of service; but they were too few to attempt anything, and
whilst they were drawn up they lost several horses and some men. One officer,
Cornet Cleveland, was struck by a piece of shell in the side, and has since
expired There are now only two officers left with the fragments of the 17th
Lancers—Captain Godfrey Morgan and Cornet George Wombwell. At 12
o’clock the battle of Inkermann seemed to have been won ; but the day, which
had cleared up for an hour previously, so as to enable us to see the enemy and
meet him, again became obscured. Rain and fog set in, and, as we could not
pursue the Russians, who were retiring under the shelter of their artillery, we
had formed in front of our lines, and were holding the battle-field so stoutly
contested, when the enemy, taking advantage of our quietude, again advanced,
while their guns pushed forward, and opened a tremendous fire upon us.
General Canrobert, who never quitted Lord Raglan for much of the early
part of the day, at once directed the French to advance and outflank the enemy.
In his efforts he was most ably seconded by General Bosquet, whose devotion
was noble. Nearly all his mounted escort were down beside and behind him.
General Canrobert was slightly wounded. His immediate attendants suffered
severely. The renewed assault was so admirably managed, that the Russians
sullenly retired, still protected by their crushing artillery.
The Russians, about 10, made a sortie on the French lines, and traversed
two parellels before they could be resisted. They were driven back at last with
great loss, and as they retired they blew up some mines inside the Flagstaff
Fort, evidently afraid that the French would enter pell-mell after them.
At one o’clock the Russians were again retiring. At 1.40 Dickson s two
guns smashed up their artillery, and they limbered up and retired, leaving five
tumbrils and one gun-carriage on the field.
November 6.—Two hundred Russian prisoners were brought in last night
to head-quarters’ camp. They were badly wounded many of them, and several
died during the night. .
A council was held to-day at Lord Raglan’s, where General Canrobert,
General Bosquet, and Sir E. Lyons assisted, for several hours.
At four o’clock Lord Raglan attended the funerals of General Sir G.
Cathcart, of Brigadier Golding, and of General Strangways; they were buried
with eleven other officers on Cathcart’s Hill. At the same time fourteen officers
of the Guards were buried together, near the Windmill. The work of burying
the dead and carrying the wounded to Balaklava occupied the day. The Rus-
sians are quiet. We hear they have lost 10,000 men and three generals.
November 7. —A council of war was held to-day, at the close of which the
Duke of Cambridge left for Balaklava and went on board the Caradoc. His
Royal Highness is, it is said, going to Constantinople. It is said we wait here
ali * The 46th Regiment have arrived here, also 1700 Turks from Yolo, and
osno French The Russians fired on our burying parties. There was an
alarm last night. The 4th division were under arms all night, and a portion of
the ? hweno time to add more. We must have men at once—and abundance
of them.


FURTHER DETAILS OF THE BATTLE OF INKERMANN.
THE LATE GENERAL STRANGWAYS. —General Strangways,
whose kindly face and venerable white hair were familiar to the whole army, is
lamented and bewailed by everybody. In his lifetime people called him affec-
tionately the “ dear old general,” and now that he is gone they recall with
sorrow those virtues which had rendered him so universally beloved. I saw the
tears trickle down the manly cheeks of many artillery officers, when they heard
of the death of their darling old general. General Strangways was struck in
the leg by a round shot, and not (as reported) by a piece of shell. The leg
was completely crushed, and the poor old general expired under the shock.
His last words were, “ I die at least a soldier’s death.”
THE LATE SIR GEORGE CATHCART.—In Sir George Cathcart
England has sustained a heavy loss. Combining great personal courage with
much good judgment, he was a favourite with the army. Without the slightest
pretension, Sir George was every inch a soldier. Simple in his habits, he
occupied a soldier’s tent, which was open to every officer of his division, by
whom he was equally beloved and respected.
BRIGADIER-GENERALS GOLDIE AND TORRENS.—Brigadier-
General Goldie, one of our most promising generals (a brigadier of Sir
George’s), died from the wound he received in the action. Brigadier-General
Torrens, also of the fourth division, was very severely wounded, but he is now
pronounced out of danger. He has since left for England.
STRIPPING THE DEAD. —Right glad were many of our poor tattered
fellows to obtain some of the more substantial clothing of the conquered, who
had now no further use of it. Some bodies (a sight unknown at the Alma) were
completely stripped. Their stout boots seemed to find especial favour in our
soldiers’ eyes. “ Shure,” observed an Irishman, whose shoes were in a very
bad state, apostrophizing the body of a poor fellow who had died with the
medallion worn by so many of them, pressed convulsively in his hands, “ Shure,
I belave you were a better Christian than those bastes we’re fighting for, but
your boots can’t do you no more good now, and they’ll do me a dale.”
SEBASTOPOL GREATLY STRENGTHENED SINCE THE
BATTLE OF THE ALMA. —Near one mud fort, on our extreme right, the
Russians are lying not merely strewn on the ground, but actually heaped upon
the top of one another, for a space of about an acre of ground, some actually
in the embrasures. The sight is most sickening. What a pity we did not take
advantage of our victory at Alma! A young Russian cadet, taken prisoner
yesterday, told us that had we gone into Sebastopol after the battle of the Alma,
we should have found opposed to us only two thousand men in the town, and
eighteen guns in position ; now they have large numbers—they go so far as to
say three corps d'arjncc in the Crimea, and 500 guns in position in the town.
Not only are their batteries well filled, but every street is barricaded, and
behind each barricade there are two or three guns.
THE STORMING NOW PERILOUS. —Now comes the all-important
question—how does all this bear on the fall of Sebastopol ? Mud battery still
roars reply to mud battery ; but this brings us little nearer to the desired point.
All seem agreed that, if attempted, its storming will be a far more perilous task
now than it would have been five weeks ago. Two Russian officers —prisoners,
I believe, on board the Tribune —state that the guns of the army beaten at the
Alma were left for more than two days at the Isatchka, and were only removed
a few hours before the arrival of our army. Still they pretend to think. that
now Sebastopol is impregnable. Our position, doubtless, is a somewhat critical
one, rendered so by the immense line of country we are obliged to occupy, in
order to keep open our communication with Balaklava, and prevent ourselves from


being hemmed in by the Russians legions. What is needed is an army suffi-
ciently numerous to perform the threefold duty of besieging Sebastopol,
keeping open the line of communication, and checking the army of observation.
We hear of 25,000 men on their way, and gladly accept a detachment of the
Guards and the 46th regiment, as an instalment. Every man that can be
possibly spared has been landed from the fleet. The steamers only, as has been
wisely determined, are kept in a state of efficiency. The generals are said to
be opposed to another general attack by the fleet, except a diversion on the day
of the assault by the screw liners and steamers; for ,the safety of the army,
certain in the case of any reverse while we command the sea as at present,
might be materially endangered by the crippling the fleet. There seems to be
no doubt in the minds of naval men that the fire of the batteries was sufficiently
silenced in the late attack to have allowed ships to enter, had not the passage
been blocked ; still, even when there, they would have met the untouched
Russian liners. Still the general voice of the army is one most sanguine of
success ; they do not believe that the men who came on Sunday with that
drunken howl, between a moan and a shout, can for a moment stand before us.
The French, too (as I said in my last), have been advancing according to all
the rules of siege operations, and the assault waits for them. General Canro-
bert is most sanguine; he declares he can enter Sebastopol when he chooses,
and both French and English place great reliance on him.
THE REGIMENTS THAT HAVE SUFFERED MOST SE-
VERELY.—Strange to say, much of the loss seems to have fallen on regiments
which suffered so severely at the Alma (77th, 33rd, 55th, and 95th). This
latter regiment has now but about 200 men fit for duty. The other regiments
which suffered severely were the 30th and 77th, and the Grenadier and Cold-
stream Guards j and there is too much reason to believe that many of our
wounded officers and soldiers were murdered by the enemy, as more than one
of the officers of the Guards, who had been but slightly wounded when the tide
of war bore their comrades back, were found dead, pierced by many wounds,
on their return. Among the Russian regiments, the 2nd and 10th, and also
the Imperial Guard, appear to have suffered very severely. Such a battle,
often a hand-to-hand encounter, was fruitful in instances of individual daring.
At present I will only mention the deed of “daring do’’ of an officer of the
Guards, who was being carried away as prisoner by a corporal and two soldiers.
While being led away, he seized an opportunity of drawing his revolver, with
which he shot dead two of his captors, and succeeded in bringing in the third a
prisoner.
DAMP FIRE-ARMS. —Great complaint is made by the picquets, as well
as by several of the regiments first engaged, of their being unable, probably
owing to the damp, to discharge their pieces. I observe that the Russians have
a very simple precaution in use, which effectually obviates this, in a hammer-
guard of leather, which fits closely over the nipple.
PECULIAR RIFLE BULLET.—I observed a peculiar rifle bullet
much used by the enemy. A hole is grooved out in the flat side of the bullet.
This is filled with concussion powder, causing it to burst like a shell on striking
the object.
RUSSIAN ESPIONAGE. —We believe that the enemy are acquainted
with the details of our camp and its general routine; for, from information given by
two deserters, an artilleryman and a soldier, they were enabled, from knowing
the time of their being relieved, to inflict some injury on our picquets ; and a
spy, in the disguise of a Zouave officer, went through the French, and most of
our batteries; and when, at length, his true character was suspected, he, to poid
being captured, sprang through an embrasure, and, in spite of the balls Which
were sent after him, escaped into Sebastopol.


EXTRACTS FROM THE LETTERS OF THE “MORNING
HERALD’S” CORRESPONDENT.
While at one time the Russians were loosing ten men to our one, they
showed no signs of giving way, but advanced towards the wall of the old post
road, firing volleys with as much coolness and regularity as if on parade. They
appeared utterly insensible to the fear of anything but a charge ; but when threat-
ened with that, they dispersed in all directions.
In their conflict with the Coldstream Guards, in front of the two-gun
battery, all the wounded were instantly bayoneted by the Russians. Some of
the officers’ bodies were found with as many as twenty bayonet wounds,
and their skulls completely smashed with the butt-ends of muskets.
On an eminence in the centre of the old post road a battery of six field-
pieces was placed ; but unfortunately it was so placed with thick brush-wood at
each side, that the enemy’s skirmishers were enabled to approach unseen, and
pick off' both men and horses'. Two of the guns, with their ammunition and
wagons, fell into the hands of the enemy. Some of the artillerymen clung
round the guns, and fought the Russians for them hand to hand. One serjeant
in particular was seen defending himself with his sword alone, amid a hundred
enemies, for full five minutes. When the battle was over, his body was found
with seventeen bayonet and bullet wounds on it; and two Russians, killed with
his sword, lay on the ground beside him. «
THE RETREAT OF THE ENEMY.—UntiI I saw it, I never in my
life could have believed that any troops in the world could have retired under
such a murderous fire, in such perfect order. The French and English, with a
whole mass of artillery, followed close upon the retreating battalions, pouring in
volley after volley of grape-shot, shell, and musketry. In fact, it was a perfect
carnage. Yet, in spite of this, the enemy kept their order, retreating almost at
slow time, and every five or ten minutes halting and charging desperately up the
hill at our men and the French. In these charges the Russians lost feariully.
We received them with volleys of musketry, and then dashed at them with the
bayonet. In one of these charges the 50th French Regiment of the line re-
captured the two guns which in the commencement of the day we had lost. By
half-past two o’clock the great mass of the enemy had completely fallen back,
leaving between 7000 and 8000 dead upon the field behind.
ALLEGED INTOXICATION OF THE RUSSIAN SOLDIERS. —
The correspondent of the Daily News says —“ It is said that the Russian
soldiers had been liberally supplied with raki previous to the commencement of
the attack. Their continued and loud shouting, and the impetuosity of their
attack, render it probable that they were under the influence of some artificial
stimulus of the sort. In the canteens, also, of many of the killed on the field
was found a mixture of raki and water.” The correspondent of the Morning
Herald says there is not tile most remote foundation for the statement that the
Russian soldiers were drunk. He saw them both fighting and when prisoners,
and can vouch for their sobriety.
NARROW ESCAPE OF LORD RAGLAN. —DEATH OF GENE-
RAL STRANGWAYS.—Lord Raglan and staff - were in the front of the
troops, and in the very thickest of the fire. So hot was the cannonade and
musketry round his lordship, that no one can understand how he escaped unin-
jured. An 8-inch shell came roaring and hissing along the ground, passed
right between the legs of Lord Raglan’s horse, and exploded behind him and
the staff. They were covered for the moment with dust and smoke, but fortu-
nately escaped unhurt. Major-General Strangwavs was killed close behind
Lord Rao-lan. When raised from the ground he was perfectly calm and
collected, and appeared not to suffer in the least. His thigh was fractured near
the hip joint, and the brave old soldier looked at the mangled limb with perfect
composure, saying he knew the wound was mortal. He died about half an
hour after the amputation was performed.


HORRORS OP THE BATTLE FlELD.—Towards evening I walked
over the battle field ; but I can never describe what it was like. Its
beggar all description; 12,000 dead and wounded—English, French, and
Russian—lay upon the heights, and the groans and screams of agony were rising
up from all parts. Alma was a mere skirmish to it. What made the scene
worse was, that the Russians from the ships in the harbour and the fortifica-
tions to the north were throwing a perfect storm of shell all over the field,
killing their own and our wounded. Passing up the road to Sebastopol, between
heaps of Russian dead, you came to the spot where the Guards had been com-
pelled to retire from the defence of the w'ail above Inkerrfiann valley. Here our
dead were nearly as numerous as the enemy’s. Across the path, side by side,
lay five guardsmen,who were all killed by one round shot as they advanced to
charge the enemy. They lay on their faces in the same attitude, with their
muskets tightly grasped in both hands, and all had the same grim painful frown
upon their features, like men who were struck down in the act of closing with
their foes. Beyond this the Russian guardsmen and line regiments lay thick as
leaves, intermixed with dead and wounded horses. The latter, with fractured
limbs, were now and then rising, and, after staggering a few steps, rolling over
among the corpses, snorting and plunging fearfully. Up to the right of the
wall was the way to the Two-gun Battery. The path lay through thick brush-
wood, but the path was slippery with blood, and the brushwood was broken down
and encumbered with dead. The scene from the battery was awful—awful beyond
description. I stood upon its parapet at about nine at night, and felt my heart
sink as I gazed upon the scene of carnage around. I shall never recall the
memory of Inkermann Valley with any but feelings of loathing and horror ; for
round the spot from which I surveyed the scene lay upwards of 5000 bodies.
Many badly wounded also lay there ; and their low dull moans of mortal agony
struck with terrible distinctness upon the ear, or, worse still, the hoarse gurgling
cry and vehement struggles of those who were convulsed before they passed
away. Round the hill small groups of men with hospital stretchers were
searching out for those who still survived; and others again, with lanterns,
busily turning over the dead, looking for the bodies of officers who were known
to be killed, but who had not been found. Here also were English women
whose husbands had not returned, hurrying about with loud lamentations,
tinning the faces of our dead to the moonlight, and eagerly seeking for what
they feared to find. These latter were far more to be pitied than the inanimate
forms of those who lay slaughtered around. Outside the battery the Russians
lay two and three deep. Inside the place was literally full with bodies of
Russian guardsmen, 55th and 20th. The fine tall forms of our poor fellows
could be distinguished at a glance, though the grey great-coats stained with
blood rendered them alike externally. They lay as they fell, in heaps ; some-
times one of our men over three or four Russians, and sometimes a Russian
over three or four of ours. Some had passed away with a smile on their faces,
and seemed as if asleep ; others were horribly contorted, and, with distended
eyes and swollen features, appeared to have died in agony, but defying to the
last. Some lay as if prepared for burial, and as though hands of relatives had
arranged their mangled limbs; while others, again,"were in almost startling
positions, half standing or kneeling, clutching their weapons, or drawing a cart-
ridge. Many lay with both their hands extended towards the sky, as if°to avert
a blow or utter a prayer; while others Jtad a malignant scowl of mingled fear
and hatred, as if, indeed, they died despairing. The moonlight imparted an as-
pect of unnatural paleness to their forms ; and, as the cold damp wind swept
round the hills, and waved the boughs above their upturned faces, the shadows
gave a horrible appearance of vitality ; and it seemed as if the dead were laugh-
ing, and about to rise. This was not the case on one* spot, but all over 'the
bloody field.
E


STILL FURTHER PARTICULARS OF THE BATTLE OF
INKERMANN.
FROM THE “TIMES” CORRESPONDENT.
In my last despatch, I could have devoted many hours more to the
description of the fight of the memorable sth of November. The battle was at
its height about o’clock, and by that time the Russians had partially
established themselves on the heights on our right. Dr. Smith, of the head-
quarters staff, and two gentlemen who had ridden out with him towards the front,
ignorant of the exact position of the enemy, got under fire in the fog, and the
proximity of fragments of shell, the whirring of shot, and the “fiz-z-zing” of
fusees, warned them that it was just as well for non-combatants to retire as
rapidly as possible towards the valley of Balaklava, where all seemed to be quiet.
As they cantered off they saw poor Sir George Brown borne back on a litter,
and taken down and put on board the Sanspareil, after Dr. Alexander had ex-
amined his wound. Men covered with blood, and spitting it out, came
limping along, and sat down by the bushes, examining their hurts, and implor-
ing water or a little brandy. Ambulances hovered on the plain in the rear
around the scene of the fight; horses on three legs, or cut by balls, hopped
»long, looking piteously for help ; the fog folded the hills in its clammy embrace,
but the roar of cannon and musketry told of the struggle which was going on
along those bloody heights.
On visiting the spot, it was curious to observe how men of all arms—
English, French, and Russians—lay together, showing that the same ground
must have been occupied several times by different bodies of troops. The
attacking force could not have been less than 20,000 ; and I make a very low
estimate indeed of the strength of the Russians when I place it at from 45,000
to 50,000 men of all arms. Some say there were from 55,000 to 60,000 men
engaged on the side of the enemy; but 1 think that number excessive, and
there certainly was not ground enough for them to show front upon. Captain
Burnett states that he saw fresh bodies of the Russians marching up to the
attack on three successive occasions, and that their artillery was relieved no less
than four times. The Minie rifle did our work. Our volleys told on the
advancing bodies of Russians fearfully, and, in order to be out of scope of such
terrible weapons, they pushed on us with the bayonet, and, after long and
desperate encounters, met their masters, and were forced to retire.
THE SICK AND WOUNDED FUND.
Scutari, November 15.
The state of the hospitals here continues steadily to improve, and, notwith-
standing the very large number of wounded brought down since the battle of In-
kermann, a degree of order is maintained, which, under all the circumstances,
must be considered creditable to the authorities. The stormy weather of Sunday
and yesterday, it is true, by delaying the landing, has given additional time for
preparation and arrangement. Decided benefit has also accrued from the dimi-
nished numbers sent by each transport; but when it is considered that there were
upwards of 2,500 men in hospital before these last arrivals, it is really wonderful
that there has been so little confusion. All the effectives that could possibly be
spared having been despatched to the Crimea, the carrying of the wounded from
the boats to the hospitals has been performed partly by convalescents and partly
by Turkish soldiers. It has been managed more slowly and clumsily, perhaps,
than could have been wished, and every feeling heart in England will sympathize
with the expression of regret, that when the men did at length reach their beds
they found them laid upon the floor—made as comfortable, indeed, as the state of
matters admitted, but still without the advantages of a bedstead. A very largo
proportion of the accommodation provided is of this description, and it should be
changed at once, before winter, with its heavy rains and cold weather, sets in upon
the Bosphorus. No doubt this want will be supplied shortly, either from home or


from \ arna, tlie last portion of the stores there being at length on their way to
Scutari; the first portion lam tokl only arrived a few days ago. The things sent
on under shot and shell by the Prince (not the Thetis, as stated in my last letter)
have probably been detained at Balaklava to supply the pressing necessities of the
army. If these necessities are to be judged of by the state of the wounded as
they arrive here, the articles of clothing included in the rnedioal stores will be
indeed a Godsend. Many of the poor fellows have no shirts, others are without
stockings, and the apparel of all is dirty and ragged to a degree which, added to
their other sufferings, is calculated to excite unbounded sympathy and compassion-,
when they reach Scutari they are restored to comparative domfort. They get a
change of linen, are carefully attended to by the medical officers, and some atten-
tion, rough though it be, is paid to the essential requirements of food, shelter, and
■cleanliness. The great additional hospital space needed here since the battle of
Inkermann has made the medical authorities very anxious to send off to Malta a
draught of from 600 to 700 convalescents ready for removal. About 160 were
despatched by the Emu three days ago, but much difficulty is encountered in ob-
taining the requisite transport accommodation from Admiral Boxer, who, perhaps,
has more urgent claims upon the resources in this respect placed at his disposal!
It may shock the humane heart to think that war postpones the consideration of
the sick and wounded to its own more imperious exigencies, but such is the fact,
and one may walk lietween rows of sufferers several miles long, noting down a
hundred things that would contribute much to their relief, without there beino' any
chance of obtaining them, or having the vast majority of them applied. It was
probably a deep sense of the difficulties thus presented which led the authorities
here and at home to look with some disfavour at the outset upon that burst of
benevolence and sympathy which led to the formation of Miss Nightingale’s staff
of nurses, and of the fund which the Times has undertaken to administer. Actual
experience, however, of the aid which could be afforded in this wav, and by the
exertions of individuals, has in little more than a week entirely dispelled official
fears and prejudices. The services thus rendered are freely acknowledged, and in-
?a ee a d ’ , S PT/°r th u, mse , ves - , Lar S e an i effective as the medical staff of the hospitals
is, and indefatigable as have been the efforts of Dr. Gumming, Dr. Mcnzies, Dr M’Gre-
gor, and the other heads of departments, with more than 3,000 patients to attend to,
a large proportion presenting very serious cases, there is an ample field of useful-
ness that cannot possibly be covered by them. Miss Nightingale and her devoted
band have not been in the way except to do good, nor has there been any difficulty
in finding suitable objects on which to expend the money subscribed by the public
If difficulties exist, they lie all in the opposite direction, and already the propriety
of further aid begins to be seriously considered. It would serve no good purpose
to lift too high the veil which hangs over the mass of suffering at Scutari or to
attempt any description of the varied and frightful picture there presented of what
injuries war inflicts on the soldier; when, however, lie arrives, exhausted with pain
and fatigue, it is some comfort to know that, besides the best surgical treatment,
there are some of the gentler sex at hand to tend him if expedient; that if the’
medical stores are deficient in anything that can be obtained quickly elsewhere
there are funds wherewith to purchase it; that gentlemen speakimo- his own
language and true-hearted fellow-countrymen write for him to his friends • and
that the overtasked hospital chaplains are assisted by zealous volunteers* in
the pious duties of their office. This system of benevolent co-operation with
the authorities commenced last week, has been continued with excellent effect up
to the present time, and bv its aid the hope now begins to be entertained that the
working of the medical department may soon be placed on a footing free from all
reasonable objection.
We are so far here from home, and the communication is so slow and irregular,
that things urgently wanted are best and most quickly supplied from Constantinople,'
Smyrna, or Marseilles. It would, therefore, be inexpedient in a communication'
like this to attempt any enumeration of articles desirable to be furnished from
England ; but, as some proof of the good which has been effected by the fund with
the administration of which I am charged, I may be permitted to state what has
been done up to the present moment. Shirts, sheets, flannels, stockings, and loose


warm robes for the wounded, have hitherto been among the chief wants of the
patients at Scutari, the convalescents on their way to Malta, and the men coming’
down here from the Crimea. The patients in the hospitals I have supplied with
these articles through Miss Nightingale; the convalescents by the Emu through
the kindness of Major Heyland, of the 95th, acting with the medical officer and
the Commander of the ship. Dr. M’Shane, of the Caradoc, has undertaken the
c.ue ot the things going to Balaklava, where they are to be intrusted to a small
working committee, which will report upon the distribution of them. There have
been supplied to the sick and wounded by this machinery; among other items,
about 2,000 shirts, 250 pairs of sheets, 400 flannel vests, 10 pieces of flannel, 365
warm quilted coats, 72. worsted jackets, 1,200 pairs of stockings, and 400 towels.
I lie contnbutmns also include arrovvroot, sago, sugar, tea, soap, three-quarter-casks
or Marsala wine, and, on ship-board, tobacco. 01 course, the larger proportions of
these articles have gone fo the hospitals, and I have endeavoured, as far as possible,
to adjust the amount of the supply to the extent of the exigency, so that there
pr'd j f ,n ° WaS^U ex P en diture of the fund in meeting wants already sufficiently
In conclusion, we take the following from a London weekly paper:
h r lO Piltrioti f ° Fund, inasmuch as the Lord President of the Council
so'dio™ , meD r <TocS ' I . ot make ! >rovision for the widows and orphans of
the d eiistnm Of rnufn b ”> a " d > as far »» Mmisterial propositions are concerned, it will remain,
the custom ot this country to furnish the means by voluntary subscription, the payment of
that becomes a matter of mere right. If ever pensions are fairly earned, it is by those who
fifv an bonourable calling in which they cannot by any possibility la/by enough
/ Ua m ? urance “gamst accident; and if ever they should be bestowed on the rela-
iTf of j lO ®entonous dead, it is wlien, but for the dangers braved and elforts made by the
lallcn, the givers might have no part of their wealth left for themselves. This war is a
necessary war, or it is authorised, organised murder. For my own part, I believe the
national existence to be bound up nuts complete success, that England must cease to be,
in all that we prize as England, if such pirate nests as Sebastopol is and Bomarsund would
have been, be not utterly destroyed. At the price of health, limb, and Hfe, this is bdng
the 0 me P re b value f of U nrnn n t whoever .y aluf * freedom and civilisation, or even has a notion of
the mere value of property, must, if he be an honest man, pay his money to the increase of
«n?l h Qt a tww aS ln discharge of a most sacred debt. The men who have fought at Alma
t la / m n aV r d ” , tbls , for us - ,J ’ h cy have shown that wherever a few thousand
Bntons tinned and disciplined hut unused to the actual struggle of battle, stand armed
under their country s banners, whoever would conquer them must lay his reckoning with
twici er tbHc« nr to « the last ma "> and I,mst P a y the penalty in his own forces of suffering
a < X V mes as much before he oan do that. At Inkeviiiann isolated dozens
or scares found themselves surrounded by from five to six times their number, and thought
surrmuW “ g v th<a ? - ? b , ere was the Presence of death, but there was
hltants • detent. Very few indeed are the missing where the British rom-
nimnst nTt hemmed in by all but hopeless odds, and where, to become prisoners, would
almost have seemed the natural result of their situation. Is it nothing to have this told to
the wor din dSeds, scaled with the lives of those who so fought ? Will any nation dare this
little island, seeing that its almost untried men, such as we shall he able to sunnlv again
and again, if the war-need calls upon us, can bo encountered at no less price of loss by their
country s enemies? This is the stuff of the seven and twenty million* l ?“hat is our debt
W rinrin^ h with eX tCclv hl .fi? n 1 V V nC,ble ( l ua ! i( y. has been proved? The whole empire has
iiiii co?n R T th i th CZ 7’ I reinforcements! reinforcements!” More of
tilf ifil P i Ce < ‘ & , S e^ eni . ent n P' st g°> and wore and more of it must be wasted and wasted
G&& SL" ***« &
To these considerations we feel that nothing need be added. Let us beg of
our reader* to ponder them well. Let it also be remembered that in England
the very poorest Lave contributed their mite to the Patriotic Fund. It is actually
a fact that the inmates ot the Westminster Penitentiary voluntarily deprived
themselves of food tor twenty-four hours, in order that they might present the
nriee ot their prison ration to the widow and the fatherless. ' What argument can
be added to so touching an example? Who is there that will not give, and -ive
again, good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, when the
prisoner and the pauper have, of their own penury, cast into the treasury all the
living that they had. •


WAUGH & COX,
BOOKSELLERS, STATIONERS,
AND
ACCOUNT-BOOK MANUFACTURERS,
111, LATE 554, GEORGE STREET,
BEG leave respectfully to inform their Friends and the Public
generally, that from the increased arrangements of their Esta-
bishment, they are enabled to ensure those persons who may favour
them with their support, the very best articles in the above line, and
at the most moderate prices.
.From the consignments they are in the habit of receiving from many
of the leading publishing houses, both of London and Edinburgh, as
well as their own regular importations, they are enabled to keep up a
supply of all descriptions of Literature, to an extent hitherto unknown
in the Colony; and, in their Stationery Department, having the ad-
vantage of the services of their predecessor in business, Mr. William
Ford, as their Buyer in London, the Public may rest assured that for
variety and quality their Stock will be found very superior, while the
prices are as correspondingly low as the value of the articles will
admit.
Country Stores
supplied with every requisite in the above line. The great increase in
this branch of their business during the past twelve months is a suffi-
cient guarantee that their efforts in giving satisfaction to their numerous
correspondents have been duly appreciated, and that the inducements
they hold out to Wholesale Purchasers are neither deceptive nor
fallacious.
Settlers in the Country, residing at a distance from
Town,
may avail themselves of the facilities afforded by the Post Office
(where the mail is not conveyed on horseback), for Magazines, Re-
views Books, &c., transmitted direct, by forwarding their orders for
such articles as may be required, which will meet with prompt atten-
tion It is particularly requested that in such cases the Post Town
be mentioned, as well as the local address.
*
School Books
are kept in great variety, of which the following will furnish a brief
M’Cullochs’ Third Book, Series of Lessons, and Course of Reading
Murray’s Introduction, Reader and Exercises, Enfield’s Speaker
Carpenter’s, Guys’ (John and Joseph), Butter s Etymological, Jen-
nings’, Kebble’s, Markam’s, and Mavor’s Spellings
Corner’s, Lennie’s, Lovechild’s, Mary’s, and Murray’s Grammars
Goldsmith’s (by Wright and Hughes), Guy’s, Bigland’s, Gaultier’s,
Ewan’s, Bonwick’s, and Stewart’s Geographies, &c.


Cassell’s, Colenzo’s, Davidson’s, I)e Morgan’s, Gray’s, Hutton’s, In-
gram’s, Joyce’s, and Walkingame’s Arithmetics
Keys to ditto
Pinnock’s Goldsmith’s Histories of England, Greece, and Rome
Mangnall’s Historical Questions
White’s Sacred History, and Histories of Great Britain and France
Little Arthur’s History of England
Geography and History, by a Lady
Markham’s Histories of Germany, France, and England
Simpson’s and Thompson’s Euclid; Bonnycastle’s Algebra and Geo-
metry ; Colenzo’s Algebra; Hutton’s Mathematics and Book-keep-
ing ; Ingram’s Mathematics
Chambers’ School Books, as far as published, with Primer, School and
People’s Atlases
Johnson’s, Walker’s, Knowles’s, Webster’s, and other English Dic-
tionaries
Latin and Greek Books in great variety, comprising the choice works
of Anthon, Arnold, Dymoclc, Ellis, Stewart, Valpy, Zunipt, and
others
Riddle’s and Dymock’s Ainsworth’s Latin and English Dictionary
Wright, Liddle and Scott’s Greek and English Lexicons
Meadow’s, Nugent’s, Levizac’s, and Surrenne’s French Dictionaries
&c., &c., &c.
French, German, and Italian Works.
WAUGH AND COX’S (late FORD’S) AUSTRA-
LIAN ALMANAC FOR 1855.
(Crown 8vo. Price 5s.)
Parties desirous of senchng a Present to their friends in England,
will find this an excellent compendium of all kinds of information re-
lating to the Colony ; containing two well-executed engravings of Syd-
ney from above Double Bay and Rushcutters’ Bay and Darlinghurst,
with coloured plans of Descriptive and Private Signals.
A few volumes of the preceding years still on hand.
WAUGH AND COX’S SYDNEY DIRECTORY,
1855.
(In Demy 8vo., Handsomely Bound in Cloth. Lettered. Price, 21s.)
As a Present to friends in England, the Sydney Directory will be
found to contain a mass of information, and convey an idea of the
population, commercial business, and every-day life of the inhabitants
of the metropolis of Australia, better than any correspondence or other
means of communication, thus rendering it well fitted as a companion
to the Almanac, and calculated to be highly prized by residents in the
Mother Country having relatives, or otherwise interested in the
Colony. •
Geography of the Australian Colonies, with a brief Sketch of the


islands of Australasia : by James Ewan, Fellow of the Educational
Institute of Scotland.
Second Edition, with numerous additions, in Demy 12mo. with
numerous Illustrations and three Maps. Price, 3s.
Colonial Agriculture, a course of Four Lectures, delivered in the
School of Arts, Maitland, during the year 1845, on the above
subject, by William Geddes. Published by request. (Demy 8vo.
Price 2s
A Commentary on the Influence which the Use of Tobacco exerts on
the Human Constitution, in a Series of Letters (Vox e deserto), by
Francis Campbell, M.A., M.D., Superintendent of the Colonial
Lunatic Asylum, Tarban. (Demy 12mo, 6s. 6d.)
CHEAP READING FOR THE BUSH.
BULWER’S NOVELS.
An agreement having been entered into with Sir Edward Bulwer
Lytton, for the publication, in the PAIL WAY LIBRABY, of his
world-wide Celebrated Novels. The following Volumes have already
appeared, and may be had at the annexed unprecedentedly low prices,
viz.:—
Pelham, 2s,; Paul Clifford, 2s.; Eugene Aram, 2s.; Last Days of
Pompeii, 2s.; Rienzi, 2s.: Pilgrims of the Rhine, Is. 6d.; Last of
the Barons, 2s. 6d.; Ernest Maltravers, 2s.
The remainder of his Writings are in course of publication, and may
be daily expected.
Cheap Literature.
Similar in appearance to the Parlour and Railway Libraries.
Valentine Vox, the Ventriloquist, 2s. 6d.; Christopher Tadpole, by
Albert Smith, 2s. 6d.; The Wide Wide World, 2s.; Queechy, 2s.
6d.; The Lamplighter, 2s.; Sunny Memories of Foreign Lnnds, by
Mrs. Stowe, 2s.; The Mayflower, by ditto, Is. 6d.; India, with
eight illustrations, by J. H. Stocqueler, Is. 6d.; Reminiscences of a
Retired Physician, Is. 6d.; Sir Roland Ashton, 2s. 6d.; Fashion
and Famine, 2s.; The Hobbs’ and the Dobbs’, or Dressmakers and
Dresswearers, Is. 6d.; Bundle of Crowquills dropped by Alfred
Crowquill, Is. 6d.; Life of the Duke of Wellington, Is. 6d.; Sin-
gleton Fontenoy, 2s. : Christmas Day and How it was Spent, illus-
trated by Phiz, Is. 6d.; Scottish Chiefs, by Miss Porter, 2s. 6d.;
Macfarlane’s Insurrection in China, Is. 6d.; James the Second, by
Ainsworth, Is. 6d. \ Crichton, by ditto, 2s. j Ihaddeus of Waisaw,
2s.; Cmsa’r Borgia, 2s. 6d.; Mary Barton, 2s. 6d.; Bachelor of
the’Albany, by Nathaniel Hawthorne, 2s. 6d.; The Half-Sisters,
by Miss Jewsbury, 2s. 6d.; Falcon Family, 2s. 6d.; Rosalind
Woodbridge, 2s. 6d.; Blackwood’s Comic Zadkiel, numerous illus-
trations, Is. 6d.; Mr. Sydenham Greenfinch, Is. 6d.; Hochelaga,
or England in the New World, by Elliot Warburton, 2s.; Book of
Fun, Is. 6d.
Any of the above may be sent by Post for 3d. extra.


WAVERLEY NOVELS.-People’s Edition (Royal 8vo., with VignetW HUeJ.
Waverley, 2s.; Ouy Mannering, 2s.; Antiquary, 2s ; Rob Roy, 2s.; Old Mortality, 2s.; Black
Dwarf and Legend of Montrose, Is. 9d.; Heart of Midlothian, 2s. 6d.; Bride of Lammermoor,
Is. 6d.; Ivanhoe, 2s.; Monastery, 2s.; Abbott, 2s.; Kenilworth, 2s.; 1‘irate, 2s.; Fortunes
of Nigel, 2s.; Peverel of the Peak, 2s. 6d.; Quentin Durward, 2s.; St. Jtonan’s Well, 2s,;
Redgauntlet, 2s.; Betrothed, and Highland Widow, 2s. ; Talisman, &c., 2s.; Wood-
stock, 2s.; Pair Maid of Perth, 2s.; Anne of Gierstien, 2s.; Count Robert of Paris, 2s. ;
Surgeon’s Daughter, and Castle Dangerous, 2s. 6d.
A New Edition of these is being published in duodecimo, price 2s. each, of which
Waverley, Guy Mannering, and The Antiquary, have been received.
THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY MAGAZINE,
A Periodical, devoted to Literature, Philosophy, Science, and Art;
published Quarterly, in Demy 8vo. Price 5s. each.
No. I. was published in January. Contents:—I. Shakspeare ; IP
Railways; III. In Memorium ; IV. Poetry—The Pearl Oyster—
On the Death of Robert Burns—Suggested by the Perusal of Uncle
Tom’s Cabin ; Y. Study of Law ; VI. Poetry—Sentimentalist—
Realist —The Myall Tree—Hie Bell Bird —Affliction—Recollec-
tions of Childhood ; VII. Recollections of an Optimist; VIII.
Chapter on Titles ; IX. Discussions on Philosophy and Literature,
Education.
WEALE’S SCIENTIFIC AND PRACTICAL TREATISES.
At Is. 6d. each.
Law of Contracts, Works, and Services, Tubular and Iron Girder
Bridges, Art of Painting on Glass, Plane Trigonometry, Pneumatics,
Mensuration, Art of Constructing and Repairing Roads, Statics and
Dynamics, Drainage of Districts and Lands, Drainage and Sewage
of Towns and Buildings, Mathematical Tables, Elements of Differ-
ential Calculus, Examples and Solutions in the Differential Calculus,
Rudimentary Treatise on the Integral Calculus, Examples on the
Integral Calculus, Rudimentary Astronomy, Steam Engine, Steam
and Locomotion, parts 1 and 2 ; Steam Boilers, Elements of Euclid,
Rudimentary Mechanics, Agricultural Engineering, 3 parts ; Medi-
cal Advice to Mothers, Natural Philosophy, Masonry and Stonecut-
ting, Atlas to ditto, Art of Playing the Piano, Book-keeping and
Commercial Phraseology, Chemistry, Analytical Geometry and Conic
Sections, Equational Arithmetic, Civil Engineering, vol. 3, part 1 ;
Descriptive Geometry, Illustrations to Descriptive Geometry, Ship
Building, part 1.,
At 2s. each.
Arithmetic, First Mnemonical Lessons, Geology, Electricity, Domestic
Medicine, Eivil Engineering, vol. 3, part 2.
At 3s. each.
Mineralogy, Magnetism, Rudimentary Algebra, Logarithms and Mathe-
matical Tables, Elements of Mechanism, Manufacture of Bricks and
Tiles, Algebra, Sailor’s Sea Book, a Rudimentary Treatise on Navi-
gation, Navigation and Nautical Astronomy, Shipbuilding, Recent
and Fossil Shells, Perspective, Civil Engineering, the Marine
Engine, Principles of Design in Architecture, Warming and Venti-
lation, Clock and Watchmaking.
WAUGH AND COX.
Ill, George Street.
