

! [
\ :
OUR NEXT LAND ACT




THE CROWN LANDS
AND
labour:
A SUGGESTION BOR
OUR NEXT LAND ACT.
DAVID iVL MYERS, IT. A.
SYDNEY :
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., PRINTERS, 70 PITT STREET.


Mr. Chamberlain (at Birmingham, in June, 1876 :
“ When an Englishman seeks a more prosperous and
“ brighter future in the lands which are destined to
“ hand down to coming ages the glories of the Anglo-
“ Saxon race , and the fame of British enterprise and
“ daring , he seems naturally to leave behind him the
“ relics of all our ancient superstition and feudalism.
“ * * * * You know that there are lands where freedom
“ loves to dwell , and where happiness, material prosperity ,
“ comfort and intelligence are more equally diffused than
“in any other quarter of the globe. Meanwhile , England
“is said to be the Paradise of the rich. We have to
“ take care that it be not suffered to become the t>w -
“ gatory of the poor."
An Echo (in New South Wales) :
“ We have to take care that it be not suffered to be-
“ come the purgatory of the poor ! ”


M 3,355
~wu-n
THE CROWN LANDS LABOUR,
INTRODUCTORY.
A Residence extending over nearly seventeen years in the interior
of the colony, and an occupation which throughout that period
has brought me into the most intimate relations with the com-
munity and their land transactions under the Land Laws, combined
with a prolonged and careful study of the working and results of
the Laws themselves, will constitute some qualification for my
dealing with the subject so far as it touches upon legislation up to
its last effort in 1884. Without further apology I shall apply
myself to that portion of my task. But, touching the very vital
question, What are we to do with the Crown Lands—the
unalienated public Estate—in the future ? I am conscious of
having entered not only upon very debatable ground, but revived
a problem which demands for its effectual solution intellectual gifts
and a wider range of experience than I can claim to possess.
But there is “ borne in upon my mind ” —to use the expressive
Irish phrase—a conviction that there is something so rotten in the
state of our Denmark, in both the current doctrines and practice
of our Land Laws—something so at variance with the inevitable
teaching of the ripened systems of the countries of Europe and
of the clear tendencies of the younger nation of the United States,
although a whole Atlantic apart, geographically and politically—
that I feel the duty of speaking, if only under the warrant of a
faithful citizenship. If lam justified in my belief that our Legis-
lature is as the sentinel that slumbers at his post, I have the
historical, if not very flattering, precedent of the saving of the
Roman citadel by the cackling of the sacred geese, to speak my
thoughts with a boldness the circumstances require. Or, to use
another historical but far more ambitious simile, if I cannot buckle
upon myself the heavy sword and armour of the powerful warrior
I can take up my sling and pebbles and aim straight at the fore-
head of the Philistine, the truculent giant of misrule. The great
point after all is to be sincere and earnest, and leave the truth to
be one’s best apologist to the public. It is a serious theme, and
the facts will make any one sincere if they are boldly presented
and effectually grasped. The waste lands that some day in the
fI BOMS


near future must constitute the backbone of our national vigour
will, I contend, never be opened to the people at large while we
accept the doctrines which underlie our Land Laws from 1861 to
1884. I hope to establish the position that we are eating up our
patrimony with the wild haste of spendthrifts, and that we are
doing so at the expense of those who, being co-heirs with
our freeholders, are most in need of its unimpaired enjoyment.
We are dealing with our labouring classes as adventurers do with
the ignorant savages who bargain away their country to the
stranger for Birmingham trifles or for figs of tobacco. With the
discordant utterances of hustings oratory still jarring in our ears,
we must anxiously ask the question—Are we ever to discover a
permanent land policy that the country will recognise as a true
solution of the agrarian problem; wherein there shall be a central
principle, which will be a scientific test to protect us against the
crude empiricism of political quacks, and will enable us to find
amidst the labyrinth of conflicting opinion a guiding thread to the
broad and clear light of settled conviction ? The statesman who
shall do this will deserve well of his country, although he will
need to be “ breasted with oak and triplex brass,” like Horace’s
sea adventurer, to carry into actual legislation the advanced
doctrines of land tenure that are now daily becoming more
and more the faith of a small but rapidly increasing
minority in all civilised communities. I have, however, no inten-
tion of turning up so extensive a field of controversy as this deep
theory involves, especially as a great master of economic thought
and clear diction has recently made the world familiar with its
scope and foundation. I refer to it now only as it bears upon the
subject under consideration, namely,—the opening of the Crown
lands of this colony to labour, under certain principles which are
not embraced in the Land Law now in operation. It is more
immediate to my object to make a brief reference to the system
of land tenure existing in other countries, because the process
will show that the New South Wales doctrines have been in the
most essential points transmitted from Europe to Australia, carry-
ing with them in the passage the virus of the disease that in the
old world is resulting in socialistic antagonism to the State, in
communism, or, if you will, to petition by dynamite. The dis-
astrous results of this application of the old world doctrines to
the virgin territory of our colony will be shortly apparent.
Our Great Mistake in the Past.
I am indebted to the celebrated official Report of Messrs.
Morris and Rankin, which was issued by the Government in
1883, for all my statistics relating to the Lands Department up to
the year 1882.


We have alienated up to and including that year no less
than 35,478,341 acres of the public lands to individual owners in
fee simple, absolute, and conditional, at the price of about
These lands so gone for ever from the national
estate comprise the “ eyes ” of the country; the rich flats and
dairy lands of the south coast and Bega; the sugar growing
plantations of the Clarence and Richmond; the magnificent
pastoral table-land of Monaro; and the valuable plains of the
west. What are these lands worth in 1886 for which per acre
has been paid in cash or on easy time payments ? What advan-
tage do we, the people of New South Wales, to whom they at
one time belonged as a national heritage committed to the
Government in trust for us, derive from them now? The startling
truth, shameful to confess, is that the total Revenue derived from
these lands, as shown by the Report referred to, was, so far as
ascertained to the year 1882, in that year, only 526 ! The
word “revenue” is used in a dual sense in all our land returns,
and is made to include both the capital sum received as payment
or part payment of the price, and the interest which is annually
paid on the deferred balances. It is obvious that the latter alone
is revenue, and is the equivalent of rental for occupation. Bear-
ing in mind this distinction, the following table exhibits our posi-
tion with regard to revenue from our alienated lands as gathered
from the official figures :
Sold up to 1882.
Revenue, 1882.
By auction ..
Improvement (?) purchases
Before 1862...
Volunteer land orders
Under pre-emptive right ..
Conditional sales ...
10,995. 120 Ni
2 ,3 0 5.938
6,365,100
In 1882, total
i 44,000 ~
246,306 ~
15,421,877
35,478,341
We shall be told that the amount that has been received in return
for the alienated lands has been invested in reproductive works
such as roads, railways, bridges, &c. That, but for such
a magnificent resource as alienation afforded us, we could not
have carried on the business of Government and the improvement
of the public estate. But, up to the time of the comparatively
recent exposure of the financial fallacy, our land receipts were
indiscriminately applied as revenue, and an indefinite but very


large portion of the millions sterling has been swallowed up in
current expenditure that should have been met out of revenue
proper. Further, so far as the alienated land has been converted
into reproductive works, the latter from the annual cost of their
maintenance cannot be considered as equivalent to the land as
an asset. Again, there is this important distinction to be consi-
dered as between public and private ownership. If the owner of
a private estate of—say, 20,000 acres, sells 5,000 acres to raise a
fund to enable him to improve the remaining 15,000, the estate,
although diminished in area, should be of at least equal value to
the original whole. The increased value of the 15,000 acres
compensates the owner for the loss of the 5,000, as all increment
goes into his own pocket. The State, the public landowner, spends
the millions it receives from the private purchasers for the
alienated portion of its estate on improvements or reproductive
outlay which produce a progressive increment of value, which, if
not wholly, yet most largely and directly, benefits the indi-
vidual purchasers, but only indirectly, and in a very inferior
proportion the other individual members of the community who,
collectively speaking, constitute the vendor. Railways and
labour will produce a value to the private landowner’s 35,000,000
acres, which before long will mean a bonus of some millions of
money, in addition to indirect benefit distributed amongst some
few thousands of honest country people, their merchants and
bankers, but only some very indefinite but not monetary benefit
amongst the increasing hundreds of thousands of other classes of
the population, who represent, as I have said, the state owner;
thus completely reversing the result attained when a prudent
private owner sells part of his estate to improve the remainder.
Thus, also, the price of the Crown Lands is not a convertible
term with “ reproductive works.” The magnitude of the differ-
ence will grow with the colony. The deficit of 1886 will be met
by some form of taxation, but we may be sure that the landless
class will have to sustain the additional burden as well as the
landed, in spite of the incontestable fact that the cause of the
deficit is over expenditure, which has benefitted the one class far
more than it has the other.
Value of the Alienated Lands.
The extent of the public land alienated up to and including
the year 1882 was 35,478,341 acres. The price, when all the
balances on conditional sales are paid up, being about jQ 1 per
acre, or approximately Some hundreds of thou-
sands of acres sold for 1 are not worth at their present selling
value ten shillings per acre, but they are “ secured,” a term I
shall refer to presently. The purchasers knew their own business


well enough when they bought the land, and tne Sydney banks
and merchants whose iron safes hold the Crown Grants, can ex-
plain the position on sound commercial principles.
The great bulk of the land has been enhanced in value, as we
can readily see whenever a large estate is sold. I have found it
necessary to extend my private experience in this division of my
subject by inviting reports from all parts of the colony as to the
market value of conditionally purchased lands upon which
nominal improvements exist, that is to say improvements merely
to “ pass ” the Minister for Lands. The cost of such lands is the
deposit of five shillings, and the improvements, which would be
on an average over-estimated at ten shillings. Where the balances
have been paid, or the purchase has been at auction or other-
wise, we must add fifteen shillings more to the cost. But it will
be borne in mind that my enquiry was directed to the market
value of transferable C.P. lands, of which the cost on an average
has been fifteen shillings per acre, and the buyer to take the
liability of the balance of fifteen shillings to be paid to the govern-
ment. I have sought the assistance of upwards of fifty gentlemen,
mostly bank managers, sometimes auctioneers or solicitors, resid-
ing in the eastern, central, and western divisions of the colony,
and the reports they have sent to me enable me to make, with
some confidence, the following statements. A Parliamentary Com-
mission alone would exhaustively accomplish the task of such a
valuation. My attempt is seriously defective and incomplete,
from the fact that I am unable to ascertain the proportions of the
alienated lands that are classed as pastoral, agricultural, or fit for
dairying. Exceptional values apply under certain conditions, but
there are no means at my command of even approximately fixing
the aggregate exceptional areas. However, it is sufficient for my
purpose, and the scope of this treatise, to state the general facts
based upon the information I have collected. First, let us ex-
clude the area which has been secured only upon the dog-in-the -
manger principle of preventing the intrusion of bona fide settle-
ment, and is not marketable at per acre. By and by these
acres will have their value, but I cannot see my way to reckon
upon them in any way usefully to the present argument, I find
that the average market value of C.P. land, of fair pastoral capa
bility, is jQi ss. per acre. Under favourable conditions a higher
price is constantly being obtained. I have known choice selec-
tions to bring £2 to in a pastoral district. I have known a
whole pastoral estate, consisting of thousands of acres, to be sold
for £2 per acre, unstocked , and I can find eager purchasers for
thousands of acres more at the same and a higher price—this,
too, in a district situated very far away from railway communica-
tion.


For lands of a higher capacity the price varies enormously,
from to the latter price attaching to rich soils near a
town. My returns give me these figures as to prices, but no areas
to which I may apply them. But if we deduct from the total
alienations of 36,000,000 acres, one third as being out of the
calculation, we have 24,000,000 acres as to which I again ask the
pertinent question, What are they worth now, what will they be
worth ten years hence ? They cost from 15s. to 305., but whenever
the State may propose to resume any portion for railway purposes,
what shall we have to pay in buying back our own land ?
Has Small Area Alienation been Successful in other
Countries ?
For information on the land system of other countries I have
mainly depended upon the work of the committee of the Cobden
Club, which was issued, it is said, at the suggestion of Mr. Glad-
stone, and is, I believe, the most compendious report on the sub-
ject which is obtainable. It embodies a series of articles con-
tributed by specially selected writers, each of whom treats of the
land tenure of that country which he is qualified to deal with.
Other scattered sources of information have been consulted, but I
regret that I have no exhaustive treatise on the United States
tenures. Mr. Griffin, the United States Consul at Sydney, to
whom I wrote, could not refer me to more sources of information
to be obtained in this colony than what I already possess. How-
ever, I deem the material so at my command ample for my pre-
sent purpose. In the evidence thus presented, one is struck with
the fact that notwithstanding the variety of systems by which the
various countries of the civilised world seek to attain the perfect
law of land, there is a unity of conception as to the great primary
principle, that the land should be held by the many and not by
the few. The countries in Europe, with one exception, that I
shall presently refer to, have cast off the old shell of feudal Land
Law and adopted the principle of free trade in land. The whole,
or nearly the whole of the platform of the party who, in England,
are so ably championed by Mr. Arthur Arnold, is law everywhere
but England. With the same unenviable solitary exception, the
world has sought, by the establishment of small proprietors upon
the soil, to cast off the incubus of a landed aristocracy and to
create a free yeomanry, whose members should guarantee the
stability of government. A glow of enthusiasm fills the breast of
the student who traces in the records of these countries, on every
page, the same wondrous pulsation of the heart of freedom. In
the colonies this deeply-rooted conviction has obtained and mani-
fested itself in legislative attempts by Land Acts, which, however
chronically under amendment, are staunchly assertive of the same


principle. If the argument lam anxious to make clear is followed,
it will be seen that a powerful addition to its force exists in the
instance of England, the exception to subdivided freehold-loving
countries, particularly when, after the few statements I have
to make are considered, we reflect that she proudly holds her
own amongt the foremost of the Great Powers—if not herself
primus inter pares. In England the most inveterate con-
servatism has resisted hitherto all attempts at assimilating her
land system to those of her continental neighbours. Her off-
spring, even to the youngest, in the colonies, are centuries in
advance of their parent in this respect. Morier, comparing the
land tenure of Germany with that of England, says :—“ England
is the only Teutonic community (we believe we might say the
only civilised community) now existing in which the bulk of
the land under cultivation is not in the hands of small proprie-
tors.” Mr. Gladstone, in his recent electoral manifesto has realised
the growth of public opinion in England, combined as it is with
the wider franchise, by admitting that the time has come for the
early handling by the'Liberal party of this terrible mischief. Mr.
Chamberlain goes beyond his leader, and approaches dangerously
near to the views now held by the advanced Radicals, and a
revolution in English land law is inevitable in the immediate
future. The whole area of England (including Wales) is 37,319,221
acres. Arthur Arnold, the author of “ Free Land,” and chairman
of the Free Land League now established in London and the pro-
vinces, and working well, computes that four-fifths of the kingdom
belong to a body of owners numbering about seven thousand;
while, excluding small proprietors, about 2250 persons own to-
gether nearly half the enclosed lands, of whom, according to the
estimation of Professor Fawcett, the late Postmaster-General, the
capitalised rental value is little short of five thousand millions
sterling ! That is to say, to quote the words of Henry George,
who is perhaps the greatest thinker of the age on the land
problem, and whom the Duke of Argyle, the great landowner,
sneeringly calls the “Prophet of San hrancisco”: “A few
thousand of the people of England hold a lien upon the labour of
the rest, the capitalised value of which is more than twice as great
as, at the average price of southern negroes in iB6O, would be the
value of the whole population were they slaves.” This congestion
in English landed wealth is attributed to the law of primogeniture,
with its congenital custom of primogeniture, and the practice of
entail amongst the larger landed proprietors. In no other part of
the world is primogeniture allowed to exist. No other civilised
country in the world has such a Land system. In every other nation
the principle of sharing the land in fee simple amongst as large a
number of the people as possible has been recognised and acted
upon. But is the system a success ?


In France a very different picture is presented to us, where
the land is chiefly occupied by small fee simple proprietors, the
direct consequence of the State law of succession. One-third of
France, excluding communal property and State domains, is
owned by peasants holding on an average about acres each.
Another third is held by yeoman proprietors, who hold, on an
average, 75 acres each. The remaining third are large proprietors.
Vine culture will, of course, make the minute subdivision more
practicable than where agriculture prevails. Official statistics,
made up to 1868, show 7,845,724 proprietors, including owners
of house property in towns, the whole population then being about
35 millions. In Germany the same subdivision has been brought
about by legislation. The other advanced continental nations,
especially Belgium and Switzerland, have done the same thing.
But of all the Great Powers the most astonishing position in land
settlement has been attained in Russia. A very interesting experi-
ment is now being worked out there, and according to some of
the best educated Russian authorities, we are to see in it the solu-
tion of the puzzle that disturbs all the practices of the Western
Powers. According to the treatise of Jules Faucher, in the Cobden
Club series, the original form of tenure obtaining amongst the
primitive Sclavonic population of Russia, was the joint husbandry
of a whole village. When a village got over-populated it sent out
a colony, which founded further on amongst waste lands what was
called a daughter village, upon the same lines. The village, not
the family, was the social unit, and was locally governed by patri-
archal rule. Moveable property alone was individual, while land
was common. The Commune paid the State a tax, and in return
they were guaranteed the security of their village. The encroach-
ment of the Czars gradually converted the villages into estates,
yielding rent to private individuals, and the villagers in time
grew to become the people so much talked of under the
name of the serfs. In the time of the Czar Nicholas, of
Crimean memory, the measure of emancipation of the serfs had
grown into a State necessity, and a concession without which
national disintegration would have been imminent. The problem
was whether the emancipated serf should be individually invested
with freehold property as in Western Europe : or, was regard to
be had to the old national system of the Communal village, known
by the untranslatable term of the “ Mir.” In xß6x {absit omen I)
the new law was passed, under which the land is held in the form
of a Commune, as in the ancient institution, paying a tax to the
State in proportion to population. The villages so called into
renewed existence were carved out of the serf-bearing estates of
the landowners, but rent was reserved to console the divested
proprietors. The area of the Commune land, arable and pasture,
was not to be less than about twelve acres per male head of the


population. The rent might be redeemed by certain payments to
be agreed upon, whereby the Commune as a whole, or the mem-
bers individually, might become freeholders in fee. In this
principle of redemption I cannot help suspecting, from colonial
experience, the germ may be sown of a gradual deletation of the
Commune, and a reversion to the evils of private property accom-
panied by landed accumulation. I regard it as a Dens ex machina
that may insidiously destroy the great usefulness of the experiment.
The Democratic party in Russia believe firmly in their destiny
under the “Mir.” Faucher states their views as follows ;—“ We
believe that the nations of Western Europe who, all of them in
times dating very far back, knew of institutions similar to the
Russian “ Mir,” committed a fatal blunder already at the begin-
ning of their career, and condemned themselves to unavoidable
decay setting in sooner or later by allowing land to become indi-
vidual right of property, which amongst the western nations was
established by the formation of a feudal aristocracy first, and the
revival of the Roman law afterwards.” This party are by their
opponents referred to as the Sclavonian Socialists; but, as Wallace
in his work on Russia, referring to this subject puts it—“ many
people habitually and involuntarily attach a stigma to the word,
and believe that all to whom the term is applied must be first
cousins to the Petroleuses.” I think lam right in regarding these
Socialists as occupying amongst Russian politicians a position
analogous to that of the men who in our colony were audacious
enough to propose vote by ballot and manhood suffrage. At any
rate, they contended for a principle, which, after a severely fought
struggle, resulted in the establishment of the present land law of
Russia, and obtained from the landholders a restoration of the
original and inalienable right of property in the soil of their
people. Not by confiscation, but by change of tenure and the
substitution of rent as compensation for their former exclusive
enjoyment—rent taken in money from the village as a whole or
communal produce. When property in the soil is considered the
property of all, it becomes a question what is the title of an indi-
vidual to possess a certain area in severalty. To this the reply of
the Russian progress party is the following, which I take verbatim
from Faucher :—“ Let the title be composed of his free will and
of his evident ability. What ? Is the stronger or more intelligent
man, or the man with more working capital to get more than the
others'? Before all other considerations we have in view the man
with a larger family. In Western Europe the difference in the
number of children between one family and the other is a more
frequent cause, particularly with the class of small landed pro-
prietors and of small farmers—of the increasing difference between
wealth and poverty than laboriousness and parsimony here, idle-
ness and spendthriftness there. The great bulk of every people


under the influence of custom and neighbour’s gossip, are pretty
nearly alike as to economical habits. Yet poverty as well as
wealth is on the increase in the west with the peasant population
in France and Germany, and with what is left of that class in
England. We ascribe it to the blessing not being known there of
our ‘ Mir.’ In a western village, with a divided soil, the family
gets poorer by being blessed with numerous children in rapid
succession. For during the first fourteen years of his life the
child is a mere burthen ; and, while the family, which the soil has
to feed, grows, the soil they possess and are able to till does not
grow. And even when the fourteen years or more later, they are
enabled to till more soil by the growing maturity of their progeny,
in numbers of cases it has become too late, and they are not any
longer in the position to buy or farm more soil. In our ‘ Mir ’
the family is not impoverished by the birth of a child, but on the
contrary enriched. For with the number of children increases the
share of the family in the village household. Of all that is held
therein in common, and produced in common, they partake a
head’s share more. The birth of a male child—this is our new title
to the right of husbandry on a unit share of the soil of the Empire;
and here you have the constantly repeated application of the
theory in which we believe Voluntary emigration
into cities is further calculated to prevent any rapid decrease of
the unit share. Those who have fewer mouths of children to feed
have to work for those who have more. We are levying a kind of
rate not appearing in public accounts for counteracting the effects
of such inequalities between family and family, for nobody is
responsible for the number of his children. We do not believe in
the doctrine of the necessity for self imposed restraint as means
to and result of a higher stage of civilisation. It is against nature ;
it cannot be right. Our village rate for assisting numerous
families to prevent inequality of wealth to creep into our village—
invented not by theories but by our people themselves, in times
beyond the dawn of history—is the result of an instructive fore-
thought, for the absence of which you in the west are punished
by your poor rates. What our people pay at once, when it can
be both given as well as received with a good grace, yours have
to pay afterwards, when it is burdensome to give and degrading to
receive—when it is, besides, unable to cure an already hereditary
evil. The ‘ Mir ’ of the village, of course, is only a stage in the
application of the theory of communism in land. Should the
increase of the population of the village have increased in such a
way as to reduce the unit share too much, we mean to resort to
the old expedient of our people —colonization. We have still
uncultivated land enough, and very good land too; and if we had
not, we would know how to procure it. Of the new village the
nation, the empire, has to take care, as the village does of its


child.” Now, for material for thought on the land problem, you
cannot find anything more practical than this Russian “ Mir ”
system. If it were merely a student’s theory ; if it were the lucu-
bration of one who wished to settle the problem by a reference to
his own “ inner consciousness,” I ought not to quote it so
strongly. The solid incontrovertible fact is that, amongst five-
sixths of the people of the largest population of any European
Power, an actual system is in existence, the scheme of which
came from the people themselves, and since 1861 has been the
law. Wallace, who reviews this system with almost judicial im-
partiality, albeit with some tinge of an Englishman’s habit of
thought, which cannot sever individual accumulation of wealth
from the law of industrial progress, fairly puts the case when
he says, “ however sceptical we may be with regard to social
panaceas of all kinds, we ought surely to study attentively
this gigantic experiment in social science, on the success of which
depends to a great extent the material and moral welfare of
forty million human beings.”
It will be at once admitted that the interest attaching to this
“ Mir ” system is not its remotest applicability to the circum-
stances of this colony, or those of any other Anglo-Saxon
community. My principal reason for quoting it so freely is to
show that the difficulty of dealing with land legislation upon
principles which would appear to be even of the most radical
type, is not so insuperable as many of our leaders in this colony
would teach us to suppose.
I have thus cursorily glanced at European agrarian institu-
tions. I shall presently direct attention to the condition of the
problem in New South Wales, but, I must not return from my
wide excursion abroad until I have seen what the United States
can show that will bear upon my conclusions. I have to depend
in the main upon extracts from Mr. Ford’s report to the com-
mission, appointed by the House of Commons, to enquire into
Foreign Land Systems, and a short treatise of Mr. C. M. hisher,
counsellor-at-law, of the States. I find that with the same
freedom of devise and intestacy distribution as obtains amongst
us the system of land occupation in the United States, may be
generally described, or that by small proprietors. The theory
and practice of the country is for every man to own land as soon
as possible. The term of “ landlord ” is an obnoxious one.
Land is so cheap that every provident man may hold land in fee.
You will observe that the qualifying word provident is a necessary
one ; because, as with us, in this colony, by thrift or other means,
a man must have a certain basis of capital to enable him to go
out upon the land. The several States and Governments of the
Union grant their land in limited areas. But note well, that by
a more recent Act of Congress, known as the Free Homestead


Law, every citizen can have a farm of 160 acres without charge.
I am unable to find out whether this holding is saddled with
conditions of any kind, but we may assume that now that the
country has a population of 40,000,000 the land thus generously
offered to the people, however good, is not immediately in
contact with the great centres of traffic, but is back country.
I shall presently again refer to this free land system. In the
United States it is said to be observable, that small holdings are
very frequently aggregated by capitalists into larger areas, not,
however, from territorial pride, but for speculative purposes.
The political theory of small holdings appears to be as delusive
in actual operation in the States as free selection in New South
Wales. In a vigorous and masterly sketch, entitled “ Our
Public Land Policy,” appearing in Harper’s New Monthly
Magazine, for October of the present year, the writer, who seems
to have a thorough knowledge of his subject, gives us an
appalling account of the enormous acquisitions that have been
made by large syndicates, at low prices, of the State domains.
“ Out of the possession of the Government and into the hands of
unscrupulous men (says the article referred to), the public lands
are passing at a rate so extravagant in acreage and so insig-
nificant in price as to give cause for alarm, and the subject
demands investigation.” One almost imagines himself in our
colony, when he reads the following remarks respecting the
operation of the act, called the “Timber Act.” “The con-
ditions of this act, are that no one person or association shall be
permitted to enter more than r6o acres; that the entry shall not
be made for speculation nor for the benefit of any other person
than the party making the entry. The applicant is required to
swear, among other things, that he has made no contract or
agreement by which the title that he may receive from the United
States shall acrue to the benefit of any person except himself.
These provisions are hardly noticed. Large operators cause
their employers and procure other persons to make affidavits,
enter the lands, and then convey to their employers. In this
manner large tracts of timber lands are secured and controlled
by individuals and firms contrary to the intention of the statute.”
This description of the land practice, as apart from land theory
of the United States, is instructive to us ; though of course, in
New South Wales, where false affidavits or declarations are going
to be things of the past, and the capitalists have become as
millennium lions lying down with the uncapitalised lambs under
the dispensation of 1884, we will shut our eyes to such things as
are quite possible in a country where there is no knowledge of
Sir John Robertson or miracle-working Minister for Lands, who
by the magic wand of “ Administration ” can annihilate the
power of capital.


I am now in a position to ask a very obvious question;
Has the universal faith in small fee-simple holdings revealed to
its worshippers the happy Paradise of contented realms ? The
reply comes to us in the low moaning misery of millions of the
uncapitalised people in every single country I have alluded to.
Let Russia altogether stand aside. Her troubles are political,
not agrarian, for her people love her Land Act of 1861 with a
deep affection, and regard it with hopeful pride. From England,
where we find the most atrocious condition of land monopoly on
the face of the globe; from France the subdivided; from
Germany, and the European ring of small-proprietor-loving states,
we have the one sad cry to pitying Heaven for help to the great
landless—to the vast majority who, be they ever so thrifty, can
barely keep the wolf from the door. The day of reckoning
approaches even in bountiful America. In New South Wales the
teeming breast of mother earth will some day cease to yield its
nutriment to all but a fraction of her children. It is abundantly
clear that whatever else is to save us from the successive stages of
pauperdom—now so manifest in Europe—the panacea is not to
be found in those Land Laws which contentedly accept as the
highest principle of progress small fee simple tenures. The
labourer, not the drone, everywhere confronts the capitalist, and,
under the electoral franchise, will, in New South Wales, seek to
know what is to be the future relation of capital to the Crown
Lands of this colony. We know not poverty as yet in this
country, except where it follows in the wake of vice, ignorance,
or misfortune. We have no workhouses or rates for the relief of
the poor. We are like Buddha in the “ Light of Asia,” before he
entered upon his divine mission to suffering humanity, ignorant of
a world where misery reigns ; yet, like him, we listen to the Devas
song in the moaning of the winds —
Oh Maya’s son ! because we roam the earth
Moan we upon those strings ; we make no mirth,
So many woes we see in many lands,
So many streaming eyes and wringing hands.
The Land Act of 1884.
We have not yet exhausted our Crown Lands, We are as
merry as they at Balshazzar’s banquet, and perceive not the hand-
writing on the wall. We have had our Land Act of nß6i. We
found something wrong, and we added another wheel to the
machinery in 1875, and yet another in 1880. Still it worked
backwards. The capitalists were grasping our lands for ever.
The old doctors were consulted, and the theory of blood-letting
was all they had learned. Alienate to the little capitalists and
keep away the devouring big ones by drawing them off to the


sweet-smelling bait of divided runs and pastoral areas. Some of
us will remember the pathetic story of the Russian traveller who,
with his wife and child were journeying homeward in a sleigh
across a great snow-clad plain. The party were pursued by a
pack of wolves, who gained every minute upon the despairing
travellers until barely a few yards intervened between them and
the gleaming fangs of the pursuers. For one moment the brave
heart of the man sank as he thought of wife and child ; but, in the
next a horrible necessity suggested his course. He threw the
child to the wolves and carried safely home his rescued but
agonised wife. The squatters have got their infant, and a sorry
meal they will make of it ! For ten years millions of Crown lands
will be held as pastoral areas on the most unproductive tenure
that we can conceive, because all improvements there may be on
them at the expiration of that term must revert to the Crown.
Nothing but the lowest possible use of these lands will be prac-
ticable. They have got the child and to-morrow will be hungering
again. Ever the same unevenhanded injustice ! To-day a boon
for the capitalist :to morrow a sop to the people. The squatter
who, with a judicious use of capital, makes the proverbial two
blades of grass grow where one grew before, and who pays the
State a justly assessed rental, is as much deserving of our sympathy
as the “ boss-cockies” who have only been able to do a little fee-
simpling with the public estate. The machinery of 1861, with its
additions of 1875 and 1880, was considered to be perfectly sound.
All we wanted was a more powerful fly wheel, and so you have
“the history of the crime” of 1884. To all but our quasi states-
men it would seem, indeed, that wherever a series of supplementary
devices is needed to meet a law of variance with the time it
indicates the under-current of another law struggling against
worn out barriers that will not long be able to withstand it. Our
children may yet rue the mischief that is brewing, and yet make
the sad retrospect over the happy days when our land was our
own and bitterly learn the truth of Tennyson’s well-known
aphorism—“ That a sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remembering
happier things.”
Shall we Perpetrate the Error?
If legislation were proposed which, under philosophical
theories and abstract reasonings, directly interfered with vested
rights, one could hardly claim the attention of the general public.
This treatise proposes a practical reform upon the sound basis of
absolute expediency, and a belief that the Crown Lands may be at
once dealt with consistently with just conceptions of the more
advanced and higher political economy that is now scientifically
established, and at the same time without disturbing the natural


order of legislation. If public opinion were to-day sufficiently
educated to see that we have been misappropriating the Crown
Lands there should be forthwith a demand made by the electors
of the colony that another system than that of alienation be adopted
in the f uture , whatever the difficulty in rectifying our mistake in the
past. To this end I have devoted my best efforts, and lam
confident, and I entertain the sanguine hope, that stronger hands
than mine will make them effectual before very many years have
elapsed, and that throughout the colony will resound the impera-
tive demand, “Stop alienation.”
Ark the Crown Lands Now Open to Labour ?
It is certain that the uncapitalised people—a class I may not
incorrectly refer to under the abstract term, Labour—are, as the
Land Laws exist, absolutely shut out from settlement upon the
Crown Lands of the colony. The more valuable or accessible
lands having been alienated, Parliament has found it to be im-
peratively necessary to increase for the second time the limit of
the area which a selector may be permitted to take up. The Act
of 1861 fixed the maximum at 320 acres. The Amending Act of
1875 extended it to 640 acres. The present law again increases
the limit, in the Eastern Division, to 1,280 acres (including leases
with pre-emptive rights), and in the Central Division to 2,560
acres. The law thus recognises the fact that a man requires a
much larger quantity of Crown Land for his necessary support
than it was thought at first desirable to allow. Unless he can
select exceptionally good land, or land which, from proximity to a
market has exceptional value, it may be admitted that 640 acres
is the fair average minimum selection the intending settler should
apply for. If he cannot manage so much he should be advised to
let selection alone. The deposit is now fixed at two shillings per
acre. That involves an immediate cash outlay of ,£64. A
boundary fence of a permanent character must be erected within
two years from the confirmation of his purchase. Under favour-
able circumstances he will manage this for, say, A
residence of a habitable sort must be erected. The purchase of
stock, &c., is a necessary preliminary. Income, or return for his
capital and labour, must be indefinitely deferred, but he must
have means to live or he must go into debt. At the end of three
years he is called upon to begin a series of annual payments to
the Government of one shilling per acre, or each, extending
over 27 years, the non-payment of any one of which involves the
confiscation of the whole of his capital and labour.
The labour, therefore, which is now invited to settle upon the
Crown Lands is, so far, of the capitalist type, that the working
man with no fortune but his capacity for industry is not included.


The men who work for wives and children from Monday morning
to Saturday night and find themselves beginning each week with
the only capital they started with —their strong arms and stout
hearts —are of no account in our Crown land system. To them
are open the shallows of existence which the unhealthy, crowded
city affords, and they may, of course, become hewers of wood and
drawers of water to the occupiers of the land until they get the
necessary “ nest egg ” to enable them to select which, as lar as
very many of them, the married ones at least are concerned, will
be “ some day.” I cannot define with accuracy the numerical
proportion such a labouring class bear to the other classes of the
community. I venture to assert that common experience will
describe them as tire vast majority in the State. We import
immigrants at a cost to the revenue of hundreds of thousands of
pounds. Parliamentary oratory tells us that we do so primarily
to settle upon the Crown Lands, fertilising streams of labour.
Common fact tells us that we do not import men with enough
money at their disposal to enable them to pass from the ship’s
deck to the land ; but, on the contrary, a class of people who, for
the most part, swell the cohorts of disappointed labour. If immi-
gration is to be continued its utility will be more conspicuous
if we adopt with respect to our Crown Lands the following
system :
The Method of Settling upon the Crown Lands
Uncapitalised Labour.
i.—No Deposit Needed.
Our colony contains 196,000,000 acres of land, of which
thirty-six millions have passed into private ownership, and about
100,000,000 remain to be dealt with by legislation, excluding some
millions that must remain practically useless for an indefinite
period. The theoretical policy ot the future is that we should
settle upon the hundred million life-sustaining acres as numerous
a body as possible of small but thriving occupiers. The practical
problem is how to do it. For a quarter of a century we, in accord-
ance with the ideas of the time that have been current doctrine in
Europe and the United States, have been trying to effect our
object by fostering the acquisition of small areas of fee simple
tenure, and we have signally and most calamitously failed to do
more than perpetrate a vile parody upon our ideal settlement. If
we continue as we have done hitherto, to act upon the same
infatuated adherence to effete political economy, and sell away
like spendthrifts until the whole hundred million acres of Crown
Lands have been alienated, a mere section of the people will hold
our land, and the State, representing the whole people, will have


expended the purchase money in what will chiefly result in
enhancing the monetary value of these private estates without
deriving at the time one shilling by way of annual revenue. Let
there be no more listless slumber over this most momentous of
dangers. We can combine in one practical and immediately
achievable system all the solid and even sentimental advantages
of alienation with what will yield an equitable return to the State
owner more consistent with the common sense view of the case
than the present mere entrance fee of per acre.
In the first place, alienation in fee must be abolished. The
State should keep for ever untouched its most valuable asset,
income producing as far as practicable, and as a guarantee for
future borrowing powers when needed to improve the land.
Instead of a complicated system of conditional purchase, the
Crown Lards should be allotted in limited areas upon a
tenure in the nature of PERPETUAL LEASEHOLDS,
WHICH WILL ADMIT OF THE MOST ABSOLUTE
SECURITY IN THE ENJOYMENT OF IMPROVEMENTS
AS EXCLUSIVE PROPERTY, AND OF THE SAME
PERFECT FREEDOM OF TRANSFER AND DEVISE AS
IS ALLOWED WITH NEARLY ALL OTHER PROPERTY.
I am convinced that it would obstruct our national progress if
tenure of Crown Lands were for a term of years only, because no
permanent improvements would be risked in such a case. Of
course, it will be understood that I refer to areas which are to form
the substitutes for conditional purchases. Large pastoral leases,
the legitimate field for the capitalist, would remain, as now, a
distinct interest recognised by the State as the natural arena for the
development of our wool-growing capacity. Even the old
squatting system, under the transition of progressive ideas, finds
its best interests in improvement tenures, if the State will grant
them. Where large pastoral holdings are alone practicable, the
leases, although not perpetual, should be based upon a well defined
tenure which will afford encouragement for real improvements, say
re-purchase by the State at fair valuation, and a careful
guardianship that such only shall be regarded as improvements as
will, when true settlement is practicable, constitute an asset which
will return fair interest in the shape of rental.
In the matter of perpetual leases in limited areas, so long as
the people generally obtain their fair charge for the land, it matters
nothing whether the settler, his alienee, or his posterity occupy.
I would not willingly break with the old tradition which is with us
equivalent to the phrase that the Englishman’s house is his castle:
nor would I disregard the very valuable sentiment that underlies
proprietorship. But in return for this form of tenure, with its
blessing of undisturbed possession, which amounts practically to


the usefulness of a fee simple , what are we to give the State in
satisfaction of the law of relationship between possessor and
owner? The basis of rental should be the unimproved capital
value of the land—the fruit of the labour and capital of the tenant
being his exclusive right. The fluctuations of annual value should
be met by an assessment sufficiently frequent to give just average
dues to the revenue and yet not disturb the reasonable calculations
of the tenant. Perhaps an annual assessment would be best,
inasmuch as while, on the whole, values may increase by special
local and general events, by railway extension, or from increasing
consumption of products, there will be years when drought, flood,
or fall in prices in wool or grain, may make it expedient to lower
the assessment. In this way the tenant ought not to find ground
for complaint that he is unjustly treated in the enforcing a rental
the land cannot justly bear, nor could the landless classes get up
an agrarian agitation that their country was sold to the others on
any conceivable shred of an argument. The mode of assessment,
whether annual or otherwise, equally with the area of the lease-
hold are matters of detail, which, however important in themselves
and involving probably considerable conflict of opinion, I am not
at present dealing with. Presumably the present Local Land
Boards with, say, two or more Assessors taken from the ordinary
District Jury Lists, would constitute an effective mode of
assessment.
The area would vary accordingly as the land would be classified.
'The two principles of leasehold tenure and assessment for annual
value of occupation are all that 1 need mention so far, but I shall
add a third in a few moments which is to break down the last
barrier now intervening between labour without capital and the
areas so provided for them.
The Crown Lands Occupation Act of 1861, section 13, pro-
vides that “ Rent is to determined by appraisement of fair annual
value for pastoral purposes,” and it is provided that in estimating
such value, “ Neither the construction of dams or reservoirs, nor the
laying down of grass, nor the making of any other improvement by
the occupier shall be taken into account.” This principle should
be continued in application to the proposed leasehold areas. Ido
not think, hownver, that the value should always be assessed as for
pastoral purposes only; but the assessor, whether a Local Land
Board or otherwise, should be guided by the local capabilities of
the district where the area might be situated. The special
capability of an area should not be taken into the account unless
it be so situated that its abnormal productive use can be at once
turned to profit. For instance, if there were a few patches of rich
arable land within a district where no industry would pay its way
but the pastoral, the assessment should be based upon pastoral value.


But if in a district such as Bega, an occupier chose to apply his
land, which was of equal character to the average, to a use less
productive than its fair capacity would admit, I think the assess-
ment should be on the higher scale. If this were the law now we
should hear no more of the necessity for an absentee tax. I claim
that in this proposal we have a true system of classification of the
lands of the colony, based upon actual capacity and not the
arbitrary and unscientific divisions introduced by the Act of 1884.
The non-payment of rental should not involve the cruelty of con-
fiscation, but the usual landlord’s remedy by distraint or by sale of
the tenant’s interest should be substituted, the proceeds, if sold,
to be held by the Crown to the extent necessary for reimbursement
only, and the balance, if any, to be repaid to the tenant.
2. —Cost of Fencing to be no Bar to Labour.
I have said that a third principle should be mentioned, which
should constitute the removal of the last barrier intervening
between the moneyless people and the Crown Lands. The
suggestion I have now to make I regard as the coping stone of
the new structure. I have especially to consider the important
fact that without capital to some respectable extent, a comfortable
“ nest egg, ” as it were, no man can become a settler under the
present law. The perliminary deposit and the fencing alone
irrespective of stock, demands more than many can find. By in-
troducing the leasehold tenure, you at once do away with the old
deposit. What shall we do about fencing ? The provision of the
Act of 1884, which makes a boundary fence a condition of occu-
pation, is, I believe, generally admitted to be beneficial, both to the
occupier and the country. In only very exceptional cases would
it be prudent to leave out such a requirement in any law we may
pass. But to fence in a 640 acre block of land, or even half that
area, takes so much capital beyond the deposit, that an intending
selector must now either be what is called a “ warm ” man or he
must resort straightway to borrowing if he has anything to pledge.
If his land be forfeited afterwards, the fencing reverts to the Crown,
together with all his other permanent improvement. The case is
different with respect to obtaining stock or plant, because, with
even very poor men, the ordinary business methods will procure
for them at least a commencement in stock or working
plant, without any capital to speak of, as these never can
revert to the State, and are transferable marketable com-
modities and may be held as security for payment to
the vendor. Well, then, I propose that the State, to whom the
land for ever belongs, should, whenever the selector demands it,
erect the boundary fence. This will be applicable, of course,
only to perpetual tenures. The amount paid out of the general


revenue would not only be represented by a very substantial asset
in the improvement of the small holdings, but should be made to
yield a return of, say, four per cent, per annum upon the cost of
fencing. It might be so arranged that easy time payment should
end in the fence becoming the property of the tenant, but Ido
not see that this is absolutely necessary. Financially, the annual
cost would be of no moment, because it would not only be a
reproductive outlay, but in facilitating settlement it would be of a
kind where cost is not material. One could see in it without
much acumen a justification for expenditure which the half
million or so spent on the International Exhibition, or the “little
bill ” for the Soudan expedition, will not quite so readily admit.
At any cost let us, if we can, get rid of the centralization of our
unhealthy crowded city, and relieve the congestion in its alleys
and purlieus. I specially noted already the interesting fact that
the United States Congress has lately so far altered its previous
land system that it offers 160 acre blocks to all citizens for ab-
solutely no prepayment. What is this but a recognition by our
shrewd American cousins of the necessity of considering the
pockets of the masses whom they would invite to come upon their
State domains ? Again, let me refer you to the facts of actual
legislation elsewhere. Prussia, after the battle of Jena and the
peace of Tilsit, shook herself together by a steady attention to
internal reforms in her land system. The edict of Frederick
William contains these memorable words, attributed to the in-
fluence of Adam Smith’s philosophy upon the royal mind :
“ Whereas it is not only conformable to the everlasting dictates
of justice, but likewise to the principles of a sound national
economy, to remove all hindrances in the way of the individual
attaining to that measure of well-being which his capacities may
enable him to attain. . . . Every inhabitant of our dominion
is, as far as the State is concerned, henceforth free to acquire and
own landed property of every kind and description.” After this
noble admission that henceforth everyone was free to acquire
land, it was found that everyone was nothing of the sort, for he
had not got the money to be “free” with. Then, in 1850, the
difficulty in the way of the people attaining to the desired “ mea-
sure of well being” was removed by the State finding the capital,
by the establishment of an intermediary institution called Rent
Banks, which advanced to the State in debentures, paying four
per cent, interest, a capital sum equal to twenty years’ purchase
of the rent. The peasant, along with his ordinary rates and
taxes, paid into the hand of the district collector each month one
twelfth part of a rent calculated at sto per cent, on this capital
sum, according as he elected to free his property from encum-
brance in 41 one-twelfth, or 56 one-twelfth years, the respective
terms within which, at compound interest, calculated in a some-


what similar way to our selectors’ annual interest in the Govern-
ment, the one or the half per cent, on the debenture would ex-
tinguish the capital. The plan, I believe, is working its end, and
the bliss giving fee simple holdings will be created. Still the
ghost of discord between Capital and Labour is not laid, but is
scaring the legislation with its fierce and haggard gestures. We
have yet Crown Lands not sacrificed, and we are forewarned and,
therefore, forearmed. The Prussian remedy was well intentioned,
but the principle of State assistance to the acquiring of fee simple
was what I have called a fly wheel to ruin making machinery.
Dummyism.
Will the leasehold tenures be dummied ?
Dummyism is the process by which capitalists and others,
mala fide , “ secure” the Crown Lands of the colony in fee simple.
Let it be assumed that in the construction of any Act of
Parliament embodying the proposals that are here submitted,
some such clauses as the following would be introduced:
“No holder of a Pastoral Lease, nor any superintendent,
manager, or overseer engaged thereon, shall directly or
indirectly, by himself, his agent, servant, trustee, or other
person, become the owner or mortgagee of any perpetual
lease. On conviction for a breach of this clause the
offender shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanour, and
if such pastoral tenant, his lease shall revert to the
Crown, with all improvements thereon.
“No person shall hold more than one perpetual leasehold,
unless under the sanction of the Local Land Board,
and the confirmation thereof by the Minister for Lands.
“ Every transfer of a perpetual leasehold, whether by way of
sale, sublease, assignment, or mortgage, shall require
the acceptance of the transferree by the Local Board,
who shall have power to make full enquiry before such
acceptance.”
Not even with such clauses to scare its unhallowed career,
would capital fail to secure land when a Crown grant or fee
simple tenure is within reach of its influence. When we read
an advertisement announcing the sale of a station, we know that
the most attractive feature is the fact, in bold type, that so many
acres are “ secured.” The condition of residence has been in-
effectual, even in the five years’ clause of the Act of 1880. The
present Act devises no new machinery for checking the evil,
except a few loose clauses relating to the Western Division
Homesteads. We still have to depend for our defences against


the powerful capitalists upon the flimsy packthread preven-
tives of the previous laws, which we know never convicted one
solitary dummy or his employer—not even the genius that dis-
covered unknown treasures in decrepit, aged, erysipelas patients.
It is an absolute fact, of which I am able to furnish the clearest
proof, that under the Act of 1884, dummyism may be reduced to
a science, and is not an uncertainty depending upon loose admin-
istration for its success, and the broad fact stares us in the face
that selection doubled in acreage after the severe penalties were
enacted against dummyism in 1880. But, with the substitution of
leasehold at progressive annual rental for freehold; with the de-
spair at never acquiring the“unearned increraent”of value; of never
“securing” the land in the coveted sense; with the law such as I have
suggested it should be, no reasonable motive remains for dummying
Crown Lands. Not even by years of patient evasion and the ( most
cunningly devised schemes can the reward be achieved, because
time, which now ratifies the fraud and obliterates the traces of
evasion by a Crown Grant of indefeasible title, covering like
charity a multitude of sins, would sooner or later, under the above
system, infallibly become a detective and eject the wrongdoer. If
you wish to secure land now —that is, to dummy it —your anxious
devices should cease after five years. If during those years you
guide your dummy clear of Mr. Inspector’s watchful eye, a thing
by no means difficult to manage, if he will only reasonably stay
upon the land in his gunyah or movable iron-house, and mind your
sheep or mend your fences, even if you are suspected of evasion,
you can rely upon getting safely “passed” as transferee and
owner. The dummy himself is under an influence which keeps
him straight to his employer, an influence the potency of which
newspaper savants only faintly conceive. Those who are situated
as I am know to what extent they are justified when they express
the profoundest contempt for the radical and inherent inefficiency
of the Land Act of 1884 to grapple with the mischief which is
absolutely certain to thrive under its benign permissiveness, if there
be such a word. When the anxious probation is over, the dummy
is discharged or used afresh, and Mr. Squatter, bold as conquest
and success can make him, enters openly into possession of the
selection. There is no rent to pay, and he can have time to pay
the balance with four per cent, interest for the indulgence. He
whispers in his sleeve, “ This is my land and as it does not and
never can make me liable for an assessed annual value, I can
afford to put it to the lowest use or none at all.” I fail to see
how this result is possible under the plan I have proposed of a
tenfire for ever under the eye of the State, Here and there the
practice will survive, but it will not be a canker eating out the
heart of our settlement policy.


As Viewed Financially.
Appended to Messrs. Morris and Rankin’s Report are tables
setting forth the areas of land alienated in each year from 1862 to
1882. From these I propose to submit a table showing analogi-
cally the financial result of a perpetual leasehold tenure system,
assuming it had been introduced in 1861 instead of the conditional
sale law. It will exclude all alienations that have taken place
other than those under the 13th, 14th, 21st, and 22nd Sections of
the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1861, commonly known as
the free selection clauses. Selectors pay now, no matter how poor
their land may be, one shilling per annum, representing threepence
for purchase money and nineppnce for interest. I have made my
average minimum rental one shilling only, and the rate of progres-
sive assessment every five years at only ten per cent, increase or
two per cent, per annum. As I treat of averages only it will be
conceded that I have taken the lowest possible estimate of the
probabilities. My conviction is that I should double the basis to
approximate the reality, even although I am bound to remember
that I am dealing with the subject tentatively.
I have not omitted to consider the question whether the
effect of non-alienation from 1862 would have been to materially
decrease the area taken up, or otherwise. But it is clear that the
withdrawal of all barriers to settlement, in the shape of serious
preliminary outlay, would have had the inevitable result of largely
increasing the number of bona fide occupiers. As to the twenty
millions or so of acres not selected, but alienated, by auction sales,
etc., I freely admit that the elimination of the Crown grant would
have cut down the swelling figures very considerably. Would
that it had been so ?
Table
Showing approximate rental of the Public Estate which has been
allotted to individuals in fee under the 13th, 14th, 21st, and 22nd
Sections of the Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1861, if the same
had been leased under perpetual leases at quinquennially assessed
rentals, calculated as increasing by ten per cent, on each assess-
ment.
Lapsed, cancelled, and forfeited C. P.’s are excluded.
Acres.
icreasmg Dy ten per cent, on ea
and forfeited C. P.’s are exclud
Qmn- Amount of Rental.'Rental, 1882.
quennium.
No £ £
1 62,944
2 69,238
3 75.532
4 81,827
5 88,121 17.624
251,776
Rental, 1886.
17,624


Acres.
169,533
113,019
92,686
243,936
180,336
185,470
327,524
272,006
279,028
503,680
876,604
1,004,467
1,158,791
1,449,371
Quin-
quennium.
Amount of Rental.
42,383
46,621
50,859
55,098
47,469
28,254
31,080
33,905
36.731
22,733
23,171
25,488
27,805
30,122
12,976
60,984
67,082
73,i80
79,279
17,075
45,084
49,592
54,100
58,609
46,367
51,004
55,641
48,222
81,881
90,069
98,257
63,868
68,000
74,800
81,600
35,360
69,757
76.732
83,708
18,136
125,920
138,512
151,105
219,150
241,065
210,382
251,116
276,228
180,804
289,697
318,667
139,054
362,342
398,576
86,962
Rental, 1882.
11,019
7,346
6,024
15,856
14,652
11,128
19,651
16,320
16,741
30,221
48,213
55,246
63,733
Rental, 1886.
11,867
6,488
17,075
14,652
12,055
21,289
17,680
18,136
30,221
52,595
60,268
69,527
86,962


Arp* I Quip-
rea‘ quennium.
Amount of Rental.
Rental, 1882.
Rental, 1886.
Acres.
i,237.394
309,348
340,283
304,3s 1
267,829
189,151
124,839
89,146
39,224
146,749
64,568
68,056
60,870
68,056
66,957
1,217,404
756,607
37,830
41,613
1880
Act 1861
1880
356,587
17,829
19,612
586,996
29,350
Act 1880
32,284
The terrible pen-
alties enacted
against ‘ dum-
myism ’ then.
i-99i,437
497,859
109,529
247,117
99,580
109,529
109,423
2,188,467
109,423
say 500,000
~ 500,000
~ 500,000
„ 500,000
25.000
25.000
25.000
25.000
Totals
15,443,119
£8,859,316
£826,427
£991,491
We are thus enabled to make the following comparison
From Alienation (C.P.’s only), revenue 1882 ... £287,526
„ Perpetual Leaseholds (lowest estimate) re-
venue, 1882 826,427
From Perpetual Leaseholds (lowest estimate) re-
venue, 1886 ... ... ... ... ... 991,491
Total Revenue as above from Leaseholds to 1882... £8,859,316
Total Revenue, that is, interest on
balances from Alienation to
1882. (See Statistical Report
above referred to, p. 115) ... £1,686,939
Total deposits, balances, and instal-
ments received to 1882. (Vide
Report) 5,689,112
7,376,051
£1,483,265
Thus, in 1882, under the proposed system, we should have
had nearly a million atid a half sterling in the Treasury in excess
of what has actually been paid, and also representing pure Revenue,


and we should have had in addition the asset which is above
represented in the deposits, &c., 689,112. In other words,
we should have been the richer by 172,377.
As to the selectors themselves, they have been 689,112
out of pocket, besides the cost of their improvements, and they ,
or nearly all of them , are now paying one shilling per acre per
annum to the Government without distinction in regard to the
quality or position of their lands.
Under my proposal the selector can for ever hold, sell,
mortgage, lease, devise by will, or do whatever he likes with his
holding at any time, so long as he pays fair assessed rent. All
his capital and labour goes to make the holding more valuable,
and such increase of value goes into his own pocket, or it
constitutes a saleable interest. The bare unimproved land alone
pays rent.
How would selectors lose under leasehold ? What has the
public pocket suffered by alienation ?
Conclusion,
The more I have studied the various aspects of the plan I
have suggested, and the natural operation of its necessary details,
the more clearly it seems to me to possess the almost incalculable
advantage over the present system in not requiring the fulfilment
by the occupant of conditions which have taken a whole army of
officials to enforce, and in which an ocean of falsehood and fraud
has been used up in evading. A scheme which wholly eliminates
the chances of the dummy requires no enforcement of residence,
inasmuch as the bona fide holder either cannot pay the proper
assessment and be an absentee, or if he be absent voluntarily
or compulsorily must make the land yield a return for the holding.
But, the fencing being done, I should insist upon a dwelling of a
definite character, not a gunyah, as the only legal requirement in
the way of improvement. For the rest I prefer to trust to the
operation of the ordinary natural and human incentives to
improvement rather than to arbitrary and unnatural conditions
and their offspring—evasion. I do not shut out of sight the
probability of many acres being thrown back upon the hands of
the Government. But a small percentage of loss or failure must
be looked for in any system. If the principle returns a general
improvement in our position we must be satisfied. One more
reflection and I shall have concluded this pamphlet, the
imperfection or crudity of which will be overlooked in conceding
the integrity of my motive, and the stupendous nature of the
subject. National progress is incompatible with a disregard for
national good faith. However bitterly we lament the mistakes


of the past, we are ourselves to blame for them. If we have
suffered the alienation of 36 million acres of our patrimony we
have voluntarily, albeit ignorantly, parted with them. We have
not been robbed, that is to say, we have not been treated in a way
which justifies the use of that word. If in 1884 we have given
the pastoralist a fixity of tenure for a term, we have done so at the
hands of our own agents, our representatives in Parliament.
Whenever in the highest interests of the public we may deem it
expedient to touch vested interests and acquired privileges, let us
not do sounder the cruel fanaticism of popular excitement, but
perform the operation with a gentle hand, firmly but painlessly
as possible. A task demanding the self-sacrificing enthusiasm of
the missionary is before us in the attuning of the electoral mind
of the colony into sympathy with the great broad principles of
land emancipation from the prejudice that hangs like a fog over
their fundamental nature. Custom has so interwoven the idea of
a fee simple with the essential conditions of a home, that it is
almost an appalling task to uproot the growth. None the less,
with Coriolanus we may say—
What Custom wills in all things, should we do it
The dust on antique Time would lie unswept,
And mountainous Error be too highly heaped
For Truth to overpeer.
The time has arrived when not only popular prejudice must be
overcome, but the conceptions of our leading men must give
way to the pressure of deeper reason. A country once a wilder-
ness, peopled by a handful of wretched outcasts and now rapidly
approaching the threshold of a powerful national development,
with nearly a million lives to support, appeals with the warning
note of Israel in Egypt to be guided by higher counsels out of the
bondage of old world darkness into the onward path. We must
not only think, but take heart of grace, and speak humbly, but
plainly. I trust that the apathetic will be awakened from their
lethargy and demand before the people in all places a right of
audience. I enter the lowly rank and file of popular educators,
conscious that I possess but a pigmy’s strength to close with
a giant evil.
I do but sing because I must,
And pipe but as the linnets sing.
When I reflect that amongst our Parliamentary leaders are men
whose knowledge and experience by measureless distance
transcend my own humble attainments, even if these men are
unwilling or unable to announce a total abrogation of a worthless
policy, my heart misgives me lest an apparent over-boldness of
speech should be misconstrued into the vanity of mere platform
denunciation. But when I read the Land Act of 1884, although


there are drops of comfort in many of its subordinate provisions,
I feel aghast at the prospect before my native country under the
old blood-letting principle it perpetuates, and I have the hideous
spell-bound sensation of one who, in a dream, sees a foul crime
in action under his very eyes but cannot speak or move a muscle
to prevent it, and thus I can but stretch forth my helpless arms,
and, Cassandra-like, weep my unavailing tears. Yet the prospect
cheers me on that the community will take up ray faint voice
with their many voices until my piping treble shall acquire the
organ’s swelling tones, and so reach the public ear and leave its
influence to work the coming change.


ADDENDUM.
Since the above was placed in the publisher’s hands I have
been furnished with the Annual Report from the Crown Lands
Department of New Zealand, as made up to 31st March, 1885,
and presented to both Houses of the General Assembly of that
colony. From this official document I learn, for the first time,
a fact which, while affecting the question of the originality of my
conception of a Perpetual Leasehold System, is to me a gratifying
testimony of a very practical character to the efficacy of the
proposition in my pamphlet.
I find that in May, 1883, there was introduced into the New
Zealand Land Laws, side by side with a system of purchase by
cash or on deferred payments, a system of Perpetual Lease at
progressive rental. On page 3 of the Report, after referring to
the difficulty of establishing effective checks to the aggregation of
large estates under the purchase system and the land speculation
that had resulted, we read, that “ The Perpetual Lease System,
pure and simple, seems to meet the case, for, while it gives
perfect security of tenure and of improvements, and allows of
transfer, the cardinal principle is maintained that the land is
never sold, and aggregation of leasehold must stop at the
maximum of 640 acres.”
Again, on same page, “As a proof of the acceptance of the
Perpetual Lease System with settlers, it may be mentioned that
there are frequent applications made to the Land Office to have
certain sections brought under it, so that the land may be held
under that tenure.”
“ But, in the deferred payment system,” says the Report
further—and I ask the Legislature of our colony of New South
Wales to “ read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest ” the words —
“ there is, as already mentioned, the future danger of amalgama-
tion of properties, and the undoing, in a measure, of all the care
and expense the colony has been to in the survey and settlement
of districts on that system. It is worthy of consideration if it
would not be well, having once carefully fixed on the areas to be
offered for occupation on settlement conditions, to determine that
in future the area of holding should be fixed within the definite
limits of acreage according to class, and be all on the tenure of
perpetual /easel’


The short time the New Zealand experiment has been in
operation has made its success undoubted. The best lands of
the colony have gone for ever, but this system has been already
applied to over 61,000 acres of inferior land, at an average of
about is. yd. per acre rental as a beginning, and they are recom-
mending its universal substitution for alienation.
The Victorian Land Act of 1884 permits limited alienation
of very considerable areas out of leasehold blocks, and absolutely
prohibits it otherwise for a period of 14 years. The objections to
alienation do hot appear to be followed by our neighbours to their
logical conclusions, but are applied partially and timidly, as though
they were feeling their way to the broad principle which they
instinctively know to be sound, but are afraid to carry out.
Gibbs, Shallard, & Co., Printers, Pitt Street, Sydney.




