

clffFP
Bio 1
IL b
Sir John Evans
His Life Story




SIR JOHN EVANS
HIS LIFE STORY.




THE LIFE STORY
SIR JOHN EVANS,
K. 8., C.M.G.
Dedicated to the
TASMANIAN SANATORIUM
Institution with which I have been associated ever
since its inauguration in 1903.
The fruit of its work is a living testimony
to the philanthropic efforts of a noble
band of workers and the generous-hearted
public of Tasmania.




Captain J. W. (now Sir John) Evans, K. 8., C.M.G.




FOREWORD.
The life stories of men and women vary greatly
according to the circumstances, the temperament, anai
the opportunities of the individual.
This is borne out to a remarkable degree in the life
of Sir John Evans, whose history 1 have had the
privilege of reading.
The romance of the sea, the beckoning sights and
education gained in the University of the Universe, the
glamour of many ports, East and West of Suez, and the
unmistakable call of the great Blue Water, together with
the desire to master the art of navigation, stimulated the
hereditary instincts within him and bore him hither and
thither over many thousands of miles of trackless ocean,
and to many strange lands.
Long before the age for leaving school had arrived
he ivas keen to follow his father s footsteps in square
rigged ships. His bent in this direction was accentuated
after spending some twelve months in the barque
“Helen’ with his father, mother, two sisters, and
brother —a family party indeed —and this voyage caused
him to disappoint his mother in her zvish that he should
complete his education in the proper environments of
home and school. ]ack would have none of this, and so
started off on life’s adventures by signing on as cabin
boy in the “Helen!’ His father, Captain George
Matthew Evans, being still in command.
Just how he fared in his many wanderings and
adventures, which are always associated with sea life,
sight-seeing, places visited, and his rise from cabin boy
to Premier of his adopted Coventry, are all related in the
pages that follozv.
J commend this history with pleasure to those who
are interested in the traditions of the sea, interested in
the men who helped to make those traditions and who
are also capable of leading the Government of the State,
and finally, leave to those who follow, a guiding star, by
which to steer through the storms and calms of life.
JOHN G. TURNER.




CHAPTERS.
Page
Childhood Days 11
Sea Experiences 12
I nteresting Sidelights 13
Incidents in the East 14
I Visit London 16
Strange Coincidence * 7
Second Mate at 19 17
The Barque “Helen” 19
From Sail to Steam 20
Boxing Day Excursion 21
A Sailor’s Lot 22
Wreck Episodes 23
Steamer “Esk” 24
Unrehearsed Adventures 25
From Sea to Land 26
11 non Districts 27
Hobart Port Reminiscences 29
Whaling Industry 30
From Ship to State 31
Cabin Boy to Premier 32
Ministerial Acts 33
Magnet of Public Life 34
Visit to New Zealand 36
Commonwealth Flag 37
Tasmania and Federation 38
Recognition of Services 39
Domestic 41
Social 42
Reflections 42




The late Captain G. M. Evans, father of Sir John Evans.




CHILDHOOD DAYS.
I was born in Liverpool, England, on Ist December, 1855.
My father was a Master Mariner, and a native of South
Wales, my mother having been born in Devonshire. She was
a sister of the late Captain William Fisher, at one time a
Member of the Legislative Council of Tasmania, and a well-
known and highly esteemed merchant of Hobart. .At the age
of four, with my mother, I left for Tasmania, as my father
had expressed a wish to stay in this part of the world. At
that time he was sailing out of Hobart m command of many
of the sailing vessels which were registered at that port, and
it was because of that he desired his wife to join him out
here.
My childhood life was for the most part uneventful,
similar to that of other children. I lived with my mother
and grandmother in Montpelier Street, Battery Point, in a
house owned by Mr. Mitchell, father of Mr. John Mitchell,
late of Dobson, Mitchell, and Allport, Solicitors, of Macquarie
Street, Hobart. Our house was situate nearly opposite a very
old established hostelry, on the corner of Montpelier and
James Streets, the proprietor being a highly esteemed and
respected man by the name of Mr. M. Quinlan.
I have to admit that my mother experienced a some-
what trying time with me, as I was strongly opposed to
attending school. On one occasion I was playing truant in
a field at the rear of our home. I was having quite a good
game, and thought I was perfectly safe for the rest of the
morning, when, suddenly, I had the mortification of seeing
my uncle, the late Captain William Fisher, coming towards
me. Naturally assuming what his intentions were, I made
off as fast as I could, but I was unsuccessful in making my
escape. He tried persuasion to get me to go to school, but
seeing that his efforts in that direction were of no avail, he
lifted me on to his shoulder, and carried me off towards the
school house.
As would be the case with all kiddies, I thought this was
too much of a strain upon my dignity, and, recognising that
discretion was the better part of valour, I gave in, and
accordingly went to school. This was but one of many
instances that I went through, because of my antagonism
to school life. For a considerable period of my early -life I
lived with my uncle and aunt at Hillside, Sandy Bay, in the
house now occupied by Mr. Bradford. It was a lovely home,
surrounded by fine orchards. In those days I was extremely
fond of horses, and I was in the fortunate position of always
having one at my disposal. My uncle had a fine horse named
“Daphne,” and I often had the opportunity of driving it in
a dog-cart to Hobart. I well remember one day having an


experience with a number of sailors. I was driving up Liver-
pool Street when a number of men from one of the English
war-boats lying in the harbour, full of life and fun, gave chase.
They saw an opportunity of passing a short time in a manner
that would enable them to have something out of the ordinary
in the way of excitement. After catching me, they got into
the cart, and taking possession of the reins, had a good drive
round before handing me back the horse and trap. The men
of the fleet in those days were full of animal life, and enjoyed
all the fun they could get while they were in port. I have
seen them with saddled horses leading them down Murray
Street hill, near the Bellerive Ferry, and then mounting them,
gallop them up the hill as fast as they would go. It is almost
unnecessary for me to add that they were fond of their
Cascade Beer. I was partly educated at the Collegiate
School, under the able control of Mr. Ireland (Paddy), father
of Dr. Ireland, now practising here in Hobart.
After I had returned to Sydney from my first trip to the
East with my parents, my mother endeavoured to persuade
me to return home with her and complete my education. She
offered to send me to the best school in Hobart, viz., the High
School, under the tuition of the Rev. R. D. Poulett-Harris,
but all to no avail. My blood was at fever heat to follow the
sea, and nothing else would 'satisfy me.
SEA EXPERIENCES.
I got a taste of the sea at an early age. I had always
entertained a desire to follow in my father’s footsteps, and
that had, no doubt, something to do with my having a rest-
less feeling so far as school was concerned. When I was only
thirteen, my mother, two sisters, and one brother, and I went
for an extended trip in the barque “Helen,” owned and sailed
by my father. We sailed from Newcastle for China, and the
voyage lasted some twelve months. During that trip we
visited various ports in China, Japan, Singapore, and other
places. Readers will be able to visualise my feelings of
excitement throughout the whole of this wonderful experi-
ence. The trip itself was a marvellous one, and the arrival
at the various ports visited gave me an opportunity of giving
vent to all my sea-wandering passions. The sights witnessed
were a constant revelation, and but whetted my appetite to
visit other parts of the world.
Our return to Australia was accomplished with the
gratification of knowing that we reached Sydney ahead of
all other traders with the first season’s tea from Foochow.
The “Helen” made the fastest run down of several ships in
the trade at that time, and father was presented with a gold
watch and chain to mark his successful trip. Unfortunately,
however, the timepiece and chain were stolen from his ship


while she lay in London docks, after two previous unsuccess-
ful attempts had been made.
My first experience at sea was the culminating point
with regard to my previous intention to follow a seafaring
life. It was then that I finally decided that the career of
my father was the one for me, and therefore, at the age of 14,
I started off as cabin boy in the “Helen,” which was still
under the command of my father. That was only for a short
time, for I then came on deck, having signed on as an
apprentice for four years at the munificent salary of £45 for
the whole four years. This was the starting point towards
reaching my ambition of being an officer, for, after my
apprenticeship, I would be in a position to stand for examina-
tion for a second mate’s certificate.
My first voyage was a prolonged one of nearly two years,
practically the whole of which was in the China seas; trading
between Chinese and Japanese ports. We visited Hong
Kong, Canton, Swatow, Foochow, Formosa, and Nagasaki.
Even though I had previously had an experience of some of
the sights to be seen in Eastern waters, yet nearly every day
there was something new to be witnessed. It was a living
kinematograph that was constantly breaking on the sight-
seer’s vision, of a description that mere words fail to
adequately depict.
INTERESTING SIDELIGHTS.
The first surprise I well remember was on nearing Hong
Kong. The “Helen” was bowling along with a fine beam
wind, all sails set, travelling about eleven miles an hour. Just
before daylight one morning there was a rattle on the chain-
plates on the weather side of the vessel. The next moment
up jumped a Chinaman, who reported to the skipper that he
was a pilot into Hong Kong Harbour. Without giving any
warning of his coming, or any request for the speed of the
ship to be eased, he had come aboard offering his services to
take the ship into port. These were accepted by the captain.
I had great fun watching the Chinaman pilot who, as is well
known, is used to eating with chop sticks, partaking of an egg
with a spoon.
At that time all the Chinese and Japanese ports had
practically no wharves. The vessels had to anchor in the
various harbours, and the loading and discharging of their
cargoes had to be carried out by the aid of junks or sampans.
Some very funny stories could be told in this connection.
The cargo was handled by hundreds of Chinese coolies at a
very low cost. Their food consisted of rice eaten twice a day.
They squatted on their haunches and manipulated their chop-
sticks in a remarkable manner. It was a most unique and
interesting sight to watch the movements of the sampans at


all times, day and night, with their occupants selling fruit,
curios, etc., and also plying to do washing for those on board
the vessel. The price asked for their goods was always about
three times higher than they eventually accepted.
Lying at anchor at Swatow, I have seen Chinamen shot
for stealing the copper off the bottom of ships, the penalty for
offences of this character being salutary. This was found
because of their prevalence. I was coxswain of the
captain’s gig which was rowed to shore nearly every day for
the purpose of purchasing stores. There were numerous
vendors of special sweetmeats, which were particularly
enticing and procurable for a cent or two. Needless to say,
I was a regular customer.
At Foochow were most of the tea-clippers loading their
cargoes of new season’s teas, and it was an interesting sight
to witness the Chinese junks coming down the river with
their load of tea, flying the flag of the ship the cargo was for.
Often sweepstakes were made up as to the number of junks
conveying their contents to one’s ship. Often we had to wait
for weeks before we could get our vessel loaded and ready for
departure. It was a wonderful never-to-be forgotten sight to
see all the tea-clippers, such as the “Black Adder,’’ “Ariel,”
“Taiping,” “Thermopylae,” “Titania,” “Spindrift,” “Cutty
Sark,” “Red Jacket,” and “Lightning,” speeding down the
China Sea, all sails set, skysails, or skyscrapers, stunsails on
every yard, and water sails wherever possible. It was the
desire of those on board these vessels to reach their destina-
tion first, as there was always a substantial prize donated to
the winner.
INCIDENTS IN THE EAST.
The sight that unfolded itself the first time we dropped
anchor in Shanghai harbour was one of a surprising nature.
It is a port of considerable extent, and at the time of this
visit there were over 100 vessels there. The water was liter-
ally alive with sampans and other class of craft surrounding
the ships. The “Helen” was absolutely besieged with boats
of all sizes and shapes, and inducements of all sorts were
made to effect sales of all kinds of goods.
The “Helen” traded between Shanghai and Nagasaki for
several months carrying coal. It was astounding the number
of Chinese and Japanese dead bodies that were conveyed to
and from these ports in wooden caskets. The master of the
vessel was paid from £2O to £3O per casket, and it was,
naturally, a paying business. My experience of Shanghai
weather was of a varying nature. During some months of
the year it was so cold that work was not done till the sun
rose. To give some description of the cold, as the decks were
14


washed the water froze. In striking contrast was the summer
at this port. The heat was so great that at least for two
hours in the day work was out of the question.
I never got tired of going on shore, travelling through
the various towns. English, French, German, and American
people seemed to have a township of their own. I had busi-
ness meetings with some of the finest Chinese and Japanese
merchants; gentlemen in every way, and better educated in
the English language than I was.
Immediately the “Helen” was moored at Nagasaki on
my first trip to that port, any number of sampans came
alongside, and close on 200 girls jumped on the ship’s deck to
load and trim the cargo of coal. It was handled in small hand-
baskets, which the girls threw to one another at a short dis-
tance apart and placed in the hold. It was trimmed there in
the same manner, the females chanting songs all the time in a
most monotonous tone. During my visit to Japan I wit-
nessed the arrival of some of their warships, which had been
purchased from England and officered by Britishers. They
were practically the first of the modern warships built.
During one of our voyages up the China Seas we ran into
a typhoon of great force. We, of course, got the usual warn-
ing, and every preparation was made in readiness for it when
it struck us. The royal and top-gallant yards were lowered
to the deck and the top-gallant masts struck. Had not this
attention been given to the warning it is safe to say that con-
siderable damage would have been done to the ship, and it
might have been accompanied with loss of life.
On one voyage from Newcastle to Hong Kong the
captain found he was running short of corned beef and
pork. Passing through Torres Straits we stayed at one of
the Islands, and all our coops, crates, etc., were filled with
fowls,i purchased very cheaply, in order to carry us through
the rest of the trip. We were fed on these fowls, roast,
boiled, and curried, until at last the sailors were so sick of the
same food, that they came aft to the skipper as a deputation,
exclaiming “We’re tired of your fowls, give us back our beef
and pork." I well remember on this trip exchanging an old
pistol that I possessed for a large quantity of beautiful tropical
fruit.
After two years in these trades we loaded a cargo of tea
for Sydney, and had a splendid run down to Australia. The
pleasure that I felt on my return was greatly marred by the
news I received that my dear mother had passed away. After
discharging our cargo of tea we next proceeded to Newcastle
to load coal for San Francisco. On arrival at that wonderful
city I marvelled at the magnificent buildings, regular sky-
scrapers, 15 to 20 stories high; the enormous traffic and the
continued activity of the populace. It was a veritable eye-
15


opener. We left San Francisco to load a cargo of timber at
Puget Sound for Australia. I here had a repetition of the
experience I had gained in China of the cold. Each morning
before stepping on to the “Helen's” deck we had to shovel the
snow and ice away from the companion doors. It was here
I had my first trip in a canoe. A number of Indians took me
up the river, and there the fishing was of an exceptional
character. Some of the fish that we caught were of great
size. After returning to Australia the timber was discharged,
and then we brought a cargo of coal to Hobart.
I VISIT LONDON.
When the “Helen,” with a cargo of wood, oil, etc., cast
off from the Prince’s Wharf for London, via Cape Horn,
words fail me to adequately express the excitement I felt
as to the experience that was before me. I had had a good
grounding into sea life in the former trips that I had had with
Captain Evans, but the thought of visiting London with all
its historical associations and glamour almost overcame me.
As the trip advanced, and we were daily getting nearer our
destination, my anticipations were intensified, and the
suspense almost intolerable.
We had a fairly good passage of 96 days, and would have
done even better but for the very bad weather encountered at
times. As we approached Cape Horn, the wind commenced
to blow in earnest, until it reached heavy gale force. I can
call to l mind the skipper laying to under close-reefed topsails,
with little or no wind for two days. My fellow apprentices
and myself could not understand why the captain had reduced
canvas to such an extent, but we were soon to be rudely
awakened. The barometer was down to 28. Suddenly the
wind burst forth in all its pent-up fury, and then we realised
that but for the skipper’s precaution of reducing sail some-
thing very serious would have most likely happened.
We had a good run up the English Channel, and what an
eye-opener after Hobart! On arrival at London all hands
were paid off with the exception, of course, of the apprentices.
My first visit in London was up the Ratcliffe Highway to the
Sailors’ Home. My first purchase was a meerschaum pipe
and some light shag tobacco. Up till then I was the only one
of the five apprentices who did not smoke a pipe. During my
sojourn here with my fellow apprentices I stopped at the
Sailors’ Home. We were what might be termed “Lads,” as
the enthusiasm we felt in being ashore in England’s greatest
capital city, caused us to metaphorically lose our heads, and
to behave in a way as to cause the authorities some concern.
One evening in our suits of blue with brass buttons, and
mufflers round our necks, we went out in search of arfmse-


ment. At length we came to the Pavilion Theatre. We as*kecl
the price of admission to visitors, and were told 6d. each, or
2s. 6d. for a private box. We, being five in number, at once
accepted the private box, which to our greatest delight we
found was situate right over the stage. Unnecessary to state
that our enjoyment that night was most complete.
A STRANGE COINCIDENCE.
During our stay in the great city we visited most parts of
it, and on one of our meanderings we came to the West End,
where we found ourselves surrounded by theatres and other
halls. After some discussion, we finally selected a theatre
whose handbills intimated that the play was a “Prayer in a
Storm.” On taking our seats we perused the programme
handed to us, and learnt to our very great astonishment that
the act that was then on was depicting a ship sailing up the
River Derwent. We looked upon it as a remarkable coin-
cidence that of the large number of places of amusement that
we had open to us to visit, we should have chosen that
one from all others.
On this trip to London, and in fact on every one that
I undertook later on in life, I spent most of my time at Gower,
South Wales, where my father’s relations lived. I looked
forward to travelling through by train at 60 miles an hour,
and also to my arrival at Banbury Station where one could
purchase the celebrated Banbury tarts, which were most
delicious. On passing through Swansea I stopped at one of
the hotels, where you could have oysters served up in 20
different ways. We remained in London docks for about two
months, and then set sail on return to Hobart and home.
We had a good run out, nothing of any importance
occurring worth chronicling, except it be the visit of Father
Neptune to the ship when we were passing over the Equator.
I was, of course, initiated into the usual proceedings, which
were of varying nature. On our arrival at Hobart we dis-
charged cargo in good time, in readiness for our next trip
abroad.
SECOND MATE AT NINETEEN.
I made a trip to Mauritius for a cargo of sugar, and on
arrival there found it very interesting work going ashore
every morning to purchase supplies for the ship’s stores. The
coffee obtainable there from the native women was the most
delicious beverage I have ever had to drink. The women
were to be seen carrying their babies slung over their backs.
It was surprising to> notice the native men bagging the sugar
on the wharves and the perspiration running off them into
the refined white sugar. We got back safely with a full
cargo, and in those days the sugar was sold at 2|d. per lb.,


there being no Federation to maintain, bonuses, etc., to pay,
and other costs to be met, as is the case at present.
It was after I had returned from Mauritius that I put up
for second mate’s certificate, and was successful in passing
the qualifying examination. Captain Leslie, of the well-
known barque “Harriet McGregor,” requiring a second mate,
I applied for and obtained the position. Naturally, I was
pleased at my going away as an officer when I was barely 19
years of age.
Barque “Helen,” on which ship Sir John Evans served his
apprenticeship.
Prior to leaving Hobart for London, my father (Captain
G. M. Evans) had a chat with Captain Leslie, requesting him
to re-engage me for the return trip, even if I were not up to
the standard of efficiency, as he was afraid I was endeavouring
to break away on my own. My dear old dad gave me a
special send-ofif and £l2 to purchase an up-to-date sextant at
a well-known establishment in London. We had a good run
Home, the only items of interest being a few iceberg's that we
encountered in the vicinity of Cape Horn. On arrival at
London all hands, as usual, were paid ofif, but before I left the
ship, Captain Leslie paid me the compliment of telling me
he was quite satisfied with the manner in which I had carried
out my duties, and that had I possessed a chief mate’s certi-
ficate, he would have ofifered me that position when the
“Harriet McGregor” was again ready for sea. At the same
time he expressed the hope that I would be prepared to be
engaged for the voyage back to Hobart, as my father had
requested prior to leaving. This lat once agreed to do.


While waiting in London for the start of the return
trip, I had a great time, and my money becoming exhausted
with so- much sight-seeing, I gave way to temptation, and
spent the £l2 my father gave me for the sextant. When I
took this step, however, I covered it up by getting the sextant
and booking it up to my father, who was well known at the
shop where I made the purchase. When the £l2 was spent
I was naturally in need of a further supply, and knowing that
I was to be re-engaged for the return trip to Hobart, I went
to Captain Leslie and demanded an advance of two months’
wages before I would agree to sign on. This he agreed to
advance, and I indulged in further enjoyment, pending joining
the “Harriet McGregor” for the home journey. We had the
customary trip back, the passage occupying about 95 days.
Mv next sea trip was to Mauritius for sugar, and I well
remember the rough time we had on that occasion. High
winds and seas were the order of the day, and on more than
one occasion the ship hove to and put before the wind twice
in one watch, which meant that all hands were called on deck
each time.
Barque “Harriet McGregor,” the first ship on which Sir John
Evans served as an officer.
THE BARQUE “HELEN.”
It is but fitting that I should have something to say about
the barque “Helen,” seeing that it was the vessel that I first
served in as a cabin boy, and subsequently went to sea in her as
an apprentice. The “Helen” was built at Scotland on similar
lines to the tea-clipper “Taiping.” She was constructed of all
teak wood, and was turned out, in what was termed in those
days, A 1 at Lloyd’s. That was the highest standard to be


obtained. The ship had one fault, being very “crank,” and
required, if not fully loaded, to take on board 200 tons of
ballast before proceeding to sea. Even then, with a stiff
breeze, she would heel right over.
On one trip nearing Mauritius, the “Helen” was struck
with a strong gust of wind, and with all sails set, she nearly
turned turtle. It was some time before she righted, and it
was a somewhat anxious time for those on board. All the
cable that was stowed on deck ready for dropping anchor,
rolled right down to leeward, which nearly brought about
disaster to the ship and all on board, as the wind was abeam.
The “Helen” carried a main skysail and all stunsails. On
more than one occasion, when with other apprentices, we
had a game of “following my leader,” I led them from the
mainmast, down the skysail fore and aft stay to the foremast,
but not one of the other boys would risk it.
After a splendid record in various trades, the “Helen,”
in the ’nineties, was withdrawn from the merchant service,
and went whaling out of Hobart, and in June, 1896, she hoisted
top-sails and slowly glided down the Derwent, outward bound
on the last whaling cruise from the Colonies. Eventually, she
was sold to a firm on the mainland, and she ended her career
as a coal hidk.
FROM SAIL TO STEAM.
Prior to the “Harriet McGregor” leaving again on her
annual run to London, I was offered the position of second
officer in the Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company’s
“Truganini.” I was, naturally, pleased to receive the offer,
but it meant several interviews with Captain Leslie before he
would consent to pay me off. The whole of the crew were on
London ship’s articles at a very much lower rate of wage than
the Australian pay. Eventually, he gave way to my frequent
appeals, and one day when he called me to his cabin and told
me I could go, in an ecstasy of joy I threw my sealskin cap
into the air and overboard it went. That was a mere trifle,
and was overshadowed by the satisfaction I got from leaving
sailing ship to join a steamer.
I took up my duties under Captain Lewis on the
“Truganini,” and remained with him some time, trading be-
tween Hobart and Launceston, via East Coast ports. This
was a regular gentleman’s life compared to my lot on the
wind-jammers and the rough sea life. At the end of two
} r ears I went up for my examination for first mate, and was
successful in getting my certificate.
I was then promoted to chief officer of the S.S. “Tamar,”
trading between Launceston and Melbourne, and for several
years remained in that trade as chief officer of the “Der-


went,” “Mangana,” and “Flinders,” under the command of
Captains A. T. Wood and W. Drysdale respectively. At a
later date, I was transferred to the “Southern Cross,” Captain
T. Capurn in command, and traded in the Hobart—-Melbourne
service.
Later on, I was appointed chief mate of the S.S. “Tas-
man.” which was in the Hobart—Sydney trade, under the
command of Captain T. M. Fisher. Just before I received
this, appointment 1 was successful in passing my examination
in Melbourne, and gained my master’s certificate. In my
early twenties I received my first command, taking charge of
the S.S. “Tasman” in May, 1883, fifty years ago last May.
BOXING DAY EXCURSION.
As chief officer of the Steamer “Southern Cross” I took
part in the memorable excursion on Boxing Day, 1880, to Port
Arthur, under the command of Captain T. Capurn. When the
vessel left Hobart wharf on an annual visit to that world-
famed resort, there were close on 800 passengers on board.
From the outset the day was far from propitious for a water
trip, and shortly after leaving the wharf the wind came away
from the west-north-west, and gradually increased to a
terrific gale. As the weather got so bad, with no prospects
of improvement, and knowing what sort of a voyage it was to
that port with such a tempest raging, the captain and I en-
deavoured to persuade the charterers of the steamer (Dr.
Crowther and Mr. Hunter) to change the ship’s course, and
go down the Channel in smooth water, and thus ensure a
somewhat comfortable time for those on board. Unfor-
tunately, they would not agree. The excursionists demanded
the value of their ss. tickets paid for the outing, and they got
it with a vengeance. Port Arthur was reached without very
much trouble, and the passengers were landed for a stay of
three hours. In the meantime, the wind veered to south-
west, accompanied with heavy rain squalls. It was with the
utmost difficulty the people were got on board for the return
trip, and the captain felt it necessary to face the journey back
to Hobart, as he thought it would be unwise to allow a big
crowd of persons, mostly young folk, to remain on shore all
night, with little or no shelter.
As we steamed out towards Brown Mountain and then on
to Cape Raoul, the wind and seas were terrific. Some idea of
the weather conditions can be formed when I say that it took
two hours to cover three miles. The seas were breaking over
the ship, deluging the passengers, who were all huddled up to-
gether, and too ill to care. The cabins were all occupied, and
several persons were under the care of two doctors, who, for-
tunately, happened to be there.


After we rounded Cape Raoul, we went full speed ahead,
as the wind and sea were on our port quarter. Hobart was
not reached till after 11 p.m. The wharves and streets were
thronged with anxious relatives and friends, to welcome the
bedraggled excursionists back safely, after the nerve-trying
experience through which they had passed.
As they joined their friends, one and all spoke of what
they had gone through, and loudly acclaimed that they had
had enough, and that a trip to Port Arthur would not be any
attraction for them in the future. But time proves a great
healer, and when Boxing Day, 1881, came round there were
more excursionists making the trip than the one I have just
related.
A SAILOR’S LOT.
This chapter is devoted to some interesting comparisons
with the life of a sailor when I was serving my time and what
obtains now. Seamen and boys were drafted into two
watches, one under the first mate and the other under the
second officer. That meant while we worked a full day when
the ship was in port, there were no eight hours at sea, but
mostly twelve. It was four hours on watch and four hours
off, including time for sleep and meals. To-day, there are
three watches, with four hours on and eight hours off. This
means eight hours’ work and pay for overtime if longer time is
worked.
Our food was of the poorest quality, no luxuries of any
kind. I rarely got up for breakfast when at sea, as we only
had ship biscuits, with weevils or maggots in them, so that
we preferred having the extra half-hour’s sleep, leaving the
biscuits till we got on deck. Our allowance of brown sugar,
of less than 12 ounces, was all gone before half the week had
gone by, and then we preferred drinking water to black coffee
with no sugar.
The quantity of salt beef or pork weighed out to us only
lasted us for dinner and tea; boiled or baked rice was also
served, and a few days a week with a few currants dropped in.
The number of currants gave the idea that they had been
dropped from the mainyard, and that most of them had missed
the pudding, and gone overboard. These puddings were
colloquially termed “Strike me blind.”
Every Saturday night during the voyage our biscuits
were soaked in water, then mixed with our short weekly
allowance of brown sugar and some salt beef dripping in a tin.
On the Sunday the concoction was baked and eaten at break-
fast. This luxurious dish was called “rot-gut.” This class of
food must have agreed with me, for I did not suffer from
indigestion; but, in fact, I put on weight.


WRECK EPISODES.
On the Ist December, 1883, I had the misfortune to lose
the S.S. “Tasman” oft the Hippolyte Rocks, three miles to
the north of Tasman Island. This ship cleared Sydney Heads
on the 27th November, and berthed at Twofold Bay on the
following day, taking on board 35 cattle, leaving again on the
29th for Hobart. We had a good run down the Coast, passing
Schouten Island shortly after midnight of the 30th November.
It was daylight at 3.30 a.m., and between 5 and 6 o’clock I
rang the bell for my morning tea, and threw my cabin door
wide open. As I sat with my legs dangling over the berth
I asked the men outside, who were washing the decks, if the
“Tasman” was on her usual course, and received a reply in the
affirmative. They also told me that the main Hippolyte rock
was well clear on our starboard bow. As I had only left the
bridge shortly after one o’clock that morning I did not think
there was any need for me to be on deck. About half an hour
later I felt a slight impact and heard what appeared to be a
rush of steam. I immediately jumped out on to the deck,
and after seeing what the position was I ordered the men to
lower away the quarter boats. I rushed down the saloon, and
instructed the stewardess to get the women and children on
deck at once. I met the chief engineer, who informed me the
water was up to the waists of the firemen. I got an axe and
cut away the amidship boats, and had them placed in the
water in readiness. There was need for hurry, seeing that
there were 70 lives to save. We got all on board the boats,
and within 20 minutes the good old ship “Tasman” had dis-
appeared. The passengers and crew were all landed at
Fortescue Bay, and they had to stay there until the news of
the disaster reached Hobart. The S.S. “Corinna” was
despatched to convey us to Hobart, and in due course, we
reached the City safely.
After the excitement of landing the people in Fortescue
Bay had been safely carried out, I asked the chief officer,
Mr. Marshall, why he had altered the ship’s course, steering
her between the rocks, and his reply was, “I do not know,
Sir." Such a reply as that was, of course, ridiculous. I,
however, ascertained later that the chief engineer (Mr.
Williams) had seen the S.S. “Corinna” passing round Tasman
Island, and he went on to the bridge and asked Mr. Marshall
to cut off all corners, so that he might overhaul the boat
ahead. Without giving the request due thought, Mr. Marshall
tried to put her through, with the result above narrated. Had
the “Tasman” been drawing an inch less water she would
have passed safely over the rock that she struck. lam satis-
fied that if I had waited to make inquiries as to the cause of
the mishap before taking the prompt action I did, all the pas-
sengers would not have been saved. The time was so short,


and somehow I had a presentiment that we were in serious
trouble. Naturally, there was a Court of Marine Inquiry
held, at which evidence as to the disaster, its cause, and result
was given at considerable length. The finding of the Court
was to EXONERATE ME FROM ALL BLAME, but the
chief officer was found to have been in fault for having
altered the ship's course, and disobeyed my orders, and he had
his ticket cancelled for 12 months. It was the first time that
he had taken it on himself to do other than what he was told.
THE STEAMSHIP “ESK.”
Twelve months later I was promoted to command of the
Tasmanian Steamship Company’s steamer “Mangana,” and
then I was transferred to the steamship “Esk.” It was in
1886 that I was unfortunate in losing the latter vessel. It
occurred while I was navigating her out of Tamar Heads,
when she struck the Hebe Reef, and became a total wreck.
The real cause of the loss of the “Esk"’ was due to one of
those unfortunate circumstances that occur both on land and
sea. I left Hobart in command of the ship for Devonport
on the North-West Coast to take in a cargo of produce for
Sydney. We arrived off the mouth of the Tamar on the
afternoon of the day following our departure from Hobart.
I found that the tide Avas such as not to permit of our navi-
gating the bar at the Mersey, I decided to anchor in
Lagoon Bay until next morning, when the bar could be safely
passed over. This decision, unfortunately, was to prove my
undoing. We left Lagoon Bay the next morning, proceeding
out of Low Head with the leading beacons in a line, which
was the sailing direction to clear the Hebe Reef. After
passing out between the buoys marking the Channel, the Cat-
head painter, which secured the anchor after it had been hove
up, carried away, with the result that the anchor dropped.
The cable ran out of the locker, about 120 fathoms, and this
necessitated me to order the engines to be put full speed
astern, so that the anchor could be hove up into position
again. While this was being done, the steamer drifted out
of the line of the beacons I have just referred to, and before
the ship could be got back into the channel she struck the
extreme eastern end of the reef, bringing about the wreck.
The usual Court of Marine Inquiry was held, and the whole
of the circumstances investigated. The finding of the Court
on this occasion was against me, for it came to the decision,
as this was my second mishap, that my master’s certificate
should be entirely cancelled, not even allowing me an officer’s
certificate. I think it is but fair to me to add that the Court
was composed almost of the same members who had held the
previous inquiry, and who had entirely exonerated me from
all blame in connection with the wreck of the steamer “Tas-


man,” and yet they mysteriously found that as I had been in
command on both occasions I should lose the benefit of my
whole life’s work up to that time.
When I received the decision of the Court, I naturally
became very depressed, thinking I was down and out, and I
almost gave in, wondering what I was going to do- in the
future. It was then that I received encouraging support from
my relatives, for they appealed to my better nature, and
reminded me that I had to give some thought to my wife and
small family. This spurred me on to make another effort,
and I determined to pull through, no matter at what cost to
mvself.
Before concluding this chapter of this unfortunate event,
I would like to add that some few years later, the late Hon. W.
Perkins, M.L.C., and an eminent solicitor and barrister,
approached me and discussed the unheard-of decision of the
Court of Marine Inquiry. Mr. Perkins communicated with
the Board of Trade in England, pointing out the whole of the
circumstances in connection with the loss of the steamer and
the finding of the Court, and although some considerable time
elapsed before getting the Board’s decision, it was extremely
gratifying to me to learn that my master’s ticket was
returned to me without even a mark on it. The Home Board
also expressed its strong disapproval of the Marine Court’s
action in the punishment meted out to me, and even at that
late date it was comforting to find that the loss of the “Esk”
was due to an unfortunate circumstance, and not to any fault
of mine.
UNREHEARSED ADVENTURES.
To those who go down to the sea in ships it is but natural
to expect that at times they are subjected to accidents of a
more or less serious nature, and, of course, I was no exception
to the general rule. I remember on one occasion when the
ship I was in was having her caj-go of timber unloaded at Port
Adelaide, I met with a mishap that might very easily have
ended my life. I fell from the top of the hatchway to the
keelson. This accident was brought about by a piece of
timber, which had been lashed across the top of the hatchway
to enable us to pass the timber up from the lower hold, break-
ing. I thought that it was perfectly safe, but when I jumped
on it, it gave away, and precipitated me to the bottom. When
my comrades reached me they found I was unconscious. A
Doctor was immediately sent for, and his medical skill had
the effect of enabling me to resume work in a couple of days.
A few dozen leeches did the trick.
I met with another very close shave when I was at
Geelong, in Victoria. The ship was taking in stores, and I
was engaged in passing them on board. Suddenly, I slipped,


and losing - my balance I fell into the water. This would have
been but an ordinary mishap, but for the fact that I went
between the wharf and the vessel. For a time my life was
in very serious danger, but at length I was brought ashore,
little the worse for my involuntary immersion.
On another occasion when I was skylarking with some
mates on the wharf at Auckland, New Zealand, I again took
an impromptu bath in the water. I was jumping over the
mooring posts, when I slipped and fell, and had to go through
another experience of being dragged from the water.
FROM SEA TO LAND.
After the decision of the Court of Marine Inquiry, fully
referred to in a previous chapter, I left the sea and went
into business with my father-in-law, the late Mr. James
Harcourt, and I stopped with him some time. After the
recovery of my master’s certificate I was offered the position
of master of the Channel steamer “Huon,” owned by the late
Captain W. Fisher, and remained in her for about three years.
I think I can fairly claim during that period among the fruit-
growers and shippers to have gained their respect and good-
will. In 1889, Captain E. T. Miles, who was then engaged in
the Hobart—West Coast trade, approached me and asked if
I would proceed to Newcastle to take command of a small
steamer there, and bring her to Hobart. I accepted the offer,
and went to Sydney and Newcastle. Some time elapsed before
I could get a crew together, the steamer being so small; she
also did not bear the appearance of being very seaworthy.
Eventually, the trouble was got over, and I was successful in
navigating the “Advance” to Hobart. I can well remember
my wife’s disgust when she paid a visit to the wharf and
inspected the tiny vessel.
The same year, 1889, I was offered the position of outdoor
traveller for Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. by the late
Mr. Charles Piesse, who was the Hobart Agent for the Com-
pany. This Company had some time previously entered the
Tasmanian trade in opposition to the Tasmanian Steam
Navigation Company. I accepted the appointment, and this
was the starting point of my association with this Company
during the 44 years that have followed. I met with consider-
able success when travelling among the growers every week,
helping them to understand the shipping of their own fruit
without the expense attached to an agent. I held regular
meetings in various parts of the Huon, keeping in close touch
with all the growers and advising them as to conducting their
business satisfactorily. Being so constantly among the
orchardists, and of so much assistance to them, I can say
without egotism that my name became almost a household
word in the districts.


It was in 1890 that Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co.
opened their own office in Hobart, and Mr. Charles Piesse
handed over the agency to Mr. James Murrell, who was
appointed the first Hobart Manager of the Company. I then
came under the control of Mr. Murrell, and remained in that
position until that gentleman was transferred to Wellington,
New Zealand, to take charge of the Company’s business there.
I was then promoted to the position of Acting Manager,
and while I was working in that capacity, I was the recipient
of two offers of a highly remunerative character, but so
generously had I been treated by Messrs. Huddart, Parker
and Co. I declined the tempting offers. In 1893 I was pro-
moted to the full managership, the word “Acting” being
expunged. This position I have held ever since. During
this period the following vessels belonging to this firm
traded between Hobart and the mainland ports: —
“Burrumbeet,” “Elingamite,” “Wendouree,” “Tambo,”
“Tasmania,” “Westralia,” “Wimmera,” “Ulimaroa,” “River-
ina,” “Zealandia,” “Victoria,” “Warrimoo,” and “Miowera."
THE HUON DISTRICT.
Prior to taking practical charge of the steamer “Huon,” I
spent two weeks travelling through parts of the Huon dis-
tricts interviewing people who would become supporters of
this small vessel in the Channel trade. I visited most of the
primary producers in the Cygnet district, up hill and down
dale, calling at Wattle Grove, Glazier’s Bay, Cradoc, and
other centres. Everywhere I went I am pleased to be able
to say that I received a most cordial welcome. As showing
the usual friendly character of those with whom I became
associated, I drank, on an average, 15 cups of tea a day. I
must also admit that something stronger was available, but I
preferred to stick to the good old beverage. I was a fair con-
noisseur of tea, as I had had the opportunity of sampling some
of the best tea in Foochow and other parts of China where it
was grown.
After I had completed this general canvass, I joined the
“Huon” steamer, and experienced a most enjoyable and suc-
cessful time for over two years. The job was no sinecure, as
I had to do my share of the manual work with the crew. As
a rule, we left Hobart wharf at 9 a.m. on certain days,
travelling through to Huonville, via all places, which included
the Channel, Huon Island, Garden Island Creek, Lymington,
Gardner’s Bay, Crooked Tree Point, and Cygnet; both sides
of the Huon River, Wattle Grove, Shipwrights’ Point, Castle
Forbes Ba}', Franklin, on to Huonville, up the west side of
Egg Island. After we left Huonville the next morning at 6
o’clock, we travelled down the east side picking up fruit and
other cargo en route. Owing to the absence of jetties, it was


necessary to pick the fruit and other goods up from the banks,
arriving at Wattle Grove about 10 p.m. to midnight. Then
we were called upon to load fruit, potatoes, swedes, etc.,
carrying it often from the beach to the boat, sometimes being
up to our waists in water. Very often, in winter weather,
with boisterous winds and a thick fog prevailing, we had to
feel our way from port to port. When going to Shipwrights’
Point in this class of weather we obtained valuable assistance
as to our direction by watching for the flash of a gun fired by
Mr. J. Dance, the proprietor of the Alabama Hotel, situate at
the Point. He would always have something hot for us to par-
take of, and I can assure my readers that it was as welcome
as the flowers in Ma}^.
PROGRESS OF THE HUON.
I have been spared long enough to see a vast growth in
the Huon and Channel districts to what obtained when I first
went there. W hen I first visited the fruit-growing centres
down there, large areas of land were in a virgin state,
covered with trees and shrubs. But the pioneers were deter-
mined to succeed, and with admirable foresight, grit, and
determination they carried on against almost overwhelming
odds. I can fairly claim to have watched and helped in every
possible way to encourage the settlers to bring their holdings
to a high state of productivity. And the result must be
eminently satisfactory to all who have the welfare of the State
at heart. Nowhere in Tasmania is there greater closer settle-
ment than in the Huon. It is with justifiable pride that I can
look back on the part I played in the advancement of fruit-
growing in the Southern part of the State. P also desire to
place on record the valuable assistance rendered by Wardens
and Councillors, whose one and only desire was to give of
their very best in pushing on and on in the face of tremendous
difficulties in the way of pests.
As I have already stated, one of the largest handicaps
that had to be faced was the absence of jetties where vessels
could berth. Directly I was returned as a Member of Parlia-
ment, it was my pleasing duty to fight for the erection of the
required wharves, as I had had practical experience of their
absolute necessity. So persistent was lin my endeavours in
this direction that I was named the one man-one jetty Mem-
ber. This proved the beginning of the very great development
that took place in the Huon. It turned out to be the most
prolific apple-growing country in the world. Densely wooded
areas have been converted into orchards that bear fruit of a
distinctive flavour and wonderful keeping quality.
There are now about 12,750 acres of full-bearing orchards
in four Municipalities, and the average crop totals approxi-
mately three million bushels. Eleven large evaporating


factories, wood wool works, and cool stores have been erected,
all as a result of the marvellous growth of the districts. In
many directions has progress taken place, and looking back
through the dim and distant past I can visualise what the
Hugh was when I was first associated with it and compare
it with what now obtains, to its very great benefit.
HOBART PORT REMINISCENCES.
Going back to the period when I first arrived at Hobart,
the port was not very far advanced so far as wharf accom-
modation was concerned. Naturally, its facilities were not
of the same order as they are to-day. There were very few
up-to-date wharves, while the service across to the eastern
shores of the Derwent was nothing compared with what it is
now. People were rowed across to Bellerive in ordinary
boats by Mr. (better known as “Dummy”) Hales and his
son. Goods were carried to and fro by sailing craft, prior to
the introduction of the paddle wheel steamer “Kangaroo”
(familiarly known locally as the Twins) taking up the
running.
The population and production were, of course, very small,
but developed to a considerable extent later. In 1859 there
were not many homes at Bellerive, and fewer at Lindisfarne
and Montagu Bay. Shipping facilities were meagre, no
up-to-date slip-ways, but they became very much improved
as time wore on. Some of the finest vessels of their size were
built at McGregor’s slip-yards, which were situate at the
Domain, and also at other yards.
The names of these vessels were: —“Petrel.” “Tasman,”
“Derwent,” “Acacia.” “Thomas Brown,” “Isabella Brown,”
“Hector,” “Kingston,” “Waratah,” “Nautilus,” “David
and Jesse,’ “Falcon,” “Eclipse,” “Harriet McGregor,”
“Loongana,’ and the “Hally Bayley.” I have known of
several mainland vessels paying a visit to Hobart to be slipped
for general overhaul and repairs at Hobart. They were, of
course, of a limited registered tonnage. At a later date, the
Marine Board considered the advisability of constructing a
dock capable of dealing with larger vessels trading to Hobart,
but the cost was found to be too great, and it was, unfor-
tunately, abandoned.
In those early days the Tasmanian Steam Navigation
Company was in existence, commencing in 1853 with the
steamer “Tasmania,” 526 tons. She arrived at Hobart on 3rd
February, and was followed by the “City of Hobart,” the
“Southern Cross,” and many others. Mr. C. Toby was the
first Manager, and was succeeded by Mr. Cunningham.
These steamers traded to most of the mainland ports, and I
believe had this Company been properly managed, it would


have been one of the largest Steamship Companies in Aus-
tralia, but it failed mainly due to the opposition of sailing
ships.
Many of the original Directors of the Tasmanian Steam
Navigation Company were shipowners, and the merchant
ships owned by them interfered with the business of the
steamers, especially in the Hobart —New Zealand trade. In
addition, the Directors were too conservative, and were lack-
ing in business acumen insofar as competing with the times.
This led to the advent of Messrs. Huddart, Parker in 1889 into
the Tasmanian service.
Then began a trade war. Freights were reduced to as
low as 3d. per case for fruit to Sydney, while fares to the same
port from Hobart were cut down to 10s. per passenger, first-
class. Later on, contracts were entered into with fruit
shippers of Hobart, the Huon, and other fruit-growing centres,
the freight being fixed at 9d. per case. This arrangement
came about after the two Companies were tired of fighting
each other; but in the meantime thousands of pounds had
been lost.
WHALING INDUSTRY.
In the days of long ago the Port of Hobart was a scene
of great activity, brought about by the vessels arriving and
departing, who were engaged in whaling pursuits. The New
Wharf, now known as Prince’s Wharf, was then occupied by
barques “Alexander,” “Maud of Erin.” “Sapphire,” “Emily
Downing,” “Planter,” “Waterwitch,” “Nautilus,” and “Der-
went Hunter.”
When the vessels arrived back from the whaling grounds,
the animation on Prince’s Wharf was something not easily
forgotten. The discharging of the oil and the loading of it
on to ocean-going ships, made plenty of work for those en-
gaged in that task. I can well remember the great fights and
uproar that used to go on when the men were busy discharging
the oil from their respective vessels.
The whaling industry in those days was a flourishing
concern. It was commenced as early as 1815, and continued
on until the end of last century, but gradually its decline be-
came so pronounced, that more than thirty years ago saw the
end of ships going out engaged in the whaling trade. Within
65 }mars Hobart’s staple industry had been born, flourished,
and died.
An adjunct of this trade was that of the cooperage busi-
ness, and while the oil was being brought to Hobart it pro-
gressed exceedingly. It was carried on by Messrs. Burgoyne,
Dingwell, and Johnston, on an area of land directly opposite
to where the vessels were berthed. I knew Mr. Johnston


intimately, and he was one of the best. I served my time at sea
with one of his sons, and his eldest son, Mr. Archie Johnston,
is still living in Sandy Bay,. and until quite recently was in
charge of the cooperag'e at the Hobart Bond.
My first trip to London was on the barque “Helen,” with
a cargo of oil. It took nearly two months to load the ship
ready to cast off for the long sea trip. I might add that in
1831 the Hobart whaler, “Caroline,” Captain John Fletcher,
of old whaling stock, went down in a hurricane off Tonga.
FROM SHIP TO STATE.
In 1896 I commenced my Parliamentary career, whicn
has continued right up till the present. It came about in
this way. The late Sir Edward Braddon, who was then
Premier, and the late Hon. A. I. Clark, then Attorney-
General, waited on me, and urged me to allow myself to be
nominated as a candidate for the Kingborough Electorate in
the House of Assembly. At that time there were single
Electorates. My political mission then was to oppose and, if
possible, defeat the sitting Member (Mr. R. J. Lucas), who
was occupying the position of Leader of the Opposition. The
request did not appeal to me, but the gentlemen mentioned
were persistent in their efforts, as they told me they were
satisfied I was the only man who could possibly win the seat.
After three interviews, I still adhered to my refusal to be
nominated, whereupon they addressed a communication to
the Managing Director of Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co.
(Mr. E. J. Parker) in Melbourne. They wrote to him explain-
ing the position, and contending that it would be a good
thing for the firm if their Hobart representative were a Mem-
ber of Parliament. They expressed their confident opinion
that I had only to contest the seat to win it. . They urged
Mr. Parker to use his influence with me to consent to be
nominated, and this was followed by a letter to me by the
Managing Director, practically commanding me to give way.
The letter was couched in such strong language that I waited
on the Hon. A. I. Clark, told him I would accept nomination,
at the same time I complained to him at having gone over my
head, as it were, and approached Mr. Parker. The result
was that I defeated Mr. Lucas by a flattering majority, and
the confidence then bestowed on me by the electors of the
Huon districts has remained'ever since, as for 37 years I have
been their representative. I have thus the proud privilege
of being the father of the House.
In 1909 there was a change in the representation of the
House of Assembly in Parliament, brought about by the
abolition of single electorates, and the adoption of large
divisions. It was then I was returned as a Member for
Franklin, being one of the six who were elected for that


constituency. I supported the Government of the day for a
considerable time, but later on joined the Opposition under
the leadership of the late Mr. R. C. Patterson, and was
appointed Deputy Leader. Subsequently, Mr. Patterson had
to retire through ill-health, and I was chosen to fill the
vacancy in the leadership.
The Propsting-Nicholls Government was in power, and
had a majority of six or eight Members. They called them-
selves the “Liberal-Democratic Party,” but I was always at
a loss to understand what it meant.
In 1904 a political crisis was brought about by the refusal
of the Legislative Council to pass the measures sent up there
by the Government. Most of the Bills that were successfully
negotiated through the House of Assembly were thrown out
by the Council. The constant repetition by the Council of
this refusal to pass the Bills sent to them so incensed the
Government that they tendered their resignation to the
Governor. Having such a substantial majority behind them,
the Members of the Government confidently felt that the
Governor had only to appoint a new Ministry for it to be
turned out of office within a month.
In July, 1904, the Lieut.-Governor (Sir John Dodds) sent
for me as Leader of the Opposition, and asked me whether
I could form an Administration that would be able to carry
on the reins of Government. I replied in the affirmative.
The task, however, was not an easy one. My desire was to
form a strong party, and, with that end in view, I offered
the position of Premier, without portfolio, to several leading
politicians, all of whom refused, in the belief that the new
Government was destined to be defeated almost as soon as it
met the House, because the Ministerial party at that time was
in a minority of at least six Members.
. CABIN BOY TO PREMIER.
As I could not get any Member to accept the office of
Premier, I had to assume that responsibility myself, without
portfolio, and that meant that the salary attaching thereto was
only £2OO a year. I made as good a geographical distribution
of the portfolios as possible in the appointment of my col-
leagues, and I then returned to the Lieut.-Governor, advising
him I had been successful in forming a Cabinet. I assumed
the head of the Government in July, 1904; but, naturally, I
had misgivings as to the length of time I would be able to
carry on, owing to the numerical strength of the Opposition.
As I expected, I encountered my first trouble when I
asked the House to grant me an adjournment for six weeks,
so that I would have sufficient time to frame the new Govern-
ment’s policy for submission to the House when it next met.
The Opposition opposed the proposal put forward, and I was


determined, if it was at all possible, to get into recess with an
opportunity to prepare a programme for presentation to
Members. I interviewed several Members of the Opposition,
and met with varying success. There was one Northern
representative who, in particular, was strongly opposed to the
adjournment being granted. I saw him on no fewer than
three occasions, but he persisted in his refusal. I was aware
that if this Member voted on the motion for the adjournment
it would be defeated, so, as a last resort, I asked him if he
would agree to return home and abstain from voting. This
request he acceded to, and by so doing I was able to secure
the respite asked for, and the Government was saved from
defeat.
When I took office it was confidently predicted in
political circles that the Government would remain in power
six weeks. I was out to prove that prophecy was wrong, and
history tells how I succeeded. When the House met after
the adjournment, we introduced our policy, and it was of such a
character that after a hard fight we were successful in having
it adopted. The prediction that we would only be there six
weeks was badly astray, for instead of that we were there for
as many years as weeks forecast. And even then I was not
defeated on the floor of the House, I having to retire from
the Premiership on account of ill-health.
MINISTERIAL ACTS.
When, with my colleagues, I accepted the responsibility
of governing Tasmania, there was a floating deficiency of over
£300.000. It was our task to see what could be done in the
way of improving the financial position. Every avenue was
explored with a view to meeting the situation, and six years
later, when I retired, I had the satisfaction of knowing that
we had reduced it very considerably, having experienced many
years with surpluses of revenue over expenditure.
During the time I was Premier I introduced Free Educa-
tion into the Primary Schools, no High Schools or University
education. I also passed into law the present Hare-Clark
system of voting at elections of Members of the House of
Assembly.
In 1909 I introduced the Complex Ores Bill into Parlia-
ment, and after a determined fight, which lasted nearly the
whole of that session, I was successful in placing the measure
on the Statute Book, which was the forerunner of the estab-
lishment of the Great Hydro-Electric works at the Great Lake
and its ramifications throughout Tasmania that have been
going on ever since.
It was Mr. J. G. Gillies who first brought the scheme to
Tasmania, and it was at his instance that I submitted the


measure to Parliament. After its passage, Mr. Gillies set to
work to obtain the necessary financial backing to carry out
the project, but he was unable to raise sufficient for the pur-
pose. This resulted in Parliament being asked by the
Government to assist Air. Gillies, but this proved only a tem-
porary expedient, for a little later, the State took over the
whole concern, and gradually but surely it grew to its present
proportions, until it has become the chief of Tasmania’s
Governmental enterprises.
In 1908 I had the honour of appointing Mr. (now Sir)
Herbert Nicholls a Puisne Judge, and he later became Chief
Justice, and for some years was Lieut.-Governor of the State,
a position from which he just recently retired. I am of the
opinion that my Cabinet’s choice in this respect was a wise
one, as evidenced by His Honour’s record on the Bench.
It was during my regime as Premier that the late Dr. J.
H. McCall (afterwards Sir John McCall) r eceived the
distinction of being selected to go to London as Agent-
General for Tasmania, and it is safe to say that again this was
a wise decision. His valuable services on behalf of the State
were recognised by His Majesty the King, who honoured him
with a Knighthood.
I was Chairman of the old Liberal League and the
National Federation for some 12 years, and in that capacity I
think I can honestly claim to have been of some service to the
State.
During the period I was Premier of Tasmania, Sir
Gerald Strickland was Governor, and on several occasions I
accompanied him on tours throughout the State. On most of
these trips Lady Strickland and my wife were of the party.
I attended five Interstate Conferences in various capitals
of the mainland on national matters, and Sir Gerald Strickland
was of great assistance to me in the preparation of material
that had to come before the other Premiers and Ministers.
The late Mr. R. M. Johnston, Government Statistician, pre-
pared voluminous statements dealing with Tasmania’s finan-
cial position, and showing even as far back as that, that the
State was in a bad way. Those documents are on record in
the House of Assembly.
MAGNET OF PUBLIC LIFE
In 1891 I was elected a Warden of the Marine Board of
Hobart, which position I held until 1903, when I retired from
the Board, as I had become Premier of Tasmania. I was
again elected a Warden in 1909 and have occupied a seat on
the Board ever since. I also filled the position of Master
Warden on several occasions.


During- 1894 I was appointed a Director of the Interna-
tional Exhibition, which was held on the Queen’s Domain,
with Mr. Jules Joubert as Manager.
In 1905 I was elected the first President of the Tasmanian
Sanatorium for Consumptives, which position I still have the
honour to occupy. This has been the greatest work of my
public life. A small band of philanthropic workers got to-
gether and formulated the idea of opening such an Institution,
which it was recognised was of vital necessity. A commence-
ment was made in a small way, for the money at their disposal
was not large. Two chalets were erected, and in addition
tents were made use of for the housing of patients, etc. The
only grant they had from the Government was £5O, which I
gave them when Premier of the State, and this continued for
some years. The struggle to continue was a bitter one, but
slowly and surely the value of the work being performed
came to be recognised, and the Government submitted a vote
to Parliament, sufficient to enable the Committee to build the
splendid administrative block now in existence. This assist-
ance was followed up by the Government accepting the
responsibility of erecting a home for advanced cases, which
was very badly wanted. I have witnessed on many occasions
some wonderful arrests that have been effected of this dread
complaint. The annual expenditure of the Sanatorium is
approximately £7,000; of which the Government provides
about half, the balance being raised by public subscriptions.
I feel proud of my efforts in this humanitarian work, and
I have been ably assisted throughout by an enthusiastic and
energetic Executive Committee. The major portion of my
time is taken up in the work of administration. In 1924 the
past and present Members of the Executive Committee pre-
sented me with an illuminated address as a mark of personal
esteem and of their grateful recognition of what they referred
to as my invaluable services to the Institution.
Over 20 years ago I inaugurated the Boy Scout Move-
ment over nearly the whole of Tasmania, travelling to many
districts to give it a start, and was appointed the first Presi-
dent of the Association that was formed. Success attended
the movement from the start, and 1 it went ahead until the
Great War broke out in 1914, when so many of the lads in the
Scouts enlisted for the Front. This led to the loss of many
of our Officers, and the troops dwindled away. A few years
ago it was revived, and is now favourably progressing. I was
appointed President of the Hobart Branch.
About 1910 I was appointed a Member of the Tasmanian
Tourist Association, and remained a Member for some con-
siderable time. I also filled the position of Chairman for a
time. Splendid work was accomplished by this body in the
development of the Tourist Traffic.


I have been for years closely associated with almost every
description of manly sports, particularly football and cricket,
while I also took part in all patriotic and jubilee celebrations
held in Hobart.
For a time I was President of the St. John’s Ambulance
Association; President of the Royal Life-Saving - Society; and
Patron, President, and Vice-President of several Regatta
Committees all over my large Electorate.
VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND.
Towards the end of 1906, I received, as Premier of Tas-
mania, an invitation from Sir Joseph Ward, Prime Minister of
the Dominion of New Zealand, to attend the opening of the
Christchurch Exhibition, as the guest of his Government.
Accompanied by my wife and daughter I left Hobart in the
S.S. “Maheno,” and travelled via the Bluff and Dunedin. We
were met on arrival at Christchurch by a representative of the
Government, and escorted to a hotel in that fine City, remain-
ing there for three weeks, which were of a most enjoyable
character. The opening of the Exhibition was a splendid
function, and well worth travelling the long distance we had
to witness it. It was in every sense of the term an Inter-
national Exposition, nearly all the nations of the world being
represented in a remarkable manner. All the entertainments
were carried out on a lavish scale, while the sideshows, in-
cluding the Maori and Fijian performers, were of a highly
entertaining nature.
We were right royally looked after, and were shown over
the Exhibition by the Commissioner, a leading merchant of
Christchurch, and who was also the local agent for Messrs.
Huddart, Parker and Coy. This gentleman was particularly
good in showing us all the principal places in and around the
city. The three weeks we were there and the kind hospitality
extended to us from all quarters have remained in our memory
ever since.
The Tasmanians residing in Christchurch entertained us
at a social gathering one evening, at which there were some
100 present. They were doing well in New Zealand, as
Tasmanians do wherever they go, and they were extremely
pleased to see us and to give us an enjoyable time, coming
as we did from their homeland.
On leaving Christchurch in order to visit other parts of
the Dominion my wife and self were presented with two
beautiful rugs woven at one of the large woollen mills there
which we had visited, while my daughter received a brooch
given her from the Exhibition. We proceeded to Wellington,
and were there met by Captain T. W. McDonald, whose guests
we were at the Hutt, six miles out of the city.


Altogether, we were in New Zealand for three months,
and throughout the whole of that time people vied with each
other to make our enjoyment complete. Ministers of the
Crown and Heads of various Dominion departments did their
utmost to give us a most instructive and pleasant time, and
we saw everything that was worth seeing. The Prime
Minister (Sir Joseph Ward) and his colleagues tendered us a
special dinner one evening at Wellington. Some fine speeches
were 'made in our honour and very complimentary remarks
made. I, of course, made the necessary reply, and I naturally
took the opportunity of telling those present, and consequently
through the Press, what a wonderful place Tasmania was,
and all the advantages it possessed from a scenic, industrial,
and mineral point of view. One of the Ministers who addres-
sed the gathering said that he had risen from a sailor to a
Minister of the Crown. I was in the fortunate position of
being able to reply that I had risen from a cabin boy to
Premier. This attracted hearty rounds of applause.
We left Wellington for Wanganui with the object of
going up the river to join the train at Taumanrauni for
Auckland; but, after travelling up this beautiful stream in a
small steamer, we reached Pipiriki and stayed there three
days. Finding it impossible, on account of the rapids coming
down so strongly to go further up the river, we contented our-
selves visiting the sights round about, and then returned to
Wanganui and on to New Plymouth to catch a steamer for
Auckland. We were in New Plymouth on Christmas Day,
and we had a most wonderful dinner for the occasion.
Leaving by boat later in the evening we reached Auckland
on Boxing Day. We stayed there a few days, and then con-
tinued our journeyings to Rotorua, visiting O’Roroire,
Whakarewarewa, Hamurana, Tikitere, Lake Tarawera, Lake
Rotomahana, and the Waimangu geysers, wonderful and awe-
inspiring sights, never to be forgotten. We joined the S.S.
“Manuka” towards the end of February for Sydney, staying
in the latter city some time. We reached Hobart after four
months’ absence, and the holiday proved one of the most en-
joyable and instructive it had been our lot to partake of.
The experience I gained was of the utmost value to me in
conducting the affairs of State.
COMMONWEALTH FLAG.
The adoption of a Commonwealth Flag, which is now so
well known all over the world, was brought about in this way.
It was early in July, 1901, that I received the following com-
munication from the Right Honourable Prime Minister of
the Commonwealth:—


‘‘As perhaps you are aware, the Federal Government,
some time ago, offered a prize of £75 for the best design for a
flag that might be adopted by the Commonwealth. In
response to this announcement a large number of designs,
believed to be upwards of 5,000, have been received. It is pro-
posed to have these designs inspected and reported upon by a
Board of three gentlemen, and the Right Honourable the
Prime Minister desires me to ask whether you will favour him
by becoming a Member of the Board. The inspection of the
designs must, necessarily, be done in Melbourne, and at the
earliest possible moment. A gentleman who has had experi-
ence in such matters, will be appointed to assist the Board in
preparing the designs for inspection. I believe that the con-
sideration of very many of them need only be of an extremely
summary character, but the service of the Board must neces-
sarily be given for several days. The Right Honourable the
Prime Minister is very anxious that the best knowledge
should be brought to bear on this subject, and as he under-
stands that you are well versed in all matters pertaining to
the history, making and use of flags, he will be very pleased
if you can assist him.”
ff his honour of being one of the representatives to choose
our Australian Flag, I, of course, accepted. The Board, which
met in Melbourne, consisted of Captain C. J. Clare (South
Australia), Captain J. Edie (New South Males), Captain f.
A. Mitchell (Victoria), Lieutenant Thompson (H.M.S.
Katoomba ), and Captain J. W. Evans (Tasmania).
Ihe judging of these 5,000 designs took some consider-
able time, and it proved a very difficult problem to arrive at
a decision that we thought would give general satisfaction.
Me unanimously arrived at the selection of the present Naval
and Merchant Flag for the Commonwealth of Australia.
TASMANIA AND FEDERATION.
I took my part in 1899 with many other public men in
advocating the peo'ple of Tasmania to vote in favour of join-
ing with the rest of Australia in a Commonwealth to guide
the future destinies of this part of the British Empire. I
addressed electors in public halls and off lorries virtually all
over the State, pointing out the advantages that would accrue
by accepting the Constitution that had been framed. At that
time I was fully aware, with the statistics submitted to me by
the then Government Statistician (Mr. R. M. Johnston), that
financially, as Tasmania was the smallest State of the six. it
was bound to suffer to a considerable extent, but at the same
time I also realised that if we stood out our position would be
worse. I recognised that the barriers of trade would be
raised up against us, that the mainland ports would be shut
against our produce, meaning that there would be little or no


export of fruit, potatoes, wool, hops, etc., across Bass Straits
to the larger centres of Australia, and being a primary pro-
ducing colony, it would be disastrous to producers all over the
Island. It was the realisation of these facts that inspired me
to tour the State to secure an affirmative vote, for it would
have been suicidal to have stood out, as our population was
insufficient to consume what was produced.
I took the stand I did in the honest belief that Tasmania,
as an integral part of the Commonwealth, would receive fair
and just treatment; that the people of Tasmania would be
cared for financially; that Federation meant co-operation and
that the weaker States would be assisted in order to overcome
the disabilities brought about as a result of being one of the
States of the Commonwealth. Time has shown that my trust
in the Federation was but a delusion, that the advantages that
were put forward have proved but a snare, and that those who
from time to time have been responsible for the administration
of Commonwealth affairs have failed to adequately meet the
position of the smaller States. Despite all the disadvantages
that Tasmania has suffered, I am far from being a Secessionist.
I still believe that if we all joined together in our endeavours
to have our wrongs righted, the Federal authorities
would be bound to recognise our just claims, and assist the
State to overcome the very great difficulties experienced as a
result of its joining up with the other States in the formation
of the Commonwealth.
One of the encroachments by the Federal Government on
the rights of the State, was its imposition of Land and Income
Taxation. To my mind that form of levy should have been
left entirely to the State Governments, so that the people
would not have had to carry the burden of double Income and
Land Taxes.
RECOGNITION OF SERVICES.
I had the very proud privilege in 1906 to receive a com-
munication from His Majesty the King, that he had been
pleased to recognise the servcies I had rendered Tasmania in
my many and varied positions and to bestow on me the dis-
tinguished honour of the rank of Commander of St. Michael
and St. George (C.M.G.), and this was followed in 1925 with
the conferring on me of a Knighthood (K. 8.). It was also
very gratifying to me to receive congratulations from all parts
of the State and the Commonwealth on the honour that had
been bestowed.
During the time I was head of the Government of the
State, I occupied the position of Premier (without portfolio)
until October, 1905. I then took over the office of Treasurer
in conjunction with that of Premier until May, 1906. I was


Premier and Chief Secretary till June, 1909, when Sir Elliott
Lewis was appointed Premier, I having to retire through ill-
health. I was Minister for Education from the time I took
over the reins of Government until 1906.
On 23rd April, 1913, I was elected to the high and honour-
able office of Speaker of the House of Assembly, and held that
position until 4th March, 1914, when there was a change of
Ministry, Labour coming into power. When a Nationalist
Government was returned in 1916 I was again elected to the
chair, and then in 1925, there was another swing over to
Labour. In 1928 Nationals once more were in a majority, and
after the formation of the Government by the Hon. J. C.
McPhee I was for the third time chosen to be Speaker. That
position I still hold, and as my term of office does not expire till
the end of the present Parliament, if Providence spares me to
complete that term, I will hold the record of the Speakersjiip
of the House of Assembly by about two months over that of
the late Sir Robert Officer, who occupied the chair for 15
years. While my occupancy was intermittent, owing to the
changes of Government, Sir Robert Officer’s was continuous,
he being Speaker at a time when the Labour Party was an
unknown quantity in politics.
In 1919 and again a few years later I was the recipient of
beautiful illuminated addresses from the residents and electors
of the districts of Cygnet and Franklin, in appreciation of
services I had rendered to them as their Member, also as
Premier and Speaker of the House of Assembly and as
Warden and Master Warden of the Marine Board of Hobart.
The addresses were couched in flattering language as to the
work I had accomplished, particularly in regard to the. cause
of suffering humanity, and the manner in which I had carried
out my high public duties.
In 1925 the whole of the Members of the House of
Assembly presented me with a gold cigarette case as a token
of their esteem. Naturally, I value the presentation very
highly, as it bore evidence of the friendship and goodwill of
those with whom I had been so long and closely associated.
This was to commemorate my thirty years as a Member of
Parliament.
In 1924 the present and past Members of the General
Committee of the Tasmanian Sanatorium at New Town
presented me with an illuminated address, as a mark
of their personal esteem and of their grateful recogni-
tion of the valuable services I had rendered the Institution.
The Members of the ex-Committee on their own behalf and
also on behalf of the general public of Tasmania, asked me to
accept their most grateful thanks for all I had accomplished,
and they further expressed the hope that I would be long
spared to carry on full active duty in a field of work which 1
loved so well and wherein I had done so nobly.


DOMESTIC.
On the 20th of October, 1883, I was married to Miss
Emily Harcourt, second eldest daughter of the late Mr. James
Harcourt, one time Mayor of the City of Hobart. My married
life has been a happy one, even with its accompaniments of
troubles and sorrows. During the whole of my public life my
wife stood shoulder to shoulder with me, and materially helped
in whatever success I have achieved.
My family consisted of two sons and one daughter. The
elder son, George, served his time as a marine engineer, and
subsequently became chief engineer in the service of Messrs.
Huddart, Parker and Co} r . Later on, he was successful in
gaining the appointment of engineer at the Hydro-Electric
works at Waddamana, where he remained for a period of nine
years. From there he was promoted to the responsible posi-
tion of chief operator at the Hydro-Electric Department at
Hobart.
My second son. Jack, enlisted to take part in the Great
War, and was at the front for four years. On his return to
Tasmania there was a vacancy in the position of Clerk
Assistant in the House of Assembly caused by the transfer of
Mr. Green to the Federal sphere, and Jack was appointed to
fill that position. In June, 1925, after an illness lasting only
two days, he passed to the Great Beyond.
On 20th October, 1933, my dear wife and I celebrated our
golden wedding. We highly appreciated the congratulations
received from all sections of the community of Tasmania as
well as those from all over Australia. One of the great aims
of my life has been to endeavour to retain the goodwill of my
fellow men, and that I had been successful in this respect was
amply demonstrated on this great day of my life, when so
many staunch friends rallied round us. The floral presenta-
tions were something wonderful, and the memory of the
respect and esteem they conveyed from their senders will
never fade from our memory.
A large number of friends honoured us with splendid
presents, and none were more welcomed than the gifts from
the patients of the Tasmanian Sanatorium, to which every
inmate of the Institution subscribed. We visited the Sana-
torium on the evening of this red-letter day to give a cheery
word of encouragement to the patients and to receive their
presents. The inmates seemed to be far more excited than we
were after the glorious day we had experienced. The Matron
and Staff also participated in the function, and with God’s
blessing we are looking forward to our diamond wedding.


My association with Church life was in the Memorial
Congregational Church, and I have worshipped there for many
years. The Ministers who controlled the destinies of this
Church were the Revs. W. C. Robinson, G. W. Sharp, H.
Perkins, Bernard Cockett, A. C. Nelson, and W. Gunson.
For some time I was Superintendent of the Sunday
School, and when Premier I had the honour of laying the
foundation stone of the present Memorial Hall in Brisbane
Street, Hobart.
SOCIAL.
During the visit of Madame Melba, Australia’s famous
singer, in 1909, I had the pleasure of extending to her a warm
welcome on behalf of the people of Tasmania, and I offered
their congratulations to her on her high attainments as a
world-famed singer. I introduced several young ladies to
her with the object of having their voices tested, and received
very kindly assistance from her. Madame Melba chose Miss
Lucy Atkins (now Mrs. Purchas) as one with the best cultured
voice and one in whom she would be prepared to take special
interest. After several interviews, it was arranged that Miss
Atkins should proceed to London under the care of Madame
Melba, on the understanding that I should raise a certain sum
of money to assist in the arrangement being carried out. Miss
Atkins succeeded wonderfully in her role of singer, and later
married a nephew of Madame Melba’s, Mr. Frank Purchas,
and they both came to Hobart to reside. They are well known
and popular in the music world.
At a later date, 1911, Miss Maggie Gard came before the
public with a marvellous voice (contralto). At that time she
was under the tuition of Mrs. Levy, an efficient teacher of
singing. With this lady’s help and also that of the late Rev.
Father Gilleran, a special friend and adviser of Miss Card’s, I
undertook the duty and responsibility of raising funds to
enable this young lady to go abroad to study and follow the
profession of singing. I formed a company of interested
Tasmanians, and air agreement was entered into with Miss
Card, that if sufficient money was forthcoming to send her
abroad, she on her part would return to Tasmania, and by
entertainment, etc., reimburse the shareholders of the Com-
pany who had helped her. The amount raised was £BOO.
Miss Gard went away and was very successful; but, unfor-
tunately, she did not return to Tasmania as anticipated.
REFLECTIONS.
In concluding these reminiscences, I have to express my
regret that my lengthy political career has not been such as I
would have liked it to be. I feel that my desires and activities


should have been keener, and that I was somewhat wanting
in statesmanship qualities in the lack of a broader outlook
and a greater perception to look ahead. To think in such a
great country as we possess in this Commonwealth nation of
ours, producing such an abundance of wheat, wool, meat,
butter, fruit, etc., that there is so much unemployment and
that the prospects for the rising generation are so depressing,
is lamentable. It is apparent that there is something wrong.
We are, of course, over-governed. There is too much
extravagance in that direction, and yet, with all our Ministers
of the Crown, Members of Parliament, and Civil Servants, the
business of the State cannot be carried out without the
appointment of Royal Commissions and other bodies to try
and settle affairs and even then fail. In my opinion, we need
closer co-operation from all parties as well as from the people
themselves.
The Great War should have had a greater result in its
lesson. With others I shared in the Supreme Sacrifice that
our brave lads paid for their King and Country. I have,
during the long years of my varied career, watched what was
being accomplished for the benefit of mankind. I have wit-
nessed the marvellous developments in telegraphy, telephones,
motors, aeroplanes, etc., and last but not least, the strides made
in wonderful wireless. What has been done in those direc-
tions is almost beyond conception, and yet it had been lying
dormant for countless centuries, waiting only to be developed.
What the future holds in store is beyond the stretch of the
wildest imagination. We have only to recall Empire Night.
24th May, 1933, when people were able in their own homes to
listen to conversations from all portions of the Globe, to realise
the advancement that has been made in bringing the utter-
most parts of the world into such close personal contact with
each other. Intercommunication has been miraculously
facilitated. The loneliest farmer away in the backblocks is
no longer shut away from what is going on in the world,
while with the use of aeroplanes we can rush through space
at a speed once unbelievable. I fear we do not fully recognise
the Great Divine Power behind it all.


Indoor Rest Home Ward at the Sanatorium.


Outdoor Rest Home Chalet.


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Davies Brothers Limited,
at “The Mercury” Press, 95-99 Macquarie Street, Hobart.
5 1508 0007A595 5






My Bear Doctor,
I have to acknowledge receipt of your
comcnmication of the sth inst. inreference to votes in the
forthcoming a.M.P. election. in reply "beg to advise that
although lam not a policy holder myself, # I will dp'what I
can to interest my friends on behalf of yourself and Hr,
Bangar.
,/ishing you every success, and with
kindest regards
Yours sincerely,
