







BARRINGTON picking the Pocket of Henry Hare
TPWNSEND, ESQ. of his gold Watch, Seals, &.c.


THE GENUINE
LIFE AND TRIAL
OF
GEORGE BARRINGTON,
FROM HIS BIRTH, IN JUNE, 1775,
TOTHE
TIME OF HIS CONVICTION
AT THE OLD-BAILEY,
IN SEPTEMBER, 1790,
FOR ROBBING .
VENRT HARE TOWNSEND, Esq.
OF HIS GOLD WATCH, SEALS, &c.
LONDON:
PRIN T ED FOR, AND SOLD BY W. CLEMENTS, AND
J. SADLER, IN THE YEAR 179 1.
PRICE SIX-PENCE.




THE GENUINE
LIFE AND TRIAL
O F
GEORGE BARRINGTON, &c,
THE attention cf the public has been, for feveral yejri
paft, fixed, in a particular manner, on GEORGE
BARRINGTON: the p rincipal events of whofc life
form the fubjedl of the following fliect?: and, indeed. Cnee the
days of Jonathan Wild, no man of the defeription of tbofc
whofe names generally grace the Newgate Calendar, feems to
have deferred public notice fo much as he does. He certainly
pcATeßes talent?, which, had they been properly directed, and
prudently conducted, on his firft frtting out, might have en-
abled him to make a diftyaguifhed ficufe caber in the line of
literature or in the 'ine of bufinefs. But having, early in life,
inade one fjlfe ftep, and that .followed by a feiits of bde
ons, we fee him advance progreffvey in the c reer of gai ! t
and difgrape, until all Icnfibility of the difference between right
and wrong, honour md (hnne, was obliterated ir. his mind,
and all.fenfe of moral obligation had totally periflied in Ms
breaft; becoming thus not only inferior to a man without feel-
ing or affections, but work than a bcaft of the fertft without
inmmfl.


The perfon fo well known, in this capital, by the name of
George Barrington, and fo unfortunately difiioguifhed
in it as a p‘ck pocket, was born about the year 1775, at a vil-
lage called Mayrmoth, in the county of Kildare in Ireland,
lbs father, Heury Waldron, was a working filverfmith ; and
his mother, whofe maiden name was Na.fh, exes cited the
trade of a mantuamaker, and cccafionaily piactifed midwifery
in the neighbouihood in which fhe lived; where her character,
rs wdl as that ol her hufband, Rood h.gh for integrity and
Induftiy. But, though their honelty was unimpeached> and
their induftry, as well as their temperance, exemplary, they
were never able to extricate themfelves from the Rate of abjedk
poverty, in which they were funk, in confequence of a law-
fuit, imprudently commencedand unfkilfully conducted, againfi
a powerful and wealthy relation, whom they uufucccfsfully
fued for a funr of money, to, which they conceived themfelves
(Entitled. The indigence of their ch corn fiance* did not allow
them to improve, by a liberal education, the excellent talents
which their fan Geoigc derived from nature, and which difco-
vered themfelves in him at a very early age. They, however,
contrived to have him taught to read and write, and he was,
by a neighboring furge n, infirudled in common arithmetic,
the elements of geogiaphy, and the general principle of
grammar.
When he entered on the fixteenth year of his age, he was
noticed and patronized by Dr. C— , of Leixlip, in the
county of Dublin, a dignitary in the church of I.eland, of an
ancient and illuftrioas family, and ample fortune. Through
the intereft of this refpedlablc clergyman, young Waldron wag
placed at a free grammar fchool, in the Irifh capital, where
his patron propoftd he fnould fit himfeif for the univerfity;
a theatre on which he hoped, from the genius difenvered by
him at an early period.of his life, he might, in time, niak*
fpeh a figure as to rival the oldtft and ablert sclors; and, in
order to enable hitn to make an appearance equal to young,
gentlemen with whom he was now to affociate, the Dodlcrfup-
plicd him very liberally with money, and every other neceffary,
to render his fituction in the fchool not only comfortable, but
alfo rcfpctfhble.
This 1 fl-fated youth enjoyed, however, but for a fhort time
the benefits that he dciivcd from the iindnefs of his patron;


for, the violence of his paflions, which equalled, at leaft, tls«
extent of his talents, precipitated him into an aeftion, by which
he loft Dr. C ’s favour for ever, and which, in its
caniequences, finally proved his ruin. When he had been
about half a year at the grammar fchoo!, he unluckily got into
a difpute with a lad, much older, and larger, and ftrongerj
than hitnfelf* the difpute degenerated into a quarrel, and fome
blows enfued, in which young Waldron fuffered confiderably;
but, in order to be revenged, he ftabbed his antagonift with a
penknife; and, had he not been leafonably prevented, wnu'd
have, in al! probability, murdered him. The wounds which
he gave, did not prove f > dangerous as to render the circutn-
fiances of the quarrel which occalioned them, a fubjcdl of
legal inveftigalion, The difcipline of the houfe, (fl rgging),
however, was InflicSled with proper feverity on the perpetrator
of fo atrocious an offence, which irrigated the unrelenting and
vindictive temper of the young man to fuch a degree, that he
determined at once to run away from fchcol, from his family,
and from his friends; thus abandoning the fair profpect that
he had before him, and Waiting all the hopes that had been fo
fondly, though vainly, formed of the great things that might
be effc ted by his genius, when matured by time, and improved
by ftudy..
His plan of efcape was no fooner framed than it was carried
into execution; but, previous to his departure, he found means
to fteal ten or twelve guineas from Mr. F— the maf-
ter of the fchcol, and a gold repeating watch from Mrs.
Goldfborough, the mater’s liter. With this bo«ty, a fev
fhirts, and two or three pair of ftockings, he fllently, but
fafely, effected his retreat from the fchool-houfe, in the middle
of a ftili night, in the month of May, 1771; and, purfuing
the great nothern road all that night and ail the next day, he,
late in the evening, arrived at the town of Drogheda, without
interruption, without accident, and, in a great raesfure, with-
out halting, without reft, and without food.
Where happened to quarter, at the obfeure inn at which he
put up, on his arrival at Drogheda, a fet of ftrolling players;
and with thefe lie, without ceremony or lofs of time, formed
an intimacy, that continued fome years, with tuatual advantage
to the parties concerned in it.


fohti Price, the manager cf this Rrclling company, was i
mlive of the town <f Pool in Doiietlhirc; he was of a good
family, of an agreeable figure, lively in converfaricn, conciln
sting in his manners, and had been tolerably v.e I educ.tcd.
Having lived fume time in London, whe<e he was deik to one
Potter, a pettifogging attorney, he was intimately' acquainted
with the town, and ail the atts of fraud o« vh tence that are
praAifed in it, by the lower and mod unprinc-pled ctaffes, to
procure money; for, entering too deeplV or too unwarily into
fame practices of fuch a nature, he w-.s profecutcd; and, hav-
ing been conviAed at the O d-BLtey, he was at this time an
involuntary exile in Ireland, until the expiration of the term
for which he was fentenced to be aanfported. This man be-
came quickly the confidant, and, from the confidant, the court-
leiior, the tutor, the foveteign diteA r. as if were, of the
fugitive WiJdion. who communic ted to him, without any
referve, all the circuroftar ces-of his file and Rory. By hra
advice this unhappy youth religned his paternal name, a {fumed
that of Barrington, entered into the company, and, in the courle
of four days became fo abfolutely and form. Sly a ftrollmg fon
cf Thcfpis, that he performed the part of Jaflfier, in “ Venice
Pieferv’d,” with fome applaufe, to a crouded audience, in a
barn, in the fuburbs of Drogheda. > .
Though the reception he met with on his dehut was very
flittering to a mind like his, Price prudently determined, that
i! would not be proper for him to appear in public fo near the
feme of his late depredations in the capital, it was therefore
teiolved on by them, that the whole company Cnould, without
delay, move to the Northward, and, if pcffible, get to the
dill ante of fixty or eighty miles from Dublin, before they halt-
ed for any length of time. In ordar to enable fo numerous a
body to move with all their baggage, it was neccflary to raife
money; and, in doing this, Barrington’s affiftance was mdil-
pcnfcbly r.eceflafy. He was accordingly applied to, andl he
acquiefccd with a good grace, giving Price Mrs. GouWibo-
rough’s gold repeater, which was difpoled of, for the general
benefit of the Broilers.
This aA of well timed liberality rendered him popular
among his new affociatcs, who defmedly confidefedl him as
a valuable acquifition to their company. He had a {peaking
cy- an exprelfive countenance, a tolerable theatrical figure,
a iiy pompous enunciation, and a moB retentive memory.


With thefe advantages, they obferved, and, perhaps, rot
without lomc reafon, that he might make, one day, a fult-
iratc figure on the boards of Drury-Lane or Covent-Garden.
But, however this may be, as foon as the neccflary funds were
procured, all thefe children of Thefpis fet out for Lon-
donderry, which was the place at which they defigned firil
to play. Travelling but flowly* they were a confidcrable
time on their journey to that city, and, during the courfe of
it, the penetrating eyes of the experienced a&refles difeo-
vered that Barrington had made a tender imprcfllon on the
heart of Mifs Egerton, the young lady who played the part
df Belvidera when he a&ed that of Jafticr at Drogheda.
This poor girl was the daughter of an opulent tradefman
at Coventry. She was young and beautiful, fwcet-tem-
pered and accomplifhed, but ftieadlef#; and, though inured
to misfortune, dellitute of the experienec which is generally
acquired in a feries of finifter events. At the age of fixteco
flic was debauched by a lieutenant of marines, with whom
Ihe fled from her father's houfe to Dublin, where, in lefs than
three months, he abandoned her, leaving her a prey to infa-
my, poverty, and difeafe.
Having boen thus deceived, in the fimplicity of innocence,
by the cunning and falfhood of one of the vileft and molt
profligate of human beings, Ihc had no rcfourcc left, and was
reduced to the moll extreme want, when, falling in acci-
dentally with Price, he propofed her to join his company;
Which, fituated as Ihe was, (he readily agreed to do, and bad
been with him about a week when flic faw Barrington, of
whom flic became fo fuddenly enamoured.
The fymptoms of her affedlion for him were fo obvious,
that, inexperienced as he was then in matters of gallantry
or intrigue, he perceived her paffim, was fenfible of her
merit, and returned her love with perfedt finccrity. Being
of an age at which love ra?kes almotl every one a rhymer,
though not a poet, he addreffed her in feveral copies of ver-
ges, all of them Ihort, hut many of them pretty enough ;
as, for inftance> the following lines, written a little before
bet death; '
B


Place me where erdlefs winter reigns,
"Where genial gales ne’er blefs the plains,
Beneath thofe cold inclement fkies,
Where morbid vapours ever rife :
Place me beneath the burning zone,
Where nothing human e’er was known ;
Still Egerton’s enchanting tongue,.
Her looks, and fmiles, fhall be my fong.
Whether o’er burning fands I go,
Or mountains topt with tracklefs fnow,
Or where the faim’d Padlolus Brays,
And all its fabled wealth difplays;
She will alone my thoughts engage.
And ever (hall, from age to age.
A connexion of this kind was neceffarily attended with a
confiderable increafe of expencc ; and the confequencc of an
increafed expenditure was, that, on the arrival of the Broi-
lers at Londonderry, Barrington’s whole Bock of money
was nearly exbar.Bcd. Thus difagreeably circuraßanced,
he applied for advice-to his friend Price ; who did not befi-
tate to fuggeß to him, how eafily a young man of his ap-
pearance and addrefs, might find means to introduce hircfelf
into fome of the public places to which the merchants and
Chapmen of that commercial city generally reforted ; and that,
he there might, without any great difficulty, find opportu-
nities of picking their pockets unnoticed, and of efcaping
undeteded, more efpecially at that particular time, whtn,
rhe fair being holtien, a favourable jusfture offered it felf of
executing a plan of fuch a nature with fafety and facility.
The idea pleafed our adventurer, and the plan formed on it
was carried into execution by him and his trufty confidant,
John Price, the very next day, w'fh great fucctfs; at lead,
fuch it appeared to them at that time, their acquifitiops having
amounted on the clofe of the evening, to about forty guineas
in cafh, and above one hundred and fifty pounds, Irifla cur-
rency, in bank-notes ; which, however, they prudently de-
termined, not, on any account, to circulate in that part of
the kingdom in which they were obtained. This precaution
b£camp peculiarly neccffary ; for, ft vend gentlemen having
been robbed, the town took the alarm, which was the great-
er, or, at leaft made the more noife, from the rarity of fech


events in that part of the kingdom, where picking cf pockets
is faid to be very little pradf ifjed or known. But, whatever the
aLrm was, or whatever noife it made, neither Barrington nor
his accomplice were fufpeclcd. They, however, ufolved to
leave Dciry, as foon as they could with any appearance of
propriety depart: fo that, having played a few nights with
more appiaufe than profit, they and their aflociaf.es, the fock
and bulkia, removed from Londonderry to Ballyfnanuon, in
the county of Donnegal, and never more returned into that*
part of the kingdom ; where George Barrrington may oe
confidered as having commenced the bufinefs of a tegular and
p/oftfled pick-pocket, in the faminer of the year 1771, being
then in the fixteenth year of his age.
After travelling about a fortnight, Barrington, with the
ftrollers whom he accompanied, arrived at Ballyfhannon,
which is faid to be oate of the pleafanteft, cheapeft, mbft
plentiful, and moil polite, country-towns in Ireland. Here
he, and the company to which he belonged, fpent the Au-
tumn and Winter of the year 1771; playing generally on
Tuefc’ays and Saturdays, and picking pockets with John Price
every day in the week, whenever opportunity offered ; a bu-
finefs, which, though attended with feme danger and certain
infamy, he found more lucrative and more entertaining than
that of the iheatre; where his fame and his proficiency
were by no means equal to the expectation he had railed, or
to the hopes that had been foimed cf him on his firfl ap-
pearance at Drogheda. Daring the latter part of the year
he was attacked by a fever, which was fo violent, that his
life was for forae time defpaired of; he, hpwever, recovered,
though flo’vly, and the period of his convalefcence was fo
long, that the company rdfolved to leave him behind, and
proceed to other quarters. His favorite, Mifs Egerton, who
attended him during his ilJncfs with unremitting afli Juity,
refolved to flay with him and lharc his fate, whatever it might
he; and Price had the fpirit to pafs the bank-notes at his own
rifque, and the generofity to leave his accomplice feventy
guineas on his departure, which was, at this time, after a
long and expenlive illnefs, a very feafonable fupply.
On the return of the Spring, it) the year 1772, his
health was perft&ly re-eftablilhed, and he wrote feme very


pretty lines, addrefied to Hygeia, the geddefs who presided
over health.
Hygeia ! thou whpfe eyes difplay
The luftie of meridian day;
Aufpicious goddefs ! ftill impart
Thy vital influence to my heart:
For, ah J Ihould’ft thou withdraw thy aid,
The bloom of all the fpring would fade j
Mufic in vain its joys infpire,
And difcaid firings the poet’s lyre;
Fortune, unmarfe’d yyould Anile; and Fame,
Unheard, diffufe the fav’rite name;
Friendship no coidial drop could yield.
Nor Freedom me from anguilh fhield ;
Kv’n Love itfelf would rule in vain,
And all be gloom, and grief, and pain I
From Ballyfhaßnon, on his recovery, he removed to ihp
fouthward, with his faithful Mifs Egerton, whom Ire had
the misfortune of lofing for ever, in crcfling the river Coyne,
in which fte was drowned, through the ignorance, cr more
culpable negligence, of a ferry roan ; thus clofuig, in the
eighteenth year of her age, a life of woe in a watery tomb !
He was for fomc time inconfolable for the lofs which he
had juft fiiftained ; but, being neither of an age nor of a
temper propitious to the continuation of forrowful fenfationF,
he battened to Limeric, where he hoped to meet Price, his
old accomplice. On his arrival In that city, he learned,
that the perfon after whom he enquired had fet cut for Cork
ten days before, and thither our adventurer followed him ;
and there he found him, within left than an heur after he
entered the town-gates. On their meeting, it was agreed cn
b/ them never to think more of the ftage ; a refolution which
■was the more cafily executed, as the company, to which they
belonged originally, was now broken up and difpetfed. It
was befides fettled between them, that Price fhould pafs for
Carrington’s fervant j and that Barrington (hould aft the
part of a young gentleman of large fortune, and of a nobis
family, who was not yet quite of age, but, until he Ihould
attain that period, travelled for his arnyfement. I purfuanc?


ol this hopeful fcheme, horfes were purchafed, and the mat-
ter and man were in every refpcdl properly equipped to act
their feveral part#. During the Summer and Autumn ai the
year 1772, they attended, in thefe charadlers, all the races
in the leathern counties of Ireland, where they were uncom-
monly fuccefcfpl, not only in obtaining large fums of money
by pickin? pockets, but by efcapmg dett&icn, or tyen fuf-
picion. When the Winter fet in, they withdrew, with a
booty of near one thoufand pounds, to Cork, where they
defigued to take up their head quartets, until tire beginning
cf the next Spring; and here it was that Partington fit ft
affedted to )pad the life of a man cf Mon Ton, cf a young
fellow of fifhion; that is to fay, to run the ufual carter of
amour, intrigue, and debauchery, of gaming, drinking, and
fighting ; indifpcnfiblc re quill; cs in trie chamflcr of a insn of
the Tor? in Ireland ; in Ihort, to gratify all the fuggeftiors of
yanity, profligacy, and whim. But, amidll ail this diffipation,
neither he nor his trufty valet ncgkflcd any opportunity that
offered of plundering with fecurity ; and they were feme times,
though not always fucccfsful. It was, however, at length,
the fate of Price to be detected in the very aft ot picking°the
pocket of the Right Hon. H K towards the
conclufron cf that winter; and for this offence he was taken
into cullody immediately, tried in the courfe of a few day*,
convi&ed, and fentenced to be transported to America for
feven years. .
Barrington did not remain in Cork, to be an Idle and ufe-
lefs fpeftator of thefe proceedings. On the firft news of the
appreheufion of his ftrvant, he, without hefitation or Icfs of
time, packed the moll valuable part of his.properly, took
herfe, and made the beft of his way to Dublin ; taking leave
abruptly of the great commercial capital of the province of
Munller. On his arrival ip Dublin, bs lived rather in a pri-
vate and retired manner, only lurking, in thedaikell evening?,
about the play-hcufes, where he occafionally picked ur> a few
guineas, or a watch, &c. But be was foon weary of the
famenefs, and difgufted with the ohfeurity of a life of retire-
ment, fuch as that he led in the Irilh capital ; fo that, when
the Spring came on, he went to the races, which ufually are
that Icsfan of the year iu the counties to tie fomhward of


Dublin. It was, however, his misfortune, at one ef the
races in the county of Carlow, to be feen picking the pocket
of L.ord B , near whom he happened to Hand. The
ftolesr property was found in his pofleliion, and relforcd ira-
mtcliatcly to the oj.vr.er of it; who, being content with the
reftitution of it, and on feeing the difiipline of the courfe
ir.fl tied on the pilferer, declined all profecution of him.
And thus, through the ill-judged and ill-timed lenity of this
nobleman, did Burlington efcapc that puniihmcnt in Ireland,
which awaited him in this country. As foon as he efcaped
Bom the race-ground, at Carlow, he took horfe, and imme-
diate!)’ fet off for Dublin, where he arrived time enough that
evening to difpek of all his ufelefs property, and to make aFI
the ncctffary arrangements previous to his departure from
Ireland, being relolutely bent on a journey to London. Two
days after he embarked on board the Dor fee yatch, which
v, as then on the point of with the Duke of Lcinllcr,
for Parkgste; and, before the expiration of the week, he
found himfclf, for the firft time of his life, on Englilb ground.
The Summer of the year 1773 may be conlidtred as the
ara of his arrival in England, he being about eighteen years
of age, and in the third year of his infamous profeffion of %
common pick-pocket.
There were at tl-'s time three perfons who had, like Bar-
rington, taken their pafipge to England with Sir Alexander
School berg, who then commanded the Dorfct yatch; and
the acquaintance which out adventurer formed with them,
confequeoce uf this accidental meeilng, contributed con-
frjerably to the long feries of fuccefa with which he carried
on his depredations in this country. Of thife perfons, Cap-
fain W H a was the moll diltinguilhed, and the
mod immediately, though the moll innocently, conducive to
the fortunate execution of the pick-pocket’s prcje&s.
This young gentleman was defeended from one of the moft
ancient, moft illuftrious, and moll noble families in the Bri-
tish Empire : he ferved in the army, and pcfEiTed a fortune
equal to his rank and birth. He was of a moll amiable cha-
racter ; generous, open, polite, benevolent, and accom-
jpuh„J j perfectly vyail bred, and better acquainted with


hooks tliaa men of his age, rank, and prcfdTion,
i-ally are : but, unfortunately for himfdf, entirely ignorant
of the grofs wavs of the world, of the artifices of ddigning
men, and the various ftratagems of intriguing women. Thus
inexperienced, and onfufpe&ing, he became an cafy dupe to
the deep laid fehemes of the infamous adventurers, with whom
it was fonaetimes his ill fate to become acquainted.
. lul,d not require fo much fagaclty and penetration as Bar-
rington at that time certainly poflVffed to fee clearlv imo
the chars Aer of Mr. H n . and to prediA the good
confcquences taat might follow an intimacy with a young
man of h.s rank, difpofition, and family. AAuated by «
fenfe of the utility of fuch a conneAion, he employed all
thole arts of flattery and infmuation, of which be had been
l»nga perfcA mailer, to ingratiate himfdf with this gcntle-
man } and in this drfign he extended to the utn.oft extent
of his wifhes. Young Mr. H n was captivated l.y his
ealy addrefs and engaging manners, fo that, before they had
been three days together, that uttfufpeAing youth repofed
unlimited confidence in him ; and, with the indiferetion, or
xmpetuofity, ufually charaAeriltic of his time of life, reckon,
ed him among the number of his faftelt and moft valuable
friends: In order to confirm thefe fentiments of confidence
and friendlhip, which were fo imprudently conceived or fo
baltrjy adopted, Barrington formed an artful tale, which he
told as h.s own fiory ; the purport of which was, that his
lather was a man of a family, noble in Ireland, and illuftriou.
in England, to which country he himfdf pow came to tludy
law, in one cf the inns of court ; more, however, to avoid
the ill-natured fe verity of a harlh unrelenting ftep-motber,
which rendered his paternal manfion in a great roeafure intole-
rable to him, than from any predileAion for the profcffinn in
winch he intended to apply himfdf; but the exerclfe of which
the ample fortune that he was heir to would render unneccflVry.
This fiery took as well as could be dt fired by the inven-
torof ,t ; and it was fettled between him and hi. new fiend.
on },l < arrival in tow . enter himfdf cf the
Middle Temple, where Mr. H n h«id feme rehticnr,
and a numerous actual ounce, to whom, he laid, fc.


be happy to introduce a gentleman fo eminently dlftinguifh-
cd by his talents and his accomplishments, as well as by his
fortune and birth, as Mr. Barrington was. Such were
the handfome terms in which he expreflcd hirafelf to this
prole (Ted pilferer, and fo great were the prepolTeflions in
his favour!
It was alfo farther agreed on between them, that they
fhou'd travel together to London, and they accordingly*
the next day, took a poft-chaife at Park-gate, and conti-
nuing their journey by eafv fiages through Chefter,
Kamptwich, and Coventry, where they it opt two or three
days, they arrived, by the end of the week, at the Bath
Coffee houfe, in Piccadilly, which, on the recorr. me rela-
tion of Mr. H— ————n, who had been feveial times be-
fore in the metropolis, was fixed upon as their head-
quarters.
As to the other two perfbns who came over with them
in the yatch, and of whom there will he ample cccafion to
fpeak at large in the fequel of thefe memoirs, they travel-
led more humbly, but more expeditioufly, and more fru-
gally, than Mr. H n and Barrington ; for, on the
third day after their departure from the piace at which they
Landed from Ireland, they arrived at the Golden-Crcfs, at
Charing-Cjots, with the Chefter ffage-coacb, at a very
moderate expence.
Though Barrington, on his leaving Dublin, rtiade a ve-
ry genteel appearance for a traveller or a country gentle-
man, yet it was indifpenftbly nccdlary to expend a confi-
derable Aim, in order to enable him to appear in a manner
juitnl to-the character which he had affirmed in Inch a
*oapiral as London ; for, having reprefented himfelf as a
young man of family and fortune, he rnn f r, to be confif-
tent, drcfi apd live like one of rank and faCtion. Of this
he was perfectly fehfible, and he fpared noexpence to pro-
cure the various articles which are hold«.n forth aseffential
in the compofitran of a welbdreffed man. In amverfation,
however, he artfully fpeke of objects of this nature with
great indifference or contempt, affedkdlv holding forth
the fu per lor excellence of an enlarged and cultivated un-


derftanding ; probably fcecaufe fuch language flittered his
vanity, fondly imagining that he was drawing his owa
Character and exciting the admiration of hi# hearers, who,
as is generally the cafe, were ready enough to approve of
his opinion on this head.
But, however this may be, the expenfive manner in
which he lived with Mr. l-f —, and thole to whole ac-
quaintance that gentleman introduced him, all of them
gay, fprightly, young fellows, who had money at com-
mand, in lefs than a month reduced the funds, which Bar-
rington had brought w i:h him, to about t a enty guineas ;
which feemed to afford him a very inconflderable refource.
He therefore refoluteiy determined to procure a fupply of
money by Tome means or other. One evening, while be
was deliberating with himfeif on the choice of experiments
to recruit hi# finances, he was interrupted in his meditati-
ons on the fuhjeft by the arrival of Mr. H n and a
party of his friends, who propofed to him to accompaoy
them to Ranelagh. Their propofal was, without much
befitation, acceded to by Barrington ; and they, without
farther Jofs of time, ordered coaches to fet them down at
that celebrated place of amufement.
. This being the firft time of his vifiting it, every thing ha
faw about it was new to him ; but the mortifying refledion
of the poverty upon which he fo clofely verged, at this
time, banilhed all thofe pleafing fenfatious which novelty,
and fplendor, and mufic, and gay company, ufually excite
in unembarraffed minds. Nothing that he heard, or that
he beheld, was capable of taking him off from the thoughts
of his prefent fituation.
Walking about in this ferious mood, of which the me-
lancholy was heightened by the gay feenes that furrounded,
him, he chanced to efpy the two companions ot his voy-
age in the Dorfet yatch, to whom he only made a flight
bow of recognition; and, in lefs than quarter of an hour
afterwards, he faw the Duke of L r, engaged deeply
fn convei Cation with two ladies, and a Knight of the Sath,
who it afterwards turned out was Sir W D ;
and near thefe he placed himfeif, quitting, for a fhort
time; the company to which he belonged.
C


\t Lite Le wos thus Rationed, an opportunity, which he con-'
fidered as a fair ore, offered itfelf of making a good booty ;
and he availed himfelf of it. He picked the" D- ’s
pocket of above eighty pounds, Sir W-J ’s of five and
thirty guineas, one of the ladies of her watch ; with all which
he got off undifeovered. and joined Mr. H - n , and'
his party, as if nothing had happened out of the ordinary and
common courle of things in fitch places as Ranelagh.
Though it may bereafonabte prefuracd, that Barrington after
fo many years piatftice, and fo long experience in the infamous
calling which he exercifcd, peiformed his part of this bufin-f*
with much dexterity and ficill , yet it was not done with fuch a
degree of privacy and art as to elude the observation of one of
ifife perfons who c itne with him in the Dorfet, front Ireland
to Parkgate. This man, who was an adept himfelf, took a
convenient opportunity, in the courfe of the evening, of let- •
tfWfc Him know thathe'was a witnefs of bis condudb; and that
nnlefs terms were made.with him, and Chare of the fpoil oi
to him, he determined to communicate his knowledge of the
trgniadion to tire perfons who had been robbed of their pro-
perty. The language which he held was very authoritative
and his manner was too commanding and decihve to be reCfT
cd ; fo that Barrington, yielding to the necdiity of the cafe,
contented to what was afted of him, and, under pretence of
fudden indifp'ofuion, he returned with his new affcciate to
town ; and there, at the Golden-Oofs I nn, at Charing-Crctf?
the booty acquired at Ranclagh was fairly, though not equal/®*
divided; the new intruder contenting him ef with taking the
lady’s watch, chain, See. which were of gold, and a ten pound
bank-note ; leaving all the reft of the money and bank-paper
with him who had originally taken it. t “
But, in order to cement the connexion which thefe two
?'• e nt)W 00 lhe P osnt o{ forming, Mr. James (for, by that
jenmed name this new accomplice is to be henceforth called!
infilled upon Barrington’s flipping with him ; and, white (he
fupper was preparing, he related to him the outlines of his
Rory; which, though not immediate’y conne&cd with the fub-
jea of thefe memoirs, it may not be improper to repeat in this
place, and whieh was to the following purport*


He fa’d that his real name was William S- —r, and that
he was born in the county of Norfolk, where his father pof-
fefied an eftite ol about thice hundred pounds a year. This
eftate, and the manfion of it, were fituatod in the neighbour-
hood of a nobleman of great influence in parliament, arid of
a confiderable weight in the cabinet. The heir of his family
and y rung S——^——r were nearly of the fame age, and for
force time were fchoolfellows, Thefe cir.cumftmcts produced
an intimacy between them ; and in the progrefs o-f it, he, who
was now a common thief, had made confiderable advat ces in
the favour and efteem of the young nobleman, who, when he
was fent upon his travels folicited him to accompany him. The
father and friends of S r, thinking that the patronage
of a minjflcr of ftate might contribute much more to his pro-
motion than the utmoft diligence that ihey could ufe in purfuit
of it, ccnfented to the reqneft; and, accordingly, he went
abroad with the young Lord H— rrr, who, on their way
home, af'er fix years abfence, was attacked by a fever, which,
in lefs than ten days, put a period to his life. This unfortunate
event was foon after followed by one Hill more fata). The
nobleman, on whom all his hopes depended, was removed from
office, and deprived of all his employments. But a piece of
intelligence, which he received on his arrival in England, was
wrrfe, and rendered his filuation more calamitous than all the
f irmer croff’s and difappointu.ents of his life. This was, that
his father’s affairs were, through extravagance and i l-manage-
ment, fo embroiled, that, when the debts, due by him, were
riifrharged, there was forcelya fufSciency left to maintain him.
All thefe diffrejffng circumttances were confiderably aggra-
vated by the conduct which the nobleman, who was in honour
bound to patronize him, held toward, him, on this melancholy
and unfoiefeen reverfe of fortune. This thorough-placed com»
tier refufc l to fee him, denied rnoff of the promifes that he had
made to him, and left him, in folifcude and in the mnft extreme
indigence, to curie his foily, and to repent of his credulity.
This unbecoming treatment at fit ft overwhelmed him with
afflidlit n and defpair. Thefe, however, in a little time fub-
fided, and made way for the atffive fentiments ©f ifidignation
and refentment ; and abandoning his native country forever,
he came to London with what little property he had left, liter-
ally as he it—-to feek h;s fortune. For this purpofc,


he ufually had recoin fe to the gaming-table, at which, lij
ItTs than a week, he was completely ruined. The tranfitioh
from the dice-box to the road is frequent enough, and by
no means unnatural. Plundered by (harpers at hazard ia
Lieicefter-fielda, he refolved to recruit his finances on Finch-
ley-common and Hounflow heath. In fto>t, he went upon
the highway, and robbed for tome time w’lh tolerable fuc-
cefs, and without meeting any d’[agreeable accident, until
attempting, in company with another perfon, to rob a gen-
tleman on Enfield-green, near Eglnm, be was fhot through
the body, and narrowly tfcaped falling into the hands rf the
officers of juflice. In this inliancc, however, more fortu-
nate than his ill-fated accomplice, who was taken, aud foes
after executed on Kennington-common.
-*fi r was a long time confined to his room, in confe-
quence of the wound Jie receiyed ; and, during the period
of his convalescence, he made many fcnVus rdleftiors on
his conduA. Sentiments of penitence and remerfe feetmd
to be awakened in him. In (liorl, he determined, in cafe
Providence ever (hould rcflorc him to health, to employ his
life entirely ia making fome atonement for his former difib-
lute oAione. With this laudable refehrion, ho, on his re-
covery, return d to town from Wyrardfbury, in Bucking-
amfhire, where, during his illntfs, he rtfided at the houfe of
a relation.
Having received a liberal education, being mailer cf two
or three modern languages, and not unacquainted with th£
world, he did not doubt of being able to procure fome em-
ployment in fo vaft a capital as London, whereby he might
be enabled to fupport himfelf hon-ftly. But Ids hopes on
this head, however fanguine, were grievoully difappointed ;
for, with all the exertions he could make, the want of cha-
raAer, of friends to recommend him, or of acquaintance to
refer to, always prevented him from fuccetciug in any oni
cf the many and repeated applications that he made to get a
place of any kind, by which he might earn his bread ho-
reftly. Be endeavoured to be tutor in a private family, to
be uther to a fehooi; to be writer for a uewfpaptr, to be


tranllator for a bnokftllcr, to be interpreter for foreign
captains, to be clerk at a coal-wharf, waiter at a tavern, or
porter at an inn ; but all to no purppfe. He endeavoured
to be even a recriting corporal for the Baft-India Company ;
but without fuccefs. He tried every line, and every line
faded him : he knocked at every dour, and every door was
Aim againll him. Much time was fpcot by him, in thus fit•
tempt.ng to get employment ; and, what was worfe, all bis
money was fpent too. Whatever he had of any va’ue was
pawned ; and, at lad, he was forced to fell the very clothe?
he wr.re, in order to procure bread to eat. But Anil, though
hr.IT famished, and half naked, though rambling in thp
bitck-lielJs by day, and fleeping under a hedge, or in the
afhes of a glafs-houfe by night, he perfevend in his refclu-
tions of living uprightly, without ever entertaining a thought
of returning to his f rjper evil couvfes, This life he led,
and this temper he continued for above a wetk, when the
devil put it into his head to rcafon about God anti providence,
and the phyfical order of the univeife and the mural world.
While'he was meditating on this fubje&, in doubt, and
fea* - , and uncertainty, he was accollcd by owe Wheeler, 3
(harper, (fmee executed at York for robbery,) whom lie had
known fit one of thofe hopfes in the neighbourhood of Co-
vent-Garden, to which men of fuch a defeription ufually
re for led at that time, and where ho himftlf, while in the
jp raft ice of robbing on the highway, generally fpcnl his
evenings. Tic’s rain, though a profcfltd cheat and thief,
was not deflitiite of feeling or generofity : fuch virtues as
thefe (hew thcmfclves ii l perlons of this damp : and he was
ftruck with alimifhment an i compailion at feeing, in fuch
a wretched plight, a man whom he had known fomc time
before make a genteel figure. However, without mora-
lizing much on the matter, he Ihook him by the band, took
him home to dinner with him, relieved his moll preffiog
dillreflcs by a feafonable fupply of clothes, with a little
money, and engaged him to return to him the next day,
when, he fad, that foracthing more fiiould be dote for
him.
S r did not fail to attend *-he appointment, pene-
trated wt:h a deep fenfe of gratitude for the kindneij (hewo


0 him, and the favours conferred on him by his cld ac-
quaintance; and he was punctually, by the fixed hrut, at
Wheeler s. apartments in Duke-kreet, Wtkminker, where
he again dined. After dinner was over, his friendly heft,
without ceremony or preface, told him, that he had a pro-
pofal to maite to him, which, if he accepted, would turn
out of great and certain advantage to both parties. The
propofal was, to drefs himftlf completely as a clergyman,
with a gown, fcarf, band, &c. all which he, Wheeler,
vould provide for him, with whatever elfe fhonld be nectffa-
ry to enable him to go into polite company. That, being a
remarkable good figure, ufed to the world, convetfant in
foreign languages, and maker of an elegant addrefs, hp
fhould, dn fled in the manner propofed, go to court on the
King’s binh-dey, which would be in the courfe of tfce week,
end there endeavour to get at the purfes, pocket-books, or
watches, of feme of the company ; which he might, on that
day, in that place, a;pearing as he would, efWtually dp
yvith fecurity and cafe.
The propofal kartled, but did not difpleafe, S r.
The fcheme feemed plaufible enough. Fiiendfhlp invited,
and want urged him on ; fo that he agreed to do what
Wheeler propofed, and to commence pick-pocket in form,
.at St. James’s, the next public day.
Every thing being got ready for the purpose, he repaired
thither in the character of a dignitary of the church, on
the fourth of June, and was fo bold, fo adroit, or fo fuc-
cefsful, in the cxercife of this new proftffic,p, that he re-
tired in the evening to Wheeler’s, in Weilminfter, with
money, watches, jewel?, pocket-books, and (heir con-
tentr, See, to the amount of upwards of four hundred
pounds.
Tin’s extraordinary fuccefs, and the apparant fecurity
with which the bulinefs lie entered upon might be tranf-
sacd, gave him a rtliih for his new profeflion, and made
him eager for plunder. And as for his fcruples, if he kill
retained any, Mr. Wheeler’s arguments, the pleafures of
the i9wn, and ite light of his &are of the booty, tkc&ually


•fuelled them. During the remainder of tjiat Summer, and tbi
while of the enfuing Autumn, he vifited Tunbridge, Buxton*
Weymouth, Brighthclmftone, and feme other bathing or
watering places, always in the txercife of his newly adopted
ailing, and Bill fuccefsful, being hitherto neither dcte&cd nor
even fufpcifteH ; fo that he returned to London, in the begin-
ning of the Winter, with near five hundred pounds, which he
hrd remaining, after living in a vcty elegant and expenfivc Oyle
the whole preceding feafon.
On his arrival in town, he laid afide the garb and appear*
ance of a parfon ; and appeared in the uniform of an officer
of the army. Duelled in regimentals, he frequented the play,
houfes, the opera, and other polite places of public amu/c-
-ittent ; and continued to pick pockets without deletion, until
he fell in, at Covent-Garden play-Soufe, with Monfieur Fran-
eois, then fecratary to the Ftench embafTy at the court of
London. This gentleman caught him in ihe very fatft of pick-
ing his pocket, in the lobby of that theatre ; and he was im-
mediately given in charge to a conftable. who took him into a
neighbouring public houfe, preparatory to his taking him to the
Watch-houfe, it being then at too unfeafonable an hour to take
him before a maturate. Having a confidence fum of money
about him, he found means, with a very final! part of it, Vi
bribe his keeper, who fuffered him, for twenty guineas,
efcape. Immediately, on recovering of his he fet out
for France, with all the money he could command ; and, hav-
ing rambled about that kingdom for two years, haywent into
Sprin, where he remained fome time, and thence be-failed t*
Lork, in Ireland. In that kingdom he remained but a few
months; for, feveral years having elapftd fince his deletion
by the French fecratary, and no proceedings .t ing carried on
againß him during his abfence, he determined!’ to return fo
London, in perfedt confidence of fafety, Morifleur Francois
having long before left England, and retired into his own coup.-
tfy; and the whole tranfabtion, which occafioned the pu dpi-
trie flight of the pick-pocket, having been, in all probability,
long fince totally forgotten. 1
Such were the outlines of Mr. James’s variegated ftory»
’feoch Barrington heard witlvco fnaall degree of pleafure.


Nor was It without good reafon that he heard the narrative
cf S——r, now known by the name of Junes, his new ac-
quaintance, with a good degree oi fatisbadl on ; for, being
himfeil entirely ignorant of the towr-, he was Icnilbie that the
acquaintance of a man, who had fo pcifedl a know. edge of it
as James poflelfed, not but be extremely ufciul so him
in the lice of fife which he. purfued ; as w ithout fume Inch
connexion it,would be difficult for him to difpofe, with any
fafety, of fncli articles of value as might fall in his w-y in the.
courfc of his predatory excurfions. So true it is, that without
receivers of Itolen goods, the depredations of thieves muft be,
in a great meafure, confined i 6 cafh, and, Ccnfequeetly, be
inconfidcrable.
Barrington therefore propofed trJhim, that they fhould enter
into a kind of partnerfhip, and carry on the huhneis of pick-
ing pockets as a joint concern ; a propofal to which James
affcdled to fcruple agreeing, as incnnfifler.t with the tendernefs
of his confcicncc. His confcience, however, was foon made
eafy, by his friend’s jocularly reminding him of Captain Ro-
lando’s oblervations to Gil Bias, that all men are defirous to
appropriate to themfelves their neighbours property. S re-
reigns feize on the territories of neighbouring princes, when-
ever they think doing fo fuits their ptopofes, without Icruple or
remorfe ; people of fafhion run in debt and never pay their
creditors ; bankers and brokers are feldom refltained by cen-
fcience in the inlerefl they take, or the charges which they
rfiake ; merchants, .and traders of a!! kinds, arc not more
ferupuious in the profits which they exadh < f their unwary
cunomers 5 and, as for lawyers of every denomination, their
bondlefs rapacry is proverbial. The mode then cf appropri-
ating (he property to one’s fe f, and not the aSI of doing fo, is
the iolc difference*, between the raoft noted pick-pocket and
the meft powerful prince or the moft opulent merchant- Such
was the argument of this crafty adventurer, who perfuaded
James to accede to the teims, which he propofed, of carrying
on bufmefs together, notwithftanding the dibcacy of his conlct-
cnce ; fo that, the preliminaries being thus fettled, it was
agreed upon, that they fhould meet the next day at the Crown
and Anchor Tavern, in the Strand ; and there, after they htd
dined, finally fettled the definitive articles of the treaty, ar | ,
alfo, the plan of’ their future operation. Matters being left irif


this ftate, the meeting broke up, and Barrington returned by-
midnight to his lodgings at the Bath Coffee-houfe, where lucki-
ly enough, neither Captain H n nor any of his party hap-
pened yet to have arrived from Ranclagh.
The next morning, at breakeft, he informed his friend Mr.
H n, that, on his return laft night, he chanced to meet a
very worthy relation of his, Sir Fitzwilliam Barrington, who
engaged him to dine with him that day, fo that it would be
out of his power to make one of the party that were to fpend
the day at the Thatched-houfe Tavern ; but that, however, he
would endeavour to join them early in the evening, and flay
to fupper with them, if they were bent upon keeping it up to
a late hour.
Barrington drefled, called a coach, and drove to the Crown
and Anchor Tavern, where he found Mr. James, who had
been for fome time waiting for him. Dinner being difpatch-
ed, and the fervants withdrawn, thefe worthy gentlemen en-
tered on the bufinefs. And here it was agreed upon between
them, that whatever cither of them acquired fhould be equally
divided between them ; and that, on the fale of watches, jewels,
or any other articles that they might have to difpofe of, they
fhould be both prefcnt. Thus no fufpicion of fraud could be
entertained ; and thus Barrington got what he greatly wanted,
an introduction to a receiver of Bolen goods. It was farther
fettled by them, that while Mr. H n remained in town,
they fhould take care not to be feen publicly together, and that
Mr. James fhould refume his long-neglected character of a
clergyman. Thefe and other weighty points being adjufted to
the fatisfaction of the parties, it was determined, that they
fhould meet regularly on Tuefdays and Fridays, to fettle with
each other; but never to meet twice at the fame houfe.
Having then adjourned to the next Tuefday, and fixed on
the Devil Tavern, at Temple-bar, our adventurers feparated,
Barrington going to the Thatched-houfe Tavern. There lie
arrived about eight in the evening, and found his friend, Mr.
H n > an d a- large party of his acquaintance, rather far
gone in liquor. Moft of them knew him perfonally, and com
fidering him in the light in which he was reprefented to
by Captain H n, as a young man of condition, they were
D


delighted with his company. And, indeed, the fadt is, that
at that period of his life, when his charadter in this country
was unl'uliied and unfufpedled, the engaging urbanity of his
manners, the poiitenefs of his addrefs, and the genteel ftyle of
his converfation, rendered his company acceptable wherever he
was introduced.
His prefence pleafed the company, who were a good deal
heated by wine; and who, when in their fobereft moments,
were more diftinguithcd for fpirit and generality, than for piu-
dcncc or difcrcticn. A man of his temper and fagacity did
not negledl to avail himfelf of the advantages which their in-
toxication prefented ; and he accordingly plundered thofe of
them without any fcruple, but not before the reckoning was
called for and the bill difeharged.
This done, he and his friend Mr. H- n withdrew, and
returned home to their lodging in Ficcdilly, no one entertain-
ing any fufpicion of the honour cf Mr. Barrington, or of the
depradations committed by him that night.
The booty taken bv him on this occaflon was great; but, as
the fpoil confilled more of watches, and other trinkets, than of
cafh, he was obliged to have rccourfe to his accomplice Mr.
James to turn it into fpecie. He, therefore, early the next
morning, called upon that profligate adventmer, who intro-
duced him to a man, by whole means the ftolen articles \verc
quickly difpnfed of, for what appeared to be an equal price;
and the money arifing from the idle of them was, according tu
agreement, equally divided.
A minute detail of the mean artifices or bafe exploits of a
profelfed picket-pocket, can afford very little inftruAion or
•entertainment to a liberal or enlightened mind. It will, there-
fore, on tins head, be lufficient to oblerve, that, as Barrington
advanced in years, he continued the exercile of his fcandalons
- pr ifoffion, and improved in the pradlice of if, but he at the
itmeiime, advanced in reputation ; for, he continued to cm-
!:V:,y his mind, and that with a degree (gf a(Tiduity.unexam-
,plel in one of his calling. He was remarkable for retaining
very faithfully what he col left ed with great eafe. One practice
( e ever had, which was calily pbferveq. If sny thought or
iprdented itlelf t» his mind, that he could uw cr im-


prove, he did not fuffer it to be loft ; but, amidft the jollity of
a tavern, or in the warmth of an interefting conversation, he
very diligently committed it to paper.
This quality, among other focial and amiable qualities,
which he pofleffed, at that time, in an eminent degree, ren-
dered him a kind of popular character.
In the courfe of his degradations, he, in the furamer of tlw
year 1775, vifited the watering places; and, among the reft,
he went to Brighton, which at that time, though frequented b/
very genteel company, was far from having arrived at the ce-
lebrity which it has fince acquired.
However, he here became acquainted, and an intimate, with
the late Duke of Ancafter, Lord Ferrers, and Thomas Lord
Lyttletcn, with feveral other of the connexions of thefe noble
perfons; who all confidered him as a man of genius and abi-
lity, (which he was), and as a gentleman of fortune, and no-
ble family, (which he as certainly was not).
But, however this may be, from Biighthelmftone he made
an excurlion to Chichefter, in company with Lord L and
Sir Alexander Leith, who lived at that time -in ibe county of
Suffcx. While he redded in that city, he was fhewn the cu-
riofrties of the cathedral, -in themfelves certainly infignificanj
and uninterefting enough. Among them was pointed out to
him a family vault, for the interment of the Dukes of Rich-
mond, which was cre&ed fome years beiore, by the late Duke,
and inferibed:
** Domus ultima.”
On this, the following epigram is faid to have been written by
him, which being not deftitute of merit, in that agreeable fpe-
cies of compofition is here given :
Did he, who thus inferib’d this wall,
Not reaJ, or not believe St. Paul?
Who fays, ” There is, wberc-e’er it (hands,
“ Another houfe, not made with hands:”
Or, (hall we gather, from thefe words,
rr hat houfe is not a hoife of Lords?


On his return, to London, in the beginning of the winter of
the year 1775, his way of life, and the nature of his purfuits,
naturally connected him with the gay and the diflblute, the
thoughtlefs and the licentious. He affeCted all the airs of a
young fellow of fafhion, and all the extravagancies of a profefled
man of pleafurc. He divided his time between the purfuit of
faflfionable amufements and the infamous occupation of picking
pockets. But thefe two objeCts did not entirely occupy his time
or his attention. The feafons of plundering and of diffipation
were fucceeded by intervals of retirement and ftudy. In thefe,
which fometimes ladled for feveral weeks, he flint himfelf up,
and devoted himfelf to the ftudy of the beft writers in the Eng-
lifli language, the only one with which he was acquainted; and
he had, in an eminent degree, this peculiarity, that, when he
was the man of the world, the fprightly wit, the agreeable
companion, he had not entirely loft fight of books and literature.
In thefe moments of leifure and reflection he compofed an
Od e to Light, not, indeed, regular in its conftruClion, nor of
an artificial texture; but certainly not void of merit, and in-
dicative of no final! degree of genius.
In the courfe of this winter he happened accidentally to fall
in with one Lowe, a very lingular and extraordinary character,
with whom he formed an intimate connexion j employing him
in the ufeful capacity of a receiver of ftolea goods, which he
had frequent occafions to difpofe of.
This Lowe had been originally a livery fervant, but who now
kept a pnblic-houfe, in which he feraped up feme money ; be
then commenced ufurer, and, by that vile bufinefs, acquired
a final! fortune, and affirmed the character of a gentleman. He
afterwards took a genteel houfe in the neighbourhood of Bloomf-
bury-fquare, where he refided to the time of his death. He
was, for one whole mind was entirely uncultivated, a man of
uncommon addrefs. He, in general, pafled for a very chari-
table and benevolent character, having performed many aCls of
beneficence through motives of policy or oftentation; and he
was a fubferiber to molt of the public charities, in or about
town, ip order to give the world a high opinion of his exem-
plary virtues and generous feelings,


By arts of this kind, he found means to get hinifclf appoint-
ed to the Ration of treasurer, or chief conductor, of a new
hofpital, for the reception of blind patients, at Kentifh-town;
in which capacity, it is faid, that he got into the pofleflion of
upwards of five thoufand pounds. But, having been fufpecßed
of fetting fire to that building, he was apprehended at Liver-
pool, in the year 1779; and, to avoid the punifhment due to
the enormity of his offence, he poifoned himfelf, and lies buried
in a crofs-road in the neighbourhood of Prefect in Lancafhire.
This connexion with Lowe rendered that with Mr. James, in
a great unnsceflary; and Barrington was the more
willing to break with him, asfome recent and unpleafant alter-
cations had taken place between them: the truth is, that James,
though engaged in a moR difgraceful courfe of life, poflefled
learning and abilities, and was not entirely deßitute of a fenfe
of honour, or of a regard to moral obligation. But Barring-
ton, who had at all times the very higheft opinion of his own
merit, was ufed to treat him with unbecoming freedom; and,
on fome occafions, with indecent infolence. Infhort, though
he had great merit, he had aifo many great failings, if conli-
dered as a facial companion; and the entire diflblution of liis
connexion with the lubject of thefe memoirs, was ultimately
benefical to James; for, at this time, he (James) lives in a mo-
naftry at Weßphalia, to which he fome years ago retired, in
an enviable Rate of peace and penitence, refpected for his ta-
lents, and loved for his amiable manners, by which he is dil-
tinguifhed in an emninent degree. To him the editor of thefe
memoirs is indebted, for. the power of communicating thefe
minute memorials of the life of George Barrington to the pub-
lic; and to his convcrfatjon he is indebted for the knowledge of
the Rory of that lingular and extraordinary adventurer.
Barrington, on his forming a connexion with Lowe, advanc-
ed with new audacity in the exercife of his practices as a
pick-pocket. His reputation for genius and literature Report-
ed him in the opinion of his acquaintance, ?nd their good opi-
nion of him conliderably facilitated the fuccefs of his depre-
dations ; for, by their countenance and introduction, he got
accefs to the company of young men of affluence, whofe un-
guarded and unfufpected character offered to him an ample
field to plunder with impunity. The bnldnefs, the indecency,


ani the liccntioufnefs of hit*, behaviour, on fome occafions, drew
on him the cenfure cf fome of the rnoft refpebtable of his
friends. However, his failings were readily pardoned and
Overlooked; for> it is well known, that much will be forgiven
to a roan in his youth, who has the appearance of birth and
fortune.
This connexion with Lowe was but a fhort time previous to
that evening of the month of January, which is obferved as
the anniversary of the Queen’s birthday; it was refolved on
between them, that, habited as a clergyman, he fhould repair
to court, and there endeavour, not only to pick the pockets of
force of the company, but, what was a much bolder and a
much more novel attempt, to cut off the diamond orders of
force of the Knights of the Garter, Bath, and Thiftie, who,
on inch days, ufually wear the collars of their refpedlive orders.
In this enterprise he fucceeded beyond their moft fanguine ex*
pedlations ; for, he found means to take the diamond order of
Lord C —, with which he got away from St. James’s per-
fectly unfufpedled.
This valuable acquihtion, by the affiflance and agency of
Lowe, he diipofed of for eight hundred pounds to one Lurfhan,
a Dutchman, who ufually made a trip from Haerlem to Eng-
land, once a year, for the exprefs purpofe of purchafing jewels
that had been fraudulently or felonioufly obtained, and for
which he gave what the fharpers, or thieves, with whom he
deait, confidered an equitable price ; at leaft, much more than
the London receivers were ufsd to give.
In the courfe of the winter of the year 1775, Prince Orlow,
a Ruffian nobleman, of the firft rank and confequence, vifited
England. The fplendor in which he lived, and the high favour
in which he flood at the court of Ruffia, were frequently no-
ticed in the public prints; and particularly his poffeffmg a geld
fhuff-box, fet with brilliants, which was pre fen ted to him by
the Emprefs, and which was generally valued at the enormous
firm cf thirty thoufand pounds. This precious trinket excited,
in an extraordinary manner, the attention of Barrington, and
he determined to exert himfeif in order to get it into his pof-
feffion. For this, a favourable opportunity prefented itfelf
•SCI'-- night at Cu vent-garden play-boufe; and this experienced


pick-pocket did not ncglcd to avail himfelf of it. He contriv-
ed to be near the prince, and found means to convey the trea-
fure from his excellency’s waiftcoat pocket, in which, accord-
ing to the Ruffian cuftom, it was ufuaily carried, into his own.
This operation was not, however, performed in fuch a man-
ner as toefcape inflant detection. For, the prince felt the at-
tack, and, having reafon to entertain feme fufpicion of Bar-
rington, he immediately feized him by the collar. Such an
adlion, in a public theatnb, naturally cccafioned feme buflle as
well as furprife; and, during the confufinn that enfued, he
flipped the box into the nobleman’s hand, who was, doubtfefs,
glad to have recovered it with fo much facility. The thief was,
however, fecured, and committed to Tcthill-ficlds, Bridewell,
for examination on the Wednefday following at Bow-ftreet.
At the time appointed he was brought before Sir John Field-
ing, and examined, not only on the offence for which he wag
taken into cuflody, but alfo relative to his family, his profef-
fion, and his connexions. On this occafion he reprefented him-
felf as a native of Ireland, where his family, he fa id, were
affluent and rcfpe&able ; that he was educated in the medical
line ; and that he came to London, to improve himfelf in the
knowledge cf It: all thefe circumftances he represented with
becoming modefty, and with many tpars, neither abfolutcly
denying the crime with which he was charged at the phv-aoufe,
nor formally avowing his euiit. So that, after all, the,prince
declining to proceed again!! him, and no profecutor appearin' l ,
he was difmiffed, after receiving a proper reprimand from the
magiftrate.
An accident cf fuch a nature as this was could not remain
long a fecret in fuch a place as London. An account of it was
foon circulated, and Barrington, now held up to view in the
niofl difgraceful light of an irnpoftor, (even from his own ac-
count of himfelf at Bow-flrcct, where he palled for a furgeon,)
was forfaken by the greateft part of thofe who, until then, coun-
tenanced him, and delighted in his company.
There were, however, fome few who fill refpecled his ta-
lents, and who, while they contemplated in him the fprightly
wit and the agreeable companion, were contented to forget the


pick-pocket, or, at leaft, were inclined to believe him
innocent of the offences with which he was fo publicly
charged. But even of thefe he loft, in a little time, the
countenance and fupporr, in confeqnence of an aft of in-
difcretion, and immediately connedted with the habits of
depredation, in which hs was by this time irrevocably con-
firmed by a long courfe of fuccefsful pradice.
In his purfuits as a pick-pocket, he, as has been already
mentioned, vifited all the genteel places of refort, and»
among the reft, he occafionally attended at both Houfes of
Parliament, where he is find to have acquired confiderable
turns. Some weeks after his ignominious affair at Covent-
garden, he went down to the Houfe of Peers, where an
appeal of an interfiling nature was, on that day, to be
heard and determined. As public curiofity was a good deal
excited by this caufc, a great number of people attended
to hear the event of the decifion of it. Among thefe there
Was one Mr. G- , who knew our adventurer.
This gentleman immediately informed Mr. Quanne, the
deputy gentleman-ufher of the hlack-rod, that the perfun*
who had been fo lately before deteded in the ad of pick-
ing the pocket of Prince Orlow, was then in the lobby of
the Houfe, probably for the purpefe of renewing his de-
predations. On this information being communicated to
the deputy black-rod, Barrington was fought after, and
turned cut by the officers, who informed him of the caufe
of their condbd towards him, and of the name of their
informant againft him.
This difiigreeable incident filled him with inexpreffible
rage and indignation, particularly againft Mr. G ;
and he, with great indiferetion, vowed in public to revenge
it. Intelligence of the relolution, and of the menaces
which didated if, being conveyed to Mr. G ,he made
application to a magiftrale, who granted a warrant to take
the pick-pocket into cuftody, and to bind him over to keep
the peace. In confeqnence of this warrant he was taken
up, and, for want of proper fureties, he wa<: committed to
his former apartments in Tothill-Fields Bridewell, where
he remained for a confiderable time confined, from hU ina*


bllity to procure the bail that was required. During Ms
impnfonment the whole of his ftory was induftnoufly cir-
culated, probably not without aggravation j lo that,
on his procuring his enlargement, his charaCier was com-
pletely biased. The entry to all decent company was
abfolutely Oiut againft him ; and he was fet down as a pro-
fcflcd impoftor and a common pick-pocket.
From this time forward, he was obliged to defcendl to
fall the mead pradices and arts of d common and protelled
pilferer.
Biit, even in the humble line of infamous depredation*
ih which he was thus reduced to move, he was, in left
than three months, difeovered; and having been detected
in the faCt of Healing a filver watch, of confiderable value,
from a woman of low condition, at Drury-Lane Play-houfe,
he was indiCled ; and, having been tried at the Old-Bailey,
he was there convicted, and fentenced to hard labour, on
the river Thames, for the term of three years.
In conference of this fenfence, he was, early in ths
year 1777, removed from Newgate to Woolwich, where he
Was put on board one of the hulks.
In this receptacle of wretchednefs and rice, he f-rtind
himfelf expofed to fuch complicated mifery as he hadnever
before known ; and to fuch fatal difeafes as he had never
before felt. He was fatigued with hard labour, and harai-
fed with all the evils of indigence, confinement, and obio.
buy • yet He up againlt all the weight of vr:;, und« r
which he laboured, with a degree of patience, refiguatioo,
and conftancy, worthy of a belter caufe than that m which
he fuffered. Fortune at length declared in Ms favour, and
freedom became the recorhpence of his exemplary conduct
during the period of his captivity ; for, on the recommen-
dation of Meflrs. Erlkine and Duncan Campbell, the luper-
intendants or governors of the convia*, a pardon was grant-
ed 10 him ; and, after fomewhat lefs than a twelvemonth s
fevere fufferings o«n tb« Thames, he was fet at larga,
E


It may well be fuppofed, that his refidence in the Ticrgh*
bourhood cf Woolwich, or the converfation of the unhappy
criminals with whom he was obliged to affociate during his
captivity there, did not contribute to reform his morals or to
eftablifh bis chara&er for integrity. The fad is, that, as
foon as he procured his liberty, he returned to London, and
reverted with incr-eafed mduftry to the pradice of the crimes
for which be had been fo recently punifhed.
But he war, by this time, too mu;h noted by the tewn to
be allowed to proceed long, wiih impunity, in the infamous
career which he had cbofen to tun. In Itfs than half a year
after his enlargement from the hulks, he was again deteded,
by the vigilance ,of one Payne, at that time a very adivs
peace-officer in the city, ia the fad of picking pockets in
St. Sepulchre’s church, during the time of the celebration of
divine fervice before the Humane Society And, having
been convided of this offence at the Old-Bailey, he was a
fecond time fentenced to hard labour on the Thames, and
that for five years.
Upon his trial, on this occasion, it was that he appeared
to have firft dittinguiihed himfelf as a public fpeaker. He
endeavoured, with much art, but without any fucccfs, to
work upon the feelings of the court and jury ; but the proofs
agaiut* him were fo clear, that he was found guilty; and,
purfuant to his frntence, he was removed once more to the
hulks at Woolv/ich, about the middle of the year 1778.
When he was this fecond time put on board one of tbofe
prifon fhips, he cither found his fufferings more intolerable,
cr his fituation to be more defperate, than they appeared to
hi n on his firft confinement ; a circumftance which is faid to
have made him engage in a variety of fchemes to effed an
tfcape.
All which plans the vigilence of his beepers rendered
abortive. And the repeated difappolnttuems experienced by
1 itn, in tbefe efforts to gain his liberty, atfcdftd Lis fpiritsfo
fuch a degree, that he determined upon fuicide ; and in con-
fecjutfaie of this impious rdolution, ho flatbed himfelf with


a penknife. The wound, though deep and dangerous, did
not prove mortal ; and, medical afGltancc being called in, a
cure was effected. It was, however, effected very (lowly,
and the wound, having been given in the bread, feemed, in
its eff.ds, after near two years continuance, to bring on a
confumption, and there leemtd to be no other profpedt before
him but that of a lingering and a miferable death.
While he remained in this deplorable fituation, it hap-
pened, fortunately for him, that Sir M L— , a
gentleman of rank and confequence, happened to vifit the
hulks, and to enquire into the ftate of the convidts. This
genr>«nan, who was of the mod benevolent character. and
pcffcffed of the mod feeling heart, was led by cuiiofity tev
converfe with Barringt»n ; and his emaciated and fqualrd
appearance fo moved him with companion, that he applied
for a remiflion of the remaining part o( his fenttnee ; which
was granted, on condition of his immediately leaving Eng-
land on his enlargement, and never more returning to it.
And, in order to enable him to fulfil his promife, a fum of
money was given him to defray the expence of hh journey
to Ireland, his native country.
On his obtaining his freedom, he returned to London j
where, however, he had the prudent caution of daying no
longer than he conceived to be abfolutely neceffary to procure
fuch a fufflciency of money or valuables as might enable him
to appear at Dublin in the chara&er of a gentleman. By an
extraordinary piece of good fortune, he was enabled, by a
booty of near an hundred pounds, in cafh, bank-notes, and
watches, which he gat in the courfe of the week after his
arrival from 'Woolwich, to effect this; which was no fconer
completed, than he took a place in the Cheder dage-coach,
and, in iefs than fix days afterwards, arrived fafe in the Irifh
capital; from which he had been now fo many years abfeut,
that he conlidercd himfelf as totally forgotten in it.
But his hopes of living long in Dublin, entirely unknown
and unfufpe&ed, foon turned out to be one of thofe imagi-
nary profpefts, with which he was frequently accudomed to
|rpufe himfelf. He happened to fall in with feveral perfoni


who rcco’lefted his pcrfon in London, and who were well
acquainted with his dory; and he was, by this time, in
every point of view, fo {lnking or fo notorious a chara&er,
that to be kno\yn and to h e fufpt&td was ope and the
fame thing.
Continuing his vicious practices, in his own country, with
a degree of induftry and audacity not inferior to what he had
excrcifed on this fide the water, he was, in the courfe of a
little time, taken into cuftody, by the officers of the Infix
police, for picking the pocket of a nobleman of a gold
watch, together with forae money, at one of the play-hopfer,
and he was committed to {he New Goal, to take his tria\
for that offence.
The profeeption not being managed on this occafion with,
much vigour, or, perhaps, the evidence net b> ing fhfficiently
clear to cftablilh the guilt of the prifone.*, he was acquitted,
end difeharged, after having b?en feriouffy admoniliied by
the judge before whom he was tried-
In the cop fe of his trial, he addreffed the court and jury
in a very animated manner ; adverting, with great art, to,
what he called the unaccountable force of the prejudices that
were fo unjuftly entertained againlt him in the filler-country,
even after he had been difeharged, as a rtformed character,
from a place which the legislature formally and t xprdly de-
clares to have be*.n appointed for the exprefs purpofe of ope-
rating the reformation of young pff nders, and rendering them,
ufcful and rtfpcftable members of the commonwealth.
‘‘Gentlemen, added he, in conclufioa, ) I folemnly declare
that I am not guilty of the charge now brought againft me ;
nor does the evidence produced apply to me. Thus, fup-
ported by confeious innocence, I wait for your verdift,
without any painful apprehenfion, as knowing that, to men,
cf your liberality of fentiment, I am not an object of thofe
prejudices that operated fo Ltally againft me in another place j.
j|nd that your decree will be the refult of feeling hearts, di«*
by enlightened underftaudinga.'*
But, though acquitted on this occafion in Dublin, hg
quickly determined to leave Ireland, ol which the capital


fectfccd to him to be a theatre of aaion too clrcurafcribed fb>r
him to mwe in. e accordisgly removed to the northern
parts of that kingdom, through which he took his way to
Edimurgb, v/here he concluded that he might, for fome timq,
r.l lc«ft, commit bis depredations with greater fafety and fact*
Iky hao he could do either in London or Dahlia.
But in hs, opinion on this head he foon learned, by experi-
ence, that he was grofsiy deceived, for he was quickly ob-
fewed in the capital of Scotland, where the police is more
ix;'(id 41i more fevere than in mpft other parts of the Britifh
iJoiyvJ i;ort» Being obferved, he was fufpufted ; but, having
received (omt intimation of the fufpicions that were entertain-
ed of him, he thought it prudent to depart from Edinburgh,
where his gleanings were comparatively ftnall.
The frnallncfp, however, of his acqulilt,ions in Scotland
was amply compenfated by the extraordinary fuccefs of hi*
depredations at Chefter Fair, which he vifited on his return to
England' through Carlifte ; for, it is faid, that, in the courfe
of his expedition to that linen fair, he contrived to get into
bis p'.iffrfllon to the amount, of fix hundred pounds in cafh and
bank notep, with which he got clear off, returning once mote
to London, to which he feerr.s tq have been attraffced by a
kind of unaccountable fatality.
On his arrival here, he lived in a genteel but retired ram-,
uer, iorthe neighbourhood of Soho fqare. It was about this
time, that, leaning again 11 a poll, and viewing he fire l , ia
Oreck ftreet, a llack of chimneys fell and fradiured his flcull
of which accident, however, he got completely cured,
being referved, we fear (as the proverb goes) unleft he a|
]aft feels the neceffity of reformation, for a more fhamc--
j(ul eud.
He continued to obferve a quiet and decent way of life
while the fpoils of Cherter Fair affjrded him the means,
s}ut the produce of thtfe fpoils being nearly exhaufted in tbp,
of fome months, he returned to his old comfes, not-
wfthftmding the additional danger which amended hi?


appearance to refume them, from the terms in which he wa«
liberated from his confinement on board the hulks f which
were, on condiiion of bis leaving this kingdom, and never
more returning to it.
However, untrrrified by the danger, he again frequented
the Theatres, the Opera-houfe and the Pantheon, for fome
little time, with tolerable fuccefs : but be became now too
notorious to be Jong ftcure ; and, being recognized, he was
elefely watched and well-nigh detected at the latter of thefe
places; at leaft, fueffi ftrong fufpicions were entertained by
the mugißrates of his condndl on the occafion, that he was
taken into cuftody, and committed to Newgate.
The evidence againfi him, however, was far from being
clear enough to convidt him of the offence with which ha
was then charged ; fo that, of courfe, he got rid of the con-
fequences without much difficulty cr rifque. He was, how.
cv r, detained at the iiißancc of Mr. Duncan Campbell, the
fupeiintendent of the convi& 3, for having returned to Eng-
land, in violation of the condition on which his Majefly was
pleafed to grant him a rcm'ffim of the punifhment, which
he was fenttneed to undergo on board the hulks at Woolwich;
and the confequence of the detainer was, that he was ordered
to ferve out in Newgate the onexpired part of the time tint
he was originally to have ferved on the river 'Thames.
When the pi-riod of Ins captivity in this prifon expired, he
was, as a matter of comic, fet at liberty ; and he no fuoncr
obtained his’‘liberty, than he returned to his former prac-
tiees* He, however, was now more cautious ; aud, being
remedied with feme very adroit accomplices, he was not fo
cafily deudled as he ufed to be on former dotations.
Pie was, Ecverthtlefs, ftrongly fijfpedled. Hence it came
t* pafs, that he lived irj a Rate of perpetual alarm, was ex-
pofed to frequent interruptions, ana was limes taken
into cqftody, but as repeatedly difeharged for want of proof*
to bring the gqilt home to him.
In this manner he lived a corfiderable time, in the fociety
ef the moll profligate and abandoned chambers of this vaR;


slid corrupt town, when he was fecn to pick the pocket of
Mr. le Mefurier, at Drury-Lane Play-houfe ; and for that
ofleuce he was immediately apprehended.
Charge of him was given to one Blandy, a conflable, who,
either through negligence or corruption, fuffered him to
make hh efcape. The proceedings againd him were, how-
ever, carried on to an outlawry, and various methods were
ineffedlually taken, for near two years, to have him ap-
prehended.
While the lawyers were outlawing him, and the conftahlea
endeavouring to take him, he was travelling in various dif-
guifes, and in various chara&ers, through the northern coun-
ties of this kingdom. He vifued the great towns, in thole
parts, as a Quack Diftor, or at a Clergyman ; fometimes he
went with an EO table, and fometimes he pretenied to be a
rider to a manufacturing boufc at Birmitghtm ox Manchefter;
and travelling on horfc-back, with a decent appearance aoi
a grave deportment, the account which he thought proper
to give of himfelf was credited, without any difficulty, by
thofe who thought proper to queftion him.
It, however, fometimes happened that he was known by
gentlemen whom he met, particularly once in Lincolnfhire,
hut no one offered to moled or interrupt him, until he ar-
rived at Ncwcaftle upon i'yric, where, on being recognized,
he was fufpedbed of picking pockets, and, ou enquiry, he
was found to be outlawed ; on which ha was removed, by a
Writ of Habeas Corpus, to London, and imprifoned in New-
gate, where he arrived poor, emaciated, and dcj.ftsd.
The companions of his life, as a chdioguifhcd charadler ia
his line, learning his circumfUnccs, made a
fubfeript ion for him, by which they colle&td near an hundred
guineas tor his ufe ; and, by this fcafonablc fupply, he was
enabled to employ council, and to take mcafures to have the
outlawry reverfcd.
This being done, he was tried for the original offence,
that cf dealing Mr. Le Mefurier’s purfc ; bat, through the


S&fcnce of the Rev. Mr. Adean, a material witnefs fof the
profecution, he Was acquitted and difchatgtd.
On his getting his liberty, he went into Ireland, in com-
pany with a young man of the name of Hubert, well known
in town for his fraud on his Royal Highnef* th« Duke of
Vork, With this accomplice he endeavoured to carry on hia
depredations in Dublin* where it was never his fortune td
Temain for any length'of time undeleted. For, on this Occa-
fion, Hubert was taken in the faft of picking a gentleman’*
pocket, and handing the property to Barrington, who, with
great diffiulty, made his cfcape to England, where he ramb-
led about for fome time, previous to bia arrival in the capital;
and he had not been long in London, or the neighbourhood
of it, when he was taken into cuftody for picking the pocket
of Henry Hare Townfend, Efq.
As for Hubert* he was tried and cohvi£led at Dublin*
and fentenced to be tranfported for feven years; but hav-
ing, fince then, contrived to make bis efcape from the
prifon in which he was confined, he is faid to be how lurk-
ing at large.
■i— o J
ON Wednefday morning, September 15, *79®> Bat'-
rington was arraioged for ftealing, on the ili of Sep-
tember* a gold watch* chain, and fcals, and a metal key,
the property of Henry Hare Townfcrid, Efq,
When he wasafleed, asufual* by the clerk of the arraigns*
whether he was guilty or not guilty of the felony with wbick
he flood charged, he addrtffed Mr. Recorder (the only Judge
on the bench) as follows»
**■ My Lord, .
« It 18 with great concern that I interrupt the hiifincfs Oi
the court for a finglc moment, but I am under the neceffity
of flating to your Lordfliip, that when I was taken into cuf-
tedy ob fafprcloft of this felony, every article about rof


perfon was taken from me ; and although the gentleman,
who is my accufer, did not attempt to fay any money was
loft, my money was alfo taken from me; and, although I
have made application that this money may be reftored, it
is, however, ftill detained ; by which detention, my Lord,
I have been hindered from taking thofe proper meafures
for my defence, and from obtaining that legal afliftance,
which my unfortunate fituation peculiarly requires.”
Mr. Recorder . Mr. Barrington, it is impofllble for me
to decide, previous to your trial, what is your property;
but, when your profecutor appears, every thing which has
been taken from you, and which is not neceflary to be
identified on your trial, lhall be reftored to you.
George Law, the conftable, produced the articles above
mentioned, as alfo a filk purfe, with twenty guineas, which
were taken from Mr. Barrington, at the time he was takan
into cuftody.
Mr. Recorder. Mr. Barrington, I (hall order your money
to be returned to you.
On Friday Barrington was put to the bar, and the in-
dictment was read as before.
Henry Hare Touunjend, Efq. /worn.
On the ift of September I was at Enfield Marih, on ac-
count of the races; I believe it was near two o’clock, that
is the time that is fixed for the horfes to ftart; I was on
foot; I went on the ground in a phaeton ; I got out of the
phaeton, and was walking about; I did not mifs my watch
.till I was fpoke to by a Mr. Blades; I milled it from my
waiftcoat pocket; I had a new pair of leather breeches on,
and was afraid the feals would dirty them ; it was a gold
watch and chain, and metal key; 1 felt my watch in my
pocket after I cam* on the ground ; I think it rauft have
been a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes before I milled
it. I recovered my watch again, but I do not recoiled
who produced it to me; the watch was given to Lady
Lake, and (he took it home with her; and, when we took
Mr. Barrington before the juftice, I fent for the watch,
aad the watch was given to me by a ferrant.
F


Walduck fworn,
I am coachman to Mr. Townfend, I knew nothing of the
matter till I helped to take the prifoner to the booth; I had
one hand on his collar and the other hold of his right hand
which was open. He could have nothing at all in his right
hind. 1 was left in care of him. I put him at the back of
the booth, and there was a carpet nailed at the back of that. I
faw the watch drop between Barrington and the carpet, it ap-
parently fell on the [eft fide of him behind him, I faw it as it
jingled down before ft reached the ground,
Mary Danby.
1 was in the next booth to tint in which the prifoner was
brought in, I was but a very little way off him, there was no-
body between him and me, nothing but the partition ; I was
pext the partition, the prifoner was fideways to me when he
dropped the watch on his fide; he dropped the watch from his
hand ; I told him of it at the time; I cannot recolleft which
hand; his hand was by the fide of him at the time. I faw ft
drop from him, and I mentioned it to him at thft time.
Prifoner's Defence.
** May it pleafe your Lordihip, and you Gentlemen of the
Jury, to favour me with your attention for a little time. The
fituation of every perlon who has the misfortune to ftand here
is extremely diftrcifmg and auktfard; mine is fo in a peculiar
degree; if I am totally filent, it may be confidcred, perphas,
as a proof of guilt, and if I prefumc to offer taefe arguments
>vh!rh prefent themfelves to my r-vnd, in my defence they may
not perhaps be favoured with that attention which they might
deferve; yet I fey no means difttuff the candor and benevolence
■(if the Jurv, and, tlicrefnre I will beg leave to proceed to flatc
•the circutnftances of the cafe, as they occur to not doubt-
ing but they will meet vVith fomc degree of credit, notwitih-
ftanding the unhappy fittiatlon lam in. Gentlemen, I was on
the Rice-ground at Enfield, pblervjng the race on the day that
the iudhiiment mentions, where I found myfclf furrounded by
M-. Townfend and numbers of others; Mr. Townfend laid,
'• Your mme i? Barrington, and you have taken my watch!
f-told him he was right a? to niv name, but he acciued me un-
4%ftly; hmvtver, I woudd go any whtre witk him; I was rtf-


moved from thence to a Rand, from whence the races were
viewed; it conlißed of two booths, and they were feparate
from each other with only a railing elbow high; and it is a
great misfortune to me, Gentlemen of the Jury, that you were
41'ot able to obferve the lituation of thole boths; for, if you had,
you would have found it nearly impoßible that fome circum-
stances which have come from the witneflcs could have been true.
1 was clofe to the railing that feparated the two booths, and
fome perfon faid, “ Here is a watch!” This watch Mr. Townf-
•cnd claimed, and faid It was his. I,was removed from thence
to the Angel at Edmonton, where the examination took place ;
and I am very forry to be under the neceffity of obferving,
•that a very material difference has taken place in -the-dilpoli-
ticos delivered that day before the magiftrate in various re-
fpedls. A witnefs, the coachman, pofxtively declared that he
did not fee this watch in my hand, that he did not fee me take
it from my pocket, that he did not fee it drop from my perfon,
but that he law it on the ground, and he might have gone fo
far as to fay he faw it fail; i took the liberty of afkinghim
one queCllon, Whether he had fecn the watch ia my band,
whether he had feen it fall from me ? He declared he did not.
1 then allied him, whether he could take upon himftlf to
fvvear, from the lituation he Rood in at the adjoining booth,
that this watch might not have dropped from fome other
perfon ; he declared he could not obferve any fuch thing.
•Gentlemen, with refpedl to the evidence of Kendrick, he
made the fame declaration then. Mr. Townfend has brought
me here, under the charge of having committed fdony ; he
has told you, Gentlemen of the Jury, that he 101 l his watch
out of his pocket, and that pocket was a waiftcoat pockety
that he was in a very extraordinary lituation ; that he was on
the race-ground, where certainly the greateff decorum is not
always obftr ved ; and he was alfo in a lituation which ex-
pofed him more to the prtffare he complained of, than any
other perfon ; for, indeed of his hoife being in pofftllion
of his jockey or groom, lie attended it himftlf; and I muli
beg leave to obferve. Gentleman of the Jury, that it is a
cuttom, where people bet money at races, to wilh to fee the
-borfe immediately after the heat is over, fo that the preflure
which Mr. Townfend had, or what he thought he had from
.me, could nbt appear very extraordinary ; and f am under
fehetiectiGty of faying, his fancy has rather been improved


on the occafion. With refpeft, Gentlemen, to the IA wit-
«eis that has appeared, I will n»t fay any thing on the occa-
cahon j that will reft entirely upon you. It was a circum-
itance, however, of a rnoft extraordinary nature, that this
peifon Ihould never come forward till the prefent moment ;
and, whether the contradi&ions and ftrange accounts fhe has
given of hcrfelf are fuch ss'to entitle her to any credit, particularly
m a ntuation where the life and liberty of another perfon is at
ftake, is not for me to obferve upon. Gentlemen of the Jury,
u may perhaps, be expedled by many perfons, in this place,
that 1 ihould fay a great deal about prepofleflion and newlpaper
reports ; and, if I had the ability to do it, perhaps I fliouid
not be biamed ; for, he who has been the unhappy objedl of
much defamation has furely a right to deprecate its baneful ef-
ects where much pains have been taken to defame, fome pains
may be furely allowed to abate that defamation. Gentlemen,
that it has been the hard lot of fome unhappy perfons, to have
been convidlcd of crimes they ically did commit, lefs through
evidence than ill natured report, is doubtlefs certain; and,
doubtlels there are many refpcdlable perfons, now in Court,
fully convinced of the truth of that obfervation. Such times,
it is hoped, are paffed; I dread not fuch a convieftion in my
own petfon; i am well convinced of the noble nature of a
Britifh Court of JufHce; the dignified and benign principles of
its Judges, and the liberal and candid fpirit of its Jurors.
" Gentlemen, life is the gift of God; and liberty its greateft
blefifing : the power of difpofing of both, or cither, is the
greateft man can enjoy. It is alfo adventitious that, great as
that power is, it cannot be better placed than in the hands of
an Eng ifh Jury; for, they will n»t exercife it like tyrants, who
delight in blood, but like generous and brave men, who de-
light to fpare rather than to deftroy; and who, not forgetting
they are men thcmfelvcs, lean, when they can, to the fide of
companion. It may be thought, Gentlemen of the Jury, that
I ai« applying to your paflions; and, if I had the power to do
it, I would not to fail to employ it; the paflions animate the
heart; and to the paflions we owe our dearelt and fineft feelings;
and whert it is ccnfidered, the mighty power you now poffefs,
whatever leads to a cautious and tender difeharge of it muft be
thought of great confrquence : as long as the paflions conduct
us on the fide of benevolence, they are our beft, our fafeft,
and our moft friendly, guides.


Gentlemen of the Jury, Mr. Townfend has depofed that he
loft his watch, but how, I truft, is by no means clear; I truft.
Gentlemen, you will confider the great, the almoft impcfljbt-
lity, that having had the watch in my poffefllon for fo long a.
time, time fufficient to have concealed it in a variety of places,
to have conveyed it to town, it fhould ftill be in my pofTeffion.
You have heard from Mr, Townfend, that there was an inter-
val of at leaft half an hour between the time of lofing the watch
and my being taken in cuftody : there is fomething, Gentle-
men impoflible in the circumftance; and, on the other hand,
it has fometimes happened, that reraorfe, a generous remorfc,
has ftruck the minds of perfons in fuch a manner as to have
induced them to furrender themfdves into the hands of Juftice
rather than an innocent perfon fhould fuffer. It is not, there-
fore, improbable, that, if Mr. Townfend loft his watch by an aCI
of felony, thepeifon who had the watch in his pofTefiion, feel-
ing for the fituation of an unhappy man, might be induced t*
place that watch on the ground. But it is by no means certain
how Mr. Townfend loft his watch, whether by an aCt of felony,
or whether by accident; it might have fallen into the hands of
fome other perfon, and that perfon, feeling for my unhappy
fituation, might have been induced to reftore it. I humbly
hope, that the circumftances of the cafe are fuch as may in-
duce a fcrupulous Jury to make a more favourable dreifion ;
and I am very well convinced that you will not be led by any
Other circumftances than thofe cf the prefent cafe; cither from
reports of former misfortunes, or by the fear of ray falling into
jfimilar ones. lam now juft thirty-two years of age, (ftiall be
fo next month); it is nearly half the life of man; it is not
worth while being impatient to privide for the other half, fo far
as to do any thing unworthy. Gentlemen, in the comfe of my
life I have fnffered much diftrefs, I have felt fomething of the
viciffitudes of fortune, and now, from obfervation, I am con-
vinced upon the whole, there is no joy but what arifes from
the praCtice of virtue, and confifts in the felicity of a tranquil
mind and benevolent heart; fources of confolition which the
moft profperotis circumftances do not always furnifh, and
which may he felt under the moft indigent. It will be my
ftudy, Gentlemen, to pcffefs them; nor wdll the heavieft af-
fliction of poveity, pain, or difgrace, caufe me to part with
refolutions founded on deepeft reflection, and which will end
but with life. I will perifh on the pavement before I will de-
viate from them. For my own part, whatever your vckUA


be, I trail I fbr-11 be enabled to meet it with a firmness of
ymnd : he, indeed, has little to fear fiotri death, whofe fame
rs tar*nifhed, and who has endated the ceafdefs abufe of un-
feeling minds ; when heaven accepts contrition, it receives in-
to favour when it pardons; but man, more cruel than his
Msker, purines his offending bVothfer with unrelenting feverity,
and marks a oeviation from re-dlitudd with a never-dying in-
famy, and with uhccafiirg fufpicion and leproach, which feem
to exclude him from the pale of \i:tue. Gentlemen of the
Jury, the thought of death may appal the rich and profperous,
but, on the other hand, the unfortunate cannot have much to
fear from it; yet the tender nefs of nature cannot be quite fub-
dued by the utmoli degree of human refulutioo, and I cannot
be infenfible to the woes which muff be felt by an affectionate
companion of an infant offipiing; and there is befides a prin-
ciple in human nature, flronger than the fear of death,’ and
#hicfre. < m hardly fail to cpciate foine time or other in life; I
mean, the defire of good fnne. Under that laudable influence,
OmUirndn, if I am acquitted, I will quicidy retire into forae
diffant land, wiieie my name and misfortunes will be al’ke un-
known; where hannlefs manners /halt fhield me from ti e im-
putnicn 6f guilt, and where prejudice will net be liable to
inifVeprcfentation; dnd I do now allure you, Gentlemen of
the jury', that I fcel a cheering hope, even at this awful mo-
ment, that thd reft of my life will be fo condudlcd as to make
md as much an object of effeem and applaufe as 1 am n«w the
Unhappy objedl of cenfure and fufpicion.” Guilty.
After thje verdict was pronounced, the Lord Chief Barca
tSUs sdrlrt ff<d the pr holier :
* % Mr. Saff rihgtor, hitherto I hive conduced rayfelf towards
yori as .! I Had never fecn you before; but now, when nothing
which I can fay prejudice the jury, I muff fay that you hav
treated with much more favour than you deferve. Thie
ought to fare been a crpical indi&ment, and it ought to have
acaded your fife; and public j«l;ice very much calls for fuch
a fafctjfice; f r, if there was a man in the world that abufed
and pfcifi itu ted great talents to the rnofl unworthy and 111 a me-
fit! purpo&s, you are that man; and you have done it againft
af! Earning, agahift the example of yi ur own cafe, and of a
tfioufd.id other caffs iliit have occurred; and 2 am afraid, that


mw, 3s the pinllhincnt does not reach your Pfe, I cannot
entertain the leaft hope that you will in any manner reform;
hut that the end of it will be, that you muft be a fiiumefuJ
fpcAacle at your latter end.”
Mr. Barrington bowed and retired.
On Wcdnefday the zzi of September, typo, the Recorder
pronounced the fentcrce of the Court upon him, which w>as.
That he be tranfpotted for the term oi feven years, to fuch
parts beyond thefeas as his Majefty in Council fhould be picafed
to diredl.
After his fentence was paffed, Barrington addrefTed the Court
jn a fort of vakdidlory ipeech, conceived in nearly the fol-
lowing terms:
“ My Lord,
“ I have a greet deal to fay in extenuation of the crime for
which I now Card convifted at this bar; but, upon consider-
ation, 1 will not arreft the attention of the honourable Court
too long. Among the extraordinary viciffitur’cs incident to
human nature, it is the peculiar and unfortunate lot of fomc
devoted perfons to have their beft wifhes, and moft earneti en-
deavours, to deferve the good opinion of the moft refprctab'e
part of fociety, entirely frufirated. Whatever they can fay, or
whatever they may do, every word and its meaning, every
adlion and its motive, is reprefented in an unfavourable light,
and is diftorted from the real intention of the fpcaker or the
adlor.
«* That this has bean my unhappy fate does not feem to Rand
ih reed uf any confirmation,
44 Every effort to deferve well of mankind, that mv heart
bore witnefs to its re&itnde, has been by fuch meafum as
thofe, and confequfnt y has been redendered abortive. Mary
cf the circumftances of my life, 1 can, without any violation
of truth, declare to have, therefore, happened abfblwtely i«
Ipiteof myfelf.


** The world, ray Lord, has giwn me credit for abilities,
indeed much greater than I pofTefs, and, therefore, much
greater than 1 deferred; but I have never found any kind hand
to fofter thefe abilities.
" I rraght aft, where was the generous and powerful hand
that was ever ftretched forth to refeue George Barrington from
infamy ? In an age like this, which, in feveral refpedls, is fo
juftly famed for liberaLfentiments, it was my fevere lot, that
no noble-minded gentleman ftepped forward and laid to me,
Barrington, you are pojfeffed of talents nuhieh may be vfeful to
fociety. I feel for your fituation ; and, as long as you eul the
fart of a good citizen, 1 be your protedior : you will then
have time and opportunity to refeue yourfelf from the obloquy of
your former conduit.
“ Alas, ray Lord, George Barrington had never the fu-
preme felicity of having fuch comfort adminiftred to his wound*
cd fpirit. As matters have unfortunately turned out, the die
is caft ; and, as it is, I bend, refigned to my firte, without
one murmur or complaint.”
After having fpoken in this manner, with more elegance,
perhaps, than reafon or truth, he bowed refpedtfully to the
court, the jury, and the auditory, and withdrew from the
public feene, at leaft, in Europe, probably for ever, in the
thirty-fecond year of his age.
THE J K B.




