

WILLIAM
DAMPIER
AUSTRALIAN STORY SERIES
BY
J. H. M. ABBOTT
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.




THE STORY OF DAMPIER


WILLIAM DAMPIER


THE STORY OF
WILLIAM DAMPIER
BY
J. H. M. ABBOTT
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET
1911




TO
JOAN
WITH THE AUTHOR’S LOVE




PREFACE
THIS book is of necessity a small one, and a
great deal of matter has to be omitted that
should have been in the text. It has often been
with real regret that the author has refrained from
quoting Dampier himself to any extent—not
because it is easy to quote, but because Dampier
writes of things after a fashion that no biographer
could hope to emulate. But one object that he
has, this biographer would like to emphasise—to
induce his readers to turn to Dampier himself.
If they have enjoyed Robinson Crusoe, they cannot
fail to enjoy Will Dampier.




CONTENTS
Chapter Page
I. THE ADVENTURERS , . , .It
11. EARLY DAYS 17
111. THE LOGWOOD MEN . . . 23
IV. THE BUCCANEERS 29
V. PIRACY AND PANAMA . . . .34
VI. IN THE PACIFIC 40
VII. TO THE EAST INDIES . . . .47
VIII. NEW HOLLAND 53
IX. THE AUSTRALIANS . . .58
X. HOMEWARD BOUND . . .83
XL THE VOYAGE OF THE “ ROEBUCK ” . . 69
XII. THE VOYAGE OF THE “ ROEBUCK ” (contd.). 73
XIII. THE “ROEBUCK” COURT MARTIAL . . 79
XIV. “ ROBINSON GRUSOE ” . . .83
XV. DAMPIER’S JOURNAL , .89
XVI. AUSTRALIA AND DAMPIER .98




Chapter I.
THE ADVENTURERS
jyj ANY of you who read this little book will
be learned in the vague far-off days that
are spoken of in fairy tales—and in stories that pre-
tend not to be fairy tales—as Olden Times. ‘ln
Olden Times there lived a very beautiful princess
who had a wicked uncle’—you know how they go?
It is an expression that storytellers have always
been fond of using. It does not tie them down to
any particular period; it suggests that so old a
story must be true; and in all things that are old
we see more romance than we can discern in our
own times. Andl that is strange; because our times
are perhaps the most romantic times that have ever
been.
\Dlden Times, and the men and women, and
boys and girls of Olden Times have come to seem
something quite different from the days we live in,
and the people with whom we have to do. But the
only real difference is that they are dead, and we
are alive. The sun rose and set then, just as it
does now; the rain came down, and the wind blew,
and the seasons followed one another, just as they
do for us. Men and women were babies first, then
boys and girls, fathers and mothers, old men and
old women—exactly as they are now. They did


the same things. Life was as pleasant or as hard
for them as it is for us. They were hungry or cold,
happy or sad, in the same way as we are.
If ever men fought giants in the Olden Times,
men still fight giants to-day. If miracles came to
pass, they come to pass still. If there was adven-
ture in the old days, if brave deeds were done, if
kind and courtly actions, noble thoughts, gentle
words were common, they are still so. We are too
close up to our own lives to see all that is in them.
If you look at a far-off range of blue mountains,
you will see their whole shape and form in a way
that is impossible when you are close beneath them.
There is still splendid adventure in this world
of ours; there is still room for the old brave deeds,
the old kindness, courtesy, high thinking, gentle-
ness. There is not much change, when you come
to think about it. Men and things, day and night,
summer and winter, are as they were a thousand
years ago. We live differently in details; but we
live only while we breathe, as our fathers lived,
and we die as they died, when we can no longer
breathe. We are just the same, bones and blood,
body and soul. If we are changed, only the good
God knows it.
And that is why, when you read this story of a
man who was born more than two hundred and
fifty years ago, it will be best if you can think of
him as having been just the same as you are.
When he was a boy hei thought and did things
that you think and do every day; when he was a


man he did things that you could do, thought of
things as you will learn to think of them, was good
and bad as we all are, and paid for everything he
had in life in the way in which we are called to pay
for it. You must look at him that way. If
you don’t, you will understand him hardly at all.
You must take him as one of yourselves.
His is a wonderful story, full of adventure, full
of brave happenings, full of romance. But so may
yours be. There is no Australia for you to find.
But there are other things, whose finding will be
as full of stirring and noble chance as his quests
were. They may be different, but they are there
to be found; and there is as much wonder and
amazement in their finding as ever Will Dampier
experienced. He is just the same as you and I,
and the fellow who lives next door.
And yet the conditions that shaped his life—in
outward appearance at any rate— were not quite
the same as those which shaped ours. This old
world was not known two and a half centuries ago,
as it is now. Its separate parts, or rather about
half of its separate parts, were known only to the
people who lived in them. There was not that
general knowledge of the whole that the whole
world has to-day. What we call the New World—
though in some ways it is older than the old world
—was only just beginning to be known at all.
There were still vast continents to be found, still
far-off seas that had never borne a ship, still
beautiful islands where no white man had ever


been. There were strange stories, one part fact
and three parts fancy, of strange kingdoms, vast
unknown wealth, curious people who existed
beyond the setting sun, and southward of the mid-
day sun. West and south the new land lay,
beyond seas that men had never seen, beyond vast
unknown spaces of the world that they had only
dreamed about. And it was the Adventurers who
realised these dreams, who wakened the world of
mankind to a realisation of facts stranger than any
fancies it had ever imagined.
From the times of the earlier Tudor kings of
England—the two Henrys—to the days of the first
Georges, there was a wonderful period of new
discovery. All through those centuries, land after
land and sea after sea were becoming known to the
world. Men sailed out into the unknown, and
came back with well-proved tales that stirred other
men to go and see for themselves. The curiosity
of man in the old world was continually stimu-
lated by the stories they had related—and that
got exaggerated in the relation. Nothing about
them was too strange or unlikely to be believed by
someone. Portuguese, Spaniards, Dutch, English,
and French became possessed of a new interest in
their life as nations. They vied with each other in
discovery. They sent their sons out to find the
very ends of the earth. Sometimes their sons came
back; often they were never heard of any more.
But always, other sons went forth to seek the
unknown lands.


And what a race of men these wonderful cen-
turies bred! Merely to say some of their names
to-day is stirring enough—Cabot, Columbus, Vasco
Da Gama, Cortes, Pizarro, Drake, Raleigh, Men-
dana, Quiros, Tasman, Pelsart, Cook, Bougainville,
La Perouse. These are a few who left good
records. How many hard, stern old tars who had
no learning but sea learning, went out and saw the
marvels of the outer ocean, and did not know how
to tell of them! How many went out and dis-
appeared !
The very means of making their discoveries
were of the poorest sort. Their ships were small;
they had no maps; their navigating instruments
were crude and unreliable. It was difficult to
preserve food wholesome for long voyages. Sick-
ness and death were always passengers with them.
The horrible illness called scurvy was always a
feature of the voyages. You must remember these
things when you read what Dampier did. Such
things made the Adventurers what they were.
Self-reliance was absolutely necessary to the
carrying out of their undertakings, to the preser-
vation of their lives, and their safe return home;
it was the means by which they achieved so much.
Science helped them very little. It was grit,
courage, pluck, determination that carried them to
the new world and back again. They had none of
the means, except a compass, that navigators have
at their disposal to-day. Perhaps they were better
sailors for that reason. At any rate, we cannot


regard them except with the greatest admiration
for the things they did with such small facilities.
And of the Adventurers, Captain William Dampier
was one of the bravest and wisest. He has certainly
left us one of the best told stories.


Chapter II.
EARLY DAYS
0 OMEWHERE about the beginning of 1652,
William Dampier was born at East Coker, near
Yeovil, in Somersetshire. The exact date of his
birthday has been lost in the two and a half cen-
turies since, but he was christened on the eighth of
June in that year. He was therefore a West
Countryman; and in his time no men in all England
were greater seafarers and wanderers over the face
of the earth than the men of the West Country.
Devonshire, Cornwall, and Somerset were sending
their sons abroad year after year, and some of the
greatest naval names in England came from that
green land of cream and rosy cheeks.
It is a pleasant country to-day, the West of
England, and perhaps there is no part of Great
Britain where you may better realise the sturdiness
of the English stock. Burly men, healthy women,
and merry children seem to endow it with a
vitality that cannot be subdued. You are always
welcome there. You may always be sure of a laugh
and a joke, and a certain heartiness of greeting.
The coasts of Devonshire and Cornwall are famous
for their hardy, bold, and skilful sea-faring popula-
tion. Somerset, more inland, is a country of farms
and rich pastures, and a most delightful accent.


‘Zoomerzet’ they call it, in the soft dialect of the
natives. It is an accent that one never tires of
hearing.
Not very much is known of Dampier’s boyhood.
His father, a small farmer, died when he was only
ten years old, in 1662. His mother continued to
work the farm, and Will was sent to a neighbouring
grammar school, probably in Yeovil. What his
boyhood was we hardly know at all, but this we
may be sure of—it was always coloured by the
strong desire that comes to most boys at one time
or another, for a life at sea. It would have been
strange if it had not come to him. All the world
was looking westward then, and nearly all the
literature of adventure had to do with the famous
Spanish Main. London merchants sought a field
for their enterprise in the West Indies, the
American colonies of England, and South America.
In the latter part of the world their enterprise took
the form of a thinly disguised system of piracy; and
it was from those coasts that thrillling stories came
to stir the blood of young Will Dampier and his
mates.
When his mother died in 1668, the preparation
for the commercial life for which his parents had
intended him came to an end. It seems inevitable
that it should have done so. He would never have
made a good shop keeper. He was by nature a
rover and a rolling stone, and it would have been
impossible to convert him to any other inclination.
So his guardian gave in to his wishes, and in the


following year he was apprenticed to the master of
a ship belonging to Weymouth in Dorsetshire.
His first voyage was a short one to France; then he
sailed in the same ship to Newfoundland. It was
a voyage full of hardship. The bitter cold, the
storms, and the ice-bound seas into which they
sailed were not the kind of sea-faring that Dampier
found to his taste, and, being able to cancel his
indentures, he returned to England. But his
abandonment of the North American trade did not
by any means signify that he was tired of the sea,
or that his desire for a life of wandering adventure
was in any way abated.
So strong was his desire that, after some time
spent in London, he decided to ship ‘before the
mast’—that is, as an ordinary seaman—for a
voyage in warmer latitudes than those in which his
first nautical experiences had been gained. An
East Indiaman named the “John and Martha,”
commanded by a Captain Earning, was on the
point of sailing to Bantam in the Island of Java.
He offered himself as one of her crew, and his offer
was accepted. The voyage out and back occupied
more than twelve months; and, although he had
not yet begun to keep the journal which has made
him famous, and there is no detailed account of
what he saw and underwent, he says that he gained
much useful experience, and particularly, that his
knowledge of navigation was greatly enlarged.
After his return, he spent some time on shore,
and passed the summer of 1672 in Somersetshire.


But he was not the kind of man to remain content
with an inactive life. War with the Dutch had
broken out, and England was hard put to it to man
her fleet. He volunteered for the navy, and joined
the company of the “Royal Princess,” a ship which
was commanded by one of the ablest and most
daring of the British captains of the day—Sir
Edward Spragge. He served under him during
the first half of 1673, and took part in the sea-fights
of May 28 and June 4.
A few days before the battle in which Sir
Edward Spragge was killed—that of August 11—
Dampier became sick, and was transferred to the
hospital ship of the fleet, from which vessel he was
landed at Harwich. For a long time he lay there
dangerously ill, and in great suffering. His re-
covery was slow, and it was, not until after a some-
what lengthy convalescence that health and energy
came back to him, and, with them, the old longing
for an active and adventurous life.
This brief acquaintance with the Royal Navy
was probably of great value to him in after years,
when he came himself to command a King’s ship.
Discipline has always been a tradition of the
British fleet; and the knowledge of it which he
acquired from underneath, so to speak, ought to
have fitted him for high command better than it
seems eventually to have done. For, though he
proved himself a great navigator, he never seems to
have acqured the right knack of handling his
subordinates.


The Lord of the Manor of East Coker was an
army veteran, one Colonel Hellier, who had been
his father’s landlord. He now took so great a
fancy to the young seaman as to offer him a post
upon a plantation in Jamaica. Dampier accepted
the position, and sailed for the West Indies at the
beginning of 1674 in the ship “Content,” of
London, whose master was a Captain Kent. As
showing the conditions of the time, it is curious to
note that, although he might have gone as a
passenger in the “Content,” he shipped as one of
the crew. The reason for this was that he feared
that on his arrival he might be kidnapped, and sold
as a slave—a by no means uncommon occurrence
to immigrants in those days and that part of the
world. At this time he was two-and-twenty years
of age.
His life in Jamaica hardly suited him. He
stayed for six months upon Colonel Hellier’s
plantation, as assistant to its manager, a .man
named Whalley. It had been arranged at the end
of that time that he was to go to the north side of
the island to manage a plantation which belonged
to a Captain Heming; but, with the suddenness
with which a great many of the important under-
takings of his life were entered upon, he shipped,
instead, upon a sloop bound to Port Royal. He
continued in the coastal trade for six or seven
months, becoming intimately acquainted with its
navigation, and the produce and commerce of the
West Indies. Then he took the first step in that


adventurous life which made him a pioneer of
Australian discovery.


Chapter III.
THE LOGWOOD MEN
certain Captain Hudsel was about to sail from
Port Royal, bound for the Bay of l Campeachy
to load log-wood. Dampier shipped with him, and
they left Port Royal in August, 1675. They did
not take money wherewith to purchase the log-
wood, but a cargo of rum and sugar to barter for
it. With his minuteness, Dampier describes the
logwood trees —and his description is a good
example of the accuracy and correct observation
which is the most striking feature of his books:
“They are much like our white-thorns in
England; but generally a great deal bigger; the
rind of the young growing branches is white and
smooth, with some prickles shooting from here and
there, so that an Englishman not knowing the
difference, would take them for white-thorns; but
the body and branches are blackish, the rind
rougher, with a few or no prickles. The leaves are
small and shaped like a common white-thorn leaf,
of a palish green. . . Some trees are five or six
feet in circumference, and these we can scarce cut
into logs small enough for a man’s burden, without
great labour, and therefore are forced to blow them
up. It is very ponderous sort of wood, and burns
very well, making a clear strong fire, and very


lasting.” Logwood, by-the-bye, is what we refer
to with difficulty to-day as “Haematoxylon Cam-
pechianum.” Its principal use was for the purpose
of dyeing.
There were some 250 to 300 wood cutters, and
they were only too eager to exchange the wood for
rum. They lived a wild, laborious, free kind of
life which seems to have had a charm of its own
that commended it to Dampier, for he made up his
mind to return to Campeachy. Having procured
their cargo, they sailed on the return voyage at the
end of September. It was an unpleasant enough
passage. Several times they narrowly escaped
shipwreck, and had to endure a great amount of
hardship. Their provisions ran short, and they
were driven to eat beef which they had carried with
them to trade with, but which was so rotten as to
be quite unsaleable. They were many weeks in
reaching Port Royal. When the cargo had been
disposed of, Dampier immediately looked round
for some means of returning, and, having provided
himself with the various articles of equipment
necessary to a logwood man, he sailed again for
the bay in February, 1676.
The next two years were spent in the logwood
trade. In the second volume of his “Voyages”
Dampier gives a most interesting account of the
business, its beginnings and its developments.
One would like to quote it here as he has written
it, but there is not room for all he has to say.
You must remember that at that time the new


world was mostly Spain’s. Her wonderful period
of colonisation had begun nearly two hundred years
before, and her vast empire stretched across the
world, from Castile to Peru, and from Peru to the
Philippine Islands. In extent it rivalled the Roman
Empire and our own British Empire of to-day.
As to the latter, it is something worth remem-
bering—that you belong to an empire that, from
its vastness and its wealth, may be mentioned in
the same breath as Rome’s and Spain’s.
But the Spanish Empire, in spite of its enormous
extent and its great wealth, was never a sound
concern. Very largely it was an empire of plunder,
rather than of honest civilisation and progress.
And it was, in its turn, plundered and robbed by
other nations in a most astonishing fashion. Its
eagles were ever losing feathers from their tails.
It is only in our day that its last feather, and almost
its very eyes, have been plucked out.
For a long time the Spaniards had themselves
cut logwood close by Campeachy; the English
privateers from Jamaica had often captured ships
of theirs loaded with it, but, not knowing how
valuable such cargoes were, had either burned or
abandoned their prizes. However, a certain Cap-
tain James, after taking a large vessel loaded with
the wood, sailed her to England for the purpose of
having her fitted out as a privateer. So little did
he think of the cargo she contained, that he used
a good deal of it as fuel on the homeward voyage.
In England, to his amazement, he was offered a


very large sum of money for what was left. The
news of this piece of chance good fortune became
widely spread about, and was the means of starting
the trade amongst the English. Naturally enough,
the Spaniards oppposed this manifestation of
British commercial enterprise in their territories,
and protected their property with arms; but the
English soon found large forests for themselves,
and the trade in their hands became a flourishing
and prosperous one.
Before Dampier joined them, the logwood men
numbered about 300. Most of them during the war
with Spain had been privateersmen, and had sub-
sisted upon the plunder of Spanish ships. When
peace was proclaimed, they had taken to this trade.
But they were pirates at heart, and, since their
license to rob Spain had been cancelled, they kept
in practice, so to speak, by raiding and pillaging the
towns of the Indians that lay near their settlements.
Many of these unhappy people—preyed upon by
Spaniard and English alike—were sold into slavery
in Jamaica.
As may be supposed, the logwood men were a
rough and turbulent people. Their work was
terribly hard. Some of the trees were more than six
feet in circumference, and as they had to cut them
into logs small enough to be carried in bundles, it
will easily be seen that their toil must have been
excessive. They relieved it by drinking bouts of the
most extraordinary kind. Indeed, their tremendous
toil seems to have had no other object than that of


providing them with the means to indulge in
periodical bouts of wild drunkenness. In the end,
this barbarous dissipation led to their undoing.
The Spaniards were cunning enough to take
advantage of their almost continual state of intoxi-
cation. Singly and in groups they were captured
—for the most part while sleeping off, or recovering
from, the effects of their bestial orgies in their own
huts—and either taken to Spanish prisons or sold
into slavery.
Dampier—who, by the way, considering the
habits of his companions, was a singularly temperate
man—soon found employment. He joined six
others who had cut 100 tons of the wood, which
was not yet moved to the creekside down which it
was to be floated to the sea. They offered him a
ton of wood per month if he would assist them in
its transport. Logwood was then worth from
£l4 to £ls a ton—and this means considerably
more money than we reckon such an amount to-
day. It was hard, but well-paid, work, and Dampier
saved most of the money he earned, so that at the
end of his stay amongst them he was in possession
of a modest, but still substantial, amount of capital.
His description of this part of his life is full of
interest. A plain, commonsense account of all he
saw and learned—without even a smattering of
science—makes the place as clear to us as if we had
seen it ourselves at the time he writes of.
His career as a logwood man was terminated
suddenly by a violent storm, of exactly the same


character as the hurricanes which occasionally
devastate South Sea Islands on our own side of the
globe. Huge trees were uprooted, the forest torn
and ravaged to an incredible degree, their huts
flooded out, all their provisions destroyed, and they
themselves permitted to escape with little more
than their lives and the clothes they wore. This
disaster was responsible for Dampier’s becoming a
buccaneer. It was scarcely a creditable profession,
even at its best; but, had he not adopted it as a
means of livelihood, we should have been the
poorer by the value of his discoveries, and the
romantic interest of his adventures. He always
writes of having been a pirate in a semi-apologetic
fashion; and although, in course of time, he became
just as piratical as his associates, and as ready for
a raid or sea-fight as the best of them, he never
glories in such exploits, and always seems to be a
little ashamed of them.


Chapter IV.
THE BUCCANEERS
w HEN the present writer was a small boy, he
had a “prevailing perplexment.” A pre-
vailing perplexment is an unsatisfied desire for
knowledge on a particular point. Where you
were before you were alive? Where the flame of a
candle goes when it is blown out? What makes a
policeman so important? Why people should die
when it is so pleasant to be alive? What became of
yesterday?—these are all prevailing perplexments
to many boys and girls. But the thing that worried
him was why the buccaneers were called buccan-
eers. He had fathomed the mystery as to why a
free-selector was called a cockatoo, and a peculiarly
frail style of enclosure a ‘cocky’s’ fence. He had
even got to know why merino sheep camp on hill
tops. Wisdom such as this is only acquired
gradually, and by the unrelenting exercise of an
inquisitiveness that is almost impudence. But he
coud never find out why Captain Kidd was called
a buccaneer. It was easy to understand why Ned
Kelly was a bushranger. That was simple. But
buccaneer? For many years he was under the
uncertain impression that the term had some vague
reference to such disorderly characteristics as are
possessed and exercised by buck-jumpers. It was


only comparatively recently that he learned the true
explanation of the curious word’s origin, which will
be found in the next paragraph.
Quite early in the seventeenth century the
island of Hispaniola—now called San Domingo—
was infested by a collection of blackguards, largely
recruited from the slum sweepings of many
European cities, most of whom had, in the first
instance, been colonists from the neighbouring
French possessions in the West Indies. They
formed as unprepossessing a community as could
well be imagined. Dirty, wild, surly savages they
were, and their appearance must have been as
repulsive as their habits and customs. You know
what the schoolboy said in his essay upon a certain
people when he wrote of them—‘manners none and
customs beastly.’ He might well have been
describing the Buccaneers. They lived by hunting
the wild cattle that abounded in Hispaniola, the
meat of which they treated by smoking on wooden
gridirons—called in the language of the country
‘boucans.’ In course of time they themselves became
known as ‘boucaniers,’ and thus the word ‘buccaneer’
has come down to us. So, you will see, it has
nothing to do with wild horses.
The favourite food of the buccaneers was raw
marrow. They slept in the open, with little more
shelter than the lee side of a tree when it rained, or
a cave in the rocks when it rained excessively.
For clothing they wore shirts and short trousers
woven of coarse linen, and they dyed their savage


raiment in the blood of the animals which they
hunted. A round cap, boots of pig skin, and a raw
hide belt stuck full of knives and pistols, completed
the costume of these Hispaniola dandies. Upon
their faces they wore most commonly a scowl.
But, almost savages as they were, they were not,
in their earlier stages, pirates. Their means of
livelihood, brutalising as it was, was in the begin-
ning an honest one. Nevertheless, the Spaniards
regarded their presence in the West Indies as an
intolerable nuisance, and so made a mistake which
in the end cost them lives, treasure, ships, and
possessions whose value it is impossible to estimate.
They waged war against the cattle men, swearing
that they would drive them either out of the islands
or into the next world. Eventually the Buccaneers
were hunted out of Hispaniola; but their complete
subjugation was no easy undertaking.
It was fierce and bitter fighting. The Spanish
soldier had discipline, and was well trained. For
generations he had been more used to victory than
to defeat. But the Buccaneer could use his quaint
old firearm with what was, in those days, a deadly
precision. It was the man behind the gun who
counted in Hispaniola, just as he has always
counted, and always will count. The Buccaneers
could outshoot the Spanish soldiers, just as a
kangaroo-shooter can outshoot Thomas Atkins of
to-day.
There was little mercy upon either side. Cruelty
of the most horrible sort was practised by both.


To the Spaniards the Buccaneers were wild dogs—
to the Buccaneers the Spaniards were devils. To
slay the devil and destroy the wild dog was the aim
at which the strategy and the tactics of both sides
were directed. It was a sacred duty to torture and
destroy the wounded and prisoners.
After the Buccaneers had been driven from
Hispaniola, they took refuge in neighbouring islands.
Every now and again troops of them would cross
over to their old haunts and raid the cattle. The
Spaniards lay in ambush for them as they hunted,
shot them down whenever they could, and cut off
stragglers and small parties. But as this kind of
bushranging warfare did not seem to check the
marauding expeditions, the Spaniards finally decided
to kill all the cattle in the island, so that the
Buccaneers should be starved out. They could
not have done a more unwise or foolish thing; for
the Buccaneers, being out of employment, joined
the pirates, who were already sufficiently trouble-
some to Spain, and it was not very long before they
had taken a revenge upon the Don that cost him
more than Hispaniola was ever worth to him.
A great deal of nonsense has been written round
these Buccaneers. Just as with some of the mean,
murderous, and miserable ruffians who have been
the land pirates of Australia—the bushrangers—
poets and story writers have clothed them with
a romance that serves to hide their infamies. They
were wonderfully courageous, determined and
enterprising; but their awful wickedness, their


sickening cruelties, their worse than bestial relaxa-
tions, outweigh their fierce bravery and skilful
navigation. For anything that can be written with
authority upon such of their deeds as you may
admire, ten things can be told of deeds that you
would hardly like to hear about.
But there were many of them who may honestly
be admired. They raided, looted, burned, pillaged,
and outraged after the fashion of their style of war-
fare. But there was some of the spirit of honourable
naval warfare in their lawless careers. They did
not wantonly butcher helpless prisoners; they had
some respect for human lives that lay in their
power. Kidd, Morgan, Le Grand were unspeakable
devils, as were scores of others; but such men as
Dampier—and there were not a few such—deserve
a better remembrance than, to do them justice,
they ever expected. Buccaneering was an infamous
trade. But it was not always carried on with
absolute infamy.
e


Chapter V.
PIRACY AND PANAMA
J N the autumn of 1678, Dampier returned to
England, and there he was married. We do not
know very much of his wife, except that she was
a woman who had employment in the household of
the Duchess of Grafton, and that her Christian name
was Judith. When he returned to Jamaica, in the
following year, he left her at Arlington House, the
town residence of the Duke of Grafton.
He had been with the pirates for a short period
before his return to England, but seems to have
had no intention of rejoining them when he sailed
on his return to Jamaica, as a passenger on board
the “Loyal Merchant,” in January, 1679.
It is abundantly clear that he intended to return
to the Bay of Campeachy and to take up again the
log-wood trade. But on his arrival at Port Royal
in April he found a reason, which he has not
explained, for remaining in Jamaica for the rest of
the year. Whilst there, he purchased a small
Dorsetshire estate in England, and was on the
point of returning home about Christmas, 1679,
when he took the second step that eventually led
to his association with Australia.
A certain Mr. Hobby persuaded Dampier to
join him in a trading voyage to what is now called


the Mosquito Coast—the strip of Nicaraguan sea-
board lying along the Caribbean Sea. The country
was occupied by a small aboriginal tribe, numbering
little more than one hundred souls, who were
themselves known as the Mosquitos.
Hobby and Dampier sailed from Port Royal,
and dropped anchor first of all in Negril Bay, at
the western end of Jamaica. Here they found
£ome pirates, including three captains named
Coxon, Sawkins, and Sharp, who were planning an
expedition to the province of Darien to pillage the
Spanish possessions in those parts. The whole of
Mr. Hobby’s crew deserted him, and joined the
pirates, and it was not more than a few days before
Dampier followed their example—leaving his
partner shamefully in the lurch.
It is to Dampier’s credit that he is not
altogether unashamed of this episode. The
curious indecision and vacillation which marks this
part of his career is difficult to account for. But all
through his life it is easy to see that the eager
desire for discovery which sent most of the
Adventurers a-roving, and which is still in our
breed to-day, was his life’s most powerful influence.
So his temperament furnishes some excuse for him.
Nevertheless, it was hard on Mr. Hobby. What
befel that badly used gentleman Dampier does not
say.
The pirates—or, as they preferred to be called,
the privateers—had nine ships. The greatest of
these was only of 150 tons, carried a crew of 107


men, and was armed with 25 guns. Her com-
mander was a Captain Harris. The smallest ship
in the little fleet was of 14 tons, and was manned
by 20 men. What they were doing in the interval
between the end of 1679 and the following April
is not known, but it was not until these three
months had elapsed that they arrived off the coast.
They landed there a little army of 331 men, and
left a small party behind to take care of the ships.
In Ringrose’s account of the expedition in “The
History of the Bucaniers of America” he says—
“ All or most of them were armed with Fuzee,
Pistol, and Hanger.” The ‘Fuzee’ he mentioned
was a matchlock, a smooth-bore musket. The
‘Hanger’ was a sword very much like a cutlass.
Their rations were of the poorest, consisting only
of cakes of bread called ‘dough-boys’; but they
depended upon the game they might encounter, and
on supplies which might possibly be looted from
friend or foe.
Try to make a picture of this extraordinary little
band of adventurers, as it looked when it landed
on that fever-stricken coast. It was divided up
into companies—each carrying a distinguishing
banner—which were commanded by the different
captains. Dampier marched under Captain
Bartholomew Sharp, and their flag was a red one,
with a bunch of green ribbons attached to it.
There was no pretence as to uniformity of dress.
Hardly two men were clad alike. But they were
all fiercely determined upon making their fortunes,


and none of them had any notion that their
designs in this direction could possibly be thwarted.
They tramped through the densest forests, across
swamps and bogs that steamed in the glaring sun-
light; they forded wide and deep rivers that were
infested by alligators, and encountered a hundred
risks and dangers which only their savage and
ruthless resolution could overcome. But all this
fierce endeavour came to nothing, and the expedi-
tion was a failure.
They stormed Portobello, on the north coast of
the isthmus, and divided its loot to the tune of
£39 per man. Then, coasting along almost to the
Gulf of Darien, they cut across to the Gulf of St.
Michael. On their way they stormed Santa Maria,
took it, and found that it was only a collection of
miserable grass huts, absolutely empty of treasure.
Three days before, a ship had carried away to
Panama some hundred-weight of gold that came
from the mountains in the interior. So they would
attack Panama itself. Their temper was such that,
at the time, they would have attacked the most
impregnable fortress ever made. Moreover,
Panama was, to captains and men alike, a fabulous
treasure house, nearly every building in which was
supposed to be a repository for gold, plate, jewels,
and unheard-of richness.
After two days’ rest in Santa Maria, they set
out on April 17, 1680, in canoes, down the river.
On the 23rd. the city of their dreams lay before them.
Morgan had sacked the place ten years before, but


a new city had arisen a few miles to the westward
of the old one’s ruins. There was a strong wall
surrounding the new city, well armed with cannon,
and. it was defended by a garrison of three hundred
regular Spanish soldiers, and over a thousand local
militiamen. To think of attacking such a for-
midable position argued a great audacity; but only
an error in judgment on the part of the Buccaneers
saved the city.
They made a mistake that was fatal to their
chances of success. When they came in sight of
the city, most of its garrison was absent. Had
they ‘rushed’ it then, the place might have been
cheaply theirs. But they waited for an oppor-
tunity to attack the shipping that lay in the bay,
and the time which was thus afforded to its citizens
enabled them to put Panama in such a state of
defence as to render it practically impregnable.
The leaders of the Buccaneers recognised their
error when it was too late. So they began, with
incredible impudence, to parley with the Governor.
Taking a sudden and fictitious interest in the wel-
fare of the Indians, they sent him word that, if he
would allow the latter to enjoy their ‘power and
liberty’, and send to them 500 pieces of eight for
each man, and 1000 for each of the leaders, they
would let Panama alone. The Governor very
civilly enquired of them by whom they were com-
missioned to invest his city. Captain Sawkins,
with a degree of brag that is hardly justifiable
under the circumstances, is recorded to have


answered:—“As yet all our company is not come
together; but when they are come up, we will come
and visit you at Panama, and bring our com-
missions on the muzzles of our guns—at which
time you shall read them as plain as the flame of
gunpowder can make them.”
But nothing came of this windy threat. Finally
the valiant Sawkins, who was in chief command,
gave orders to sail, and the Buccaneers departed
without a single coin of gold, a single piece of
plate, or any treasure whatever to shew as recom-
pense for the enormous hardships they had under-
gone.


Chapter VI.
IN THE PACIFIC
"pHE Buccaneers met with still further dis-
appointment within not much more than a
month. A party of sixty or seventy men went
ashore to attack Puebla Nueva; but they were
expected by the inhabitants, and repulsed, after a
hot little fight which resulted in the death ot
Captain Sawkins and several of the party. These
two failures, one coming so soon upon another,
induced a feeling of mutiny amongst the pirates—
a kind of strike for easier plundering, and more of
it. In the end, Captain Sharp made a proposal
that they should stay in the South Seas, and return
home round Cape Horn. He was good enough to
guarantee a thousand pounds to every man who
should remain with him until they reached
England. Sixty-three of the men declined this
offer, but the rest accompanied Sharp southward,
in which direction they sailed on June 6, 1680.
They had one ship.
Their intention was to attack Arica in northern
Chili, but when .they arrived off the place they
found it in such a state of defence that they decided
to leave it alone. Soon afterwards, however, Hilo
(now Ylo, a little N.W. of Arica) fell an easy prey
to them. Principally owing to the cowardice of


its inhabitants, it was captured and looted with
little difficulty. Their booty was a fair one, and
seems to have put the Buccaneers in better heart.
And so they sailed southward.
Ringrose, from whose chronicle this part of
Dampier’s story is mostly recorded, tells a story of
the great Sir Francis Drake, whose name, nearly
a century after his time, still remained a terror and
a scourge amongst the South American Spaniards.
Writing of a small island* at which they called, he
says: —“This island received its name from Sir
Francis Drake, and his famous actions. For
it is reported that he here made the dividend of that
vast quantity of plate which he took in the Armada
of this sea, distributing it to each man of his
company by whole bowls full. The Spaniards
affiirm to this day that he took at that time twelve-
score tons of plate, and sixteen bowls of coined
money a man; his number being then forty-
five men in all; insomuch that they were forced to
heave much of it overboard, because his ship could
not carry it all. Hence this island was called by
the Spaniards the Isle of Plata, from this great
Dividend, and by us Drake’s Isle.”
On December 3, after having captured a few
small ships during their run down the coast, they
attacked La Serena (now Coquimbo). The in-
habitants fled before them, but not so hurriedly
as to be unable to take with them the best part of
their most valuable property. The Spaniards
*Off the Ecuador coast, just below the Equator.


made offer of a ransom for their city, and the
amount agreed upon was arranged at 95,000 pieces
of eight. But the Buccaneers awaited payment in
vain, and, at length, presumably to show their
dissatisfaction with Spanish bad faith, they set fire
to every house in it in order to destroy it utterly.
They were nearly destroyed themselves before they
sailed. The Spaniards inflated a horse’s hide with
air, and a man floated himself off in the dark upon
it to their ship, inserted a mass of inflammable
material between the rudder and the sternpost, set
fire to it, and paddled quietly ashore. It was not
without great trouble that the flames were put out,
and the ship had a very narrow escape.
On Christmas Day, 1680, they anchored off Juan
Fernandez—Robinson Crusoe’s Island. It was
from the story of Alexander Selkirk, who was
afterwards marooned here, that Defoe wrote the
wonderful book that has been so much to all of us.
Here another mutiny took place. Some of the
Buccaneers wanted to sail homeward immediately,
while others wished to cruise in the Pacific until
they had amassed a larger booty. It ended in
Captain Sharp being deposed from the leadership
and a man named John Watling appointed in his
stead.
Three Spanish Men-of-War hove in sight after
they had been at Juan Fernandez but a short time,
and they hastily cut their cables and stood out to
sea. The Spanish ships were large and heavily
armed. Both sides hoisted the ‘bloody flag’—a red


piece of bunting that meant a resolve to give no
quarter. Neither was very willing to fight, but
the Spaniards were even less willing than the
Buccaneers, and owing to the cowardice of the
former, the latter made good their escape.
On January 13, 1681, they were once more off
Arica; and this time they attacked the place with a
ferocity that might be accounted for by their
former disappointment. It was the fiercest fighting
of the cruise. The streets of the town were soon
filled with the Spanish dead, and the Buccaneers
lost heavily themselves. Captain Watling was
killed by a bullet through the heart almost at the
beginning of the affair, two quartermasters were
presently slain, and in a little time their losses in
killed and wounded were so heavy that there was
nothing for it but a retirement. The Spaniards,
however, had surrounded them, and they were
thrown into the greatest disorder. They were
.without a leader, and, in their extremity, begged
Captain Sharp (whom they had a short time before
treated so badly), to take command, and extricate
them from their difficulties. In spite of his bitter-
ness, the Captain consented to place himself at
their head; and, after desperate hand-to-hand
fighting, they managed to cut their way to the
beach. The battle lasted all day. It was not until
ten o’clock at night that, badly beaten, they
managed to get themselves aboard the ship. Arica
had been a disaster to them.
The Buccaneers do not seem to have remem


bered their indebtedness to Captain Sharp for very
long. No sooner had he got them safely away
from the hornet’s nest of Arica, than they recom-
menced their mutinous and quarrelsome conduct.
No argument but the ‘heavy hand’ had ever
appealed to their reason or their sense of discipline.
And Sharp’s shipful was no exception to the
general rule. When they were again ofF the Island
of Plata, in the middle of April, the trouble came to
a head. Some of them desired, now that
Captain Watling was dead, that Sharp should be
comfirmed in his reappointment to the chief
command. Others hotly opposed this suggestion.
Finally, a vote was taken, and, Captain Sharp’s
party outnumbering those who opposed him, the
latter decided to leave him. It was agreed that
Sharp and his men should keep the ship, whilst the
rest, in the long boat and in canoes, should return
whence they had come, by way of the Isthmus of
Panama, or please themselves as to whether they
did otherwise. Accordingly, forty-seven men, one
of whom was Dampier, left the ship on April 17,
1681, with the intention of making Santa Maria,
‘which,’ says Dampier, ‘is about 200 leagues from
the Isle of Plata,’ and thence recrossing the
Isthmus. But at Santa Maria the Spaniards were
keeping watch for them, and they were forced to
land on the coast to northward, and tramp by
Indian paths that zig-zagged along the spine of the
Isthmus until they reached the sea at Santa Cruz.
The march of the forty-seven across the


Isthmus is one of the most wonderful feats that
has ever been recorded in the story of travel. As
has been mentioned before, the climate is one of
the very deadliest of all the unhealthy climates of
the world. The French found that when their
great engineer, De Lesseps—the constructor of the
Suez Canal—began the work of joining the two
oceans, which the engineers of the United States
are now completing. The dark, matted, tropical
forests abound with deadly serpents; the rivers are
full of alligators; the hills are high, and steep, and
nearly impenetrable. Fevers lurk everywhere.
Dampier and his party took twenty-three days to
cross it, and the distance they had to travel was
only 110 miles. Before they started, it was agreed
amongst them that anyone for whom the journey
should prove too severe should be put to death.
“For we knew that the Spaniards would soon be
after us, and one man falling into their hands
might be the ruin of us all by giving an account of
our strength and condition; yet this would not deter
’em from going with us.” It would take much to
stop men possessed of such dogged resolution, yet
not all reached the coast of the Atlantic side. The
twenty-three days was a time of struggling against
fearful odds. You must have known tropical,
mountainous, and savage country to fully realise
what this handful of daring ruffians endured on
their march. They came in sight of the Atlantic
on May 23, and the next day embarked on a French
privateer, which in two days reached Springer’s


Key. Here they found ships with crews amount-
ing to about five or six hundred pirates.
After remaining with these enterprising
personalities for the best part of a year, meeting
with many adventures, for a detailed description
of which we have not space here, and acquiring a
large share of plunder, Dampier set sail for
Virginia, then an English colony. He reached it
in July, 1682, and lived there for the next thirteen
months; but he tells us little about this period of
his life, hinting only in a vague way that it was not
a period of unmixed blessing to him.


Chapter VII.
TO THE EAST INDIES
J N 1683, Dampier, then thirty-one years of age,
began that series of voyages which was to bring
him first in contact with the great, dimly-known
continent which we dwell in to-day. Australia,
then known as New Holland, was so little known
as to be almost a land of fable and legend. The
Portuguese, the Spanish, and the Dutch had ex-
plored its coasts, or rather part of its coasts, in a
hap-hazard and erratic fashion. There had always
been rumours of the existence of a Great Southern
Continent; but though early navigators had verified
its existence, they had done little more than locate
its position, and make very rough and inaccurate
surveys of small portions of its enormous coast-
lines. With his departure from Virginia, a new era
in the story of its discovery begins.
He sailed from the old colony of Queen
Elizabeth, in the above-mentioned year, in a
privateer called the “ Revenge,” commanded by a
Captain John Cook. Cook made some pretence,
in the first place, of being about to sail under
commission as a privateer, and the “Revenge” was
manned on that understanding. But it was not
long before it became evident that the beginning,
the middle, and the end of Cook’s design was plain,


unvarnished piracy. As showing the time that was
occupied in the voyages of those days, it is inter-
esting to note that the length of time occupied in
sailing between the coast of Virginia and the
latitude of Cape Horn was no less than five months.
After they had rounded the Horn, and were
come again into the Pacific, they fell in with a
privateer that had been fitted out in London and
sent forth on a voyage of plunder to the West Coast
of South America. She was commanded by a
Captain Eaton. The two ships sailed in company
to Juan Fernandez, where they arrived eight
months after the commencement of the “Revenge’s”
voyage. There they picked up a Mosquito Indian
who had been unintentionally left behind three
years before—when the Spanish Men-of-War had
alarmed Captain Watling into cutting his cable and
putting to sea. Although it was not this man
whom Defoe took for his model in “Robinson
Crusoe,” but Alexander Selkirk, he might well
have based the lonely life of his famous hero upon
that of the Indian. He was hunting goats in the
woods when Watling sailed so suddenly away, and
all that he had in the way of equipment were his
gun, his hunting knife, a little powder, and a small
quantity of shot. He notched the knife into a sort
of saw, or file, and with this primitive tool managed
to cut the gun barrel into pieces, from which he
was able to manufacture fish-hooks, lances, harpoons,
and another knife. With these implements he was
able to hunt goats and catch fish, and so had


supported himself during his lonely term on the
island. He had also made himself a little hut, lined
with goat-skins, and his single article of clothing
was a goat-skin wrapped about the middle of his
body.
-On April 8, 1684, they sailed from Juan Fernan-
dez, and during the next month captured several
small ships, none of which, however, contained
cargo of any great value. One of them had carried
from Lima eight hundred thousand dollars; but
in consequence of rumours that a privateer had
been seen near what was to be her course, the
whole sum had been removed from her for safety
at the Port of Guanchaco,* not very long before
she fell in with Cook and Eaton.
They had many adventures in those seas which
there is not room here to describe. While they lay
at Juan Fernandez, Captain Cook had fallen ill,
and he died not very far from Cape Blanco in Costa
Rica. The quartermaster of the ship, one Edward
Davis, was chosen to fill his place. On September
2, 1684, the two ships separated, and nearly three
weeks later the “Revenge” anchored at Plata.
Here they were joined by another London ship,
the “Cygne,t,” under command of Captain Swan.
It is a quaint conjunction of names, for, as you
know, the young of a swan is called a cygnet. This
ship had been filled with a cargo intended for
honest trade; but, while she was lying at Nicoya,
in Costa Rica, Captain Swan’s crew brought a party
D
♦Just north of Truxillo, in Peru.


or privateersmen aboard from the shore and forced
him to convert her from a respectable merchant
ship into a pirate. Still, it does not seem that
Captain Swan had any very deep-rooted prejudices
against buccaneering.
We will pass over the series of piracies perpe-
trated by the two ships in company, together with
certain French buccaneers whom they had en-
countered on the voyage. On the whole, they did
not do very well—their greatest enterprises, such
as the attack on Guayaquil and on the Spanish fleet
near the Island of Taboga* being almost disas-
trous. The latter, especially, was a dismal failure,
and they were even glad to escape defeat and
capture at the hands of the Spaniards.
Towards the end of August, 1685, Swan and
Davis parted company off Nicaragua; and as Swan
had announced his intention of making a voyage
to the East Indies, Dampier transferred himself to
his ship. They sailed from Cape Corrientes, in
Mexico, in two ships with 150 men in their crew,
on March 31, 1686. The second ship was com-
manded by a Captain Teat. This long voyage was
the first of those in which Dampier sailed all round
the world.
Their object was, by running into the N.E.
Trades, to reach Guam in the Ladrone Islands, and
this they did, almost starving, on the 20th of May
following. They had but three days’ food left upon
their arrival. “I was,” writes Dampier, “after-
*ln the bay just south of Panama.


wards informed the men had contrived first to kill
Captain Swan and eat him when the victuals was
gone, and after him all of us who were accessory
in promoting the undertaking of this voyage.
This made Captain Swan say to me after our arrival
at Guam, ‘Ah! Dampier, you would have made
them but a poor meal’; for I was lean as the
Captain was lusty and fleshy.”
It is curious to note the difference, in the rela-
tions of the Buccaneers with the garrison of Guam,
from those which obtained between themselves and
other Spaniards elsewhere. A solution to the
conundrum lies in the fact that Captain Swan and
his merry men arrived at the Ladrones in a state
of semi-starvation, and were, in a sense, dependent
upon the Spaniards for a replenishment of their
stores. Had it been otherwise, they would
probably have helped themselves to almost all that
the little garrison possessed, and burnt their houses
into the bargain. It was dark when they came
ashore, and a friar came off in a canoe to enquire
as to their indentity. Him they kept as a hostage
while they treated with the governor of the island.
The happiest relations were established, the
Buccaneers obtained all the supplies they needed,
and the Spaniards received presents of various
sorts in exchange.
While they lay at Guam, the great Spanish
treasure-ship, which sailed every year between The
Philippines and South America, hove in sight of
the islands. This was the famous Acapulco Ship,


which was the desire of every pirate and privateer.
Not so very long afterwards a great English
admiral, Lord Anson, made her a prize (but that
was in time of war). Dampier relates the incident
in his usual inimitable fashion. “She did not,” he
says, “come in sight of us; for the Governor sent
an Indian Proe* with advice of our being here.
Therefore she stood off to the southward of the
island, and coming foul of the same shoal that our
bark had run over before, was in great danger of
being lost there, for she struck off her rudder, and
with much odds got clear; but not till after three
days’ labour. For tho’ the shoal be so near the
island, and the Indians go off and fish there every
day, yet the master of the Acapulco Ship, who
should (one would think), know these parts, was
utterly ignorant of it. This, their striking in the
shoal, we heard afterwards, when we were off the
coast of Manilla; but these Indians of Guam did
speak of her being in sight of the island while we
lay there, which put our men in a great heat to go
out-after her, but Captain Swan persuaded them
out of that humour, for he was now wholly averse
to any hostile action.” Swan, you will remember,
had begun his voyage as a peaceful trader, and
had leanings that way.
They sailed from Guam on June 2, and arrived
at the Philippines—the Island of St. Johnf —on
the 21st of the same month.
*A native canoe. Dampier calls all natives Indians, as was
the custom of the time.
fßeally the eastern part of Mindanao, though old maps show
it as a separate island.


Chapter VIII.
NEW HOLLAND
J N writing this short story, the author is con-
stantly tempted to quote from Dampier’s
journals some of his descriptions of places and
things. In these days Dampier would have been a
prince of pressmen. No better descriptive journal-
ism has ever been done than his accounts of the
places he visited, the things he saw, the people
amongst whom he fell, the scenery that charmed
him, the birds, beasts, fishes, flowers and plants he
came across. There is a faithfulness about his
work that compels the warm admiration of those
who know anything about authorship. He is as
much a master of that, as he was of navigation. If
the old Somersetshire grammar school in Yeovil
taught himi this, it did well.
But there is not room. It is only in dealing with
his impressions of Australia as he saw it that it is
possible to let him say his say.
They came soon to Mindanao, in the island of
that name, which is one of the largest in the
Philippine group. When Dampier visited it, its
inhabitants were still independent of Spanish
control; but they feared that the Dutch from Java
would attack them, and were very anxious to
encourage English folk to settle among them, as


being ‘not so encroaching as the Dutch or Spanish.’
So the adventurers lay long at Mindanao, till
again the wilder of them grew mutinous. It is
pretty clear that Captain Swan had had enough of
the business of buccaneering, and was in no haste
to be off on further piratical ventures. He wanted
to get home. A fireside in Wapping, a mug of ale,
and a long pipe held more attractions for this good
‘lusty and fleshy’ man, than did the sordid turmoil
of piracy. It was not with unassuageable grief,
therefore, that one day he saw his ship seized by a
number of his men, amongst whom was Dampier.
The latter, indeed, had had nearly as much of the
voyage, if not of privateering, as had had Captain
Swan, and it was only lack of a chance to give his
comrades the slip that brought him to New
Holland.
Poor Captain Swan! He never again saw the
white cliffs above Dover Town; never dropped
anchor any more in the Downs; never drifted up
London River on the flood-tide, past the Isle of
Dogs, past Deptford, past Wapping, to the anchor-
age in the Pool below London Bridge; never
enjoyed his pewter pot of ale and his long pipe at
that snug fireside by Wapping Old Stairs, the
while he swapped tales of the Indies with other
‘lusty and fleshy’ old sea dogs of his sort. While
he and his surgeon were coming to a Dutch ship
that was to carry them to Europe, they were upset
in their canoe by some natives, who stabbed them
to death as they swam for their lives.


On January 14, 1687, the mutineers sailed from
Mindanao. For nearly a year they cruised about
the China Sea, touching at Cambodia and Siam,
and then doubling back eastwards of the Philip-
pines, and coming south past Celebes and Timor.
The only reason for their taking this course that
is suggested by Dampier is, that they were greatly
afraid of falling in with English or Dutch men-of-
war. Such a fear was natural enough. Capture
in those seas by such ships would have meant for
most of them that undignified and uncomfortable
dangling from a yard-arm which those who sailed
under the “Jolly Roger” always had in dread.
Once clear of the islands, they stood off south still
further, in order to see, as Dampier (pirate still
rather than discoverer) puts it, “what that country
could afford us.” They probably first dropped
anchor on the shores of North Australia, near
Buccaneer Archipelago, which was named after
them.
“The 4th day of January, 1688,* we fell in with
the Land of New Holland in the latitude of 16 d.
50 m. having, as I said before, made our course
due south from the shoal that we past by the 31st
day of December. We ran in close by it, and,
finding no convenient anchoring, because it lies
open to the N.W., we ran along shore to the east-
ward, steering N.E. by E., for so the land lies. We
steered thus for about 12 leagues; and then came to
a point of land, from whence the land trends east
•Almost exactly 100 years, to the day, before Governor Phillip
founded British Australasia (January 26. 1788).


and southerly for 10 or 12 leagues; but how after-
wards I know not. . . . About a league to the
eastward of that point we anchored, January the
sth, 1688, 2 miles from the shore, in 29 fathoms,
good hard sand, and clean ground.
“New Holland is a very large tract of land. It
is not yet determined whether it is an island or a
main continent; but I am certain that it joins
neither Asia, Africa, nor America. This part of it
that we saw is all low even land, with sandy banks
against the sea, only the points are rocky, and so
are some of the islands in this bay.
“The land is of a dry sandy soil, destitute of
water, except you make wells; yet producing divers
sorts of trees; but the woods are not thick, nor the
trees very big. Most of the trees that we saw are
Dragon Trees, as we supposed; and these too are
the largest trees of any there. They are about the
bigness of our large Apple Trees, and about the
same height; and the rind is blackish, and some-
what rough. The Leaves are of a dark colour; the
Gum distils out of the knots or cracks that are in
the bodies of the trees. We compared it with
some Gum Dragon, or Dragon’s Blood, that was
aboard, and it was of the same colour and taste.
The other sorts of trees were not known by any of
us. There was pretty long grass growing under
the trees; but it was very thin. We saw no trees
that bore fruit or berries.
“We saw no sort of animal, nor any track of
beast, but once; and that seemed to be the tread


of a beast as big as a great mastiff dog. Here are
a few small land birds, but none bigger than a black
bird; and but few sea fowls. Neither is the sea
very plentifully stored with fish, unless you reckon
the Manatee and Turtle as such. Of these
creatures there is plenty; but they are extraordin-
ary shy; though the inhabitants cannot trouble
them much, having neither boats nor iron.”


Chapter IX.
THE AUSTRALIANS
JQ AMPIER’S impressions of the original inhabi-
tants of that portion of the Commonwealth upon
which he first set foot are as interesting, as fresh,
and as full of minute detail in their setting forth
as those having reference to the country. Indeed,
all through his journals he never fails to be inter-
esting and instructive. The deeper one dips into
them, the more astonishing does it seem that a man
who had passed the most impressionable years of
his life in the rough sailoring of those days should
have developed so fine a gift of literary expression.
“The Inhabitants of this Country are the
miserablest People in the World. The Hodma-
dods* of Monomatapa, though a nasty People, yet
for Wealth are Gentlemen to these; who have no
Houses and skin Garments, Sheep, Poultry, and
Fruits of the Earth, Ostrich Eggs, etc., as the Hod-
madods have: And setting aside their Human
Shape, they differ but little from Brutes. They are
tall, straight-bodied, and thin, with small long
limbs. They have great Heads, round Foreheads,
and great Brows. Their Eye-lids are always half
closed, to keep the Flies out of their Eyes; they
being so troublesome here, that no Fanning will
♦Hottentots, then to be found in S.E. Africa.


keep them from coming to one’s face; and without
the assistance of both Hands to keep them off,
they will creep into one’s Nostrils, and Mouth too,
if the Lips are not shut very close: so that from
their Infancy being thus annoyed with these
Insects, they do never open their Eyes as other
People: And therefore they cannot see far, unless
they hold up their Heads as if they were looking at
somewhat over them.
“They have great Bottle Noses, pretty full Lips,
and wide Mouths. The two Fore-teeth of their
Upper Jaw are wanting in all of them, Men and
Women, Old and Young; whether they were drawn
out, I know not: Neither have they any Beards.
They are long visaged, and of a very unpleasing
Aspect, having no one graceful Feature in their
Faces. Their Hair is black, short and curl’d, like
that of the Negroes; and not long and lank like
the common Indians. The colour of their Skins,
both of their Faces and the rest of their Body, is
coal black, like that of the Negroes of Guinea.”
He goes on to describe in minute detail their
manner of living, their arms, the food they subsist
upon and their method of preparing it, and a
hundred-and-one particular traits of character and
manner, which, if you like to see for yourself how
true a story-teller Dampier was, you may observe
to-day in the Northern Territory. He tells a
quaint story to illustrate their uselessness.
“After we had been here a little while, the Men
began to be familiar, and we cloathed some of them,


designing to have had some service of them for it:
for we found some Wells of Water here, and
intended to carry 2 or 3 barrels of it aboatd. But
it being somewhat troublesome to carry to the
Canoes, we thought to have made these Men to
have carry’d it for us, and therefore we gave them
some old Cloaths; to one an old pair of Breeches,
that was scarce worth owning; which yet would
have been very acceptable at some places where
we have been, and so we thought they might have
been with these People. We put them on them,
thinking that this finery would have brought
them to work heartily for us; and our water being
filled in small long Barrels, about 6 gallons in each,
which we made purposely to carry Water in, we
brought these our new Servants to the Wells, and
put a Barrel on each of their Shoulders for them to
carry to the Canoe. But all the signs we could
make were to no purpose, for they stood like
Statues, without motion, but grinn’d like so many
monkeys, staring one upon another: For these poor
Creatures seemed not accustomed to carry Burthens;
and I believe that one of our ship-boys of 10 years
old, would carry as much as one of them. So we
were forced to carry our Water ourselves, and they
very fairly put the Cloaths off again, and laid them
down, as if Cloaths were only to work in. I did
not perceive that they had any great liking to them
at first, neither did they seejm to admire anything
that we had.”
Dampier was not the last visitor to Australian


shores to observe that the natives did not like work.
The incident which he relates above is delightfully
typical. But it is highly probable that the
Buccaneers were not their first visitors; they must
have been visited by strangers from the islands to
northward long before they ever saw a white man.
“At another time,” writes Dampier, “our Canoa
being amongst these Islands seeking for Game,
espy’d a drove of these Men swimming from one
Island to another; for they have no Boats, Canoas,
or Bark-logs. They took up four of them, and
brought them aboard; two of them were middle
aged, the other two were young Men about 18 or
20 years old. To these we gave boiled Rice, and
with it Turtle and Manatee boiled. They did
greedily devour what we gave them, but took no
notice of the ship, or anything in it, and when they
were set on Land again, they ran away as fast as
they could.”
The Buccaneers’ stay in Australia lasted but a
few days over nine weeks. Before they sailed they
careened the ship—that is, ran her ashore at high
water, so that, when the tide ebbed, she rested upon
her side, and they were able to examine her bottom,
in case she should need any repairs below the water
line.
“While we lay here,” somewhat wistfully
records Dampier, “I did endeavour to persuade our
Men to go to some English Factory;* but was
threatened to be turned ashore, and left here for it.
Trading Station.


This made me desist and patiently wait for some
more convenient place and opportunity to leave
them, than here: which I did hope I should
accomplish in a short time; because they did intend
when they went from hence, to bear down towards
Cape Comorin.” It is evident that he had become
thoroughly tired of the company that he was in.
It must be remembered that he was entirely
without position amongst the crew, and was only
rated as an ordinary seaman. To a man of
Dampier’s intelligence it must long have been an
intolerable situation. At the ends of the earth, far
from home, cut off from all intercourse with people
of his own kind or education—little wonder that
he longed to be anywhere out of the ship.
They sailed from Australia—or, as it was
known to them, New Holland—on the 12th of
March, 1688. The wind carried them to the east-
ward of the Cocos Islands, where they had intended
to call, and they did not sight land until they had
been at sea for about four weeks. Then they)
touched at a ‘small woody Island,’ probably Christ-
mas Island. Sumatra was the next land they saw.
Coasting along it on the S.W., they cut across to
Great Nicobar, and dropped anchor in a small bay
at its N. W. end.


Chapter X.
HOMEWARD BOUND
JT was from the Nicobar Islands that Dampier
started to go home. But it took him three
years, and more, to accomplish his design, and his
route in the beginning was a curiously complex
one. During those three years he had more
strange adventures than are likely to come into the
whole lives of most of us.
At Nicobar, the long-hoped for opportunity of
cutting adrift from the pirates came to him. He
obtained leave to go ashore, but had hardly landed
when a boat-load of armed men from the ship came
and fetched him back again. He found something
like a riot in progress aboard. Some others of the
crew, stimulated by his example, had made up their
minds also to leave the ship, the surgeon being one
of their number. Him the captain absolutely
refused to let go. The upshot of it all was that
Dampier and two other men were put on shore.
After a while some more men arrived; but it was
not until late at night, when, standing on the beach,
they saw the ship get under weigh, that they felt
themselves safely out of her. On the next day the
party bought a canoe from the natives, and went
to the south end of the island, where they pro-
visioned her with bread fruit, cocoa-nuts and a


supply of fresh water, so that at the coming of the
western monsoon they might make a start for
Achin, in Sumatra. The canoe was little larger
than a fair-sized dingy, double-ended and narrow-
beamed, having out-riggers and a mat sail. In
this tiny vessel Dampier and three of his com-
panions, together with four Malays, put to sea on
May 15, 1688.
On the 18th they were overtaken by a hurricane,
which nothing but the most remarkable seamanship,
combined with no small amount of good fortune,
brought them safely through. “The Sea was
already roaring in a white Foam about us;” —
writes Dampier—“a dark Night coming on, and no
land in sight to shelter us, and our little Ark in
danger to be swallowed by every wave; and what
was worst of all, none of us thought ourselves
prepared for another World. ... I have been
in many eminent Dangers before now, some of !
which I have already related, but the worst of
them all was but a Play-Game in comparison with
this. I must confess that I was in great conflicts
of Mind at the time. Other Dangers came not
upon me with such a leisurely and dreadful
Solemnity: A Sudden Skirmish or Engagement
or so, was nothing when one’s Blood was up, and
push’d forward with eager Expectations. . . I
made very sad Reflections on my former life; and
looked back with Horror and Detestation, on
actions which before I disliked, but now I trembled
at the remembrance of.” But Dampier was no


amateur seaman. The canoe was marvellously
handled, and on the 20th of the month, exhausted,
fever-stricken, and so weak that they could not
stand, they drifted into a river-mouth on the coast
of Sumatra, and were received by some friendly
natives who assisted them to a neighbouring
village.
The hardships and privations of that canoe
voyage told upon Dampier’s health for some time
to come. It was long before he really regained
full vigour. He remained in the village for nearly
a fortnight, and when he felt strong enough, made
his way to Achin. Here he fell into the hands of
a Malay physician, whose drugs nearly killed him;
and when, in spite of the doctor, he had sufficiently
recovered his health to go to sea again, he shipped
with a Captain Welden for a voyage to Tonquin
upon the “Curtana.”
They came to the Bay of Tonquin, after a
voyage devoid of incident. The principal trading
town of the country was at Cachao, eighty miles
above the highest point which ships of the
“Curtana’s” size were able to reach, and he
journeyed to that town by boat, in company with
several captains of trading craft who were going
there on business. There was an English factory
there, and Dampier spent a week as the guest of
the Englishman in charge; after which he returned
to his ship and lay, more or less ill, for another five
or six weeks. But the fever of exploration was
so strong that, sick as he was, he set out again with
2


a native guide and two dollars—which he had
earned on board the '‘Curtana,” by teaching naviga-
tion to some of the young seamen—on a sort of
walking tour through the country.
The story of this journey is intensely interest-
ing. Everything strange and new—and all things
in the oldest civilization in the world are always
new and strange to a European—he scrupulously
makes note of it in his journal. He narrowly
escaped with his life at an inland village, because
he mistook food-offerings that were spread before
the funeral pyre of a deceased notability for a kind
of market. At a town called Hean, he instructed
a French missionary in the art of making gun-
powder, greatly to the latter’s gratification and his
own material advantage. But when he returned
to Cachao he was so run down that he could
scarcely crawl about. Soon afterwards, in
February, 1689, he returned to Achin in the
“Curtana,” and sailed in May to Malacca as mate
of a ship whose command had been promised him,
but was finally bestowed upon a man of the name
of Minchin.
A month or two later he obtained a position as
gunner of the fort at Bencoolen, on the S.W. coast
of Sumatra, where there was an English factory.
He did not get on well with the Governor, and, as
he was anxious to return to England, he asked to
be released from his engagement. The Governor,
however, was unwilling to let him go; and it was
only by escaping through an embrasure of the fort.


at night, to a ship lying in the roadstead, that he
was at last able to get away. This ship, the
“Defence,” was commanded by a Captain Heath,
with whom Dampier had made friends, and
arranged for a passage home. The ship sailed
immediately, had a less eventful voyage than was
usual in Dampier’s life (though he got some
pleasure from a visit to the Cape of Good Hope on
the way), and dropped anchor in the Downs on
September 16, 1691. The whole of Dampier’s
possessions at that moment consisted of a curiously
tattooed native of the Philippines. He hoped to turn
showmar in England, with this unhappy native as
his principal and only attraction. He was, how-
ever, so extremely ‘hard up’ that he sold the
‘Prince,’ whose name was Jeoly, as soon as he
came to London.
And thus ends Dampier’s first voyage round the
world—a voyage that had taken eight years and
many ships to make. Altogether, beyond a know-
ledge of the world, which not many of his contem-
poraries possessed, a wide experience in navigation,
and the material for his books of voyages, he came
back empty handed.
We know nothing of Dampier’s domestic life.
His wife he never mentions. She may have died, or
she may have thought him dead, and married some-
body else. He does not tell us. Whether he still
owned the estate in Dorsetshire is not known, but
it is certain that at this time he was a very poor
man. We know very little, indeed, about the next


six years of his life. In 1694, he was in a Spanish
port; in 1697, he published his first volume of
“Voyages,” and was called as a witness in an
enquiry about the possibilities of colonizing the
Isthmus of Panama. He never seems to have lost
the idea of making another voyage to the unknown
south, with a view to properly exploring the coasts
of New Holland. He managed, at any rate, to
obtain for his schemes the support, amogst others,
of Charles Montague, afterwards Earl of Halifax,
president of the Royal Society, and one of the
Lord Commissioners of the Treasury; of the Earl of
Otford, First Lord of the Admiralty; and of the
Earl of Pembroke, who was Lord High Admiral.
His abilities must have inspired a good deal of
confidence, as well as his tales of New Holland and
his travels, for at the beginning of 1699 he was
appointed to the command of H.M.S. “Roebuck,”
with a commission of exploration, and provisioned
for a voyage of twenty months.


Chapter XI.
THE VOYAGE OF THE “ROEBUCK”
"P HE suggestions which Dampier laid before
the Admiralty concerning the projected
expedition are lucid and simple, though in several
respects his conjectures regarding the almost
unknown Southern Continent were wide of the
mark. The wonder is, however, that they were
not wider of it. He had little enough upon which
to base his speculations. His notion of Australia
was that it was an immense area of land lying in
climates like those enjoyed by some of the most
fertile parts of the then known world; the natural
products, therefore, must be the same as those of
other lands with the same climate. Fruits and
plants should be as rich and luxuriant as they were
elsewhere; the minerals, too, that had made other
countries prosperous would surely exist in this
corner of the earth. The years have proved that
Dampier was, in the main, correct in his con-
jectures. The unfortunate part of it, for him, was
that he came upon a side of Australia which did
not bear out their correctness. The rich lands and
the minerals are here, the wealthy country is no
dream—it was his bad luck that he could not
prove how true were his surmises.
His plan of operations—or, rather, the idea


which he had as the function of his explorations—
was this: He would make a survey of the coasts,
charting “all islands, shores, capes, bays, creeks,
and harbours, fit for shelter as well as defence.”
He would take careful and accurate soundings as
he sailed along the shores. Winds, currents, tides,
and weathers were all to be minutely noted. He
was especially to seek out the most suitable places
for settlement. The natives were to be closely
investigated, their habits, customs, and possessions
to be estimated as truly as was possible—though
he says frankly, in view of his previous knowledge
of the Australians, that he does not consider that
very much is to be expected from them. He intended
originally to sail to the westward, past Cape Horn,
in order to strike the eastern side of New Holland.
Had he done so, he would have found all that, and
more than, he expected, and the history of Aus-
tralian colonisation might have begun a century
earlier. But his own hatred of the cold latitudes
—never forgotten since that first early voyage to
Newfoundland—and the murmurs of his crew,
which were based upon nothing much more solid
than ignorant prejudice, decided him, at the last, to
sail by way of the Cape of Good Hope. And so he
came again to that inhospitable North West coast
which had before impressed him so unfavourably.
The third William was King of England when
he sailed, and His Majesty King Wiliam the
Third’s ship “Roebuck” was about as disgracefully
unseaworthy a craft as My Lords of the Admiralty


could have chosen. He might well have supposed
that they desired never to see his face again.
But it was not so. It was merely the way of
My Lords. They sent brave men out to the
unknown ends of the earth in ships that were
hardly fit for a voyage round Great Britain. If
they did not do that, they provided them with
crews that should have been either in gaol or in an
infirmary. Almost invariably they provisioned the
ships with foodstuffs whose sale to-day for pur-
poses of human consumption, either in London or
Sydney, would render the seller liable to prosecu-
tion and fine, if not imprisonment. There was no
malice about it. It was simply a curious and
hardly understandable way they had. Only a few
years after this time the great Anson himself was
sent upon one of the longest voyages ever made,
with a crew of Chelsea pensioners, who died like
rotten sheep in time of drought. It was their
peculiar fashion, and they did not depart from it
in fitting out Dampier’s expedition. The extra-
ordinary wonder is that those brave old seamen
accomplished so much as they did—in ships that
you or I would not care to sail in from Sydney to
Broken Bay, manned by crews in whose company
we would not care to be seen, and provisioned with
food which we would not throw to a favourite dog.
But Dampier cheerfully weighed anchor in the
Downs on the 14th of January, 1699, and stood
down Channel in the awful old “Roebuck,” bound
for the unknown. He meant to make for Pernam


buco, in Brazil, and thence to steer directly for the
coast of New Guinea. But he was only a few
weeks upon his voyage when the crew became
semi-mutinous, openly expressed their disapproval
of the voyage, and even threatened to make him
turn back. Pernambuco would have been an ideal
place for them to take possession of the ship; and
Dampier’s experience, during his buccaneering
days, had been such that he knew better than to
give them any such chances. He steered, instead,
for Bahia de Todos los Santos, some distance
further south, and thence, on April 3, directly for
New Holland. He passed the Cape of Good Hope,
and at the end of July was in the vicinity of the
West Australian coast, and about 400 miles north
of where Fremantle stands to-day. On August 2
he sighted land, and coasted’ along it for a few days
in search of a harbour where they might find a safe
anchorage. Finally, on the 6th, he anchored in a
wide inlet which, from the number of sharks his
men caught there, he named Shark’s Bay. His
men were glad to devour shark flesh in place of the
ship’s rotten and unsavoury stores. Dampier’s
description of the place is so detailed and, as usual,
so minutely accurate, that he may be called upon
to furnish his own account of it. This will be
found in chapter XV, further on. As he describes
that part of Australia, so it is to-day—two cen-
turies later.


Chapter XII.
THE VOYAGE OF THE “ROEBUCK”
(Continued)
there was no fresh water to be had in
Shark’s Bay, so four days later the ship goes
coasting along, north east, in search of it. On and
off they stood, in fairly dangerous navigation, since
Dampier was unwilling to put far to sea, lest he
might miss a possible inlet where fresh water could
be found. They groped along, taking soundings,
until they came to a number of small rocky Islands
which to-day are called, after their discoverer,
Dampier’s Archipelago. It was pressingly necess-
ary that they should find fresh water, since the stock
of it which they had taken in on the South
American coast was almost exhausted. But in
that dry land there was none to be found. This,
perhaps as much as anything, contributed to
Dampier’s fast growing belief in the poor nature
of the country which he had come to investigate.
“If it were not,” he writes, “for that sort of
pleasure which results from the Discovery even of
the barrenest spot upon the Globe, this coast of
New Holland would not have charmed me much.”
About the end of August they came across the
first of the natives they had seen since picking up
the land. The white men made what they con-
sidered to be peaceful overtures; but they only


succeeded in frightening the natives by their signs
and gesticulations, and it was not long before there
was blood-shed. Dampier had purposely taken
only a couple of his men with him, to lure the
natives to close quarters with the little party, in
order that they might capture one of them, so as to
find out where they obtained their drinking water.
“So a nimble young Man that was with me,
seeing one of them near, ran towards them; and
they for some time ran away before him. But he
soon overtaking them, they faced about and fought
him. He had a Cutlass and they had wooden
Lances; with which, being many of them, they
were too hard for him. When he first ran towards
them I chas’d two more that were by the shore:
But fearing how it might be with my young Man,
I turned back quickly, and went to the top of a
Sand-hill, whence I saw him near me, closely
engag’d with them. Upon their seeing me, one of
them threw a Lance at me, that narrowly miss’d
me. I discharged my gun to scare them, bur
avoided shooting any of them; till, finding the
young Man in great danger from them, and myself
in some; and that tho’ the Gun had a little fright-
ened them at first, yet they had soon learnt to
despise it, tossing up their Hands, and crying Pooh,
pooh, pooh; and coming on afresh with a great
Noise, I thought it high time to charge again, and
shoot one of them, which I did. The rest, seeing
him fall, made a stand again; and my young Man
took the Opportunity to disengage himself, and


come off to me; my other Man also was with me,
who had done nothing all this while, having come
out unarm’d; and I returned back with my Men,
designing to attempt the Natives no farther, being
very sorry for what had happened already. They
took up their wounded Companion; and my young
Man, who had been struck through the Cheek by
one of their Lances, was afraid it had been
poison’d: But I did not think that likely. His
Wound was very painful to him, being made with
a blunt Weapon: But he soon recovered of it.”
Dampier describes the aboriginals in much the
same terms as he employs in describing those
whom he encountered on his first visit to the coast
in the “Cygnet.” . . . “And these were much
the same blinking Creatures; he!re being also
abundance of the same kind of Flesh-flies teasing
them, and with the same black Skins and Hair
frizzled, tall, thin, etc., as these were; but we had
not the Opportunity to see whether these, as the
former, wanted two of their fore Teeth.” He does
not lavish praise, indeed, upon Australia or the
Australians. Neither the people nor the places in
that portion of the continent were prepossessing,
but neither are quite so bad as he makes them out
to be.
The truth is, that Dampier was a bitterly
disappointed man. He knew that the results of
his expedition had not justified its existence, and
it is almost impossible not to suppose that he
purposely painted his pictures of North West


Australia in as dismal colours as he knows how to
use. From his manner of writing, it seems obvious
that he wants his readers to believe Australia a
barbarous, useless, inhospitable and utterly worth-
less country, peopled by an uncanny race, the
members of which are a kind of cross between
monkeys and demons.
But he had a great deal to discourage him.
There was pressing need of fresh water; scurvy
had broken out in the ship, and his crew were
discontented and inclined to be mutinous. He had
been on the coast for five weeks, had cruised along
it nearly 1,000 miles without finding anything that
was worth finding, and the water difficulty was a
serious danger to the safety of the expedition.
And so, when he weighed anchor on December 5,
1699, and put to sea, it must have seemed to him
that every malign and unkind circumstance had
combined to drive him from the realisation of the
Australia of his dreams. When the coast finally
faded from sight on the 7th, Will Dampier had
seen the last of the land which had seemed so full
of hope, had been so full of disappointment, and was
to realise a future that even he had never con-
sidered the possibility of. It would have been
unnatural if, at the time, he had taken his leave of
it with any regret.
They sailed away to the Island of Timor, and
remained there until December 12; then he headed
his ship for New Guinea. Some time was spent in
exploring the coasts of this great island, and, in a


measure, its richness and fertility seem to have
softened Dampier’s disappointment with Australia.
His account of where he went and what he saw,
together with his descriptions of the natives, is of
the greatest interest. He discovered and named
New Britain, to the eastward of New Guinea, and
he carefully charted every course he followed.
There is an excellent map in the volume of his
“Voyages” which relates to this period—“A View
of the Course of Capt. Wil. Dampier’s Voyages
from Timor Round Nova Brittannia, &c.”
He started on his return home on April 26,
1700, and called at Batavia, to put the almost hope-
less “Roebuck” into shape for the long voyage to
England. Her sailing was incredibly slow. It
was not until the end of June that they reached
Batavia. The ship’s sides and bottom were coated
with weeds and barnacles, and she was, literally,
almost falling to pieces. In heavy weather, when
she rolled and pitched, her timbers worked in such
a fashion that it is simply marvellous how she kept
afloat. Cleaning and repairs occupied three
months. But her career was fast drawing to a
close.
They sailed from Batavia on October 17, and
reached the Cape of Good Hope at the end of the
year. They put into the Island of Ascension, in a
sinking condition, on February 21, 1701. She was
like a sieve by this time. The carpenters seemed
to make matters worse, as they vainly tried to
patch the old vessel up. “The plank,” writes


Dampier, “was so rotten it broke away like Dirt,
and now it was impossible to save the Ship; for
they could not come at the Leak because the water
in the run was got above it.” She sank at her
moorings, and captain and crew only just had time
to escape with their personal belongings and
sufficient provisions to help to feed them until they
were rescued by three British Men-of-War, with
whom was an East Indiaman named the “Canter-
bury.” The warships went to Barbados, and
Dampier took passage in the “Canterbury” for
England. From the time when he sailed from
the Downs until she sank at Ascension, the “Roe-
buck’s” unfortunate voyage lasted just over two
years.


Chapter XIII.
THE “ROEBUCK” COURT MARTIAL
JN every way the voyage of the “Roebuck”
proved unfortunate for Dampier. It was the
means of bringing his short career as a com-
missioned officer in the Royal Navy to a premature
and somewhat inglorious end, and shows us an
aspect of his character that is strangely out of keep-
ing with it as a whole, and the manifestations of
which even the time that has elapsed since his
death cannot make creditable.
There was an instability of temper about him
which shows through his whole career. He
married the mysterious Judith, and then seems to
have changed his mind about settling down to a
domestic life. He bought a farm in Dorsetshire,
and set out to be a pirate. He joined the unfor-
tunate Mr. Hobby in a trading venture; another
enterprise that chanced to present itself took his
fancy, and he left that worthy man undeservedly
in the lurch. He sailed South to find out all about
New Holland, firm in his belief in the destiny of
the unknown country, and permitted that belief to
be destroyed during a five weeks’ search for water
along a phenomenally dry coastline. Not by a
very great deal was his temper a constant quantity.
He might almost be said to have possessed that


very inconsistent thing, the artistic temperament.
This mental capriciousness broke out again in
the form of an irritability, a sort of crankiness, that
sometimes made him absolutely unfit for command.
This peculiar temporary unfitness has shown
itself in the lives of more than one navigator who
possessed otherwise nearly every quality that
made for greatness in his profession. Captain
William Bligh of H. M. S. “Bounty” is a notable
example. It came out as an unconquerable faculty
for falling foul of subordinates, a lamentable
tendency towards irritating treatment that made
the lives of those who served with them, in the
long, unescapeable confinement of those old
voyages, simply unendurable. With Dampier it
was much in evidence during the voyage of the
“Roebuck.”
That wonderful 1 treasure-house of historical
wealth which stands in Chancery Lane in London
—the Record Office—contains fatal evidence of
Dampier’s conduct as a leader of men. “The case
of Lieutenant George Fisher, together with the
Sufferings and Oppressions laid on him by his late
Commander, Capt. William Dampier in His
Majesty’s ship ‘Roe-Buck’ ” is a strong case, and,
though Dampier’s answers to Fisher’s charges are
very detailed and minute, one cannot but feel that
the balance of evidence lies in Fisher’s favour.
The Court-Martial held at Spithead on the Bth
of June, 1702, unanimously found for Lieut. Fisher.


The evidence is too long to go into here, but the
finding of the Court may be quoted, since it was
momentous as regarded Dampier’s future career:—
“The Court having strictly examined into
all the particulars of their severall Informa-
tions: It is of opinion that it has appeared
to ye Court by Evidence upon oath that
Captn. William Dampier has been guilty of
very Hard and cruel usage towards Lieuten-
ant Fisher in beating him on Board ye sd.
Ship, and confining him in Irons for a con-
siderable Time, and afterwards Imprisoning
him on shore in a strange Country, and itt is
Resolved that itt dos not appeare to ye
Court by ye Evidence that there has been
any grounds for this ill usage of him, and
that the sd. Captain Dampier falls under ye
33rd Article for these his Irregular proceed-
ings, and the Court dos Adjudge that Hee
be Fined all His Pay to ye Chest at Chatham
exclusive of about Fifty Pounds stop’d in
ye Treasury of ye Navies Hand for indem-
nifying the Queen as to a Bill drawn on ye
Navy Board by Lt. Fisher from Lisbon:
And itt is farther the opinion of ye Court
that the said Capt. Dampier is not a Fitt
person to be employ’d as comdr. of any of
her Maty, ships.
And the Court is of opinion that the
Information sett forth by Captn. Dampier
against Lt. Fisher have not been made good
F


and therefore the Court does Aquit him from
that Charge.”
This finding, as has been said, finished Dam-
pier’s naval career. There can hardly be any
doubt but that it was a just one. Naval Courts-
Martial have ever looked upon the maintenance of
discipline in the Navy as a consideration whose
importance transcends everything else, and any
unconscious bias that the members of this one
might have had would undoubtedly have favoured
the Captain rather than the Lieutenant. More-
over, Dampier’s fame as a navigator would have
caused a leaning towards his side if there had been
any possibility of such a leaning being taken.
That he was not a “Fitt person to be Employ’d”
in the first line of his country’s defence was an
opinion which the members of the Court could not
be blamed for entertaining, in view of the over-
whelming nature of the evidence that supports it.
But it is a pitiful thing that this weakness of
Dampier’s should have been the means of hindering
him from devoting to her service those other great
talents and qualities which have caused his name
to live in her records. He might have done the
greatest things, as an explorer, if he had had the
continued backing of the Government. As it was,
there was little left for him but the course he took
—that of resuming that privateering career which
it is so very difficult to differentiate from one of
piracy.


Chapter XIV.
“ROBINSON CRUSOE”
JT is not intended here to go into the details of
the two other voyages that Dampier made
between 1702 and 1714, the year of his death.
They were as full of adventure as almost all the
voyages of those days were bound to be, and quite
as full as those which have be,en described in
earlier pages. But we have not got Dampier’s
own narrative of them. Their story is related by
chroniclers who were avowedly hostile to him, and
that same infirmity of temper which led to his
downfall from the Royal Navy seems to have
increased with advancing years, and not to have
earned him any greater share of affection from his
contemporaries than he had gained in the “Roe-
buck’s” voyage. Nor is there space for a full
description.
It was fortunate for Dampier that the War of
Succession broke out soon after he found himself
retired from the Navy. England was at war with
France and Spain, and the vast and wealthy
colonial possessions of the latter once more came
to be regarded covetously by privateer and pirate.
City of London merchants came to seriously con-
sider the question of equipping and financing
expeditions whose plunder of the Don would give


them a remarkably good investment for their
money. They did more—they speculated heavily
in such enticing ventures. And so Dampier,
whose fame as a circumnavigator was his only
asset, found himself in charge of a little squadron
of two ships—the “St. George” and the “Cinque
Ports”—with a commission to harry Spanish South
America to the very best of his ability, and to bring
back to London all the ‘loot’ he could possibly get
hold of. The voyage was not a success. Dampier
came home a beggar, but full of fame. The Queen
sent for him, and listened to the relation of his
adventures—but did nothing more for him. He
was only a poor seaman, and he must needs go to
sea once more, lest he should starve. So we find
him sailing as pilot, or navigating officer, to his old
friend Captain Woodes Rogers on a similarly
organised venture to that on which he had sailed
in the “St. George.” They were merchants of
Bristol, however, who invested their money this
trip. Two ships, the “Duke” and the “Duchess,”
composed the little armada. It was a memorable
and enormously successful undertaking. The
treasure which it brought home was valued at
nearer £400,000 than £300,000 — and in those days
twenty shillings were more money than they are
now.
But you and I had no share in “that” pie. It
jWas quite another sort of “dainty dish” that was
set before us by Mr. Daniel Defoe, when he wrote
“Robinson Crusoe.” And the inspiration for that


wonderful work came from this voyage. The
story of Alexander Selkirk cannot be passed over.
He is much more to us to-day them all the money
those West Country merchant-adventurers made.
They are dead, and we hardly even knew their
names. But “Robinson Crusoe” lives for ever.
The story is peculiarly associated with Dampier.
Alexander Selkirk was mate of the “Cinque
Ports” on Dampier’s previous voyage. When the
captain of that ship, Stradling, had a bitter quarrel
with Dampier in the Bay of Panama, he remained
with Stradling; but, himself quarrelling with the
latter, he was not long afterwards marooned upon
the Island of Juan Fernandez. His story, as
quoted here, is told in the Narrative of Captain
Woodes Rogers. The latter’s expedition arrived
at the island on February 1, 1709, and a boat was
sent ashore.
“As soon as it was dark, we saw a Light ashore.
Our Boat was then about a League from the
island, and bore away for the Ships as soon as she
saw the Lights. We put out Lights aboard for the
Boat, tho’ some were of Opinion the Lights we saw
were our Boat’s Lights: But as Night came on it
appeared too large for that. We fired our Quarter-
deck Gun and several Musquets, shewing Lights
in our Mizen and Fore Shrouds, that our Boat
might find us whilst we were in the Lee of the
Island. . . . All this Stir and Apprehension
arose, as we afterwards found, from one poor
naked Man who passed in our Imaginaion, at


present, for a Spanish Garrison, a Body of French-
men, or a Crew of Pirates.” On the following
morning they sent another boat to the beach, and
when it did not return, another to find out what
had become of it. “Immediately our Pinnace
returned from the Shore and brought abundance
of Crayfish with a Man clothed in Goat-skins, who
looked wilder than the first Owners of them. He
had been on the Island Four Years and Four
months, being left there by Captain Stradling in
the “Cinque Ports”; his Name was Alexander
Selkirk, a Scotsman who had been Master of the
“Cinque Ports,” a Ship that came here last with
Captain Dampier, who told me that this was the best
man in her, and I immediately agreed with him to
be a Mate on board our Ship: ’Twas he that made
the Fire last Night when he saw our Ships, which
he judged to be English. . . . The reason of
his being left here was a Difference between him
and his Captain; which, together with the Ship’s
being leaky, made him willing rather to stay here,
than go along with him at first; and when he was
at last willing to go the Captain would not receive
him. . . . He had with him his Cloaths and
Bedding, with a Firelock, some Powder, and
Tobacco, a Hatchet, a Knife, a Kettle, a Bible,
some Practical Pieces, and his Mathematical
Instruments and Books. He diverted and pro-
vided for himself as well as he could; but for the
first eight Months had much ado to bear up
against Melancholy, and the Terror of being left


alone in such a Place. He built two Huts with
Pimento-trees, covered them with long Grass, and
lined them with the Skins of Goats, which he killed
with his Gun as he wanted, so long as his Powder
lasted, which was but a Pound; and that being
almost spent, he got fire by rubbing two sticks of
Pimento Wood together upon his Knee. In the
lesser Hut, at some Distance from the other, he
dressed his Victuals; and in the larger he slept, and
employed himself in Reading, singing Psalms, and
Praying, so that he said he was a better Christian
while in this Solitude than ever he was before, or
that he was afraid he should ever be again. At
first he never eat anything till Hunger constrained
him, partly from Grief and partly for want of
Bread and Salt: nor did he go to Bed till he could
watch no longer; the Pimento Wood, which
burned very clear, served him both for Fire and
Candle, and refreshed him with its fragrant
Smell. . . . By the Favour of Providence and
Vigour of his Youth, being now but Thirty Years
old, he came at last to conquer all the Inconven-
iences of his Solitude and to be very easy. When
his cloaths wore out he made himself a Coat and a
Cap of Goat-skins, which he stitched together with
little Thongs of the same that he cut with his
Knife. He had no other Needle but a Nail; and
when his Knife was worn to the Back he made
others as well as he could of some Iron Hoops that
were left ashore, which he beat thin, and ground
upon Stones. Having some Linen Cloth by him,


he sewed some Shirts with a Nail, and stitched
them with the worsted of his old Stockings, which
he pulled out on purpose. He had his last Shirt
on when we found him on the Island. At his first
coming on board us he had so much forgotten his
Language for want of Use that we could scarce
understand him; for he seemed to speak his words
by halves. We offered him a Dram; but he
would not touch it, having drunk nothing but
Water since his being there; and it was some
Time before he could relish our Victuals.”


Chapter XV.
DAMPIER’S JOURNAL
'J'HE following extract, relating to the part of
Australia which he touched at in his voyage
in the “Roebuck,” gives a fair example of Dampier’s
powers as a descriptive writer.
“The 6th of August in the Morning we saw an
Opening in the Land, and we ran into it, and
anchored in 7 and a half Fathom-water, 2 Miles from
the Shore, clean Sand. It was somewhat difficult
getting in here, by Reason of many Shoals we met
with: But I sent my boat sounding before me.
The Mouth of this Sound, which I call’d Shark’s
Bay, lies in about 25 deg. S. Lat. and our reckon-
ing made its Longitude from the C. of Good Hope
to be about 87 degrees; which is less by 195
Leagues than is usually laid down in our common
Draughts, if our Reckoning was right, and our
Glasses did not deceive us. As soon as I came to
anchor in this Bay, I sent my Boat ashore to seek
for fresh Water: But in the Evening my Men
returned, having found none. The next Morning
I went ashore myself, carrying Pickaxes and
Shovels with me, to dig for Water; and Axes to
cut Wood. We tried in several Places for Water,
but finding none after several Trials, nor in several
Miles Compass, we left any farther Search for it,


and spending the rest of the Day in cutting Wood,
we went aboard at Night.
“The Land is of an indifferent Height, so that
it may be seen 9or 10 Leagues off. It appears at
a Distance very even; but as you come nigher you
find there are many gentle Risings, tho’ none steep
nor high. ’Tis all a steep Shore against the open
Sea: But in this Bay or Sound we were now in,
the Land is low by the Sea-side, rising gradually
in within the Land. The Mould is Sand by the
Sea-side, producing a large sort of Sampier,* which
bears a white Flower. Farther in, the Mould is
reddish, a sort of Sand, producing some Grass,
Plants, and Shrubs. The Grass grows in great
tufts, as big as a Bushel, here and there a Tuft;
Being intermix’d with much Heath, much of the
kind we have growing on our Commons in England.
Of Trees or Shrubs here are divers Sorts; but none
above 10 foot high: Their bodies about 3 foot
about,+and 5 or 6 foot high before you come to the
Branches, which are bushy, and composed of small
Twigs there spreading abroad, tho’ thick set, and
full of Leaves; which were mostly long and narrow.
The Colour of the Leaves was on one side whitish,
and on the other green; and the Bark of the Trees
was generally of the same Colour with the Leaves,
of a pale green. Some of these Trees were sweet
scented, and reddish within the Bark, like Sassa-
fras, but redder. Most of the Trees and Shrubs
♦Samphire, the edible Crithmum Maritimum.
ti.e., in circumference.


had at this Time either Blossoms or Berries on
them. The Blossoms of the different sorts of
Trees were of several Colours, as red, white, yellow,
&c., but mostly blue: And these generally smelt
very sweet and fragrant, as did some also of the
rest. There were also besides some Plants, Herbs,
and Tall Flowers, some very small Flowers, grow-
ing on the Ground, that were sweet and beautiful,
and for the most part unlike any I had seen else-
where.
There were but few Land-Fowls; we saw none
but Eagles, of the larger Sorts of Birds; but 5 or
6 Sorts of small Birds. The biggest sort of these
were not bigger than Larks; some no bigger than
Wrens, all singing with Great Variety of fine
Notes; and we saw some of their Nests with
young Ones in them.
The Water-Fowls are Ducks (which had young
Ones now, this being the Beginning of the Spring in
these Parts); Curlews, Galdens, Crab-catchers,
Cormorants, Gulls, Pelicans; and some Water-
Fowl, such as I have not seen anywhere besides.
The Land-Animals that we saw here were only
a Sort of Raccoons,* different from those of the
West Indies, chiefly as to their Legs; for these
have very short Fore-Legs; but go jumping upon
them as the others do (and like them are very good
Meat): And a Sort of Guano’s of the same Shape
and Size with other Guano’s describ’d (earlier in
the journal), but differing from them in 3 remark-
•Probably the kangaroo-rat.


able Particulars: For these had a larger and
uglier Head, and had no Tail: And at the Rump
instead of the Tail there, they had a Stump of a Tail
which appeared like another Head; but not really
such, being without Mouth or Eyes: Yet this
Creature seem’d by this Means to have a Head at
each end; and, which may be reckoned a fourth
Difference, the Legs also seem’d all 4 of them to
be Fore-legs, being all alike in Shape and Length,
and seeming by the Joints and Bending to be made
as if they were to go indifferently either Head or
Tail foremost. They were speckled black and
yellow like Toads, and had Scales or Knobs on
their Backs like those of Crocodiles, plated on to
the Skin, or stuck into it, as part of the Skin. They
are very slow in Motion; and when a Man comes
nigh them they will stand still and hiss, not
endeavouring to get away. Their Livers are also
spotted black and yellow: And the Body when
opened hath a very unsavoury Smell. I did never
see such ugly Creatures anywhere but here. The
Guano’s I have observ’d to be very good Meat:
And I have often eaten of them with Pleasure; but
tho’ I have eaten of Snakes, Crocodiles and Allega-
tors, and many Creatures that look frightfully
enough, and there are but few I should have been
afraid to eat of, if prest by Hunger, yet I think my
Stomach would scarce have serv’d to venture upon
these N. Holland Guano’s, both the Looks and the
Smell of them being so offensive.
The Sea-fish that we saw here (for here was no


River, Land or Pond of fresh Water to be seen)
are chiefly Sharks. There are Abundance of them
in this particular Sound, that I therefore give it
the Name of Shark’s Bay. Here are also Skates,
Thornbacks, and other Fish of the Ray-kind; (one
sort especially like the Sea-Devil) and Garfish,
Boneta’s, &c. Of Shell-fish we got here Muscles,
Periwinkles, Limpits, Oysters, both of the Pearl-
kind and also Eating Oysters, as well the common
Sort as long Oysters; besides Cockles &c. The
Shore was lined thick with many other sorts of very
strange and beautiful Shells, for variety of Colour
and Shape, most finely spotted with Red, Black,
or Yellow, &c., such as I have not seen any where
but at this place. I brought away a great many of
them; but lost all, except a very few, and those not
of the best.
There are also some green Turtle weighing
about 200 lb. Of these we caught 2 which the
Water Ebbing had left behind a Ledge of Rock,
which they could not creep over. These served all
my Company 2 days; and they were indifferent
sweet Meat. Of the Sharks we caught a great
many, which our Men eat very savourily. Among
them we caught one which was 11 foot long. The
space between its two Eyes was 20 inches, and 18
inches from one Corner of his Mouth to the other.
Its Maw was like a Leather Sack, very thick, and
so tough that a sharp Knife could scarce cut it:
In which we found the Head and Bones of a Hippo-
potomus; the hairy Lips of which were still sound


and not putrified, and the Jaw was also firm, out
of which we pluckt a great many teeth, 2 of them
8 inches long, and as big as a Man’s Thumb, small
at one end, and a little crooked; the rest not
above half so long. The Maw was full of Jelly
which stank extremely: However I saved for a
while the Teeth and the Shark’s Jaw: The Flesh
of it was divided among my Men; and they took
care that no waste should be made of it.
’Twas the 7th of August when we came into
Shark’s Bay; in which we anchor’d at three several
Places, and stay’d at the first of them (on the W.
side of the Pay) till the 11th. During which time
we searched about, as I said, for fresh Water,
digging Wells, but to no purpose. However we
cut good store of Fire-wood at this first Anchoring-
place; and my Company were all here very well
refreshed with Raccoons, Turtle, Shark and other
Fish, and some Fowles; so that we were now all
much brisker than when we came in hither. Yet
still I was for standing farther into the Bay, partly
because I had a mind to increase my stock of fresh
Water, which was begun to be low; and partly for
the sake of Discovering this part of the Coast. I
was invited to go further, by seeing from this
Anchoring-place all open before me; which there-
fore I designed to search before I left the Bay. So
on the 11th about Noon, I steer’d farther in, with
an easie Sail, because we had but shallow Water'.
We kept therefore good looking out for fear of
Sholes; sometimes shortning, sometimes deepning


the water. About 2 in the Afternoon we saw the
Land a Head that makes the S. of the Bay, and before
Night we had again Sholdings from that Shore;
And therefore shortned Sail and stood off and on
all Night, under 2 Topsails, continually sounding,
having never more than 10 Fathom, and seldom
less than 7. The Water deepned and Sholdned so
very gently, that in heaving the Lead 5 or 6 times
we should scarce have a Foot difference. When
we came into 7 Fathom either way, we presently
went about. From this S. part of the Bay, we
could not see the Land from whence we came in
the Afternoon: And this Land we found to be
an Island of 3 or 4 Leagues long, but it appearing
barren, I did not strive to go nearer it; and the
rather because the Winds would not permit us to
do it without much Trouble, and at the Openings
the Water was generally Shole. I therefore made
no farther attempts in this S. W. and S. part of
the Bay, but steered away to the Eastward, to see
if there was any land that way, for, as yet we had
seen none there. On the 12th in the Morning we
pass’d by the N. Point of that Land, and were con-
firm’d in the Persuasion of its being an Island, by
seeing an Opening to the East of it, as we had
done in the W. Having fair Weather, a small Gale
and smooth Water, we stood further on in the
Bay, to see what Land was on the E. of it. Our
Soundings at first were 7 Fathom, which held so
a great while, but at length it decreas’d to 6.
Then we saw the Land right a-head, that in the


Plan makes the E. of the Bay. We could not come
near it with the Ship, having but Shole Water: and
it being dangerous lying there, and the Land ex-
traordinarily low, very unlikely to have fresh
Wateir (though it had a few Trees on it,
seemingly Mangroves) and much of it probably
covered at High-water, I stood out again that
Afternoon, deepning the Water, and before Night
anchored in 8 Fathom, clean white Sand, about the
middle of the Bay. The next day we got up our
Anchor; and that Afternoon came to an Anchor
once more near two Islands, and a Shoal of Corral
Rocks that face the Bay. Here I scrubb’d my Ship:
and finding it very improbable I should get any
thing further here, I made the best of my Way out
to Sea again, sounding all the way: but finding by
the shallowness of the Water that there was no
going out to sea to the East of the two Islands
that face the Bay, nor between them, I return’d to
the West Entrance, going out by the same Way I
came in at, only on the East instead of the West-
side: in which Channel we had 10, 12, and 13
Fathom-water, still deepning upon us till we were
out at Sea. The day before we came out I sent a
Boat ashore to the most Northerly of the two
Islands, which is the least of them, catching many
small Fish in the mean while with Hook and Line.
The Boat’s Crew returning, told me, that the Isle
produces nothing but a sprt of green, short, hard
prickly Grass, affording neither Wood nor fresh
Water; and that a Sea broak between the two


Islands, a Sign that the Water was shallow. They
saw a large Turtle, and many Skates and Thorn-
backs, but caught none.”


Chapter XVI.
AUSTRALIA AND DAMPIER
W HEN Dampier went ashore at Erith, on the
Thames, at the end of his voyage with
Woodes Rogers, it is probable that he never was
to go to sea again. We do not know for certain
whether he made other voyages; but he was in his
sixtieth year—no great age in itself, but a good ripe
one when you consider the fevers of Panama, the
starvation and bad food, the worry and disappoint-
ment, and the constant poverty that had been his.
He might well take his ease now.
And so we lose him. We do not know how the
last years of his life were spent. All we know
with certainty about his latter end comes from his
will, which was found many years since at Somer-
set House. And that only tells us that he was
living, just before his death, in Coleman Street, in
the Parish of St. Stephen, London, that he died
early in March 1715, and that most of his property
went to a cousin, Grace Mercer, and the rest to his
brother George, a Dorsetshire farmer. There is
no mention of his wife.
His enduring record lies within the covers of
his “Voyages.” They will stand for ever as his
most creditable achievement. “Dampier was not
only the finest sailor of his day—l mean in the


strictly professional sense of the word—his travels
are to this hour foremost among the best-written
and most interesting in the language. . . . The
union in Dampi'er,” writes a biographer, himself a
literary sailor-man, “of the qualities which he
exhibited must have rendered him something of a
prodigy to his contemporaries, whilst it forms his
claim upon the attention and esteem of posterity.”
To know the best of Dampier, to know him at all,
in fact, you must read his own books. His pages
have the rare merit of never including dull ones
in their number. The passages that are treatises
on navigation do not even weary a landsman.
They are so cheerful, so conscientious, so pains-
taking, and so simply illuminating that they hold
the attention when the reader would naturally be
inclined to “skip.”
To us in Australia, Dampier’s connection with
our continent is naturally of the greatest interest.
You always hear of him nowadays as high up
among the pioneers of Australian Discovery.
When you consider what he actually did, you may
at first be astonished that his name should be so
prominent. The Portuguese and the Dutch had
both been before him. The surveys and maps
which they left for the guidance of subsequent
navigation were of infinitely more practical use
than his. Yet his name stands out just as much
as, if .aot more than, any of theirs in our Geographi-
cal record. Why should it? He was twice upon
our coasts, and on neither occasion did his stay last


longer than a few weeks. He landed upon useless
coasts. The actual map-making that he did covers
a very small portion of our immense sea-board.
Why should his name loom so large?
The secret of it is this. Dampier could dis-
cover more in an acre than the usual sailor could
find in a hundred miles square; he would see more
in a sandhill than some navigators would be able
to perceive in a mountain. And he could tell of
what he saw. It is this faculty .for description that
places him high on the roll of our explorers. The
very fact that his accounts of the little he saw were
so brilliantly readable, that they were obviously
written in such good faith, and that they bear the
impress of truth on every page—these qualities
fastened the attention of the Old World upon the
New, held it, and induced other voyagers to devote
themselves to the fulfilment of schemes of dis-
covery that he had dreamed of but never realised.
That is the simple secret.
To his memory—pirate, buccaneer, special-
correspondent, petulant martinet as he was—all
Englishmen and Australians must do reverence.
With all his faults he was a very great man.
With the whole combination of courage, determina-
tion, vacillation, weakness—and sometimes mean-
ness—that went to form his character, he was a
great Englishman. He ranks amongst the
Worthies of England. And our Empire of to-day
—the world-wide realm of which we are citizens —
could not have spared him. The whole collection


of the English Nations—Canada, Africa, New
Zealand, and Australia—must rejoice in the Somer-
setshire lad who went so far afield and saw so
much. The British People must do homage to
the name, and give respect to the memory, of
William Dampier.
W. O. Penfold A 00., Printers, 183 Pitt Street, Sidney.
