



THE
DARCY
STORY
The Life of the Australian-born
World's Champion Boxer
TOLD BY
SOLAR PLEXUS
(WILL LAWLESS)
PRICE
1/'




SPORTSMEN!
ALL READ
The Evening N ews
AND
The Sunday News
PRICE - - ONE PENNY
LATEST, BRIGHTEST, BEST
REG. (s now y) BAKER
SPORTING EDITOR.


THE DARCY FAMILY.
The recently deceased Frank, and a younger brother, are missing. The late champion is standing in the centre of the picture,
between Mr. and Mrs. Darcy.
Last photo, of the late champion. Taken
after interview with Governor of Tennessee,
who gave Ills consent for Darcy to box,
when Darcy had joined the Flying Corps.
He died soon after.
MIKE HAWKINS AND LES DARCY.
Champion’s first photo. He was but
fifteen, yet at that early age showed
immense power in his large, w'ell-
formed neck. Hawkins was his first
and only trainer, a good, honest and
faithful pal.
Late champion and his many youth-
ful admirers at the Spit Baths,
Mosman. Even when his wonderful
ability made him world famous, Les
still remained “King of the Kids.”
LATE LES DARCY.
World’s Greatest Middleweight.
This photo was taken in Sydney by
Mr. Milton Kent.


THE—
Darcy Story
FROM BLACKSMITH’S APPRENTICE
TO WORLD’S CHAMPION BOXER.
By ." SOLAR PLEXUS.”
The Life Story of the Late LES DARCY.
How he got his Chance. His First Fight.
Fights with Jeff Smith, Clabby, Chip, King,
Crouse, Dave Smith, McGoorty and others.
An unbroken record of success upon success.


EDITORIAL
This is-the authentic story of the short but re-
markable career of the late Les Darcy, one of the
greatest boxers the world has ever seen. It tells of
his brilliant and meteoric rise to the position of
world’s champion of champions, and of his cruel fall,
brought about by the intrigues and machinations of
those who, had-they achieved their end, would have
grabbed 95 per cent, of the enormous prize money
which appeared certain to fall to Darcy’s skill.
By way of introduction, I am giving a few inti-
mate details of the environment in which Darcy
spent his boyhood’s days. That truth is stranger
than fiction is a truism, and the story told here will
be found to be as full of exciting incident and stir-
ring interest as the most thrilling romance from the
pen of a Oonan Doyle.
> “SOLAR PLEXUS.”
CONTENTS
' Chapter Page
I.—Early Days. The Young Breadwinner 3
ll.—Tho Country “Mug”—How He made
Good 4
111. —Early Successes 5
IV. —‘Further Triumphs 7
V.—Darcy Gets His Chance . 8
Vl.—Darcy’s First Big Fight 9
Vll.—How Darcy Lost in Return Match with
Holland 11
Vlll.—Darcy’s Clcar-cut Victory over Mar- j
chand .13 j
IX. The Meeting with Christie 15
X. —Fred Dyer Outpointed in Brisbane ... 10
Xl.—Tho Darcy-Jeff Smith Contest ....... 17
Xll.—His Contests with Loughrey, Holland,
Demlen, and Smith . IS j
XIII. —Tho Smith-Darcy Return Battle 21
XIV. —Eager for Meeting with McGoorty .... 22
XV.—How He was Released from His In-
dentures 22
XVl.—His Easy Defeat of Murray and Dyer ~ 28
XVII. —His Win Over Clabby , . 29
XYIH.—The First Darcy-Clahby Contest 30 .
XlX.—Why He did not meet Harry Reeve .. 30
XX.—Old Timers’ Performances Compared . 31
XXII.—My Views on Proposed American Trip 33 •
XXIII.—How McGoorty Knocked Australia ... 34
XXlV.—What Happened prior to the Return
Darcy-McGoorty Contest ......... 35
XXV.—Preliminaries of the Historic Darcy-
McGoorty Return Fight . : -37-
XXVI.—The Return Match with McGoorty .... 38
Chapter Pa**
XXVll.—Eulogistic Remarks on my Judgment
concerning the Possibilities of the
Late Les Darcy 41
XXVIII.—His Claim for Middleweight Champion-
. ship Honours still disputed by
Americans 43
XXIX.—His Easy Victory Over K. O. Brown .. 44
XXX.—How He Won Heavyweight Title from
Harold Hardwick ... 45
XXXl.—Defends Heavyweight. Title against Les
O’Donnell 45
XXXll.—Again Defeats Brown 47
XXXIII.—Darcy Scares Rumanian Costica ...... 4S
XXXlV.—Darcy Real Middleweight Champion . . 4 9
XXXV.—“He will Whip Jes Willard” 43
XXXVI.—The Buck Crouse Contest 50
XXXVII.—Darcy and the Americans . 51
XXXVIII.—Darcy a World’s Wonder 52
XXXlX.—Darcy and Previous Alleged Champions 53
XL.—The Darcy-Dare Smith Contest 53
XLl.—Extracts from “New York Polled
, Gazette” 54
XLII.—Mr. Sid. Baker’s Challenge on behalf of
Darcy ....’. .... . 54
XLlll.—Darcy Again Defeats Dave Smith ; . 54
XLIV. —George Chip Arrives 65 '
-XLV.—Darcy Again Beats Clabby ;. ... i i 56 "
XLVI.—The Contest—-Darcy’s Easy Job t 0...,. - 56'
XLVII.—How Darcy Loft Australia .;. .v’. 57/
XLVIII.—That Lotter. to Darcy : 59-
XLIX—The Cruel End 61


CHAPTER I
Les Da rev was born (in October ill, 181)5. at \V ood-
viilo in the far-famed Paterson Liver • district. of
sunny Non - .South \V;*ies. lie was the second of a
family of eleven, and man’.' of his brothers and sis-
ters may he said to. have- only just emerged from
the swaddling clothes period of their existence.
From an early age Les was, with his father, tin; only
wage-earner for this very large family of baby bro-
thers and sisters, and for many years they lived in
poor circumstances. The wage of a blacksmith’s ap-
prentice is scarcely a princely one, yet it was large-
ly upon this that the family had to keep body and
soul together. Les in those days was a line, strap-
ping specimen of the young Australian—big-boned,
muscular and well developed—and the trade to
.which he was apprenticed was one that attuned his
muscles for the even more strenuous but more lucra-
tive calling in'which he was later to shine. His
eldest brother, through an accident at birth, was
a helpless cripple, and was therefore unable to as-
sist to keep the family larder replenished. Of this
elder brother I can, nevertheless, say that a more
charming youth in every way never existed. His
maiiy little thoughtful actions to myself and others,
who attended his brother’s funeral at East Maitland,
on that ever-to-be-remembered July Ist, 1917, will
never be forgotten. Thanks to the generosity of
his dead brother, the’ future of “Major,” as this
crippled lad is so well and favorably known through-
out the Northern district, is assured* because he be-
came the possessor of the deceased’s motor-car, by
which, through deserved popularity and expert
knowledge of motor driving, “Major” has been able
to earn a comfortable living.
The defect in “Major’s” make-up is a badly de-
formed foot. With a pair of sound underpins the
lad, as he has frequently proved, when put upon by
fellows looking for an easy conquest, would have
made a name for himself second only to that earned
by his famous younger brother. Next to Les comes
Frank, better known by the sobriquet of “Frosty,”
and he also, if less promising than Les, is notwith-
standing, chockful of fighting instinct and ability.
Although he did not follow in the footsteps of the
shazepion of champions and take on blaeksraithing,
preferring the calling of a baker, he has the same
Early Days. The Young Bread-winner.
.strong neck and shoulders, and now that he h -n d-'r)-
>d to.grow, has developed into a line figure 0/ a man
\vi!h a K.O. pnneh in either hand, as was sho"m 1 >,y
the manner in which lie outcd Dan Tierney, r, r-
McLaughlin, and,Al Cullen, and the Victorian cham-
pion Barney Thompson in recent battles. That ho
will he as strong as was his dead brother I cannot
believe. Men of Les Darcy’s stamp only once
in a hundred years, but at their corresponding ages
Frank seems to have the greater punch. This might
appear so because of their different methods, for
whilst Les was always punching with left and right,
Frank is more deliberate in delivering his blows.
Still, there is every likelihood of “Frosty” turning
out half as good, which, in normal times, will bo
sufficient to enrich him, and he may perhaps prove
superior to any other man in the world at his weight.
My candid opinion is that Los Darcy himself was
easily 100 per cent, better than any other middle-
weight of his day.
All the other male members of the family, though
still vei’y young, have a strong resemblance to their
late brother—the same pleasant smile, the same
game, bright eyes, strong neck, and powerful shoul-
ders. Of the baby of the family—a mite of four
years—l can tell a remarkably funny stovy, which,
had I no witnesses, 1 should fear might not he be-
lieved. '
At one of the many patriotic entertainments pro-
moted by Mr. Jack Burns and other well-known re-
sidents of Balmain, a four-round exhibition spar be-
tween clever Dave Smith and his world-famed pupil,
the late Les Darcy, was one of the star Items. Mrs.
Darcy and her infant, then four months old, oc-
cupied a seat in the front row. Babylike, the young-
est member of the Darcy family paid no heed to
what was going on until, after being kissed by his
big brother, the youngster’s eyes followed Les on
to the stage. When the spar began baby’s chubby
fists worked up and down in a Very offensive man-
ner, his eyes bulged, and he was highly eScitcd,
and, as good old Fred Holland remarked (Fred was
one of the many who witnessed this extraordinary
happening), “Gee! How can you expect to beat s
Darcy! Why, damn, it, they are born fighters!'*


CHAPTER II.
In reviewing the circumstances which led up to
tbc entry of Les Darcy into the boxing world avc
must recall the extraordinary revival which took
place in pugilism in 1908. Up to that time the pos-
sible stake earnings of a successful boxer amounted
to a few paltry pounds for each contest Avon. With
tho entry of Mr. Hugh D. Mclntosh into the game
and the opening of the Stadium, a radical change
Avas brought about. Interest in the sport revived
in the most astonishing Avay, and such were the fin-
ancial possibilities offering that a top-notch per-
former avrs placed in the position of being able to
earn sufficient in a few short years to enable him to
live in Kasy-strcet for the rest of his life. As a re-
sult of this revival the youth of the country Avent
boxing mad. Operations wci’e by no means confined
to the city, and in the northern districts of NeAV
South Wales, Avhere Les Darcy spent his boyhood,
every barn and shed became a boxing arena, where
many gory battles were fought. Numerous private
boxing clubs Avere organised, and nightly contests
were promoted.
Les Darcy, at this time a well-grown boy, twelve
years of age, caught the fever in an acute form.
Every night found him an enthralled spectator of
one or other of these rough-and-tumble
Rnd often he joined in and became an active partici-
pant. This went on for mahy Aveeks, until one day
his mother was taken suddenly and seriously ill. It
is eloquent testimony to the innate goodness of the
boy’s nature that from that moment he sacrificed
the hobby which had grown to be his principal in-
terest in life, and set himself to sec to the welfare
of his baby brothers and sisters. At this time of
erisis in the affairs of the family the wholehearted
youngster found no time for play. Prom early morn-
ing till late at night he Avas busily hunting here,
there, and evcryAvhere for any kind of work which
would enable him to keep the children from actual
want. He fed, clothed, and Avashcd them, and, I
know, was often himself on the verge of starvation.
knd even then they were many a time compelled to
go foodless to their beds. This was a great testing
time for Les, and very nobly did he respond. One
of his employers was an old lady (Mrs. Cummins)
who kept a dairy. This good old soul found many
odd jobs for Les to do, and often could he have
been seen in the coAvyards early on a Avinter’s morn-
ing, minus boots (the state of the family exchequer
would not run to such luxuries), and his poor young
feet cracked and bleeding. But always he wore
that pleasant smile which was afterwards to win the
keaarts of thousands of his fclloAv countrymen.
The Country “Mug." How He Made Good
In due course Mrs. Darcy recovered and came out
of hospital, and, lvitlr liis principal anxieties thus
removed, Les hvas able again to turn to the sport
which held for him such a strong appeal. About
this time the youngster learnt that in a certain shop
in the town there was a second-hand set of boxing
gloves for sale at 6s. 6d. His heart became set on
gaining possession of those gloves. Every odd penny
he could spare Avas carefully hoarded, and day after
day the lad could be seen standing outside that shop
AvindoAV eyeing the much-coveted prize Avithin. But
6s. 6d. represented a large sum of money to Lcs in
those days, and the little pile of coppers, grew all
too slowly.
After Aveeks of scraping he managed to increase
his hoard to 3s. 6d., but the other 3s. seemed far
aAvay indeed. His perpetual dread Avas that some-
one might get in first and secure the gloves, and
every day he anxiously visited the shop to make
sure that they were still on sale. At last he made
up his mind to a drastic step. Summoning all his
courage he confided his ambition to his kind old
employer, and asked her to lend him the balance of
the money. Imagine his joy when Mrs. Cummings
complied Avith his request, and he fared forth with
the silver coins rattling in his breeches pocket to
make the purchase. It is safe to say that there Avas
not a prouder or happier lad than Les Darcy in the
whole of Australia on that day. With the posses-
sion of those gloves his young ambition became
doubly fired, and night after night he might have
been seen wending his way from barn to barn Avith
those wonderful mits in a sugar bag tlirovm across
his shoulder.
Les Darcy’s first public appearance took place on
August 8, 1911, at the West Maitland Town Hall in
a preliminary bout to the Billy Hannan-Charley Raff,
contest. He beat a local lad called Pacoe. Of that
first contest little heed be said, but about that time
a youngster named Orchard Avon a bantamweight
tourney, and threw out a challenge to any 8.4 boy
in the northern district to meet him. The challenge
was immediately taken up by Les Darcy, but the
challenger laughed at what he considered Darcy’s
impudence, and told him to go and make a “rep.”
before he had the cheek to challenge a man who had
won a tourney. It is strange to reeall that incident,
and to remember that in five years’ time the despis-
ed acceptor of the challenge was to become tho
greatest middleweight that ever lived, whilst the
challenger’s start and finish was in that paltry
tournament. ■


Early Successes.
CHAPTER III
One of the early achievements which marked Les
Darcy out as a youth of promise, took place at the
"West Maitland show of 1911. A showman named
Sam Norman came along with his team of boxers,
and drove a thriving trade owing to the fact that
no one was found capable of earning the £1 which
was offered to anyone staying four rounds with any
of his men. A£l prize was a whole heap of money
to young Les in those days, and he made up his
mind that the prize should be his. The boy’s prowess
was already known in the district, however, and
Norman decided that rather than risk defeat for
his team he would take on the local crack himself.
Les, quite undaunted, took up the challenge and
the showman got the shock of his life when the East
Maitland boy knocked him cold.
So nettled was Norman that he readied up
“Young” Athorne for Les. Athorne was a:clever,
hard-hitting youngster, who had made quite a name
for himself in Sydney, and it was thought would
surely K.O. the East Maitlander, but, like Norman,
he was also put to sleep.
At that time Mick Hawkins had a stable which
comprised Les Darcy, Matt Ross and Eric Newton,
a wonderful featherweight, who was one of the first
batch of Australians to lose his life at the front.
Les, at this time, boxed a great deal ■with Donohue,
a good man of local fame, who brought the embryo
champion on, and made him as fit as nails for his
encounter. This took place at Thornton against
“Governor” Balser, one of the fastest and best
boxers up north. Les won in twelve rounds.
Boxing was booming well at Newcastle in 1912
and Mr. Alec Burke, a butcher of East Maitland,
entered Les for the lightweight division of a tour-
ney that was to be held there. Once more the boy
proved victorious. The then gritty, clever and popu-
lar heavyweight Les O'Donnell was referee, and had
no difficulty in arriving at the correct decisions in
those bouts in which the coming champion figured,
but in the semi-final Harry Emery gave Les a hard
fight. In the second round Darcy’s right cracked
Harry on the jaw so hard that he saw a dozen op-
ponents in front of him for a few moments, but in
the sth Emery got even by cracking Les on the same
spot with the same effect. Darcy was frequently
heard to state that this was the hardest punch he
ever received.
Darcy’s showing in this tournament was a revela-
tion co O’Donnell, who said then, and repeated it
to tha Sydney boxing writers of that time, that in
Darcy we had the makings of a world’s champion.
Shortly after this another tourney was inaugur-
ated at the same place, and although Darcy could
easily have entered for the lightweight division (the
limit in those days was 10 stone, and ha unly weigh-
ed 9.7), he dec£d«d-4»-4atkeon‘<li©JweltocK. Tfee raa-
jority of these were welters with a bit to spare.
For instance, Tom Page, whom Darcy beat in the
final, tipped the scales at 12 stone if he weighed
an ounce. The scales upon which the weighing was
done were set at 10.4, so that it did not matter how
much- the over-poundage might be the limit to it?
weighing power was 10.4.
In spite of the enormous amount of weight he
was called upon to give away, however, Les had no
difficulty in accounting -for all his opponents. It
was a wonderful performance for a lad of sixteen.
If a matured man of, say, 23, weighing half a si
below the lightweight limit of the time, had beaten
a host of husky mid-heavyweights, he would have
been boomed to the very skies, but for some unex-
plained reason Les’ great work did not get the re-,
cognition it deserved. . Consequently the D.< >
ily still continued to eke out an existence on Lhc
small salary which their brother brought in. In
spite of the frequent booming given to Les by me in
“The Arrow,” and personally, the Sydney pro-
moters could not see their way clear to give him a
start in the big smoke.
In 1912 a colored lad named Dave Depena wa*
showing great form as one of Sam Langford’s large
stable, and after trying hard to get a suitable match
for his protege, the mighty Sam thought it would
be a shame not to go to Newcastle and collect the
easy money which he believed could be made by
backing his boy against the soft snap from East
Maitland. So to Newcastle he went, and on Novem-
ber 4 of that year the Darcy-Depena contest was
brought off. The match created considerable inte-
rest, as it was well known that Langford looked
upon it as a “good thing” for Depena. Much to
his astonishment, however, the country “mug” made
his man stop in the ninth round.
In connection with this contest an incident occur-
red which, trifling as it may have been, thoroughly
convinced me that Darcy’s strength and fighting
ability were on a par with his wonderful confidence.
It was a-few moments before the advertised time
for hostilities to commence when, in compliance
with the usual custom, Les, accompanied by Mike
Hawkins and his other seconds, entered the ring,
The minutes passed, and there was no appearance
of the other side, and I could see that Les was be-
coming impatient. It was easily realised that this
delay was purposely brought about in order to un-
nerve the East Maitlander, and Hawkins was not
slow in warning the lad of the ruse. He smiled his
pleasantest smile, and from, that moment all trace
of impafienco wamshed- As a .matter of fact, this
was an objectionable American custom practised a
good deal by -visitors from the United States in
those, days.


Sam Langford, in the meantime, instead of being
in the dressing-room attending to liis boy’s final
rubbing down, was seated in Darcy ’s angle chatting
away to the latter as pleasantly as possible, and
every now and then telling him what a, trouncing
he .was about to receive. This, instead of having
the desired effect of putting fear into the boy’s heart,
merely made him laugh heartily. After a while
Langford playfully suggested that as Depena was
so late in putting in an appearance, he (Langford)
should take his place in the ring. Les turned quick-
ly, and with a queer light in his eyes, said: —“I
wish you meant it. I’d love to box a few rounds
with you.” Little did Sam think that the boy whose
leg lie was trying-to pull, would, three short years
later, be seriously spoken of as the most 1 worthy
opponent of his own great self.
Darcy’s next opponent was Jimmy Bums—a good,
hard, game lightweight, of West Maitland— whq.
was tipped as being the mail who would surely stop
the Easterner’s onward march. After putting up a
wonderful battle Jimmy was beaten by the knock-
out in the eleventh round.
Just then there was another Maitland boxer who
was well up among the best lightweights of the day.
His name was Billy Hannan. After earning quite
a long record of wdns round the northern towns,
Billy’ decided to try his luck in Sydney, and made
a capital start by outing Finney, Arthur Douglas’
sparring partner, in one round at the Old Gaiety’.
He fought a twenty-round draw with Dave Meekin
at'Newcastle, and on his second visit to Sydney 7 out-
ed in short order and quick succession Joe Conroy-
and Charley,and Harry Raff.
At that time that splendidly-controlled body, the
Wellington (N.Z.) Boxing Association, had written
to the Australian representative of the Association
(a position which, by the way, I have held for years)
asking for a suitable opponent for their good hon-
est pld champion, Tim Tracey. Upon my recom-
mendation Hannan got the trip, and beat the New
Zealander by a knockout in the fifteenth' round.
On his return horned Billy 7 was deemed a good
match for Arthur Douglas, who, at one period of his
career, was, in my opinion, the best lightweight in
the world. Hannan, therefore, suffered no disgrace
in being whipped by this redoubtable antagonist in
ten rounds.
After a second trip to the land of the Moa, where'
he again did well, Hannan had no difficulty in find-
ing backers for a match with the youthful Darcy,
but the latter put paid to his more experienced coun-
tryman’s account in the eighteenth round.
Poor brave little “Regio” was the next to try his
luck with Les, but was compelled to cry enough in
the eighth round. Right up to the time of his gal-
lant death at the Eront “Regio” proudly 7 boasted
that he was the one and only man who had knocked
the champion of champions off his feet. It happcn-
■ cd when Les was off his balance.- A wild left swing,
catching him on the side of the head, caused him to
fall; but, rising immediately, the embryo champion
fought hack iu dead earnest, and, although liis op-
ponent had no superior and very few equals in grit,
he was oblig'ed to cry.enough.
A match was next suggested between Darcy and
Rillv McNabb, the extremely hard-hitting Cessnock
butcher. The latter's friends and a big percentage
of Maitlandcrs felt certain that the lad was flying
much too high, and fried to persuade him to dodge
McNabb, for the time being at least; but, listening
to the advice of Mike Hawkins, as he did in almost
all things connected with matchmaking, Les signed
articles and fought, and beat McNabb on points in a
twenty-round contest oft October 25, 1010. This
was a great performance, seeing that Les had in-
jured both hands badly early in the tight.
Just prior to the battle Bob Whitelaw challenged
the winner. Mike Hawkins preferred waiting until
his boy’s hands had mended, but Les, for the first
and only time, refused to accept his advice, and in-
sisted upon signing up for a eontest and on Nov. o,
hut a few days later, he foolishly took on the best
welterweight in Australia, and was beaten on points.
This reverse was solely due to the fact that he was
unable to do himself full justice owing to his much
puffed and greatly damaged hands. At that time
Mike Hawkins was approached by certain men con-
nected with the sport, and offered quite a large
amount of money if he would consent to the match,
but he refused point blank, knowing that tlic, boy
would not have a hundred to one chance of winning
over so formidable an opponent as Whitelaw, un-
less his hands were in proper shape. ",
All my booming in “The Referee ’’ seemed to have
no effect at the time, and Darcy’s defeat by White-
law afforded an excellent handle for the Stadium
people, who still turned a deaf ear to the suggestions
of a match with the Maitland boy as a, principal.
With good old “Sugar” Flanagan as secretary
and matchmaker for the Olympia Stadium, however,
we saw' a ray of light, as “Sugar,” from his own
personal knowledge and that gained from the oft-
expressed opinion of his friend, Les O’Donnell, was
a great admirer of Darcy, and I knew he (Darcy)
would get a chance. ’
It came sooner than was expected, and Les’s op-
ponent was Englishman Jack Clarke, whom he
knocked out in nine rounds. I felt that this per-
formance was surely good enough to warrant a
match at headquarters being arranged, but still no
move was made in that direction. I am still at a
loss to understand the attitude adopted by the
Stadium people to* Darcy at this stage, of his career.
At this point in our story we must hark back to
the early days of Darcy’s career, and recount an
incident which has just come to mind. This inci-


Sent, had it been witnessed by the Stadium folk,
would, I fedl certain, have impressed them so much
that their attitude to the young Maitlander would
have been different. They must have marvelled to
think that a mere hoy of sixteen could have put up
such a wonderful performance.
Arthur Douglas, the great South African light-
weight, was at this time training for his match with
Whitelaw. Les was always keenly interested in the
work of any of the many celebrated visiting boxers
who came to these shores, and was a frequent visi-
tor at Douglas’ training rooms. One day he asked
to be allowed to spar three rounds with the South
African. Douglas was agreeable, and. the private
bout was arranged to go, not over tjiree rounds, but
over six. Now, everyone knew that, game as Doug-
las was in. battle, he was, at the lowest estimate, 40
per cent, better in the gymnasium, where lie had
more than held his own against, the majority of. his
sparring, partners. These, at various times, had in-
cluded Ted Whßeing, who at that time was in line
for tlie middleweight championship, and had beaten
such cracks as Jerry Jerome, Gus Dcvitt, Bill Rudd.
Tim Land, and Roy Kenny and had lasted the full
twenty rounds with Cripps and Clubby, when this
pair were at the top of their form.
The six-round bout duly came off, and the pair
boxed at a faster clip than any of those present
had ever witnessed. At the end of the bout, to
everyone’s astonishment, Les wanted still more, but
Douglas’s manager would not allow it, fearing that
his lad might overdo his work and thereby damage
his chances of success in his forthcoming contest with
Whitelaw.
This private bout was not arranged for the pur-
pose of trying the S.A. champion out. Arthur’s great
quality had been shown on many previous occasions.
The object was rather to discover whether Les could
take punishment, and if there, were any' present
that day who were in doubt on that score they went
away thoroughly satisfied that Les was as tough as
leather and game as the proverbial pebble.
CHAPTER IV.
Another interesting incident .in connection with
these early days of Les Darcy’s career occurred one
Sunday at the Newtown Railway and Tramway
Gymnasium. The lad paid a visit to this institution
in the hope of being given the opportunity of in-
dulging in a spar with'one of the large number of
good boxers who frequented that resort. Immediate-
ly upon expressing his desire for a few rounds, it
was suggested that Darcy should don the gloves
against Sid Deering, a hard-fighting and hard-hit-
ting middleweight, who never played light, and al-
ways aimed at “outing” his opponent. Darcy at
once fell in with the proposal, and those present
were delighted with the prospect of seeing their
champion knocking out the boyish-looking country
“mug.” Once more Darcy proved his quality, how-
ever, and Deering’s friends had to sit .by and see
their hero severely handled by this mere boy.
Following his victory over Jack Clarke, this great
performance caused a great deal of talk among the
good sports of the southern suburbs, and the opin-
ion was expressed on all sides that Darcy was a cut
above, the ordinary, but the Stadium folk persisted
in ignoring his qualification, and a Saturday night
fight at Rushcutter’s Bay was still withheld from
him. Fortunately good old “Sugar” Flanagan was
looking after the lad’s welfare, and matched Les
with, a good little fighter named Young Hanley, a
pupil of that clever instructor Tommy of that ilk,
wto thought so much of his boy’s chance that he
put up a, fairly substantial side bet on the result.
After playing with his man for a round or so, Les
put him to sleep in the fifth session.
, DARCY v. SUMMERS.
Yet another good trial was given Darcy before the
lad showed his paces in an advertised contest in
Sydney. This took place whilst Johnny Summers
was preparing for his contest with Tom McCormick.
This match, although not for the Lonsdale belt, then
in possession of Summers, really decided who was
. England’s premier welterweight, and McCormick
won.
Now, in spite of what might be said.of Johnny’s
comparatively poor showing on that occasion, it was
not lack of conditioii that caused bis downfall. He
was as well for that light as it was possible for hands
to make him, and yet lie could make no impression
on the lad Darcy when the pair met in a spar. Les
took Johnny’s famous left hooks to his chin without
a flinch, and all the time forced the English cham-
pion to break ground.
This bout was witnessed by Mr. Stewart Robin-
son, Mr. “Sugar” Flanagan, and the writer, be-
sides, of course, the many hundred local enthusiasts
who never missed an afternoon watching Johnny at
work, and it was really the means of getting Darcy
his chance at headquarters later on.
In the meantime Billy McNabb was training hard
in the hope of getting a return match with Darcy,
and was much annoyed when the later signed ar-
ticles for a contest with Whitelaw. This disap-
pointment, together with the fact that he did not
consider the decision in their previous contest the
coiTect one, rankled in the butcher boy’s breast,
and made him speak ill-of his opponent, A good
Further Triumphs


deal of bitterness was thus engendered between the
lads. Les, though preparing for the WliitelaxV con-
test, promised to meet McNabb. a month later, and*
after knocking out Bob in the fifth round on March
21, lie administered the same dose to Billy in four
rounds oil April 23, 19.1-L
At the time of the signing of articles and again
just prior to entering the ring Darcy and McNabb
indulged, in high words, and, but for the balance
and forbearance shown by the former, the pair
might have come to blows then and there. The con-
test which followed was probably the only really
bitter one of Darcy’s career, and was fought “all
in,” so to speak.
In every one of Darcy’s many brilliant efforts,
with the exception of the fight in which “Buck”
Crouse “sneaked one over,” the deceased never en-
tered the ring with an idea other than to win with
as litfle punishment as possible for his opponent. It
must be admitted that it would have been better for
many of his victims had he boxed with the inten-
tion of winning at the earliest possible opportunity.
He would then Imvc been kind to be cruel, whereas
the line he took, was really cruel to be kind.
With McNabb it was different. Billy had hurt his
feelings, and he set about the Cessnock crack at such
a pace that at any moment it looked likb a k.o. vic-
tory for Darcy. All the time he was in the ring the
light was akin to that brilliant spurt by which he
so completely overwhelmed the American Crouse in
1917.
By the defeat of two such good men as Clarke and
Hanley, aiad his good work in private, combined
with the continual “boosting” ox myself, .Darcy nat-
urally thought there would be no difficulty in get-
ting matched against some of the best men ou a
Saturday night at headquarters, but every effort in
that direction failed. In May, 1913, Mike Hawkins
came to Sydney with Darcy to see a big battle which
was fought at the Stadium. They were accompanied
by the lad’s closest friend, and one of his best spar-
ring partners, Jack Burns.
Whilst Jack and Les remained on the outer, Mike
Hawkins managed to get a word or two with the
manager, who laughed at the idea of matching an
unknown up-country boy with one of the well-known
draw-cards, aDd declared that there was no pros-
pect of drawing a payable house for such a contest.
Hawkins offered to give £5OO for the rent of the
house for one .night, and said he was prepared to
bet £lOO that the lad’s friends alone would nearly
pack the’ house. He xvas only laughed at for his
pains. Then came the unkindest cut of ail. The
trio were refused free admission, and waited on the.
off-ehance of getting a ticket or two from me. Learn-
ing from those who xvere standing around that I
had .already arrived, and had entered the Stadium,
thej- xvere about to purchase tickets for the cheap
portion of the house-when Mr. Corbett, then of the
“Sun,” arrived. Mike Hawkins put the position
before Mr. Corbett, who provided passes for two.
These were used by Les and Jack, and Mike Haw-
kins viewed the contest from the outer circle. This
was the only occasion upon which Mr. Corbett pro-
vided either Darcy or Hawkins with passes
CHAPTER V,
**3f you try and don’t succeed, try again.” This
may be said to have been the policy adopted by
Darcy’s friends at this stage of his career. They
knew that the boy only had to be given a chance at
headquarters to make good, and were determined
-not to rest until they had obtained for him the op-
portunity which he had earned long since. My re-
peated appeals through the columns of “The Re-
feree,” for a long time fell on barren ground, but
by shear keeping-at it my efforts were at last re-
warded. A match was arranged between Darcy and
Pred Holland, at that time one of the most cunning
ftnd clever of our middleweights. It looked a pretty
stiff proposition for a comparative novice, but nei-
ther Darcy himself nor his trainer felt any' doubt
about the result. They xvere too glad to get the
chance for which they had been xvaiting to have any
qualms regarding the vratcome.
Many followers of the game are inclined to the
belief that I, “Solar Plexus,” alone xvas responsible
tor Darcy's first chance. That is not the case. My
Darcy Gets his Chance.
continual harping on Darcy’s brilliancy must, of
course, have had its effect upon the Stadium man-
agement, but Darcy's wonderful ability must have
brought him to the front sooner or latex*—he was a
lad of destiny. But it must be remembered that
Darcy had in a great measure to thank Mr. Stewart
Robinson for the chance which ultimately came his
way. We have already told of that trial “go” with
Johnny Summers at Gate Hotel “gym,”
which was witnessed by Mr. Robinson, a director of
the Olympia Stadium Go., Ltd., “Sugar” Flanagan
and myself. What he saw that day so impressed
Mr. Robinson that when the two great boxing con-
cerns, Stadiums Ltd. and the Olympia Go., amalga-
mated, and Mr. Robinson became one of the dir-
ectoi*s, one of his first steps was to suggest a meet-
ing between Darcy and a suitable opponent as a
Saturday night attraction. Thus it was that on
July 18th, 3914, nearly five years ago, Darcy’s re-
markable career, which was to have so sad a deter-
mination, commenced.


JACK BURNS.
JACK BURNS,
Darcy’s best friend and
earliest sparring partner,
who would have shone as
a boxer but he has ambi-
tions for a higher profes-
sion. He is studying medi-
cine.
BILLY McNABB,
nephew of old time Jim
Fogarty, one of the hard-
est hitting middleweights
that ever lived. Billy was
twice beaten by Darcy.
BILLY McNABB.
Master and
Pupil.
DAVE SMITH, ex-heavyweight champion of Australia, who, with the able assistance of American Jimmy FUton,
was responsible for Darcy’s great ability. Darcy twice outed his former tutor for the title in 12 and 11 rounds.


Australia’s Greatest Sports
Outfitters and Tobacconists
WE CATER FOR SMOKERS AND SHAVERS
AND EVERY KIND OF SPORT AND RECREATION
V 7
&
2?
?/»«•
r-i
0,,,,
itniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiii 1
I Specialists in all kinds of Sporting Repair Work |
Illustrated "Can’t-B Beat Sportsman’s Guide,” "Sure Catch Angler’s Guide”
and “ Sunol Smokers’ Guide.” Gratis and Post Free.
HEADQUARTERS
Haymarket - Sydney
Branches. CITY, SUBURBS, NEWCASTLE and BRISBANE.


THE HOLLAND-DARCY BOUT.
ALL MAITLAND SEEMED PRESENT.
The many trips which the lad made in company
with his guide, philosopher and friend, Mike Haw-
kinSj from their home in West Maitland to the Syd-
ney Stadium were more than repaid on that memor-
able night, for never before nor since have so many
thousands paid for admission to the now world-
famous Rushcutter’s Bay boxing resort. Alike Haw-
kins was indeed a true prophet when he stated that
Darey would pack the house with his Maitland
friends alone. This proved actually to be the case.
They came down in special train loads to see their
popular idol in action, and more than 3000 late ar-
rivals were unable to gain admission. Jn spite of
the fact that Fred Holland was at that time un-
beaten in this country, the up-country lad’s'big
army of supporters, would, had betting been allow-
ed as in the days of old, have emptied out, to use
a racing phrase, on their man.
In spite of the unexpectedly large house, bo biteh
occurred, a high tribute to the Stadium’s efficient
staff and those who controlled the tram traffic; also,
to the fans themselves, all of whom, at the request
of the large body of uniformed and plain clothes
constables, formed themselves into queues which ex-
tesoded for- l»uadre<is of yewds- in -most orderly i&r-
rnation in direct lines to the entrance gates of th<S
various portions of the house.
Nothing of an objectionable nature occurred.dur-
ing the progress of the encounter. The ardent plau-
dits and encouraging cries that were showered on
Darcy were only to be expected, for here was a
mere lad, still in his 18th year, quite holding his
own against a matured b'oxer of rare ability. But.
never once did Holland receive unfair criticism.
At 8.50 the mightiest cheer that ever rent the
air at the Sydney Stadium heralded the arrival of
Darey and his retinue of seconds. The reception
was enough to unnerve the oldest campaigner in the
game, but it had no apparent effect on the simple
up-country boy, whose behaviour just then impress-
ed us more than anything else. He had^no nerves, and
to our mind was capable of performing any feat ih
the boxing world. From that moment -I tipped him
as & earning-champion. . '
Fully 75 per cent, of those present came with but
one idea in view. They wanted to see the mneb«
boomed Darcy in action, and- carried out their ia«
tention to the very letter, for, judging by their bos,
tile demonstration against the decision—a perfectly
just one —in favor of Holland, they had eyes foi
nothing but Darcy ’s work during the .progress
tbe-sbattle. '
CHAPTER VI. ,
The usually dear and far-reaching voice of the
Stadium's announcer was almost completely drown-
ed by the hum of the excited thousands. Reporters
occupying their customary ringside seats had to ask
a second time for the respective weights of the
contestants—Holland, 11.21; Darey, 11.1 j. The at-
tendance was enormous, proving my oft-repeated
contention, that a eontest having a local lad as one
of the principals would prove the best of draw cards
even against the best in the game. With the putting
on of the gloves, followed by the customary hand-
shake, the crowd, as if by some magic signal, be-
came quiet—so quiet, that, as Gilbert and Sullivan
bad it, a fly’s footfall could have been distinctly
heard. A moment later a mighty roar of encourage-
ment. went up for Dayev, when the battle began.
Darey made the pace immediately. He blocked
Holland’s left and simultaneously scored with a?
snappy right to the head. Holland smiled, and again
tried to connect with his left, but Darcy 's defence
was too good, and, following on, he reached the
much-surprised American’s head with left and right,
I-es made a wild right swing for the body. Fred
easily retreated, and with all bus force uppercut his
right to the country boy’s mouth; exactly the same
kind of .blow that put Albert Llovd down and out on
Darcy’s First Big Fight
a subsequent occasion. The-la tier's chin wasevi*
dently made of more brittle material than Darcy's*
for, instead of hurting the latter, it only made him
fight all the harder, and, rushing Holland to the
ropes, he jolted many lefts and rights -to-the-head
in close. i
At this- stage it looked as if the new- chum was
going to settle the pretensions of one of America's
best middleweights in double-quick time. Holland
appeared nervous and unable to cope with the
strength of his rushing young opponent. However,
he pulled himself together, and near corners scored
frequently with well placed lefts to the cose, draw*
ing blood.
Tn the second round Darcy again forced,' but only
at close quarters did he do any damage. His left
and right jolts scored often enough, but Holland,
by a clever twist of his cunning .old head, robbed
these blows of much of their weight, and at long
range, by clever footwork and blocking, he made
Darcy expend a deal of forle unnecessarily. Fred
was evidently acting on the defensive.with the idea
of tiring his inexperienced opponent, but, as many
others were to learn, such a thing was impossible
Darcv could set the pace from the word “go,’ 1 and
sustain it throughout the fall twenty rounds,


HOLLAND GETS GOING.
Up to this point Darcy looked all over a winner,
but in tho next session quite a big change came o’er
the scene. Holland started operations by pumping
left after left to Darcy’s damaged nose, and when
tho latter rushed and swung left and. right the
American blocked them grandly.
DAROY DOWNED.
Darcy’s next rush was again cleverly beaten. Fred
side-stepped and, as' his man went blundering on,
he delivered a hard left swing to the neck, sending
Darcy to his hands and knees. . As indicating the
good spirit in which the contest was fought through-
out, Holland helped his man to rise. Fred continued
to pile up points per medium of his straight left, but
by his persistent, forcing Darcy managed at last to
reach the head with a left hook. He followed up
with a mighty right drive to the body, then left and
right lo‘the head, too high up to more than the
American, who was forced to hong OU desperately.
On breaking away, Fred made much use of the ring,
jtnd kept lfis man off with straight lefts tp the face.
HOLLAND RATTLED.
Holland was much the weaker man at t}ie begin-
ning of the third round, but fpr a time he managed
by well-placed lefts and clever footwork to keep out
of harm’s w r ay. But Darcy’s persistent forcing en-
abled him to score Jefts and rights to the head, and,
amid wild cheering, lie crossed his right to the ear,
and Fred’s knees bent. With a full head’of steam
on, Les forced his man clear across the ring, and
sunk left and right to the body, causing Holland
to bend almost double.
Recognising that he had no chance of successfully
coping with the up-country boy’s strength at close
quarters, Holland, when forced into a position where
this kind of milling only could be used, saw to it that
he acted only on thp defensive, and reserved his at-
tack for long range. .
HOLLAND’S POINTS MOUNT UP.
The fifth round was one in which Holland scored
many points with straight lefts. He landed with
annoying regularity, but Darcy took them, as if they
were light taps. In close Fred hung on to his op-
ponent’s arms, and, jumping back quickly from the
left or right swing which invariably came along, he
chopped or uppercut his right to the back of the
head or flush on the nose or mouth. Still, he failed
to stay for the fraction of a second Darcy’s onwai’d
rush.
DAROY DOWN AGAIN.
Jumping clear of a left and right swing, Holland
caught his man off his balance, and, with a mighty
left swing to the neck, again sent him to his knees.
Once more cheers rang out as the American assisted
the boy to his feet- and before corners sounded
Darcy burst Holland's right eyebrow with a henry
left hook.
The sixth opened well for Darey, but finished so
very much in Holland's favor that many at the ring-
side mode bets that the contest would not last the
full, journey, How little they knew of the wonder
boy’s toughness and pluck I Darcy started off jn
this roupd. by laming so stiff a left on Fred’s nose
as to make the latter haug on for a few seconds, and
afterwards caused hint to fight very much on the
retreat until he had recovered, Holland got inside
a left swing, and delivered left and right below, He
ne?t swung two hard rights to the jaw and an up-
pereqt under the chin, hut was mpre than surprised
to find that these blows had little or no effect on
Le,s, who,,in spite of quite a host of lefts to the face,
was forcing his man when the gong for corners rang.
Even now Darcy was the stronger of the pair, and
ill the seventh was learning his lessen by bitter ex-
perience. He found a way of defending himself
from those powerful upperputs, and was also beat-
ing many of Holland’s left leads by blocking, whilst
others he got his head beneath, and sunk lefts and
rights }n fhe body, making Fred wince. A left hook
to the jaw and several cruel-looking right chops to
the body added to the American’s discomfiture- Hol-
land now showed wonderful defence, H e blocked,
back-moved, retreated, and dfipked in a rpally won-
derful manner, and on recovering he scored hard
and often to Darcy’s body with his right. He was
decidedly tired, but managed, by using all his known
cunning, to escape Darcy ’s many attempts. Darcy,
though having received by far the greater number
of blows, was still the stronger and more eager to
fight.
Boxing carefully, Holland was piling up points
with his left during the eleventh, but just on cor-
ners be went within an ace of being beaten, when a
right cross got him squarely on the chin. Fortun-
ately for the American, corners came to his rescue
soon after.
Fred used different tactics in the twelfth. He
waited Darcy’s lead, jumped back, and, returning
quickly, caught the Australian off his guard, and
swung with ail bis power rights to the body and
head. Still the boy came on, and, with three heavy
right jolts under the chin, made Holland clinch des-
perately.
THE THIRTEENTH.
, In the unlucky thirteenth it looked as if Holland
had shot his bolt, and that the big score that stood
to Ifis credit might, after all, he wiped out before
the full journey was completed. His left kept shoot-
ing out to Darcy’s face, but the latter quite ignored
these attentions, and jolted short, punishing lefts
and rights to body and head, landing more often than
did Fred, and always with more damaging effect.
Holland opened the fourteenth with a right swing


to the neck, and ducked left and right and dug a
heavy right in the body, then a heavy right on the
chin annoyed Darcy. His pleasant smile disappear-
ed, and, after - jumping in the air, he rushed the
American, swinging lefts and rights, all of which
Fred ducked and clinched. Darcy, on the break-
away, hooked his left hard on the chin, sending
Holland back in his tracks, but when Les came again
and swung his left, Fred, in capital style, connected
with his right uppercut to the chin.
Again Darcy became annoyed, and, rushing his
man, swung with wonderful speed and strength lefts
and rights under and over, and Holland was un-
doubtedly worried. At this stage many at the ring-
side were taking short odds that the boy would win
by the short-cut route, which, as we have indicated,
was his only chance of victory.
Being fully convinced that he did not possess
of punch sufficient to cause Darcy the slight-
est discomfiture,*to say nothing of knocking him out,
Holland refrained from attempting to land a heavy
blow throughout the fifteenth session. He was con-
tent to let well alone, and place the lightest of light
lefts to the face, jumping clear of returns. But
every now and then, when Darcy got dose enough,
he chopped rights to the ribs that made Holland
wince.
Holland.’s condition must have been excellent, for
he came up for the sixteenth looking very yell, all
things considered, and after placing quite a host of
lefts to the face, he put all his strength into a right
uppercut that bumped. Les squarely on the chin.
Thinking that this blow.would surely- weaken
Darcy, Holland rushed in swinging left and right.
Imagine his surprise when Darcy dueked, and sunk
left and right inches deep in the American’s body,
finishing up this charge with a heavy left hook to
the eliin that made Fred hang on. Nearing corners’
Holland swung his .right three times to Darcy’s
mark, but even these had no damaging effect.
By clever footwork in the seventeenth Holland
made Darcy miss a lot and.leave himself open for
the right that pounded hard on the ribs or upper-
cut under the ehin. Darcy proved an apt pupil. He
was learning as be went along, and blows that Hol-
land bad no difficulty in landing early in the con-
test were now cleverly blocked or beaten in other
CHAPTER VII.
ways. He blocked and backed from lefts and rights,
and simultaneously hooked his left to Fred’s head.
Holland for a tirtre showed plenty of speed in shoot-
ing left after left to the nose, but, back-moving one
of these, Darcy hooked bis left again to the side of
the head and swung left and right to the nose and
mouth as comers rang.
Tt was wonderful how fresh and strong the East
Maitlander appeared when he came up for the nine-
teenth. He blocked left and right, and with a left
hook to the chin dazed his man, who skipped out of
further harm’s way, uppercut' two rights to the
chin, shoved his left three or four times to Darcy’s
nose, and tried to land with left and right. All
‘these were so cleverly beaten by Darcy’s footwork
that Holland missed and fell to his hands and knees.
Fred backed from Darcy’s left leads in the last
round and uppercut with his right. This perform-
ance he repeated several times, and he also scored
with a right in the body, but still Darcy came on,
and breaking through the American’s guard, he
slammed lefts and rights to the body, making Fred
gasp. The latter was evidently determined to throw
no chances away against his stronger opponent, and
3h the few remaining moments he was careful not
to get close enough to allow Les to get in his deadly
t work below. The latter still hgd a knock-out punch,
which, landing any way near a vulnerable spot in
Fred’s then broken-up condition, might have won for
Darcy at the very last moment.
THE DECISION.
>
When the referee (Harald Baker), without hesi-
tation, placed his hand on Holland’s head a storm of
cheers arose from those in close proximity to the
ring, hut almost immediately came the loud hoots
and groans from the outer circle. Never was a hos-
tile demonstration so unwarranted, as Harald Bak-
er’s decision was a perfectly fair one. Holland
sti’odc across the ring and grasped his boyish op-
ponent warmly by the hand) Les, with that charm-
ing smile, returned the greeting, and thanked the
winner for his hurriedly-uttered words of congratu-
lation on the great fight-he had*put up. As Fred
wended his way to the dressirig-room the groans
and cheering broke out afresh, and Darcy’s first big
fight ended, as did all his others, in a wave of en-
thusiasm.
How Darcy lost in return match with Holland.
Looking back at that first meeting between Darcy
and Holland, we are more than ever inclined to
wonder that.any man calling himself a judge of the
game should have failed to see the possibilities which
lay before the young Maitlander. In view of Hol-
land’s subsequent, performances against Smith,
Olabby, Lloyd, Harry* Reeve, “K. 0.” Brown and
others, Darcy's achievement, aa a practically untried
youth, in making a close thing of it against one of
the best middleweights' of the time, was little short
of phenomenal. After the contest I wrote in “The
Referee 1 ’ as follows:—“Darcy is uncommonly cool,
tough and game, and, with proper handling, will
make a great name for himself. He has a wonder-
ful idea of the game, and will pick up the fine points
quicker than any youngster we hare flyer known. 0


How truly prophetic was that statement has since
been clearly shown, for in all subsequent battles his
improvement was most marked. The fact that there
were still critics who, through ignorance of the game
or personal bias, failed to see that improvement, in
no way detracted from the young champion’s work,
and made no impression upon his followers.
' Although he uttered no word of complaint against
the referee’s decision in his first contest with Hol-
land, Darcy at once asked for a return match, and
Holland had no hesitation in accepting, knowing
that, win or lose, his efforts would he handsomely
rewarded. A return match was arranged for Sep-
tember .12, 1915, and on that evening the pair met
again before a crowd that packed every comer of
the Stadium.
EARLY TRAINING DIFFICULTIES.
Bearing in mind the strength and endurance of
liis youthful opponent, the wily Holland got himself
into perfect shape this time, and before entering the
ring stated that in all his long career he never felt
so well or so confident of being returned the win-
ner. Darcy had to be content with doing his train-
ing at night time, after putting through a heavy
day’s work at the smithy, and had no good spar-
ring partners to help him through. This maimer Of
training would have cracked up 99 per cent, of men,
but Darcy was much out of tho ordinary. No amount
of work seemed nearly enough.
Just prior to the signing of the articles for the
second battle Mr. B. L. Baker paid me the very
high compliment of .asking my opinion as to who
should have the job of polishing the rough edges off
this promising colt. The writer unhesitatingly nom-
inated Dave Smith, reasoning out my selection thus:
—Darcy was the best natural fighter I had ever
seen, and all that was required to bring him to the
front ih giant strides was speed, a quality which
no man in the world possessed more of than otir
heavyweight champion of that period.
When Dave fell in with the proposal I was de-
lighted, but disappointment followed when we found
that Darcy’s boss at East Maitland would not grant
him the two weeks’ holiday which he intended put-
ting in with his new manager and tutor, and he was
therefore compelled to train in the manner already
described. Still the lad showed a marked improve-
ment on his first encounter, and would surely have
won by a wide margin had tho contest gone the full
journey. Darcy, when well ahead on points, was
disqualified for accidentally delivering a low punch
in the IStli round, and for the first atid only time
in his brilliant career he lost on a fouL
THE RETURN MATCH.
Darcy on this occasion was 11.3 J, heavier
than in their first contest, whilst Holland
llib. lighter. The American started operation* hy
swinging a heavy right to Darcy’s left eye, almost
closing it, but Fred’s many other attempts to land
in similar fashion were cleverly beaten, being block-
ed or the left shooting out to the nose, checking
Fred’s punch when half-way on its mission. Hol-
land crossed his right to the jaw and was immedi-
ately repaid with left, and then left and right to
the nose and mouth, with force sufficient to cause
the American to hang on desperately.
DARCY ONCE MORE DROPPED.
Amid much excitement Holland countered a left
hook with a straight one on the nose, causing Les
to sit down hurriedly, but just as rapidly did he
rise and try to connect with left and right. Hoi'
land’s long left kept him at bay, however, and by
this means, as in their former encounter, the last-
named notched many points in the remaining few
seconds of this, the opening round.
Darcy fought vigorously throughout the second
session and got home some punishing lefts and rights
to the body, at the same time blocking his oppon-
ent’s many attempts to land his right. Holland,
near comers, sent Les’s head back with a jerk, per
medium of a straight left to the nose, but Darcy
more than evened this by getting home with left
and right.
Darcy seemed keen on scoring to Fred’s body in
the third; too keen, in fact, for in his eagerness he
swung a heavy left to the American’s groin, and
had Holland complained he must have won then and
there on a fouL How very few would have let pass
this splendid opportunity of gaining the verdict
without further trouble! Holland showed himself
a thorough sport. He did not even lose his temper,
but coolly waited Darcy’s lead and beat him with a
straight left to the nose. Although Holland seored
heavily with a right chop to the Australian’s head,
he received a host of lefts and rights to the head,
and was kept busy defending himself at olose range.
It looked any odds on Darcy being returned the
winner hy a knoek-out in the fourth round. He
swung taany punishing lefts to the body, some dan-
gerously low, and then with a right to the other
side and up to the head he had Fred in sueh a bad
way that the latter was compelled to clinch desper-
ately to Save himself from falling. After hesitating
awhile, Darcy, with both hands free, pumped left*
and rights to the body, and a heavy right to the
head compelled Holland to let go and stagger back.
A right swing landed en Darcy’s left shoulder with
a resounding smack, which not a few applauded,
thinking it had reached the jaw. Holland tried te
clinch, but Darcy’s lefts and rights below caused
him to break ground hurriedly. Anticipating a left
hook, Holland ducked and received the full weight
of a right uppercut in the body, but as Darcy was
posting for the delivery of a left swing Holland


drove his right with all his force to the youngster’s
jaw, without, however, having the slightest effect.
Holland started off well in the fifth by frequently
scoring with his left, which Les geemed powerless
to block. Ducking under one of these Darcy forced
Holland across the ring per medium of powerful
left and right drives to the body and, after retreat-
ing from a left swing, Darcy scored a right to the
jaw and a left to the body which made Fred wince.
In the 6th round a heavy right to the body caused
lies to grunt, but although a second one landed on
the same spot, Darcy forced and swung left to the
body and head hard and often, compelling Holland
to clinch. Fred was hard pressed in the 7tli. After
blocking a left hook Darey ripped his left to the
body and hooked that weapon on the chin, and with
a left swing below Darcy nearly lifted his man off
his feet. With left and right to body and head the
Australian had his man dead weak at comers. As
the contest progressed Darcy’s pugnacity and
greater strength enabled him to outfight the visitor,
and he looked a sure winner either on points or by
the knock-out. Recognising that he was up against
it, Holland, in the hope of living through the full
journey, acted almost entirely on the defensive.
Now and again, when the opportunity presented it-
self he swung a right to Les’s head, which punch,
though heavy enough to drop almost any other man,
had no apparent effect on Darcy.
Holland made a gallant attempt in the fourteenth.
He swung left and right to the head, and in the
hopes that the amount of work his opponent had
crowded into the previous sessions, w r ould have found
the youngster out, tried to outpace him, but he
was soon made wise to the fact that our lad was as
fresh, strong and eager to mix it as ever. Conse-
quently Holland was compelled to once more act
»on the defensive. The American was becoming slower
as the- fight progressed, and Darcy, in his anxiety
to end matters by a knock-out, landed several blows
so low that they struck the front of Fred’s thigh.
In the ICth-one in the-grormnade the American turn
white, hut he did not complain.
HOLLAND “ALL IN.”
Seeing his man was “all hr” Darcy rushed, and
with a left in the solar plexus he sent Holland to
his knees. Prcd foolishly took only two seconds of
the count, ami when he regained his feet, stood in
a dcmbled-np position in the middle of the ring.
Darey was bewildered and refrained from taking
what he thought would have been an ratfair advan-
tage, but when Fred recovered a few seconds later
and adopted a fighting attitude, Les was soon at
work again scoring with both hands to the head
and body. It was now a question whether Holland
would see the full journey through. In sheer des-
peration Holland swung lefts and rights almost con-
tinuously throughout the 17th round, but these at-
tempts were easily beaten, and although. Darcy lift
him often enough in the body and-up to the head,
owing to his hard work prior to the battle he was
unable to deliver a knock-out. IDs. muscles '"wees
all tied up.
Darcy swung a left very low
the 17th round, which foul was not observed by Be-
feree Harald Baker, but just when he
be putting the finishing touches to his -opponentdn
the 18th he again swung his left low and was im-
mediately disqualified.
The lad’s wonderful improvement, which was
brought about chiefly through the experience-gain-
ed in the first encounter, and one or two- lessoos
from Smith, was further proof of his good,
raw material, and also bore out to the very
letter the statement that he would pick up the fine
points of the art quicker than any lad we ever had.
1 also wrote in “The Referee” of September lfi:—
“When Darcy is knocked into proper shape, like
many of his countrymen of old, he will vie with
middleweights of other countries for the worlds
championship.”
CHAPTER VIII.
it . MARCHAND’S ALLEGED PUNCH.
Under Dave Smith’s skilful handling, and ably
assisted by Jimmy Pitton as sparring partner, the
lad soon showed remarkable improvement. He was
now a different Darcy from the immature lad who,
by his great strength and pluck, had done so well
in his two contests with Holland. This improve-
ment was first publicly demonstrated on August 5,
1914, when Darcy met the over-boomed Preneh mid-
dleweight, “K.O” Marchand, a man who, accord-
ing to his record, possessed a punch which, if it
reached a vulnerable spot, was likely to bring the
Haitl&nder’s ouward-march to an ahraot end, Bat
Darcy’s Clear-cut Victory over Marchand.
the rumors of his opponent’s prowess had no effect
on the Australian, who, when told of Mareoand’s
great punching power, merely smiled his ingratiat-
ing smile, and remarked, “My word,. I’ll have to
keep clear of his swings. Anyhow,” he added, “I
have learnt to hit a lot harder since joining Dave
Smith, so there will be a pair of us when we meet.”
The meeting finally took place on Eight Hour
night, the one public holiday night above all othera
which, in previous years, had proved bad for a box-
ing contest. Contrary to past experience, a vast
crowd packed the Stadium. Darey was the attrac-
tion. No other man would have drawn half m snteh


DARCY’S POPULARITY.
Apart from the Australian’s great popularity,
fans were eager to see how much Dave Smith’s tu-
ition had benefited the lad. Those who knew Les
ior a rusher were agreeably surprised to see him
back move, back, block, or duck his opponent’s
powerful swings in the opening round. The clean
and crisp manner in which he landed his blows was
favorably commented upon. Their weights at the
ringside were Marehand 11.4 and Darev 11.2 h
Instead of tearing in, as had been his custom in
the past, Darcy waited Marcliand’s lead, a left
swing, which was neatly blocked by Darcy’s right
forearm. - Meanwhile out shot the latter's left,three
times, with such force that the Frenchman’s nose
was peeled. Marehand’s next attempt was a double,
left and right. Each blow was blocked with ease,
and then Darcy sent his man’s head first this way
and then that by short- left and right jolts. Two
'efts scored to the foreigner’s damaged nasal organ,
and a right uppercut that came soon after nearly
toppled him over. Marehand tried a. right swing,
which was cleverly ducked, and before the Frencli-
aa an. could get back to a defensive position he re-
vived left and right to the nose, which now bled
profusely.
A REVELATION.
, Darcy's improvement was a revelation. It was
greater than his most ardent admirers had antici-
pated, and he was cheered to the echo. Darcy start-
ed the second round by placing a light left to Mar-
chatid’s nose, starting the blood flowing afresh. This
was followed by a right smash on the jaw, which
mnoved Marehand, who swung wildly in the hope
>f connecting somewhere. Darcy skipped clear or
lucked smartly, and poked his left tantalisingly to
'‘K.O.’s” nose.
Marehand at last got home a. right swing to the
head, much to the enjoyment of his countrymen,
who, knowing the power of their man’s punch, went
wild with excitement. They never for a moment
realised the toughness' of our boy, who, though stop-
ping the weighty blow with his chin, merely smiled
and waded in with renewed vigor, bringing home
left and right to the nose and mouth, a right to the
body and then over to the head.
Getting under a right swing, foarcy hooked his
left to the chin, and once more performed with his
right under and over. Marehand looked anxiously
at the overhead clock, but immediately swung a
right for the* head, and missed. He feinted with that
hand, and as Darcy ducked the latter received a
;oiid right uppercut to the forehead!
Les ducked first left and then right, and sent in
: snappy left that sent “K.O.’s” head back with a
.erk. As the contest progressed, and Darcy be-;
canje more used to the Frenchman's methods, his
.‘jjdence became more pronounced He eaMlv and
quite gracefully blocked, backed from or ducked all
his .opponent's swings, ns the occasion - warranted,
and jolted, drove, hooked, or swung left and right
to head and body.
THE knock-out;
In the fifth round, after backing away from two
right swings, Les put all his force into two right up-
percuts under the chin, and Marehand was dazed.
To put it bluntly, and with all respect to the En-
tente Cordiale, the Frenchman squibbed badly.
Marehand was all in and an easy mark for left
and right to either side of the head. A right in
the body and a left hook on the chin dropped Mar-
chand like a log. At the count of five the visitor
regained his feet, but before Darcy could land an-
other blow he flopped to the boards, grovelled,
grunted, and growled and somersaulted'. He rose
again, and then flopped heavily for ttye third time,
and Darcy was declared the winner.
Gus Christie, a new arrival from America, who
had been outpointed by Mick King, and who sub-
sequently outed Marehand, was Darcy’s next oppon-
ent, and many predicted that he would stop Darcy’s
onward march. The American’s newly-made friends
and admirers were telling all and sundry that Chris-
tie was not nearly at his best when he lost to King,
and that he would surely prove too fast, clever, and
experienced for the promising West Mailander.
had my doubts on that score, and argued that, with
the knowledge Les would gain by his connection
with Dave Smith, Christie’s rushing style would be
the means of making Darcy shine out more than
ever. I tipped Les to win.
loxing Made Easy
(Already in its Second Edition)
The Book for Beginners and Professionals.
£lO/10/- worth of Expert advice
on the manly artofselfdefence
By “SOLAR PLEXUS”
The jreatest autharity ea Boxing in Aus ralia.
Price: One Shilling.
FROM ALL BOOKSELLERS
AND NEWSAGENTS.


The Meeting with Christie.
CHAPTER IX.
In the “Referee” of October 7, 1914, I wrote as
follows concerning Darcy’s wonderfully-improved
showing against Marchand as compared with his ex-
hibition in the contests with Fred Holland:—
“Les Darcy’s connection with chapipion Dave
Smith in his training operations for the contest with
Marchand last Monday night was the means of vast-
ly knproving him. He is quicker to take advantage
of openings caused through a flaw in the opponent’s
defence, and has learnt sufficient to create such op-
portunities. Iri opposition to Fred Holland, Les
made the mistake of continually hurling himself at
his deverer and more experienced opponent, with
the Tesult that Fred’s blows landed with redoubled
foffice. Resides, Holland was always aware of the
ta#£ks to adopt against the lad, who never varied
has methods of milling. But on this occasion it was
aallrety different. Darcy feinted nicely, brought
hasunan ever, and then did the correct thing in at-
tack. Besides, by back-moving, a trick hitherto
foreign to him, he made Marchand miss badly, and
thus leave himself open for attack, which came
quick, supe, and weighty, in the shape-of well-timed
rights or uppercuts. The yqungster was in splen-
did form, and with every likelihood of further im-
provement a few months hence, if still under Dave
Smith’s tuition, he will be a worthy opponent for
the bestmiddieweightsi in the game.”
We were not kept long in waiting for proof of
the correctness of these remarks, for on November
1, 1914, Les cleverly outpointed Qns Christie, the
man who had previously had the better of Eddie
McGoorty in a ten-round contest in America. Once
more Darcy’s wonderful popularity was shown, for,
in spite of the fact that the world was at war, and
*fl eyes were anxiously turned towards the battle-
gwwßKfcin France, thousands gathered at the Stadium
bprsee fhe fight. If any doubts still existed in the
winds of unbiased critics as to Darcy’s claim for
recognition as a middleweight champion possibility
they were dispersed on this occasion. His victory
over Christie, one of America’s best men, was so
•lean -cut, to ray xniad at least, that a-victory over
th* them champion* Jeff Smith, wasrfulTy anticipated.
However, the friends of our local champion, Mick
King, insisted that their man must first be account-
ed for, and to go a Bffle in advance of our story,
this-feat vrasr duly •peafomed.,
For-theSr-cootest ‘Dnrcy-and Christie complied
the weight conditions' whieh, according to the
roles of the game, sioald govern, dll contests.. They
weighed at the ringside within one hour of com-
mencing hostilities. Olirixtie turned the scale at
lLifaad Bqarey of 1L2%.
DARCY’S SUPREME OONPIDENOE.
Despite the American’s reputation, Darcy .came up
to the scratch with the utmost'confidence, ami'im-
mediately scored with a light left to the nose, Chris-
tie worked in close and drove a' few powerful lefts
to the body, hut his left and right attempts were
neatly back-moved and Les landed his left, solidly
on his’ opponent's nose. The visitor’s leads were
frequently beaten either by back-moving or clever
footwork, and Darcy’s left landed plunk on his op-
ponent’s nose with almost monotonous regularity-
Christie’s left and right swings were blocked with
the ease and grace of a master, and jolts "With Left
and right uppercuts were plentiful. At an earlv;
stage in the contest there was every prospect of aft
easy win for Darcy, and tlie-crowd went m»d. Chris-
tie rushed and swung desperately in the second
round, but failed to get past our lad V-cte-ver de-
fence, until stray left and right swings caught
Darcy on either jaw, sending him hack a- pace*
Christie, thinking he had his opponent’s measure,
rushed in and-tried to repeat these punches, J>ut his
attempts were neatly ducked or blocked, and Les
retaliated with three stiff lefts, which* sent Gus*»
head back with painful-looking jerks.
Christie scored with a left swing to the mouth,
but his right swing was ducked and lie received tha
full force of Darcy’s right under the heart. Tha
tough German-American was badly rattled when tha
gong cgme to his aid.
CHRISTIE’S FREQUENT FOULS SHOWS THE.
DIRTY GERMAN.
-Although Darcy, in the third round, had the mis-
fortune to receive a bqd bump from Christie’s head,
which cut his left eyebrow, the Australian kept im-
proving his position as the contest progressed. This
greatly annoyed Christie, who on several pccasions
showed signs of temper, and tried by fair and foul
means to get some of his own back. His every effort
was thwarted, and it was apparent to all (himself
included) that he was up against a map infinitely
his superior- Darcy proved, withal, a lenient op-
ponent, and showed a preference for outpointing
rather than knocking out his man. So superior, in
fact, was Darcy that the spot which suffered from
the severe bump in the third round was never again
touched, although it was made the target for Chris-
tie’s frequent swings, ail of which were beaten, by
some cleyer. defensive work.
Darcy now made the mistake (his only on*
throughout the battle) of leading with his right for
the body,, giving his man an opening for the landing
of some terrific upposrwsis, which, however, were
flad. he so wished it Darcy might
have noted h& mas, ia the fourteenth rotmd, fas ift


this session Christie was all in, but even though the
latter, when in close, attempted to connect in a foul
and cowardly manner with his right elbow, our lad
remained unruffled, and merely passed the offend-
ing weapon aside. Les only laughed at his man’s
attempts to wrestle him off his feet in the fifteenth
round, but when Christie tried desperately to bump
Darcy’s chin with his head in the sixteenth round
he was severely cautioned by the referee.
About midway through the nineteenth round the
Australian gave his friends some,idea of what would
surely have happened had he so desired in' almost
any one of the previous sessions. Putting more
ginger into his work he pumped a heavy left to the
nose, and\vith a right uppercut under the chin he
dropped Christie. In the twentieth, and last, round
CHAPTER X.
About this time Fred Dyer, a new arrival from
Wales, had been showing real championship form at
Brisbane, where''he had accounted! with ease for all
opposition, and on November 14 he was said to have
had much the better of Fred Holland, although the
contest was declared a draw. Such brilliant form
oh the part of the recently-arrived Welshman was
deemed worthy of consideration by the promoters,
who in their wisdom saw fit to match Fred with our
own coining champion, thus bringing together a
well-matched pair and giving the good sports of
Brisbane an opportunity of seeing Darcy in action.
Consequently this formidable pair came together at
the Northern capital on December 26, 1914.
In spite of Darcy’s all-conquering career in his
own State, the clever visitor had every confidence in
his own ability tgt at least stay the distance, aifd
looked to liis*greater experience to earn for him a
points decision. Fred no doubt thought that Darcy’s
success was solely due to the lad’s pugnacity and
phenomenal strength. He never for a moment an-
ticipated meeting one whose science and speed were
in keeping with the natural advantages already men-
tioned. Consequently the Welshman was more than
astonished to find that from the word “go” he was
kept very much on the defensive. It soon became
plainly evident that Dyer had made up his mind to
direct all his. attention to seeing the full journey
through, and the contest thus lost much of its inte-
rest to the majority of the onlookers. To those who
admire the fine points in defence, Dyer’s exhibition
was certainly a treat, hut it took much away from
Darcy’s showing, and as a result a pile of money
was lost by the good sports of the Northern capital
when Darcy mot the world-famed Eddie McGoorty
seven months later.
In the third round Dyer swung a heavy left to
Darcy's right temple, cutting it slightly; but al-
though he tried often enough in the remaining rounds
Darcv beat his 'man from pillar to post by means
of left and right jolts, but never once throughout
this three minutes of boxing did he put all his
strength behind any one of his blows. For this rea-
son alone Christie avoided a knockout.
“AN ALMIGHTY GREAT QUARREL.”
In spite of Christie’s foul fighting, it must be ad-
mitted that he took his defeat in a manly fashion.
When the.verdict was given in Darcy’s favour, he
gripped the latter by the hand, and spoke a few
- words of congratulatory nature, and in the Stadium
office a few moments later, he caused much amuse-
ment by remarking, “Well, Les, you are no doubt a
wonderful fighter; but, say, was it not an almighty
great quarrel we just had!”
Fred Dyer Outpointed at Brisbane.
lie failed to reach that spot again. In these early
rounds Les missed consistentlywith 'left leads, ow-
ing to the elusive tactics of the Welshman, who, ow-
ing to his opponent's incessant forcing, soon slowed
him down. He .could not, however, avoid the num-
erous short left prods and hooks and jolts which
Darcy got home with less power than usual. Still it
was due to the Australian’s leniency, rather than the
Welshman’s clever defensive tactics, that Dyer was
allowed to remain on deck until the gong sounded
the termination of the 20th round..
The conditions of the match called for an 11.4
limit, and the announcer gave their poundage as:
Darcy 11.1, and Dyer under 11.4. ( Those behind the
Welshman, in their wisdom, made a special request
that their man’s actual weight should not be given.
They feared that the knowledge of his big advan-
tage in weight would give Darcy increased con-
fidence, and so cause him to go “all out” from the'
jump-off and overwhelm their man. Had they known
Les better they would have realised how unneces-
sary was such a precaution, for of the lad’s many
fine qualities his self-confidence was outstanding,
and it mattered not whether Dyer was a stone under
or over the limit, the fact would not have influenced
the Sydney boy.
So much discussion went on regarding the Welsh-
man’s actual weight that at the request of one or
two well-known sports Fred got on the scales after
the contest and just raised the beam to 10.2. Thus
at the very most Dyer could not have been more
than 10.4 before hostilities commenced, because, be-
ing in perfect trim, he would scarcely have dropped
more than 21b. on the journey. Upon his return
home, Darcy told me that Dyer, was the cleverest
roan at ducking he had ever seen, and that during
the progress of the bout he studied his opponent’s
methods in this direction, and before the end came
successfully rrot many of them into.action, thus add-


Comparison of Length of Reach in DARCY and McGOORTY.
McGOORTY, sft. lOin. in
height.
rx
This photo was taken
prior to the first Darcy-
McGoorty contest. Al-
though the late champion
was four inches the
shorter in height, it will
be seen in this picture
how very much longer he
was in reach, for whilst
Eddie’s arms are extend-
ed in almost a straight
line, each of Darcy’s then
formidable weapons have
an upward tendency, yet
the tips of the fingers of
each hand extend far be-
yond those of the
American’s.
DARCY, sft, Gin. in
height.
MICK KING.
Ex-middleweight champion of Aus-
tralia, who was badly beaten by
Darcy in ten rounds for world’s
championship honors.
HAROLD HARDWICK.
Amateur heavyweight champion
of Australia, the British Empire,
and heavyweight champion of
Australia, champion swimmer, a
soldier, and a man.


Born 1820
—Still going strong*
fs/r/
v\\
/a
%
w
/
y/t
Nervous Gentleman: “One takes a lot of risk travelling nowadays.”
Experienced Traveller: Of course there always will be risks, bud they
ARE ENORMOUSLY REDUCED BY STICKING TO ‘JOHNNIE WALKER IN
THOSE NON-REFILLABLE BOTTLES.”
This wonderful tamper-proof bottle ensures that what is poured out is what the distillers put in.
The excellence of “ Johnnie Walker” Red Label Whisky requires the protection which this non-
refillable bottle gives.
Guaranteed same Quality throughout the World.
JOHN WALKER & SONS, Ltd., Scotch Whisky Distillers, KILMARNOCK, Scotland, '
SYDNEY and MELBOURNE


ing yet a few more tricks to his already extensive
store of boxing knowledge. *
, Having so easily defeated Dyer, who was pre-
viously deemed the equal at least of Fred Holland,
Darcy now took his acknowledged place among the
first-flighters, and it was with one of the very best
©f-. that bunch that he had next to do battle; I refer
to Jeff Smith, who, by his defeat of Jimmy dabby,
won the world’s middleweight championship. Smith
still held the title when, on January 23, 1915, he
and Darcy came together, because though he lost it
to Mick King at their first meeting, he regained the
championship on December 26,1914. Thus the meet-
ing between Smith and Darcy was for the world’s
championship. As in almost all his previous battles,
it was thought by many that Darcy’s onward 'march
was to receive a check. Although this proved to b®
the case, it came about in so unsatisfactory a man-
ner that, until the pair met again, Jeff was not
looked upon as being Darcy’s superior.' ; .
CHAPTER XI
. FIRST BATTLE.
We now come to that memorable January 23,1915,
when our great boy toed the mark with the clever
and much more experienced Jeff Smith, who had
beaten all previous opposition, and was regarded by
very many as being the one who would surely stop
Les’s triumphant march. Although those who were
of that opinion backed their fancy and collected,
they did so because of Dave Smith’s hasty action
in throwing, in the towel after, his appeal for a foul
went unheeded by MK Referee Harald Baker, who
claimed that he was not in a position to see whether
the blow Smith landed was under or above the
waist band.
The attendance was close upon the record in num-
ber, and I think the gate receipts, with the exception
•f the Johnson-Bums championship fizzle, was easily
among the largest ever.
Some weeks or so previous to the date of the con-
test, Dame Rumor had got in her fine work,' with
the result.that she had Darcy, in the minds of many
©f liis friends, in a very bad way through a more
than ordinary severe cold and a touch of rheuma-
tism. Had it not been for the Thursday matinee,
at which the boy showed so wonderfully well, the
chances are that the takings would have suffered
Severely.
At that mid-week re-nnion, Les informed me that
he never felt so well, and as Jeff was his match in
beigth he thought they would provide a great go,
hit that he had no doubt as to the result. He felt
«ae of defeating his clever opponent and winning
the youd title of world’s middleweight champion-
ship.
Their respective weights were—Darev, list. lib.
Jos.; whilst the beam balanced for Smith at list,
fib. 2oz.
DARCY’S BRILLIANT START.
The lad was confidence itself, as he came forward
to the ring centre, and when his left lead was ducked
he brought his heavy right down on Smith ’s neck.
As the, latter straightened up he received the full
farce of a swinging right behind the ear.’, Les block-
ed with ease Jeff’s well-meant left and right at-
The Darcy-Jeff Smith Contest.
tempts, then feinting with his left he brought his
right round to the side of the head and the Ameri-
can’s feet shuffled for a moment. He recovered in
time to retreat, and thereby escape the full force of
a left and right that caught him. high up..
At close quarters, Jeff, whilst hanging desperate-
ly to Darcy's right, sunk his own to the kidneys, to
the accompaniment of much hooting and appealing
from the Australian’s corner, and who were inamodi-
ately ordered to keep quiet.
Early in the second round, Jeff worked in close
and scored with.tnany short travelling left and right
jolts to the body. The American’s left, which in
many previous contests had proved so dandy .and
punishing a weapon, had no chance of getting past
Darcy’s wonderful guard. They were picked off
with the ease of the master, giving lessons to his
pupil.
SMITH OUTFOUGHT.
Darcy then took a hand in the attack and scored
so freely that many of the ringsiders loudly express-
ed the opinion that Smith-was a non-trier.' They-
eould not credit that Darcy had come on so well
under Dave Smith’s tuition, but they quickly chang-
ed their tune when they saw Smith swinging, with
all his force, a right to the jaw. It was as cleanly
delivered and hard a punch as the American < had
ever .let fly, but he must have been more than disap*
pointed to find that instead of steadying the. recipi-
ent it made him fight all the harder. Blows came
so hard and often that Jeff Smith folded his arms
about his head to protect that part from the human
battery, and when he got close enough again impris-
oned Darcy’s right under his own left arm and be-
labored the Australian’s body with right swings.
SMITH AT HIS BEST.
Never in. all his career probably did Smith fight
so fast or well as he did in the third. Each blocked
and back-moved cleverly, and after beating mne of
Jeff’s rights by last-mentioned means, Darcy receiv-
ed the full force of a left swing squarely on the
chin without so much as causing the Australian’s
head to turn the slightest. Then, with all sail set*


Les fought his man clear across the ring, Jeff, mean-
while employing all his well-known'skill in order
to get away from mighty left and right swings.
It was hard to keep track of.the American’s
blows. They flew from every conceivable angle with
the speed of thought and with sufficient weight to
momentarily stagger our boy, who, amidst the wild-
est of cheers, fought hack and went within an ace
jf getting his^ right home on the champion’s chin.
In the fourth round, each man showed many
clever things in the. way of defence, Darcy parti-
cularly being fine, and once after side-stepping a
right he returned and nearly toppled his man over
with lefts and rights to the head. The contest w r as
now most exciting. They seemed warmed up to their
work in the fifth round, and although Jeff had
landed many punishing blows, they had. not the
slightest effect on Darcy, who fought back all the
harder. In sheer desperation, Smith swung his left,
missed and for this mistake received a mighty
downward wallop on the left ear, and Les was in
the act of following on with his left "when 'Smith
shot out his right to the body. Whether this blow
was unfair or not is impossible for me to say, as
Darcy’s back was square on to where I was seated.
Darcy, with his left' hand pressing-low, turned and
walked in a doubled-up manner to his corner and
complained to Dave- Smith that he had beeh struck
low, and the latter immediately claimed a foul. The
..’referee, whose vision was also obscured at the time
the blow landed, ordered the lads to fight on, and
walked to Darcy’s corner and repeated his order.
Les, still nursing his affected part, walked slowly
in the direction of his opponent, seemingly bewil-
dered. Smith refrained from taking advantage of
Darcy’s undefensive attitude, but tapped the latter
lightly on the side of the head with his left, which'
seemed to galvanise Darcy into action. In his
frenzied state of mind he swung wildly, and as. a
consequence missed his intended mark.
Meanwhile Smith did nothing in the way of at-
tack. Before the gong for corners sounded Davo
Smith informed Mr. Baker of his intention to .throw
in the towel, and in spite of the Stadium Managing
Director’s request not to do so, the heavyweight
champion, after a short conversation with his pro-
tege, sent the wipe soaring to theming centre. Thus
ended what promised to be one of the most In-
teresting contests ever witnessed at
When seen in their dressing-rooms a few moments
later, Darcy explained that when the blow, landed
he felt giddy and' sick, and was unaware what Jio
did for a moment, but the pain gradually wore.: off.
He could have continued, and was sorry he did not
do so, and expressed his anxiety to meet Smith in
a return match. ,
Smith said he was positive the blow was a per-
fectly fair one, and reasoned out thus: “If I were
a man capble of doing such a thing deliberately,
would I not have taken advantage of Darcy’s ap-
parently helpless condition and landed a heavy blow,
instead of a mere tap to let him know that the
order to fight on had been given, by the referee? I
would like Mr. Baker to put us on again. That
is the only way we can now. settle it.”
CHAPTER XII.
His Contests, with Loughrey, Holland, Demlen, & Smith.
With each man expressing a keen desire for a
•return match, as being the only way to settle the
unsatisfactory ending to their first meeting, it was
■generally, anticipated that Darcy and Smith would
be on the Stadium fixture list for decision at an
early date, but Jeff Smith’s manager'had other fish
to fry. " Another member of his team had to be
catered for, and he wisely decided to have him,
Frank Loughrey, as Darcy’s next opponent, and
after some bickering Les decided to give Frank
battle, and.bide his time.
• Mr. Lippe was delighted when all arrangements
had been completed for the Loughrey-Darcy con-
test. He openly boasted that, though he was certain
of Smith’s superiority over Darcy, the lastnamed’S
aggressive style would suit Loughrey better still,
as Frank would he certain to give a stone of weight
away and a beating to any man in the world who
would come in and fight him. Consequently there
were quite a large. number, of sports who ' were
gulled by Lippe’s boost of Loughrey into putting
a large amount on the American, who from go to
stop had not a hundred to one chance with the East
Maitlander. They met at the Sydney Stadium op
the night of February 27,’ 1915, and Darcy, though
more than lenient, so impressed me by his wonder-
ful improvement under Dave Smith’s tuition that
I headed my article with “Prospective World’s
Champion,” “Darcy Outboxes Loughrey in Every
Round,” and I continued: “Les Darcy has arrived.
His boxing and fighting and generalship at the
Stadium on Saturday night establishes him as ..a
prospective world’s middleweight champion. There
is nothing for it but another meeting with Jeff
Smith. And then—well, Jeff will have the tejst of
his life with a middleweight.”
Darcy on that occasion, though never at any
period was he fully extended, gave Frank a most
artistic beating. If Loughrey led, it was beaten
by clever ducking, back-moving, side-stepping with
the ease and grace of the finished artist, and then
the novice, minus the full punching power of bis
powerful arms, cleanly placed lefts and rights at
will to head and body. When one compares his


showing with that of the Darcy who was-outpointed
by Fred Holland, the improvement was amazing.
On occasions his power of punch was such that
for the first time iu -his career Loughrey was com-
pelled to break ground.
' Darcy’s improvement, however, was not so much
appreciated as was his leniency to an opponent who,
rt appeared, could have been knocked out at any
time the Australian so wished. Thanks to the liberal
use of water by the American’s corner, the going
was made heavy. No limit, to the quantity of resin
used made it otherwise, with' the result. that Frank,
towards the finish, was slipping and sliding all over
the ring. On many an oceasiori Darcy pulled his
blows up short .in order-to prevent striking Frank
when in a defenceless attitude, and often again did
Les walk back and allow his man time to return to
his corner to scrape his feet in the resin tin or
shallow case, with the object of affording him a
firmer grip with his feet. Is it any wonder that poor
dead Les Darcy was so universally popular with
boxing followers?
The Australian was, of course, declared the win-
ner, and the verdict was well received; hut the
spectators had not lost sight of the American’s
plucky effort against overwhelming odds, and cheer-
ed Frank again and again as he wended his way
to his dressing-room.
LOUGHREY ON DARCY. ,
On the following Monday morning the lads paid
me a visit, and, meeting, fairly rushed each other,
and shook hands warmly. ’ - .
Loughrey was the first to catch the speaker’s—
I mean writer’s— eye, and unburdened himself as
follows: “Gee, I got some hiding on Saturday night,
but am feeling O.K. now!” (What a grand thing
youth and condition must-be! It is so long since I
enjoyed both that I quite forget the feeling now,—
“Solar Plexus.”) . ;
j. ‘'What do you think of Darcy?” I asked.
“Well, he’s right here, and I feel kind of bash-
ful. But it does not matter; I’ll say jnst what I
would if he were not present, and that is that he is
sure some good fighter.”
Les Darcy was illuminated with the smile that'
never wore off until that fatal day at Memphis, when
King Death claimed him and bore him away to that
bourne from where no traveller returns.
In reply as to his opinion of Loughrey, in, his
quiet, boyish way, he remarked that Frank was
exceptionally tough and game. •
Darcy’s next opponent was good old Fred Hol-
land, and the boy was delighted with the chance
of wiping put the two defeats that stood against
his-record and in favor of Holland. They ipet on
March 13,1915, and Darcy won easily on points, and
thus he 'cleared his list of defeats, with the exccp-
tipn of the one that still remained on. Jeff Smith’s
ledger’s credit side. After the third. Fred Holland
battle the lad, as usual, paid me his friendly visit
on the following Monday, when he spoke most en-
tertainingly on past and events to come. •
DARCY ON HIS OWN IMPROVEMENT.
Asked what his feelings were compared with that
of his first, meeting with the formidable Holland—
“Oh, altogether different,” came the reply. “In
my first battle I hardly knew what was going to
happen. Of course, I expected a hiding, but it did
not come off; or, if it did, I certainly did hot feel it.
“On that occasion I was quite annoyed with Hol-
land for blocking blows that I fully expected to
land. In my second contest I felt , a great deal bet-
ter and more confident. But he bewildered me, so
that the direction of my blows was somewhat out-
of plumb. It was this that brought .about my dis-
qualification, as I accidentally struck'him low.
“You know that troubled me more than enough,
and I couldn’t sleep for nights after seeing that
cartoon of myself and Holland in a Sydney paper.
“Moreover, it made me careful in future, and I
attended closely to everything Dave Smith told
me, and I dearly wanted, the third fight with Fred
Holland, if only for the chance of redeeming niysclf
•with boxing followers.” .
“When you get older trifles nf that kind will
not trouble you,” I remarked.
“I don’t* know. I’ll never he too old not to
feel ashamed if boxing followers thought I could
do anything unmanly. Win, tie, or wrangle is no
good to me. . I will win or lose fairly and squarely.”
A fine sentiment, which, as everyone knows, he
carried out to the letter; but few know, as I do
now, the enormous temptation that was put in his
way. Had the lad and his friend, Mick Hawkins,
been dishonest, they could have' won thousands of
pounds by going down to at least three of his con-
testants,. who were regarded by many as having
more than an even money chance of stopping Darcy’s
onward march. .
The poor lad was also cut up because in my re-
port of the Darcy-Smith contest I stated that I was
not in-a position to see whether the blow was a
foul or a fair one. He took it to mean that I
doubted him when be claimed having been struck
low, and he remarked:.
“Really, I would not tell a lie,about it. I was
struck low, and it paralysed me for the moment,
but I recovered quickly, and have been sorry ever
since that I was not allowed to continue. -Anyhow,
a chance will come again, and, believe me, I iwill
make the most of it, for * .
“I WILL SURELY BEAT JEFF SMITH.”
“When Jeff landed bis rights to your jaw, did
they daze you?” * ;
“Not in the slightest. .Only twice in my career


have I feK a punch' that hurt—the low one Smith'
delivered, and the one I received in the semi-final of
my first teumey at Newcastle.”
“Of course, you give Dave Smith all the credit
for bringing you along so rapidly?”
“There is no doubt about that; but I must also
say something in the way of praise Of Jimmy Fitton, ‘
whose clever and fast boxing helped a whole lot.”
“Another man I must thank is Mike Hawkins.
When we came to Sydney first, Mick, as trainer,
was on a par with myself as a boxer; but as I have
undoubtedly improved, so has Mick. In fact, I
think he is a better trainer than I am a boxer.”
FRED HOLLAND’S OPINION.
Shortly after my interview with Darcy his latest
opponent arrived, and when Les took his departure
a moment or so later, but not-before indulging in a
friendly handshake with Holland, the latter got the
floor, and delivered himself as follows: “Well, I
guess you people in this country think you have
a good fighter in Darcy. Let me tell you that he
is ten times better than you really think he is, and
the only way to find that out is to get in front of
him in the ring..l don’t know the legitimate middle-
weight in the world he would not beat.”
Henri Demlin* the Belgian boxer, now arrived
on the scene with[ Manager M. Camille Denquet,
who, after seeing Darcy in action, exp'ressed a keen
desire for a meeting between his protege and the
East Maitlander. He spoke of Demlin’s greater ex-
perience, of his pluck, speed, science, etc., etc, but
the story of Henri’s intention to return immediately
he had had four fights, and had earned sufficient
money to house his aged parents, who were ren-
dered homeless through the shellfire of the enemy,
did more to bring about a meeting with our rising
champion than anything else. But, by the way,
Henri has not yet returned to Belgium. .He is still
with us, and it is now 1919, and it is now four years
6ince that promise to return was made.
Boxing followers knew that the visitor had no
earthly chance. They saw him get a questionable
decision over Frank Loughrey, when the lastnamed
was compelled by articles of agreement to make an '
impossible weight, and on top of this great disad-'
vantage, Frank had not nearly recovered from the
hiding he received from Darcy; therefore, What
other result than a severe drubbing for Demljn
could any man have expected when they came to-
gether on April 3, 1915?
From the very start Les found how poor an op-
ponent he had to deal with, and in his customary
generous way he dealt'with him most leniently; con-
sequently Demlin was allowed to remain on his feet
until midway in the fifth round, when his manager,
seeing he had no earthly chance, threw in the towel
Demlin. [With his eye to business, the-wily Fred „
Holland sued for eyet another contest ■with. Darcy.*
Fred had certainly outpointed our boy in their first
bout, and won on a foul in the next, but although
he put up a great and plucky battle against Les
when-they met for the third time, Fred knew he
had no chance of ever again turning the tables on
the young Australian. He also knew that a loser’s
end with Darcy was preferable to the winner’s end
: against any other opponent; therefore after frequent-
ly challenging, he was rewarded, and they met on
May 1, 1915.
The scene of this, their fourth battle, was the .Mel-
bourne Stadium, and as it was Darcy’s first appear-
ance in the southern capital, where Holland’s bril-
liant victory over Tom McCormick had made him a
prime favourite with fans on the other side of the
Murray, a great house was in attendance. Acting
on the experience gained in previous contests with
the coming champion, Holland, instead of mixing
matters, kept religiously away, as far as he was al-
lowed; but in the thirteenth round he was nailed
by a left in the body and right to the head, sending
him to the boards. Holland regained his feet inside
the count, but seeing he had no Chance his chief
second threw in the towel, and Darcy was declared
the winner of a contest that was not at all apprs
dated by those who saw it. They had previously
witnessed the American outclassing McCormick, and
hy comparing it with his comparatively poor show-
ing .against an entirely different proposition in
Darcy, they really thought Holland was a non-trier,
and hooted vigorously.
Referee Newbouse stated that in his opinion the
men were afraid of each other; those who knew
Darcy in particular, know how absurd was the bare
suggestion of cowardice from that quarter, whilst
no one cobid ever claim that Holland in his many
contests in this country ever showed the white fea-
ther. *
The fact of the matter was that the American, who
is nothing if not a business man, took on Darcy
knowing ho had no chance of winning, by points or
a knock-out; there was big money in it for him, and
he made up his mind to see the full journey through
if possible.
Excepting when the lad and his friends were try-
ing so hard to get him going, Darcy had no occasion
to issue challenges; he accepted them as they came,
and'on one-occasion only did he turn an offer for a
match down. It happened in the case of the English
heavyweight, Harry Reeve. The last-named chal-
lenged Darcy, and Los accepted, but when I saw th*
puffed condition of our boy’s hands, ! strongly ad-
vised him to postpone the meeting, and after a deal
of persuasion the lad complied with my request. On
the occasion of his next meeting, Darcy had his say;
and. insisted upon-having it out with Jef£ (flmith,


The Smith-Darcy Return Battle.
CHAPTER XIII.
IT3 ABRUPT AND UNSATISFACTORY ENDING.
DARCY WINS WORLD’S MIDDLEWEIGHT
CHAMPIONSHIP. V
The return contest between this pair of contend-
ers for the world’s middleweight title created so
much interest that no less than 12,000 fans turned
up to witness the encounter at the Sydney Stadium,
on the night of May 22, 1915.
The accommodation of the vast Rushcutter’s Bay
resort was taxed to its utmost carrying capacity on.
that memorable occasion, which was in war time,
too. Does this fact not point to boxing being more
popular than ever now that we have whipped the
Kaiser, and once more restored peace to the world.
As in the ante-war days, that once familiar hum of
excitement, followed by the death-like silence, pre-
vailed from the time when the men indulged in the
“may the better man win handshake,” and then re-
turned to their angles to await the signal from the
electric gong to commence ■ hostilities. They were
an exceptionally well-matched pair in height and
weight, Darcy’s list. s|lb. giving him the advantage
pt but
Immediately they were set loose Darcy went for
his man in great style, and, breaking through Jeff’s
guard, landed left and right to the head, then jump-
ing back a foot or so, Les surprised Jeff by scoring
a short but powerful right to the left ear. Smith
ducked Darcy’s left, and uppercut a right low, mak-
ing the Australian wince. The referee administer-
ed a severe caution, and the lads shook hands.
Darcy soon recovered; that was evident by the
way he sent Smith’s head from side to side, and,
keeping up the_ pace, he compelled Jeff to hang on
desperately.
Smith cleverly ducked his'head from some of
Darpy’s blows, but not all; others got there, good
and hard, and often enough to make the Australian
look a sure winner by the short-cut route. Near,
corners, Jeff Smith sunk a powerful right to the
solar plexus; his glove sunk inches deep, but through
having no effect on Les, Jeff must have been awfully
disappointed; the blow on any other man almost
would have spelt victory for the deliverer.
Darcy kept the pace going in the second round,
and was beating his man at every turn. A left and
right to the head made Smith hang on for a few sec-
onds. He then jumped hack, ducked a right, and
swung his left to Darcy's groin. It did no damage,
and Darcy made no complaint, but the referee aav.
the blow, and promptly disqualified Smith, amid the
cheers and uproars of the assembled thousands.
AFTERMATH OF HIS CONTEST WITH JEFF
SMITH.
MICK KING CLEARLY OUTCLASSED.
It was surprising how calmly the American’s party
took their man’s disqualification, they making no
demonstration whatever.
A 1 Lippe, Jeff Smith’s manager and chief second,
came towards where I was seated, and remarked very
calmly that as Darcy was not hurt, and as the lat-
ter did not claim a foul, Mr. Harald Baker was a
bit too previous in declaring against his man. <*But
the fact remained a foul had been committed, and
the referee seeing the blow landed was qftite
right in acting as he did.
The excitement wa» but momentary; the' Darcy-
Smith contest had soon become a matter of history,
and the possible result of a Darcy-McGoorty bout
became the chief topic of conversation as the patrons
of that night wended their various ways homeward.
The general.opinion then was that the powerful hit-
ting American would surely account for our boy,
but—and it is no after tale—l still remained stauqcli
for Les, and in “The Referee,” of May 26, 1915, I
wrote that in spite of the popular opinion I thought
Darcy would prove the better man under champion-
ship conditions. On the night of battle A 1 Lippe, as
he thought for safety’s sake, refrained from collect-
ing his man’s cut of the gate. He merely, took a
small portion of the amount, something in the vicin-
ity of £5OO, for the purpose of paying those who had
looked after their interests on the turnstiles, etc.,
and that is where he made a big mistake,'for after
thinking the matter over very carefully the direc-
tors of Stadiums Limited arrived at the conclusion
that Smith was guilty of a deliberate foul, which,
according to a clause in the articles of agreement
earned for the offender disqualification for life, and
this they decided to put into operation.
Furthermore, it was decided, in terms of yet an-
other clause in Smith’s signed agreement, to with-
hold the payment of the-loser’s percentage of the
takings, and hand the amount over to one of the
Patriotic Funds.
The matter did not end here; it was later on de-.
eided in the Supreme Court, and the jury’s verdict
went against Smith.
Darcy’s next appearance was against his country-
man Mick King, at the Sydney Stadium, on June
12, 1915. It was a really live world’s championship
affair, between the then title holder, Darcy, and an
opponent, who, for a brief period, had held that
honor by his defeat of Jeff Smith.
For many weeks prior to the contest, Mick King
and his trainer, Patsy Burke, were confident of vic-
tory. It was claimed for the challenger that liis im-


provement in speed, science, and condition was some-
thing to marvel about, and they would not listen to
even the bare possibility of defeat. What a fool’s
paradise this pair at least were then living in, for
King had as much chance against the East Maitr
lander ’as little Jacky Green would have in opposi-
tion to Tommy Uren.
The general opinion favoured Darcy, but the most
< ardent^of his supporters never for a moment dreamt
that the lad’s superiority would have been so vast.
- Darcy on that memorable night was a human tor-
nado, with the science of a master and the.spced of
a: featherweight, and overwhelmed and outclassed
King in all but courage.
. At any moment it appeared as if King would have
to take the count, but the champion in his usual
i
CHAPTER XIV.
EDDIE’S STRANGE REMARK RE DAVE
SMITH’S PUPIL;
AND MY ANSWER THERETO.
• Immediately after the fight Darcy, in order to re-
port himself to the military authorities at East Mait-
land on the following day, Sunday, left by the New-
castle steamer, consequently he was unable to pay
me his customary visit!
Darcy’s friend, manager, and trainer, Mike Haw-
kins, came along, however, with the startling news
that his boy had requested me to challenge Eddie
McGoorty, who had a few weeks previously paid his
second visit to this country. In conversation with.
Eddie and his cousin, Mr. Mike Trant, shortly after
their arrival, the first-named remarked: “Say, this
boy Darcy is the goods, eh?”
“Yes, he is as you put it,” I replied.
“He fights all the time, I believe. Well, that’s
fine. We should have a great go. I do like them
CHAPTER XV.
AN INTERESTING EPISODE.
’ MR. KEESING’S GREAT FORESIGHT.
MR. DREW’S INTERVIEW WITH DARCY’S
BOSS.
• Before continuing the story Of the first Darcy-
McGoorty fight, and the many peculiar circumstances •
attached thereto, I must digress a little for, the
purpose of telling a few interesting incidents in
the lad’s early pugilistic career.
Darcy, as probably everyone is aware, was a black- ■
tmith’s apprentice, but it might be news for the ;
majority to.’learn that his employer was’ a strictly *
religious man, who was very much up against box-
ing, and tried every means in his power to persuade
his assistant to Tefrain from taking any active part •
|n the game... But, much as the lad respected his
A
sportsmanlike action' refrained from delivering his
hardest blows after th'e first round; but it would
have been better had the lad decided to go all out,
when Bung would probably hate been put away be-
fore the termination of round two.
Mick struggled gamely until midway through the
tenth round when Inspector Jones interfered, and
put a stop to the most uneven battle.
Winner and loser were then cheered to the echo.
Darcy for his wonderful boxing ability, and King
for his rare pluck.
. Each man weighed 11.5.
When seen on the following Monday, King very
briefly summed his victor up thus: “He is wonder-
ful. I never thought.it possible for a man to pos-
sess such strength, endurance and speed.”
Eager for Meeting with McGoorty.
to stand and mix it. .And say, would it not be *
funny.thing if Dave Smith had unearthed a boy to
get'even on me for my three defeats of Dave?”
And even then I made no bones about the matter,
tut openly stated that in my opinion Eddie’s col-
ours would be lowered, and repeated myself later
on at Sandringham in reply to Mr* Trant’s request
for my candid opinion concerning the relative merits
of his eousin and our boy.
• "Whilst-more than willing to accept Darcy’s chat
lenge’at the 11.6 limit, McGoorty preferred meeting
with some other opponent first, consequently he was
hitched up with our then heavyweight champion,
Harold Hardwick,, and on June 26, 1915, McGoorty
opened his Australian campaign by beating our best
big man by the short-eut route in the tenth round.
The American’s boxing Oh that occasion was quit*
up to his free and taking style, and he made many
friends who really thought he would prove the hur-
dle that Darcy, could not surmount. The meeting
of this great pair will be told later.
How he was released from his Indentures.
boss, he could not abandon the healthy pastime he
so dearly loved, at which he was an expert, and also
the huge amount of prize money that would surely
he his .for the trying. This fact was made clearly
.evident by the record attendance at the Stadium to
witness the youn’gster in his first contest at head-
quarters , against Fred Holland. For the return
match with the latter, Darcy’s application for two
weeks’ and a half holiday, for the purpose of train-
ing under Dave Smith, turned down eolcL
■ This information was forwarded on to the Stadium
people, who had taken' for granted that the lad’a.
request would be acceded to, and as a result adver- ■
tised the fact that Les would he under the watchful
eye of Dave Smith’for two or three weeks prior to
the forthcoming important event, and naturally the
.news came as a big disappointment. It happened


when -Mr. Baker was absent in Brisbane, busily en-
gaged iii preparing for the mammoth patriotic car-
nival—-that, by the way, was so successful that the
handsome sum of £3,000 swelled the funds of the
most praiseworthy object.
HOW DARCY GOT TIME OFF.
That really live wire, and highly capable business
man, Mr. Harry Keesing, during Mr. Baker’s absence,
was in sole command at headquarters, and to that
gentleman’s great foresight is due the happy condi-
tions under which, in the very near future, Darcy
was able to take up his new profession, and soon
make a name for himself in the history of the game
as-.
THE GREATEST MIDDLEWEIGHT THAT EVER
DONNED A GLOVE.
After considering the matter thoroughly, Mr. Kee-
sing decided to -journey to East Maitland and inter-
view-Darcy’s boas. He left by that evening’s train,
and bright and early on the following morning he
called at the smithy.
THE PIOUS SMITH RELENTS.
•All. this capable little man’s eloquence went for
nothing. Mr. Ford seemed determined that his ap-
prentice would not have the required time off. But
, when the matter of payment for the privilege was
mentioned the highly respectable and most religious ■
blacksmith relented, and for the sum of £25 gave
his consent, on a solemn-promise being entered into
that immediately upon his arrival in Sydney Mir.
Keesing would go forth to <the secretary of the Far-
riers’ .Union and secure the services of a blacksmith
during the lad’s absence.
. At first Mr. Keesing demurred, arguing that such
a course would be unnecessary, as he imagined that
blacksmiths were so plentiful they eonld no doubt
be found at almost any street comer, even in East
.or “West Maitland.
To this remark the reply came: "Thai might be,
my friend. But you must bear in mind there are
blacksmiths and blacksmiths, and were you to travel
Australia you might fail to find one capable of
equalling young Les.” •
‘ However, the Stadium representative agreed, the
substitute arrived, and in due course completed his
contract, and received only the bare wages agreed
Upon. But the worthy smith would not, as is custom-
ary in the circumstances, pay the man’s second-class
train fare to and from Sydney, consequently this
Small amount had to be made good by thb Stadium
people.
'Recognising the great possibilities for Les in this
new profession, the lad’s relatives Started negotia-
tions with his employer for the purpose of buying
the boy out': A matter of £3OO was mentioned, and
would have been willingly paid, but Mr. Keesing
again came to the rescue, . .
MB. KEESING’S HAPPY THOUGHT.
■ “Whilst pondering over the matter the thought
came to his mind: “Would it not be funny if, after
all, the agreement between Les and his boss was not
a thoroughly legal document? There might be soma
flaw through which the matter could be settled,
without the payment of so large a sum.”
Acting on the thought, Hr. Keesing sent an urgent
wire to Darcy before the latter’s time had arrived
to resume duties at the smithy. The message read
as follows: “You must come at once; bring your
mother, also indentures.”
On the following morning they arrived, and, after
studying these papers, Mr. K. up the
Stadium’s solicitor (Mr. Wm. Drew), and made an
appointment with that gentleman to meet Mrs. Darcy
and her son and see if their opinions (Mr. Keesing
and Mr. Drew) agreed concerning the legality of
otherwise of these indentures. They did.. The pa-
pers were absolutely worthless. But, in order to
make doubly sure, Mr. Drew sought counsel’s opin-
ion, with the result that the last-named gentleman
returned with Mrs. Darcy and Les, with the object
of having it out with the highly respectable em-
-ployer, a bigwig in the local Salvation Army.
Mr. Drew, on the following morning, approached
the blacksmith on the subject of payment for Darcy’s
release.
He was informed that £3OO was the amount.re-
quired, and not a farthing less.
. Some time was wasted in going into the matter,
the solicitor meanwhile appearing as if he were try-
ing to beat his man down in his price.
In order to make certain that the agreement Ford
had was a facsimile of the one handed to him *by
Darcy, Mr. Drew requested that he be shown the
document. After a diligent search it was unearthed,
and proved to be a true copy. ' ,
DARCY’S RELEASE.
Being sure of his case, the Stadium’s representa-
tive once more asked for a reduction of the amount
demanded for the boy’s 'release. When it was once
more turned down the blacksmith was informed
that Darcy would never again work as his appren-
tice, or in any other way, as the agreement was not
worth the paper it was written on, and, moreover,
Darcy was entitled to the difference, for so many
years, between apprentice pay and that of a thorough
tradesman, which would, of course, .have amounted
to some hundreds of pounds.
Whkt a shock it must have been to the ultra
pious individual, who, I will bet, was not one of <
the many friends the lad bad who on every occasion
he entered the ring, after that amusing incident,
journeyed from far-off Maitland to witness the plead-
ing sight of their kloFs-suporiority over champions
from all other parts.
That daytwas»-a Ted > -letter-one3iU'Hast=and West


ln a few minutes after Mr. Drew had so
artistically outed Darcy’s employer, the good news
was known to every one, and the champion’s large
army, of friends, old and young, male and female,
went out of their W3y to congratulate their favorite.
. Who, under such like circumstances, would not
have suffered from that complaint known as “swell-
ed head”? And yet this boy remained unruffled
through it all.
. At the period of which I write he had not reached
his nineteenth year, and yet was regarded as the
equal at least of Fred Holland, who could, at that
time, lay claim to. being one of the best men of his
weight in the world. . '
AN AMERICAN OBJECTS TO DARCY’S CLAIM.
Being now freed from, blacksmith work and hav-
ing most of his time to devote to his new profession,
a transformation took place in the coming champion.
Daily boxing "bouts with his mentor, Dave Smith,
and that prince of sparring partners, Jim Fetton,
of America, combined' with Mike Hawkins’ expert
massaging, Darcy became much more supple. The
muscles of the back behind his powerful biceps re-
laxed, and gave them freer play, and consequently
he hit harder and with greater speed and direction,
as was shown in his contest with “K.O” Marchand
, on September 12,, 1914.
On. the Monday following that date, I think it
, was, Les called on me in my den, and stated that he
wanted my ,advice on. a certain private matter. For-
rtunately, he arrived at a time when my usual mom-
ing callers had paid their visit and departed.
Like all successful atheletes/ Darcy was besieged
v by persons who wanted temporary (?) loans, women
( applicants being the chief offenders.
All the inventions known to the professional cad-
gers were used and told in such realistic style that
the poor, lad had serious notions qI falling a victim,
(hie in particular seemed to strike home; it told of
being left stranded by her lord and master with a
; big lot of youngsters to support. It had special in-
terest to the lad, who in his very early days knew
from bitter , experience what such a position really
jneant, and he unburdened himself as follow: “You
know, Mr. Lawless, if I ever found out this to be a
: genuine case, I would never forgive myself, because
I know what.my own poor mother had to suffer.”
However, to go a little ahead of ray story, on going
into, the. matter a little later it was found to be a
fraud.
In.order, to .draw him out I gave him this leading
‘ Question: You had a rough time then, Les, when you
jpere a kid! . '
“My.word I bad,” came tlic reply.,
“Well, never mind, when you are champion and
Jtave made a heap of money, you will-look back and
laugh at what happened in your earlier days.” He
loilcd that delightful smile of his as he replied: “To
•win a •title would .of coarse be very nice, but. tha
money part has more interest to me; it would en-
able me to fulfil the dearest wish of my heart, which
is to put Mum beyond all possible chance of want,
and give the kids a good, education, a thing that
was denied me, as I had to work to help, to keep
mum and the youngsters.
■ “Dear me, how I miss that education now. ■ For
a long time I hated being introduced to a stranger,
for fear hie would detect the many mistakes I would
make in talking, and I have made up my mind to
earn sufficient to prevent my brothers and sisters
from undergoing the same terrible experience.'’ .
‘'You’ll soon do that.”
“I don’t know. There are so many of them that
it will take a whole lot of money to pay for their
, education, and also fix Mum up properly.”
• DARCY TRIED TO ENLIST FOB SERVICE
- : ABROAD.
1 “I suppose you are nut aware that after my fight
with Fred Holland I tried to enlist. My friend, Eric
Newton—a great little fighter—rand two other chaps
and myself, offered our services, but the military man
turned me down on account of my age.”
(The other three died at the front.—“ Solar
Plexus.”)
“I was very keen, on going then, hut now that J
am no longer bound to the blacksmith trade, and
it looks as if I am going to make money in the gome,
all my thoughts lie in that direction; but if I qan
earn sufficient to accomplish all I am after before
the finish of this war, I .will certainly join the
colors.”.
In reply to that portion of my story that appear-
ed in previous pages, and also my remarks in another
portion wherein I proved by facts, figures, chapter
and verse, Darcy’s undisputed right to the title, of
middleweight, champion of the world,. I received
many letters, all, with the exception of a couple, of
a complimentary nature, for which I now return my
sincere thinks. •• . ;
, One gentleman from Paddington strenuously ob-
jects, to-Darcy’s claim being a good one because he
did not account for Mike Gibbons, who in his opin-
ion would surely have beaten our great lad.' To use
his own; words, “I would have you know, sir, that
I have sef>n both these men perform, and whilst ad-
mitting that the Australian was a strong ehss who
possessed sufficient staying power to beat such down
and outers as Holland, Clabby and MeGoorty, and
such nevcivwasers as' Chip,' Murray and Crouse—the
latter I never heard of in America—l say that he
would never have had the ghost of a chance with’
: the -ghost from St.. Paul’s./ Why, I figure that Dil-
. lon would have put your, boy away in a punch for
: punch fight, and this I guess was the only way cither
knew how to box.” ■
Good ( ?) old American sport againj when will we


iver have a man from that part in the boxing 'game
who will acknowledge defeat! It was a lucky punch,
.a bad decision, the American representative ! had
seen his best days, or some other excuse.
' Long before Darey met MeGoorty in their first
memorable battle, he had gone a long way'towards
accomplishing his set task of putting his mother and
younger brothers and sisters far beyond the pale of
.want ~
A capacious and splendidly built cottage, sur-
rounded by a very fine farm, was one of his gifts to
his mother, which land and premises, we ire sorry to
say, is being claimed by the father, because Les died
without leaving a will. : "
Having dealt with so many side-lights in connee-.
tion With the lad’s private life, we will now proceed
with his doings in the magic square.
We now arrive at the most important pugilistic
event in Darcy’s career, the lad’s first victory over
the Oshkosh terror, a man in his 26th year, and the
hero of quite 100 fights that were decided in almost
every corner of the globe without once, until Darey
did the trick, suffering defeat by the knock-out.
Notwithstanding the fact that ‘ our representative
had so clearly demonstrated his superiority over
first-class opponents from America, England, France,
Belgium, and elsewhere, some of the lad’s best
friends, and the big majority of fans, pooh-poohed
the idea of his having any chance against so inighty
a man as Eddie MeGoorty. l Well do I remember poor
Les coming along to may den iii the “Beferee” of-
fice after he had done his' compulsory training stunt
at a camp for that purpose,, somewhere in close
proximity to his home in West Maitland.
On that occasion he was accompanied by quite a
small army of youthful friends and admirers, all of
whom soon made it plainly evident that they were
there for the express'purpose of soliciting’mv aid
in persuading their idol to miss MeGoorty. They
tried hard to impress me that it would be an unfair
and an unwise match, as MeGoorty’s world-wide ex-
perience, baqk-d.up by bis famous power Of. punch,
would surely prove too much for their friend. One
member of that deputation was loud indeed in argu-
ing against his friend being served up as a victim
to the American’s superior skill and punch,, and
whilst nothing further than a sour look came in pro-
test to my opinion concerning the probable result,
I know that he said many uncomplimentary'things
in regard to my poor judgment when he left my
presence. But when my prophecy came true, and
Darcy woo, that same individual was the first to
come forward with, “What did I tell you?” and
without a moment’s hesitation I replied, “That
Darcy whuld be surely beaten by MeGoorty.” ’
In his excitement he had evidently forgotten that
little meeting in my room, and when so abruptly
reminded ox the incident, he blushed like a girl.
When the discussion referred to was going on,
. > 1
Darey himself was highly amused, but every now
and then, when an idea was expressed that seemed
in any way logical he listened intently. Les was un-
doubtedly a thinker; However, in order to get rid
of any doubt that might exist in his mind, I remark-
ed that if the match was fought under champion-
ship conditions, which called for ringside weighing,
I was not only sure of the lad winning, but would*
bet a new hat that victory would come by the short-
cut route.
This bet was taken up by Darey himself, and in
due course the bonnet arrived, and is still, and will
as long as I live, remain in my possession.
That MeGoorty held the youngster in respect wai
shown by the way in which he tried to have thd
weighing performed at 2 o’clock on the day of bat-
tle, claiming that as this was a clause in his signed'
agreement with Mr. Baker, he was quite within hi*
'rights in demanding it. In fact, he was so deter*
mined that this important item would be performed
at the time mentioned, that he openly stated that h*
would not fight under any other conditions. *
Darcy, however, was naturally keen on putting
beyond all shadow of doubt his claim to the title!
of world’s middleweight champion, consequently hfil
was equally determined that ringside weighing '■
should prevail. This argument continued until with-
in a day or so of the battle. In the meanwhile!
Eddie w r as putting on his finishing touches at San*
dringhain, whilst Darcy was compelled to do hi*
training between drills and other rdilrtary exercise*
at the 'camp. At last the obstacle in regard to tba
time of weighing was removed: Darcy’s argument
prevailed. ' .
For two weeks prior to the battle a deal of monfcj?
was wagered on the result, the odds being very mucK
in favour of MeGoorty, but on the night of that
battle the odds veered round, and the Australia#
went to the scratch at even money, at least, _ *"
THE BETTING. fcr
This state of the betting market did not fit in witS
the views of many, who argued that ok perform-
ances the American should be a pronounced favour-
ite. One well-known racing man waxed very wroth at
the turn the betting had taken, and in conversation
with me expressed the opinion that the thing was t#
he a scblenter; nothing I could say would convince
him otherwise. * I
I even likened the pair to a couple of race-horses,
and asked him if he, as a handicapper, would so ad- ,
just the weights as to make MeGoorty the horse giva.
Darcy the horse any great handicap, and he prompt-
ly replied, “I would make MeGoorty give Darcy *
stone, and if the result rested with the pair only,
I would empty out on the topweight.” His atten-
tion .was even drawn to the little that existed be-
tween Mick King and Jeff Smith, who, despite the
blunder made by the referee in declaring


‘Goortyy-Jeff Had won by a wide margin, and as
Darcy had trounced the life out of King, was he
not, on paper, superior to McGoorty?
CAUSE OF THE RUMOR.
All this, however, was so"mueh waste of time, and
in a “When I speak let no dog bark” kind of style,
he stated that McGoorty was not trying.
Another trifling thing that was made the most of
in calling the thing a sehlenter took place immedi-
ately Eddie arrived.
A countryman of the lastnamed, who was interest-
ed in the moving picture that was taken of the con-
test, met McGoorty at the entrance gate of the Sta-
dium, and in reply to the question concerning his
condition, Eddie reported all being well, but offered
his share of the movie for £5O. .
This wa£ told in confidence from one to another,
and lost hothing in the telling. The usual few ad-
ditions' were, of course, included, with the result
that it was itnediatelv proclaimed a sehlenter. 'Now,*
the very fact that McGoorty offered his share of the
pictures for so small an amount was really no evi-
dence of his non-trying. It might have been taken
to mean that, in his opinion, the task before him was
so .easy that by his quick disposal of Darcy the
picture would be next to worthless.
CONTESTANTS INTERVIEWED BY MR. BAKER
BEFORE ENTERING THE RING RE
SOHLENTER. *
These rumors having reached Mr. Baker’s ears,
that gentleman, accompanied by his brother Harald,
and Captain Rice, an American visitor, paid a visit
to each man in his dressing-room, and informed him
that if the slightest suspicion arose to lead the re-
feree to suspect that they were not doing their best,
the bout would be declared no contest, neither would
get a cent., and other complications would surely'
follow. . It had reached his ears that betting on the
result had taken place at the different racecourses
during the last week or so, and all bets would, in
such ah event, be declared off.
To this McGoorty indignantly replied, “If you
think anything like that is 'going to happen this is
the time to act. Get into the ring before we start
and declare all bets off.” Darcy laughed at the
mere suggestion of sehlenter, as far as he was per-
sonally concerned.
VARIOUS EXPERT OPINIONS ON GENUINE-
NESS OF BATTLE.
What happened in that memorable encounter is
still known to every one, and consequently needs no
further comment in these pages further than that
from the very start of, hostilities until the finish in
the fifteenth round, when Darcy practically outed
his man, McGoorty never had a look in. No one dtuv
ing the progress of the mill detected anything that
tvould lead them to believe that McGoorty was a
non-trier, Hfe reached the chin wtb apparently: afl
the power of his left swing that was regarded as fatal--
to any man whose jaw came in contact with that
powerful punch; but when McGoorty for the first-
time in his very long and victorious career, was
beaten to the boards, the know-alls proclaimed it a
schlenter. Always wise after the thing was over,
of their own personal knowledge McGoorty was a
trier all the time, but through having lost a heap of
money on what they thought was a certainty, they
willingly listened to the tales of others, who, with
all their alleged knowledge, did not take advantage
of same, and plank their all on Darcy.
However, let us agree that McGoorty was, a non- 1-
t ‘ trier on that occasion, I will never have it that, he
intended losing on a knock-out. Perhaps he was
wise enough to know that, no matter how hard he
fought, that Darcy would prove his master, and if,
he did back the other'fellow he did so. because, of
making a certainty of winning a large* amount,. : po
matter what the result might be, meanwhile ...
McGOORTY DID HIS BEST TO WIN. :*
To say that the American was not all out-on that
occasion is an insult to the intelligence of any one
who was present and could, boast having any know-
ledge of the game. At times he certainly appeared
slow in comparison to previous efforts, but whoever
proved fast in opposition to Darcy?
McGoorty was never a clever or a brilliant boxer.
His chief asset was- his great power of punch, and,
in that fight he seemed to land as heavily as he ever
did before; therefore if he was attempting any
sehlenter work would it not have been .detected be-
fore many moments of the first round had gone by?
Some people I know will still argue that the Ame-
rican was not nearly outed when the contest was
stopped, but had they seen what I saw in Eddie’s
dressing-room after the contest, no matter how much
they wanted to believe otherwise, down-in their
heart they would have been, convinced that he was
all in. - .
. McGOORTY HAD NO EXCUSE. *
Although an immense crowd had congregated
round the small rooms that housed the mighty pair,
thanks to the courtesy of the Stadium officials I was
able with little difficulty to gs(sn. access to both. The
first I visited was McGoorty, who was being skilfully
treated by his experienced and most capable trainer,
Harry Nathan. For quite a time the American was
too dazed to recognise me, but after waiting awhile,
and upon, being told again who I was by his trainer,
Eddie brightened up, and apologised for not know-
ing me right away. He thanked me-for inquiring l
how he felt, and, under the circumstances/said be
felt fairly well. He then volunteered the informa*-
tion that Darcy was a great boy, bard to hit, and '
harder still to hurt when you did land. He had no


excuse to make, and freely acknowledged that he
was beaten fairly and squarely. Harry Nathan point-
ed out that his man’s shield was dented, but Eddie
remarked: “Never mind that; it was accidental, and
had no bearing whatever on my defeat.” .
DARCY’S TRIBUTE TO McGOORTY.
I then went to Darcy’s room, where everything
was so different, for whilst Eddie was alone with
his trainer—the fate of every loser —Darcy was be-
sieged by hundreds, who swarmed round the small
room like a swarm of bees. ...
With that smile that never wore off until that
fatal day at Memphis, he thanked me heartily for
my congratulations, and said he “felt splendid.”
, He paid McGoorty a high tribute as a puncher,
but although he hit him harder than any other op-
ponent ever did, he never once felt more than mo-
mentarily dazed, and was sure of victory from the
word go.
“I never felt so well before, and am as strong How
as when I started the battle,” he remarked, and cer-
tainly looked it. 1
“He is, I suppose, the hardest hitter you have
ever met?”
“Yes, easily,” he replied, and catching sight of
Fred Dyer, who had-at last gained admittance,-said:
“But this man, Mr. Lawless, is far and away the
cleverest. In the last minute or two of the twentieth
round of our battle in Brisbane I aimed no end of
blows at him, but failed to connect; his head shifted
this way and that in an astounding manner.”
Terence O’Rourke, though 78 years of age, came
down to see his grandson win the world’s champion-
ship. , - . .
In an interview he said Les was his grandson on
the right side. What a world of wisdom in that
remark! , , v
He was the son of his daughter, and it was
something akin to surprise the old mas learned that
his bonny boy was the undisputed champion middle-
weight of the world.
“I didn’t know that,” he said; “I had no nbtion
there was that to it. I thought they were making
a great fuss of him and his boxing, but I didn’t think
there was anything like that at the end of it.”
Mr.. O’Rourke was not unduly elated to know of
his grandson’s great boxing ability; in fact, hail
nothing to say on that score. But with no small
amount of pride he boasted of his grandson as being
one of the best sons that ever lived.
“He was always a good boy, and is still,” he re-
marked, and continued: “Since he started, in the
boxing game be has won a good bit of money, and
now owns lus own farm, and works very hard on it,
and all is for his mother.”
“There is nothing you can say that will be too
good for him,” this grand old man oouelttdkL .
" JEFF SMITH’S OPINION.
Jeff Smith, one of Darcy’s rivals, was specially
selected by “The Referee” to be present at the ring-
side, and after the contest to give his opinion on
the battle. This is his written statement
“It is useless for me tc try and describe the de-
tails of the fight, because ‘Solar Plexus' has done
that for all. Besides, it was all Darey, with the ex-
ception of the seventh round, which was about even.
After ten years of exceptional fighting, never hav-
ing the count put on him, Saturday night’s affair
must have' been a terribly hard dose for McGoorty
to take. i.
“The question is: Has Eddie good grounds for an
excuse? Or is Darcy really the wonderful fighter
that he appeared to be to the huge crowd that was
present ? Beyond a doubt MeGoorty never befora
showed to such a disadvantage in Australia. Per-
haps making the weight was his undoing, for the pub-
lic well know that he would never before concede
to it, even at the risk of losing a match.
“I am not trying to make any excuses for Mo-
Goortv, but merely trying to point out facts that
' are quite probable.” ‘ ■*•-
FEED (FRITZ) HOLLAND’S OPINION. ' *
Without being asked, the genial Holland remark-
ed: “Les Darcy is the best man in the world.”
“Of course he is among middleweights,” I re-
marked.
“Yes, that’s all right,” came the reply, “But I
mean he is the best of any weight—l don’t care
who the others are. I bar no one, not even Jess
Willard, for the man who can take McGoorty’s left
and right swing on the jaw without flinching would
not be hurt by anyone. He is not only champion
middleweight, but the best man in the world at any;
weight.” . i
“Some people. ” I remarked, “are inclined to think
that McGoorty did not fight up to his true form.”
‘-‘Well, you know, it has been the same since time
immemorial, and I suppose will always be so. There
are some who, when a contest does not go the way
they expected, contend that their man did not try,
or invent some other lame excuse. To talk about
McGoorty in such a way is cruel. But even if it
were so, would Eddie not have continued to the final
gong if he had been able, and then lose on points,
instead of a k.o. —the first that happened in bis long
career? Why he was never before knocked off his
feet! No, I’ll never have it. McGoorty met a maal
stronger-and cleverer, and the inevitable happened.”
“Do you think the weight had anything to do
with McGoorty’s defeat?”, ' . '
‘ ‘ Certainly not. With all due respect to Eddie, a
good, game boxer, with a mighty punch, I feel sort
that Darcy would always beat him) in Dang
witt beat a&y _


CHAPTER XVI.
.Darcy’s hands after his contest with McGoorty
were much puffed, yet the plucky lad wanted to meet
the English heavyweight, Harry Reeves, but owing
to my .advice the match fell through, and I came in
for some adverse criticism for my interference by a
certain individual whose love for Darcy was such
that he would have given anything to bring about
tire lad’s defeat, for no. other reason than that he,
and perhaps one other, failed to see anything very
special in the youngster’s always brilliant work.
My argument against the Reeves match was that,
first of‘all, the Englishman was no draw, and if
Darcy failed to out him in quick order his (Darcy’s)
stock wcfuld go down with a bump. With badly-
puffed and sore hands, it was quite on the cards that
a knpck-out victory would not have come our boy’s
way; in fact, in the circumstances it might have
meant Les’s first real defeat;
A good fighter with bad hands may not beat a
bad fighter fit and well, just as surely as would the
champion runner of the world lose to a second-
rater of the champion’s feet were any way crippled.
These were the arguments I put to Darcy, and he
fell in with my views. Besides, why should the lad
be matched with Reeves? He was not nearly class
enough, as was shown on October 2, 1915, when Me-
Goorty knocked him out in six rounds.
Darcy’s next opponent was the over-boomed Ame-
rican, Billy Murray, who was described by his blat-
ant Yankee manager, Jack Kearns, as the one boy
who will “sure” beat Darcy. “It is all over bar
shouting, ’ ’ remarked the alleged handsome one.
Without any reason for doing so, other than it
being Kearns’ idea of boosting, he wrote to me com-
plaining of the trouble he was having with Darcy
concerning the time of weighing, etc. However,
immediately upon receipt of the letter Darcy arriv-
ed at the office, and I asked him if there was any
truth in the statement, but he laughed the sugges-
tion to scorn, remarking that even then, a week
before the contest, he was able to do 11.6.
Now, in order to satisfy my own curiosity on the
question of the'champion’s weight, I persuaded him
to get on the scales, devoid of all his clothing, and
sure enough he was some 1-Jlb. below the 11.6 pound-
age, thus proving that that limit was not hard in the
making, and should he have been compelled to make
11.4 in America I was copfident he would have done
it without in any way doing himself an injury. As
a matter of fact, a year later he got into the ring
at 11.3, and gave “K. 6.” Brown the father of a
lacing. '
Little need be herein recalled of what happened
in the Darcy-Murray contest Suffice to say that,
His Easy Defeat of Murray and Dyer
AND OTHER INTERESTING ITEMS OF THAT PERIOD.
thanks to the Australian’s leniency, and the fact
that his opponent was allowed to hold and hit
throughout, Murray saw the full journey through.
Less than two months later Murray met McGoorty,
and was easily kno’cked out in the fourth, round.
Then how did the “know-alls” squeal! Eddie’s
clean-cut victory over his countryman to them meant
strong and irrefutable evidence that McGoorty was
a non-trier against Darcy, and that the latter would
surely suffer defeat in their return fight.
. This much they were certain of, yet they had not
the gumption to see that the McGoorty-Murray af-
fair was one of the most awkwardly-worked ‘ ‘ sclilen-
ters” that was ever fought at the Sydney Stadium.
Since his defeat by Darcy, McGoorty performed
wonderfully well by, in just two weeks, knocking
three opponents out in double-quick time—Joe
Bonds in ' one round, Billy Murray in four, and
Harry Reeves in six. The fact, that his opponents
were of the second-class order of scrappers was
never taken into consideration; all the average fan
could argue was that it took Darcy twenty rounds
to accomplish what McGoorty did in four. They
were blind to their own interests, otherwise they
would have seen that Darcy absolutely allowed Mur-
ray to stay the full journey, whilst the last-named
saw to it that McGoorty would bring over the k.o.
punch just when he did.
However, these clean-cut victories caused many
who were in doubt as to the genuineness of the first
McGoorty-Darcy contest to become convinced • that
Eddie was a non-trier, and foolishly planked their
money on the visitor in the return match.
When on the arrival in America of a second-rate
vaudeville actor, the crew of the American mail-
boat, a lady writer and others, the rumor of Mc-
Goorty’s “schlenter” work was freely circulated,
with the result that many American scribes in their
usually clever style told how McGoorty would sure-
ly dish up thd Australian should he manage to trap
the latier into the ring for the second tim'e.
In spite of all these tall stories I still* stuck to my
opinion concerning the probable result of a second
meeting, and although I was never guilty of back-
ing a man in a contest on any previous date since
I first took on writing boxing notes I have to con-
fess having broken the rule that time, when I laid
one very good friend the liberal odds of £5 to £1
that Darey would win quicker the next time than
he did the first, and £1 to 5/- to another friend the
same way. Yet on several occasions, when the man
I selected to win the coming Saturday night’s event
did not meet with the approval of certain sports I
was offered very tempting bets against my selection.


but refused because I would not give my friends (?).
the chance of accusing me 'of writing the way I bet.
In ehch of the Kay-Saylor battles I selected Kay,
and was offered £lOO to 10/- against Kay lasting
ten rounds, whilst 100’s to 2 and 3 against Pal
Brown beating Mehegan and such like odds in seve-
ral other battles were also offered.
In the Darcy-McGoorty battle it was different.
The bets were made as the result of a friendly argu-
ment, and my desire to convince my good friends of
the error of their judgment. This, by the way, how-
ever. Let us now return to Darcy’s doings in the
rinir.
CHAPTER XVII.
THE CHAMPION’S MOTHER'S CONFIDENCE.
Darcy’s next contest-was far and away the most
important to date, for his oponent Was none other
than the redoubtable American, Jimmy Gabby, the
man who was regarded as having no peer over the
Marathon route; the man, too, who owned a decision
over Mjke Gibbons over the latter’s pet distance, ten
rounds, and also outpointed McGoorty.
The soothsayers and others, whose shallow pates
would not permit of them seeing good in the youth,
were certain that Darcy was doomed this time.
Even Clabby himself, whilst recognising that he had
a wonderfully strong and clever youngster to con-
tend with, felt sure that in his then condition he
would stop Les’s onward march. Artie McQueen,
Gabby’s trainer, was also sanguine that victory
would come their way, whilst “Red” Watson, one
of the many imported ( ‘false alarms,” boasted loud-
ly and often that there would be only one in it, and
when asked who that one would be, he roared,
“Gabby, of course.” A week before the contest I
paid a visit to Darcy’s training quarters, and found
him in the very “pink,” and confidence itself re-
garding the ultimate result. In the coarse of our
conversation he remarked, “The improvement you
have been good enough to state I have shown every
time I appear will, I feel sure, be observed next Sat-
urday night.”
“Ton are confident of winning?” I asked.
“Yes, I feel certain of doing, the trick again.”
“Have yon ever seen Clabby at work?" I queried.
“T have, and studied him pretty well, and although
I regard him as being a better man than anyone
else I have met, I feel so well and strong that I am
confident of winning,”
“You don’t look upon it as an easy-tiring?”
“No, indeed, I am not prone that way, I know
I will hare to box harder and faster than ever be*
Les's poor showing against Billy Murray gave the
elosely-watching Fred Dyer the opinion that our
champion was not so great after all, and thought he
had studied the lad’s methods so minutely that the
clever Welshman immediately issued a challenge to
meet Darcy in a return match, provided the latter
would lay him £3OO to £2OO on the result. But when
they did meet on October 9, 1915, Dyer got tha
shock of his life, for it was a different Darcy en-
tirely to the one he saw Absolutely playing with
Murray. With little, if any, effort on the part of
the champion, the challenger was badly beaten and
knocked out in the sixth round.
His Win Over Clabby.
AMERICAN NEARLY OUTED IN EIGHTH ROUND.
fore. But I Trill be well enough to set the pace at
the word “go,’ and continue to the final gong, un-
less I am fortunate to win earlier by the other way
than a points’victory.”
“Or be knocked out yourself,” Inremarked.
At this he laughed merrily,, and-themreplied
am never afraid of that.*
“Why the laugh? Have you never,yetbeendazed
by a heavy blow on the chin ? ” >,
“Well, I don’t like saying it for fear people might
think I am flash. But as you have asked me the
question, I tell you candidly that in all my contests
in Sydney, Melbourne, and Brisbane, I have never
once felt more than the slightest bit dazed. McGoorty
hit me often enough on the chin with left and right,
and whilst admitting they were the heaviest punches
I ever received, they did net-cause me a moment’s
worry.
“Billy Murray also gave me a hard crack on the
chin, but, really, I did not have the rattled feeling
I hear other fellows speak of, my head swum for*
a while, that’s all. Therefore I have no reason to-
think for a moment that Jimmy or any other man
is ever-going to get-me that way.”
The statement that appeared in a daily paper at
the time to the effect that Darcy would surely find
trouble in fighting strong at the weight (11.6) ring-
side, made Les laugh again, and he replied in his
boyish, winning way, “That will be alright. I’ll
do it easily.” And so he did, by weighing
C3abby doing 10.13 J, over which poundage the -last*
feamed is far from being at his best. ,
Previous to this contest that rattling good Ame-
rican sport, Moose Tausig, cabled me for my tip, and
I immediately replied, “Darcy a cfertainty,” and 1
sincerely hope the-good fellow--
and Tim & pile* , i


Whilst her son was engaged in the most import-
ant future of his career, the result of which was to
determine whether he was the great champion his
many friends on this side claimed him to be, or the
false alarm! others whose warped minds made them
say he was, Mrs. Darcy was enjoying the company
of a few friends at an “at home” in the private por-
tion of the Lord Dudley Hotel. One of those pre-
sent asked if she was not worried over the probable
result of the contest, to which Mrs. Darcy smilingly
replied, ‘ ‘ Oh, dear, no. My only regret is for poor
Jimmy, but I hope Les will spare him as much as
possible, because all the boys speak well of the Ame-
rican.” But whatever he might have got in a sub-
sequent battle, on that particular occasion Jimmy
was not spared. i
CHAPTER XVIII
THE FIGHT.
From the beginning of the battle to the end of
the 15th round Les outfought and outpointed his
lighter, but more experienced, opponent, and but for
his over-anxiety would have scored a knock-out in
the eighth round, ■vyhcn a left to the chin and a right
to the body and over ta the head had Clabby all
but gone. With the prospect of a win by the short-
cut route over so world-famed an opponent, who,
excepting in one' of his very earliest of his very
many contests, had never suffered defeat in that
way, Les completely lost his head and swung wild-
ly, thereby missing and allowing Clabby to live
through the round and, thanks to the superb eondi- -
tioii Artie. McQueen had got him in, toe the scratch
for the ninth session well and strong again.
Nearing the end of the 15th round Darcy’s speed
slackened, and he acted almost entirely on the de-
fensive, and Clabby, noticing this on going to his
corner, spoke hurriedly to his seconds, who worked
hard on their man, and sent him out for the 16th
round as fresh as paint.
The American, thinking he had his opponent go-
ing, sot Sail at’a terrific bat, sending in his blows
from all angles, but whilst Darcy in this session
never did much in the way of attack, his defensive
work was an eye-opener to all excepting, perhaps,
the one man who was foolish enough to display his
ignorance .by publishing his absurd opinion that
Darcy had not improved under Dave Smith’s tui-
tion. Though Darcy for some reason had slowed
down for the first time in his career at the tail-end
of this battle, in my opinion he never showed to
greater advantage. His blocking, ducking, back-
moving and retreating were worthy of a Freddie
Welsh. When seen on the following Monday the
champion looked as fresh as new paint, and had
not a single mark as a result of his twenty-rounds
cojitest of a-few hours before.
He accounted for, his slowing down in the last
five rounds as being due to a severe cold that at-
tacked him on the previous Thursday.
“It was not the weight that hurt you?” I enquired.
“You may believe me that 11.6 is easy for me.
Why, more than ten days before the fight I was be-
low'the limit, and had to stop working.”
“Yes,” he continued, “I worked harder for Clabby
than I did for any other man. I remembered that
you told me that Clabby in his best form would
prove the hardest man I had met, and I was deter-
mined to get myself in the very pink, and now I
don’t mind telling you that I overdid it.”
“You don’t mean to infer that you were likely
to be beaten at any time owing to that tired feel-
ing?” •
“Oh, dear no! But it was a new, experience to me,
and will do me no harm. I will know what to d*
in future.”
The First Darcy-Clabby Contest
CHAPTER XIX .
CHAPTER XIX
Why he did not meet Harry Reeve.
HIS WORK COMPARED WITH THAT OF OLD-TIMERS. UNFAIR CRITICISM.
Sinee his. defeat by Darcy, McGoorty did wonders,
by outing Joe Bonds in one round, Billy Murray in
four rounds, and Harry Reeve in six rounds, and
more than ever convinced those who thought they
knew that the “Oshkosh Terror” was not wanted
©n the journey with Les on the memorable July 31,
ltd 5.; .
As mentioned before in these pages, Eddie had,
by outing Murray in four rounds, accomplished
something that appeared to them to be beyond the
power of our boy to perform in twenty rounds, hut
yo all but crockery-eyed individuals the McGoorty-
Murray contest was one of the worst kind of fakes
that was ever perpetrated.
In expressing my opinion in this way to a certain
betting man, who asked my opinion on the fight, he
smiled and- admitted that I must have had, as he
t put it, '‘the dinkum oil,” because he thought they
had worked it splendidly.
I answered him neither yea or nay, and drew him
on to.talk for the purpose of learning all I could
anent their alleged prior arrangements.
It appears that as far as those who thought they
were in the know were concerned, the contest was


to- Save lasted into the tenth' round, when Murray
would be sent down and oat, but a double ready
took place, and the end came in the fourth round,
and therefore friends and foes alike were let,in.
Of course, the mere suggestion that I knew be-
forehand was absolutely absurd, for had I been
armed with such information I would most certainly
have made the thing public. On the night of the
battle between McGoorty and Murray, the latter’s
manager, Jack Kearns, came round tp where I was
seated, and asked me what I thought of the battle,
and when I told him that it was the rankest schlenter
that had ever, taken place, he became angry, and
said something to the effect that McGoorty would
treat Darcy in a like manner if ever Les would prove
game enough to give him a chance, and this, mind,
you, was the man who at even that stage was pour-
ing tales of the great wealth that awaited our boy>
in America, but only under his (Kearns) manage-
ment. - ’ : ,; -
' Thb Stadium management at that time was try-
ing hard to bring Darcy aricl Reeve together, even-
though-it must have been known to them that the
youngster was in need of a rest, especially as far
as his hands were concerned. In eleven mpnths of
that-year, 1915, he had no less than twelve contests.
' In the “Referee” of September 22 I had the fol-
lowing to say, which I think will here bear repeat-
ing: “The Darcy-Recve match is off, as the young
middleweight champion has very wisely determined
to give bis hands the rest they are so much in need
of. The wonderful boy has crammed as much fight
into the last twelve months as some of the famous
old-timers crowded into half of their careers, and
it is certain that were lie built of steel and riveted
‘with steel, he could not go on fighting and boxing
at this rate.
“Were he not.the wonder he is as boxer^and
fighter, and an exemplary young fellow in his life
and general habits, he could never have accomplished
what he has done without breaking up.
CHAPTER XX.
“In saying' -QHs r do not misunderstand me and
imagine that I think there is’anything wrong with
Darcy’s hands, beyond that which will be remedied
by a brief rest from the strenuous work he .has made
them perform in the last, year or so.
“Candidly, 1 am sure that tlie young Maitlander
is doing the only wise thing in taking a rest, for he
has a big'programme ahead of him. He is still only
19 years of age, and, -wonder that he is, he has
nothing to gain by tackling the men who are any-
thing from a stone to. three stone heavier than he
is. All in good time, I say.
‘‘No man has a higher opinion of Les Darcy, boxer
and man, than I have; and no man wants to see him
go higher in boxing than I do. That being so, I
sincerely hope that he will not rush things too much,
but rest content to take on the middleweiglits.
“The Maitlander always kept-faith with public
and promoters, and has proved himself as straight
a goer and as fine an ornament to the ring as any
man in the world. But were lie’to go into the ring
and give a disappointing display on account of his
hands not being at their fittest for the work, he
would be breaking faith with the public and pro-
moter. 'And because he is determined to do
that, he is, forsooth, roasted. He can smile at the
advice of the soreheads. If he were to box with
weakened fists, and make a poor showing or be
beaten, he would receive very little comfort from
his critics. Besides, the boy will find the rest do
him the world of good. Later on he may be 'able to
perplex the wiseacres a little more in a second battle
with Eddie McGobrty.
“MOST UNFAIR CRITICISM.
“We are told by one oracle that Darcy has done
nothing to compare -\vith the severe work of the old-
time champions, also what a young fellow of Darcy’s
age ought to be able to do. Well, within the past
twelve months Darcy has; had twelve contests. Now
let us compare this with a year’s work done by
some of the greatest of old-timers.
Old-timers’ Performances compared with Darcy’s
busiest year.
JIM HALL.
In 1890 Jim Hall figured in a dozen contests, which
did not “average” six rounds a fight. He beat
Peter BolaUd in 16 rounds, It. Fitzsimmons in four
rounds, boxed four rounds with Joe Goddard, beat
Eddie Walsh in four rounds, boxed Pat Kiely four
rounds (draw), was k.o’d. by Owen Sullivan in ten
rounds, beat Tut Ryan in five rounds, “Dummy”
Mace in five rounds, failed to out. Boland in eight
rounds, also Dan. Creedon in eight-rounds, and beat
Starlight in five rounds. Hall was then 22 years
of age.
GRIFFO.
Although the mighty Griffo had no less than 16
contests in his busiest year, 1895, only twice did he
go over the twenty-round course. He fought a twenty,
five round draw with Dixon, and twenty with Kid
Lavigne. The others were" made up of a twelve, two-
tens, one eight, three sixes, and five four round en<,
counters. Griffo was 24 years old.
PADDY SLAVIN'.
To give his name in full, Patrick Francis Slaving
He was, strange to say, not only born in close pres*


imity to where Darcy first saw the light of day, hut
was also of the same calling—a blacksmith. In his
day Slavin was undoubtedly one of the leading
lights of the boxing world, and would probably have
beaten any otho? opponent but Peter Jackson, hut
in spite of being so famous he did not in all his
career; from 1885 to 1907, a matter of twenty-two
years, have many more fights than did Darcy in
two years. He does not compare even if we include
contests under E.P.R. rules, rough and tumbles with
Jaeksoh and Charlie Mitchell, and exhibition bouts.
, DAN CREEDON.
“This.famous Australian ex-champion was before
the public from 1890 to 1896, and the greatest num-
ber of. battles he figured in in twelve months was
seven in 1595, when he was a seasoned man of 27.
. 808 FITZSIMMONS.
“The!year Bob Fitzsimmons defeated the. Ameri-
’n idol, Jack Dempsey, he had'only three battles,
id he was 29 years of age. In 1892 Fitzsimmons
ught five times (his record number), with the ag-
•egotej number of rounds only 18. In 1893 he
mght four times, and only once after that to 1908
-ie fought’four times in one year. Compare this with
Darcy ’s doings.
' PETER JACKSON.
“In Peter Jackson's busiest year, ISB9, he fought
only nine limes in real matches, and the last seven
of these only aggregated 17 rounds. At that time
Peter was 28 years of age. The year he boxed Jim
Corbett lie had only that match, and in the follow-
ing .veer; 1893, when he had the wonderful fight
with Paddy Slavin, he only had three contests, and
they aggregated 15 rounds.
“These figures show the-utter absurdity of any
man citicising this splendid hoy because.he has de-
termined to take a brief spell after such a campaign
as he had gone through. It shows the absurdity of
quoting what .the. old-timers did. None of them did
anything ,in the matter of fighting at'Darcy’s age
to compare with what Darcy had done; in fact, many
of the vety best of ancient days hadn’t Very many
more really live contests in the whole of their career
than Darcy had in one twelve months.
. “My opinion of Les Darcy is, that in matters of
honor and right he needs no advice from anyone,
let alone the pessimists. He is well aide to deter-
mine such things for himself, and determine them
wisely, bov .though-he still is!
“If,-as is alleged, Darcy signed an agreement to
box Reeves, we may rest assured that he will do so,
hut not until he feels that he is fit to do justice to
himself. And lam sure that Mr. R. L. Baker would
jiot have it ■ otherwise. It is just as much in the
interests of the Stadium company as in Darcy’s ti'at
the middleweight champion of the world-retain his
fitness.” ■
So much for Australian boxers. "We will now
glance through the records of the best of America's
- scrappers of old, and see hOw very far wrong the
gentleman was who, in knocking Darcy because he
refused to meet a no-draw card opponent in English-
man Reeve, stated that our boy had done nothing
to compare with the severe work of old-time chain-
. pions. We will start with
JOHN L. SULLIVAN,
who, in fourteen years, from 1879 to .1892, had 28
short encounters with the gloves, a few exhibition
bouts, and three-knuckle fights. Under M. of Q.
rules he went 115 rounds, not nearly -as many as
Darcy boxed in one twelve months.
JAMES J. CORBETT.
This actor •(?) fighter (?) started as an amateur
in about 1885, and accounted for seven lily-whites,
• and boxed an exhibition bout with Professor Billy
Miller; then from 1886 to 1903, seventeen years, he
was a principal in 27 contests, and as at least seven
of these were exhibition bouts, his average was a
little over one fight per year.
! STANLEY KETCHELL.
In this alleged world’s champion’s best year, 1908,
he had seven contests, during which 49 rounds wer»
boxed.
TOMMY BURNS.
In 14 years, from 1900 to 1914, ex-champion Burn*
had something inside fifty contests, but less than
twenty of these were to have been twenty rounds,
therefore he did average four battles per year.
JAMES J. JEFFRIES..
James J. Jeffries started in 1896, and retired in
1904, nine years, in which time he faced the music
twenty times in legitimate contests, and as nine into
twenty does not go three times, he did not average
three bouts a year. *Six years later he came out
again and lost to Johnson, and lest you forget whero
it took place, I might mention that it was Reno.
These figures show the. utter absurdity of any man
criticising Darcy because he had determined to take
a brief spell after the enormous amount of trork hc
had crammed into so short a space of time
I could fill pages of this book in reproducing re-
cords of old-timers, and thereby prove that not one
of them did anything in the matter of fighting at
any time of their career to nearly compare with
whit the youthful Darcy had done; in. fact, many
of the best of ancient days' hadn’t very many more
really live contests in the whole of their tim* it the
game than Les had in one twelve months.


LES. O’DONNELL
like Uncle Steve of old, was clever,
but was much gamer than the ancient
one. O’Donnell was the first to ac-
quaint us of the promising Maitlander.
He lost to Darcy in 7 rounds.
HENRI DEMLEN.
The Belgian boxer who was
allowed to remain 4 rounds
by Darcy. He is at present
lessee of the Bondi Swim-
ming Baths.


FROM BULLET
How New Zealand Quota ol
from Fighting Tyranny abroij
Comment on the remarkable prohibition debacle in New Zealand by leading Australian
papers has been both keen and accurate. Indeed, a Wellington (N.Z.) despatch to the
“Sydney Morning Herald,’' after admitting that the conclusions of the Sydney papers were
perfectly correct, added: “In fact, they were far more searching in their analysis than the
comments made by the newspapers in the country of origin” (i.e., New Zealand itself).
Leading Australian editorial opinion is appended:—
Jllontinjg; Sjmib
‘Prohibitionists’ Strength Waning.’
“During - the last eight years the strength of the prohibitionists has been
steadily waning, and the vote for liquor gathering in strength. . . . The vote
by the soldiers is so preponderatingly against prohibition as to raise a point
of great speculative interest. . . . They are the flower of the country’s man-
hood. . . . Three out of four of them have voted against prohibition. Does any reason exist for assuming thaat their vote is not
a reflex of the vote cast by New Zealand men generally? ... It would be disturbing to think of prohibition being carried by a
men were in the minority.”
Sydney, April 14, 1919.
bare majority in a country where three out of four
pQ ftilj) vft,p 1)
Sydney, April 15, 1919.
“New Zealand May Be
Congratulated.”
‘That the soldiers have de-
clared emphatically against
prohibition has been established
beyond controversy. The New
Zealand soldiers may be regarded as typical of the national manhood.
Great numbers of them were volunteers. Some belonged to the class of
young married men with families, who had been called up under con-
scription. None had been so long away from New Zealand as to forget
the conditions, of which local prohibition was among the best known and
most often discussed. Their vote may therefore be taken as a guide to
the feeling of the rest of the population. It is a fair inference that the
greater number of the supporters of prohibition were women, and that
the greater number of its opponents were men. If this is so, the people
of New Zealand may fairly be congratulated on having refused to take an
irrevocable step. They would have had great difficulty in revoking their
decision if it had been followed by the abolition of an important industry
and the payment of compensation. They would have imposed on them-
selves a restriction against the will of the class on whom it would operate
more directly.”
EVENING NEWS
Sydney, April 14, 1919.
The French soldier is a wine drinker, and his magnificent deeds explode
the fiction that alcohol means the inevitable degeneracy of a nation.
Not only is France not degenerate, but the clear intellect of her states-
men and generals, and the valour of her sons, have raised her to a
point of national dignity, honour, and renown beyond any period of her
fame-emblazoned story. . . . Prohibitionists this side the Tasmaii
Sea will read the New Zealand verdict with additional cause for gloom.
New Zealand has no wine industry, whereas in New South Wales vine-
growing is not only strongly established, but is one of our industries for
which a great expansion can be confidently predicted. . . Assuming, there-
fore, that will endorse the New Zealand verdict, the reasonable
assumption is tfiat'she will 'better the Instruction’ by turning down the
attempt to force general prohibition.”
Influence of Noble
Prance.
“The soldiers have
been fighting in a coun-
try that has used liquor
from time immemorial.
Prohibition is receiving l a significa
In England it would seem dead for a
all time. Canada, after adopting it s
to work to throw it into the discard
press, dated April 11th, from Vancoi
the ‘bone dry’ law in Quebec Provinc
Parliament will soon introduce some i
now effective.” Even America is up i
men by the hundred thousand are v
Chicago recently returned a majority
hibition. And now New Zealand has
increasing as the soldier returns com<
N.Z. vote that the men who risked the!
be the ones to defeat so overwhelming
personal liberty proposed in modern t
that the soldier vote is intended as a
The Evils of Extremism.
“We see little justification for such an important issue being
decided by a bare majority. ... It seems intolerable that a
majority of one should ,■decide an issue involving a consider-
able area of employment, and the comfort and convenience of-
by far the larger portion of the male population. Argument that drunkenness, crime, insanity, and disease are
caused by drink does not justify the placing by one section of the community of an embargo on the entire
population, the majority of whom drink only in moderation, and are not criminals, lunatics, or diseased. . . .
Extreme measures, as proposed in New Zealand, may bring worse evils in their train, and thus defeat the
very object they were intended to attain.”
The Mirror
Sydney, April 20, 1919.


'S TO BALLOTS
If Anzac Brotherhood turned
kd to Fight Tyranny at Home.
In the final issue, had not her gallant soldier sons kept the clear ideal of liberty before
them in peace as in war, New Zealand might have been voted dry by the machinations of
an unholy alliance between greedy domestic importers and equally greedy alien exporters.
Which may explain why America is willing to spend £1,000,000 to make the world dry; and
also, incidentally, why Australia is being flooded with a visitation of peregrinating Yankee
prohibition propagandists.
“The Sane Man’s Attitude.”
‘The great body of people in an educated and intelligent democracy are always
reformers. The vote in New Zealand does not mean that half the population is
in favour of reform and half against it. It means reformers are equally divided
upon the best method of reform. . . . On the prohibition side are some whose
narrow prejudice and fanatical obsession make them more dangerous destructionists of personal liberty than honest reformers.
.. . The sane man’s attitude is how to prevent abuse of alcohol. The argument of the prohibitionist is—there is no way save by
preventing the use. It is obvious the argument cannot be applied generally. If the use of everything that can be, and is,
abused were prohibited there would be nothing to do but dig a hole in the ground and die in it. The argument of the temperance
reformer is that abuse of alcohol can be prevented by proper control and regulation, which still allows use in moderation. On
moral grounds this argument is far stronger than that of the prohibitionist. In Victoria the traffic is rigorously controlled.
Without question these reforms have minimised abuse of alcohol.”
% ii c c.
Melbourne, April 14, 1919.
nt and fatal setback all over the world,
generation to come at least—if not for
,s a wartime measure, is busily setting
. A Reuter’s despatch to the Sydney
iver, said:—“ln view of the defeat of
i by a majority of 125,000, the Federal
elaxation of the strict prohibition . .
in arms from Pacific to Atlantic. Work-
faring buttons, “No beer, no work.”
of a quarter of a million against pro-
rejected it by a majority continually
s in. It is a significant feature of the
r lives to keep their country free should
ly the greatest invasion of private and
lines. One cannot avoid the corfclusion
stinging rebuke to rabid extremists.
ifJrjpg,
‘ ‘ Coercion—Naked,
Unashamed. ”
Melbourne, April 15, 1919.
‘‘A very large majority
of New Zealand soldiers,
who have done such
' slendid service in war,
object to returning to a ‘dry’ country. . . . The New Zealand proposal
means'coercion, naked and unashamed. The would-be prohibition despots
leap beyond all reasonable bounds, and actually propose if prohibition
be carried—which is now out of the question—it shall be a final solution
which may never be questioned or reversed, for one provision of the bill
is that no licensing poll shall ever be taken after the carrying of national
pi*ohibition’—an attempted double prohibition, and an absurd one, since
no Parliament can bind its successors in any way; but its insertion in the
Bill shows how the prohibitory habit grows. ... It is notoriously untrue
to say that prohibition is the only remedy. The influence of public
opinion has worked a remarkable improvement. In Victoria the Licenses
Reduction Board has done much to reduce temptations to drinking.
19X9
“Compulsion Not
Proper Means.”
Melbourne, April
"In this contest it is plain,
that 245,000 people—teeto-
tallers mainly—voted to
compel others to become
teetotallers. On the other
hand, the winning of the
■ '* contest by those opposed to
prohibition does not compel teetotallers to become moderate drinkers. . . .
.Movements of this kind are retrogressive, and compulsion is not the proper
means of working reforms. It leaves nothing to conscience, nothing
to the intellect of the individual. The tendency in all Australia is towards
moderation in the use of drink. There is far less drunkenness in all the
States than there was twenty years ago.”
Prohibition’s Trail of Ruin.
“New Zealanders have tolerated local option because, wet
dry, liquor was procurable all over the Dominion at any
Sydney, April 13, 1919. time. ... It will not be very long (i.e., in the event of
prohibition) before the Government that allowed licenses to
be abolished, and expelled liquor in its entirety in New Zealand, will be thrown out, and a movement set on
foot to repeal the law. . . . For abolition of liquor will kill immigration and tourist traflic, ruin countless
businesses, lower land and property values, and drive capital out of New Zealand.”
THE SOLDIER'S FRIEND
'Site JlumiOT ©roes.


EDDIE McGOORTY
“Oshkosh Terror.”
For the first time in his victorious career was outed by the late
champion, who, despite the ugly rumors concerning McGoorty’s
showing in that event, performed the trick in shorter time the
next time they met.
KEG PATON. (“Regio.”)
One of Darcy’s early victims, lie
was beaten in 8 rounds at West Mait-
land. Next to Darcy, no more popu-
lar lad ever graced an Australian
ring, lie took his last count in the
firing line as a result of stopping a
Hun bullet.
■JOE SHAKESPEARE.
u> A husky Cessnock welter weight.
Anotiier of Darcy’s early victims, and
whose good work at the Front has
added to his popularity.


CHAPTER XXII
My Views on Proposed American Trip.
MURRAY, McGOORTY AND OTHERS SHOW POOR SPORTSMANSHIP,
BILLY MURRAY A PLAYTHING.
r Jack Kearns, the much bejewelled American man-
ager, who first put the idea of paying the United
States a visit into the youthful champion’s head,
and who, with his desperado pals, prevented the lad
from showing when they got him there, because he
refused to give them the lion’s share of his earn-
ings* was continually clamouring for a return match
for his protege, Billy Murray, who according to
Kfeams, gave Darcy the fight of his life, and he had
the cheek to remark that the decision should have
been a draw, whilst it was plain to everyone pre-
sent that Darcy absolutely allowed this false alarm
to remain the full journey.
Darcy at first was inclined to turn a deaf ear to
Kearns’ challenge on behalf of Murray, on the plea
that the latter through being so* easily disposed of
by MeGoorty, would not act as a sufficient - draw
eard, but tlys American manager’s absurd boasting
spurred Les on, and he agreed to a meeting with
Murray at Melbourne. The conditions of this match
called for catch weights, and Darcy, with little or
no training:, would have outed Murray in a round
or two had he so desired. In his usually generous
manner, Darcy smilingly tolerated Murray’s tenac-
ious clinching, but cutting loose in the 6th he soon
outclassed the man who Kearns thought (or pre-
tended to think) should have had a draw decision
against the champion in a previous meeting.
Tearing himself away*from the*American’s close
embrace, Les stabbed his left to the nose, jammed
his right to the body and over to the head, an up-
percut both hands to the nose and mouth, and down
went Murray for 8, and so badly beaten was he
that the towel was thrown in to save him from fur-
ther unnecessary punishment.
Murray, like most of his countrymen who follow
the game fistic, was anything but a sport, and in-
stead of telling the truth of Darcy's wonderful
powers, he wrote to his friends in America, and told
them that Darcy was of no account, and attributed
his defeat to the fact that Les was too heavy for
him, etc. Was ever anything more absurd? The
difference in their announced weights was but 21b.,
Darcy doing. 11.8 against his opponent ’s 11.6. Such
an epistle, however, was only in keeping with those
E““"* forth by MeGoorty, the many sailors of a cer-
American steamer, alleged American vaudeville
artists, a lady writer, and a few local sore-heads who
had lost their money backing the Oshkosh Terror,
telling of how Eddie was labelled “riot wanted” on
the first trip and advised their friends on the other
side to be on the American in the return trip with
Dar«y. I sincerely'hope they did.
By many persons I was assail eel fdr- "BernffTCe Wt
whose advice Darcy left these shores on his ill-fated
trip to America. All anonymous of eourse; and
one of these cowardly individuals, even after the
poor lad’s death, was contemptible enough to write
and accuse my interference as being the cause of his
death. If they only knew the amount of grief I suf-
fered as a result of that unfortunate happening I
am sure they would have had more respect for my
feelings. However, as further evidence of my inno-
cence of the charge of being a party to his get away,
I herewith publish word for word what I wrote in
‘‘The Referee” of 2io.yiember.24, 1315;
* '
CALL PROM U.S.A. TO DARCY. .
t.
WISDOM OP TOUR WHILST WAR IS ON
QUESTIONED.
The latest uews is that Les Darcy has signed a
contract for three years with Mr. Kearns, who came
to Australia as manager of Billy Murray, and that
lie will leave for the land of Uncle Sam. early next
mouth.
We are told that the contract provides for'a long
spell on the vaudeville stage as well as matches with
suitable men. Les Darcy has not been in Sydney
since this Was made public, nor have I had an oppor-
tunity of obtaining his confirmation, but Mr. Kearns
states that it is all arranged.
I must confess that I do not look upon a trip to
America by Darcy just at present with the happiest
of feedings.
But the hoy—he is just twenty—appears to have
determinedjthis matter for himself. I sincerely hope
itSv’ill not dimunition of his powers as
a fighter, or his popularity in the ring before the
fans of liis own country, the country that bred him,
and gave him the inspiration to success and the
tangible rewards of that success. d
We have come to regard Darcy as our own, and
iii this crisis in the world’s affairs we feel that we
ought not 'to be parting with him for the benefit
of old Uncle Sam.
. That Dave Smith is not to be associated with
Darcy in future will surprise those who are, as .it
were, not behind the scenes in boxing, though it
does not surprise those who are.
I have no’doubt that Darcy will do well in Ame-
rica if he makes up-his mind to keep in the best of
nick, and to eschew the lures.of the wider life to
be lived, there, and which will always tend to knock
the edge off the form of any athlete who does not
apply to the old rule of early to bed, etc.


Net'ilU£'‘&jKtek'l)*rey will not honor that rule,
but. experience of the world of sport has left me a
sceptic, so that I feel constrained to put in a proviso
in any prophecy I may make respecting success of
any of our boys who take it into their heads to visit
America.
: The agreement with Dave Smith terminated, and
the pair automatically separated in the business
sense. Darcy’s association with §mith put the pol-
ish on him, as perhaps no other association would
have done.
Dave quickened him, finished him, and turned him
from a raw champion in the making into a world’s
Champion. It is a pity that the association of the
CHAPTER XXIII.
I have already mentioned that Eddie McGoorty,
- among Others, had written to his home country pa-
pers deerying Australia and Australians and more
than hinting that his contest with Darcy Was not
«a the level, I have received a letter, from a friend
M McGoorty’s denying that the latter had done as
Lstated,-and that Eddie had always boomed Aus-
tralia had J»er inhabitants, etc.
Now,* as we have every reason to know that the
majority of America’s writers, like almost all of her
pugilistic representatives, do not handle the truth
with any great degree of accuracy, we'might be
inclined to believe-that Eddie was wrongfully ac-
cused, but as the latter practically admitted having
written when I accused him of having done so, our
correspondent will have to admit that the error is
-on his side.
The letter referred to is mentioned in the follow-
ing, which was culled from the “Chicago American”:
—“Eddie McGoorty went to Australia and was
knocked out by Les Darcy, the latest Australian won-
der. That surely vTas enough to sour him of the
Antipodes. But that is not the reason, he explains,
why he is out with the advice to American boxers
to stay away from Australia.
“ The Oshkosh man says things are so bad in the,
British colonies that nobody but a real champion
can make any money over there.
“ ‘Stay in America,’ Eddie writes. ‘This is not
a “safety first” bit of advice as far as boxing is
concerned, but a warning that the money is not
here. .
• “ ‘DAROY AND I ONLY DREW £4OOO.
“ ‘ln normal times we would have tripled that
amount; ordinary bouts attract little or no atten-
tion. s
How McGoorty Knocked. Australia.
HIS TIP AS TO ULTIMATE RESULT OF RETURN MATCH.
DARCY’S AGREEMENT WITH KEARNS. DARCY ON TRACEY.
two-colonialsdias- not continued, for Smith and Darcy,
had worked up a very clever vaudeville stunt, a lec-
turette on boxing, illustrating by actual perform-,
ance on the stage; And, ! of course,- if a tour of Ame-
rica became a necessity for Darcy,-Dave Smith had
been there, and knew tfy?*ground and the ways of
Americans, which, very good ways as they be, are
nevertheless not always our ways. (The Almighty'
forbid, at least where boxing is concerned.) How-
ever that unfortunately is not to be, and in Mr.
Kearns Darcy will have a man who knows America,
the American ring, American boxing, and the pecu-
liar publicity stunts for which the American press
appears to stand.
“ ‘Were you surprised at my defeat.?' Well, don’t
worry. I’ll get him again, and you may expect a
sharp reverse the next time. ” #
Previous to publishing the foregoing in the “Re-
feree” of November 24, 1915, I ’phoned McGoorty
and asked him if he had anything to say- on the
matter. He informed me that he merely-wrote tb a
friend who wanted his advice re coming to this coun-
try, and stated that his reply was not intended for
publication. He denied knocking Australia or Aus-
tralians, but evaded the question re his remarks con-
cerning the first Darcy contest, and said something to
the effect that things would be better next time
they met. And sq they weije: Eddie was put out of
his misery much sooner.
At that time Eddie was preparing 'for his return
battle with Darcy, but as a kind of pipe-opener he
agreed to a meeting with Mick King, who was then
our middleweight champion. Mick did not lose that
title when he was so badly beaten by Darcy. In
that contest it was a case of Les defending his
world’s championship, so that the challenger had'all
to win and nothing to lose.
Mick and Eddie met on November 27, 1915, and
although the American won in eleven rounds, when
King’s comer threw in the towel, he did not win
with that ease one would expect from the man who
was going to have a possible chance against Darcy,
to say nothing of defeating the latter. In discuss-
ing the ultimate result of that much-talked-of return
contest in which McGoorty was going to play the
deuce and break things, ! frequently pointed out his
comparatively poor showing against King. But ad
against that some fans argued that Eddie beat Mur-
ray in four and Darcy took first twenty -and then
six rounds to account for the same man. They would
not have it that whilst Murray was not doing his
honest" best against McGoorty, he was all out in op*


position to Darcy. In their opinion there was only
one schlenter, and that was the Darcy-McGoorty af-
fair, and these absurd statements it was that com-
pelled me to lay fabulous odds before-mentioned in
this story,' that our bonny boy ’s' win would be of a
more convincing nature than was the first.
“Whilst MeGoorty was leaving no stone unturned
'in order to fit himself for the ordeal of completely
turning the tables on his former conqueror, Les was
not bothering. He, with long Jim Tracey, was on
tour with the Hollyford-Barry dramatic company,
and on November 27, 1915, he wrote me from Glen
Innes as follows:
“Just a line to let you know of my whereabouts.
I am having a tour of the country with the Robert
Hollyford-Dan Barry Dramatic Co_; Jim Tracey and
I give exhibition bouts every night. We have visit-
ed Maitland, Singleton, Muswellbrook, Kurri Kurri,
Artoidale, Quirindi, Tam worth and Tenterfield; and
we played here last night, and to-day we are leaving
for Inverell. I expect to be in Sydney about Friday,'
and if so, I will call on you.
“I HAVE DECIDED TO GO TO AMERICA WITH
■ KEARNS
An December 18, and try my luck on that side. No
doubt some will be right up against me for do-
ing this, but some I hope will be with me; and if I
fail, Mr. Lawless, it will be my own misfortune;
there is not much left for me here now.”
In view of the fact that there was a possibility of
Jim Tracey meeting Lloyd for the championship,
the rest of Darcy’s letter might be found interest-
ing:—
“Jim Tracey is improving every day, getting fast-
er, hitting harder, and is better in every way. I
would like to see him meet Harold Hardwick, and
I’ll put £5O of my own money up if Hardwick cares
to cover it. I really think Jim is
THE COMING CHAMPION OP AUSTRALIA^
He scales 13 stoned-stands. 6ft. aad'fetaly.l9
years of age. ' '' 1
“Jim is anxious to try his luck in Yankee Land,
and if tilings do not brighten up I’ll do my best to
take him with me. - ,
“I weigh 32J.0 in my clothes, so that doing tS 9
middleweight ringside is still easy foe xa&ia -MO*
complish." j
The departure-of Jaek Clune, Jack Duxffeavjnanil
Cliff Thomas for America just about that time,
ever, prevented Darcy from carrying out his plana.
The action of the three named gave Parliament fim
‘ ‘ office, ’ ’ and it was determined that no one baiweem
the ages of 17 and 45 would be allmgfyir4o»ipan|»
[Australia without a passport. <
This move, however, did not have*
feet on the young champion when I next met fibi
a few days after the receipt of the letter above re»
produced. I told him that I was pleased the- ©•»
vernment had made this new regulation, if oaly
because it prevented the boy, going away imder
Kearns’ management. I asked him. if he had signed
an agreement with the tastnanued, and he assured
me that he had not; that Kearns almost daily pes-
tered him for sueh a document, but die best he
gave the latter was a promise, and I understand
that even this was cried off in a letter to the Azorai-
ean manager after the Government ’smew mgofetaoa
had become known to Les.
Darcy’s intended hurried departure to America,
without giving MeGoorty a return match, was taken
to mean by very many people that the lad feared
a return meeting with his old opponent, and when
I told the lad this his smile momentarily departed
as he replied, “All right, that settles it; I would
not go to Ameriea now if they offered me the irift
that is, until I’ve met and beaten Eddie.”
CHAPTER XXIV.
What happened prior to the return Darcy-McGoorty Contest
EACH MAN EXPRESSES HIS UTMOST CONFIDENCE. McGOORTY’S CONDITION PERFECT.
As absurd rumours were rife concerning the split
up between Darey and Dave Smith, and as there
are many, even to this day, who still persist in say-
ing unkind things about one or the other, I think
it would be as well to here reproduce Dave Smith’s
explanation of the whole thing.
Many of Smith’s supporters were unkind enough
to state thaf Darcy, after learning all he knew from
the then heavyweight champion, turned the latter
down Cold; whilst the Darcy man voiced the opinion
that Dave’s demands were exorbitant, etc., etc.
Now, the true facts are contained in a letter sent
sie by Dave in December, 1915, and read' as follows:
“Many people were wondering what had become
of Dave Smith when all the paper stuff was flying
about re Darcy's propsed trip to America with-Jack
Kearns. Les and I had a contract which gave me
20 per cent, of the first hundred, 12|- per cent, of
the second, and 10 per cent, of the balance of all
moneys taken in his contests for one year, which
finished on November 17.
“Les and I worked that contract through to our
mutual benefit, and”now, having gained sufficient
knowledge of .the boxing business, he is quite right
in his decision to in future paddle his own canoe*
“He was undoubted!®***® apt pupil, and I know


Ms success: in the limelight as one
capable of putting the finishing touches on aspiring
champions.
. "Be his social standing, he is as different as chalk
is from cheese to the country boy who placed him-
self under my charge twelve months previously, and
I am delighted to be able to say that he can now
take his place in any company. I, of course, was
delighted to learn that he had changed his mind,
and decided to remain at home. I took on the trip,
and know from bitter experience that an American
trip is not all they say it is. My advice to Les
was, ‘Stay at home, my boy, and clear up all the
good money that’s lying about.’ And later, with
his position assured, he could then try his luck in
America or England before settling down to farm
life. Anyhow, no one, Outside bis own good mother
and family, is more sincere than I am in wishing
him the best of good luck.’’
This manly letter, from one of the whitest men
that ever, donned a glove, should therefore disabuse
the. minds of those who are inclined to think ill of
either the late Les Darey or Dave Smith in connec-
tion with that'agreement.
We have now reached that most important peyod
of- the late great world’s champion’s career, the
fefr days preceding the McGoorty return battle, in
whieb the "know-alls’’ knew how our boy was go-
ing to be so badly beaten.
There was great excitement, and all other contests
sank into insignificance compared with this event.
A week before this historic event came on for
decision I called at the contestants’ training quar-
ters for the purpose of obtaining from them their
opinions as to what they thought wquld be the ulti-
mate result.
Darey said, with confidence and without bragga-
docio, that the title would surely, remain in his
hands.
, He had every reason to be confident, but not over-
confident. Such a thing he knew was a pitfall,
therefore the belief in his own ability to once more
"bring home the bacon” did not prevent him from
training hard for the bout.
DARCY WAS BETTER THAN EVER.
I then saw him doing wbnders at the Spit Baths
gymnasium, and, whilst fully expecting McGoorty
to show improvement in his coming contest, I was
as certain that night follows day that Darcy would
onee more prove the better man.
On that day he sparred three rounds with Mick
King—not the has-been of to-day, but Mick at his
very best—and how Darcy outboxfed him on that
occasion was nothing short of wdnderful.
Colin Bell also .acted as one of Darey’s sparring
partners. The big, good-hearted Colin, in reply to
my query as to Daroy’a strength and hitting power,
remarked: "Well, I don’t know. I’ve heard other
fellows say that he is as strong as a horse. I can
hold almost any horse, hut I’m, blowed if I can
hold this fellow when we get in close, therefore he
must be stronger than the average horse; and as to
his hitting power, well, I thought Langford could
deliver a heavy punch, but it is not in it with
Les’s.”
I then journeyed by car—we used to do it in
style in those days, thanks to the generosity of the
Stadium’s managing director —to Sandringham, to
witness the American at work, and obtain that in-
terview.
Never in any of his previous training bouts did
'he show so well. He had the good luck to have se-
cured the services'of Les O ’Donnell, who just then
had rid himself of the muscular rheumatism that pre-
vented him from going ever so much higher in the
game, and in these circumstances proved the very
best sparring partner imaginable.
tEddie was certainly better for that fight than
he was for any of his many previous bouts in this
country, and seemed very confident.
After being rubbed down by trainer Tom Cubitt,
£he American requested me to register his weight,
which was, a week before the contest, 11.8 J.
Asked how he liked his chance of turning the
tables on Darcy, he replied: "I like it immensely,
because I will be a hundred per cent, better in every
way than I was when we last met. I look upon this
contest as being far and away the most important
of my career, and I have set my heart upon winning
it.
"I promise you I will fight as I never fought
before, and' that, of course, I must do in order
to defeat Darcy, who is
#
THE MOST WONDERFUL BOY THAT EYES
LIVED. i
"But my much greater experience and present
excellent condition will, I think, prove too much
for him this time.”
"And the 11.6 limit will not weaken yout”
"Not this time, for I'haVe worked well, and got
.it off gradually. But that seems like taking all the
credit to myself, which is certainly not right, as
my trainer, Tom Cubitt, has been most valuable
to me in that direction. He is a first-flighter in his
profession, and I never had, nor do I wish to ever
have, a better one. Then, again, I must also include
my sparring partners. Les O’Donnell’s science and
speed have sharpened me up wonderfully, whilst*
‘Red’ Watson’s toughness has allowed me to go my
hardest every day.
"Now, if Darcy can beat me in my present ex-
cellent shape; I will be very much surprised, but


trill not forget to boost him as the ehampion of afi.
champions.”
BIG FORFEIT TO MAKE WEIGHT.
Clause 13 in the special articles of agreement that
governed this contest read as follows: “The said
contestant hereby gives the promoter full power
and authority to retain sum. of two hundred
and fifty pounds out of any moneys due to him in
connection with the said contest should his weight
exceed eleven stone six pounds at 7.30 pjn. on the
day of the said contest The said sum of two hund-
red and fifty pounds (£250) to be handed to ioa
opponent as a forfeit for sack overweight^
CHAPTER XXV.
FINE SPIRIT OF THE CROWD.
We now come to that most important period of
the late Les Darcy’s career, when, after defeating
the mighty Eddie MeGoorty in half the time it took
him to do the trick on the first occasion, that ignor-
ant —or, better still, biassed—few who could never
see anything great in this wonder boy’s work, had
at last to acknowledge that he was IT in the boxing
world, and that, after all, he didjeam something
from his capable mentor, Dave Smith.
This contest took plaee at the Sydney Stadium
on December 27, 1915, and as to what happened—■
well, I don’t think I could do better than reproduce
what I wrote in the following issue of the “Referee”:
“There have been fights and fights in Australia
since the renaissance of boxing. But none compares
with the return match between Les Darcy, the young
Australian, and Eddie MeGoorty, who represents
the unbeatable in American middleweight^—that is,
by the k.o. route. He is no longer that phenomenon
to his compatriots, for to-day he stands thrashed a
second time, outboxed and outpunehed. But what
a battle! It was an honor for even the beaten man
to have played his part in it, for he may be sure
that it will not fade from the memory of any man
who was there to see it, while he has the power to
think and repicture the electrie events as they rush-
ed one upon the other, with Darcy, the artist, the
lightning flash and the whirlwind incarnated;
“Everything save the dampening influence of war
conspired to invest the battle with unique signifi-
cance. When Darcy knocked out his famous rival
some months back some depreciated the perform-
ance by hinting that the American, for some strange
■reason, took one of the severest hidings a man is
ealled upon to take with the gloves without doing
his best. It was useless to argue with such people;
that, no' matter what wiseacres on the street comer
and elsewhere might have to say, a man with the
reputation of MeGoorty would never, accept the hu-
miliation of such a whipping as he received,' and
the loss of prestige it meant, if he could possibly
have avoided it. This sort of talk was heaping coals
of fire on the head of the vanquished warrior, after
he had earned "*3 sympathy of men who have any
Preliminaries of the Historic Darcy McGoorty
Return Fight
EACH MAN IST PERFECT FIX,
el jam to sportsmanship. But it had another
which the subsequent series of knock-out victories
MeGoorty won by means of flashing punches at the
expense of heavies and the Australian middleweight
champion, Mick King,' heightened, and that was
the desire by men whose faith in Darcy was as firm
as the Roek of Gibraltar to see what the doubters,
also desired —another match between the pair under
the same conditions —that the world’amiddle-
weight title, i
GRAND SPIRIT OF THE CROWD. 7 ~
“It was one of the most wonderful crowds ever
seen at a sporting event, and plaudits and cheers
went on for eight rounds without a break.
“These were the appreciative plaudits of ffce-frar
sporting instinct for the marvellous alliance of box-
ing and fighting in the Australian. It was not the
applause of oue-eyed partisans prepared torail
rant and hoot and howl at anything and everything
not in accord, with the way they wanted Clings to
go.
“The science and skill of Darcy earned people oS
their feet, so to speak,. It were idle to deny that as
the day and hour neared for. the battle the ehanees
of the American were very highly appraised -by
many regular smgsiders. These people buttressed
their views by arguing that MeGoorty this time was
in better form than he had been on the first occa-
sion, and to bolster up the contention pointed to the
k.o. victories he had plaeed in the record-book at
the expense of bigger and heavier mm than hint,
self some little time later. It was useless to combat
in words the views of such men; the only way to.
answer was as Darcy answered it cm the night to the
SEVENTEEN THOUSAND PEOPLE.
,v! *
“The maner in which the smiling youth clenched
his teeth and eyed his rival as soon as they faeed
one another in the ring-centre—a moment of un-
speakable tenseness, when a watch tick might be
heard, carried the message to his friends that he had
determined to answer, in the shortest possible
within the limit of the stipulated twenty rounds, to.
friend and foe who had not been Able to see the


fir*i fight through the cool, calm, judicial eye of
the connoisseur of the fistic art.
»
Though MeGoorty was not as fine-drawn as he
had.been for the first battle, his expression was that,
if a man who felt that, with all his grit and strength,
and power of puneh, he was about to face one whom
he knew was at least his equal, and who possessed
the priceless inspiration of a big and unequivocal
victory over him.on a previous occasion. In a word,
' the-great puncher looked very serious, without the
relaxing, hoy-like smile of his adversary.
“The weights were announced—-MeGoorty 11.55,
and Darcy 11.5}, so that the American’;} advantage
was but half a pound,
“At the command of the referee, Mr,. Arthur
. Scott, they advanced to the ring centre, shook hands,
and stepped back to wait the electric gong sound
to send them forth to battle. And what a crop of
sensation it produced! The first, a whirlwind round,
the fiercest ever seen in the Stadium, almost beg-
gars description, with MeGoorty fighting desperate-
ly, but' already severely punished about the nose,
mouth, ears and ribs. He was up against the great-
est, fighting machine that ever donned a glove.”
CHAPTER XXVI
Opening Rounds of Return Match, with McGoorty.
AMERICAN'S FINE CONDITION AND BBAVE BUT USELESS EFFOBT.
’ - THE CONTEST ROUND FOR ROUND.
. • the McGoorty-Darcy return contest was one
of -Die meat important events of modem times, I
think ii is as well to state exactly in this story what
happened during every moment of that sensational
battle. ' The following is iny original report of .the
..fight:—•
ROUND ONE.
They came together without attempting to feint
»r spar, and Darcy at once plunked his left venom-
' uusly square on to MeGoorty’s nose and mouth,
Issying a ntd patch to evidence his enhanced hit-
}sl£ig: potror. MeGoorty’s left swing was partially
gild then in close the champion pumped
: left- after left to the nose and mouth, drawing blood.
Then left and right belabored the body, making the.
American hang on tenaciously for dear life, mean-
; taking punishing blows by the right to the
■ Vbdy and over to the head. The bombardment made
’•him Ist go, and as soon as he was disentangled he
'swiihg left and right with express speed for Darcy’s
‘head. But the latter coolly caught them on his fore-
-■axifls, and promptly replied with short but powerful
* right jolts into the body and over to the head, while
•MeGoorty held the ehampion’s left arm tightly. Pre-
-jieaUy Des got,free of his opponent’s grip, and with
■ left 'and right caught Eddie on the nose and mouth.
k . Tie battle was cyclonic, with the crowd in one
• long roar of cheers. More blood appeared, and thus
early it was seen that MeGoorty was badly rattled.
iEddie was receiving the hottest peppering in the
, whole of Ids career, and was barely able to place
a blow himself, the attack fairly bewildering him.
t ■ Presently they separated,.and MeGoorty let fly
-With loft and right in the hope of finding a resting
place, on Darey’s head, but-tliey were blocked half-
way, and the return came like a flash of lightning
With lofts and and rights to nose and body and a
short right jolt under the chin, making Mae "a baak
. hair fly. •
■Any expectations the crowd had formed were sur-
passed by the brilliancy and force of tbe Australian,
and their roars were continuous. Darcy again easily
ducked a left swing, and sent home his left to the
mouth and right to the body. Those who had ar-
gued that if MeGoorty landed a fight on Darcy’s
'jaw the latter would be dropped were now sadly
disillusioned. i
Bight here the American’s mighty right swung
with all its force to the jaw, hpt its only effect was
to .make the Australian fight back harder than ever.
With left and right to the nose and left eye, he
bunged the optic, and had his man retreating and in
a bad way when corners rang. ; No more sensational
round had been seen in Sydney.
. ’ .
THE FIRE OF DARCY.
*
BOUND TWO.
MeGoorty started off by punching home a good
straight left to Darcy 's nose —a corking -blow—hut
immediately Darcy’s right jolted to the body and
. head, and the American found it necessary to hang
on desperately.
Fighting like a machine, Darcy sent his left out
stiff and hard to the nose, ducked a left swing, and
,dug his right inches into the “solar plexus.” Me-
Goorty wiuced and hung on, the pained expressioii
of his face remaining there for several seconds. A
.right to the body and head made him loosen his
hold of Darcy’s left-, aud the latter ripped it up with
snap and weight to the nose and mouth. MeGoorty’s
left swung into the body, hut Darcy only grinned,’
and, stepping back from left and right swings, he
returned at once with right ,to the clinging Ameri-
can’s body and head. The sensational pace of the
battle continued, and the enthusiasm of the crowd
was boundless.


(MeGoorty- swung left and right, hut'Darcy got
inside, first with right and then left to the face,
sending his man. tottering amid, thundering cheers.
■MeGoorty raised the hopes of bookmakers, who at
Randwick that afternoon had wagered hundreds on
him at 2 to 1 on, when he scored a right swing to
the jaw and two stiff lefts to the nose. But these
hopes were immediately shattered when- Darcy’s
weighty rights to the body and head compelled Me-
Goorty to hang on desperately as he showed a
troubled face. Recovering somewhat, the American
thought he saw an opening fof a right uppercut, but
it was neatly blocked by the left forearm of Darcy,
who simultaneously fired rights to the ‘body and
bead of the distressed MeGoorty. Face and body
were showing palpable signs of severe punishment,
but Eddie tried pluckily to land a venomous right
swing, only to miss badly, and then be beaten at
every point until comers came to his rescue. He
Was an ■eclipsed l man—outfought, outboxed, out-
punched, and outgeneralled.
" McGOORTY SEVERELY TROUNCED.
ROUNDTHREE.
. No man was ever so clearly outpointed and badly
trounced as McGoorty in this round. Darcy opened
by pumping three lefts to . the left eye, which was
closing. He hacked from a left swing that carved
its way through the air, and scored three more
telling lefts to the face, and ripped his powerful
right to the ribs.' McGoorty, maddened and desper-
ate as a bull at bay, saw him baek three left swings,
but the fourth got liim on the side of the head. This
riled Darcy, and, with face hard set, minus the smile,
he tore after McGoorty, and landed with all his
power rights to. the body and head. .He blocked a
powerful left swing, and at the same time sent Ed-
die reeling beneath the weight of a powerful left
drive to his damaged mouth. MeGoorty, stung,
bleeding, and weakening, came baek and tried to--
land a-swinging left, but Darcy’s head dipped nice-
ly under if. Then Les got so busy with left and
right to the body that .Eddie was forced to hang
on: McGoorty, after the break away, swung a left
to the head, and tried another, but it went Sailing
over the champion’s head, and Darcy, like a flash, re-
sponded with a- right below and three stiff lefts to
the nose. He - next dodged a left swing that en-
circled his neck, and McGoorty hung on until or-
dered to break. Eddie nearly swung himself off his
feet in the attempt to land two left swings. Darcy
landed a right uppercut on the mouth, and belabour-
ed Eddie ? S'body with that hand, and'brought it up
to the Side of the head. Often before’the bell rang
in - this round Darcy played his under and over right
to such purpose that his oponent looked likely to go
down and out at any moment.
MCGOORTY TRIES PBRPBRATBLY FOE A E.O.
BOUND FOUE.
- r
McGoorty fought most desperately in the fourth,
but the harder he made the pace the greater became
Darcy’s speed and force,- -with the' result-that the
challenger was on the verge of eollapse when the
gong rang. The American rushed to the
when they started as though he had determined to
risk all *in a violent effort to land a k.o. He swung
his left, but it was cleverly blocked, and received twm
heavy rights, one in the body and, another to the
side of the head.
Darcy then with ease blocked left and right swings
that came at the speed of thought., A left swing
was treated in the same way, and with short left
and right jolts Eddie’s head was sent baek again
and again, and he Was again forced to clinching and
pressing forward, in the hope of preventing Darcy’*
right from landing with its fnll force to thc body;
and head. \ m
i
The champion ducked a left swing. Another
tempt got there good and hard squarely on lies’*
chin, but without any apparent effect, for immed*
ately after Eddie’s face was made the target for a
half-score or so of left and right prods that drew
blood in a copious flow from nose and mouth.
Darcy used his left splendidly just here. .He sent
it out as straight as a gun-barrel to his opponent’s
nose and mouth, and easily backmoved,
ducked, or sidestepped the many mighty swings that
were aimed at his head.
•
It was all over now bar the shouting. Darcy’s
superiority as boxer was more marked than ever,
and hard hitter and all as MeGoorty was, his punches
had no effect whatever on the youthful champion.
HOW HE DEFEATED EDDIE McGOORTY.
AMERICA'S OPINION OF VICTOR’S FINE
QUALITIES.
BEST MIDDLEWEIGHT IN THE WORLD.
Poor Eddie looked the very personification, of the
defeated one as he sat in his corner awaiting for
the electric clock td' clang out its order to commence
hostilities for round five. His good-looking, boyish
face had an expression of despair. He knew he had"
no chance of turning the tables oh his former con-
queror. The latter’s science and speed were of too’
superior a brand, whilst his toughness was far too
great to allow of Eddie's powerful swings'having
the slightest effect In fact the harder-MeGoorty
landed or attempted to land his punches the- more
he received in reply.


MeGOORTY DOWNED FOB EIGHT.
BOUND FIVE.
1 After missing with " a left swing, McGoorty
clinched, and by pressing his body close to that of
his youthful opponent, managed to save himself
somewhat from Darcy ’s venomous drives and swings
to body and head.
, ; McGoorty swung left, left, then right and again
right,, but they were blocked in superb style by the
champiop, who, with left rip in the body, and right
to; the head, had McGoorty in sore trouble. By a
r supreme effort he put all his remaining strength
into a left swing that went clearly over the cham-
pion’s ducking head, and before Eddie could get
back' to anything like balance, a stinging right to the
butt of the jaw put him down for eight seconds.
The cheerS were indescribable.
The coolest man in that vast assemblage was Les
; Darcy. Immediately he had sent his o opponent to
‘the boards he skipped hack far enough to allow
McGoorty 'to regain his feet and remained away
long enough to permit Eddie to onee more put him-
,'self into a' position of attack or. defence. As Darcy
; came coolly forward to put the finish to his excel-
lent work, Eddie jushed forward and clasped him
lovingly, hut a few short left uppercuts sent the
•American’s head back and added to his discomfiture.
BOUND SIX. .
.. McGoorty’s right swing was easily blocked, also
: the left, then a right under and over, and a straight
.left to the nose and mouth sent Eddie back two
yards or more, and very nearly sent him down for
the second time. Darcy blocked a left swing, and
treated a right uppercut in like manner, and then
sent in his famous right under and over punch caus-
ing blue to hang on in order to save himself from
gsi&g to the boards.
‘ Darcy’s left played a merry tattoo on the chal-
lenger’s nose and mouth, and try as Eddie might he
failed to get, his top-piece out of the way of our
dandy boy’s piston-like left. Darcy blocked a left
swing, but missed with a right that was aimed at
the jaw—-a mighty effort which must have ended
the battle had it. landed.
A mighty, rpar. of. encouragement Went up as Me-
Crcorty scored with a right to the jaw. Perhaps
never before had the-American got home so cleanly.
Without dropping, his man. How disappointing,
therefore, must it have; been when the blow had no
apparent effect: Q'nthe one.particular opponent in all
his long career he. most particularly wanted to down.
McGoorty tried Again With a right, but it was
neatly beaten, and a rib-bending right to the body,
and over to the head more than evened that one
punch, then three straight lefts to the mouth made
Eddie clinch. "Whilst in close, McGoorty was cheer-
ed when he sent Les’s head back by the agency of
a right uppercut under the chin.
GALLANT BUT FUTILE. •
BOUND SEVEN. ' r
McGoorty made another gallant, but futile attempt
to fight back in this round, but was .severely pun-
ished for his pains. He managed to drive a good
straight left to Darcy's nose. This left swing was
' neatly blocked, but he dug that hand inches . deep
in the. champion’s body—McGoorty’s. best blow
• throughout the fight. It was a pity for poor Eddie
• that it was so, for it stung the champion, ahd for
the moment he lost his smile and leathered' the
■ American unmercifully. Many dud-sounding heavy-
thumps from left and right scored to the body and
head and had McGoorty fairly gasping.
The latter’s left and right swings had no possible
■ chance of landing—they were blocked half way, or
beaten by clever ducking, and the inevitable one-
man clinch resulted. The end was nearing. M«-
■Goorty was receiver-general, but game to the last. •
’ McGOOBTY DOWN AGAIN—“TOWEL.”
BOUND EIGHT.
McGoorty tried desperately to even matters, hut
all to no purpose; his lefts and rights were blocked,
hacked from, or backmoved, and thus Darcy created
openings for his powerful fists that were particular-
ly busy in this round and kept McGoorty from
clinching. A left hook got . the American on the
chin and sent him ds>wn for 6, and he rose to his
feet in a dazed and drupken condition,.when;“Red”
Watson saved his countryman from a sure knock-
out by throwing in the towel, as a then token '»£
surrender. The winner was flushed a hit, yet un-
marked, and looking as fresh as paint, pushed for-
ward and. shook his gallant opponent by the hand
as he sat hopelessly in his chair. Darcy then returned
to his own angle, waving his .hands aloft ia his own
boyish and gleeful fashion. He was kept busy giv-
ing the glad hand all round. So excited were many
khaki-clad youths that it took Mr. Baker and his
assistants all they knew' to prevent them entering
the ring to shower their praises on their country-
man.
McGoorty’s plucky fight, in alb the excitraent,
Was not lost sight of, for he, too, was cheered as he
left the ring for his dressing-room.
IN THEIR DBESSING-BOOMS.
< After a reasonable time bad elapsed I paid a visit
to the rooms occupied by the boxers. McGoorty’*
was the first encountered. “Well, Mr. Lawless,” he
said, “I have no complaints to make. Les beat me
fairly and squarely. He is a much better man than
I thought he was, and I have no hesitation in sav-
ing he will defeat any middleweight in the World,
and a. big majority of heavyweights.”
.; “How about your weight?”
< “I was well and strong, but not good enough. He
is a wonder.” •


- Darcy, as fresh as a lark, and without a single ■
scratch, assured me that he had been very confident
af winning, And by a knock-out. He never felt the
slightest hurt from any of McGoorty’s blows—even,
the few that did land; He paid a high tribute to the
fairness of the methods his opponent-employed, and ;
to MeGocrty’s rare pluck, for, said this wonderful ,
Wy, “I hit him harder than I hit any other man in
wty life, and I was surprised at the way he took my
ptmehes.” • 4 - . ; •
“It was a fine gate?” t
•■ “Yea, best to date. I am pleased I did not goi to ■
America. Let them eorae to me, and I will- accom-
modate them, one after the other.
After the contest McGoorty was driven to St. .
Vincent’s Hospital to have his lips, stitched and his
nose attended to.
Les had, on tha£ occasion, dearly answered the
wiseacres who stated that the first contest was a.
schl enter. Even to this day many members ef the
betting ring will tell you that it was> so, but I’ve
never yet met a man who can bring forth any .kind
of proof. They merely state that-they know it was
not on its merits, etc., but my candid opinion' still
is that on each occasion McGoorty was out to .wait
if he could. - , , -
The contest resulted, as I anticipated, a knock-out
victory, for the undoubted world’s champion. - ; f
Our boy was without fault or fumble, and fr**
the first moment his superiority stood out boldly,
thus blasting the rumours freely circulated otoeer*-
ing their first meeting, to the effect that all was not
as it should have been; and. in a return match the
tables were sure to be turned. • -
CHAPTER XXVII
Mr. H. C. Douglas’ eulogistic remarks on my judgment
concerning the possibilities of the late Les Darcy.
MB, B. L. BAKES IN LIKE STRAIN.
If, by publishing the following eulogistic com-
ments oii my judgment concerning Darcy’s boxing /
ability, written by Mr. H. C. Douglas, I hope my :
many readers will not mistake it as an act of conceit
to my part. Personally, Ido not think it was any
great achievement, because from the very first the
laid showed such promise that none but one possess-
ing a biassed mind, or an ignoramus as far as boxing
•is concerned, could have'seen otherwise than that ,
the West Maitlander was the most promising colt wC
had ever had: But when poor Les beat his opptm- '
tots one after the other, well, it was more than
madness for anyone to say that he was not the best .
of his own or any other time at the middleweight
limit.
Of course there are a lot of people who have no
confidence in their own opinion. They will go to a
boxing match or horse race and will he thoroughly
Satisfied in their own mind that the man or horse
that occupied second place at the finish'was an hon-
est trier. After hearing the loud-mouthed bleatings
•f some never-will-be-sport—who for no other rea-
son than that he was not on the winner—giving out
that the thing was a eehlenter, the former, hi order
to air his great knowledge, will also tell of how it
was‘done and who did it, etc. I have seen them so
often cheering the loser at the ringside for his plucky ;
effort, but kef ore they left the Stadium they have
hoard what some sorehead punter had to, say,-and ’
then loudly voiced the latter’s opinion. “Sure,
Shan’s the shrewdies,” as good old Joe Atcheson i
would say.. The same also applies to, the refereeV
' decisions. On more than one occasion I have beesfc
• asked by the weak-kneed ones whom 1 thought h*4
won, and when I told them they replied something
to the effect that So-and-so and So-and-so, mention*
mg other boxing writers, thought otherwise,, and
then in a friendly way, no doubt, advised me to.he
with the majority, thus showing the weakness, of
- their nature. .With my brother boxing scribes, I am
there to give my own unbiased and honest opinion,
■ the courage of our convictions, so to speak,, .and
there is scarcely a single member of those journal*
ists who has openly attacked the. other fellow her
cause their opinions did not coincide, whieh is only .
as it should be.
The article written by the pen of Mr. H.C. Doug-
las, reads as follows:—■ ' ,
“FINE JUDGMENT VINDICATED.,
“THE PREMIER PROMOTER PAYS TRIBUTE
TO ‘SOLAR PLEXUS.’ '
“I want to congratulate you, Mr. Lawless, on ynvtr
fine judgment From the first you said that Dare#
wonld be, a .world-beater. To-night sets the seal
yonr opinion. You were absolutely right. Youh*T* ",
turned out to be the true prophet. I think ills &
great tribute to yourdiscernment
“In the words quoted above, Mr. R. I*. Baker,pn6. :
siding, genkse of Stadnuas, Ltd, paid hja fciiratCaf :


admiration to the unerring ring judgment of Mr.
William Lawless. ,
“Both Mr. Lawless’ intimate friends and the outer
circle of his readers who know him through his writ- '
ings only, may hail him as the keenest judge of fis-
tic ability, and the ablest critic of boxing, in Aus-
tralasia to-day. .
“It ’was about the fifth round of the great boxing
night Darcy-MeGoorty rumpus, that Mr. Baker per-
ambulated round to the press well and fetched up
immediately behind the chair occupied by Mr. Law-
less. He came to express his appreciation of judg-
ment vindicated by the facts. And there were others.
Indeed, it seemed as though ‘Bill’ was holding a
rmgside levee of his admirers. Men who had, per-
haps, disagreed with his judgment, particularly over
the first MeGoorty-Darcy battle, generously paid
tribute to his superior insight. It was by way of a
triumph for ‘Solar Plexus,’ and no man ever de-
tsenvedit better. Be is proud of his ‘find.’ He is
pleased with his-'‘discovery.’ Why not? Weall like
‘Thrrekal* when we justly ean do so.
1 “Lawless is the man with the seeing eye. Darcy
wasthe raw country lad, who to-day is world’s mid-
dleweight champion, and-Darcy would be fee first
to how much he owes to Mr. Lawless’s wise
encouragement,, both in fee press and by spoken
word* • *. i";S*-' tf- < j
•“ When Darcy made Bis No. 1 appearance at fee
Sydney Stadium and was outpointed by the superior
science and experience of Fritz Holland, the follow-
ing comments were made by ‘Solar Plexus’:
“ ‘Australian boy great natural fighter with a big
future.—The youth from Maitland evidently made
of the toughest material.—Darcy is uncommonly
eool, tough and game, and with proper handling will
pick up the fine points of the game quicker than
any youngster we have ever known.’
“How about feat in the light of to-day? ‘Natural
fighter’—‘great name for himself’—‘big future’—
pretty accurate vaticination, isn’t it? ’Tis easy to
be wise after fee event. There wasn’t any ‘event’
then, though. Judgment and experience were all
feat ‘Solar Plexus’ had to draw and they’ve
proved a substantial bank. ‘
“On October 7th, 1914, ‘Solar Plexus’ wrote thus
of Darcy’s victory over Marchand. (Be it known
that it was ‘Solar Plexus’ who suggested that Dave
Smith be appointed the mentor of Darcy.)
“ ‘Les Darcy’s connection with Dave Smith in his
training operations. ... was the means, of vastly
improving him. He is quicker to take advantage of
openings -caused by a flaw in his opponent’s defence,
and he has learnt sufficient to create such opportuni-
ties. . In opposition to Fritz Holland, Les made the
inistake*cf continaaHy hurling himself- at his clever
and more experienced opponent, with'the result that
Fred’s left landed with redoubled force.’' ;;
“Here is something that ‘Solar Plexus’ had writ*
' ten after Darcy had messed ujf Frank Loughrey:
“‘Les Darcy has arrived. His boxing, fighting
and generalship in the ring with Frank Loughrey
established him as a - ./
PROSPECTIVE WOELD’S CHAMPION. ’ '
There is nothing for it but another meeting with
Jeff Smith, and then? Well, Jeff will have the test
of his life with a middleweight.’ -
“Here is another of ‘Solar Plexus’s’ glimpses into
futurity, on March 17th, 1915, when Darcy defeated
Holland in their third match:
“.‘Though many fine performances stand to tfafe
credit of Les Darcy since July 18th,' 1914, when be
engaged in his first eontest of note and was defeated
by Fritz Holland, none can compare with his latest
showing. He has very clearly outpointed one of the
best of the American visitors who bare visited Aus-
tralia .... And that is the strong endorsement of
Darcy k quality. ~ \
“*DARCY LOOKS THE MOST LIKELY
WORLD’S CHAMPION WE HAVE SEEN.’
“And now'one more reference and we have done.
‘Solar Plexus’ said on December 22nd, 1915, prior
to the return match with McGoorty: ‘lf McGoorty
turns out the better man I will freely admit it, and
will give him all the credit that will be due to him.
But as one who holds that the first contest between
the pair was fought on its merits, I CANNOT SEE
ANY REASON WHY THE RESULT ON THIS
SHOULD BE REVERSED.’ ■ ■
“As a parting toast I would couple: ‘Darcv, the
hoy who justified the man who knew.’ ’’
Boxing Made Ea
(Already in its Second Edition)
The Book for Beginners and Professionals.
£IO/IG/-worth of Expert advice
on the manly art of self defence
By “ SOLAR PLEXUS”
■ ' '• ( . v . *; ') .
Its ersaHJt artlwrltir en Boxlne ln tosSraDa.
Price : One Shilling;
FROM All BOOKSELLERS
AND NEWSAGENTS.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
His Claim for Middleweight Championship Honours still
disputed by Americans. „
ABSURD ARGUMENTS CONCERNING MIKE GIBBONS. MeGOORTY’S OPINION OF DARCY;
Havmg disposed of America’s best men, in .Jeff
Smith, Jim Clabby, and McGoorty, each of whom
proved themselves game enough to fight twenty-
round battles, the Americans still refused to admit •
Lcb Darcy’s elaim to the title of world’s middle-!
•weight, champion. They stated that before he could
wear the erown that once adorned the brow of the
ixeamparable Dempsey, and the lamented Stanley,
Ketehell, be would have to prove his superiority
over Mike Gibbons. What utter rot! What. 'un-
sportsmanlike sentiments! Here we had a lad who
defeated with ease those who had previously shown
themselves to be the superiors of the best of England,
France, ana America, and also of his own country,
and he was said to have not equalled the claim of ■
others who had never met a representative from any
. other country. Jaek Dempsey reigned supreme over
l all Americans. He lost to La Blanche, a Canadian,.
J and was beaten by Bob Fitzsimmons, an Australian,
p and not champion of Australia at that. Stanley
•j ehell only met Americans, and Mike Gibbons never.,
< m bis life engaged in a twenty-round contest. As
the first two, Dempsey and Ketchel, were dead before
•V Darcy’s time, they, of eourse, do not come into the
p argument as far as the lastnamed is concerned, there-:
< fore my remarks can only touch on Darey’s claim .
p as against that of Gibbons. The big majority- of
?| Gibbons’ victories (?) were given in no-deeision af-
|f fairs, when verdicts were arrived at by the majority
“ of the paper reports, many of which were written by
men who did not see the contest' but depended upon
the 'phoned message of some other party, more: of-
ten than not, the manager of the contestant.,: When.:
White and Welsh met, in one of their many ten-
rotund no-decision bouts, the manager of each sent,
a telegram to a certain paper, stating that their owp
respective boy Had won easily, but White’s mana-
ger’s report only was accepted, and w]jen the man
who looked after Welsh’s affairs wanted to know
why his message, that was in first, was ignored, ke
was politely told that the reason was solely due to
the fact that his telegram was a collect one, whilst
the other was prepaid. These are the circumstances *
under whieb Gibbons earned the right to be deemed
better than Darey. ’
" Gibbons, on a few occasions, fought tinder'condi-
tions that called for a straight-out verdiet by a re-
feree after twelve rounds had been boxed, and it was
in one of them that he lest on points to Clabby, and
as the lastnamed was twice beaten by Darcy,'under
straight-out conditions, with a referee’s deeision tbat
was endorsed by the many thousand onlookers and
Clabby himself. How, in the name of all that, is
fair and just, could anyone say that. Darcy was not
better than Gibbons, or that Les was not
) ' ;
THE CLEAREST CUT CHAMPION EVES'?
. r 5 ' ■
Gibbons won his claim to world’s supremacy by.
outpointing his own countrymen in no-decision boutaC
Welsh was declared to have been outpointed h&lf-a-
seore of times under similar conditions. Yet he stilt
was regarded as lightweight champion. Then.hoV
the dickens could Gibbons win what Welsh could act
lose t \
In writing in this strain just prior to the meeting
' of Darcy and McGoorty in their return match, in' re-
ply to Mr. Sam Austin, of the New York. “Police
Gazette,” I also remarked, “As to the second raeefir
ing there is no reason to anticipate that the result
will be changed, for McGoorty possesses no greater
punching power or science than he did on thefsin-
ful night in July. However, this battle has ’te bc
determined in the ring* and not on paper;** '
After that battle, among many other letters I re-
ceived, all of which are now in my proud possession,
was the following:—Dear “Solar Plexus*”—! am a
resident, born and reared in Darcy’s native
town, and I don’t think I have missed a “Referee’'
since “Smfler” Hales first wrote in it, so that I feel
I have-a good knowledge of its boxing writers in'
their journalistic capacity. I want to say this, Mr.
“Solar Plexus,” that no fairer writer than yob*,
self ever wielded a pen. There is none of the spleeny
bias or partiality dm your efforts, and, of course, as
a judge, results of late speak eloquently of your abil-
ity. I trust this does not appear fulsome, but I han*
long had a marked admiration for your clean 1 writ-
ing.” . A; .
On.the Monday following his contest with Darey*
Eddie McGoorty, accompanied by his cousin, Mike
Trant, and trainer, Tom Cubitt, called upon me, and
the “Oshkosh Terror” spoke in the following nfaiity
way:—“Well, Mr. Lawless, as I told you before, t
have no excuse for my defeat. I met a better man
and one who will beat most of the heavyweights, and
will have an excellent chance with the best min lit
that division. I have been so well treated by Aus-
tralians that being beaten by one ef their numbed
makes me better pleased than if I had been beats*
by a man from any other country. And say! Also
mention that the glad hand I have received all round,
since my defeat, relieves me very much. Yourp&e-


pie are great sports. Nowhere else but Australia
have they time for a beaten man.” __
/'•‘Once more about the weight conditions,” I ask-
ed. “Did the 11.6 ringside in any way account for
your defeat?”
“Not in the slightest degree. I was very well and
strong, but Darcy was too good, and would probably
have beaten me, no matter how much I weighed.”
“JJow long have you been at the game?”
“Over twelve years. I started when I was 15
years old, and in the following year won the watch
I wear”—as he showed a beautiful gold timepiece.
“It was for the amateur championship of Wisconsin.
I have enjoyed myself, and have had a highly
successful career, and must not complain. I
went .along more than holding my own until I met
this ring marvel, who is going to prove to the world
that he is the greatest man of his inches probably
for all time.”,,-How different was McGoorty’s opin-
ion to that of another individual in this city, who,
for a certain good reason, was turned down by the
late much lamented champion, and then expressed
fffie opinion that the poor boy was not game, and
fast McGoorty was anything but well when he lost
fo the champion. 'Who, and when it was said, will
appear in its proper place in this story, provided, of
Course, the war is over when I reach that part. At
Ipresent it would be dangerous to my liberty to give
CHAPTER XXIX.
fall details, but all in good time! Darcy’s next op-
ponent was the tough, hard-hitting Italian boxer,
K.O. Brown, who, though he saw our champion dish
up McGoorty, really liked his chance of being the
first man to stop our boy’s victorious career. The
visitor, with jaunty step and hilarious gesture to the
fans, showed arms any champion might envy, and
was applauded as any champion might be.
DARCY v. K.O. BROWN..
When they met in the ring centre to indulge in the
time-honored custom of shake hands, the valiant
K.Q. stood off, and stretched out to its full his left
hand for Darcy to grab the tips of his gloves. He
was so careful to keep his head and body away that
everyone was highly amused. Perhaps Brown had,
on a former occasion in America, received a mighty
wallop whilst so engaged. They have done that
kind of thing there. As a matter of fact it was in
that-way that Billy Papke paved the way towards
his defeat of the late Stanley Ketchell. Whilst grip-
ping Stanley’s right with his right, in what was in-
tended to be a friendly hand shake, Papke swung
his powerful left to his opponent’s chin,' and he
never recovered properly, and was k.o’d. in'the 12th
round. Or perhaps friend Brown was the victim to
some practical joker, as he lent himself to that kind
Of wwm-.
His Easy Victory over K.O. Brown
"BEST MAW IN THE WORLD,” SAID THE CONQUERED GRAECO-AMERICAN.
WHEN DARCY’S TROUBLE FIRST BEGAN. ' THE CAUSE. *
The men bad agreed to catch weights. Darcy
'Weighed 11.11 aid Brown U.B-J, but it must be re-
membered that the Australian had all his fighting
togs on, whilst Brown was minus everything.
Of one thing certain, Brown was far and away
pluckier than many of the other opponents who
came from ÜBA. to try conclusions with our won-
derful hoy. He tore into Darcy immediately they
were set loose for round one, and Les’ clever defence
was never more strenuously tested. These blows he
blocked er backmoved, ducked or sidestepped,, and
in response pounded the head and bojly of his plucky
Graeco-American adversary so hard and often that
one wondered how Brown stood up under the heavy
lyjmbardment. Although beaten at every turn, the
top-notch American had the pleasure of collecting
his largest cheque. Darcy’s great superiority over
Brown proved pretty conclusively that he was also
better than the many White Hopes of America, be-
cause he, without ahy effort soundly thrashed Brown
who had cut even with. Jack Dillon, the lastnamed
meanwhile doing suelr great things that American
writers, perhaps without a single exception, touted
him-as being Jess Willard’s only logical opponent.
IMPRESSIONS OP THE MEN.
On the following Monday morning Brown and
Darcy paid me their usual call. Les was first, and
looking as bright as ever, whilst wearing that glori-
ous smile of his that I would give much to see this
moment. '
“Brown is certainly strong and tough,*’ said the
champion. ,
“Yon did not appear to box with your usual free-
dom. Do you think the extra weight was the cause
of it?"
“Well, I was not as good as I was when I met
McGoorty, simply because whilst showing at Mel-
bourne I hurt both my hands on Colin Bell, and they
'had not mended sufficiently to allow me to do any
boxing. The only spar I had was the three-round
exhibition bout with Mick King at the Stadium’s
matinee on Wednesday afternoon. Besides, don’t
you think that Brown is of a nature that enables
him to last the full term? You know as well as any?
one that it takes two to make a fight.” '
“Quite right, my boy, especially if one-is.trying
only to saye himself from being k.o.’d and the other


fellow, through’ leniency, is helping him on the way
in that direction.” ;
BEST MAN IN THE WORJJ).
Brown followed in the champion’s wake. The ;
tough and courageous Greek’s left eye was discolor-
ed and his lips still much puffed. I did not ask
Brown any questions'concerning what he thought of
Darcy, hut he at ofice remarked: •
“Well, I feel well considering I went twenty
rounds with the best man in the world last Satur-
day night.
“I have no excuse to make for my defeat. I was
in perfect condition—never better in my life—mid
was beaten fairly by a* better man. Still, nothing
would please me better than another meeting with
him at the middleweight limit.
“I would like to say this of Darcy,” added Brown.
“He is the first man I ever hit on the chin without
sending, him down at least. Why, instead of going
down, he came back harder than ever. He is a won-
derful boy.’ ~
“How about the crowd?”
“It was the biggest and best conducted crowd I
have ever struck. I would like you to thank them
for their kindness towards me.”
In a conversation concerning the heat caused by .■
the electric power used for the purpose of taking
pictures; Jack "Warner, onfrflfDaoWV Sag-
arded the opinion that it was wanner outside the
ring than it was inside, whereupon Brown said la-
. conically, “Don’t you believe it. I was in the zing.
You were not. I tell you I never felt'it warmer jin
my life. It was not the electric fight either. Darey
was the disturbing element Once when, he hit me
in the body, I thought his hand went through me.**
DARCY FOB AMERICA. . 1
AN AUSTRALIAN OFFER FORA. TOUB OF THB
STATES, i :
After Ms-defeat of McGoorty, and before be met
Brown, -he was under engagement to Mr. Mclntosh
for a short vaudeville stunt, and whilst fulfilling
that contract it was that an offer of £sooo—how gen-
erous (?) —was.made for a tour of the United States.
In every probability the lad, though up against leav-
ing the country whilst the war was on, would have
accepted had the tempter put the amount up. This
set the American trip bee buzzing in the poor lad’s
bonnet, and when he finally fell in—“fell in” hi
very appropriate—with o’Sullivan's views and left,
he had many bitter enemies who wanted all kinds of
dreadful things to happen to those-.whom the cham-
pion left behind.
CHAPTER XXX.
How he won the Heavyweight title from Harold Hardwick.
ENGLISHMAN GREEVES’ IMPUDENCE.
LES O’DONNELL'FIRST TO TIP DARCY A POSSIBLE WORLD’S CHAMPION.
Harold Hardwick who, by the defeat of Les
O’Donnell in the first elimination bout to decide
who was Australia’s best big man, after Dare Smith
Retired, had prior right to any other man to the
title, and when he was approached re a match with
Darcy, the gentlemanly young giant willingly con-
sented, and they came together on February 19,
1916.
From the very opening of hostilities it was plain-
ly evident that Hardwick knew he had no chance
against his smaller, if more powerful opponent, and
infinitely better fighter. Harold, on every oppor-
tunity, grasped Darcy’s arms or body, and clinched
and clinched again, but failed to stop all of his great
little opponent’s short and powerful jabs to the head
and body. At times Darcy would go nearly all out,
then, without apparent effort, tear himself from
Harold’-s close embrace, and, without putting all his
well-known force behind his punches, flayed the big
man’s handsome features, until they were no longer
were of a drunk and disorderly.ap-
pearance.
Though he clearly outpointed his man, and oat*
classed him in every moment of every ronnd, before
outing him in the 7th round, Les’s “ casualty list”
was greater than in all his previous battles put tp*
gether. Tp date he bore no trade marks, such a*
thick ears, or a bent nose, but on this occasion b#
lost two of his front teeth.
It happened nearing the end of the third round
when, at the ropes just above where I used to sit,
Les had missed with his right and looked down and
smiled, when Hardwick, quick to take advantage of
his opponent’s carelessness, uppercut two powerful
rights to the mouth, snapping off his pearl-like teeth
short at the gums, and the bell rang, so soon after
that Darcy was unable to get even.
Les was true to his compact, for instead of send-
ing home one mighty left or right, his continual
jolt, jolt, jolt here, there and everywhere, were doing
their work slowly and surely until the 7th session
was reached, and before 40 seconds of that three
minutes had expired Harold was down, and so very
badly rattled that Patsjfjßurfce t in Hardwick’s cor-'


■pftiibxHrttt'the Darcy wus cheered
as ihe heavyweight champion, of Australia. , { _
jSfc WHAT WONDERFUL STRENGTH!
r
spoke highly of the new champion’s
t&rength and hitting powers, and predicted that he
■pould beat any man. "Where he gets his strength
ikom I don’t know,** remarked Hardwick; “I nevey
fboagkfe a jnaa could be so good. ”
i **.Wi3l yoalook for.a return, match?” he was ask-
-44.'
1 '*■*&*- d? wanf/mritfrer Darcymor any-other man.
ismy last contest. I will now retire from the
and devote my time and energy in quite an-
«flt£r'directian. I wish Darcy all the good fortune
ferae*richly deserves, for apart from his being a
great glove fighter, he is also a. very fine lad in
mtxr way.”
'A* this juncture Darcy came along, and smilingly
asked Harold if he was not sorry for knocking out
his teeth.
”Yes, Les, I am; but it’s the fortune of war.”
Then between them and tlieir friends a number of
Ice cream blocks disappeared—a departure from the
customary champagne that most boxers quaff after
a strenuous encounter.
Poor Les, he thought more over the loss of his
teeth than one would have thought it possible. Be-
ing minus that winning smile'for once, he remarked,
“By crikey, lam sorry. You know, I would much
rather have lost the fight than those teeth of mine. ”
- The English champion, Harry Reeve, on his re-
turn to England, described Darcy as being over-
rated, and that his defeat by McGoorty was due te
lack of condition.. But this lame excuse of not be-
ing in the best on the night was ever a coward’s ex-
cuse. He bewailed his bad fortune in not having
had a smack at Darcy, but he failed to tell the En-
glish people that why he was so desirous of the
match was because he would have earned more
money for standing one or two rounds, certainly not
more than three, even if he did try, than he. did in
all his life.
This valiant third-rater also hinted that Darcy’s
excuse for not fighting him, through having injured
his hands, was not the truth; the Australian was
afraid of being beaten. Well, well, the infernal im-
pudence of some men! Why, welterweights Uren or
Kay would have made a hack of the English dub,,
whose long suit was, well, not fighting world’s
champions.
K.O. Brown was now hot on getting a return
match with Darcy. Darcy and Brown had met
under catchweight conditions in the first contest, but
Brown now wanted the 11.6 limit at ringside to gov-
ern their return match, and he also expressed the
desire to have £lOO at slake.
Before he could talk business with Brown, how;-
ever, the champion had to fulfil a contract he had
made with his old pal Les O’DonnelL Strange to
relate, it was from Q ’Donnell that I first heard there
was such a lad as Darcy. The big Les, after boxing
• Kelly Mansfield at Newcastle, was asked to' act as
referee of a tournament, in which Darcy, though a
mere youth of about 15, gave weight and experience
to all the others, and won handsomely. We can all
say what we like concerning being the first to antici-
pate the lad’s wonderful success, but that honor be-
longs-entirely to Les O’Donnell,.
CHAPTER XXXI
He defends his Heavyweight Title against Les O’Donnell.
THE LATTER’S OPINION OF THE CHAMPION.
They met on March 18, 1916, and although every-
one anticipated victory for Darcy, and by. the k.o.
too, a very good house witnessed the dual champion,
Darcy, against a previously strong contender for
heavyweight honors in Les O’Donnell. Although
the latter was 'beaten he frequently boxed up to the
old form, which I had so often contended he was
likely to reproduce, provided he had rid himself of
the muscular rheumatism which, when opposed to
Ben Doyle, Cowler and Hardwick, handicapped him
so greatly.
■ O’Donnell weighed 12.1 and Darcy 11.92. In close
O’Donnell seemed able to hold his man’s powerful
arms, a feat that proved beyond the strength of
others to accomplish.
.In flashes Darcy fought desperately .during the
MICK DARCY THE COMING MARVEL.
fifth ahd sixth rounds, and had his plucky oppon-
ent on the verge of dreamland when he would pull
up short and allow him to recover. Once in the last
round, the sixth, they stood and exchanged lefts
and rights with the speed of thought; then Darcy
suddenly jumped back clear of a right swing, and
taking full advantage of an opening thus made, he
hooked his left squarely to the chin, dropping 0 ’Don-
nell for 7. The latter rose to his feet and charged
his opponent, who was near his corner talking to his
seconds, but turning quickly he met 0 ’Donnell with
left and right dazing him badly when comers rang,
and seeing his man had no chance the big fellow’s
astute and humane little second, Jimmy Russell,
threw in the towel. .
like all others who had met the champion* Lea


O’Donnell called on the following Monday, and
gave his opinion of Darcy’s great ability in the fol-
lowing characteristic style:—
,• “What do I think of Darcy?’ said the big, good-
natured mid-heavyweight. “He’s a.freak. It seems
impossible that any man can outbox him, and any-
one who says he is not clever knows nothing about
the game. Darcy is the cleverest man I have, ever
met, and he’ll heat any man his weight in the
world.”
.. “Another thing you often hear,” said O’Donnell,
“js that he has no punch. If some of them got what
I. did;they’d hold a different opinion. Yes, that hoy
is.„a wonder; a paralyser in fact.”
,Darcy did not’pay his usual visit. Hearing that
his mother was ill he hurried home, and from there
he wrote me as follows:—“When I returned I found
(rny mother very 7 ill, so I am staying at home and
training here for my next contest with Brown. I
have a fine gym., fitted up in the new house and have
that the few, very few, who stll maintained that the
Jim Tracey as sparring partner, and I get some
CHAPTER XXXII
rattling good work out of hint Everything is going
grand except poor Mother’s illness, which put a
GLOOM ON THE HOMESTEAD.”
(Poor boy, little did he know that a greater gloom
was to overshadow that home through his own
death that was to occur but a few months later.) •
.He finished his letter by stating that l!is baby
brother, little Mick, is as fat as butter and as good
as gold.
LITTLE MICK! TWENTY YEARS FROM NOW
I MIGHT BE ABLE TO LOOK BACK AT THESE
PAGES AND SEE WHERE I TIPPED A BABY
SOME THREE YEARS OF AGE TO FOLLOW IN
HIS ELDER BROTHER’S FOOTSTEPS, AND BE-
COME THE MARVEL OF HIS TIMS IN THE
PUGILISTIC BUSINESS, FOR THIS IS THE
YOUNG MAN WHO, WHEN BUT FOUR MONTHS
( OLD, TOOK SUCH AN INTEREST IN A SPAR
THAT WAS GOING ON BETWEEN LBS DARCY
AND DAVE SMITH, THE STORY OF, WHICH I
HAVE TOLD IN A PREVIOUS PAGE. '
Again Defeats Brown. Weighs only 11.3
REASON OF SHRINKAGE DUE TO WORRY OVER HIS MOTHER’S ILLNESS.
HIS GREATEST ACHIEVEMENT.
Having disposed of O’Donnell, Darcy, it was
thought, would have no other local celebrity to con-
tend against excepting Colin Bell, but the ex-cham-
pion, Dave Smith, then on the retired list, was think-
ing seriously of attempting his comeback act. Whilst
negotiations were being arranged “K.O” Brown
broke in with a bold challenge which could not he
overlooked. Even though Darcy gave him the father
of a lacing, as previously mentioned in these pages,
the Graeco-American was sure he could turn the
tables if given another chance, and at the middle-
weight limit. Darcy, having signified his willingness
to meet any heavyweight, and never in any of his
previous contests this year, 1916, having made the
middleweight limit, Brown had a shrewd idea that
the n. 6 mark was then beyond our champion’s mak-
ing. . .
On March 28 the visitor called upon me and got
the following off his expansive chest: “Darcy is a
man above all others I would rather battle with, be-
cause he comes to you every time and gives you a
chaneeof exchanging a wallop; still, I think PE
have it on him next time, when we will meet at 11.6
.ringside.” • ..
. “ What make you like your chancein u return con-
test? Did he not beat yon easily enough last4imel ’ ’
I asked.
.“Yes,” same the reply. “I have no fauli-to find
about the decision; I guess it was right;dmt since
then I’ve been figuring him out. I saw- him go
against Hardwick, and I think I have arrived at the
proper methods to nse next time, when we will be
at the middleweight. Just you wait and see if I
don’t trim him up in good style. Anyhow, I Want
to hack {nyself for a hundred.” >.
This I could not make out. I could easily under-
stand him wanting to meet Darcy in preference to
all others, because of the greater amount of mohey
that would come his way, but betting a hundred on
himself against Darcy, and two days after being ac-
counted for by Fred Holland, was beyond me. I was
not kept long in doubt, however, because when it
came to putting up the cash, “K.O.’s” terms did not
suit. He wanted to back himself to see the full jour.,
ney through, but a wager of that kind was not per r
missible in this country where the sport counts for
something. Besides, if Brown played the hanging-
on game, as he was allowed to do in his first con*
test, he might have been able to go the full twenty
rounds with the giant Jess Willard, let alone such a
comparative midget as Darcy. However, they came
together on April 8, and although eatehweight con-
ditions'prevailed,
DARCY ONLY WEIGHED 11.3
as against Brown'* HAD. This announcement cans-
ed a hum of disappointment from the majority,of
the enormous- crowd, something Eke 15,000, that
were present With apprehension: I viewed the
opening roranl.-m'wiaeh: there was no -the
visitor scored by far the greater number of points,


and landed rights to the skEo of the Head with force
■efficient to down any other man. Our tough lad
who, entering the battle a weakened man, was cer-
tainly staggered for the moment. But for all this
the boy disclosed the judgment and ringcraft of the
general and won well. - t:
DARCY WEAKENS. T
Nearing the end of the unlucky 13th round, a
heavy right to the jaw made Darcy’s knees bend,
and then bang together with a clap. From then to
the end, Darcy was in a weak condition, but yet he
was never , seen to better advantage. It was then
that the few, the very few,, who still maintained that
thq boy was only a great natural fighter, and not
dever, saw only too plainly, what better judges
than they were continually preaching.
The boy’s wonderful science in attack and de-
fence must have been galling enough to one chronic
«nti-Darcyite, who was mad enough to write that
I<es had not learnt anything as a result of his asso-
ciation with Dave Smith. But how much more so
must his feelings have been hurt when thousands
of voices cried, “What about him now, So-and-So?
Don’t yon think he is clever?” and other remarks
that were anything but complimentary. 5
Although very angry at times, Brown fought a
fair and plucky fight.
. DARCY’S BEST PERFORMANCE TO DATE.
. *His best performance to date,” was the remark
made by Joe Thomas, a former middleweight, as he
referred to Darcy’s triumph. And in the circum-
stances friend Joseph was undoubtedly correct, for
the wonderful lad, who should have been 11.10, was
half a stone lighter than that
CAUSE OF DARCY’S LIGHT WEIGHT.
; Many opinions were expressed concerning the
champion’s shrinkage. But the real cause was the
worry over his mother’s illness. The poor boy lost no
time in returning to her sick bed. That very night,
he left by boat, and took his motor car with him,
and immediately upon arriving at Newcastle, drove
to East Maitland, and that very day, Sunday, April
9, he rang me up to tell me the good news, the pa-
tient had passed the danger point, and was well,on
the road to recovery. Poor Les, how very delighted
he seemed, and when I told him he appeared pleas-
ed, he replied: “Yes, Mr. Lawless, I don’t ever re-
member being nearly as happy.” I then asked him
how he accounted for being so light on the previous
night, and he stated that it was a mystery to him-
self. Asked if he had been worrying, he said, “Wor-
ry! I did nothing else but that, I could neither eat
nor sleep.” ‘ s ' ■'
The champion’s next opponent was the muefi.
boomed Rumanian, Costica, who was alleged to have
beaten Basham and other crack English boxers, but
of all the false alarms that the Stadium’s agent in
America was responsible for inflicting on the long
suffering fans of this country, Costica was easily the
worst. He was beaten before he started, and entered
the-ring like one who was beipg led to slaughter,
and I am certain, that but for the careful watch his
trainer, Patsy Burke, kept on him, he’d have bolt-
ed from the Stadium before the time had arrived
for the bout to commence. On the Wednesday pre-
vious to the night of the contest, he was missing, and
when found, Pat threw no more chances away, but
kept with him night and day.
After all there was some excuse for his bad show-
ing. He commenced his training for this contest at
Chiddy Ryan’s Gym at Coogee, and every afternoon
“Red” Watson, and one or two other undesirable
Americans, made it their business to be present for
the purpose of ridiculing the unfortunate visitor,
a stranger in a strange land, and with little know-
ledge of our language. On one occasion Watson
said, “Say, what’s the use of your training to box,
practice going down and getting up again, that’s
all you’ll be doing when you meet Darcy.” And
as Costica remarked to me after the contest “AH
de little boy, all de little girl, dey say, you fighta
der Dars, der Dars he killem you.”
Knowing his inferiority to onr great champion,
was it any wonder that, in the circumstances, be.
was so unnerved?
CHAPTER XXXIII .
A FEW ROUNDS OF BUNNY HUG.
Arthur Scott, as a rule, looks the most serious
man in the world whilst officiating in the ring. He did
so on this momentous occasion, ‘but eventually the
ridiculous nature of the affair made him smile.
V' DARCY WEIGHS 11.6.
The announcement that Darcy scaled but 11.4
surprised all, hut he looked and boxed on occasions,
as one in full possession of his health and strength,
Jmt Costica’s 11.0£ was more astonishing still, for
Darcy Scares Rumanian Costica.
three weeks or so back, he appeared likely to hare
trouble in making 11.6. It transpired that a mis-
take in Darcy’s weight was made, as he actually
scaled the merest shade under 11.6. }
RUMANIAN LOOKED NERVOUS, 1
. Darcy was in his comer some minutes before
Costica apeared. It was not done by the latter
with the object of unnerving the champion; quite
the reverse in fact, for it was Costica who was jib-
bing frightfully. However, when the Rumanian, did


JEFF SMITH
Clever American who, through Dave
Smith’s action in throwing in the
towel because a claim for foul went
unheeded by the referee, was de-
clared winner over Darcy in otli
round, but lost on a foul in their,
return match, concerning which
there was much litigation.
GUS. CHRISTIE
Of America. . Clearly outpointed at Sydney, Nov.
7, 1014, previous; to which date Christie had at
least held his oY>vn with the best middle and
mid-heavy weights in America.
JIM FITTON.
The clever American, who, with
Dave Smith, helped to make Darcy
what he was.


“Solar Plexus” Praises
Dr. Sheldon’s MAGNETIC LINIMENT
There is no name better known in the Australian Boxing World than that of Mr.
Will Lawless, who, under the pen-name of “Solar Plexus,” has contributed for years
to the leading spotting papers of Australia, prominent among them being “The Referee”
and “Fairplay.” Naturally his calling has brought him in touch with every boxer of
note in Australia during the last decade. Read what he says:—
S#*«S3
ms
n
'Mm
mm
Mr, WILL LAWLESS
(“Solar Plexus”), from a pho'.o.
“It has been recognised by all men who are in train-
ing for boxing and other athletic contests that a suitable
muscle Liniment is an absolute necessity in every train-
ing quarters, and many visits to the training camps of all
our leading boxers has convinced me that Dr. SHEL-
DON’S MAGNETIC LINIMENT is held in high esteem
by those responsible for the welfare of their charges. In
my own case although long past the training stage, I
have used your Magnetic Liniment with very beneficient
results in attacks of rheumatism. ’
Yours truly,
(Sgd.) WILL LAWLESS.
“Solar Plexus.” /
Athletes all use Dr. SHELDON’S
MAGNETIC LINIMENT.
Athletes and lovers of strenuous sports of all kinds will find Dr. Sheldon’s Magnetic
Liniment of the greatest use in the training-room. As a rub-down for strains, soreness
and tired muscles, it is unsurpassed, quickly removing all stiffness resulting from over-
exertion. Youthful athletes, as well as professionals, must train like professionals to
excel,in sport. The youthful athlete who rubs Dr. Sheldon’s Magnetic Liniment into
tired muscles and revivifies his whole system is the real athlete in the making. The
rebound of tired muscular tissue, the hardening of his legs and arms, and the freshening
of his whole system are the good results he obtains from training with the famous
rub-down, DR. SHELDON’S MAGNETIC LINIMENT. The fact that Magnetic Liniment
is found iq the training-room of most professional athletes speaks for itself. They are
the ones who know, and have proved its value.
If, in the course of your sports, you get a bad fall or knock, causing a
serious cut or bruise, don’t forget to apply DR. SHELDON’S MAG-
NETIC LINIMENT—it is an antiseptic germicide of the highest order
Dr. Sheldon’s Magnetic Liniment, small size, 1/6. Large bottles, holding two and
a half times the quantity of the 1/6 size, price 3/-.


at last appear, hi 3 general appearance surprised
everyone, excepting his trainer, Patsy Burke,
and one or two others who were in the know.
Darey meanwhile was calmly crunching the resin
under-foot, and waited for the electric clock to
sound, starting them on their journey. Costica
stood motionless in his angle, and the look of fear
on his face indicated clearly uhat he thought of his
chances of winning.
Costiea came shambling forward, and with arms
outstretched, managed to obtain a firm grip of
Darcy’s arms, and was allowed to hang on. But
immediately he released with his right, and attempt-
ed to swing that weapon to the body.
Darey allowed this kind of thing to continue for
some time without attempting to pull himself free.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
In letters to America, Mr. R. L. Baker, who was
at the time managing director of Stadiums Ltd.,
let the critics over there understand that he had no
doubt as to the right of Les Darcy to the title of
world’s champion.
He wrote as follows, to the “New York Police
Gazette”:—
“According to some of the American sporting
papers, the critics are not unanimous in recognis-
ing Darey as the champiop. Well, you may take it
from me that this boy Darcy is the real middle-
weight champion of the world. lam not trying to
boost the boy from any selfish motive, but have
reached the conclusion, after watching him closely
and critically in all his contests since the day he
first started.’
“Can you point anyone out to me who ever gave
Eddie MeGoorty a thrashing in every round that
he stood, before him, and then knocked him out, as
Darcy did? Will you name any middle-weight who
has made Jimmy Clabby look cheap through a
twenty round contest? Clabby has practically fought
every good man in that division, and you must admit
that he is clever and game, still Jimmy was beaten
in every round. Jeff Smith is a clever boxer,.but.
he never had a chance to stay with Darcy, even at
CHAPTER XXXV.
FRED DYER ON DARCY.
After witnessing World’s champion Willard doing
his gymnasium work. Fred Dyer, the clever Welsh
middleweight, and one of Darcy’s victims, expressed
himself as follows, on the middleweight champion:
“Darcy can whip Willard, T tell you,” said Dyer.
“But he is only a middleweight,” was offered.
“I don’t care about that. He has the strength
of four middleweight, can hit, and can box rings
He was either enjoying the joke, or took pity on his
harmless opponent. However, when tired of be-
ing so closely embraced, the champion would push
his man gently back, and when the latter came in
for the purpose of a cuddle, Darey uppercut him
with his right to the nose and chin, afid he then
slammed the same weapon to the body and over to
the ear, but neither were hard, and he actually al-
lowed Costica to gain grip after grip of his arms
without trying to release himself, and with the
broadest of smiles, he seemed to be enjoying him-
self thoroughly.
THE ARM OF THE LAW.
After lmin. 14secs. of the fourth round had ex.
pired the farce ended, Costiea was dropped, and
Police Inspector Jones stopped the figl^t.
“This Boy Darcy is the real Middle-weight
Champion, ** said R. L. Baker.
defensive work, which was'his long suit. George
Brown went through twenty rounds with Darey,
but the Greek demon took an awful beating to do
so.’ .
“I have the greatest respect for Mike Gibbons, and
think he is a wonder’ and his defeat of Young
Ahearn by a knock out in one round shows that he
also has the punch; but to any-knowledge, or the
printed knowledge of the record book, Gibbons has
never travelled the Marathon route. Darey goes
the entire route every time he goes into the ring—
that is provided the other fellow is good enough to
stand the journey.
‘ ‘ I wish you would get in touch with the best class of
middleweights in America to - come over here and
jfieet Darcy/ If Mike Gibbons makes the trip*he can
gather more money than he can get in America, so
can Young Ahearn, Chip, or any other middleweight
who looks like a real champion. I will guarantee
they will get good money for their trouble.”
Thus it will be seen that the much'boomed “no
decision” American, Miek Gibbons, hid every op-
portunity of meeting Darey, but turned it down ;
why then waste time in trying to bring him into the
picture at all in the light of being even a conten-
der for championship honors!
“He will whip Jess Willard..”
round Willard. Oh, I know that Ketchel tried it.
He fell before Jack Johnson, it’s true, but that has
nothing to do with Durey. Les would have knock-
ed Ketchel out inside ten rounds. Any man who
comes to him and fights him will go out. Willard
would never lay a glove on him. If Mike Gibbons
goes there to fight him, I warn yon, don’t back
Mike, for Les will surely knock him out. He is
the greatest fighter in the world to-day.


The Buck Crouse Content.
CHAPTER XXXVI
HOW THE AMERICAN TRIED TO SNEAK ONE
OVER.
Buck Crouse, the American mid-heavyweight, was
the champion’s next victim.
He came here with Costica, Murray, Watson and
Bonds, and was heartily ashamed of his stable-
mates' showing, as his letter to me will show. It
read as follows: —
‘ 1 It is with the greatest of confidence for my con-
test with champion Darcy I write these few lines.
I start hard training to-day. Don’t misunderstand
me when I say hard training, as I have been doing
a little each day sinqe I landed. ~ The third of June
is tp be the big chance of my life. I only have my
mind on one thing, and that is my dream of a k.o.
I dPn’t helieve in dreams as a Tide, b\it this ape has
impresssqd me. I can hit, arid anyppe I do land on
1 kjujc-k down or out. .lust you look up' some of our
gppd 'jpidd.leweighis and you will see why I say that.
And you will also note that 1 am the only one to
knock put Billy Berger, who fought Dillon, Chip and
Klaus each a few times. Most of the others never
even kneeked Berger down, and yours truly knocked
bin out in four- ’
“Also look up Young Loughrey, who boxed Jeff
Smith, Boh Mohn, Jack Eileen, Jim Clabby, Leo
Hpuck, and you will see 1 am the only ope who
stopped him. I am boosting myself. Anybody can
do that, hut I have to do H after what Costica did,
1 hope the fight fans of Sydney don't make me suf-
fer for it. I do not want a cent, if I don’t give
them their mopey’s worth,' J start work at the Sta-
dium Wednesday, and I invite everyone to come
alpng and have a look, bearing ip. mind that trpin.-
ing is pot fighting.”
Before the receipt of this letter, Costica polled to
hid good-bye, and his last "words were, “I go by
boat now, Cropse, lip soon follow. Darcy knock him
out quick, you see.” So that if the Rumanian was
a poor fighter, he was certainly a true prophet, as
the following aponnt of the Darcy-Crouse contest
will |ihow.
I would here like to tell my readers of a funny
thing that happened prior to the men catering the
ringi and which was told to me by Barey himself a
day or two after the contest.
Immediately-after weighing, and when Darcy was
returning te but dressing-room, he was met by his
opponent, who said; “Say, hoy, there is something
I’d like to say to yon before we enter the ring. Top
sec, I have a Ettie plot of land nw»y back in the
StgtDft and I went to win g pertain sum of money
ip th\V fountry for the purpose pf building © house
op that bffid fpr any wife? and ypu ore the lad who
can help me through by oar battle to go
the full journey ; besides, you axe a Catholic,
and so am I, so what’s the use of us two knocking
each other about 1”.
“Very well, Buck-, that will be alright,” and they
shook hands warmly, and the way in which Lea al-
lowed Grouse to adopt a Costica like cuddle in the
opening round, without attempting to tear himself
away from the embrace, inclines one to helieve that
the champion intended dispensing his customary
leniency in this contest. In the opening session
Darcy certainly landed some stinging blows, hot not
as often as he could have, as what happened in the
second round clearly demonstrated. ;
IdBS DARCY KNOCKS OUT “RUCK” C3MWSE.
AND INTERPRETS “BUCK'S” BREAM IN >
. SECOND ROUND.
I might here mention that the talkativeuAmeowam,
indulging in much letter writing to this
teffiftg of how he would prove fh»-'*oek-
Wbi?h Darcy would perish, also mentioned that he
had a mast vivid dream to that effect, fcenee AN
rvagw of tire warding » my* second beadE*w.
FISTIC MARVEL OF THE DAY.
STUNG BY A RIGHT, FIGHTS 13KB A
TORNADO.
“The magic of thp name of Darcy in short W«*S
exemplified more than ever by the skee and charac-
ter of the crowd at the Sydney Stadium op Satur-
day night, dune 13,1916. Something Eke T,QOO peo-
ple were there, amongst them lights in. every branch
of provisional and business life. Old and young
rolled up, and about £1,250 was taken at the gatea.
“To one and all, Darcy is the magnetic star. Ha
is the boxer, the fighter, and the man of tnind and
might who embodies the people's ideal of a worlds
champion. As it was with Trnmper in cricket, so it
is with the Maitbcnd boy in boxing, for ids person-
ality, as well as his fistiegenius, touches the imagin-
atjon of jnefi: Crons© "was & giant alongside <mr
man, enad -owned a very fine record in America,
where, a.eeordmg~to handih; (1) letters to
the press -of this eity, h© more ‘than held his oea
with the best naiddle-and micti«U(yweight» <ff that
eonnfcry. i
‘ "Fli eir~wmgh tfmrpr©, T)areyffX7and Ooosa
ILTSV-Xnd fhe actual appeararaee-oflhe men more
strikingly illustrated the cEffewne© between them
physically. It w»3 plainly evident, by what hap-
pened hifbe first round, that Darcy intended to al-
low the -contest to last the full term, in compliance
with big bigger opponent's request, for he allowed
the latter-to clineh awd hang on without attempting
to drag-bimseif free,' amd pnt into'-aetion his-fanjows
right, under and over, but one lefthookrto the ehia
sept a wad o£,sh»wing. gaza from- the big tollpwhi


mouth, it fell with a smack, and many ringsiders
for the moment thought the big fellow had lost seve-
ral teeth.
DARCY FIGHTS LIKE A WASP.
“The American was cool enough when he came up
for the second .-ouiul, and sent over two good left
drives,for the head, which, however, just shifted
free of the danger zone. Crouse followed on with a
right, that struck Darcy’s left forearm held up in
defence, and skidded along and landed on the shoul-
der. Darcy drove out'his right, that was countered
wejl by Buck’s right. Catching 'Darcy on the jaw,
it staggered him slightly, amidst excitement. It was
the beginning of the end. An angry flush o’erspread
Darcy’s face, and even down his neck. He saw red,
and setting sail more grimly than I had ever seen
CHAPTER XXXVII.
“THEY TALK OF JACK DILLON; GIVE ME
DARCY,”
IS WHAT “BUCK” CROUSE SAID.
CROUSE’S IMPRESSIONS.
Crouse was in no frame of mind for an interview
immediately after the contest. But the big fellow
next day, Sunday, metlne thus:
“Well, Mr. Lawless, I suppose you’d like to know
how I feel? Certainly very sore at not makingjgood;
that is, not showing my true form. I was well
enough—never better—confident, though a bit ner-
vous at first. But it all went for nothing, I was at
the mercy of the greatest fighter I ever saw, and the
inevitable resulted.
“If you remember our conversation some
time back, I told you I thought it impossible
for any man to knock me out? Well, up to Saturday
night at 8.30 I was still of that opinion, but not now. 1
I also told you that no man could take my right on
the jaw without at least going down, and probably
out, but I have lived to learn differently—l met Les
Darcy.”
•“What I said to you on that occasion referred to
was not, to use an Australianism, ‘skite,’ but unad-
ulterated fact. I have met such men as Jack Dillon,
who landed often enough on my jaw, and McGoorty,
who, you will agree, is one of the heaviest punchers
in the world, and yet even failed to put me down
after landing twice in quick succession on my jaw
with his famous left swing, that has put to sleep so
many tough fellows. Naturally, I prided myself on
my ability to take punishment more than most men.
I never thought it possible for any middleweight to
win from me in the way which Darcy did.
“My performances,” added Crouse, “fooled me
into a belief that I could punch hard enough to
knock out any man whose jaw came into collision
him in a previous bout, soon had the measure of tho
visitor. He became a tornado in green trunks. A
second or two later he dropped Crouse with a left
hook to the month. That,the big fellow was rat-
tled was plain by the fact that he rose immediately
instead of taking advantage of any of the ten seconds
count. He paid the penalty, for another left hook
to the same spot, and he fell heavily; ' remaining
down for the eount of five. Darcy at him as me rose
to his feet, rained left and rights to the head and
sent him once more to the canvas. Inspector Jones
was calling for hostilities to cease, but with his back
turned to the police official; Arthur Seott was busy
calling the count to the beaten man. About 8 was
recorded when Crouse attempted to rise, but fell
again to his knees, and the referee immediately
stopped coimting and declared Darcy the winner.”
Darcy and the Americans.
with my right, and in proof of this, I could mention
many cases, hut I will confine myself to one.
“There is a man on our side (America) named
George Ashe, who made himself famous by staying
12 rounds with mighty Jack Dillon. He was always
considered to be as tough as leather, yet I put the
k.o. over on him —something that Dillon failed to ac-
complish. It made me think I was some knocker-
out. I still think so, but not when Darcy is at the
other end.
TOLD TO CLAIM HIS EIGHT.
“Before entering the ring on Saturday night I was
told to claim Darcy’s right, I did so; but soon found
that the other one needed similar treatment, for it
(the left), banged me a mighty wallop on the mouth.
Gee, it was some punch! However, by that means
I lived through the first round, and when I return-
ed to my corner I expressed the opinion that I cer-
tainly was up against some fighter.
WHOSE STRENGTH WAS SIMPLY/-
ASTOUNDING.
“I told my seconds that I was going right aftei
him in the next round, and I did, as you know, bul
he did likewise.
DAECY, DADDY OF THEM ALL.
“Naturally I am broken up at my apparently poor
showing. I would not care about being defeated if
I could only have shown something of my true form,
and I hope the sportsmen of this country will give
me another chance. I don’t mean a return match
with Darcy—l acknowledge that he is too good. In
opposition to any other man in Australia, /I am. con-
fident of showing differently.”
“How would you compare Darcy with Jack Dil-
lon and Mike Gibbons?”
“At the 12 stone limit I would stake my last dol-
lar on ami (treat and all as Gibbons is, I


can't see hka having a chance with Darcy at 11.6.
No, sir, Darcy is the daddy of them all.”
“I let go one right and he stuck out his left, and
my punch struck an arm that was more like a steel
bar than a human limb; I tried again, and was de-
lighted to find it land on the right spot, but I was
surprised when it only, spurred on my terrible op-
ponent, who downed me like a shot. Of the rest in
that ring I am ignorant.”
“GOLLY, IT MADE ME GO SOME!”
“When seen after the battle, Darcy's smile was
still there. I asked him about the punch that sent
him slightly tottering, and he said: "It was a'hard
one and came as a great surprise to me; but the ef-
fect was only moment ary.”
“It stung you?”
“Yes,” he smiled, “I was nettled, but by golly it
made me go some, I think.”
“GOLLY, IT MADE ME GO SOME!”
CHAPTER XXXVIII
WHY I THINK HE V7AS THE BEST EVER.
There has never been a greater fighter and boxer
in the world than Les Darcy, especially for his age
and weight. Some time previous to the writing of
this article in the “Referee,” on June, 14, 1916, I
thought that perhaps the freakish Bob Fitzsimmons,
if the pair could have brought the hours of time to-
gether, might have been too good for him, taking
the auburn-haired warrior in his prime, and the
boy as he is to-day, still under 21 years. But since
the “Buck” Crouse battle I have advanced my opin-
ion of Darcy, much as I thought of him before. He
and Fitz. would have been aVgreat pair in a battle.
Here we have a man built by nature for the game,
even if he is on the short side. He has the strength,
the stamina, the power to take a blow and fight all
the harder for getting it. He has the fighter’s in-
stinct, for the moment he is stung he starts to fight
as he never attempted to do beforp. We saw it in
the Grouse battle and we saw him before.
Darcy is a wonderful boxer, as smart on his feet
as a ballet girl. As clever in ducking from a blow
as the feathered diver from the gunshot of the
sportsman who stalks him. Relatively, almost as
accomplished at blocking a blow from the most bril-
liant opponents, as was the incomparable, from a
purely scientific viewpoint, Griffo.
As good a two-handed fighter as the World has
ever seen. And more formidable in close than any
man of any time.
Now, the man who is able to do all this is not a
man in the eyes of the law, hut he has the head of
the man of the world who is able to steer clear of
the pitfalls into Which so many of his predecessors
rf other years stumbled, at the expense of their phy-
sical condition.
DEVELOPED THE BUNCH.
Darcy has evidently developed the punch. His lat-
ent victory showed this, for lie outed Crouse with
six ounce glover, just as easily as Fitzsimmons did
his many victims with four-ounce. When you hear
people talk of Darcy being rio puncher, just pity
• heir want of discernment. They have not seen Ed-
die McGoorty twice spread-eagled, and for the first
Cm.' in the latter’s career. They have not seen the
Darcy a World’s Wonder.
famous Jimmy Clabby almost outed with One clout,
and at a time, too, when Darcy had not learnt all
there was to know in connection with the art of de-
livering a blow. They have not been where Holland,
Hardwick, O’Donnell, Crouse, and Coy have
been. And remember that Darcy has yet to
reach his zenith,, for' a wise old head that
he might haVe on his broad and powerful
shoulders does not know • quite so much as
the man of 22 or 24, and Darcy has to become yet
stronger and faster than he is to-day”—what a man
he would have been in this year of our Lord 1919!
“We read of the men of other countries being
wonderful fellows, and we acknowledge them as.
such when of the McGoorty, Clabby or Jeff Smith
type. But some Australians are inclined to pick
holes in the armour of the mighty men of other
countries when those men happen to have their
laurels plucked from their brows by an Australian.
This is neither sensible nor patriotic, nor is it sports-
manlike. By this time I thought that since so many
of the best writers in America had conceded that
Darcy had established his right beyond question to
the world’s middleweight championship, there was
hardly anyone in Australia not disposed to regard
the East Maitland hoy as champion after he had won
the title from Jeff Smith, which Mr. R. L. Baker was
careful to advertise as being for the world’s cham-
pionship. But apparently there were a few doubters
left.
For, perhaps the 20th time, I was asked why I
persisted in writing world’s middleweight champion
after Darcy’s name. The last was from “Ameri-
cahus,” writing from St. Hilda, Victoria, thus:—
“Allow me to have a cut in the argument con-
cerning your idol, Les Darcy’s claim to the world’s
title. Surely you cannot seriously mean that be-
cause of his defeat of McGoorty, Clabby, Jeff Smith,
Costica, Crouse, Fred Holland and Fred Dyer, that
he has earned so high a position in the pugilistic
world? Not one of them was champion of anywhere.
I notice, too, on more than one occasion, that you
go further even and say he is the.cleanest cut cham-
pion who ever held the middleweight crown. How
you can figure this out gets.me for sure. Darcy is


a great boy, I will admit; but he has a-long, long
wav to travel before lie’ll convince me, or anyone
else who knows anything about the game, to deserve
being placed in the same plane as Dempsey, Fitzsim-
mons, Stanley Ketchel, or even his own countryman,
Jim Hall or Dan Creedon, neither of whom ever
claimed to be anything near world's champion,
though either did more to deserve the distinction
than Darcy. I hope you will see your way clear to
CHAPTER XXXIX .
A COMPARISON OF CLAIMS.
Let us take them in order named by “Ameri-
eanus” and see how many times these old champions
did not meet the best of other countries.
DEMPSEY AND KETCHEL.
Jack Dempsey comes first. The great little Irish-
man might have earned the right to sign himself
world’s best middleweight. But as he had disposed
of Americans only, he was only champion of Ame-
rica. He lost to
FITZSIMMONS,
who was not middleweight champion, not even of
this country, as Jim Hall had beaten him for the
title. But by disposing of Dempsey, and then turn-
ing the tables on Hall, Fitzsimmons proved that he
was the best man of either America or Australia.
Still he had not defeated the English champion, or
anyone who had done so. So Fitz.’s claim was in-
complete. It is the same with Stanley Ketchel, whom
Americans dubbed the world’s champion because of
his superiority over all men his weight in America.
But as not one of his victims proved superior to the
best of any other country, Ketchel, was, after all,
only champion middleweight of America. A great
man, undoubtedly, who, like Dempsey, would have
won the title if he had been given the opportunity.
DAN CREEDON AND JIM HALL.
As to Darcy having no better claim to the world’s
championship than Creedon and Hall, this is non-
sense. Creedon was indeed a good little man, and
he had no greater admirer than myself. He would
eertainly have put up a great fight with our lad,
who, however, would have come out on top. But,
CHAPTER XL.
Darcy’s next apearance was in opposition to his
former teacher, Dave Smith. The contest was for
the heavyweight championship, owned at the time
by Darcy through his defeat of Hardwick and
.O’Donnell. Smith, as will be remembered, owned
the title in previous years, but retired undefeated,
when ex-amateur heavyweight champion, Harold
Harwich, joined the professional ranks, and in the
elimination bout to decide the ownership of the
make your opinion public, and, if space will permit,
would like to read what yon have to say in reply.”
As ‘‘Americauus,” who, of course, gave Ills real
name, preferred to assume a nom-de-plume, there is
really no reason why his opinion should be publish-
ed, but replying thereto affords a splendid oppor-
tunity of further proving how much . better was
Darcy’s claim than any of those who were alleged
to have held the tide in the past.
Darcy and Previous Alleged Champions
it is not a matter of Creedon or Hall being better
than Darcy, the question is, Darcy’s claim to the
title to-day. Creedon’s record, though short, con-
tains, here and there, brilliant performances; hut
apart from winning the championship of Australia,
he accomplished nothing in opposition to the best
middleweights of his day. He was knocked out in
two rounds by Fitzsimmons, and lost to “Kid” Mc-
Coy in fifteen rounds, and boxed a six round draw
with Choynski,
Jim Hall was clever to a degree, but. lacked other
essentials, and apaft from winning from Ted Prit-
chard, a top notch Englishman, and Paddy Slavin,
when the lastnamed was in poor shape and said to
have been doped, his record amounted to little; in
fact, no man who gained such world-wide reputation
had so few contests.
In his chief battles in this country he defeated
Geo Wright, 7; Starlight, 22 and 5; Jack Slavin, k.,
.10; Jack Molloy, k., 6; Nolan, k., 6; Herb Goddard,
w., 4; Page, of England, k., 3; had better of a four-
round spar with Joe Goddard; failed to k.o. Jim
Purge, a featherweight in 10; had better of Jkn
Fogarty in 15; beat Peter Boland, 10; k.o.’d Fitz-
simmons in 4, after latter had beaten him in a like
number of rounds on a try-out; was k.o.’d by Owen
Sullivan in 10 rounds; beat Herb Goddard and Tut
Ryan, and lost on points to Billy McCarthy. In
America and England his record reads: R. Ferguson,
k., 4; N. White, k. 1; Ted Pritchard, k. 4; R. Fitz-
simmons, k. by 4; P. Slavin, k. 7; bested Aliek Greg-
gains and was beaten by Joe Choynski. And this
is one of the men who is said to have done better
work than Les Darcy.
The Darcy-Dave Smith Contest
championship, the lastnamed won from Les O’Don-
nell. (
That Dave Smith had lost none of his old-time
speed through his many months spent in retirement
was .shown in his contest with Jimmy Clabby, prior
to meeting his former pupil who, though lenient, a-
usual, defeated the great ex-champion by a knock-
out- in the 12th round.
Smith weighed 11.8$, and Darcy 1J.6.


Extracts from “New York Police Gazette.
CHAPTER XLI.
PROBABLE RESULT OF A DARCY-DILLON *
CONTEST.
ALLURING OFFERS FOR AMERICAN TRIP.
At about this time, July, 1916, it was thought that
Mr. Baker would succeed in enticing the then fam-
ous American middleweight, Mike Gibbons, to come
this way and test our great champion, and touching
on the probable result of such a meeting, the writer
of the “New York Police Gazette” had the following
to say:—
“Whilst Les Darcy, the Australian crack middle-
weight, may he all his adoring countrymen think ho
is, it is evident that he is not a remarkable hitter.
When Darcy tackled “K. 0.” Brown, the Chicago
second-rater it was under conditions that called for
him to show just what he could do in the hitting
line. A reward of £5O was offered to Darcy if ho
could score a single knock down during the twenty
rounds. Brown also agreed to forfeit a considerable,
sum if he indulged in unnecessary clinching. Darcy
had no excuse for not winning the "prize.” Which, of
course, was all tommyrot, as will be seen by turn-
ing up the account of that particular contest, but as
to Darcy’s lack of punching power, I wonder what
they thought when they read of the easy manfmr
in which he outed Crouse and Chip, and thus show-
ed power of punch far beyond that of Dillon or any
other topnoteher in America.
In the same paper, “The New York Police Ga-
zette,” this also appeared: If fear of Mike Gibbons
CHAPTER XLII.
As if to make Darcy’s position doubly certain
ihat prince of good fellows, Mr. Sid Baker, the well-
known member of Tattersall’s Club, offered to back
Les Darcy for £lOOO against any man in the world
for the middleweight championship. He put up
£2OO deposit, and left it in the hands of the stake-
holder, Mr. W. F. Corbett, for threo months.
Mr. R. L. Baker, then managing director of Sta-
diums Ltd., cabled to his agent in America, offering
a £2,000 purse for such a contest with Gibbons and
Darcy or any logical contender for our boy’s proud
title, and also the cost of two round trips, for fighter
CHAPTER XLIII.
HOW HE ENLISTED AT BRISBANE.
The youthful champion’s next appearance took
place at Brisbane on August 23rd, 19To, when he
met Dave Smith in a return match. On this occa-
sion they were equal in weight, eaeh man made
11.81, and once again the pupil, though anything but
lias anything to do with the fact that Los Darcy has
turned down so many alluring offers to come to
this country, the Australian crack may change his
mind when he learns how Gibbons failed to out Kid
Lewis, -who was outpointed by the then Australian
lightweight, Herb McCoy.
“As time goes on it begins to look as though Darcy
will have an easy time of it winning the middle-
weight championship. Having defeated Clabby and
McGoorty, there is only George Chip left with the
least trace of class.
The idea of Darcy being afraid of any man, to say
nothing of one who was himself frightened to risk
a match with any one over a twenty-round course,
is too silly for words, he’d have willingly met Ame-
rica’s sky-scraping heavyw eight champion, Jess
Willard.
The American writer’s remarks re the many al-
luring offers for Darcy to visit the States is further
evidence of how the unfortunate lad was badgered
by the “blood suckers” here and there. Was it any
wonder that he wanted the enormous fortunes they
spoke of!
Now, as according to the “New York f’olice Ga-
zette’s” authority, Chip was all that remained for
Darcy to whip ere claiming the championship, and
as 'this, the lastnamed was so easily accomplished,
as will be later on shown, what reasonable excuse
could they possibly have for not acknowledging him
as such!
Mr. Sid Baker’s Challenge on behalf of Darcy.
and manager, was to be paid by Mr. It. L. Baker,
but Gibbons was having none. How, therefore, in
the name of all that is sane and reasonable could
anyone argue in Gibbons’ favor, re the latter’s claim
for championship of anywhere!
He had beaten all who had the courage to meet him
in the ring, 'Englishmen, Frenchmen, American ga-
lore, a Belgian, and a Rumanian, and the best of
his own country, and then a tempting bait was of-
fered for others to come out of their hiding and en-
rich themselves by running a good, bad or an in-
different second to him.
Darcy again defeats Dave Smith.
severe, proved ranch too strong and vigorous for the
brilliant ex-champion,- and teacher of the, thefy pre-
sent title holder.
t
This trip up North proved the beginning of poor
Darcy’s troubles. Before leaving Sydney he tried
to come to some arrangement whereby he - would be


able to pay America a visit before enlisting, but- all
to no purpose. He was a marked man, and was
therefore not granted the same privileges that
were extended to others who were allowed to go
forth to America and elsewhere to transact business
ere enlisting. The champion explained to the authori-
ties, civil and military, that he merely wanted to go
to America for the purpose of gathering in the few
thousands of pounds that could have been earned
by him at his profession, and offered to post a thou-
sand pounds guarantee that would be forfeited if
he did not enlist within six months, hut it was no
use, as I just remarked, Darcy had offended some-
9ne, and he was a marked man. Yet many
there were, and of a military age, too, who
on the plea of having to fulfil engagements, were
allowed to-travel backwards and forwards to Ame-
rica and other places without any trouble.
Darcy’s case, in a sense, was on all fours with
thousands of other brave Australians who refrained
from enlisting prior to that period, August, 1916.
Like the champion boxer, they had business to trans-
act that they may have left to some friend or rela-
tion to perform, but because theypreferred to at-
tend to their own affairs in their own time and in
their own way, they were not insulted as was poor
Darcy, by being called “Slackers.” The business
Les had to perform could not have been attended to
by any other man in the world but himself, and fur-
thermore, as far as America was, concerned, could
not have been transacted at any other time hut then.
In conversation with him prior to leaving this city
for Brisbane, I strongly advised him to enlist, point-
ing out the enormous amount he would win by de-
feating Carpentier when the war ended. I even pic-
tured to him the glorious send-off he would receive
when leaving for the front. Also the great time he
Would have whilst away. That he was impressed
by what I said was borne out by the fact that, at a
recruiting meeting at Brisbane, prior to defeating
Smith,
CHAPTER XLIV.
ANOTHER AMERICAN WHO WAS GOING TO
OUT DAROY.
American writers and others from that part were
sure this time that Darey would meet his Waterloo,
fpr in Chip he was opposing a man whose right hand,
coming anywhere within reasonable distance of the
chin, meant slmnberland for the recipient, no mat-
ter who that might be. He had fought many battles
with “Giant Killer” Jack Dillon, and on July of
the previous year earned a ten-round draw with
the latter. The following extract from an American
George Chip Arrives.
DARCY REALLY DIB ENLIST.
I will prove this -beyond all shadow of doubt, in
spite of the article that appeared in the “Referee”
of August 23, 1916, by publishing herewith a
letter from Darcy from Treasury Hotel, Bris-
bane, in which he wrote: “I put my name
in to-day for military service. I am keen on going
as one of the Plying Corps. Anyhow, J cannot do
anything in that direction until I return home, for
I have to get my mother and father’s eonsent in
writing, which was not forthcoming.” Thus Les
for the second time was prevented from doing his
bit. The wiseacres now got in their fine -work, ac-
cusing “Snowy” Baker of having arranged this en-
listment as a means towards booming
the morrow's Darcy-Smith contest. In view
of the conditions under which we then
lived, with more than half the popu-
lation in fayor of conscription, as wag shown by~fhe
vote taken on the subject two months later, would
Baker or any other man be foolish enough to damn
his name for all time for the sake of earning a
few extra pounds that might have been added to the
Darcy-Smith contest as a result of the former en-
listing?
Conseriptionists took the matter up, however, and
in letters to the daily papers dealt it out hot and
strong to the Stadium manager, Darcy, and the game
generally, with the result that Mr. Baker, accom-
panied by *his solicitor, Mr. Drew, waited on Darcy
at Mr. O’Sullivan’s hotel in Jersey-road, and at the
champion’s suggestion a statement appeared in the
“Sun” to the effect that Mr. Baker would not give
Darcy another fight when the latter ? s contract ter-
minated unless he enlisted.
Unfortunately for Baker, he, according to the
“Sun,” gave it out as having come to this arrange-
ment on his own account, for the anti-conscription-
ists were then well up against him, and later on it
helped more than anything else to interfere with
the game to such an extent that the gate receipts
dwindled down to next to nothing for any contest
that Darcy was not a principal in.
paper is a fair sample of what was written by the
American writers concerning what they imagined
would be the result of a Darcy-Chip contest:—
“Jimmy Dime, of Newcastle, Penn., one pf the
most popular managers of boxers in this country,
left here to-day (July 28th, 1916) for Australia.. He
is going pver to the Antipodes to match his classy
middleweight, George Chip, with Les Darcy, the
Australian champion. Of all the many Darcy has
been up against, he has never faced a man of Chip’s
abilty, and it looks as if the downfall of the hero
of the hour in Sydney and Melbourne is in sight.”


“CHIP IS ONE OP THE GREATEST BOXERS
EVER PRODUCED IN THE UNITED STATES.
The local sports simply went crazy over him when
he landed here (Chicago), and they pronounced him
every inch a fighter.”
MORE OFFERS FOR DARCY TO VISIT
. AMERICA.
The money offered Darey to visit America and
engage in contests there kept rapidly increasing.
CHAPTER XLV.
This great pair met in their return match on
September 9th, 1916, and Darey, weighing 11.6 40z.,
again clearly outpointed his clever opponent, whose
weight was 61bs. lighter, in 20 rounds at the Syd-
ney Stadium. It was absolutely the only contest
that Darey appeared in that something of a sensa-
tional nature did not occur. Darcy’s showing on
that occasion was far below his true form. It might
have been the champion’s great liking for his op-
ponent that caused him to refrain from going all
out, if not then the true reason is certainly not hard
to solve.
At times Les opened up and dealt out pretty stiff
punishment; in fact, with an extra hard punch he
dislodged one of Jimmy’s teeth, but on the whole
it was so disappointing that several times some of
the spectators eounted the .men out, a new experi-
ence for Darcy, who as a rule was eheered through-
out his tenure of the ring.
Mr. Jimmy Dime and George Chip were interested
spectators of the fight, and were as merry as sand-
boys .when I met them when most of the crowd had
CHAPTER XLVI.
CHIP OUTED IN NINTH SOUND.
The contest was decided on September 30th at
the Sydney Stadium, in the presence of some 12,000
oh 13,000 persons, who saw Darcy absolutely play
with the much-boomed American midleweight, the
man who was surely going,to stop onr lad’s onward
march. What wonders these American scribes sure-
ly are;.they knew Chip, and boosted him as being
classy, but they hadn’t the faintest idea of what
Darcy was like, yet were certain their man would
win. Some of their fighters are the same. When
Darcy took on that ill-fated trip in 1917, America’s
ex-middleweight champion, Tommy Ryan, then in
his 47th year, boasted that he could heat Darcy,
whom he had never seen. Ryan, in his best day,
was eertainly clever, but h.is heart was never in the
First £5OOO, then £6OOO, Und early in September that
genuine sport, Mr. Alec Williams, of the firm of
Messrs. Hackett and Williams, returned from
America and informed Darcy that, he was commis-
sioned by certain . prominent people of St. Paul
(Minn.) to offer him £7OOO for three contests, whilst
the previous amounts were guarantees for a six
months’ tour of the States. According to Mr. Wil-
liams, everyone he met in America were keen on
getting our great hoy to visit them, Vet when ho
did arrive he was killed, and not with kindness.y
left the Stadium. I asked them what they thought
of Darey, and Dime answered the question by ask-
ing me if it was our hoy’s best effort. I unhesitat-
ingly said “No.” But they both agreed that he
would have to improve considerably to have any
chance against Chip.
Before telling of the Darey-Chip contest, I must
dwell a little further on the Darcy-Clabbv affair.
The weight conditions for that bout called for .a
11.6 limit at ringside under forfeit of £250, there-
fore Clubby bsy 1 every right to claim that amount
owing to his opponent’s 4 ozs. extra poundage, but
he generously overlooked this trifle (?), and that,
no doubt, accounted for Les’ leniency.
Prior to meeting Darey, Chip was a raueh inter-
viewed individual, almost, every paper, sporting and
otherwise, published the American’s views concern-
ing his chances with the champion. They were cer-
tainly very rosy according to George. He had seen
Les in action, and had sure sized him up to a nicety.
Yes, he felt certain of winning, etc., hut poor humble
Les had nothing' further to say than that he would
be there whilst George ivas doing it.
The Contest Darcy’s Easy Job.
right place to account for such a real fighter al
Darcy. However, let us back to the fight (?), Darcy'
absolutely made a plaything of Chip—hit him when 1
and where he liked, and as if to show what he!
thought of Chip is wonderful punching power, he l
actually allowed the last-named to reach his jatfl
with loft or right, without making the slightest at-l
tempt at blocking these amateurish-like swipes.
What Darcy might have brought off in the open-
ing round he proceeded to put into effect in th«
ninth. He jolted and hooked and drove with lefts
and rights, and stopping back nimbly measured his
man, and landed right; squarely to the chin inside
Chip’s left lead, and dropped him ]i>e a loe Esc!
man weighed 11.59
Darcy Again Beats Cla bby.


“BUCK” CROUSE.
American mid-heavyweiglit, outed in
2 rounds, after trying to work a
double cross.
G. CHIP. JACK GRACE.
Darcy’s last opponent, shaking hands with Jack Grace, famous globe-
trotter.
DAVE SMITH.
Ex-amateur champion of N.S.W., ama-
teur and professional champion of
Australia, teacher of Les Darcy, one
of our most popular boxers.
BILLY HANNAN.
Another Maitlander, and owner of
an excellent record, who was beaten
by Darcy in 18 rounds.
FRED. DYER.
Clever Welshman, who lost to the late
champion on points, 20 rounds, and
bV a 1f.0.. ft. in ihnip rohum malaVi


JIMMY CLABBY
Ex-middleweight Champion of America.
One of Darcy’s most formidable ojiponents, but who was clearly out-
pointed on two occasions. Jimmy is still with us, and still a
contender for middle and heavyweight championship honors.
JIM HAACK (well-known American Promoter and Referee), FRED
GILMORE (Sparring Partner), LES DARCY (minus Ills smile),
and MICK HAWKINS (faithful friend and trainer).
FRANK LOTJGHREY.
Jeff Smith’s stable mate, easily
beaten on points.
SID DEERING.
Hard-hitting Newtown wel-
ter, who in private was going
to out Darcy, but did not.


Chip acknowledged his defeat in a manly way. He
had no excuses, although be thought he might do
better in a return match, when he would be more
used to our climate. He was sure Darcy would de-
feat Gibbons, but thought Dillon might account for
Les, but he was none too sure of that.
As Chip had fought Dillon a ten-round draw and
many other no decision affairs without being outed,
it is hard to understand why George thought Dillon
might prove superior to our great champion. Poor
Les, who ever thought for a moment that would he
his last fight? He was to have met Chip in a return
match at Melbourne, but he bad evidently made
up his mind some months before to take the law in
his own hands, and leave for. America without a
passport.
CHAPTER XLVII.
THRILLING STORY TOLD FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN THE LATE CHAMPION’S OWN
WORDS.
The following facts regarding the manner in which
the late Les Darcy made his “get-awav’’ to America
are contained in a letter written by him to a friend
in Australia. The full story has never previously
been in print, and will be read witli interest by every-
one. The bitterness felt by some; people at the time
of the lad’s ill-advised action has long since been
removed by his tragic death, and wo feel that the,
time has arrived when the thrilling story may he
published without the risk of injuring the reputation
of one of the gallantest of Australia’s sons.
As previously mentioned, it was whilst returning
from Brisbane to Sydney by train that Darcy met
Sullivan, the man who was alone responsible for the
champion’s fatal step. The pair were by no means
intimate, and had it not been for this chance meet-
ing during a long railway journey, and the oppor-
tunity it afforded to Sullivan to work upon the lad’s
feelings, the story of Darcy’s life might have been
painted in much brighter colors. Sullivan immedi-
ately introduced the subject of Darcy going to
America, and earning the enormous fortune that
"was there awaiting him. The matter was earnestly
discussed by the pair throughout the journey, but
no finality was then reached. Darcy had to first
make good his promise to enlist if his parents ’ con-
sent could be obtained.
SULLIVAN’S PLAN.
About a month, later Darcy received a telephone
ring from Sullivan, asking him to call and see him.
Darcy kept the appointment, and Sullivan then told
him that he knew' of a boat which was sailing imme-
diately from Newcastle for America, and asked how
As I previously mentioned, I thought I had con-
vinced the unfortunate lad on the absurdity of such
an action, just before he went to Brisbane to meet
Dave fernith, but.whilst returning by train he lis-
tened to the tempter, Sullivan, and went forth by
the steamer “Hatty Luckenbach.”
Sullivan had engineered the getaway with some-
one, who received £l5O, which, of course, Darcy had
to pay, hut before the steamer’ left Newcastle the
champion was seen by another indivdual, whu
threatened to put him away to the authorities if he
did not come to light with £5O, but as Les was £IC
shy of that amount at the moment, the blackmailer
hud to he satisfied with £4O.
How Darcy Left Australia.
much he would give to get out of the country. "Darcy
replied that he would 'be prepared to give £lOO, and
Sullivan replied that he could arrange for the pair
of them to be taken to America for £75 each, add-
ing that he, had arranged it through high political
influence. Darcy has since declared that he does
not believe that the politician mentioned by Sulli-
van Had anything to do with the matter.
Darcy at once fell in. with the proposal suggested
by Sullivan, and arrangements were made for
“shanghaing” their trunks on board. The rest of
the story is best told in the late champion’s own
words, as contained in the letter referred to above.
“I brought my car on Wednesday night from Syd-
ney,’’ he wrote, ‘‘and drove it with our two trunks
to the place arranged. A man took charge of the
baggage, and I then drove the car home," leaving
Sullivan in Newcastle. I left by the 10 o’clock
train for Newcastle, and, after meeting Sullivan,
we took a taxi and drove to Stockton. On arrival
at the wharf we were met by an individual, Vho
smuggled us on board without any trouble. He
stowed us away in the bolj under a 3on of sells,
which almost crushed the life out of us. AH through
the night we lay in these unsavoury quarters, hut
I Urns tired out, and slept well. At 8 am. the sol-
diers came on board to look for stowaways. They
had no chance of finding us, and the hunt made by
the officers of the ship later on proved equa... fruit-
less.
THE VOYAGE BEGINS.
“Soon after this we heard a commotion up above
and before long we could tell by the motion
our voyage had commenced. Before long we re-
ceived a visit from our friend on board, who, telling
us that he had more comfortable quarters for us,
asked us to follow him. He led us to a place they


called tKe pantry, and fold us that we would be all
light there for a day Or two. The place didn’t
look too inviting, as there was no air, and the heat
was intense. However, we were scarcely in a posi-
tion to complain, and there was nothing for it but
to grin and bear it. We were both horribly sea-
sick, and at times we thought we had reached the
end of the section. Sullivan looked awful, and once
or twice I really thought he would die. He groaned
all the time, and occasionally screamed out, ‘I am
going to die; I know I’m going to die!’ I was so
sick that. I could scarcely hold my head up, but I
simply roared with laughter at him. ‘lf they don’t
let us out of here, I’ll break that door down!’ he
yelled, and several times I really thought he would.
Then a steward brought us some real strong coffee
and some wedges of bread, which I ate, and in-
stantly brought up. To make matters worse, the
pilot forgot some papers, and the ship had to lie
out on the bar waiting till they went back to the
Customs and get them. We continued to be horribly
sick for what seemed like hours, and both of us
must have sweated down to bantamweight. At last
I got up on a shelf and lay there, feeling a little
better, but honestly I wouldn’t have cared much if
the boat had gone down.”
“ALIAS JAMES DAWSON.”
“After we had been a few hours at sea one of
the crew .came and opened the door, and we walked
upon deck, and I can tell you I have never been more
pleased to see God’s own sunshine. I took in great
gulps of fresh sea air, and soon felt myself again.
We must have been a queer-looking pair as we came
out on deck. The crew didn’t seem to know what
to make of it. We had to toe the mark before the
captain, who asked us all sorts of questions, and
then sent for the first mate, and gave him'a dressing
down for not searching the ship properly. In a
■couple of days we recovered from our seasickness,
raid chummed up with the crew, and the rest of
the voyage was enjoyable enough. I gave my name
as James Dawson.
“We had a little trouble at Tal Tal, as,the cap-
tain is supposed to put off stowaways at the first
port of call, and of course he had to do so with us.
.However, we wore only there for a day and a half
when we fixed up with the agent for a big oil com-
pany to take, us to New York for £52. We jour-
neyed in the oil boat through the Panama Canal,
which was a wonderful sight. There was not much
chance of doing any work on board, but we walked
nearly all day, and that did me a lot of good. I
went up to 13st. 41b. stripped, but after a week in
New* York I was back around 12st. again.
NEW YORK AT LAST.
“We arrived at the mouth of the Hudson on De-
cember 14th. Tex Rickard hired a tug and came
out to meet us, and soon the oil boat was surrounded
by tugs filled with fight promoters and vaudeville
managers, newspaper men, photographers, and
others, all clamouring to see us. It was as funny
as a circus.
“The quarantine officers came alongside, and we
had to sign our names in the book and show about
25 dollars, but we never went into quarantine on
Ellis Island —they say anything in the papers. We
got aboard Tex Rickard’s tug, and very soon I
found myself on American soil at last.”
The sudden departure of Darcy, and his manner
of going, caused much commotion. Many of his
best friends and supporters, whilst blaming the
authorities for not allowing him to go in the ordin-
ary way, especially under the one thousand pounds
guarantee, were very sore with him for taking the
law into his own hands, and many severe articles
were written in our various papers. In the “Sun-
day Times,” of Nov. 17th, 1916, the following ap-
peared;—“Now that it seems to be definitely es-
tablished that Les Darcy has slipped away to
America, this paper and a great' crowd of reput-
able citizens want to know what action the Federal
Government purposes taking in the matter. Here
is a young man in the heyday of his physical fit-
ness, the most able-bodied athlete in the Common-
wealth, middleweight champion of the world, as
well as heavyweight champion of Australia, whose
annual income for the last three years has not been
less than £SOOO. (That is why his estate paid duty
on £l7oo.—“Solar Plexus.”) He is fit for military
service, and he has made all this money out of the
people of Australia. Australia has put him in a
position of advantage that few young men of Aus-
tralia at this crisis enjoy; he is independent for life,
if need be, and in case of his death his parents are
abundantly provided for.” “There need be no mag-
nifying of this man Darcy’s importance. He is hot
important in the least. In the scales of civilisation
he counts for very little.” (Why all this fuss, then,
and nothing said of Mick King and a few others t—
“Solar Plexus.”) “The point is that he is a young
Australian, and all he can find to do with the large
sum of money Australia has poured into his pockets
is to pay some other mean fellow to help him to
bolt from his natural obligations.” “Australia can
surely have no use for that sort of young Australian,
and Australia at this moment is not in the least
disposed to make excuses for him. Nor are we. ”
“What is to be done? The Commonwealth •Govcm


ment surely cannot sit down meekly to the indig-
nity of this man’s lawlessness and breach of com-
mon faith.”
“WHAT MIGHT BE DONE.
“If the Federal Government will do nothing, is
there nothing that the State Government can do?'
The matter is a Federal concern, but the State Go-
vernment can keep a on ports, were it
only for the sake of its own repute.” “If no power
to deal with this scandal at present exists under the
War Precautions Act, legislation should be introduc-
ed at once, and the necessary power taken. Mean-
time the Commonwealth might reasonably request
that the United States will refuse permission for
Darcy to land.” “lie can be barred quite easily as
an undesirable immigrant.” “If you can conceive
an immigrant more undesirable than a- pugilist dis-
loyal to his country, your imagination is fine.”
“The position-of this paper must be made per-
fectly clear. It regards with indignation the con-
duct of any man who bolts from liis country at the
hour of its need. It regards with unspeakable con-
tempt any and every person who connives in any
such levanting. For the man who stays at home
and doggedly refuses to see ids duty, one may have
a certain poor respect. But for the fellow who
bolts in a dreadful funk when he begins to deem it
possible that his duty may be thrust upon him there
can he nothing but disgust and scorn.” (The ar-
ticle also urged that Darcy’s property should be
confiscated.)
Hear, hear, one is inclined to cry after reading
this, hut if Darcy told the truth when lie wrote from
the Albert Park Hotel, Albert Park, Melbourne, on
3rd January, 191 G: “I think I’ll be doing some more
CHAPTER XLVIII.
. THE WRITER'S TROUBLES.
Now came my troubles. For many years pre-
viously I scarcely missed an outgoing American mail-
boat without sending a letter unstamped and un-
addressed per favor of a passenger who fulfilled
all requirements when America Avas reached, and the
whereabouts of those they Avere intended for Avas
ascertained. On about the 10th November, 1916,
Mick Hawkins, Darcy’s old friend and trainer, call-
ed upon me at the “Referee” office, and asked me
to address an envelope to Les. I did so, not know-
ing that it contained anything, and also being un-
aware of where the Lid resided.. I Avrote, “Les
Darcy, -undisputed champion of the world. ’ ’ Shortly
after two lads came in for the purpose of saying
good-bye. They had received their passports Avitfi-
That Letter to Darcy.
theatre shoving. I got an offer of £5OOO, with the
privilege of 50 per cent., for sis months—a nice little
trip this is in America.” One must agree that any
hoy might he pardoned for wanting to first gather in
the easy money.
According to certain ultra-respectable and highly
patriotic gentlemen, everyone of military age should
have gone forth to the front. Why, then, did they not
enlist! They were not that important that we could
"not have done without them.
If reminds one of the purse proud ignoramus I
once heard of, who, when war first broke out, wrote
to the late Lord Kitchener telling of his willingness
to pay for the equipment of a troopship, provided
he ( the ignorant one) would be placed in command.
In that “Sunday Times’’ article such things as:
‘‘l'n the realm of honest trade, he is, or was, a
blacksmith, and blacksmiths are particularly useful
in Australia at the present.,” “It is also understood
that he has been an armorer’s laborer. He is in
various ways fitted for the Commonwealth’s present
need at what happens to be a time of the Common-
weal ths special peril; and things standing so, he
cuts and runs.” To cut and rim when the Com-
monwealth was in such peril was only worse than
getting-out of the difficulty by way of a passport.
Darcy was a blacksmith, but he threw up the anvil
for a much more lucrative game, and for sticking to
the latter, even during wartime, makes him no worse
than the former hotel boots, farm hand, or baker’s
carter, etc., who had the good fortune to
pick a winner in Tatt’s. or find a better
way of earning a living, yet did not fill any-
one of the three posts named during the .Common-
wealth’s peril, when drivers of milk, baker’s, and
butcher’s carts were so scarce that, in many country
towns, and some of our suburbs, I think, these posi-
tions had to be filled by members of the gentler sex.
out any fuss, yet one of the pair later on had donned
the khaki. Strange! I gave them several letters
of introduction. In the meantime Hawkins, after
a conversation with the lads, asked me to write a
few lines to Les. I abused him for coming at such
a busy time, but dashed off the following:—
Les, —I was awfully annoyed when I found you had
gone, and without Mick Hawkins. However, I hope
you have good luck. Be careful, and if my advice
is worth having, just listen to it. Box Jeff Smith
first, and demand £4OOO for your cut. Work up
the agony over a twenty-rounder with Gibbons, and
•demand again the lion’s share. Likewise against Dil-
lon. Now your name here is ‘up to putty,' but if you
whip across to England and enlist you will make
good. Then after peace is declared you and Carpcn-


tier would draw £20,000 each. Good old Mike (mean-
ing Hawkins) is now here with me.” At this junc-
ture a certain well-known fan at my elbow said
that lie knew a journalist who was sending along
by that mail a very severe article on Darcy, and I
mentioned the fact. I handed the letter to Haw-
kins, who, instead of posting it in the ordinary way,
handed it to one of the lads mentioned, for it- was
found on the latter, and he, with his friend, had to
forfeit their passages, and in due course the unfor-
tunate youngster was fined £lO, and I was fined
wbst the amiable Mr. McParlane termed the mini-
mum, £25, and was bound over in £2OO not to offend
In a like manner during the war. The Stipe was
evidently in a bad mood that morning, for in spite
of the fact that the summons was not served on me
until the previous Saturday afternoon, which pre-
vented me from obtaining legal advice, he would
not grant me a remand for a few hours for the
purpose of consulting a solicitor. My friend in ad-
versity also swore to the facts here explained, yet
more than one paper had the evidence read that it
was I who handed the letter to Barrington, and
also that it was Hawkins who first handed me the
letter, with the request that I forward it on to
Darcy. That such could not possibly bo the case
was proved by the fact that the letter and address
on envelope was in my handwriting.
My offence was described by the amiable Stipe
as being an indiscretion, and also mentioned that in
a sense I was a dupe, and kindly fined me £25, the
minimum, yet two Germans, for sending letters to
their home country without stamping them, were
fined something like £5 each. Mr. McParlane grant-
ed remands upon remands to others whose offences
against the War Precautions Act, appeared ever so
much greater than was mine. For trading with
the enemy was an offence equally as great as was
my indiscretion, judging by the penalty imposed,
and for giving advice to Darcy, and impressing up-
on him the advisability to enlist, was even greater
than making use of public utterances with a view
to prejudice recruiting, and according to Mr. McFar-
lane, too, for he it was who in August of last year
ordered the Rev. Frederick Sinclair to enter into
recognisances, self in £2OO and two sureties of £IOO
each, to observe the War Precautions 'Act regula-
tions during the war. He imposed no fine, but or-
dered the.defendant to pay £5 5s costs. Ex-middle- ,
weight champion Mick King, for doing as Darcy
did, was on his return to this country fined only
£lO. I could go on filling pages with instances
to prove that I was fined the minimum, but enough
has already been mentioned to suit my purpose.
Now to,...get .back to Darcy. It is well known
how the unfortunate lad was hounded to death by
governors, managers, many of the latter of whom
would be provided with cheap lodgings in this city
were they to attempt to live the lives they do in
their own corrupt country. Boxing writers, for
some unknown reason, gave him no praise for his
f undoubted ability. Even the ex-boxer, Jack Skclly,
who is generally regarded as being one of America's
few reliable authorities, was sure this one, that one,
or the other one would beat Darcy. Pure bias, as lie
had never seen our hoy in action. These unfair
critics were helped in their unmanly task by a
person or persons on this side. No, not Mr. li. L.
Baker, as .was, and still is, thought by many, for
that gentleman, at the inquiry held at the West
Maitland Town Hall, clearly proved in all he did
and wrote that he was the lad’s friend, and not his
enemy, hut the miscreant’s identity will some day
be revealed.
Darcy had several workouts in gymnasiums in
America, and those who opposed him in these friend-
ly spars were among the few who testified to his
true worth, but writers heeded not their stories.
Once Darcy compelled the giant Pulton to cry
enough in two rounds. The writers again were
silent, but how eagerly would they have made men-
tion of a Darcy defeat!
Too had, especially coming from men whose sec-
ond-rate-dubs, in the majority of instances, were
not only tolerated here, but made much of. How-
ever, these Governors who were spineless enough to
heed the writings of their own kind in this country,
the boxers, the miserable band of pointing mana-
gers, and the writers of that and this country who
called him slacker, goes for nothing, because, the.
men whose opinions did count, our bonny boys at
the Front, thought otherwise, as the following letter
will show: —
Anzac Club,
Victoria, Loudon,
25th May, 1917,
Mr. Lawless,
Sydney.
The Australian boys on leave at the above
Club wish me, through you, to express their
sorrow to all in the loss of our champion,
Les Darcy. When the news was received in
London the Australians were spellbound. We
all had such hopes of his doing great things
in America,
Yours faithfully,
ANDREW J.-SEELEY.


No matter how bad was Darcy’s action in leaving
this country without obtaining that permission he
tried so hard to obtain, he eventually proved him-
self not nearly as much a slacker as those who
called him by such an ugly name, for on April 20th,
1917, he did what they were not game to do,
he enlisted, and in the Flying Corps, too.
From one of Darcy’s last letters I take the follow-
ing extracts: —‘‘I did not want to go to the war
just then, and I don’t know anyone else in my posi-
CHAPTER XLVIX.
Brave though the lad was, his heart could not
longer stand the awful strain, and he passed away
Memphis on May 24th, 1917, aged 21 years, and
\Wiilst his remains were awaiting the time to arrive
when they w-ould be shipped 1o Ibis, his far-off, na-
tive home, the following excellent sermon was ren-
dered by the Rev. Father Joseph P. McQuade:—
}
IN MEMORIAM.
LES DARCY.
Friends, we are engaged to-day in performing
one of the corporal works of mercy, albeit under
most unusual circumstances. We are engaged in a.
funeral which had its beginnings in Memphis, on
the Atlantic seaboard, and will have its finality in
the land of the Southern Cross. We are engaged
in the transportation homeward of all that is mor-
tal of one, a mere boy in years, whom we knew only
by reputation; of one who in life had not put his
foot in this, our City by the Golden Gate. Yet wc
bear gently, as our hearts, touched by the pathos of
this boy’s sad ending, impel us, these, his remains,
to the good ship that will carry them over the track-
less Pacific to have them finally rest at home touch-
ed (by the hands and moistened by the tears of a
heart-broken mother.
Maybe, as the cortege files through our streets
towards the dock, when it will be asked who it
is that is being 'buried, and it is answered a boxer,
many will ask the why and the wherefor; and yet
I fed happy and proud in saying, and I speak as a
clergyman and a life-long San Franciscan, I re-
member nothing ever done by a 'body of our citizens
half so touching, half so kind, as this act of our
sporting community in respect to the remains of
the lamented Les Darcy. All honor to you men, in
that you show you have hearts and souls, feelings
and sympathy, for your fellows in distress, particu-
kriy in that sad hour when the shadows of death
are deepened and lengthened by suffering and wide
separation.
only know that Les Darcy was a grown, boy,
Jras without a peer as a boxer in Ms native Auc-
tion who would want to go either. I have, as you
know, a chance right now of putting my family on
their feet for the rest of their lives, and can do it
in a short time, then I don’t care what happens to
me. I’d willingly go to the front, but not until I
had a chance of earning money for my mother and
family. I offered the authorites £lOOO to let me
come over here and earn that money, but they
would not let me.” \
Are these the sentiments of a shirker?
tralia. He was the eldest but one among his broth-
ers and sisters; he was a clean-liver, and practised
in the religion taught him by a devoted mother,
lie had goodness in his heartland a deep affection
for his family, to help whom and to place in better
conditions he sought for the opportunites offered
in this country to one of his prowess in his chosen
field of sport.
It is needless to relate the story of his hurried
and secret departure from home. I have a (mental
picture of a big, broad-shouldered boy, folding with-
in his strong arms a timid and weeping parent, and
whispering words of hope and cheer, promising to
soon return with the prizes—the presents he would
give to her and the little ones. Then began the
long journey in the hold of a freighter bound for
New York. We see him as he, landed at the Bat-
tery, and stood, in the little group that awaited
him, nil smiling and eager to begin what we Ml
thought would be a successful career. But God
knows best. He rules. Poor Darcy could not begin.
What with set-backs and disappointments, fretful-
ness and worse, of which we need not speak, he
took sick, and at Memphis, Tennessee, he breathed
'l/ack to God his soul, unsullied, dauntless, though
beaten by a fate against which he was helpless, as on
the day he first opened his eyes, upon this world.
The pathos of the passing of Darcy touches to
the core. This gathering of us around his bier is
clearly an evidence that the heart calls us and speaks
in no uncertain accents. Oh, the, sweetness of it.
How it (brings us closer together, and enkindles the
fire of brotherly affection, no matter the race, re-
ligion, color or profession. You kind-hearted,,
thoughtful sporting-men of San Francisco! How-
can I find words to adequately express my admira-
tion of your generous impulses, of your noble act
in answering thus your human hearts. Surely, in
that far-3way Australia, in the modest little home
that to-day is shrouded in gloom, and where hearts
are bowed under grief and woe, the solace and com-
fort of this act of you Sa» Franciscans will last as
long as the memory of lies Darcy will live with
those who- loved him- and whom he- loved
The Cruel End.


No time now for criticism., The occasion is too
*acred. Let the dead past bury its dead. We will
enly say that when the Governor of New York re-
fused Darcy permission to box there was a wound
indicted from which, according to the sporting writ-
ers of the newspapers, the young champion never
fully recovered. And we regret, out of considera-
tion for our common nature, to remark that the wil-
lingness of people to worry a wounded individual is
astonishingly cruel at times. There seems to be
satisfaction of egotism in throwing stones at any
indivdual whose case, being precisely like many
other cases—l refer to Darcy being called a_•
“slacker’—whose case happens to be made tragic
by prominence. If a small man in a big place had
not decided to acquire easy merit by becoming
theatrically virtuous, the stones might not have
ieome to poor Darcy, and the boy would have gone
«n and done what he was as sincere in claiming he
would do as he was just and right in the claim,
teamely, protect his family and afterwards offer him-
self to his country in the uniform of a soldier..
■We owe it to ourselves td say that the American
sport-world was anxious to see Les Darcy perform.
Had fee done so, I am sure he would have received
the same generous treatment that scores of bis
sombrymen, many of them less famous than he, re-
him. (We feel that in the death of
Darcy a bright star was lost to the long, proud list
of Australia’s sons in the realm of sport. His clean
life would have added to the bright effulgence of
his name and fame.
May He Who watches over all give comfort and
strength to the bereaved family of the stricken
champion. May others feel towards ours in the last
hour as we feel toward the parents, the brothers and
sisters of Les Darcy—this is our prayer, this our
message.
On June 26th, 1917, the body arrived in Sydney,
and was brought to Messrs. Wood, Cofnll’s mortuary,
_. George-street, and nearly a million men,
women and children viewed the corpse
during the two days it remained thereat.- It
was then removed to St. Joseph's Catholic
Church, Woollahra, where on' Thursday morn-
ing, June 28th a, Requiem Mass was celebrated. The
church was packed to almost suffocation, -whilst
many thousands thronged the precincts, and joined
in the funeral cortege to the Central Railway Sta-
tion, where it was entrained for its final resting-
place, the picturesque cemetery at East Maitland,
where on the following Sunday, July Ist, 1917, one
hundred thousand persons were in evidence to pay
their last respects to their dear young friend, the
best boxer, the best 'brother, and the best son that
ever lived.
« x
REQUIESCAT IN PACE.


GET IT-==-WHAT?
‘FAIRPLAY’
EVERY TUESDAY MORNING,
8 PAGES. 8 PAGES. .
PRICE - ONE PENNY
Features —
Horse Racing.
Pwjr Racing.
Trotting,
Boxing.
Football ,
and other sport*
by the best Sporting Journalists in
Australia.
FEATURES EVERY WEEK.
Always Valuable to Sports.
Every Tuesday - - One Penny
One Penny - - Every Tuesday
From all Newsagents and Newsboys
Stfflg— YOU CAN’T GO TO THE RACES •mesrnm
WITHOUT wßq®
“FAIRPLAY
Race Special”
i« PAGES EVERY FRIDAY.
Price 3d. t Worth a Guinea.
Specials—
ONE ONLY per race tips.
Advice to Punters.
Latest Training Gossip.
Gallops and Performances.
WITH THE BOXERS. WHO WILL WIN?
By Expert Sporting Writers.
EVERY LINE A WINNER.
Price THREEPENCE - - - Worth a Guinea
Worth a Guinea - - - Price THREEPENCE
All Newsagents, Booksellers and Newsboys.
WITH THE DAWN ON FRIDAY.
PRESS NOTICES
Evening News—
"Bexihg Made Easy” Is the title of * manual o t
instruction by Mr. Will Lawless (“Solar PIeXUS”).
Many years of close connection with the game make
the •writer eminently qualified to do justice to- his
subject, and those interested in the science will give
the book their approval. Excellent diagrams, hints
on training and physical Culture, and anecdotes Of
notable boxers, give additional interest.
Sydney Morning Herald—
“ Boxing Made Easy.’*
In these days, when the value of boxing as an
adjunct to military training is universally recog-
nised, and when the Prince of Wales lends distinct
tion to the sport by attending the National Sporting-
Club and making a speech from the ring, as he" did
the other day, anything that tends to raise the
stahdard of boxing is to be Commended. Much
sound advice to learners ahd to boxers, amateur
and professional, is contained in a handbook, en ;
titled “Boxing Made Easy,” by Mr. Will Lawless,
well known as a sporting writer under the h6m-de-
plume of “Solar Plexus.” The author has dfevOted
more than half a century to ft close study of boxing,
and as one who knows the methods of the Mace
school, as developed and taught In Australia by the
late Larry Foley, he Is-well able to explain why so
many modern boxers never become better than third-
rate professionals. The lessons in the book are
based on thoroughly sound principles, and with the
growth of amateur boxing among the Schools, Mr.
Lawless’ work should serve a useful purpose. The
educational Value of boxing to the schoolboy is
emphasised In a preface to the book by Mr. Harald
Bjelke-Fctersen, who speaks as a physical culture
expert.
* * • •
Smith’s Weekly—
A Scrap Book.
There Is a punch in every line of Will Lawless’
new book, “Boxing Made Easy.” There are some
sound hints for beginners, with self-explanatory Il-
lustrations and ft critical study of the methods of
all boxers. The big contests of the. past are racily
recounted, and there are plenty of good boxing
stories for old hands. The beginner Is not only
taught how to box, but the author also counsels
the methods of training and physical culture. It Is
the sort of hook which boxing men, and sportsmen
generally, will welcome.


PRESS NOTICES (Continued)
Sydney Sportsman—
“ Boxing Made Easy.”
For many years past Will Lawless, better known
to the reading public by his pen name, “Solar
Plexus,” has been a leading authority on the art
of boxing. His newspaper accounts of ring doings
have always been marked by a clear insight into
all the fine points of the game, free from that bias
that is so common with recorders of the manly art.
The store of experience gained by “Solar Plexus”
now finds expression in a tastefully got up bobk
entitled “Boxing Made Easy.” Illustrated with
blocks, the explicit reading matter that accompanies
them cannot fail to teach much, both to the tyro
and the old hand at the game. The book is issued
by the “New Century Press, Ltd.”, and, priced at
1/-, should command an extensive sale.
* * *
/
Newcastle Sun—
“ Boxing Made Easy.”
Under that title, Billy Lawless (“Solar Plexus”)
has given the public something in the literature of
\ boxing like Darcy gave it in the art—something
exceptional. Concentrated in its 60 odd pages is
the ripe experience and expert knowledge garnered
from 25 years’ association with the game in an
active and critical capacity. None knows more, or
jHfobably as much, of tho finer science of boxing
than “Solar Plexus,” despite his aversion to con-
tinually advertise the fact. ‘The book is true to
title —which is its best recommendation. The present-
day methods are fully explained and illustrated;
the old-time boxers’ methods; the art of Jem Mace
and Larry Foley; how titleholders have deteriorr
ated; how to-train; exercises for all classes; and
amusing boxing yarns, are further features. In all
we have a boxing classic for a modest shilling.
* ’ *
Wally Weekes—
Garratt’s Hotel,
Market-street, Sydney,
15/4/1919. ‘
Mr. W. Lawless. / ,
Dear Sir, —I wish, to thank you for sending me
ane of your,books just published on boxing, and
after reading it through I think it just hits the
pail on the head. A publication like yours is just
the idea for public and private schools; the rising
generation are just hungry for the information sup-
plied therein; I wish you every success with the
>e. Again thanking you.
I am, sincerely yours,
WALTER R. WEEKES.
Capt. DONALDSON’S
(OF THE BURNS PHILP S.S. " MATUNGA”)
RECORDS OF THE
Amazing Cruise of
the German Raider
“Wolf”
15 months at liberty on the high
seas, twice nearly round the world,
capturing numerous merchantmen,
including the s.s. Matunga, s.s.
Wairuna, Hitachi Maru, well known
in Australian trade, laying mine-
fields which levied toll of British
shipping in various parts of the
world, including the steamers Cum-
berland, Wimmera, Mongolia, Port
Kembla, and others.
ABOARD THE RAIDER,
witnessing the sinking of steamers
and sailing ships, with the Germans
crossing the ‘‘line,” the exploits of
the seaplane, and in the internment
camps in Germany,
Graphically told and profusely
Illustrated.
A BOOK OF IMMEDIATE INTEREST TO ALL
AUSTRALIANS AND NEW ZEALANDERS.
Don’t Fail to get a Copy.


FRANK DARCY DEAD
A VICTIM TO PNEUMONIC INFLUENZA
Promising Champion passed away at
1.25 a.m. on 8th May, 1919.
Since this book was written the boxing world has had to suffer an additional loss in the death of Frank Darcy. So that
the Darcy Story may be complete-, I have added a short chapter on Frank Darcy’s career, which, I feel sure, will prove
interesting to readers. —“Solar Plexus.”
In very many articles headed “Can Darcy Beat
Uren?” I expressed the opinion that by adopting
certain methods such was far from being impossible,
and judging by what happened in a private try-
out with his instructor, I really think the poor lad
would have justified my good opinion of him. But
it is all off. Poor Frank has had' his last fight,
and if we are to have another champion from that
family we must wait until little Jackie, now about
sixteen years of age, has sufficiently developed to
take up the running so suddenly left incomplete by
his famous older brothers.
Frank figured in some nine contests all told, and
was only beaten on one occasion, when, early in
1916, then but seventeen years of age, he stayed 14
rounds with Fred Fitzsimmons, a powerful, well-set
and fully-matured man, who was perhaps old enough
to be the lad’s father, and that only in the
victor’s prime, but with years of experience and a
rough style of milling that is calculated to quickly
defeat any youngster who was not abnormally strong
and ga,me beyond the average. And as Fitzsimmons
is regarded by his many Northern friends as having
a chance with featherweight champion Sid Godfrey,
some idea can be gleaned of the full merit of Frank
Darcy’s effort on that occasion.
In his early teens he also defeated that crack
lightweight, Tommy Ryan, and boxed a draw with
Wal Scutts, but since his re-entry to the ring in
November last he had four wins for four starts,
winning all practically by the K.O. Dan Tierney
was outed in 7, E McLaughlin in 2, and A 1 Cullen
in 1 round, whilst Barney Thompson was so far
gone that he accidentally landed low in the 18th
round, and was disqualified, thus saving himself
from losing by the short cut route. Frank’s show-
ing in that, his last fight in the ring, did not please
many who expected too much, but to anyone pos-
sessing the slightest knowledge of the game he
showed championship material, and ex-champion
Dave Smith wisely entered into an agreement with
the lad to train, instruct and manage him for all
future engagements, and thanks to Dave’s clever
tuition, the poor lad gave promise of nearly ap-
proaching his great brother when given the same
opportunity of developing as Les received after he
first got going. ■ ,
Even Les himself was no more keen on learning
all there was to know than was poor Frank. The
latter would listen most attentively to all his mentor
had to say, and he worked hard, and went through
his gymnasium work in that thorough manner that
only a lad determined to succeed could have kept
up the daily grind without complaining; as a matter
of fact, left to himself he might have overdone it,
but his astute teacher kept a tight rein on his
pupil, and saw to it that the latter’s strength and
magnificent constitution were not overtaxed.
When last I saw Frank Darcy it was on the Mon-
day or Tuesday prior to his admission to St. Vin-
cent’s Hospital on the following Friday. Accom-
panied by a friend, he was at the steering wheel of


a small motor car going along Market-street, and
I remarked on his excellent appearance. He looked
the picture of good health, and with his powerfully-
developed neck and game, pugnacious head, yet
withal kindly appearance, he looked the part—a
promising champion. Man, however, proposes,
but God disposes. In a few short hours compara-
tively he contracted the dreaded disease that even-
tually outed him for all time, before half-past one
on the morning of May Bth, 1919, and my fervent
prayer is that he and Les are now enjoying together
all the good things of a better land.
Even a day or two after Frank’s death, when much
sympathy was expressed for the poor lad’s mother
and family, the chronic anti made his obnoxious
presence felt by asking why so much sorrow should
be felt for Mrs. Darcy, and asked if other mothers
who had lost more than one son at the front, and
others who mourned the death of several members
of her family through the ’flu, were not deserving
of an equal amount of sympathy? Most certainly
they are, but it does not alter the fact that any
person with a heart at all cannot help but feel
genuinely sorry for his mother in particular. To
her Frank’s death meant the last straw, for in spite
of the fact that, thanks to the generosity of Les,
she has a very fine farm, there are reasons why
she does not receive the beneficial results that should
accrue from so fine a property, consequently the
money she received weekly from her recently de-
ceased son went almost all the way towards helping
her to support her large young family, and, in fact,
had it not been that Frank, by taking on boxing,
saw a way of placing his mother in a better posi-
tion financially, the chances are that the lad would
have forever remained a foreman bakef, the wages
for which went to mother, minus a small sum per
week that was scarcely sufficient to pay his own
way down here. That is the kind of son she lost,
and through his death one can better imagine than
describe what it really means to her. No one but
those who have had experience can have any idea
of what a mother’s love is. Even though she be
blessed with all that money can buy, the death of
a loving, dutiful and a promising son at the very
threshold of his manhood must be a heart-breaking
experience, but how very much worse must it be
when it results in the loss of her breadwinner. Look
through the pages of this book. Read of the abject
poverty in which they lived in Les’ childhood days.
Learn how this noble boy, by his own exertions,
raised them from that unenviable position to com-
parative comfort, and how in his endeavour to fur-
ther increase their welfare he died. Was not the
loss of such a son enough to break the average
mother’s heart? Other things that cannot be men-
tioned in these pages happened in the meantime to
always remind her of the treasure she missed. Grim
poverty, again threatened her, but a gleam of hope
presented itself when her third son gave every
promise of becoming another shining light in the
fistic firmament, and wipe off the debt that was
brought about through no fault of hers; but it was
not to be. That gleam blazed only momentarily,
and then passed away.
And now we come to yet another awful blow to
poor heart-broken Mrs. Darcy. Hardly had she
time to recover from the shock of poor Les’ death
in far-off Memphis, on May 24, 1917, when between
the early hours of one and two, at St. Vincent’s
Hospital, Darlinghurst, Sydney, on May 8, 1919,
her son Frank also passed away, a victim to pneu-
monic influenza. This certainly filled the poor
mother’s cup of bitterness to overflowing, as it did
that of the other members of the family, who, with
but one exception, are now able to realise their
great loss. May God strengthen them in their hour
of trial.
How terrible it is to think that but one week or
so previous to that Bth day of May, poor Frank
was fairly bubbling over with health, and with hap-
piness at the thought that almost immediately he
would be starting to prepare, under his tutor-
manager, Dave Smith, for his contest with middle-
weight champion Tommy Uren. Master and pupil
were very keen on this meeting, and in order to
run no risks of his protege being stricken down with
the ’flu, Dave Smith accompanied him to the South
Coast, where both benefited to such an extent that
our ex-heavyweight champion wrote to tell me of
his confidence in Frank’s ability to down even
Tommy Uren, and, in fact, to go far in equalling
the wonderful deeds of his famous brother.
But that will never be solved; the poor lad is now
no more, and all that remains of one that was going
to electrify the boxing world now lies in his last
resting place, with the brother who did.




LETTERS from SIR ERNEST SHACKLETON
The intrepid Antartic Explorer, and members
of his Ross Sea Party, tell of the value of
HEENZO
I
%
m
v.
J,
r 4
m
Wk
-■?
Ws
l
6
I
'A
Ilit/HUI* —
h
The Great Money-Saving Remedy for
COUGHS, COLDS, CROUP,
INFLUENZA, CATARRH
and other Chest and Throat Troubles.
SIS ERNEST SHACKLETON, after returning' from his last voyage, wrote:
A parcel of HEENZO went South on the ship "Aurora” on my recent
Antarctic Expedition, and was used by members of the Ross Sea Party, who
found the remedy of value under the exceedingly severe conditions experi-
enced in the Ross Sea.—Yours truly, E. H. SHACKLETON.
MESSES. JOYCE and WILD, two of the most prominent members of Sir
Ernest Shackleton’s party, sent the following jointly-signed letter: —
You will be interested to know that we used your celebrated HEENZO
during our recent Antarctic Expedition. We found it an admirable prepara-
tion. Its cold-resisting properties are very pronounced; Its soothing and
healing action Is excellent, and as a cough and cold remedy we think it
should be kept in every home.—H. E. WILD, ERNEST E. JOYCE.
OVER 7000 OTBEB TESTIMONIALS have been received from well-
known citizens, including Soldiers, Clergymen, Members of Parliament,
Solicitors, Singers, Athletes, Public Speakers, and others, stating that they
found HEENZO superior to anything else they had ever used. If you desire
further proof of the healing, soothing, Phlegm-loosening action of HEENZO,
let it be your own experience.
COSTS 2/-
SAVES POUNDS.
Each bottle of HEENZO, when diluted with water and sweetened
according to easy directions printed on the label, at once produces a family
supply of superior-quality cough, cold, influenza, and sore throat mixture
A like quantity of ordinary remedies would cost anything up to 30/-.
HEENZO costs only 2/-. Moral: Use HEENZO, get quickest possible relief,
and save much money.
HEENZO (price 2/-, by post 2/3) is obtainable from
all leading Chemists and Stores, or from G. W.
HEAN, Manufacturing Chemist, 178 Castlereagh Street
Sydney. J- ‘
FOR! YOUR OWN SAKE
REFUSE IMITATIONS.
FOR YOUR NERVES USE
rUl\ I UUI\ INLixYLg Ujc< /
HEAN’S TONIC NERVE NUTS


