

THE.
GOLDEN
MILLSTONE
1880
1930
50 YEARS OF
PROGRESS




THE
GOLDEN
MILLSTONE.
1880
1930
Being a brief summary of the
beginning and development of
the Young Women’s Christian
Association of Sydney over a
period of fifty years.


A MESSAGE AT THE
FIFTIETH MILESTONE
1 Q2.C\ ° ne reac^s the recor d of half a century, the heart is
stirred deeply, especially when one has had the great
privilege of sharing the joys and helping to meet the difficulties that
have come in the passing of the years.
First and foremost comes the heartfelt desire to offer praise and
thanksgiving to Him for all He has made possible through the
Young Women’s Christian Association. But what of the road ?
As we look back, grateful memories arise of the pioneer road'
makers who have toiled up so many hills, built many bridges, and
made many crooked paths straight.
As we view the present, let us consider whether we have proved
worthy of the heritage in the past, and what we have to offer “those
who come after.’’ We cannot rest satisfied until we are ready to
go the second mile, and more.
Looking to the future and those who are starting out along
the way, I would say :
“Life is before you ! From the fated road
Ye cannot turn : then take ye up your load ;
Gird ye your soul within you to the deed,
And take Christ with you. I bid you God-speed.’’
President.


THE YOUNG WOMEN’S
CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION.
189 Liverpool Street, Sydney.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
1930-1931
President : Miss L. M. Fowler.
Vice-Presidents: Mrs. C. T. Newman, Miss Vickery, Mrs. G. Penning-
ton, Miss H. D. Newbery, Mrs. W. E. Bennett.
Honorary Member of the Bocrd : Mrs. R. Glasson.
Recording Secretary : Miss Lillian E. Vickery.
Corresponding Secretary : Miss H. D. Newbery.
Hon. Treasurer : Mr. R. H. Nesbitt.
Lady Butters, Mesdames F. Burley, E. Dixon, A. L. Evans, J. A.
Ferguson, A. M. Graham, R. J. Lyons, H. Pratt, Earle Page, E.
Plowman, J. B. Renwick, F. D. Stafford, F. S. Stuckey ; Misses
M. A. L. Gillespie, Ruby Martin, C. Nesbit, F. Newman, A. E.
, Quaife, Theda Potts, E. L. Russell, E. Thurburn.
ADVISORY BOARD.
Mr. Walter Dickson
Mr. R. W, Gillespie
Mr. R. H. Nesbitt
Mr. E. H. Newman
Mr. C. M. C. Shannon
Mr. G. B. Vickery
Miss Vickery.
The purpose o£ the Young Women’s Christian Association is
to associate young women in personal loyalty to Jesus Christ as
Saviour and Lord; to promote growth, in Christian character and
service through physical, social, mental, and spiritual training; and
to become a social force for the extension of the Kingdom of God.


Y.W.C.A. Headquarters,
189 Liverpool Street.
Officially opened by
Lady Stonehaven on
May 5, 1926. The ideal
of fifty years an accom-
plished fact.


THE GOLDEN
MILLSTONE
FIFTY YEARS OF PROGRESS.
It was
in 1855
that the movement now known as the
YOUNG WOMEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSO-
CIATION was founded in England to meet
the needs of the girlhood of the day :
1. A Home for Nurses passing to and from the
Crimean War ;
2. A Prayer Circle.
The organization spread to other countries and rapidly
multiplied its activities.
It was not until 1880 that the first definite move was
made to form an Association in Australia —half a cen-
tury ago ! Since that time, Sydney has made rapid
strides in growth and world importance ; from the capital
of one State with a population of 751,468, it has grown
to be the largest city of a continent, with a population
of one and a quarter millions, and ranks as third British
city of the Empire.
The girlhood of Sydney in those far-away days did
not loom very large in the life of the city, yet there
was even then need and room for the Y.W.C.A. The
very earliest mention of its beginning dates back prior
to 1880, when one who was interested in the work of the
Association in England and America called a meeting of
women in a room in Bathurst Street. There it was
unanimously decided that it would be a “good thing” to
form an organization in Sydney. But nothing was done
until 1880, when, in response to a letter from Lady Archi-
bald, of Putney, England, to Mrs. Henry Moore, the
matter of the formation of a Young Women’s Christian
Association was taken up by Mrs. F. Barker (wife of
the Bishop of Sydney) and Mrs. R. Chadwick, and at


a meeting held on Ist June, 1880, in the Registry,
Phillip Street, a Young Women’s Christian Association
and Institute Union was established. For twelve months
the meetings were held there. It was not until De-
cember, 1881, after much searching, that Loma House,
in Wynyard Square, was taken at a modest rental of
£250 per annum (the decision at once being made to
sub-let the second floor at a rental of £120), and opened
amidst great rejoicing as a home (called the Institute)
for governesses and young women, on 28th February,
1882.
The Association in Sydney, according to an extract
from the first minute book, consists of two parts :
(1) The General Circle is open to all young women
of all classes of society, and its object is to form a bond
of union between those who desire to place themselves
under Christian influence and to secure to them help and
sympathy as they move from place to place.
(2) The Prayer Union is open to all who desire to
be distinctly and avowedly on the side of Christ, who
agree to unite in prayer for young women of all classes,
on Saturday or Sunday.
These two statements, though worded in the language
of fifty years ago, stress certain principles for which the
Association stands : the recognition of no particular class
or creed—for all are welcome within its doors ; and the
stressing of the spiritual aims of our work.
The twentieth century may express itself in widely
differing phraseology from that of the late nineteenth,
but the spiritual basis of our work remains. It is built
upon that sure foundation.
It would be impossible to enumerate all the women
who have been instrumental in making the Association
what it is to-day, but a glance at the list of officers
throughout the years will suffice to show the high type of


Australian womanhood attracted to the Association as
organizers and supporters.
To trace a movement throughout fifty years is a
difficult task, especially when the record must be con-
densed into a few pages. It will be best to divide the
period into decades.
1880
1890
Soon after the establishment of the Young
Women’s Christian Association in Loma House
it became evident that hostel, prayer circle, and
restaurant by no means met all the needs of
the girls. It was not long before a Mission Committee
was formed and a missionary appointed. A room was
rented in Wentworth Lane and a club formed, consisting
of twenty girls, who met three times a week to be taught
needlework, reading, and writing.
Visitation of factories was begun and the members of
the committee were thus brought into touch with hundreds
of employees.
Meeting of overseas boats was undertaken, and an
invitation extended to girls from the Old Land to visit the
Y.W.C.A.
Charitable work was begun ; working parties were
held for making up material for the poor ; visits were
paid to Newington Asylum, and gaol visitation was under-
taken by the General Committee.
As early as 1888 the Annual Report deplores the
great disadvantage under which the Association labours
“in not having a place to which they could invite those
who must spend their days in close application to work,”
and stresses the urgent need for bright, comfortable rooms
open every night.
During this first decade a policy of decentralisation
was adopted, and branches of the Young Women’s Chris-
tian Association were established at Waterloo, Alexandria,
Ashfield, North Shore, Bowral, Forbes, and Orange.


1890
1900
An important development in 1890 was the
establishment of an employment agency ; (a)
for governesses, (b) for domestics. This
agency did excellent work until 1915, when
it was disbanded as other offices seemed to be meeting
the need, and new Association departments were being
established and required help.
Early in this decade we find the Association interests
extending beyond its own borders to other lands. The
old record reads : “Feeling there was a danger of be-
coming self-centred, and believing there should be no
variation between home and foreign work, it was decided
to form a Foreign Mission Branch, and the first Y.W.C.A.
missionary from New South Wales was sent to China.
This decade witnessed also the formation of an
Association Building Fund, so that the dream of a home
of its own might one day be realised. The policy of de-
centralisation went on, and branches were formed at
Surry Hills, Redfern, Hay, Gundaroo, Mudgee, Wagga,
Pyrmont, Strathfield, Windsor, Burwood, Parramatta,
Cootamundra, Manly, Berry, St. Leonards, Coogee, Ers-
kineville, and Marrickville.
Depression in 1893. —This had a serious effect upon
Association funds. We read of salary reductions and
rooms given up. “Early in the year it became evident
that if the work was to be carried on at all, it could only
be done under altered conditions—the present expenses
being beyond the income of the Association, reduced as
it was through the general depression.” Loma House
was given up and rooms found at 49 Phillip Street. The
serious financial position led to the establishment of a
Relief Fund, subscribers being Association members and
friends, the money being used to help deserving cases
of need. This Relief Fund has never closed, and is con-
stantly being called upon by girls in distress.


The first junior Branch was formed at Ashfield, for
girls between eleven and fourteen years..
In the report of 1898'1899 we find an interesting
development, under the heading of “Y.W.C.A. Extension,”
in the words, “for a long time the Committee have felt
that their work has been to a large extent one-sided, and
that Social and Educational efforts have been greatly
neglected.” An Extension Committee was formed, and as
the Waterloo and Alexandria branch of the Association
had just handed over its property to the General Com-
mittee, it was decided to appeal for funds to furnish a
club'room. The appeal was generously responded to,
and the first club-room owned by the Association was
opened, where girls could meet each evening, and classes
were held regularly for Bible study, cookery, and needle-
work.
The first Intercolonial Conference was held in
August, 1895, when Miss Reynolds, World’s Secretary,
was present and tendered to the Australian Association
the first greetings sent by the World’s Association to any
conference. Modern development dates from her visit,
when the work was organized into departments, namely,
Evangelistic, Factory Helpers' Union, Foreign Missionary
Department, Travellers’ Aid, Total Abstinence Union,
Home Missions.
1900
1910
The opening of this decade witnessed the
removal of the Young Women’s Christian
Association from 49 Phillip Street ; the In-
stitute had to be given up for the time, and
rooms were taken in the Queen Victoria Markets for
Office, Governess Agency, and a new department con-
sisting of Rest and Luncheon Room.
Shortly afterwards the Building Fund was sufficiently
large to enable the purchase to be made of a block of
land in Castlereagh Street.


Branches were formed at Glebe, Wahroonga, and
Leichhardt.
On November 13, 1902, the foundation-stone of an
Association building was laid by Lady Rawson, and Sep-
tember 7, 1903, saw the opening of the new building by
His Excellency the State Governor. The dream of
twenty-three years was fulfilled. The Young Women’s
Christian Association of Sydney had a building of its own.
The Institute was re-opened under the name of “The
Home.” The spacious gymnasium was fitted up as a rest
and luncheon room, to take the place of the one vacated
in the Queen Victoria Markets.
The name of the Missionary Committee was changed
to Membership Committee.
A Guild of Helpers was formed with the following
objectives in view :
(1) To unite girls of education and leisure who
are willing to use their gifts for the service
of God ;
(2) To encourage personal development, both
spiritual and social ;
(3) To provide a spirit of love and service among
girls ;
(4) To enlist helpers for the general work of the
Y.W.C.A.
A Domestic Training Department was also organised.
1906. The magazine of the English Association, “The
Gazette,” was localised under the name of “Our Own
Gazette.”
1907 was a most important year in Australian Asso-
ciation life, for the fourth Australian Conference (pre-
viously called Intercolonial) was held in Sydney, when
Miss Clarissa Spencer, World’s Secretary, was present,
and the National Y.W.C.A. of Australasia was formed.
The hope that this would consolidate and unify the work


of the various Associations has been more than justified.
The headquarters were established in Sydney.
Ashfield, in 1907, became an independent Associa-
tion.
1909. Sydney Association undertook to train students
for Y.W.C.A. work. This year witnessed the decision
of Sydney to support the Foreign Department of the
National Y.W.C.A. in its work in India, and individual
mission efforts were given up and the whole Foreign Mis-
sion help was concentrated on the National Foreign De-
partment, or, as it was called later, the World Fellow-
ship Department.
This year the departments of the Association appear
under General, Spiritual, Educational, Physical, and
Social.
1910
1920
The era of building campaigns began. The
first was held in 1910, and the second in 1912,
to raise £20,000 for new headquarters, the
work having already outgrown the Castle-
reagh Street building.
The first National Training School was held in Syd-
ney.
Lyons Terrace, consisting of three houses (among
the oldest in the city), was purchased in Liverpool Street,
The name of the Missionary Committee was changed
to Foreign Work Committee, and the Sydney Association
decided, in addition to supporting the National Associ-
ation in India, to help the national work in China.
Departments. —These appear as Religious, Social,
and Industrial, Membership, Educational, House, and Res-
taurant.
The Hearth-Fire Movement was established by the
National Association for teen-age girls, with the object
of helpfulness, health, and happiness. A
Hearth-Fire came into being in Sydney in 1913.


The first Outdoor Club, the Ramblers’ Club, was
formed in 1913, its programme including rowing and
walking.
This year witnessed also the separation of the general
work of the Association from the boarding home, the latter
remaining at Castlereagh Street and the former was re-
moved to the new administrative headquarters in Liver-
pool Street.
The appeal of the out-of-doors is heard more clearly
and a Swimming Club and Rowing Club were formed,
also Holiday Camps were introduced.
A Social Service Club was established, and a Hostel
was opened at Liverpool Street,
In 1913 a Cafeteria was opened in Liverpool Street,
and the Employment Bureau was closed.
1914 brought a new element into Association life,
and the girls rose splendidly to meet the challenge of the
day to help in war work.
A Demonstration, “The Story of the War,” a silent
drama, held in the Sydney Town Hall, was responsible
for raising £2ll for the Soldiers’ Comforts Fund. A
repetition of this raised a further sum of £lO5 for the
Red Cross, £lO5 for the Y.M.C.A. Field Service, and
£55 for the Australia Day Fund.
The Australian League of Honour was initiated by
the National Y.W.C.A. and Sydney Association formed
the N.S.W. Divisional Council.
This Council held all its meetings at the Y.W.C.A.
headquarters, the Association having 105 out of the
1,500 members in N.S.W. At the conclusion of the War
the League of Honour donated its funds to Association
work, and asked them to file the League of Honour
records.
Knitting Circles were formed, and were responsible
for hundreds of pairs of socks for the soldiers.


Collection boxes were used for the Y.M.C.A. Field
Service and the Belgian Fund.
A War Emergency Working Circle was organized,
its object being to have girls in readiness to answer
emergency calls from war sewing societies.
An appeal from the Y.M.C.A. for support for Red
Triangle Day met with a ready response, and on the
Street Day organized on June 1, 1917, the Blue Triangle
stall contributed £230 towards the amount raised.
Entertainment of Soldiers was carried on when the
men from Liverpool Camp had many a jolly evening in
the Castlereagh Street Hall.
A Red Cross Sewing Circle was formed, and did
excellent work.
1918. Sydney Association raised £250 for a Hut for
the use of the Women’s Auxiliary Army Corps in France,
and sent £27 for Relief Work among the girls of Europe.
These years of war were busy ones, and many were
the activities of the Association.
Everybody’s Club, the first Association Club man-
aged by a combined committee of Y.M.C.A. and Y.W.C.A.,
was formed. Its activities were purely social ;it met once
a month and proved exceedingly popular.
The Hearth-Fire Movement was merged into the
Australian Girls’ Club, and groups were established at
Hunter’s Hill, Manly, Rozelle, Newtown, Kogarah, Chats-
wood, Balmain, Rockdale, making, with the two at head-
quarters, twelve in all, with a membership of 683.
1915. A Club for Overseas Girls was formed, called
“The British Maidens’ Club, and a spirit of friendliness
shown to lonely girls away from their own land and
friends. This Club lapsed in 1920, but was re-formed as
the Union Jack Club and still continues to meet weekly.
Thrift, established as far back as 1904 with the object
of persuading girls engaged in industry to save, was de-


veloped more fully in 1915, and many new centres were
formed.
The Fourth Australasian Convention was held in
Sydney, October 5-11, 1916.
1917. An important piece of extension work was
accomplished when the Blue Triangle Club Room was
opened in Kent Street. The Association, some months
previously, had been approached by some leading ware-
housemen, and asked to open a luncheon room in their
vicinity for business girls. Messrs. Sargood Bros., Gar-
diner & Co., Robert Reid, and John Keep & Sons, gener-
ously guaranteed the rental for three years, and two
Board members lent money for equipment. After much
searching a suitable building was found in Kent Street,
a cafeteria was opened on the third floor, and a com-
fortable rest-room furnished by the Guild of Helpers on
the ground floor.
1918-1919. The Annual Report begins thus : “Per-
haps no year in our Australian history has seen such
extremes of joy and sorrow as has the year 1918-1919.
The signing of the Armistice was the signal for expres-
sions of joy and thanksgiving so genuine and spontaneous
that one could never quite lose the sense of uplift that
came to all who shared in them. Following very closely
on this great day of national thanksgiving came the be-
ginnings of the influenza epidemic, and the first six months
of 1919 have been dark indeed.”
This was a period of disorganization throughout the
Association, for if members were not themselves ill, they
were nursing others. Leaders were busy doing V.A.D.
emergency work ; cafeteria helpers had to withdraw their
services temporarily ; Thrift collectors could not visit the
factories ; secretaries were fully occupied with nursing or
relief work, or doing double duty in the office to make up
for those who were ill.


Although everything was done to keep things as
normal as possible, there was inevitably much time lost,
and tremendous arrears to be made up.
1918. The Association was registered as a limited
company, called the Young Women’s Christian Association
of Sydney.
1919. The Castlereagh Street property was sold for
£16,715, and within a few months the Hostel was vacated,
and the Cafeteria removed to the Blue Triangle Club room.
1919. A Finance Campaign was undertaken to raise
funds for a Central Administrative Building and Hostel.
The objective was £20,000, of which £14,314 was realised,
and a second campaign the following year raised an
additional £13,137.
1920
1930
1920. A Housing Bureau was established
which has proved of great value to girls seek-
ing suitable and safe residence. It is still
conducted through our Hospitality and Migra-
tion Committee.
Our first suburban Hostel, “Tremayne,” Kirribilli,
was opened on April 1, 1920, and a few days later the
second suburban Hostel, “St. Elmo,” Waverley, was
rented and furnished in three days, in order to be ready for
the first arrivals of ex-service girls under the Govern-
ment scheme. This was made possible through the gen-
erosity and public spirit of an anonymous Englishman.
During the first year “St. Elmo” accommodated 600
girls. In October, 1921, the lease expired, and as the
Hostel could not accommodate a sufficient number to make
it self-supporting, it was decided to close it.
The third house in Lyons Terrace, at first let as a
boarding-house, was now taken over for administrative
offices, club and class rooms, and additional Hostel space.
The three years’ lease of the Kent Street property
fell due in 1920, and the rent was guaranteed for a further


three years by Messrs. Sargood Bros., John Keep & Sons,
Ltd., D. W. Murray, Ltd., Robert Reid & Co., Ltd., and
two of our Board members.
The Industrial Department used the Blue Triangle
Club Room as headquarters, and the Cafeteria continued
to be most popular.
The Girl Citizen Movement was adopted as an ex-
periment in the Girls’ Department. The Code to which
Girl Citizens strive to be loyal is :
The Ist Civic Law is the Law of Health.
The 2nd „ „ „ „ „ Self-control.
The 3rd „ „ „ „ „ Self-respect.
The 4th „ „ „ „ „ Knowledge.
The sth „ „ „ „ „ Honour.
The 6th „ „ „ „ „ Co-operation.
The 7th „ „ „ „ „ Courage.
The Bth „ „ „ „ „ Duty.
Love is the fulfilling of the Law.
The Industrial Department was re-organised in 1920,
and an attempt made to meet the needs of girls in in-
dustry.
The first Girl Guide Company was formed in the
Association in 1923, and lasted till 1927, when it was de-
cided to concentrate upon the Girl Citizen Movement.
A house in Commonwealth Street was taken as an
overflow hostel.
1923, it was possible, after long years of waiting, to
commence the new administrative building. Lyons Ter-
race was vacated, the offices and Hostel being removed to
25 Commonwealth Street. Through the courtesy of the
trustees of the Congregational Church, Bourke Street, the
school-hall was granted for a year (this was extended to
1926), rent free, the Association being responsible for the
caretaking and cleaning of the premises. The Kinder-
garten Union generously placed several halls at our dis-


posal for night use, and we were able to carry on our
work. The lease of the Kent Street building terminated
this year, and it was decided to close the Blue Triangle
Club Room and transfer the industrial club work to the
Kindergarten Hall at Surry Hills.
1925. The foundation-stone of Sydney’s new build-
ing was laid on the 18th June by Her Excellency Lady
Forster.
1926. The building was officially opened by Lady
Stonehaven on the sth May, and the “house of dreams”
was at last a happy realization. Sydney had a building
worthy of the great work it was destined to do.
It was in this decade that the Association realised the
large place sport is taking in the life of the Australian
girl, and sports were organized, first under the aegis of
the Physical Education Department, established in its
present form in 1927, then as a Sports Section. In
1929 it was found best to amalgamate the Indoor and
Sports Sections of the senior girls into one Department,
each having its own Council, and sending representatives
from these to the Senior Department Committee. This
works well. The Girls’ Department has its own Sports
Section.
1927. the name of the Association magazine was
changed to “The Doorway ”
In this year also the Government Savings Bank took
over the Thrift Account, and thus relieved the Association
of much responsibility.
1926 witnessed the separation of New Zealand from
Australia in the National Organization, and the removal
of National Headquarters from Sydney, where they had
been since 1907, to Melbourne.
1927, Sydney Association was privileged to be repre-
sented at Canberra on the occasion of the visit of their
Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of York. For


some time the National Association had been negotiating
with the Federal Capital Commission for a permanent site
for a Y.W.C.A. in the Federal Territory, so when the
official opening of the Federal Parliament took place in
May, Sydney represented the National Association and
erected two large marquees—one for a rest-tent, and the
other for a refreshment buffet—on the hill opposite
ment House. This served the public and acted as pub-
licity for the Y.W.C.A.
1929, the Association awoke to its obligations to-
wards girls of other nationalities in our city, and with the
approval and sympathy of many of the Consuls resident
in Sydney, our International Club was formed. English
classes are held in connection with this club.
The visit of Yuki Kimura San, a Japanese Secretary,
to our country in 1929, did much to cement happy re-
lationships between Associations in Australia and Japan.
Kimura San worked on the staffs of our larger Associ-
ations, and exerted a beautiful spiritual influence wherever
she went.
In the handsome building facing Hyde Park, with its
spacious Entrance Lounge and Enquiry Office, well-
equipped Club-rooms, Board and Committee rooms, Audi-
torium, Hostel and Lounges, Cafeteria, Gymnasium, Roof
Garden, the Association has excellent equipment for its
work. This has grown in every way, and the following
figures from the 1930 report give some idea of what has
been accomplished.
THE ASSOCIATION TO-DAY.
Enquiry Desk has answered 121,180 enquiries, dealt with
42,384 letters, received and delivered mail to 321
overseas girls.
Liverpool Street Hostel has accommodated 8,372 girls
during the year.


“Tremayne” Hostel has accommodated 120 girls ; has in
permanent residence 46 girls.
Cafeteria has served, during the year, 136,525 meals ; has
catered for many entertainments.
Physical Education Department has enrolled 380 students.
Remedial work is proving an important part of our
Physical Education Department.
Thrift Clubs —in factories, 22 ; in Y.W.C.A. Clubs, 20 ;
in Y.W.C.A. Sports Groups, 3 ; amount of deposits
for the year £7,375.
World Fellowship has contributed £2lB/10/- towards
the support of our Secretaries in India and Japan ;
has carried through an educational programme by
means of the World’s Week of Prayer and Group
meetings.
Senior Department has—girls in clubs, 216 ; girls in
classe,s, 177 ; girls in sports groups, 649.
Girls’ Department —girls enrolled, 375.
Travellers’ Aid —trains met during the year, 2,240 ; boats
met during the year, 404 ; persons helped during the
year, 1,374.
Relief Work.—A class for unemployed typistes and sten-
ographers has been held, free of charge, since August,
1930, to enable girls to keep up their speed. This
has been much appreciated. The enrolment is at
present 120. Several members have secured good
positions.
A Soup Kitchen was opened in 1930 to distribute
free soup and bread to men and women out of work.
This gives help daily to about 200.


Many girls out of work have been given free accomo-
dation and meals, until positions can be found for
them.
Many of our clubs undertake definite social work,
sending parcels of clothing to missions and gifts to
children in Homes at Christmas-time. One club has
adopted a child.
As one reads through the records, certain trends are
observed :
(1) The gradual policy of centralisation : the thirty-
three Association branches that once were linked up with
the centre have closed or else are independent. Of the
junior branches there are but two—Rozelle and Longue-
ville.
(2) The diminution of educational classes. As it
became evident that this need was being met by other
organizations, such as Continuation Schools, Workers’
Educational Association, Technical College, the Associ-
ation decided to hold classes only when the need for
such was apparent.
(3) The absence of a definite Religious Work De-
partment. More and more the Association has come to
see that the whole must be spiritual in its basis, and
although special groups meet for definite Bible Study and
Sunday afternoon services are held, our spiritual work
must be done in clubs, classes, and all departments.
(4) Recognition of the value of Mothers’ Clubs, at
which the mothers of girl members may meet together
to discuss problems that their daughters are facing. Both
Senior and Girls’ Departments have to-day Mothers’ Clubs
meeting regularly, the members of which are loyal sup'
porters of the Association.


(5) The establishment and multiplication of self-
governing clubs. In the early days of our Association
life, planning was done by leaders for the girls in the
quiet and accepted assurance that the leaders knew best ;
but with the emergence into prominence of girls and
women, there has come a new view-point. To-day we
regard our Association as a co-operation in which each
contributes what she has to give in the pursuit of a com-
mon purpose. We are recognising, as never before, that
if girls are to grow they must shoulder responsibility and
be given the opportunity for self-expression and self-
development.
(6) The increasing demand for camps and confer-
ences. A few days in camp often does more in cement-
ing friendship and giving a realization of Association
ideals than many weeks at clubs and classes. Local con-
ferences, National conferences and conventions are the
best means of education along Association lines, and in
the furtherance of the idea of “one-ness” in our work.
The history of the Association bears witness to the
fine work given by volunteer workers through the years—
women who have been willing to give of their time,
interest, and money to further the aims of the Associ-
ation. Without them it would have been impossible to
accomplish so much, and in times of financial stress like
the present, it would have been quite impossible to carry
on many of our Departments.
The records reveal the courage and faith of the
pioneer builders who have handed to us a goodly heritage.
Now we face the future and embark on a new epoch
of service.
Ways and customs alter with the years, new times
demand new ways.


The girl of to-day is confronted by problems un-
known to past generations ; a freedom undreamt of in
the days of the Association’s beginning is hers. Many
are disillusioned, dissatisfied, seeking something, they
know not what.
Is our Association sufficiently adaptable to meet the
need ? That is the question we must face.
We must examine ourselves and see clearly what
is our aim.
Our aim is educational, and education does not mean
the formation of classes and attendance at them. It is
used in its highest sense. The kind of education aimed at
is that which creates a desire to advance step by step,
and recognises the fact that no human being can attain
the highest without continual training and development.
The educational aim of the Association is, first, character-
building, to enable girls to find an experience in life that
will satisfy, that will make their lives complete ; to work
out together, through a spirit of co-operation and under-
standing, the highest development of young womanhood ;
to evolve the highest type of citizenship in the age in which
we live.
Secondly, our aim is to develop leadership, and within
the manifold activities of the Association there is room
and need for leaders.
Our aim is to really feel that each one of us who
belongs to the Y.W.C.A. belongs to a great fellowship
of girls and women, for to know that one is working side
by side with others who are facing the same problems
in life gives strength and courage.
Our aim is to extend that fellowship beyond our
local borders till it recognises a national fellowship, and


then stretches far out beyond that to link up with a great
fellowship of women and girls throughout the whole
world.
Our Association is international, our membership
embraces girls and women of all lands, races, and classes,
and our opportunity is unsurpassed of bringing about
happy international understanding.
Internationalism is becoming more and more part
of our Association education. We are realizing that not
only are our own lives enriched by increased knowledge
of other nations, but that the interchange of ideas is one
of the greatest aids to world peace.
Our greatest aim is implied in our title. We seek to
follow Him, the one Perfect Example of life and living ;
as Ruth Niven (World’s Secretary) said, “We of a
Christian organization feel that the cohesion of our move-
ment rests on something deeper than the thrill of imagina-
tion or even of devotion to a common cause. We believe
that we are united in the deepest things in our experience
of God and of His way with human life ; our fellowship
tends to have a warm quality, as of those who have lived
through some great personal experience together.”


“Farewell I It is a road-mender’s word, I cry you
God-speed to the next milestone —and beyond


THE WORLD’S Y.W.C.A.
Headquarters : 2 Rue Daniel Colladon, Geneva.
Made up of Association in 54 countries, with a membership
of one and a quarter millions.
Sydney’s links with the World’s Office are :
Sydney’s President is a member of the Executive of the
World’s Y.W.C.A.
Australia, whenever possible, is represented at the
World’s Conferences.
In November of each year Sydney, with all other affili-
ated Associations, observes the World’s Week of
Prayer.
NATIONAL Y.W.C.A. OF AUSTRALIA.
Headquarters: 145 Collins Street, Melbourne, C-1.
ASSOCIATIONS AFFILIATED WITH THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION.
Canberra : Civic Centre.
Townsville : Municipal Buildings, Flinders Street.
Rockhampton : Bulletin Buildings, Quay Street.
Brisbane : 278 Adelaide Street.
Sydney : 189 Liverpool Street.
Newcastle : Y.M.C.A. Building, King Street.
Melbourne : 60 Russell Street.
Geelong : 14 Malop Street.
BcndigO' : Howard Place, Pall Mall.
Mildura : Cr. Madden Avenue and Tenth Street.
Adelaide : Hindmarsh Square.
Hobart: 134 Macquarie Street.
Perth : 16 St. George’s Terrace.


PRESIDENTS.
1880—1930.
Mrs. Barry .... 1881
Lady Stuart 1882—1884
Mrs. J. H. Goodlet 1887-1902
Lady Renwick 1903—1909
Mrs. E. H. Sully 1909—1914
Mrs. J. B. Nicholson 1917—1916
Miss Heard 1916^-1917
Mrs. C. T. Newman (Acting) 1917—1918
Miss Vickery (Acting) 1924
Mrs. R. H. Nesbitt (Acting) 1927
Miss L. M. Fowler 1919
VICE-PRESIDENTS.
Lady Manning .. .. 1907-1912
Lady Fairfax 1907-1927
Mrs. E. H. Sully .. 1907-1917
Mrs. McClelland .. .. 1907-1924
Mrs. B. Palmer .. .. 1907-1917
Mrs. T. J. Thompson 1907-1910
Mrs. H. C. Dangar .. 1908-1913
Mrs. Andrew Harper 1908-1913
Mrs. C. T. Newman 1911
Mrs. R. Chadwick .. 1913-1920
Mrs. F. C. Roberts .. 1913-1916
Miss Heard 1914-1916
Miss Mullens 1917-1916
Miss Vickery 1917
Mrs. F. E. Miller .. .. 1916-1918
Mrs. Newby Fraser .. 1916- / 1926
Mrs. Joseph Vickery 1916-1922
Mrs. L. M. Pattinson 1916-1919
Miss Ivy Hanson .. 1916-1929
Mrs. Pennington .. .. 1929
Mrs. N. J. Cocks .. 1921-1924
Mrs. R. H. Nesbitt .. 1921-1927
Miss H. D. Newbery 1923
Mrs. W. E. Bennett .. 1928
HONORARY SECRETARIES.
Miss Mitchell 1882-1883
Mrs. Robert Chadwick 1883—1886
Miss Manning .... 1886
Mrs. Tregarthen , .... 1887—1888
Miss Morgan 1889—1890
Mrs. Dovey 1892
Miss Rennie 1892—1903
Miss Sydney Jones 1904-1907
Miss Mullens 1906—1909
Miss Pickard 1910—1911
M ss L. M. Fowler 1912—1919
M'ss H. D. Newbery 1920—1923
Miss A. E. Quaife 1923-1927
Miss H. D. Newbery (Corresponding) 1927
Mrs. John Macrae, B.A. (Recording) 1927
Mrs. A. H. Austin (Recording) 1926—1928
Miss Lillian Vickery (Recording) 1928


Lady Manning 1882—1900
Mrs. E. H. Sully 1900—1910
Miss French 1910—1911
Mrs. L. M. Pattinson 1908—1909 and 1912—1915
Mr. E. H. Sully 1912—1915
Mr. R. H. Nesbitt 1918
GENERAL SECRETARIES.
Miss Laura Smith .... 1881-1882
Miss Fox 1882-1892
Mrs. Dovey (Honorary) ’ 1893
Miss Bayley 1895-1898
Mrs. Hales 1899
Miss Mayers 1900—1903
Miss S. B. Heard 1904-1905
» » (Honorary) 1906
Miss E. L. Meager 1907—1912
Miss Mary B. Hill 1912
Miss Amy Snelson 1914—1915
Mrs. A. H. Austin, M.A 1916-1917
Miss A. M. Bignell 1917—1920
Miss L. Soundy 1920—1923
Miss E. S. Reed (Acting) 1923-1925
Miss Josephine F. Lynch, B.A 1925-1928
Mrs. A. H. Austin, M.A 1928


Y.W.C.A. COMMUNITY AFFILIATIONS.
Y.W.C.A. has two representatives on the National Council
of Women and one on the Executive of that body.
Y.W.C.A. is represented on the Executive of the Insti-
tute of Industrial Psychology.
Y.W.C.A. is represented on the Executive of the Board
of Social Study and Training.
Y.W.C.A. is represented on the United Missionary Council.
Y.W.C.A. is represented on the Executive of the Young
People’s Temperance Society of N.S.W.
Y.W.C.A. has two representatives on the Travellers’ Aid
Executive.
Y.W.C.A. is represented on the Good Film League./
Y.W.C.A. is represented on the State Sub-Committee of
the Australian Pan-Pacific Women’s Association.
Y.W.C.A. is affiliated with the League of Nations Council.
“A milestone is not for sitting on —
Its chief use is to show you how far you still have to go.”
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by D. S. Ford, 44-50 Reservoir Street,
Sydney.




