

'l'flC
httf-lo




■




NORTHERN TERRITORY
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
ANNUAL
Report of the Government Resident,
WITH
Report by Rev. J. E. Tenison Woods,
F.G.8., F.L.S., Etc.,
ON THE
Geology and yVL inef^alogt
OF THE TERRITORY.
BY AUTHORITY : H. F. LEADER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH-TERRACE.
1888.




ai-i.T
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
GOVERNMENT RESIDENT’S REPORT ON NORTHERN
TERRITORY
FOR THE YEAR 1887
PASTORAL.
The year 1887 has marked a decided advance in the progress and
stability of pastoral enterprise. This is shown not so much by the
increased area of land under lease, as by the area declared to he stocked.
The wild speculative taking up of thousands of square miles at sixpence
per square mile rent by persons who were entirely unconnected with
squatting, who never intended to he squatters, has bad its natural
Teaction. As the period for declaring the leases stocked drew to a close,
and renewals were only granted to those who had made bond fide efforts
to place stock upon the country they held, these speculative holders were
compelled to relinquish great areas which had been locked against
legitimate enterprise for periods varying from three to five years. The
total area declared to be stocked up to December 31st, 1887, is 200,817
square miles, which leaves 331,385 miles without a hoof or horn. The
area declared stocked on December 31st, 1886, was 183,883 square
miles, which shows an increase in stocking to the extent of 16,934
square miles. The estimated number of sheep is 80,513, of horned
cattle 190,427, of horses 7,853, making a gross total of stock of all kinds
in the Northern Territory 278,792.
The real progress in the pastoral industry is indicated by the increased
confidence of the pioneer lessees in the extensive improvements under-
taken in the comparatively large number of cattle droved successfully to
southern markets from even as far north as the shores of the Gulf of
Carpentaria, and in the direct introduction of English capital, by the
formation of the North Australian Territory Company, to develop the
■extensive leasehold and freehold properties held by Mr. C. B. Fisher.
This last event marks the beginning of a new epoch in Northern
Territory pastoral occupation. Hitherto the northern portion of the
Territory has been depending almost entirely upon the enterprise and
capital of the eastern colonies, Dr. Brown and Messrs. Tennant &. Love
being the two chief exceptions. In securing the active co-operation of
English investors who possess large city connections, after most careful
investigation on their part of the freehold land and leases, the suitability


of the soil and climate for stock breeding and fattening and cultivation
has received a signal confirmation. For this, as for the successful
stocking of the north coast of Australia, the honor is due to Mr. C. B.
Fisher. The freehold land of the company is 40,772 acres, and the
gross leasehold area 34,000 square miles, of which it is probable 10,000
square miles will be surrendered.
During the period in which the negotiations for the sale of’ these
properties were carried through, the work of development and stocking
was energetically prosecuted. Mr. H. W. H. Stevens, J.P., the general
manager, informs me that a line of fencing, thirty miles in length towards
the Adelaide river, and another of fifty miles going in an easterly
direction, both starting from Glencoe, have been erected. The easterly
line will ultimately be taken out to the Alligator rivers, and enclose
10,000 square miles of pastoral country. At the head waters of the
Alligator rivers a new station, named Gerowoo, the native name of the
creek on which the homestead is built, has been established. Gerowoo
is about seventy miles east of Glencoe. Eighteen hundred breeding
cattle have been placed upon it.
Since his return from London, where he assisted Mr. Murray Smith
in floating the North Australian Territory Company, Mr. Stevens has
visited Java and Singapore, and has found in both islands a good market
for Australian fat cattle.
On receiving the sanction of the London board of directors, shipping
operations will immediately commence. The place of shipment will be
at the Beatrice Hills, where 5,000 acres have been fenced into small
paddocks for the reception of fat cattle from the back country, and
where, also, shipping yards and wharf are being erected.
I am informed that a number of our northern squatters are making
arrangements to pass their stock through the company’s hands, ft
appears obvious that co-operation in securing and developing a market
for fat cattle in the East is better than rival enterprises and the severe
competition that almost invariably follows. Of the general condition of
the stock on the runs, the increase, and the seasons, the reports are very
satisfactory. Nearly all the information obtainable with reference to
the other stations is embodied in the report of the Stock Inspector (Mr.
E. H. Whitelaw), which I place in the body of my report. The only
additional items are that Mr. W. F. Buchanan has visited England with
a view of disposing of his valuable leases and stock on the Victoria river ;
and that Messrs. Osmand & Panton, in addition to pushing on the
development of their western country, have purchased the Elsey station.
I have obtained from Mr. Hugh Heber Percy, of Queensland, a very
graphic account of the Florida station, which has been established on
Glyde’s Inlet. It forms a valuable addition to our knowledge of
Arnheims land both for pastoral and agricultural pursuits.
Writing to me under date of December 10th, 1887, Mr. Heber Percy
says:—
Having been asked to give you the impressions that I have received during this my
first visit to the Northern Territory of South Australia, I am very pleased to do so.
After a delay of about three weeks, Mr. Macartney and I steamed away from here
in the s.s. Active, owned by Mr. Millar. We found ourselves on the morning of
Monday, the 31st October, about twenty miles up Glyde’s Inlet, at what is known as
Carrington’s landing, about eight or nine miles from Florida head station, and were
met by the manager (Mr. Eandell) with horses to take us tip to the station.


The country going up Glycle’s Inlet was generally by plains, which are thickly
grassed, and on which I hear the _ stock thrive extremely well. These plains, the soil
on some of which is good, deteriorating towards the coast line, are bordered on the
one side with a narrow belt of mangrove scrub along the inlet, with now and then a
patch of vine scrub with feather palms and Leiohardt trees ; and on the other, the west
side, with ridges through which run good creeks, some, if not all, starting from springs
having in their course large clear waterholes, with pink lillies, looking both picturesque
and permanent. Ihere is no timber on the plains ; but in the ridges on the tableland
behind we saw much fine timber, including pine, though I did not see a great quantity
of the latter, but here it is considerable. The country hereabouts is all good coast cattle
country, carrying the usual coast grasses, and make a grand resort for the cattle in
heavy wet, being sound and sometimes sandy. Further to the north-west of the Green
spring, near the mouth of Glyde’s Inlet, say some twenty miles, you get on to first
low-lying paper-bark country, sometimes with a dry swampy appearance; and then
on to very large plains, some three miles wide by eight miles long, of good soil and
well grassed, and bordered on the west side by some sort of palm trees growing in
beautifully rich soil, and carrying very rich grasses, with here and there an acre or so
of thick vine scrub. .Near here we saw two fine banyan trees ; one a very handsome
tree, with quite a roofed room in the centre. This good country runs on to the west,
I bear, for some five miles, till you reach some fine lagoons, extending for miles—
these, however, I had no time to see—and then stretches away to the Blyth river.
During the day we explored this country. We came upon a small camp of blacks,
and later in the day surprised some others. They all ran like red shanks, leaving their
possessions behind. I never saw anything before approaching to the number and size
of the pads formed hereabouts by the blacks, all worn bare, through long grass, and
evidently constantly used, and branching away frequently in different directions.
These pads, we noticed, were much patronised by the Blue Swamp buffalo. They
are very curious in their habits; “walking enormous distances, always on pads, if they
can, and walking, seemingly, for the pleasure of doing so ; refreshing themselves and
freeing themselves of mosquitoes and flies by walking now and again in a muddy
claypan.
Biding up near and parallel to Glyde’s Inlet, starting from the Green spring towards
the station, that is, about south, one crosses large plains of good soil bordered on the
west by ridges, at the foot of which grow palm trees, with springs and swamps of
good water dotted about, then through a narrow belt of scrub. After this we went
through a mile or so of poor country fairly grassed on to two other plains like the
former ones, and into the west side of one of these plains runs a creek. Mr. Eandell
took us up one branch for some distance to show us where the water fails over a high
rock into a pretty, clear pool, surrounded on three sides by high rock, under one side
of which is a sort of cave, formed, I supposed, by a large piece of the rock having
become detached, but looking as if it had been cut out from the height of eighteen
inches from the ground to about nine or ten feet. At the back of this the blacks had
made some very curious drawings in ochre, one represented an alligator, another a
centipede. The alligator one could recognise at once hy his extensive set of teeth,
there were other drawings too that we could not make out.
Riding up to the top of a bare ridge near here we had a grand view of the country
on the east side of Glyde’s Inlet towards the Goyder;. it was a fine sight, beautifully
green plains divided from one another by low single bald ridges, and stretching away
east and south for many miles. In the distance to the south-east we could see the
dark rich green of the timber on Nelson’s lagoon; also that of the station lagoon.
Riding on south towards the station the track runs through a teatree dry swamp, and
so on to the ridge on which the head station is placed. The head station is very prettily
situated, standing out on the point of a ridge sloping down to a fine horseshoe-shape
lagoon. The buildings are good and comfortable, the yards are large, well planned,
and gated throughout, and there are two good paddocks, the one round the homestead
being secured on three sides by the lagoon; along the banks of the latter there are
some handsome feather palms, fig trees, and Leichardt trees. The lagoon is swarming
with fish of various kinds. I went out in a large Malay canoe they have on it, and
being paddled about through the lilies I speared over twenty fish—a sort of cod—in a
short time, and had I not been a novice at the work might have speared many more.
I speared two at one shot. The number of geese that we saw passing over the station
at flight-time was very great, from the horizon to the west to the horizon to the east,
as far as the eye could reach, for about half an hour there were continued flocks of


from two to 150 flying southward. The garden, which is near the lagoon, is a capital
one, having all sorts of fruit and vegetables, mulberries, melons, pineapples, pawpaws,
mangoes, bananas, passion fruit, figs, lemons, oranges, &c.; they have over 700 pine-
apple plants, and we were assured that pineapple tops, not suckers, that were planted
had borne fruit within live and a half months. In Qiieensland pine tops take eighteen
months or two years to hear fruit.
Eiding across to the east from the station we crossed over large plains, some partly
flooded, carrying a heavy growth of wild rice, and these, the Chinese working on the
station said, were admirably suited for growing cultivated rice, and that they had seen
no soil so good in China for growing that crop. The dry plains were of a very rich
soil, carrying rich grasses, &c. We rode on to Nelson’s lagoon, which is shaped some-
thing like the letter T- hut so continued at one side that a splendid paddock of about
two miles by three could he made by fencing about half a mile. On the far side of the
lagoon, and with a short slope directly into it, is a ridge, which seems a capital site for
a house.
Nelson’s lagoon is very fine and deep, and has pink lilies and a floating weed like a
small cabbage, which is continually drifting backwards and forwards with the wind.
We saw beautiful feather palms, Leichardt trees, and fig trees along its hanks. We
could hear the blacks shouting at us from the other side in a patch of scrub, hut could
not see them. We also saw a tree on which they had cut the figure of a man.
Going south from the station we had to keep to the west of largo rice plains and
teatree swamps, the former of which the cattle are very fond of, and get very fat on.
The wild rice grows so thick that, although water may he lying on the surface of the
ground, and although the blades of rice are all quite green, still, when set fire to he
low the green surface, where it is matted, it burns fiercely, and is wholly burnt up.
Within a fortnight it again springs up beautifully green.
Some ten miles south from the station is Mount Delight, mentioned by Mr. David
Lindsay, which is surrounded by richly grassed country. It lies near hut separate
from the edge of the tableland which runs all along to the west of the plains. This
tableland is ten miles in width opposite the station, crossing which you find Eururya
creek, which I believe is always running ; and from there, fifteen miles, is the Myth
river. About opposite Mount Delight, going west, we rode about half a mile over
tableland, and then got on to one of the heads of the Myth river. Until you reach
the Myth, the country is fairly grassed, but not so rich ; but on the Elyth, which has
fine reaches of water on it, and always continues running, the country is very good,
with rich plains on it of good soil and good forest country. From Mount Delight,
continuing south, we crossed through ten miles of forest country, well grassed, with
here and there a paper-bark swamp; and then turning east crossed in a couple of miles
Capsize creek, in which we found water, but not running.
The country was good forest country carrying good grasses ; from there we rode
south-east about eight miles over mixed plains and forest country on to Boggy creek,
which runs continually, and is very boggy, and then on some four miles through rich
soil plains carrying rich grasses, and good forest country, till we reached the Crescent
lagoon and the Serpentine; the latter is a splendid reach of deep water surrounded by
richly soiled forest country richly grassed; from there we rode east on to the Goyder
river, about three-quarters of a mile or more. This river here is very fine, being about
300 yards in width, with generally high banks dropping almost perpendicularly down
into deep, black, clear water, and not tidal, and on getting to a bend in the river we
had a splendid view up and down, wherever the banks were low. The richly leaved
trees and cane grass overlined and swept the surface of the water, and made a beautiful
picture. I did not go any higher up, but Mr. Macartney, who has ridden down from
the junction of the Annie, about forty miles above this, says that it continues the same
upwards for about ten miles; after which there are the falls, which Lindsay describes
as the fastest running water he ever saw.
Turning north along the Goyder we rode for a mile or two through open scrubby
country, and then got on to beautiful rich soil plains carrying beautiful grass, herbage,
and vines of all sorts, with here and there clumps of feather palms and Leichardt
trees. About here we saw some wallaby which were the biggest I ever saw, and Mr.
Eandell told us that they are excellent eating, being very fat, and having a caul fat
like a good sheep. I have killed many kangaroo and wallaby in Queensland, and I
never saw one with any fat. We also saw many plain turkey, and some Torres Straits
and other description of pigeon. These plains reach to the north along the Goyder as
far as we rode, about eight miles: we then turned west, and crossed Boggy creek
again, and then west or west-north-west back to Mount Delight.


This is a rough sketch of all the country I saw at Florida ; there are miles and
miles of the richest soil there fit to grow anything for which the climate is suitable,
and I should say especially sugar, and owing to the regular rainfall everything grows
in the most wonderful way. I have heard it stated that, instead of getting one crushing
of sugar in eighteen months as is done in Queensland, two crushings could he got here
in twelve months, and there are no white ants to destroy it. Mr. Eandell told us that
during the two years and a-haif he has been there he has only had two months without
rain, and the heat is certainly not so great as at Port Darwin. I hear that further to
the east along the coast there are some fine rivers running into the sea, one called the
Macartney. We intended to have taken a trip in that direction to look for minerals,
where Tenison Woods states there is probably rich mineral country, hut had not time
to do so.
I have seen nearlv all the best coast country in Queensland, and I can safely say
I have seen none that I like so well. I was surprised to find it so good, as, previous
to my visit here, I had heard the Northern Territory so often run down that I looked
upon it as a foregone conclusion that I should see inferior country; but it is nothing
of the kind, and it is destined sooner or later to he made use of for agriculture, and to
carry a large population. It seems quite a pity to leave it lying idle. In the mean-
time however, if good markets can be found for cattle or beef in China, India, Java, or
somewhere in that direction, this and any good stations on the northern coast must
become some of the most valuable in Australia. I cannot see why young cattle, say
twelve or eighteen months old, should not be shipped in large numbers for England or
Europe. There would not be much risk if sent young, and the right season picked ;
sufficient fodder for the journey could be obtained with mowing-machines in a very
short time. What a splendid property that would be from which you could turn off
your cattle at that age at a remunerative price, and there must surely be sufficient
margin between £2 per head, which would pay handsomely at that age here, and the
price obtainable in England or Europe, say £8 or £lO, which even at present low prices
they would be worth, and many would be fat, and bring a good deal more. The number
you could grow on 10,000 square miles of country like Florida would be great, when
you could get rid of them at eighteen months, instead of keeping them till they were
three or four years old or aged, waiting for a market. I might enlarge on the subject
of shipping young cattle to the mother country ad lib. ; there are so many advantages
to be obtained by doing so—quick return of money, greater capacity for breeding
numbers, smaller percentage of loss, safe market, and you can always relieve the run
in case of drought, &c.
I cannot end this letter without alluding to the kindness and hospitality that has been
shown me during my visit here, and of thanking you especially for having made it so
agreeable.
HUGH HEBER PERCY.
MINING.
The year 1887 will probably be noted and remembered throughout
the world as an annus mirabilis in the history of mining. At its begin-
ning every metal except gold was depressed ; at its close every metal,
and notably silver, tin, and copper, have sprung up in value with extra-
ordinary rapidity. It follows therefore that in a country like the Northern
Territory, which has such widely distributed and varied mineral riches,
that the year has been one of great enterprise and activity. The pro-
spectors, discoverers, and investors, who have maintained their faith in
the ultimate success of mining properties, and continued their annual
payments to hold mineral licences in particular, are beginning to reap the
harvest of their confidence. The unique and marvellous history of the
Broken Hill Proprietary mine, in the Barrier Ranges district, has given
an immense impetus to the search for silver in the Northern Terri-
tory. A few years ago our mineral prospectors appear to have been


almost without knowledge as to the characteristics of silver-bearing
ores. It is now evident that not the careless foot, but certainly the
ignorant eye of the courageous and often weary prospector, has passed
over mineral deposits when only a slender acquaintance with geology
or mineralogy would have been sufficient to have arrested the footstep,
and to have gladdened the eye. In fact, until the discovery of tin in
1881, the mining people of the Northern Territory appear to have looked
for nothing, and to have expected nothing, hut gold. In 1882, when I
visited the Northern Territory with the parliamentary party, there was a
whisper here and there of galena, but nothing was known as to where
it was deposited. Those who were here with me in 1882 will remember
the ill-concealed incredulity with which the statements of the existence
of other minerals besides gold were received on our return to South
Australia.
Even in tin, although fine specimens taken from the beds of running
creeks and from lodes were shown as extracted under personal super-
vision, there was apparently no confidence placed in the genuiness of
the specimens or the existence of payable tin-bearing country. Now
tin is known to stretch from Bynoe Harbor to Mount Todd; silver
from near Rum Jungle to the Katherine ; copper from the Daly River
to Pine Creek ; while gold, which is still being found in the old fields
and reefs, has been discovered at Maude Creek, and in the centre of Au-
stralia itself.
On the 31st of December there were fifty gold mining leases in
existence occupying an area of 686 acres, and yielding an annual rental
of £343. There were 1,553 mineral licences covering 31,070 acres with
an annual rental of £1,553. There were also sixteen mineral licences
extending over 2,635 acres, and a rental of £329. The total area thus
licensed and leased for gold and other minerals amounts to about fifty-
four square miles, and the annual rent is £2,225.
If the present “boom” in silver continues, and the present prices
for tin and copper are maintained, there will be a much larger area
taken up, and a greatly increased revenue will be received during 1888.
GOLD.
The total quantity of gold exported during 1887 was 18,8461 ounces,
the declared value being £68,775. This is a slight increase upon the year
1886, in which the gold exported was 17,489 - ounces, of the declared
value of £63,139. These figures will, however, I think surprise those
who know to how large an extent the Chinese diggers were drawn away
from the goldfields to engage upon railway construction. It is indeed
a surprising proof of the enduring riches of the patches of alluvial
gold-bearing country, and the few reefs that are being permanently
worked, that so much gold has been obtained.
As in past years the pride of place belongs to Mr. Oluf. Jensen, J.P.,
of Pine Creek, where the Eleanor claim has sustained its old reputation.
The yield for the year has been nearly 3,500 ounces, including the
magnificent specimen of 1,652 ounces of retorted gold which was so
conspicuous a feature in the Adelaide Jubilee Exhibition.


At the Union the Chinese appear to he in possession as tributers.
At the Twelve Mile, the Spring Hill plant and mine are idle, as is the
case at the Extended Union and Grove Hill. On the old diggings the
patient Mongolian ekes out a subsistence when not more profitably
employed. At the Port Darwin Gold Mining Company’s claim, where
so much was promised and expected, I fear the results have been
disappointing to promoters, shareholders, and manager. At Maude
Creek some most promising reefs have been opened.
On all these several districts and claims Mr. Chief Warden Nash
reports ;
The general depression that has had such a baneful influence on the colony of
South Australia has, of course, had its effect on our mining, so that very little develop-
ment has been made during the past year, except in one or two instances, and these
instances notably the Eveleen Silver Lead Mine and Jensen’s Gold have been of great
importance, inasmuch as the output from these mines has been exceedingly good;
while the fact is made manifest that only a wise and judicious expenditure is necessary
to raise many of our mines to the same standard. It is not necessary for me to do
more than point out that Mr. Jensen’s claims were originally the properties of some
Adelaide companies who, after a few years messing about, abandoned them as worth-
less. Since then Mr. Jensen has turned out many thousands of ounces of gold. During
the past year great progress has been made in opening up the mine, while the stone
from the lower levels about the water-line has improved very much in quality.
The Eveleen, young as the mine is, has not been without seeing days of adversity;
indeed, for a time, there was every indication of the mine being closed; but happily
this was prevented, and its past days of doubt and failure are now mere matter of
history.
A large amount of prospecting has been done, and many new lodes found, principally
tin and silver ; while the more recent discovery of gold at Maude creek has consider-
ably increased the area of the mineral district. During the year applications for
prospectors’ quartz claims have been received from the Macarthur and Alice Springs;
but, as those places are so very distant, I have been unable to visit them, and, as yet,
have received no particulars as to the prospects obtained.
The population of the goldfields has greatly diminished during the year, nearly all
the Chinese, with the exception of those employed by the various claims, having taken
employment on the railwa3 r works; but, now that the rainy season has set in, many are
returning to engage in their annual occupation of surfacing.
Several mining experts have during the season visited the various mines for the
purpose of reporting on their value to various syndicates, and, as they have expressed
themselves very favorably impressed with many of the properties, I am in very great
hope that some of the properties will be taken over and developed in a proper manner.
Notwithstanding that the railway has made great progress, and has been delivering
goods within sixty miles of the centre of the goldfields, the exorbitant prices demanded
for goods of all description still continues. This in itself is enough to cripple all
enterprise, and has done for years past. It matters not whether cartage is £lO or
£3O per ton, the prices do not diminish or fluctuate; however, I think this ensuing
year will somewhat alter this state of affairs. I will now adopt m3 7 usual plan of
particularising each district, commencing with the most southern portion of the gold-
fields.
The Katherine. —The prospecting claim is situated on Maude creek, about twelve
miles south-east of the Katherine telegraph station, and distant from Palmerston about
200 miles, in a tract of country passed through by the Eev. J. E. Tenison "Wood in his
geological trip through the Territory, who spoke of it as a country inviting pro-
specting. The country is entirely new to the Territory in a geological point of view,
the reefs running east and west, while the country is diorite. The prospectors, Mr. A.
J. Giles and others, as yet have done but little on their claim. The reef has been
opened out in various places, showing a nice compact reef. A small crushing, taken
indiscriminately, has given the very satisfactory result of loz. of gold per ton. It is
now the intention of the prospectors to open out their claim in a more systematic
manner. Adjoining the Pine Creek on the east is Jones, Murphy, & Jones’ claim. A
shaft has been sunk 50ft. At about 25ft. the reef, about 3ft. Gin. thick, was cut
through, and are now driving from the bottom of the shaft to again cut the reef. This


The Eleanor, six weeks’ crushing
Tons.
Ozs.
272
Dwts.
0
Do. do.
—
267
0
Do
783
1,652
0
Ah Ching Phillip
38
1,200
0
Do.
84
151
0
Do.
26
35
0
Thos. Gash
84
10
should be done in a few feet. There are about twenty tons of very nice-looking stone
at grass taken out of the shaft. About fifty yards north of this shaft another small
shaft has been commenced, from which two tons of stone has been crushed, which gave
the very encouraging result of IJoz. of gold per ton. 1 may here mention that this
stone, as well as that of the prospectors’, was carted to the Pine creek battery, a
distance of about eighty miles. South and adjoining the Pine creek is Maccraddon and
Davis’ claim. I was unable to go below, as the shaft, 22ft. in depth, was being
timbered; but there were a few tons of very nice stone at grass. About forty yards
north, on same claim, another reef had been opened up, from which about fourteen
tons of stone had been taken, equal to any I have ever seen, as a nice, fair average
sample of stone. The reef is from 9in. to 18in. in width, and has every appearance
of permanency. South of Jones’ is Davis, Richardson, & Davis’ claim. A shaft has,
been sunk 34ft. on one of the best formed reefs I have ever seen, 4ft. wide, with very
nice walls dipping a little to the north. The reef is very nrach impregnated with
iron, so little gold is seen, except when breaking dowm, when a much better show of
gold is to be seen. Besides this shaft several other shafts have been sunk on the
same reef, the reef in all places looking equally well. There are about 150 tons of
stone ready for crushing on this claim. In all there are some twelve or fifteen claims-
registered, with a population of about twenty men, ■who have made themselves com-
fortable camps for the wet season, and intend giving their claims a thorough good trial;
and, I think, should the present prospects and the good appearance of the reefs con-
tinue, there should be by next dry season a really good inducement for the capitalist
to step in and provide the means for reducing the quartz to money. At present there-
is no crushing plant nearer than that at Pine Creek.
Fine Greek. —A large amount of useful work has been done here, principally on the
Eleanor and Christmas leases. In my last report I then mentioned that a shaft was-
being put dowm on the boundary of the Eleanor and Christmas, with the view of
getting the Christmas leader. At about 150 ft. a leader was struck, which wms thought
to be the same, and from which some very nice stone was obtained ; but more recently
another leader has been found, and is, without doubt, the original leader that has been
worked through the Christmas claim. From the appearance of the stone I anticipate
reporting some very excellent returns from this part of the mine. The old workings
are now down to about water level, with great improvement in the reef both in quality
and quantity. A crushing of 783 tons gave the excellent return of 1,6520 z. of gold.
On the Christmas (Mullens’) a large amount of dead work has been done during the past
six months; but everything is now in readiness for breaking down.
The claim, originally the property of Winn & Searles, has long been in the hands-
of Chinese (Ah Ching Phillip & Co.), who from time to time have taken out some very
good crushings ; but the leader being both flat, and small necessitates a deal of labor.
They are now commencing to sink a shaft to the south of the present shaft, w r hen the
leader is expected to be cut in about 150 ft. There aie about forty tons of stone at
grass, estimated to go about 4ozs. The following are the Pine Creek crushings for
the season:—
Union. —The Union line of reefs have fallen entirely into the hands of Chinese-
tributers. All the claims are worked to the water level, and need pumping and wind-
ing gear. As it is expected the railway wall reach here in another twelve months,,
claimholders are simply complying with the labor requirements until able to put
machinery on their claims at a reasonable cost. The manager of the Union battety,
Mr. Macpherson, has kindly handed me a report, which I cannot do better than re-
produce, more particularly as this gentleman is of known and long experience in Vic-
toria. The followdng is the report:—
“ During the past eight months I crushed at this battery 1,074 tons of quartz,
which yielded 1,6460z5. of smelted gold. With the exception of forty tons from the
Twelve Mile the above quantity of stone has been taken from the Union line of reef.
Nearly every claim from No. 8 south to No. 12 north contributed towards the total
yield.


“For the past two months a considerable revival on this line of reef has taken place.
From No. 12 south to the same number north has been taken up on tributes, and most
of the tributers (Chinamen) seem satisfied with their prospects.
“ In No. 10, South Union, rich stone was struck in their deepest level, 120 ft. from
surface. The lode is from 15 to 20ft. wide. No. 1, South Union, broke out a ton and
a-half of good_ stone at a depth 110 ft. The reef is 12 to 20in. wide, but were com-
pelled to give it up owing to the heavy inflow of water. No. 12 are now waiting
their turn to crush. A few months ago eighteen tons from this claim gave a return
of 1200z5., but the water is likely to best them also.
“It is a thousand pities that we have no means to follow the gold, which is now
proved beyond a doubt to be getting richer below water level, and the body of stone
larger and more defined.”
Komchildfs Rush.— The several claims that during part of four years have been
worked by Chinese have now passed into the hands of a small local company, who are
sinking a shaft to a depth of 100 ft. If at that depth reasonable prospects are met
with, it is the intention of the company to at once erect a crushing plant. These
claims have already been worked for quite 300 yards in length, in some places to a
depth of 40ft., the Chinese picking out the best of the stuff and crushing by hand
power. I have never been able to ascertain with what results, but I believe the
dirt so crushed averaged from 1 to Sdwts. per bucket.
Extended Union. —This property is again idle. For some time a party of Chinese
have been working the claim, who did a large amount of dead work, but have re-
linquished, owing to the heavy royalty demanded by the syndicate who own the mine.
I believe the amount of royalty paid was £4O per month.
Spring Kill. —Nothing has been done here for the past two years. It is a pity to
see a mine and plant, complete in every respect, lying idle as this is, more especially
as during the two years previous to suspension of work, over £20,000 worth of gold
was the output.
The Port Darwin Gold Mining Company, who I mentioned in my report of January
last had acquired the claim so long worked by the Beetson Bros., have done but little
during the past year except bail water from old shafts and crush the mullock ac-
cumulated by Beetsons’, until within the last month, when a start has been made to
sink the engine shaft.
TIN.
I adhere to the order in which our minerals have been discovered.
The exportation for the year has been only trial shipments —from
Mount Shoobridge chiefly—the weight being 28 tons or ore, the value
£1,322. These figures are not large, but they are a satisfactory increase
on 1886, in which the weight was 8 tons, and the value £72. The
closing quotation of the year, £167 per ton, is a ti-emendous leap from
about £lOO per ton in January Ist, 1887. With the price advancing
thus by leaps and bounds, as might be expected, the holders of mineral
licences in stanniferous areas have congratulated themselves and been
envied by those who have left opportunities slip.
Notwithstanding Mr. Clartch’s wholesale condemnation of the dis-
coverers’ claim at Mount Shoobridge, splendid ore has been taken from
the original lode. Mr. Solomon’s claim is commanding the attention of
the London market. Mr. Phillip Davies, a well known authority, has
visited and favorably reported on the claims held by the McKinlay and
Mount Wells Company. Mount Wells itself, after disasters and disap-
pointments, is giving good promise of satisfactory dividends. Those who
are interested in the mining claims have lost none of their confidence in
the ultimate richness of the district. And last, but probably not least,
comes intelligence of rich tin lodes inside the mangroove shores of
Bynoe Harbor.


Adventure and enterprise in the pursuit of mineral riches nearly
•cost us the lives of two valuable townsmen, Mr. V. V. Brown and Mr,
T. H. Harwood, but they were found. Those who have seen this
•country say that tin will be found rich in this district. The original
discoverer of tin in the Bynoe Harbor district is Mr. Clarke. A large
number of mineral licences have been taken out.
The following information is supplied by Mr. Chief Warden Nash on
the tin districts he has visited :
The Melvinlay and Mount. Wells Tin Mining Company . —This company is making no
attempt to work any portion of their mineral areas, of which they have many miles.
I cannot too strongly condemn the practice of allowing syndicates the right of hold-
ing immense areas of mineral country without having to expend a single shilling year
after year beyond paying the yearly rental, as this company has done for many
years ; it savours so much of the dog in the manger—they neither work themselves nor
can anyone else, besides crippling the miner and prospector.
The Port Darwin Tin Company , Mount Wells. —During the past wet season crushing
has been carried on in a small scale, there being insufficient water to employ more than
one shift. It is very disappointing that delay after delay should occur with the
developement of this property. It is now patent, after very large sums of money have
been expended in dam-making, that other means for the supply of water must he
found. It is to be regretted that the immense evaporation of water during the dry
season, and the open porous nature of the rock, is not taken into consideration before
making dams, more especially when a plentiful supply of water is to he had by pumping
from running streams. The output of dressed tin for the season has been about twenty
tons.
Recently a new manager—Mr. Thomas—has taken the management of the mine, and
has been fully occupied in removing the wire tram to a more central position, and
getting everything into working order. It is expected that crushing will commence in
about a week. A great improvement has taken place in lodes Nos. 17 and 18; and
should present prospects continue, the company should have a nice stack of tin ready
for the market in a very short time.
At the Mount Shoohridge Tin Mines a considerable amount of work has been done.
Saunders & Co. have sunk several shafts to various depths, displaying exceedingly
nice lodes of very rich tin ore. I believe it is contemplated placing the claim in the
English market. On Solomon’s a large amount of work has been done, and about 100
tons of ore have been treated by handpower. The main shaft is down about 40ft.
The lode at this depth is about 6ft. wide. At about 30ft. a drive has been put in
northward about 20ft., and southward 12ft., both drives showing very excellent ore.
Recently a hand-power crusher and some tin-dressing appliances have been added, hut
I fear are far too primitive to be worked profitably.
In conclusion, I have endeavored to point out that the goldfields areas, besides being
of great extent, includes, in great profusion, metals, the existence of which until
within the last few years was not suspected.
COPPER.
The significance and value of the wonderfully improved tone of the
■copper market is probably of more importance to the southern portion of
the colony than it is to the Northern Territory proper. Notwithstanding
the crushing low price, the exports of copper ore from the Northern
Territory have nearly reached those of 1886.
The only two mines which have been really worked are the Daly
River Copper Company and the Wheal Danks. The former company
for some reason has not prosecuted its operations with that vigor which
was expected, but Mr. Y. L. Solomon has most energetically developed
his mine, the Wheal Danks. It is understood that an intrusion of


country rock has cut out the lode for the present, but later intelligence
gives assurance that this is a temporary “ fault.” The Wheal Banks
Copper Mine, on the Daly and the Mount Shoobridge Tin Claims, have
now passed into the hands of a London company.
SILVER.
The export of silver bullion during the year has been 295- 2 V tons,
value £13,675. This has come entirely from the Eveleen Mine. The
export of the same metal in 1886 was 16TJ} tons, value £303. Of course,
after the year’s experience of the Eveleen Mine, and also the discovery
of silver-carrying ores in widely separated parts of the Northern Terri-
tory, it could not but happen, with the Broken Hill shares advancing so
rapidly, that silver claims here with any approach to genuineness should
be very highly appraised by their holders.
Mr. Chief Warden Nash gives full particulars of the Eveleen, Coronet
Hill, and the Flora Bell in his report, from which I quote :
About three miles N.W. of these claims is the Eveleen Silver Mine. It is not
necessary for me to reproduce the account of the many failures experienced by the
company in starting the mine; that has been done by the various newspapers. It is
far more pleasing for me to report that, since the mine has been under the management
of Mr. Drake, everything has worked smoothly and well, as if by magic. It is to be
regretted that the manager has had to shut down. I believe one of the chief reasons
is that the bullion cannot be carted away during the wet season; another is the inflow
of water, at 40ft. in depth, is far too strong to be combated with except by steam
power, and yet the smelting plant was erected half a mile from the claim, the then
manager deeming there would not be sufficient water on the claim; however, after the
wet no time will he lost in getting a pump up, and starting the mine generally into
full working order. I suppose no mine is more favorably situated for the supply of
wood, water, and the fluxes, iron and limestone. All of these are on the claim in
abundance. The following particulars of the mine have been supplied me by the
manager:—
In the centre of main outcrop a shaft Bft. by 4ft. has been sunk to a depth of 40ft.;
the w r ater came in so strong' at this depth that sinking had to be abandoned until a
pump is erected; drives have been driven on the course of the lode —to the northward
116 ft., and to the southward 141 ft., at a depth of 33ft. ; there are barren spots in the
lode, but more or less ore has been got throughout the entire length of the workings.
About 100 ft. west from main outcrop a shaft has been sunk 36ft, From the bottom
of this shaft a drive has been put in to tbe north for a distance of 22ft. ; this shaft and
drive has given ore in small quantities at all stages of its working. About 60ft. E.
from main outcrop a shaft has been sunk on another lode to a depth of 60ft.; a crosscut
from the main shaft has been driven through hard limestone to connect this ; this lode
has been driven on both W. and S., opening up a very nice galena lode, assaying very
well. On the flat ground, N. of main workings, the lode has been traced, and about
150 tons of ore has been taken from a trench along the surface. No effort has been
made to look for the lode deeper on account of the water coming in in quantities that
cannot he handled by windlass and bucket.
At the furnace 1,640 tons of ore have been treated for a product of 418 tons of
bullion, containing about 60,0000z5. of silver.
The ore is said to be very refractory, and the quantity of flux used seems to bear out
the statement, 1,455 tons of fluxing "being used to smelt the 1,540 tons of ore. The
manager states that the charcoal is the best he has ever used, one ton of charcoal
sometimes smelting as high as tons of furnace charge, the average consumption of
charcoal being 1 ton to 6-n7i tons furnace charge.
The furnace used is a 30-ton rectangular water-jacket furnace, but is not yet erected
to its full size, two jackets being left out. This is the identical furnace that caused so
much trouble, and was pronounced to be an utter failure. I feel I cannot conclude


without retracting my remarks made in my report of January last, when I re-echoed
the statements of the smelters and managers preceding Mr. Drake, that rectangular-
furnaces were new, unknown, and impossible to work with charcoal. It now appears
that the rectangular is the furnace in general use. Further than this, the plant on the
Eveleen was in the first instance recommended by Mr. Drake, and that it is all that
can be desired has been exemplified in a most practical manner.
Coronet Hill. —About fifteen miles S.E. of the Eveleen are what are known as the
Coronet Hill Silver Claims, discovered by one of our old pioneers, Mr. H. Roberts,
and considered by many to be one of the best lodes yet found in the Territory; it is
certainly the largest outcrop of ore, in some places a huge wall standing 20ft. high.
There are three parallel lodes running N.'W. by S.E. in direct line to the Eveleen.
On the main lode a shaft has been sunk on one of the outcrops to a depth of 85ft.,
the width of the lode averaging 12ft. At the bottom of the shaft the lode is 10ft.
wide, but the hanging wall is not touched. The assays from top to bottom average
40ozs. of silver to the ton. The lodes have been opened in other places, and can be
traced for four miles in length. Mr. Roberts has four 160-acre blocks, and joining on
to him areas have been taken up extending many miles ; but only on the prospector’s
claim has any work been done. The claims are admirably situated for the supply of
Avater. The main branch of the Mary river, a fine permanent stream, is running at
the base of the lodes, while timber is in abundance ; and another fact not to be lost
sight of is the railway, Avhen finished to Pine Creek, will be distant only about thirty
miles.
Flora Bell.- —About two miles south of the Spring Hill are the silver claims of
Mr. J. B. Robinson, more generally known as the Flora Bell; there are six 80-acre
blocks, but very little work has been done. The surface appearance of the lodes is
exceptionally good. This is freely pronounced by all who have visited the property.
The ores assayed exceedingly well, as high as 800 ounces of silver to the ton being
obtained.
Adjoining the Flora Bell are five 80-acre blocks, the property of Cruikshank and
others. A shaft has been sunk on one of the blocks, from which seven tons of very
nice looking ore has been obtained. The lode is a continuation of the Flora Bell. I
believe it is the intention of the shareholders to further open up the property after the
present wet season. Both the Flora Bell and these blocks are conveniently situated,
the railway passing within a mile.
GOLD AND PRECIOUS STONE DISCOVERIES IN CENTRAL
AUSTRALIA AND ALLEGED EXISTENCE OF GOLD IN
MACARTHUR DISTRICT.
The information before me is too meagre to warrant more than general
remarks. It appears certain, however, that there exists in the centre of
the continent a large and probably a rich auriferous area. The reputed
prospectors and discoverers have made application for a reward claim.
Other pioneer diggers have also applied for claims. And, as is usually
the case, applications from speculators have been put in to preempt all
the ground in which gold has been discovered, and the immediately
surrounding country. It is due, hoAvever, to those who go out and find
gold that their claims and applications should be first considered and
allotted. The history of gold and other mineral discoveries is a long-
record of speculators endeavoring to step in before the discoverers, and
then to obtain a monopoly of large areas of ground, not for development,
but to sell to a syndicate or float into a company.
I am unable to pronounce upon the value of the discovery of precious
stones, as the only information I possess is from the public papers. If
all the stones are rubies, a revolution in the value of that stone must


ensue. The area, within which these discoveries have been made, has
been erected into a gold mining district named B, and Mounted Constable
Wiltshire has been appointed warden.
Mr. Lynott, manager for Messrs. Amos Brothers & Broad, when in
Port Darwin, informed me that back from the Macarthur there is an
undoubted gold-bearing region. He has travelled over it, and is of
opinion that the belt stretches from the Croydon field. He is confident
it will be prospected; and, to afford the necessary security to discoverers,
the district has also been erected into a gold mining district, numbered
C, and Mounted Constable Donnegan has been appointed acting warden
during the absence of Mr. G. R. McMinn, S.M., resident magistrate.
Until the appointment of mining boards for districts B and C, the
regulations of the mining board for district A have been gazetted as
applying to districts B and C.
The discovery of gold and precious stones in Central Australia, and
the probable existence of minerals throughout the continent, are strong
incentives to the prosecution of the Transcontinental railway.
THE MINING DISTRICTS.
My annual official visit to the mining districts was necessarily later
this year than on former occasions, occupying nearly the whole of the
month of September.
Being at the end of the dr}’ season the heat and dust were very severe.
In the course of the trip 1 visited nearly all the old mining centres, and
also pushed out into some of the new districts, where the pioneering
efforts in connection with our mineral deposits are being made. The
Chinese were working chiefly in the neighborhood of the Howley,
although at the Fountain Head and other old diggings small numbers
are still at work. At Bridge Creek the Europeans, who hold that field,
were reported as doing fairly well.
At Grove Hill the holders of mineral licences and gold mining leases
on the “ Iron Stone Blow ” have amalgamated, and this large mineral
property will shortly be developed. There is a great surface similarity
between this cap and the cap of the Broken Hill. Should the under-
ground characteristics at all resemble that famous mine, quiet little
Grove Hill will become a famous place. At the Port Darwin Tin
Company’s claim, Mount Wells, nothing was being done, pending the
taking of levels by Mr. David Lindsay (who was there) for a water
supply, and the arrival of a new manager. It is impossible to regard
the operations in connection with this claim as satisfactory so far, but
since my visit, under the new management, the machinery has been at
work night and day, and prospects are much improved.
The Mount Wells Tin Company’s ground has been carefully examined
by Mr. Phillip Davies; an elaborate report has been laid before the
company, and it is confidently reported that this vast area of tin-bearing


country, which has been so long held without any attempt at develop-
ment, will pass into the hands of an English proprietary. [This has
since taken place.
In response to a telegram from me, Mr. Davies expressed himself as
greatly pleased and impressed with the gold, silver, lead, tin, and copper
prospects of the Northern Territory.
From Burrundie we passed through the granite country to the Eveleen
Silver Mine. In appearance the site of this mine—Fumade Hill—is a
smaller but more picturesque Broken Hill, as trees grow out of the
rocks on the summit. The hill is a striking natural feature, and should
have challenged the attention of prospectors long before it was opened;
but until silver began to be regarded as a possible deposit in the
Territory it was passed by without any careful testing. The lodes are
strongly marked on the surface, but the cap, unlike that at Broken Hill,
which is a calcarious formation of great size, stained with iron. The
main lode has been followed to the fiat on the north, and about 150 tons
of good ore were taken from the surface trench. The Chief Warden
gives full particulars of the workings and quantity of bullion obtained.
The present manager (Mr. F. M. Drake), who is a Californian, is a highly
intelligent and energetic man.
Charcoal is readily obtainable, and the manager states that for
smelting purposes it is the best he has ever used.
From the Eveleen I rode, with Chief Warden Nash, to the silver-
country near Coronet Hill. The route taken was through Houschildt’s
Bush, where a new European company has taken up several claims, in
which the reef has given rich returns on assay. The company is
importing a rolling mill for dealing with the stone. The Chinese have
been “ dollying” (i.e., obtaining gold by dry crushing) for several years,
with very excellent results. After leaving these claims the ranges were
crossed. Going east, the surface indications of gold—slate quartz, with
diorite intrusions —were very marked. After striking the Mary its course
was followed until Mr. H. Boberts’s camp was reached.
Early next morning Mr. Boberts conducted us up to the prospector’s
claim, which he is working. The outcrop of the lodes, which extend for
many miles, is very striking. In one spot one of the lodes stands out
a solid wall, over 20ft. having been weathered out to that depth.
Mr. Boberts has put down a shaft about 50ft. from the cap of this lode.
At that depth it was 12ft. wide, no walls being visible, and lead ores,
carrying silver, were being raised. If the many lodes in the district
should on development prove to carry payable silver. Coronet Hill will
be a great mining centre, which may warrant the construction of a branch
line of railway through the Eveleen, similar to the one from Cockburn
through Silverton to Broken Hill.
I next visited Pine Creek. Mr. Jensen took me over his claims and
those adjoining. On the Eleanor, the workings are on three levels, and
good gold-carrying stone was being raised. At the Telegraph, Mr.
Jensen has opened a new well-defined reef, close to the old company’s
workings. It carries good gold, and specimens were broken out on the
spot.
At Mullins’s Christmas claim, and O’Donohue’s and Gash’s claims,
good gold was being obtained, and several new claims have been taken
up. The Chinese claim, on the boundary of Mr. Jensen’s Telegraph


claim, which yielded 1490z5. per 84 tons, is still being worked on rich
leaders, some of which have gone as high as 30ozs. to the ton. At the
Union, only No. 12 north and No. 10 south were really being worked,
although some tributing was being done. Nearly all the Union Reef
claims are under offer to syndicates.
On the return trip I visited the tin country near Mount Shoobridge.
Messrs. Cruickshank and Barretts, Mr. Y. L. Solomon, and the Company
with which Mr. Phil. Saunders is connected, all showed rich tin ore,
remarkably similar to the best Poolammacca specimens. Mr. Solomon’s
property has been sold in London. No doubt when the railway touches
the Howley, many other tin claims will be taken up and worked.
On reaching the Adelaide river, the surveyors were found making
surveys for a temporary railway bridge. The line lower down was open
on the 23rd September, to the 38 mile peg. At this point Mr. C. G.
Millar met me with a special train, and one-fourth of the total distance
to Pine Creek was performed by rail. The result of my visit beyond the
beaten tracks has convinced me that the mineral resources of the
Northern Territory are richer and more extensive than I had ever
supposed them to be, and are sure in the near future to secure the
necessary capital for their development.
AGRICULTURE.
In agriculture there is little to chronicle. Mr. Brandt, who is really
the only tropical agriculturist upon a plantation scale, has pursued his
operations at Shoal Bay sugar plantation. I fear the result of the
crushing is not satisfactory. The parcel of sugar sent to Adelaide realised
£22 per ton. The so-called “ Daly River Plantation ” is virtually
abandoned. The coffee at Beatrice hills is still doing well; an excellent
sample has been picked. Rice continues to be grown by the Chinese.
But although so poor a record must be confessed, the agricultural
interests of the Northern Territory only await intelligent development
to be absolutely secure of success.
In the present position of the mineral market there appears ample
ground for belief that agricultural industries will not be without their
recompense to the tiller of the soil. If the confidence in gold, tin, silver,
and copper properties be based upon an intelligent reading of the world’s
requirements and stock exchange facts, then undoubtedly there will be a
large amount of English capital employed, not in dummying, but in
developing the mineral wealth of the Northern Territory. This means
maize for horse feed, vegetables for the persons of whatever nationality
who Avill be employed in overseeing and working the mineral claims —
rice for Chinamen (importers have to pay Id. per lb. import duty), and
many other troprical and sub-tropical products, such as sugar, tobacco,
coffee, arrowroot, tapioca, &c. On this I need not further dwell, as the
report of Mr. Holtze, the curator of the Government gardens, gives full
details of the garden itself, and of the various plants and trees which
have been proved successful, and those which are under experiment.


In order, however, to secure agricultural settlement of the best class,
it is absolutely necessary to give those who are desirous of cultivating the
soil ready and cheap access to the right kind of land, and to secure to
them possession, if they carry on their operations in a bond fide manner.
The clauses relating to plantations in the Land Act, No. 271 of 1882,
clauses 77 to 79, are sufficiently liberal in their provisions, if the
applicant could obtain the land he requires. But an insuperable difficulty
arises in the initial definition of the available country. It must be
“ country land;” and in the interpretation clause “country land” is
defined as “ all surveyed lands situated in the Northern Territory.” As
there is only a very limited area of land surveyed, the would-be planter
cannot avail himself of the liberal provisions made by the Legislature.
Clause 77 provides that an applicant for plantation lands may select a
block of country lands of not less than 320 nor more than 1,280 acres at
an annual rental of sixpence per acre, payable annually in advance.
If within thirty days of the expiration of five years from date of
application he can prove that at the end of two years he has cultivated,
in a husbandlike manner, one-fifth of the total area; that after the
second year he has annually similarly cultivated an additional one-tenth,
and that at the expiration of five years he has one-half of the entire
area under cultivation, and the whole enclosed with a fence or Avail, he
shall be relieved from further payment of rent for five years—half-a-crown
in all shall be the purchase money —and the Governor shall thereupon
issue to the applicant a grant of the land.
THE PALMERSTON AND PINE CREEK RAILWAY AND
THE TRANS-AUSTRALIAN RAILWAY.
The Palmerston and Pine Creek Railway was really commenced in
August, 188/ ; but the work was only slowly prosecuted, apparently
under pressure, in consequence of the presence in Port Darwin of a large
number of returned diggers from the Kimberley goldfield.
This sudden and large influx of a white population embarrassed both
the Government and the contractors, as the necessary plant was not here
so that the men might be profitably employed.
The result of such employment was that the great majority of Europeans
left the lerritory as soon as they had earned a sufficient sum to pay their
passages. Of course, during the wet season, the kind of work that could
be undertaken was limited.
The arrival of Mr. C. G. Millar in April was the signal for an
enterprising recommencement. Since then the work has been prosecuted
with great vigour, and day by day the platelayers have been pushing on
the line.
Mr. James, the superintending engineer, has favored me with the
following report of the progress made and the present condition of the
line:—
The permanent way has been laid up to 71 j miles from Palmerston, or within five
miles of the Adelaide river, and through sidings are laid at McMinn’s Lagoon station
20 miles from Palmerston; at Southport Hoad station, 38 miles; Hum Jungle station,
56-| miles ; and at the Stapleton river, 69| miles.


Revenue.
Port Darwin
£
s.
19
12
4
d.
1
Port McArthur
1
Port Roper
3
£43,477
15
5
Less Drawbacks and Repayments
8
1
Total Net Revenue
7
4
The earthworks are all hut completed to the Adelaide river, with the exception of
some earthwork at Palmerston station, at the site for the locomotive workshops,
2| miles from Palmerston, and at the Darwin river. From the Adelaide river, to
88J miles from Palmerston, the earthworks are progressing as well as can he
expected, when the season'and sloppy state of the country are considered. [The first
section of the line to the Adelaide river has since been opened to traffic.]
Concrete in bridges and culverts is all finished up to the 67th mile, except the
bridge at the Darwin river, where little can he done for at least another month, and
the iron girders are in place on all hut the Elizabeth, Finniss, and Darwin river
bridges. From the 67th to the 74th mile the larger bridges and flood openings and
many of the culverts are built, and one of the abutments of the Adelaide River bridge
is in hand.
A reservoir for the supply of the Palmerston station and jetty, capable of holding
four and three-quarter million gallons, has been constructed and is now full of water.
A reservoir for the supply of the loco, workshops, about three miles from Palmerston,
was commenced towards the end of last year, but the rainy season put an end to the
work there,
One first-class residence, offices for the Resident Engineer and Traffic Superintendent,
and a general store, have been erected at Palmerston, and one first-class residence, and
eight second-class residences are in course of construction at the site for the
locomotive workshops ;• two workmen’s cottages have also been built there.
The railway works have suffered little from rains and floods, and the waterways
provided are more than sufficient to carry off all the flood water that has hitherto come
down to them. The permanent way has been maintained in good running order without
difficulty, and the construction trains have run over the whole length of it daily,
through the rainy season, without a hitch. Ballast of an excellent quality has been
found in abundance convenient to the works, and the contractors have made free use
of it, and the steel sleepers supplied have given great support to the rails; they keep
the line well, and give little trouble after they are once well packed.
As the construction of the Trans-Australian line is largely a matter
of policy I do not in this official report consider it permissible to discuss
the method or manner which should he adopted. I may, however,
perhaps be permitted to say that, as the country from Pine Creek to
the Katherine river is perhaps the richest in minerals in the whole of
the Northern Territory, it is not expedient that grants of land should be
made between these points unless mineral rights are reserved. The
bare chance of giving away a gold, silver, or tin area is sufficient, I
think, to show that this section will be more prudently constructed by
loan money. The same consideration will apply to known and present
metalliferous areas in the centre of Australia, where also precious stones
have been found.
J. LANGDON PARSONS, Government Resident,
Palmerston, January Ist, 1888.
CUSTOMS.
jßeturn showing Revenue, Values of Imports, Exports, and Staple Produce.
Total for Year ended December 31st, 1887.


Imports. £ s. d.
South Australia , 64,298 0 0
Victoria 7,394 0 0
New South Wales 59,705 0 0
Queensland i . 10,193 0 0
Western Australia—Gold, 2,4710z5., £9,047. Sundries, £1,674 .... 10,721 0 0
Hongkong , 52’628 0 0
Singapore 799 0 0
Germany 7,669 0 0
Macassar 928 0 0
Java 8 0 0
8 0 0
Macao 100 0 O'
Timor 226 0 0
Belgium 36,909 0 6
United Kingdom 39,117 0 0
£290,695 0 0
Exports. £ $. d.
South Australia 7,199 0 0
Victoria 43,427 0 0
New South Wales 21,006 0 0
Queensland 612 0 0
Western Australia 4,348 0 0
Hongkong 22,907 0 0
Singapore 394 0 0
Macassar 2,800 0 0
Java 2 0 0
Japan 15 0 0
Arrou Islands 24 0 0
New Guinea 1 0 0
United Kingdom 7,314 0 0
£110,049 0 0
STAPLE PRODUCTS, SHIPPING AND PASSENGERS
Staple
Products,
£ s. d.
Gold, 18,846|0zs , value 68,775 0 0
Silver bullion, tons “ 13,675 0 0
Copper ore, 566J§ tons “ 5,888 0 0
Tin ore, 28 tons “ 1,322 0 0
Trepang, 91jg tons “ 3,182 0 0
Hides, hoofs, and horns “ 1,006 0 0
Sugar, 20- 2 1 o -tons “ 287 0 0
Tortoise shell “ 15 0 0
Specimens, Natural history “ 262 0 0
Sundries “ 903 0 0
British, Foreign, and other Colonial.
Gold frcm Western Australia, 2,471 ozs value 9,047 0 0
Sundries “ 5,687 0 0
£110,049 0 0


Shipping.
Vessels—lnwards ..... 120
Tonnage 112,067
Outwards 124
Tonnage 116,690
Passengers.
Arrived—Europeans 1,265, Asiatics 2,402 3,667
Departed—Europeans 1,130, Asiatics 278 1,408
Excess of Immigration—
Europeans 135
Asiatics 2,124
2,259
ALFRED SEARCY, Sub-Collector.
Custom House, Port Darwin, January 9th, 1888.
METEOROLOGICAL.
Meteorological
observations recorded at Telegraph Station , Port
Darwin.
i, Northern
Territory , for Year ended December 31 st, 1887.
Mean Maximum
Temperature
Month.
Mean Minimum
Temperature
in Shade.
Mean Maximum
Temperature
in Sun.
Rain during
Month.
in Shade.
January .
February.
March ...
Inches.
9-975
20-310
119-0
221-0
April ...
May
June ...
July
August .
September
October .
November
December
115-9
3-845
10-030
0-673
112-4
116-0
119-2
122-2
4-590
7-300
10-285
1086-4
1417-1
67-008
Mean for one year
J. A. G. LITTLE, Senior and
Inspecting
Officer.
Post Office and Telegraph Department, Port Darwin.


Return of Rainfall in the Northern Territory for the Year ended December 31 st, 1887.
Place.
Jan.
Feb.
March.
April.
May.
June.
July.
Aug.
Sept,
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
One
Year,
Inches.
Inches.
Inches.
Inches.
Inches.
Inches.
Inches.
Inches.
Inches,
Inches.
Inches.
Inches,
Inches,
Port Darwin
9-975
20-310
3-845
10-030
0-673
nil
nil
nil
nil
4-590
7-300
10-285
67-008
Fanny Bay
12-350
18-690
2-940
11-600
0-410
nil
nil
nil
nil
2-980
8-350
8-690
66-010
Southport ,
7-570
19-470
13-615
7-795
0-370
nil
nil
nil
nil
3-860
7-170
12-120
71-970
Beatrice Hills
11-082
23-066
14-040
8-190
0-330
nil
nil
nil
nil
2-785
6-337
11-880
77-710
Yam Creek
7-220
9-410
12-570
9-820
nil
0-170
nil
0-550
nil
3-040
5-430
6-300
54-510
River Katherine
5-750
8-805
5-640
3-240
nil
nil
nil
nil
nil
1-090
10320
3-300
38-145
Daly Waters
4-010
15-060
4-600
3-410
0-095
0-530
nil
0-160
nil
0-670
2-970
4-250
35-755
2-200
6-000
5-400
1-350
0-780
0-390
nil
1-360
nil
0-080
3-570
0-060
21-190
Tennant’s Creek
1-675
5-355
4-520
0-180
0-210
1-045
nil
1-220
nil
0-090
0-860
nil
15-155
Barrow’s Creek ,
0-490
3-080
5-860
0-530
nil
0-240
nil
0-400
nil
nil
3-580
nil
14-180
Charlotte Waters
nil
0-570
2-720
2-555
0-080
0-320
nil
nil
nil
nil
nil
nil
6-245
L A. G. LITTLE. Senior and Insnectmo- Officer.
Post Office and Telegraph Department, Port Darwin.


REPORT ON GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY OF
NORTHERN TERRITORY.
By the Rev. J. E. Tenison Woods, F.G.S., F.L.S., &c.
Acting on instructions, I proceeded to Burrundie, and then, accom-
panied by Mr. Nash, the chief warden, examined all the places where
mining had been or was actually being carried on. In the course of
these journeys must of the intervening country was prospected, and the
geology noted.
Herewith are the results of these geological explorations. It will be
observed that in many respects I differ from Professor Tate ; but in
justice to that gentleman it should be borne in mind that, to use his own
expression, his trip was no more than “a reconnoisance in the saddle,”
made at a season when detailed examination was impossible. The time
at my disposal and the season gave every facility for entering into
matters of geological detail. I have in this report dealt with the general
conclusions as far as the detail warrants, and I must record here my
complete satisfaction at the result of the prospecting tour. I confidently
assert that the Northern Territory is exceptionally rich in minerals, only
a small portion of which has been made known to the public. I do not
believe that the same quantity of mineral, veins of gold, silver, tin,
copper, and lead, will be found in any equal area in Australia. In fact,
I doubt if many provinces will be found in any country so singularly and
exceptionally favored as Arnheim’s land is in respect to mineral riches.
Of the mines that have already been worked, in gold especially, they
cannot be said to have gone to any depth, but all nearly have shown
unusually good ore, and it is unquestionable that not 25 per cent, of the
veins visible have ever been worked at all. As to the causes of this and
the depression in the mining interest in the Territory generally, the
report will give ample details ; but it is from no want of mineral deposits.
Years will not exhaust the discoveries to be made here when the difficul-
ties of labor have been got over, as they will be surely ere long. The
peninsula of Arnheim’s Land will become one of the great mining centres
of Australia.
Before proceeding to give details of the geology of the Territory,
it will be necessary to correct an erroneous idea which has prevailed as
to the physical structure of this part of the continent. That idea has


been that the mineral area, after rising by an easy slope to the south-
ward, reaches points at varying distances where it is covered by a rampart
of sandstone about 600 ft. in height. This rampart is supposed to he the
edge of the great plateau of an interior or continental Australia. In
other places the tableland is supposed to he 800 ft. in height above the
plains, and I,Booft. above the sea. Latterly the plateau has been called
by the name of the “ desert sandstone,” and is supposed to cover over
most of the older formations, and to block out, as it were, all the older
and mineral deposits.
Whether it does so or not in the far interior I cannot say, though I
am inclined to think not. Where I have been there is no such thing as
a continuous tableland. Patches of broken tableland occur frequently
at the sources of rivers and creeks, but they are only patches—often no
more than ridges, and if more than four or five miles in width they
descend as an inclined plain to the valley of the next large watercourse,
where the older formations generally crop out. Their height varies
between 120 ft. and 300 ft. Once only have I seen a plateau of 370 ft.
in height at its northern edge, Avhich is always broken. It was less than
half that elevation Leichardt is said to have found on his descent from
a plateau, precipices 800 ft. high, but this is now known to be an error
in transcribing his notes. The name of “ desert sandstone” is unfor-
tunately chosen for these tablehills or flat-topped ridges. Sandstone
there is in abundance, besides ferruginous sandstones and sandstone
conglomerates; but they are not always in the cliffs, or only form a
portion of them. Nearly all the cliffs are capped with compact magne-
site, or carbonate of magnesia, from 10ft. to 40ft. in thickness, sometimes
ferruginous, or quite pure and white. The cliffs are made up of various
formations, and it is incorrect to call them “ desert sandstone.” Here
are the proofs. At Yam creek, about two miles south from the tele-
graph station, the line passes through a gorge, bordered on each side by
precipitous cliffs, varying in height from 130 ft, to 200 ft. The bottom of
the valley is 335 ft. above the low-water level of the sea. At one place
where I ascended the cliffs they were 130 ft. high. Of this 90ft. was granite,
10ft. water-worn quartz conglomerate ; ferruginous, magnesian sandstone,
16ft.; pure white magnesite, 14ft. Two miles farther the cliffs were
143 ft. high; of this, 80ft. were granite, and 50ft. a highly ferruginous
sandstone, horizontally stratified.
At the head of the Mary the cliffs were 150 ft. high—3oft. of this was
a fine-grained white sandstone, formed of wind-blown sand, the grains
under the microscope being rounded and abraded like the sands of the
Sahara. Above this was 100 ft. of pure white magnesite; the valley was
composed of paleozoic slates and felsites—a compact mixture of quartz
and felspar, without any traces of crystallization. Other instances will
be given in the body of this report. At the gorge of Yam creek, the
tableland is a mere ridge. At McMinn’s bluff (270 ft. above the plain) it
is an outlier broken up into detached hills. It is the same at Mount
Shoobridge. At the head of the Mary the cliffs are about 200 ft. high;
then there is an inclined plain rising 100 ft, higher in six miles; then
for four or five miles an inclined plain descends 40ft. a mile until
Kekwick’s springs, on a tributary of the Katherine, are reached.
Again, on the heads of the Katherine a sandstone tableland was
ascended to a height of 250 ft.; but it was a mere ridge with a valley


50ft. deep on the east side, with large springs of fresh water giving rise
to a creek—crossing this led to an inclined plain of four miles, with a
fall of about 25ft. to a mile. This brought us to a gully—the head of
Maude creek—where we were, in about three miles, almost on the level
of the Katherine, and in auriferous country again. It will be seen,
therefore, that, as far as I have seen, the “ desert sandstone ” (so called)
is confined to numerous small patches of a newer formation of moderate
thickness, which does not cover the older rocks to any large extent. Yet
this character would not be suspected from its aspect as seen from a
distance. I don’t wonder in the least at earlier explorers having been
led into error with regard to it. When one ascends to the summit of
any moderate elevation, the sloping base, white cliffs, and flat summits
of these hills are conspicuous objects, and there extends from them level
plains of apparently unlimited extent. But none of the hills are high
enough to command an extensive view ; if they did, other hills would be
seen cropping out.
The mistakes which have occurred have been for want of careful
measurements, or from giving descriptions from distant views, rather than
from actual exploration and a close examination of the nature of the
rocks. I have also had the advantage of the 125 miles of levels taken
for railway purposes. It must be also borne in mind that the magnesian
and sandstone formation never rises to the height reached by the
paleozoic and metalliferous rocks. Thus Mount Wells (mica slate with
tin and copper veins) is about 900 ft. above the level of the sea; Spring-
hill gold mine 800 ft.; The Union 700 ft.; Jansen’s 800 ft., and so on.
None of these heights are ever attained by the flat-topped tableland.
So far, therefore, from much of the auriferous formation being covered
by it, from its nature and elevation, that formation is far more likely to
crop out above it. From what has been said it appears that the term
“ desert sandstone” is a misnomer. Whether the formation is the same
as that which was described under that name by Mr. Daintree, in
Queensland is very doubtful. There are here three kinds of rock. (1)
A red sandstone composed almost entirely of rounded grains of sand and
ferric oxide. The appearance of these grains and the stratification of
the rock show a desert origin, such as blown sands present. (2)
Magnesite and silicate, and ferro silicate of magnesia; this rock is pure
white and yellow or mottled and fiery red. These rocks I believe to be
derived from the decomposition of fine volcanic ash, containing much
olivine, or otherwise, rich in magnesia. South of the Edith river there is
a large volcanic area with high basaltic hills and much vesicular lava, all
rich in olivine. When these volanoes were in activity (in miocene times),
the fine dust from the ashes covered a large area. Thus we find these
flat-topped cliffs of magnesite lying on granite rocks on slates (Mount
Shoobridge) and sandstone, (3) The third formation, included under
the name of “ desert sandstone,” is a fluviatile conglomerate. It is only
found on the banks of streams. It is an extremely hard sandstone
horizontally stratified and cross-bedded with the finer laminations marked
by black specular iron. It contains much rounded and waterworn quartz
gravel, from the size of a pebble to that of a man’s head. This forma-
tion is much broken into immense boulders and rocks of most fantastic
shape. It is very hard; but being full of cracks and fissures, weathers
easily and gives rise to a surprisingly rough country, almost inaccessible


to explorers. It is composed of sandbanks and river boulders, which
have hardened since the rivers cut through them. Like the banks of the
rivers of the present day, they rise occasionally 100 ft. to 300 ft. above the
bed, and extend two or three miles on either side. Mount Douglas is
an instance of this formation, and in the ranges on the upper Katherine
river it is developed to a large extent.
The above description of the tableland and other formation will help
much to understand the physical structure of the Northern Territory,
which is as follows :—-The coast is very low and flat, and rises by a gentle
incline at the rate of about sft. a mile; but there are low ridges of
quartzite, slate, and sandstone rising almost from the sea level to a height
of 50ft. or more, gradually increasing to 100 ft. They run north and
south, that is generally speaking, with a general trend to the eastward.
As they are traced to the south, from these ridges small creeks and
tributaries take their rise, and descend towards the main valleys, in which
there are permanent waters.
The following heights and distances will give a better idea than any
description The Elizabeth, distance from Palmerston 25 miles 15
chains, height above sea 52-56 ft.; the Berry, distance 35 miles 70 chains,
height /6 - 84 ft.; the Darwin, distance 43 miles 45 chains, height 93ft.;
the Finniss, distance 54 miles 50 chains, height 184 ft.; the Stapleton,
distance 69 miles 64 chains, height 236 , 50 ft. ; Peter’s creek, distance 74
40 chains, height 188 ft.; the Adelaide, distance 76 miles 50 chains,
height 183 ft.; Burrell’s creek, distance 80 miles 12 chains, height
177‘50ft.; Calder’s creek, distance 88 miles 36 chains, height 199 ft.;
Bridge creek, distance 94 miles 59 chains, height 322-60 ft.; the Howley,
distance 99 miles, height 250‘50ft. ; sfam creek, distance 111 miles 69
chains, height 328 ft.; the Margaret, distance 114 miles, height 340 ft.;
Foelsche’s creek, distance 122 miles 66 chains, height 318 ft. ; the
McKinlay, distance 124 miles 68 chains, height 304 ft.; Snadden’s creek,
distance 131 miles 10 chains, height 404'50ft.; Lady Alice creek,
distance 135 miles, height 484 ft.; Pine creek, distance 145 miles 79
chains, height 657 ft. The distances are by the railway line, and the
heights above low-water sea-level at the railway crossings of the various
streams.
It will be seen that the heights begin to increase rapidly from the
ninety-fifth mile, and continue to Pine creek ; so that, though the average
rise is about sft. per mile, it is less than 3ft. per mile for the first 100
miles, and more than 6ft. per mile for the next fifty miles. This is owing
to the commencement of ranges which are connected with most of the
mineral country in the Territory. These ranges are a series of parallel
ridges, having a south-south-easterly trend, and rising to a height of
from 200 ft. to 600 ft. above the plains, though the latter height
is exceptional. This mountainous area is about twenty miles in width,
from east to west; and forty in length, from north to south. In it
are contained the sources of most of the small tributaries of the Adelaide
and Mary, which are rivers with a north and south direction. The
Adelaide may be said to take its rise in the midst of this chain, and the
Mary to the eastward and southward. The ridges and ranges are
separated in their northern portions by somewhat wide alluvial flats or
valleys ; but to the south-east the ranges are closer together, higher, and
more abrupt, besides being exceedingly stony and barren. Thus the


country south-east from Mount Wells, as far as the Mary river, is
exceeding rugged, and many of the ranges and valleys almost
inaccessible. The most closely metalled road would not he more deeply
and thickly covered with stones than these valleys and ranges.
Several long and high spurs (500 ft. above the plain) are continued to
the eastward into the valley of the Mary river, but at about 100 miles
from Southport the ranges decline to the level of the plain. At the
sources of the Mary the river takes it rise amid flat-topped cliff's of the
most picturesque description. The view along the stony white gorges
has few parallels in Australia. The valley of the river is hemmed in by
straight cliff's or castellated outliers, some 150 ft. or 200 ft. high. There
is often a slope or talus at the bottom, but they are only accessible in a
few places. But the valley is for the most part fertile, and shaded by fine
graceful palm trees ; springs bubble out from the shady thickets at the
foot of the cliff’s, giving rise to streams many feet wide and deep at a
short distance from the sources. The valley is strewn to a bewildering
extent with huge boulders and masses of rock, which have fallen down
from above, because the magnesite is very brittle, with a foundation of
loose and friable sandstone. Thus no very long time would be required
for the springs to crumble and break away the edge of the tableland, or
scoop away the valleys as we see them now. These springs, therefore,
I believe to be the origin of the cliff's and gorges at the heads, not only
of the Mary, but of the west and south Alligator rivers, and many besides.
The magnesite and sandstone strata are very permeable to water. The
heavy rainfall of the wet season easily drains through the strata, and
bubbles out at the base, where it has weathered and broken away the
stone into abrupt precipitous and fortress like hills.
Beyond the Mary, to the eastward, there is tableland, probably partially
composed of the sandstone fluviatile conglomerates of the west and south
Alligator rivers. To the west of the chain of ranges there is a small area
of flat-topped ranges, granitic at the base and capped with horizontal
strata of sandstone and magnesite. To the westward of this it is said
that the metalliferous rocks crop out again, but I have not visited this
area. It is evident that it cannot be either important or extensive as a
mountain region, as from it no stream of any magnitude takes its rise.
At the Daly river we have an outcrop of the metalliferous country with
copper mines of unusual richness. To the south of Pine Creek there is a
change in the features of the country. Hitherto all the drainage is to the
north, and the sources of the waters are the high lands of the metalliferous
ranges and the springs at the foot of the tableland; but about 150
miles from Palmerston (railway distances) a watershed is crossed
not higher than 800 ft. above low-water sea level. Beyond this
point the streams have a southern and westerly direction, until the
Katherine river is reached, whose bed is about 100 ft. above the Mary.
Ultimately this large river has a north-west direction, and enters the sea
as the Daly river. Thus there is a well defined mountain system, com-
prising the ranges in which the principal mines are found. It is an
isolated system, whose culminating points are Mount Wells on the north,
and the country between the Union mines and the Mary river on the
south. It is cut off to the north by the river Finniss, which has a gene-
rally north-westerly trend, and whose coast outlet is unknown. No part
of the ranges seems to be over I,oooft. above the sea.


GEOLOGY.
The whole of the geology of the Northern Territory is of a simple
kind. The formations are few in number. There are no fossils, and the
exposed sections are numerous and clear. The most conspicuous, as well
as the most common, is mica slate. It is not crystalline, and therefore
Ido not call it metamorphic. The stratification is frequently perpen-
dicular, but it is inclined at almost every angle. It is jointed into so
many lines of fracture that it falls to small angular pieces when quarried.
This has been from pressure, and this, combined with the way in which
the strata are crumpled and folded, makes it probable that we have in
this formation a series of anticlinal and synclinal folds, as if the horizontal
strata were crushed together by lateral pressure. Nearly all the upper
curves have been subsequently removed by denudation.’ The rock is,
in places, highly ferruginous, and also contains large portions of magnesia,
occasionally chlorite and mica. The latter is very common in the mineral
form of muscovite. Near mineral lodes, and near these only, it becomes
exceedingly large and abundant. At Talc Head, Port Darwin, the
brilliant show of mica which there occurs, marks the occurrence of five or
six mineral lodes; also, at Snadden’s creek, McKinlay mine, and Mount
Shoobridge, The whole of this formation is paleozoic, and probably,
from its mineral character, of the same age as the auriferous slates and
schists of Victoria, New South Wales, &c. In those colonies it is called
“ lo wer Silurian,” but, in justice to Professor Sedgwick, should be named
“upper Cambrian,” or (as proposed as a compromise) “ Ordoecian.”
There are no fossils to verify this identification. Plant impressions are
certainly found in the slates at Pine Creek, but they cannot be identified
as yet; but the whole character of the formation is such as to leave little
doubt on the mind of the geologist as to the identity in age with the
auriferous deposits elsewhere.
Dykes. In every part of these deposits there are dykes, mineral lodes,
and faults. Near Port Darwin camp there has been a considerable
overflow of ancient lava, which now consists of a few hills of diorite, a
volcanic rock of deep blackish-green color and waxy lustre. It consists
of crystals of hornblende, mixed with felspar, triclinic in small quantities.
Until more carefully examined, the rock at Port Darwin camp may be
called “ diorite.” There are also diorite dykes in many places, especially
where the gold has been abundant, such as at Margaret creek and other
places. In addition, the country is interlaced in abundance with dykes
or veins of a greyish-blue flaggy rock of volcanic character and extra-
ordinary hardness.
These dykes are narrow and of great length—sometimes several miles.
Throughout their course they stand out like flagstones, often 10ft. above
the ground. The stone is fine grained, and not vesicular. It resembles
phonolite, but I must defer any decision as to its character until I have
had sections examined. What are the relations of these dykes to the
auriferous rocks is hard to say, but they always accompany them. That
diorite dykes are accompanied with singularly rich shoots of gold, is
what experience throughout the colonies has borne out. Thes dykes of
phonolite (?) appear to be more modern. There are many instances
where they accompany a white barren quartz. Probably they are not
connected with gold in one way or the other. The quartz veins


generally, though not always, run along the summits of the ranges, as
their existence has preserved the ridge from decay. This gives rise to a
peculiar aspect to the hills, which are a series of sharp ridges, with saddles
between. Of course the quartz lodes run parallel with the hills, as they
are in fact the nucleus of the ranges.
The strata around the reefs are frequently metamorphosed for a short
distance. At the Eleanor mine, Pine creek, the casing is crystalline with
crystals of staurolite. At the McKinlay mine the walls are pink granite
and much mica. At Springhill mine the ground is faulted in successive
steps as it were. At the Eleanor reef the country is mixed up, crushed,
and faulted, in much confusion, yet not sufficient to prevent the lodes
being followed. The lodes or quartz reefs vary in their mineral contents.
Eor the most part they are gold veins of the usual character, but they
are also mineral lodes of silver, copper, lead, tin, and probably nickel,
graphite, iron, and manganese. I have seen no antimony.
The term generally used by the miners for the outcrops of the heads
of a vein is a “ blow,” and the idea of their origin in connected -with the
action of fire. Whatever may be the origin of veins, it is certain that
the burnt red and black appearance is the result of exposure to the action
of air and water, which has rusted the iron ores and decomposed the
other minerals. For a long time past the miners have had a prejudice
against what are called “ iron stone blows,” or caps of lodes in which
there was a great development of peroxides of iron. They have often
been tried and found poor in gold, or destitute of it, so that even
prospecting them has been generally abandoned. There are a good
many throughout the district, and the majority have been untouched.
They are the heads of true mineral lodes, the mineral character of which
will not be determined until the water-level is reached. Silver, copper,
and lead are the principal minerals to be expected in them, with, probably,
a little gold. I think they are rich ores, but not suited for ordinary
methods of treatment, or the battery appliances in use here. New and
patent methods for the separation of the ores will have to be adopted.
The experience of the Ravenswood (Queensland) miners will be found
of service in the Northern Territory. There is in most respects a close
similarity between the two mining districts.
Granite. —The peculiarities of the metals will be dealt with presently.
The rest of the geology of the country may be dismissed in a few para-
graphs. All round the mining area there is a belt of granite. I infer that
it is a complete ring, though I have not traced it in every part. Thus,
granite is found on the west side all along the telegraph line, and on the
east side all along the valley of the Mary, on the north side from the
Fergusson to within four miles of Pine creek, and on the south about
the neighborhood of the Finniss river. On the north-west and south
sides of this belt the granite is pink in color, coarse-grained with large
crystals of orthoclase felspar, often two inches or more in length.
Usually this coarse kind of granite is termed granite porphyry. On the
west side it is partly of this kind, but on the east its place is almost
entirely taken by blue, close-grained granite—a valuable stone. On all
sides this granite crops up into hills of 100 ft. and more in height, but
never quite so high as the metalliferous slates.
The existence of this belt of granite round the mineral deposits is of
the greatest importance. It is a state of things which all experience


has taught to he the most favorable for mineral deposits. Usually the
greatest richness is found at the edges of these formations, or rather at
the junction of the slates with the eruptive granite, and from what I
have seen, this locality seems to he no exception. All along the east side
of the ranges, or the valley of the Mary river, there is a continuous outcrop
of mineral veins almost upon the junction. The Eveleen silver mine is
actually upon the extreme edge of the latter, but the section is not
visible, as it is overlaid by a small outlier of ancient limestone. This is
one instance, but there are many more which have never boen prospected
to the north and south along the valley of the Mary.
It would seem as if silver, lead, copper, and tin were the metals
developed on the edges of this junction, while gold exists generally
throughout the slates. But the district is hardly sufficiently prospected
to form safe conclusions. The width of this ring of granite varies as
far as it is known. On the south of Pine creek it is at least fifteen miles
wide, and in some parts of the valley of the Mary it must he nearly as
much, as well as on the north. On the west it is overlaid by sandstone
and magnesite rock. An accurate geological survey of this line of
junction would lead to the discovery of many mineral lodes.
As far as I have seen the minerals are found in the slate country
only. There are quartz lodes and other lodes in the granite, but they
have proved barren as yet. Not that gold and other minerals may not
he found in granite, as they are in Charters Towers and in Victoria; but
there are few exceptions to the following rule : Where mineral veins
pass from one formation to another they change their character. Thus,
if they have been rich in slate country and pass into granite, they will
become poor and barren, and vice versa. When the belt of granite is
traversed we find that the metalliferous formation again crops out on the
north and south—thus the whole country between Southport and Port
Darwin consists of that formation, capped here and there with a little
magnesite. There are many quartz lodes, and I am of opinion that
the outcrop of ironstone in ridges of black nodular limonite marks the
locality of mineral lodes. There is every reason to suppose that the
junction between the granite and slates on the outside of the granitic
ring should be as rich in mineral lodes as the inside line of junction.
Mineral lodes, which become barren in passing from one country to
another, become metalliferous in returning to the country from which
they took their origin. Thus then the edge of the granite country on
the outside of the belt to the westward of the telegraph line to the south
of the Fergusson and north of the Finniss should be prospected, and
may prove to be rich in minerals.
Limestone. —Next in succession to the granite and the folded and
contorted slate strata comes a small outlier of ancient crystalline lime-
stone, which occupies a small area of a few hundred acres at the Eveleen
mine. The strata are contorted, and even bent and folded into rude
circles. Besides presenting the usual weathered appearance of lime-
stone, of fantastic pinnacles, &c., this formation has a most peculiar
aspect from the nature of the rock. The area is composed of alternate
layers of hard flaggy chert or flint and blue limestone. The latter, of
course, weather much quicker than the siliceous rocks, which stand out
in ridges and curves like heaps of tiles or fanciful shapes in pottery.


This curious feature and the heaps of boulders with which the granite
is weathered give the neighborhood of the Eveleen mine a somewhat
bold scenery.
In the absence of fossils, no decision can be given as to the age of
these beds. They are extremely like the mineral limestones of Queens-
land. A similar stone occurs as an outlier in the Malay peninsula,
Borneo, China, and the Philippines. It is devonian or lower carboni-
ferous, and so, perhaps, is the limestone at the Eveleen. The peculiar
way in which the strata alternate with quartzites or chert is exceedingly
interesting, and unless deposited in connection with mineral springs
is difficult of explanation. The carboniferous limestones of Europe
often contain bands and nodules of chert. Under the microscope the
limestone is seen to be perfectly crystalline. This metamorphism may
be due to the contact of the eruptive granite, or the slow infiltration of
water. The mineral lode of the Eveleen has broken through these
strata. Therefore the filling in of the silver-lead lodes is of later age
than the carboniferous period.
Magnesite and Sandstone. —Above the slate there is a complete absence
of any fossiliferous rocks, and almost a complete absence of lime, except
in some places on the Katherine river and the Eveleen. The inference,
therefore, is strong that there never has been any subsidence into the sea
or upheaval from it within what the geologists call more recent times.
What we find wherever a good section is exposed is this—A layer of
loose white or red decomposed rock or rubble, some 3ft. or 4ft. thick,
lies on the upturned edges of the slates. Above this a layer, some 2ft. thick,
of loamy earth, which has been surface soil. Above this is from 14ft. to
120 ft. of magnesite or carbonate of magnesia, more or less impure, with
silicates of alumina and iron, and mere traces of lime. Not often is it
pure white, for the stains of brown, red, and purple, from iron oxide,
permeate the whole.
There are also bands and strata, a foot and more in of
yellowish brown limonite or hydrated peroxide of iron. In many cases it
appears to be of the same mineral composition as the slates, and though
this is more apparent than real, there is no doubt that they closely
approximate in character, but the magnesite is horizontally stratified, is
never contorted, it has no uniform dip, but its strata follow the inequali-
ties of the surface on which they rest. The whole rock is essentially a
decomposition product; it has not been placed there by the sea or it
would contain some marine remains. I believe it to be a decom-
posed ash, containing olivine, or a fragmentary deposit carried into the
air, when the extinct volcanoes of the south (to be referred to presently),
broke through the metalliferous slates. The extent and thickness of the
deposit need not deter us from this explanation. When in Java, during
the eruption of Krakatoa, I have seen deposits of ash several feet in
thickness at more than a hundred miles distant from the volcano.
There is one important fact in connection with these rocks, and that is
that the mineral lodes do not crop out above them, unless where it is very
thin; there is an interesting and instructive section visible at Talc Head,
Port Darwin, which shows this. Five or six mineral veins of consider-
able hardness crop out from the slates, which here dip in various direc-
tions, at an angle of about 30°. The slates have been eaten away
considerably by the action of the sea, so that the lodes stand out like walls.


But the magnesite formation covers them on the top. From this we learn
that the deposit is one which took place long after the lodes were filled in.
I say long after because the magnesite formation is geologically a modern
one. Similar volcanic emanations are clearly of miocene age in South
Australia; and so I think it is highly probable that they are in this area.
Cretaceous Formation. —l have seen no trace of the cretaceous forma-
tion which is so extensively developed in the western plains of Northern
Queensland. But in that colony it is reduced by denudation to a few
fossiliferous nodules on the summits of the divide—and on the Hodgkin-
son and Tate rivers. There the slates are of same age and much the
same character as the slate here. If, then, the cretaceous sea once
covered the area, it is highly probable that it covered this too, though
every trace of the formation has been swept away.
Red Sandstone. —As much as 80ft. of highly ferruginous sandstone,
horizontally stratified, is found resting on the granite, and even forming
small flat-topped hills on the slate hills. Magnesite also covers a few of
the slate ridges. The instances are specially about Mount Shoohridge.
I believe that these sandstones are of volcanic origin also, but the
evidence is too long and too technical to be entered into here. I propose
to treat the whole question at an early period in a complete paper on the
desert sandstone.
Volcanic Rocks. —About ten miles north of the Katherine river, on the
telegraph line, there is a volcanic area of several hundred square miles.
It would take some time to examine it closely and to find what remains
there are of the ancient craters from which so much lava has been poured
forth. The volcanic hills are rugged and confused, rising to a height of
400 ft., and perhaps more. This is insignificant for volcanic peaks, but
all the volcanic centres of Australia are of moderate elevation, and when
they have been exposed to much weathering mere mounds of dolerites are
the result. Here probably the mountains are more rugged. The lavas are
vesicular, and in many of the specimens that I have seen every fragment
of rock was encrusted with green glossy crystals of olivine.
I had already concluded that there must be some volcanic centres
which had sent forth such quantities of magnesium ash which I found on
the ranges, and this olivine rock was a remarkable confirmation of the
theory. Ido not think that any valuable minerals will be found in con-
nection with this volcanic area.
Porphyry Rocks. —Beyond the sources of the River Mary the metallife-
rous slates do not reappear south of the magnesite tableland; neither
does the granite, but in its place a red porphyry rock of a very barren
and arid character. It is a crystalline mixture of quartz and felspar, the
crystals being plagioclase and small. This rock rises into small hills of
broken and angular character, never weathering into rounded masses
like the granite. It is grouped into hills of 200 or 300 ft. in height, and
forms ranges about the junction of Keckwick’s creek with the River
Katherine. It also covers the plains with heaps of angular fragments a
foot or so in diameter, incredibly difficult for horses to travel over.
In a few places we found in this porphyry dykes of basalt, very hard,
and like the phonolite already described, except that it does not stand up
in slabs. The porphyry occupies a large extent of country always of the
most worthless character. It is lightly timbered, covered with coarse
reed-like grasses of the dry country. It is utterly destitute of minerals.


Fluviatile Sandstone Conglomerates. —These have already been
described. They lie on the banks of the Katherine, covering the porphyry,
but a few water-worn fragments of that rock were visible in the con-
glomerate. The majority of pebbles are white quartz, of which, strange
to say, there are no veins in the porphyry rock. This sandstone forms
tablelands on both sides of the river, and a mile or two in width for
some ten miles or so. Then the metalliferous slates reappear with tin
and alluvial gold. This is on Maude creek, where gold is reported, but
the country does not appear to me to be very promising.
Limestone. —About the telegraph station at the Katherine river the
banks form a tableland some 60ft. to 100 ft. above the stream. It is
covered with an outcrop of grey limestone which has weathered into
boulders and pinnacles of a very rough character. It forms low ranges
about five or six miles from the north bank of the stream. These ranges
are very rough, and quite inaccessible to horses.
MINERALS.
Gold. —From what has been already said, it will appear that the gold
of this country is found in exactly the same manner as in other parts of
the world. It is needless to repeat what these conditions are. The
stone in those reefs which have been worked is rich, and would pay
well to work in any country but this, where wages and cartage are so
enormously high. The gold generally is of high standard. The total
amount exported from August, 1880, to September, 1885, is 121,7790z5.,
of the value of £432,959. This, of course, is not by any means a full
statement of the gold obtained in the Territory. The amount is large,
but divided amid the number of mines worked, and the number of miners
employed, it is relatively very large, and shows the richness of the
country.
Of two things I am convinced —first, that not one of the mines
hitherto worked or abandoned has been exhausted of the gold; secondly,
not twenty-five per cent, of the auriferous reefs of the country have been
fairly tested. If a prospector does not get a good assay from a bagful
of stone, which he digs from the top of the “blow,” the whole is
condemned. The test, of course, is utterly insufficient. The chances
are much against the prospector striking on the shoot of gold at the
first blow of his pick. Who does not know the thousands of instances
where rich mines have lain idle for years from bad prospecting ? A
slight examination convinces one that many of the reefs in the Territory
contain rich metal, even though the prospector has turned away from
them. The gold in most of the reefs is remarkably clean and pure,
with little sulphur or arsenic or other troublesome minerals.
Some mines are an exception, and the sulphurous tailings in them are
considerable. It would be well if the miners would follow an important
piece of advice, which has reference to tailings. They should be stacked
like compost heaps, Avith equal quantities of leaves, branches, grass, or
any decaying vegetable matter. In a couple of years the pyrites will be


considerably or completely decomposed, and can be treated in the mill
without any roasting. Pyrites heaps are often very rich in gold, and will
soon pay for their keep.
It may certainly be said that the quartz reefs of the Northern Territory
have never had justice done them by first-class machinery. Indeed, it is
stated that the Union reefs have been brought to ruin by the battery em-
ployed, which let large quantities of amalgam go down the creek; but
with small capital, enormously high wages, and equally high cartage, it
could hardly be otherwise. When these shall have been adjusted to the
rates of the value of the quartz, then the day of the mines of the Northern
Territory will have come. Everything is hoped from the railway to bring
this about; there is plenty of material to work upon. I regret being
unable to give the proportion of gold produced to the quartz crushed.
I believe the average in high, generally over an ounce. Some of the
crushings of the top stone have been enormously rich. Thus at the
extended Union, in 1877, forty tons of quartz yielded 740 ounces of gold.
This is exceptional, and belongs to the returns which miners always
expect to obtain from the capping of reefs, where the gold lies, which has
weathered out of the stone during countless ages.
In reference to this, I have been asked to give an opinion as to whether
deep sinking will give increased returns. For increased returns, I should
say that there is nothing peculiar in the ground which would lead one to
expect it. In those mines where the shoots of gold have a tendency to
form pockets of metal, the ground may become richer at any moment,
especially where the quartz lode is intersected by veins of diorite ; here
rich gold will nearly always be found, and often as much in the diorite as
the quartz. All questions connected with deep sinking are best answered
by the diamond drill, but seeing how few of the mines are able to pay for
an efficient battery, it is hardly to be expected that they could pay for
drill exploration. Besides, the question of deep sinking is not important.
Just now there is plenty of payable stone within easy reach in most of
the mines if labor and cartage were only obtainable at a price comensu-
rate with the value of gold.
In the alluvial workings the conditions are precisely similar to alluvial
gold in other parts of the world, the sinking is shallow, sometimes merely
surfacing, and the gravel scarcely waterworn; this is the more extraordi-
nary, as the rainfall is much greater here than in Victoria or New South
Wales, wnere the drift gravel is so much rounded, but the elevation is
much greater.
The alluvial diggings are generally in shallow valleys with low ridges
on each side. Curiously enough, rich gold has been found in valleys
where on the ridges forming the valley not a trace of a quartz reef could
be found. Finely-divided gold, no doubt, exists to some extent in the
slates, and this must be the explanation of fine gold in alluvial far from
any reefs, just like stream tin. True stream tin is not derived from reefs
or lodes, but from finely disseminated particles of tin in granite. Nuggets
are not common, and never of very large size. The very fine gold would
appear to be inexhaustible, as the Chinese always seem able to make a
living, no matter how often they turn over the old headings.
It only remains to say that, as the reefs containing good gold are far from
being all discovered in the Territory, so it is with the alluvial; there are
gullies and flats innumerable which have never even been prospected ;


they are all connected with the auriferous slates, and even with quartz
reefs. To name them would be endless, but I especially mention the
country between Mount Wells and Mount Douglas, amid the ranges on
the east side until the ranges fall away, a distance of between forty and
fifty miles.
The fluviatile conglomerate is full of quartz boulders—in fact it is a
drift derived from quartz lodes. It may be worth while trying whether
gold is to be found at the base. Ido not expect it, however ; these drifts
have an ugly resemblance in character to what Mr. Selwyn named the
barren miocene alluvial drifts of Victoria, in which gold is never found.
It is at present inexplicable why this should be so, and it is very odd that
the phenomenon should be repeated in North Australia, but it needs
further investigation.
At present all the alluvial diggings, except Bridge Creek, are entirely
in the hand of Chinese, and Bridge Creek soon will be. A European
Avho expects £4 10s. to £5 per week, and who gets it here, will find,
even on a rich alluvial gold field, a poor field for his labor. While this
state of things exists it would take a very rich goldfield indeed to make
much change in the prospects of the Northern Territory.
Silver. —All the silver lodes that I have seen in the Territory are silver-
lead lodes. Silver is also associated with gold in one or two mines, and
with copper. I have seen no horn silver, or any of those ores which
make a speciality of the mines of the Silverton lodes. Some of the so-
called pyrites from the gold reefs contain sufficient silver as to rank
almost as a silver ore. All the lode silver in the Northern Territory
comes from galena. This, as a rule, is very rich in Very large
assays are reported from some mines, but without paying too much
attention to these rather uncertain kind of statements, it may be asserted
that there are few ores from which a bead of silver cannot be obtained
with an ordinary blowpipe. The silver-lead veins have been found
generally on the edge of the slate, and near the junction with the granite.
There are several outcrops of such veins on the west side of the valle) r of
the Mary. Comparatively few have been prospected as yet. There are
also excellent shows of galena on the surface, especially at the Eveleen,
Robinson’s, Barrett’s lode near Mount Shoobridge, south of Pine Creek,
and other places. The amount of silver must be very large to pay the
expenses of smelting and carriage, as things are now; but eventually
there can be no doubt large productions of silver may be looked for from
the Northern Territory.
Lead. —From what has been already said it will be seen that lead lodes
are numerous in the Territory. They are always associated with silver;
the ores are sulphides and carbonates, and, like the lead ores of Biitain,
varv very much in the quantity of silver. In England the lead ores oi
Devonshire and Cornwall are the richest, Derbyshire very poor, ana
Shropshire ores are entirely free from silver. In most cases cavities of
carbonate of lead (cerusite), besides mimetessite (arseniate of lead) are
common, with peculiar crystals of cupro-plumbite, or a mineral compound
of oxides of lead and copper.
Tin. This metal will eventually be one of the great sources of mineral
riches in the Territory, especially as it occurs in the form of reef tin
which is so comparatively rare. It may be well to explain that the most


of the tin discoveries in Australia have been made in stream tin, which
is never of a permanent character. The exceptions are the rich tin vein
district in Herberton, Queensland, and probably some places in Tas-
mania.
Stream tin is quite a different formation. It is derived, as far as my
experience go.es, from the weathering of granite rocks at their junction
with newer and stratified rocks. It has not been in veins, but diffused
through the substance of the rock generally in grains and crystals of
small size. It is entirely an alluvial formation, and where it exists no
lode tin is found. This was the character of the stream tin mines at
Stanthorpe and other places in Queensland, New South Wales, and
Victoria. This is universally the character of the tin mines in the Indian
Archipelago, many of which I have visited. On the other hand, I know
of no case in Australia or the East where stream tin occurs in connection
with tin veins. There is always in the watercourses near the lodes a
certain amount of rubble tin ore derived from the lodes, but it is of large
size and small in quantity. Thus it is in the rich tin-vein district in
Queensland, and thus it is in the Northern Territory. I have seen no
stream tin, properly speaking, except a little from Maude creek on the
south of the Katherine. The rubble tin from Mount Wells, and the
splendid specimens of wood tin from Snadden’s creek, are derived from
the lodes. There is no wash, so to speak, and the supply was very soon
exhausted. But the vein tin of the Northern Territory is abundant and
rich. It is spread over a wider area than the Herberton mines, and the
lodes are more numerous. lam convinced, from what I have seen, that
no part of Australia can show tin lodes to the same number and extent,
though in particular instances, such as Mount Bischoff in Tasmania, they
may be richer. The instances of this will be seen in the detailed
descriptions of the mines, such as Mount Wells, the mines on the
McKinlay river, Mount Shoobridge, and the Finniss.
So far the lodes have been found confined to the north and western
and southern edges of the metalliferous country. At Mount Wells and
the McKinlay mines they are more central. These mines are dis-
tinguished by the number of veins, and their being crossed with copper
lodes, as in Cornwall. In fact there is much resemblance between this
country (as using the word “ country” in the miners’ sense) and Corn-
wall. In the direction of Mount Shoobridge there is a great development
of mica (muscovite), which is always regarded as a favorable sign. At
Mount Shoobridge (Cruikshank’s claim) crystals of mica are of very
large size, and abundant also at Nash’s claim, Solomon’s, &cc. It would
be invidious to single out any mine for special notice, but I may say that
all of those I have examined promise well, and some give indications of
extreme richness. It may be added that many more lodes will yet be
discovered on the edge of the granite country. At Talc Head, Port
Darwin, I counted five mineral lodes of some width, probably poor in tin,
and at the sea level; but a careful search will develop many more. The
Northern Territory may be emphatically pronounced to be a tin country.
Copper. —Lodes of this metal have been found in many places, either
alone or in connection with tin and silver-lead lodes. The Daly river
copper mines I have not visited, but the ores I have seen are of singular
richness. They are apparantly abundant as well, being situated close to
a place of shipment, it has paid so far to send them to Newcastle, New


South Wales, for treatment, This promises well, and, should the price
of copper rise, as it assuredly must do, the Daly river will he a most
important mining district. Moreover, the country is extremely good.
Copper is also found at Cruikshank gully, south of Pine creek, at the
Howley, and near Port Darwin camp. At Mount Wells there are many
small veins intersecting the tin and the McKinlay mines. The Eveleen
mine is a lode of copper and galena. The copper ores are poor, but
probably contain a proportion of silver. Copper would be found in many
other places if prospected for, and it will yet he a valuable mineral in
the Northern Territory.
Nickel. —At the Eveleen mine there are several indications of nickel
ore. It is also spoken of as having been found at Mount Wells and
Snadden’s creek.
Iron. —Ores of this metal are found everywhere, but of poor quality.
No doubt they would be useful in reducing copper ores, and may be
serviceable to the Territory yet.
Manganese , Graphite , and Bismuth are all found in small veins,
especially near Mount Wells, the Eveleen, and the Union. The bismuth
seen by me was metallic, and of fine quality; but the possessor did not
state where it came from.
Gem Stones. —My opportunities for observation were not long enough
to investigate in this direction. The indications are hardly favorable,
but the most likely places are the basaltic country, ten miles north of the
Katherine river.
PROSPECTING RESULTS.
It only remains now to give the result of the prospecting tour and
exploration through the southern and eastern portions of the territory.
On my arrival at Burrundie, rather more than a month was spent in the
examination of the mines, whether abandoned or in operation. The
details are given in the following pages. The object of this portion of
the report is to show that the mines are still good and valuable, and have
only failed, where they have failed, from the peculiar circumstances and
difficulties of labor and capital.
Mining Districts—Mount Wells. —This mine has a special interest
attached to it, not only because it was the first place in the colony from
which extensive deposits of ore were reported, but also because of the
extraordinary accounts of its richness which have reached the other
colonies from time to time. It has been called the Mount Bischoff of
Australia; but there is no resemblance between the two mines. The
Mount Bischoff is an exceptional deposit of tin ore, not conforming to
previous experience in tin mining ; Mount Wells, on the contrary, is a
tin mine of the usual character, very much resembling the tin mines of
Cornwall, both in the country and in the occurrence of ore in the veins.
But the tin itself is of excellent quality, surpassing anything ever found
in Europe or anywhere, except in Australia. The mine is situated in the
best part of the mineral country of the Northern Territory, between
Yam creek and the McKinlay river. The whole country between these
'two points is one large network of quartz reefs, porphyry dykes, and


dioritic eruptions. Mount Wells is the culminating point of the ranges,
or the highest summit. It is about 600 ft. above the plain, and, say,
950 ft. above the sea level. It consists of stratified quartzose slates, with
a little—very little—mica, not differing much from the rest of the
country hereabouts.
But the surprising thing about Mount Wells is the number of tin, and
I should say copper, lodes with which it is injected, and all within a com-
paratively small area. No doubt many of these are mere leaders, and
will he found to join the main lodes ; hut their number is considerable,
and they all contain some tin ore. There are two main lodes from which
the ore is being taken, and on them a shaft has been sunk and an adit
driven below for 100 ft. These are only a short distance from the
battery. By means of a tramway and an endless wire the crushing stuff
can be be easily and cheaply brought down, and this work is about to be
commenced forthwith. A dam has been constructed close to the engine-
house, on a creek which comes from a guily on the side of the mountain.
Thus a considerable quantity of water has been stored, but, possibly, not
equal to the requirements of the place.. But another dam is in course of
erection higher up the creek, which will give a very large storage of
water. The machinery erected is of a very complete and first-class
description, with a sufficient battery, elaborate contrivances for separating
the iron ore, of which there is a good deal, and dealing with the tin slime.
This is also in working order; but at present nothiug can be done for
Avant of water, and this must continue until the rainy season sets in.
In a tunnel driven into the hill on the side of the creek, to catch
another lode, there is a small copper lode ; but all the sides of this adit
have been covered with infiltrations of copper sulphate from the joints of
the rock, showing that there must be an extensive vein, or a series of
veins, of copper at no great distance. There have been some hitches in
the management of this mine, which have led to much delay and expense,
and kept the work from giving returns to the shareholders, as it ought
reasonably to have been doing by this time. Whatever may be the
causes it is not the fault of the mine. That is good enough if skilfully
and economically managed. In character the ore is like that of the Her-
berton mines, in Queensland. The appearance of some of the stone is
very good. Taking them all round, the ores may not yield a high per-
centage, but then there is a large quantity, and easily accessible. When
the railway is opened the Mount Wells mine ought to pay good dividends.
McKinlay Mines. —These mines occur on a range lying about a mile
and a half south by west of the Burrundie. It is one of the series of
detached north and south ridges which cover, in parallel lines, much of the
country between the coast and the table land in the Northern Territory.
It is exceedingly steep, very stony, with an uneven outline, rounded into
a series of camel-hump elevations. The bed rock crops out in irregular
angular fragments, slaty in structure but not finely fissile. The rock is
crystalline, shewing mica in minute crystals and quartz in a very hard
feldspathic paste. In spite of the marked crystalline structure, there are
distinct marks of stratification, the strike corresponding with the range,
and the dip varying in inclination and direction. Besides the stratifica-
tion there is a series of joints, five or six in number ; two are almost
perpendicular to the plane of stratification, one almost parallel with it,
and the rest inclined at various angles so as to break the rock into wedge-


shaped masses. The color of the rock, where not weathered, is dark
blue-black, but where the influence of water and carbonaceous matter has
affected it on the surface it is stained in various shades of red and brown.
There are two parallel ridges on this range, the eastern one a third lower,
say 400 ft. above the plain, and the higher about 600 ft., or 1,150 ft. and
1,350 ft. respectively above the sea-level. These ridges command a good
view of the surrounding country, Mount Wells bearing north ten degrees
east four miles, with a remarkable conical hill named Piccaninny Mount
Wells, on the western slope. On both the ridges there are conspicuous
outcrops of quartz and ironstone near the summit, which, running parallel
with the range, show the lines of the lodes.
At the summit of the eastern or lower ridge a few shafts have been
sunk, and clearings made on the cap of the lodes. These workings have
been made by the Mount Wells (Northern Territory) Tin Mining Com-
pany, Limited, who are at present under suspension from working by
Government, as I am informed. The company is represented on the
ground by Mr. Deane. The mine is commonly known as No. 1 company.
The first shaft one meets with is called No. 3. It has been sunk on the
lode for 30ft., and then a drive made for 35ft. This has uncovered the
lode about 2ft. wide, with very clean cut parallel walls and a slight
northerly dip. Several other leaders were uncovered at the same time,
not all tin bearing. The main lode shows exceedingly well. The tin is
in fine crystals in quartz, or disseminated in chlorite of massive character,
and little or no iron. Some of the leaders uncovered in this shaft were
of mica slate, with aggregations of plumose green mica, probably
muscovite. There was also, at No. 3 shaft, hard casing to the lode
composed of a pink and green granite of very pretty appearance. The
felspar was orange pink orthoclase, and the mica a yellowish green,
quartz scanty. The fact of this granite near the lodes is significant, and
seems to indicate that a more complete state of metamorphism would
convert the whole of the stratified slates into granite. No. 2 shaft, a
little further up the hill, is on a different lode. It has been followed for
about 60ft., getting good ore right through. Mr. Deane states that
picked ore sent to England produces over 50 per cent, of tin of the
finest quality. The ore is in chlorite and quartz, but not so much
chlorite as in the No. 3 shaft, and more of quartz. On the ridge of this
hill there are many quartz reefs cropping out, indicating lodes. No. 1
shaft has been sunk for 70ft. on a 3ft. lode with a casing of pink
felspar and mica with chlorite. The stone on the ore heap shows very
good tin of high percentage. There are also faint traces of copper in
this lode. A peculiar white friable stone on the foot and hanging wall
may be found to contain other minerals.
In the gullies leading from these hills prospecting for stream tin has
led to good results. There must be a considerable amount of detritus
from the reefs, which has collected in the course of ages from the
weathering of such steep mountain slopes. A large amount of good ore
remains untouched in these localities. At the south-west base of the
range whereon the shafts have been sunk, a drive has been made for
100 ft. into the hill to catch the lodes above mentioned. This gives
a very interesting section, revealing many leaders and some lodes not
seen above. It is from this section also that a correct idea may be
obtained of the stratification, the true mineral character of the rock, and


the system of joints. At the further end is a lode of graphite about
Sin. wide; it is the laminated variety, but at this part of the lode of
poor quality. It is largely mixed with peroxide of iron so as to give a
brownish streak under the microscope; this is seen to contain only a
small proportion of graphite particles.
Springhill. —The road between Deane’s and Springhill, about six
miles, passes over the anticlinal and synclinal folds of a very fissile
slates. The low outcrops bristle like spikes on all sides, difficult and
dangerous for travellers, and of most peculiar appearance. The road
also passes along the eastern base of a range 400 ft. above the plain.
The sides of this ridge are exceedingly steep and covered with loose
stones. Half way between the township of Burrundie and Springhill
there is a conspicuous outcrop of rock in pale green flags, weathering
into yellow and red. It is remarkably hard, fine-grained, and of a paler
green than the diorite of the country, and finely crystalline. This
whinstone dyke is stated to be traceable for over forty miles of country,
or beyond the Adelaide. It may be described provisionally as a horn-
blende porphyry.
At Snadden’s creek there is an engine and battery of stamps, with
buddies, &c., and altogether a complete and very excellent crushing
plant. The road from this proceeds westward, and soon ascends the
range by a steep path; the mine is on the very summit, 400 ft. above
the plain. Close by the shaft B 300 ft., there is a timber shoot of 400 ft.,
giving a fall of 276 ft. for carrying the ore into the valley. The quartz
is ferruginous and so are the strata, mottled red and purplish brown,
variegated in almost every pattern and color, especially in the joints
and stratification lines. The natural color of these slates, however, is a
beautiful glossy black, and this is found at moderate depths and a short
distance from the lodes. These details are mentioned so that the real
nature of the formation may be understood. When not weathered or
decomposed it is a fine-grained black slate of excellent quality; it is
jointed in five or six systems, lines crossing generally at acute angles ;
the stratification is always traceable. The lode has been followed for
about 300 ft. For the first 200 ft. there was little difficulty, but then the
country became confused and full of faults with much mullock (hydrated
iron oxides principally) for 30ft., then another body of stone like the
surface was found, only it was faulted 100 ft. to the northwards. This
stone gradually thinned, and ran out at 250 ft.; then the country became
confused again for 25ft., at which depth another body of stone was found,
but again 70ft. or 80ft. to the northwards. They sunk on this for 25ft.,
and it was 4ft. thick when the work was discontinued. The stone then
averaged about 12dwts. of gold to the ton. About B,oooozs. of gold
were taken from this claim. The gold was very fine and worth about
£3 17s. 3d. The gullies around have been worked for alluvial gold,
where it has a character quite different from the reefs, having been
generally' found in coarse grains. The range is full of quartz reefs and
leaders, none of which have been properly tested at all.
The Clifton mine is a claim close by the Springhill. It has been
worked for some short time, and some 600ozs. of gold were got out, but
the stone was not rich enough to pay wages and expenses in the
Northern Territory. It is a remarkable fact connected with the Spring-


hill mine, though not an exceptional one, that whenever good gold was
reached, the strata on each side of the lode were much disturbed, and
unless where the strata and joints were disturbed, gold was not found.
Snadden’s Creek. —Snadden’s creek mine lies a little east of south of
Mount Wells, say ten or twelve miles. The road to it, which is very
circuitous, runs by succession of low stony ridges with curious drainage
hollows in the soil; that is to say that, in places where there is no regular
drainage, valley, the rain causes pits and hollows, which form water holes
or the heads of gullies. Outcrops of quartz are met with continually.
Where the alluvial has been worked the creek flows across the edges of
the strata, which form continual natural barriers of hard blue quartz rock,
with much white quartz and crystals of felspar. The stream tin has been
caught by these barriers and lies in deep depressions on the upper side.
The ore is a coarse tin sand with fragments of beautiful wood tin about
an inch or so in diameter ; most of this was taken out in the rainy season,
and with, it is said, some small quantity of gold, but as the miners
employed were Chinese, it was stolen. The amount of tin got out from
this portion of the mine was sufficient to pay expenses, but there is still
a good deal of tin sand visible in the wash. The mine could only be
worked in the rainy season as there does not appear to be any favorable
site for the storage of water. From the size of the fragments it is
evident that the tin ore in the creek came from veins at no great distance,
and must be derived from the quartz lodes at each side, which are in the
highest degree worthy of further exploration. Many indications and
leaders have been found. The only lode which has been at all explored
is one on the summit of a low range about a mile from the camp. The
ground has been uncovered for a few yards on the cap of the lode. This
is a quartz lode lying almost horizontally, with excellent specimens of
tin on the surface. Indications of nickel ore have been spoken of as
occurring in this locality, but the local manager was not able to find the
precise spot from which the specimens were taken. They were said to
be much like the light-green Garnierite of Noumea, New Caledonia.
Yam Creek.— ln proceeding northwards from Burrundi to Yam
creek, which is distant about twelve miles west, many low but wide
ranges of diorite were crossed; the stone is coarsely crystaline, and
much the same in character as the diorites of Queensland, notably those
about the Gympie diggings. The color is generally a fine dark green,
and decomposes into a chocolate soil of excellent quality. No more
favorable indication of a mineral country could be had than this outcrop
of rock. Some few geologists are inclined to regard this rock as
similar to granite, and that it will be found at great depths at
the same width or wider than it occurs on the surface. It is more
probable that it is a rock of volcanic character, and that when it is found
covering wide areas of ground it has overspread them much as lavas do
at the present day; if so, these dioritic areas may cover many valuable
and extensive mineral deposits. Apart from its mineral indications, the
soil is excellent, and the occurrence of the rock may be known by the
farms that are always taken out upon it. Yam creek is an extensive
mineral or gold-bearing area, including the Margaret, Stuart’s, Cement,
Neates’,and many other creeks and gullies too numerous to mention.
The description of a few may, however, be given. Since silver has taken
such an important position in the mineral products of the colonies many


reefs and rocks which were passed by with contempt because they did
not contain gold are now reprospected with much interest. Thus, an
outcrop of dark haematite at Grove Hill, which forms a conspicuous rock
mass, has been taken up as a silver lode by Messrs. Wilson & Cruik-
shank, and now has been jumped as a gold mine. The mineral lode is a
remarkable one, and eventually will reward its workers in one way or
another. At present the only show is a haematite and carbonate of
copper, the latter prevailing; but the sinking is only down 40ft. Here
water was reached, but this is merely local; the main water level of this
country is probably much deeper. It is stated that some of the stone
from this capping produced upon assay as much as 800ozs. to the ton.
There are many other outcrops of ironstone visible along the ranges
here, which look much like heaps of furnace clinker. No doubt they
indicate mineral deposits, probably silver, copper, and some gold. They
go by the name of “ ironstone blows.” The word blow comes from an
erroneous idea that the ferruginous character is due to the action of fire;
it is due, however, to the action of water. The prominent character is
owing to the hardness of the silicates of iron, which resist the action of
weathering. Miners as a rule thought them unworthy of notice, possibly
from inability to explore them; they will, however, form a source of
permanent mineral riches in the Northern Territory. With no other
means of assay than a smith’s forge small samples of silver were obtained
from another “ blow.”
Ceynent Gully. —This is a shallow flat close to Grove Hill. It has low
gently sloping ridges at each side, which are covered with broken stone
—a quartzite in rather large angular fragments. The sinking was
shallow, 10ft. to 12ft. There was much gold taken from this gully,
which no donbt was derived from the ranges at each side; yet in these
there were no quartz lodes, but only a few unproductive leaders. In such
cases the vein from which the gold w r as derived has been denuded down
to where it cut out, and these leaders might indicate where it makes
again.
Neales' Gully. —A short marshy flat receiving the drainage of a narrow
stony creek. Much alluvial gold was got from this valley. At the top
of the ridges at each side there are quartz reefs, and at the head of the
valley there is a mine now being worked on tribute by Chinemen. It
seems a very good shoot of gold. Though irregular the lode looks
excellent with a good show of gold ; there are a few scattered crystals of
zinc blende, but much well developed crystals of iron sulphide.
Margaret Creek. —The road to these mines leads along the side of the
River Margaret, where the land is of excellent quality, chocolate brown
and black, derived from the decomposition of diorites and the black car-
bonaceous alluvial of the creeks. Nearly all of this is under cultivation
by the Chinese. Fine crops of maize, sugarcane, sweet potatoes, and
culinary vegetables are visible all along the creek, fringed as usual by
rugged green lines of bamboo. The diorite from which the soil is derived
is an outcrop everywhere. It forms a broad range some 200 ft. or so in
height, often abutting on outcrop of slate at the bottom of the valley,
or even sorrounding such outcrops as if it had flowed around it. Its
color varies between dark-green, gray, and black. The stone is in no
case vesicular; it is entirely crystalline, showing a rock almost entirely
composed of hornblende. At the head of the creek, about five miles from


Port Darwin camp, there is a network of low quartz ridges, giving rise
to many shallow short gullies, where the alluvial has been worked; the
sinking was shallow in red earth; about 20ft. or less to the bedrock the
soil contained a few angular fragments of rock stratified horizontally.
The bedrock was quartzite or felsite of various shades of yellow, red, and
brown, with innumerable joints, in which the stratification was not very
clear. There were many quartz veins from these leaders to lodes several
feet thick. It may be inferred that these are intersected by dykes of
diorite, for there were many fragments of this rock on the edges of the
claims, but it was impossible to obtain any information on this subject
from the Chinese. There were two claims working on a quartz lode,
but no crushing mill. It was stated that all the gold obtained was
broken out of mullock by hand. Judging by the surface indications
there appeared to be a dyke of diorite to the eastward, and then a thick
quartz lode. This was said to be poor, presumably because no gold
was found when a few stones were cracked on the surface. To the
westward was another dioritic dyke at the base of what was called the
tableland. Though somewhat resembling the appearance of the desert
sandstone, this is probably a highly inclined outcrop of fluviatile sand-
stones, giving rise to precipitous escarpments dipping away from the
stream. This goldfield has been entirely mined by Chinese, and most
wretchedly mined. It has all the indications of a rich gold country;
great quantities of gold have been got out of it, but no one can tell how
much, and probably it has nearly all left the country. The district may
employ prospectors for a long time to come, and probably has yet to
reveal much important mineral wealth to the country. The fact of so
many dioritic dykes forming a network as it were with quartz lodes
indicate with certainty important mineral deposits.
Griersons's Gully. —A broad flat, with low mammillated hills all
round, very stony. It has been worked in shallow sinkings for alluvial
gold. The gravel is small, in angular fragments of an inch or less, of
blackish quartz, rock, and schist. Here and there a softer fragment is
rounded as if by Avater, so that the alluvial is probably derived from
weak currents. The Chinese work at the heads of the claims, and go
cradling them over and over again.
Sandy Creek. —This valley is wide and open, with high, barren, stony
ridges on each side, almost destitute of timber. The spurs from the
ranges are almost regularly alternate from each side, and these give rise
to a series of small gullies, which have all been more or less auriferous.
Some of them have proved extremely rich. The ridges from which these
gullies descend show quartz lodes, with an occasional conspicuous out-
crop of ironstone. It is said that the reefs have been prospected; but
this can only have been done in a most superficial and imperfect manner.
The whole of the ridges near Sandy creek have a most promising appear-
ance. Diorite dykes are found at the foot of the ridges, and, like them,
preserving more or less of meridional direction. It may be some time
before capital and enterprise will be brought to bear on these ridges, but
most certainly much mineral riches will be found to be contained amongst
them. The road along Sandy creek leads to the Yam creek telegraph
station, or the Shackle, as it is called. Alluvial sinking has been carried
on almost to the doors of the telegraph office. Amid the wash gravel, at
the heads of the old sinking, there are a good many rounded lumps of


magnesite (magnesian carbonate), which look like lumps of limestone in
the gravel. There is no limestone anywhere near this locality. About
two miles south of the Yam creek telegraph station the overland line
passes through what is here termed a gorge, or open valley, bordered on
each side by low outliers of tableland. In the bottom of the valley there
are outcrops of granite in the form of boulders in many places, and the
same rock forms the sloping sides of the valley for 100 ft. to 150 ft. It is
a pink granite with a black mica, and very large crystals of pink and
yellowish orthoclase felspar, dhis formation is capped by red or purple
horizontal strata some fifty feet in thickness. The rock is always much
weathered and broken into irregular squares, and at a short distance the
appearance is that of a ruined wall. In some places the piles of wea-
thered and highly colored stone assume the most fantastic and artificial
appearances. This is the so-called desert sandstone, which is supposed
to form a continuous plateau over a considerable portion of Australia.
At the place now referred to, the lower stratum lying immediately on
the granite is a waterworn conglomerate about 10ft. thick. It is of
extraordinary hardness; the stones composing it are completely water-
worn, and evenly, smoothly rounded. They consist for the most part of
red quartz, but there are pebbles of felsite and eurite. There was no
good opportunity for seeing the connection of the granite with this con-
glomerate, but evidently it did not furnish the materials. Above this is
about 35ft. of magnesian rock ; it is a compact soft yellowish white rock,
with red stains. It consists of silicate of magnesia and carbonate of
magnesia, with scarcely a trace of lime, but much iron oxide. On the
lower there is a little rough caronate of magnesia lying on the
surface, derived from the weathering of the rock above. It is a globular
compact earthy magnesite, nearly completely soluble in nitric acid. At
the top of this outlier, which was not a plateau, the stone Avas much
broken, but in large masses, with porcupine grass (TriodiaJ, and a
peculiar gum tree with a fibrous bark called here stringybark (Eu-
calyptus acmenioidesj, but differing in many particulars from the stringy-
bark of South Australia. This is said to occur only on the sandstone
tablelands. At another outlier, two-and-a-half miles to the north-west,
the cliffs were of fiery red or purplish red sandstone about 50ft. thick,
resting on granite, the junction being about 80ft. above the plain. There
was no conglomerate at the base, but the junction was obscured by fallen
fragments of rock. Ihe stratification is horizontal, and the joints form
a series of lines more or less perpendicular to the plane of stratification.
The whole aspect of this formation is very picturesque. Its resemblance
to the Hawkesbury sandstones in New South Wales is striking, but it is
of deeper red, and there is oblique or cross stratification, or false bedding.
Ripple marked slabs are very common, and the grains Composing the
sandstone are rounded, and covered with a thin pellicle of ferric oxide.
But the strange part of this part of the tableland is that these outliers
are not 200 ft. above the plain, and therefore 200 ft. at least lower than
the gold mine at Springhill. Thus the horizon of the metalliferous
deposits is considerably above some portions of the sandstone tableland.
This is, it will be seen, not uncommon in the Territory.
Attention is also directed to two important facts manifested. One is
the thinness of the capping of sandstone on these hills. Next, the
stratum of conglomerate of waterworm stones on which it rests. This is


not a universal occurrence, but it is very common. Lastly, the sand-
stone rests on granite in this instance, and in others on the metalliferous
slates. Practically, therefore, this leads to the conclusion that the occur-
rence of desert sandstone is no evidence whatever that it may not be a
metalliferous country easily worked, in spite of its capping of sandstone
or magnesite.
Brock's Creek , Bergin’s Creek , and the John Bull , are alluvial and reef
mines which are now in the hands of Chinese. It is impossible to find
out from them what they are doing, but a good number of men are em-
ployed. The country has a very promising appearance. The field is
about six miles south of the Howley, where the indications are all of the
best auriferous character. The history of how these fields gradually fell
into the hands of Chinese, gives rather a sad instance of what neglect and
bad management may do to ruin excellent mining properties. I was in-
formed that the workings of the John Bull were allowed to become
flooded in a shamefully careless way, and the mine rendered unworkable
because of the limited resources of the proprietors. It may, however, yet
be a profitable concern.
The Stapleton. —l did not visit these gold reefs, which are not now
working. The stone is said to be good, and when carting and crushing
have been cheapened by the railway these mines will be worked again.
Beatson’s Mine. —About eight miles a little east of south from the line
at the Howley is Beatson’s mine, where there is a small quartz-crushing
mill erected on a ridge about 150 ft. above the Howley river. The inter-
vening country is low quartz ridges, a little over 100 ft. above the plain,
with slate in the valleys of a hard siliceous character. In all the valleys
there have been alluvial workings, and much gold taken out. At the
mine itself the slate is a kind of chlorite, with much sulphur and iron
pyrites. The water is strongly impregnated with iron, sulphur, and alum.
The country is evidently full of other minerals besides gold, showing that
the chemical and mineralogical operations of nature have been carried on
here on a large scale. Lead, silver, gold, copper, tin, zinc, iron, and
manganese have all been found in the country near, besides granite,
porphyry, magnesite, kaolin (very excellent, pure white and soft, but
with a trace of lime), and tourmabine. At no distant time this will be a
great mining district in the north. Beatson’s mine is working a lode
which has been followed almost perpendicularly for 90ft., keeping a
remarkably uniform width of 2Jft. It has been worked for over 200 ft.,
and may extend further in a north or south direction. Mr. Beatson got
the mine second hand, and could not give accurate details of its former
history, but believes that a good deal of gold was taken from the upper
part of the reef before it came into his possession. In the commence-
ment, before he had the battery, he used to cart the stone twenty miles
for crushing, and still it used to pay ; and by this means he was able to
buy machinery. With all the expenses of labor, &c., the mine paid
moderately well until they got down into stone full of pyrites, which their
machinery could not treat. They continued the crushing for some time,
but the amalgam got carried down into the creek. The tailings gave on
assay l|oz. to the ton, and as these were being put through, the pump
got out of order and the work was stopped. The stone latterly has
averaged an ounce to the ton. The gold was very good—always up to
£3 19s. an ounce.


Mount Shoohridge. —About eight miles west of Beatson’s mine there
is a series of detached hills, the highest probably not much over 300 ft.
above the plain, or, say, at most 500 ft. above the Howley. These hills
are for the most part truncated cones. The summits are covered with a
thin capping of ferruginous sandstone, horizontally stratified and between
20ft. and 30ft. thick. The hills themselves, beneath the capping, are
composed of a micaceous slate of beautifully silky lustre, or rather the
stone appears as if freshly moistened Avith dew drops. This slate is full
of joints, and the stratification difficult to make out. The hills are all
connected together by very loav ridges, with quartz reefs on the crests
and sides. On one of the outcrops of quartz, about four miles south of
Mount Shoohridge, there is a most singular show of large crystals of
mica, black on the edges, but of pale yellow color where not weathered.
Some of the plates are more than two inches across, and give a dazzling
effect Avhen the sun is shining on the stone. There is very little felspar,
no iron, but much Avhite quartz, amid Avhich there is a fine show of
black tin ore. There are several parallel lodes of this nature, two or
three of which have been uncoA r ered to the extent of removing about a
ton of the ore. This reef Avas discoA-ered by a miner of the name of
Snadden, but it is uoav OAvned as a mineral selection by Messrs. Nash
and Co.
A number of other claims have been taken out on this country, Avhich
certainly shoAvs very rich tin indications. Here and there are marks left
by prospectors, such as costeening trenches, small pits, a little raised
stone on the outcrops of quartz lodes. Thus, on a claim of V. G.
Solomon’s, there is a small lode exposed Avhich shows a little tin, but the
Avork has not been carried more than two feet in depth. But the most
remarkable “ blow,” as the miners term it, is on Cruickshank and Bar-
rett’s claim on a southerly extension of the same range, but probably a
line of lodes much more Avesterly than those previously described. This
is a quartz outcrop on a ridge not more than a few feet above the plain.
It stands out almost like a Avail and is perfectly dazzling from the large
plates of mica Avith Avhich it is covered. The stone, Avhich is exposed, is
thickly marbled Avith A r eins of black tin ore. A little work has been done
here in uncovering the reef. As far as this has gone there is a very fine show
of tin. One block, Avhich lies in the trench, is a beautifully rich speci-
men, containing about a quarter of a ton of ore. It is Avorthy of being
exhibited in any colonial museum. Altogether, the place is a curiously
beautiful mineralogical display. There are large quartz crystals in the
stone, and the bunches of mica, Avhich edgeAvays look like large black
crystals, and on the planes of like plates of silver. Then the
slates at each side are composed of coarse glittering black mica scales,
all combining to make a surprising display of light color and variety of
forms of crystals. This remarkable tin mine Avas discovered by a miner
named G. Barrett, Avho took it up in partnership Avith another miner.
This was about four years ago. From that time little or nothing has
been done.
Territory mines, still more difficult to get capitalists to join in working
them. Generally there has been a tendency to exaggerate the first
discoveries, and the reaction has turned capital aAvay. It can hardly be
supposed that the Mount Shoohridge district will have its treasures of


mineral wealth long unworked. Then much more than merely appears
on the surface will show that this is a metalliferous country of no ordinary
character.
Bridge Creek. —This is an alluvial diggings on some open flats between
low ranges of quartz and diorite dykes, about a mile or so south-west
and south of Bridge creek (a tributary of the Howley). The whole
formation partakes of the usual character which all the alluvial quartz
diggings in the Northern Territory manifest with two peculiarities. One
is, that the quartzite in the alluvial is often like flint, white on the outside
with a black core in which there were faint traces of stratification. The
second is, that in the alluvial there are small boulders of whinstone or
the hornblende porphyry, which occurs as a dyke in so many portions of
the mineral country to the southward. There are also stones of magnesia,
carbonate, and many pebbles with stains of blue and green carbonates of
copper. No doubt there is a copper lode at no great distance. One
small quartz leader is worked, and in this the stone is crushed by hand.
The alluvial extends all along the creek. The gold is so fine and scaly
that it floats away in the panning. Only about twenty white miners are
now working (July, 1886), though the gold is by no means worked out,
and the alluvial might be called rich, but provisions, &c., are too dear in
the Northern Territory to enable a miner to pay his way. There are
many Chinese miners, and there will soon be none others. Bridge creek
diggings is one of the many instances hereabouts of low ranges producing
rich alluvial. Probably there is no country in Australia where, as a rule,
the gold veins are in ridges so little elevated above the plains.
Fountain Head. —This is a very remarkable mining district or area,
about six miles north of the Port Darwin camp goldfields. What is
remarkable about it is that it is situate in a wide plain, and there is no
creek or watercourse of any kind, but just a small stony hill of gentle
acclivity rising to about 60ft. above the plain. All around this hill for
half a mile or so, and on its slopes to the summit, the ground has been
turned over and over, giving rise to a series of gravel mounds. The
gravel is small and angular. Not the slightest trace of water-wearing
can be seen. The fragments are slate like the Union and Sandhurst,
mixed with much blue quartz. With the exception of the reef the hill
is entirely composed of these fragments, appearently derived from the
reef on the summit. There was a large amount of gold found in the
alluvial, all worked by Chinese, of whom there were as many as three
hundred on the ground at one time. The quartz reef on the summit
runs N.N.W. and S.S.E. It is about 12ft. wide and was worked for gold.
Some tons of stone were crushed, but it did not produce more than one
ounce to the ton, so the lode was abondened. Yet it is a most remarkable
reef, probably containing much valuable mineral. Samples have been
carefully selected with a view to further analysis. There are two points
of especial interest in connection with this hill. One is that it is not an
outcrop of slate, but is nearly entirely composed of detritus from the reef.
Secondly, this rich alluvial diggings on an open plain gives rise to the
expectation that many more of these open valley plains will prove to be
auriferous. There are plenty of such where quartz reefs are known to
exist, though they do not crop out, and from all a rich alluvial may be
expected. To the south of the lode, distant three quarters of a mile,
there were some leaders or narrow quartz veins found. These were


worked by Chinese, who carried the stone to Yam creek to the battery,
distant six miles. It turned out well, but not good enough to pay the
enormous expenses of carting, crushing, &c.
The Fountain Head diggings are still worked by a few Chinese who
seem to make wages by turning over the old gravel. In the rainy season
there are always plenty of the same miners, for in the dry months there is
no surface water, but this would be easily overcome, for at a depth of
20ft. there is abundance. The appearance of this field from the top of
the hill is very peculiar with its miles of gravel heaps on a wide, stony
plain. It may yet be an important mining centre. At the Wulwonga
diggings, a short distance north-east of Fountain Head, there are some
flat leaders, yielding in a trial crushing about an ounce of gold to the ton.
North of Glencoe station, about six miles, there are some likely-looking
patches of country ; it is close to the granite junction.
Extended Union. —These gold mines lie about three miles S.E. of
Springhill. Between them there is a dyke of porphyry of the same
character as that already described. It is very hard, and stands up in
conspicuous flag stones like tombstones, with the edges set in a N. and S.
direction. The range on which the mines lie is rugged and broken—
that is to say, it is broken into low conical hills about 300 ft. above the
plain, and connected with each other by low saddles. The low r er ground
is one mass of the usual turned up slates, whose jagged leaves bristle
out of the ground like the “ quills upon the fretful porcupine.” In the
midst of this sort of country are the mines.
First of all, there is a good deal of turned-up ground in the gullies
hereabouts, and the nature of the country shows that the whole of it
might, nay, perhaps will, be in a similar condition, for the gold is not
half prospected, and it is impossible for such masses of quartz rock not
to have had shoots of gold which have weathered into the plains below.
There are shoots of gold in the hills, too, as yet untouched. It is mere
chancework finding them. A prospector sees a quartz reef and gives it
here and there a few blows with his pick or hammer. From this he
pounds a few specimens in a mortar. If no gold is found, henceforth the
reef has a bad name as hungry quartz, or it may be, as at Pine creek, a
good show is found, and though there are many barren ones prospecting
and working goes on. At the Extended Union a great mass of stone has
been taken out, and the cap of the lode looks like an empty quarry. It was
formerly a tangled mass of leaders, going in every direction. These
were very rich, giving as much as 80ozs. of gold to the ton. By and bye
the reef was found; of poorer stone, but still good; very good in any
country but this. It was -worked—bungled and mismanaged—in a way
that need not be chronicled here. The first owners sold out, and their
successors put down a shaft farther out to catch the lode. This was sunk
until the money was exhausted, but the reef was not reached. Then the
mine was let on tribute to Chinamen, who are working it now. They
have sunk a new shaft nearer to the first, but have not caught the lode at
100 ft. The property is a good one, and, with good management, will
yield large returns.
South of this none is the Isabel, worked formerly by Messrs. Mclntyre
and Calmer. It is a fine reef of stone, nowhere less than Oft. wide, and
in some places much more. The owners got from 209 tons of quartz
2680 z. of gold; but when they got down 25ft. the water was too much


for their resources, and from that day to this they could not raise money
to proceed farther. The same owners have another claim, called Pender’s
Hill, which adjoins the Isabel. In this the shaft was sunk 7Oft. and 124
tons of stone got, which yielded 1690z5. gold. This is not working now ;
as usual, no capital to proceed further.
The Union. —These mines may be said to be amongst the greatest and
richest deposits of gold in the Northern Territory. From the prospectors
claim on each side there are twelve claims, north and south, or, in all,
twenty-four claims, extending for nearly three miles. The whole of this
line of country may be said to include good reefs of payable stone—
payable, that is, in other colonies. Besides these reefs, there are those
which lie nearly parallel on the east side, perhaps joining it at No. 5
South Union. In the commencement the caps of these reefs gave
wonderful results from the early crushings, as usual in such cases. For
these the reports of Chief Warden Nash may be consulted, but 60,
70, and lOozs. to the ton have been recorded. It may be safely said that,
though this field is lying idle, or nearly idle, and the claims have been
deserted and abandoned one by one, in no case has it been for want of
good auriferous stone. The gold is there, and it can be confidently
asserted that the resources of the mines have been comparatively
untouched ; but they present a sad prospect now with all their treasures
almost abandoned.
When the Europeans began to give up working their claims a good
many were let on tribute to the Chinese. The average of the crushings
was nearly loz. to the ton ; some of the stone was very good indeed, such
as No. 1 South Union, 15 tons of stone, Slsoz. gold; 22 tons 1440z5.;
9 tons 200z5.; No. 10 South Union, 32 tons 1500z5.; and so forth. But
the stone should have yielded double the above amounts, and for this
reason the only battery on the field was almost useless and wasted half
the gold. Before this was understood the Chinese went to work merrily,
and for some time the stone was raised faster than the battery could
crush it, but the results discouraged them. The wretched battery could
not properly crush the stone, or could not deal with it. Thus, between
waiting and disappointments, the margin of profit from the gold dwindled
away, and one after another the tributors gave up.
It is worthy of remark in connection with these mines that the stone
and the country, and indeed their whole character, is exactly like Sand-
hurst, in Victoria. The gold, however, on the Union reef is not so good
as on the rest of the Territory. Not so the Lady Alice ; there the gold
is very pure ; yet the latter reef inclines in a southerly direction towards
the Union, and ultimately joins it. The Union mines may be truly
called the Sandhurst of the Northern Territory, and probably will bo
found little if at all inferior to Sandhurst as a mining district.
Pine Creek. —This is another large mineral district, about ten miles
south of the Union, and the terminus of the railway. Like the latter, as
like all the mines in this country, it is a series of quartz reefs in slates
having almost a meridonal direction ; but the ranges here are not truly
meridonal. They run almost north-west and south-east. The quartz
lodes are the same. Amidst the quartz lodes there is a variety and
extent of minerals which has few parallels in other countries—gold, silver,
lead, tin, and copper; the latter in a good lode four miles further south.
Once this district attracted much attention, and a comparatively large


population—large that is for the Territory, and very large to what it is
now, for there are only four claims working, those of Messrs. Mullen
and O’Donohoe, both are giving excellent stone. Mullen got 3600zs of
gold from 30 tons of stone. This will give an idea of what the country
is. Since the Eleanor has been worked by Mr. Jansen, about five years,
he has got some 9,0000z5. of gold from it. He has a battery supplied with
water from a dam, and even as late as the end of August he had still
water to keep the mill going for eight hours daily.
It would take one a considerable time to specify the numbers of reefs
which crop out on every side in this extraordinary mineral country.
Here is an example. Close by Mr. Jansen’s house on the flat below the
range there is a silver reef just showing above the level. A small pit
about 3ft. deep has been dug on the top of this. The assay of the ore
showed silver, but no more has been done. But the whole of this
country gives more favorable indications of mineral wealth, and one
cannot speak too highly of it. It is useless saying more as to what the
mines are to what they might be, or what the field might be if there were
capital to work it. Some day surely these deposits of gold, silver,
copper, kc., must yield up their treasures. It should be added that
stream tin has been found at no great distance from Pine creek, and
there are other indications of tin veins. If they have not been found it may
be confidently asserted that they will be in the course of time. A careful
survey of the field would reveal literally hundreds of mineral veins which
are hidden now. There has been a good deal of alluvial working, but
there is a large area of surface untouched.
The slates about Pine creek have been formerly a kind of carbonaceous
shale. In many places partings can be obtained as thin as paper, and on
both sides are covered thickly with indistinct carbonaceous markings.
They are undoubtedly plant remains, but in the specimens exposed not
distinct enough for identification. This discovery in such old rocks is
very interesting, and may lead eventually to some accurate position in
the geological scale for the auriferous slates of the Northern Territory.
McMinn's Bluff. —The road from Pine creek by the side of the
telegraph line passes along a valley formed by a flat sandstone tableland
on the the west side, and a low slate range on the east side. The west
side of the valley is granite, and this also forms the base of the hills.
The eastern side has a much finer grained granite of quite a different
character. This is well seen at the base of a detached series of three hills
called McMinn’s Bluff. At a place called the Rocky Waterhole, on the
east side of the valley, the rocks are close grained and extremely hard.
It seemed to me that the felspar is plagioclase. Probably the rock is a
dyke or vein, and newer than the granite on the west side, which is the
basal granite of the country. This is so coarse-grained as to be more
like a granite porphyry than what is usually called granite. The crystals
of felspar are sometimes Sin. or 4in long. They are orthoclase of very
pale pale pink or grey or faint blue. The mica is golden-brown, but in
masses looks black. Both these granites decompose into a white
powdery soil, which pulverizes into the finest dust. It is important to
bear this in mind when we come to look for the origin of the so-called
desert sandstone.
The tableland forming the western boundary of the valley is at its
southern end, a long narrow range, covered with a stratum of stone


which stands out like a rampart some 30ft. or 40ft. thick, and giving a
castellated appearance to the flat-topped hills. As the range is followed
north it is broken into three or four small outliers of white and red color.
They look like ramparts and fortresses, and are of very pictuesque appear-
ance. They all have a steep incline for about two-thirds of their height,
then become ragged for some distance, and then suddenly precipitous for
34ft. to their flat-topped summits. One of these hills is of fiery red on
the top, and it is joined by a low saddle to another outlier which is
capped with picturesque cliffs, which are white. The section of these
hills is as follows : —Granite, 90ft. at least; it may be more, but the line
of junction is concealed by weathered masses of rock, which have fallen
down from the cliffs ; then follows 100 ft, to 150 ft. of coarse red sand-
stone ; then 30ft to 40ft, of magnesian silicate, making a total at the
highest of about 270 ft. above the plain. The coarse red sandstone lies
in horizontal strata. It consists of large quartz grains embedded in a
reddish-brown cement. Its materials have no apparent connection with
any rock visible in the valley now. The upper stratum is a compact
rock with small visicles. It is either creamy white, yellow, or mottled,
or deep-red brown, with streaks and veins of lighter color. There is a
concretionary character about its decomposition, which makes it break
up into a number of small red rounded pebbles, like pea-iron ore. But
this is not always visible, only where there is not much iron-oxide. In
other places it is a pure white, and consists of a magnesian silicate.
These cliffs seem to be a decomposed volcanic ash, possibly mainly
derived from olivine.
There are three things to be particularly noted here : —(1) The so-
called desert sandstone does not form a continuous tableland. (2) It
lies in comparatively thin strata of sandstone, and magnesian silicate
capping other rocks, usually granite. (3) It does not attain, at McMinn’s
Bluff, a height of 300 ft. above the plain.
The Eveleen Silver Mine.— This mine is situated on nearly the south-
eastern extremity of the metalliferous ranges, about four miles west of
the upper reaches of the River Mary. As already stated, it is situated
on a small patch of limestone exactly on the junction of the metalliferous
slates with the blue granite of the valley of Mary. The formation is
probably paleozoic in alternate strata of chert and limestone. There are
many small outcrops of the usual character of limestone, but the outcrop,
called here Pinnacle Hill, is a pile of boulders rising abruptly from the
plain and covering several acres of ground. There are many lodes
visible in this hill, the main one of many feet in width with wide
brilliant shoots of galena. There is also much copper in stone giving
rise to veins and crystals of blue and green of the most lively colors.
There are an immense number and variety of minerals in the veins and
pockets forming a sight of rare beauty. Some very uncommon minerals
are found amongst the stone, which can be easily imagined from the
combination of silver, lead, copper, iron, and probably nickle. It is said
that the percentage of silver in the lead is very high. It looks well, and
it is easy to extract silver even with a blow-pipe. The copper ores are
poor and light. The company are going to great expense in machinery,
&cc., and seem determined to test the property. Its proceedings will
be watched with much interest. If bullion lead can be produced
and exported so as to pay at the present rates of labor and cartage, it


will be a great thing for the Territory, and any failure would do much
injury to many mines. We must hope for the best, and hope also that
prudent and economical management which the mine will require may
contribute to this. At any rate the property is a very good one as far as
it has been explored.
Many other discoveries of argentiferous galena are reported, as I have
stated, in dealing with the subject of silver lead. About two and a half
miles south of the Spring Hill mine, where an auriferous quartz reef is
worked by a miner named Robertson, a lode of silver lead has been found
close to the Elizabeth creek. The ore is reported to have yielded a very
high assay. The whole country thereabouts is rich in minerals, and the
prospectors evidently think so too, for he has taken out nearly a square
mile of it.
HouschikUs Rush. —This is an alluvial and reef goldfield, about four
miles south of the Eveleen, and extending, it is stated, for about seven
miles. The sinking is very shallow, in a soft furruginous slate, with no
drift or wash properly speaking. There is a lode worked by some Chinese
in a band of decomposed limonite or ironstone. It must be very rich, for
gold was visible in all the matrix, which is a very red gravel. The great
difficulty on this field is the want of water. It can only be worked for
about six months in the year, yet to me it seemed as good a field as any
I have seen in Territory. There must be other reefs—many others I
should say—of the same ironstone cement which only require careful
searching for, as the country is full of the same material. As usual only
Chinese are working now on these mines.
PROSPECTING EXPLORATION.
On the 20th August I started from Burrundie, accompanied by
Mr. Surveyor Kingston, two men, and ten horses, to explore and pro-
spect the country beteen Mount Wells and the Katherine river, by way
of the Eveleen mine. Our course at first was due north to Mount
Douglas, a very conspicuous hill, visible from Mount Wells, said to be
granite; beyond this I could get no information. Mount Douglas has
been prospected by few miners, but no one could I meet with who had
proceeded further. We reached the mountain in question in two days. The
intervening country consists of low slate ridges, with sharp and bristling
outcrops of slate, quartz lodes, and phonolite dykes. It is entirely an
auriferous country, any portion of which may contain alluvial or good
reefs. The country is well watered, but rough to travel from the stony
nature of the soil, and the many tributaries of the McKinlay along which
our course lay. Mount Douglas consists of a course slightly reddish
quartzite, enclosing many rounded water-worn white quartz pebbles with
faint blackish lines of specular iron. The pebbles are generally sparingly
scattered through the stone, but there are sometimes thick strata of con-
glomerate, with fragments of slate and numerous veins of segregation
(quartz) of small size. The formation is, in fact, what I have described as
fluviatile sandstone. It dips away from the river at an angle 30° or more.
The base and sides of the mountain are covered with enormous masses of
boulders, which have broken away from the summit. It is cross-bedded,


and evidently a derivative formation from the wearing down of auriferous
rocks. We ascended to the summit easily ; the highest portion is only
550 ft. above the plain, though most of it is much less. It is about two
and a half miles long and a quarter of a mile wide. On is northern base
the River McKinlay flows, and on the opposite side of the valley arises a
low river range doubtless of the same fluviatile conglomerate formation.
The base of the formation may be auriferous, but in the sandstone no
mineral exists.
We continued to pursue a generally south-east course from Mount
Douglas, which is connected with moderately high and steep but very
stony ranges of slate, felsite, and hornstone, broken by weathering and
the original jointing of the rocks into a kind of metalling of 2in. gauge.
There is no surface soil, but the ground is deeply covered with these stones,
like a shingle beach. We continued through these ranges for several
hours. They are separated by open valleys and mud flats, with dry creeks
and poor timber, and occasional outcrops of mineral veins of quartz, with,
I believe, silver lead ; there were also porphry dykes. A gully to the east
brought us into granite country, and so on to the plains of the Mary
river. Another day’s travelling to the south-east brought us into the
ranges again, which here stretch out far into the eastern plains; the
ridges became very high and almost impassable. The stone is slate, but
differing from the auriferous slate. We passed the capping of four or five
mineral lodes. The whole country is of a promising character for
minerals, mostly, I should say, for silver lead, though perhaps for gold
also.
When we had prospected for some time and found the ranges be-
coming much too high for the horses, we descended from them into the
eastern plains, and camped at Francis creek, near some fine reaches of
water, where we got colors of gold. Here again were the cappings of
mineral lodes. From this point to the Eveleen mine our course was more
easterly, leading us into the granite plain. The granite is blue, close-
grained, and forming hills and heaps of boulders 100 ft. or so in height.
To the westward the slate ranges continue, with promising indications.
Through this part of them the track to the Eveleen mine has been made,
so that the neighboring country will soon be well known.
The Eveleen mine I have referred to in another place, as well as the
curious limestone country. At the Eveleen we were joined by Mr. Nash,
the chief warden. From the mine we went to Houschildt’s rush, about
four miles south. This also I have described, and I need only add now
that this country is all of an exceedingly promising kind, and will yet, I
am convinced, be found yielding much valuable mineral. It is very little
known. From Houschildt’s rush we went eastward to the Mary, and on
the second day’s journey along its banks came upon the camp of two
prospectors, Messrs. Roberts and Hann. Here we remained a couple of
days resting the horses and examining the conntry in advance.
In our course to the Mary we had passed over auriferous slates with
porphyry dykes, differing from anything observed in the northern portions
of the range ; the small veins of ironstone and quartz cropping out here
and there are all of a most promising character. In passing along the
valleys of the Mary, as we travelled south, we soon found ourselves
hemmed in between the ranges and the river valley, which is too boggy
for horses to cross without a long delay. The range was granite at the


edges and slate further to the westward. All the ranges are very steep
but scarcely 300 ft. above the plain. Many outcrops of quartz and other
mineral lodes were seen, notably a copper lode, and probably one of silver
lead. This end of the ranges is full of excellent indications. From
what has been observed by myself hereabouts, I think that the southern
end of the ranges will prove to be richest in minerals at the junction
with the granite. There are several hundred square miles tween the
head of the Mary and Pine creek, most of which is not prospected, and
all of which may be reasonably supposed to contain metals, and especially
gold and silver-lead ore.
We reached one of the heads of the Mary in three day, travelling from
the Eveleen mine. The last half day’s journey was through high narrow
gorges, formed by cliffs of white magnesite and sandstone, which looked
like chalk ; some, however, were not white. At a fortress-like outlier,
opposite our camp, the following was the section : —the base was white with
large stains of red and yellow, and brown ; and there was a talus slope
120 ft. high, consisting of ferruginous sandstone in blocks, scattered amid
trees and grass ; then there was about 40ft. of cliffs at the top, the lower
half white and the upper 20ft. yellow and red. Of the floor of the valley
we could see nothing, as it was so thickly grassed or covered with
immense fragments of magnesian sandstone, fallen down from above.
Our camp at the head of the Mary was Dougias springs, a beautiful
shady valley with abundance of tall cabbage palms (Ptychosperma).
We found a passage to the top of the cliffs without difficulty, up a gorge
180 ft. above the valley. There was a gap in the perpendicular cliffs
which, Avith a little cutting, and the removal of stones, became perfectly
accessable. Inside this was another rampart, some 20ft. high, so that in
all the height was 200 ft. above the valley. The summit was apparently
a perfectly level plain of poor open forest; but it rose in imperceptible
incline, for about six miles, about 30ft. a mile, then it descended by an
inclined plane for about five miles, until Ave came to springs and a creek
100 ft. above the Mary river. Here auriferous slate re-appeared, and
then a red porphyry rock, Avhich is no doubt Leichhardt’s pegmatite.
The name pegmatitie Avas a term much in use formerly, and applied to a
kind of granite without mica, or mica in minute quantities. Base of
quartz, Avith the felspar crystals lying separate in the quartz. The term
is uoav disused. Until the rock has been carefully examined it will be
referred to here as red porphyry.
The creek Ave came upon Avas KekAvick’s fine springs, Avhere Stuart
camped twenty-five years ago. We looked for his camp, but could not
find it, though ancient tomahaAvk marks Avere visible on some of the trees.
From this point the country Avas all red porphyry or pegmatite, for some
days, mingled Avith a little fluviatile sandstone at KekAvick’s springs, and
occasionally dykes of blue basalt or phonolite. We reached the
Katherine river in tAvo days. It is here a very fine river, Avith a deep
Avide valley, long reaches of water seA r eral miles in extent, and flood-
marks on the trees 10ft. and more above the highest banks of the stream.
The river valley is at first through porphyry ranges, but it gradually
narroAved into gorges of fluviatile sandstone, quite impassable even on
foot. The river also AA r as confined betAveen precipices of the same stone,
some 50ft. in height. We lost three days in trying to find a passage
through these fluviatile conglomerates, Avhich hem the river betAveen


cliffs, forming gorges of varying width extending to over two miles.
Ultimately we struck eastward again, crossing the tablelands, and we
found beautiful springs and valleys at the base, with good grass. The
ranges are about 300 ft. above the plain, thickly timbered, with grassy
valleys and large springs of water on the very summit. We found the
first cliffs a mere ridge, very rough and stony, and rising to 400 ft. above
the plain. A series of ridges continued, and then a level inclined plain
of three miles or so. By this we descended 150 ft., and then came to the
head of a rocky gorge, which proved to be the head of Maud creek.
This we descended until we reached almost the level of the Katherine
river, and found auriferous slates cropping out. Ido not think the
country very promising, but still it is a mineral formation which wants
prospecting. I saw no traces of mineral lodes.
From Maude creek we came in a few miles to Galloway’s cattle station,
which is fourteen miles from the telegraph station on the Katherine river.
Here poryhyry reappears, and low ranges of fluviatile sandstone, forming
rough stony country. At the telegraph station is the limestone already
described, which continues for ten miles north. Then succeeds the
volcanic area nearly as far at the Phillips, at which is a promising
auriferous country full of quartz reefs. This continues to the Fergusson
by Mount Todd and the Driffield river. It seems more an auriferous
country than likely to produce minerals such as we find on the eastern
side of the ranges near the head of the Mary. From the Fergusson the
granite crops out to within three miles of Jansen’s mine, at Pine creek.
Thus the whole metalliferous country between Pine creek, or the end of
the auriferous ranges and the Katherine river, is about fifteen miles from
north to south. I had not time to ascertain its width. I heard that some
eight years ago two men got 28ozs. -of gold by breaking it out of a reef
at the head of the Driffield. Some prospecting parties were there at the
time, but nothing very rich was found, and other places had greater
attractions for the miner. It is said that to the westward of the auri-
ferous ranges, say at Pine creek, granite succeeds, then narrow belts of
magnesite tableland, and then granite again, until the ranges at the
sources of the Fitzmaurice are reached. This I have not seen, but, if
true, it will guide prospectors to point out to them that the locality best
worth inspection, and which will most likely lead to discoveries on the
slate country, is the junction between them and the granite.
The Victoria River. —Before undertaking the prospecting tour for the
Government, I was, through the kindness of Mr. Stevens, of Palmerston
and Glencoe, enabled to visit the Victoria river. Though not connected
with my tour in the Northern Territory, 1 may here state the general
results—For sixty miles above the mouth I found the river bordered with
fluviatile sandstone and conglomerates exactly like those here described.
At first these rocks formed a wide valley, and then narrowed into
precipitous and very narrow rocky gorges. The stone is red and mottled,
and dips away from the river at a high angle There were also high
outliers of broken tableland visible inland. Higher up the river runs
through good volcanic country. Ido not think that the fluviatile quartz
conglomerates extend to any great width on either side of the valley,
and the nature of the country beyond is not accurately known.
J. E. TENISON WOODS.
Palmerston, October 7th, 1886.


fiiiuo
f\^4ho




