

Sir Arthur Sullivan
Frederick Bevan
Adelaide
G. Hassell & Son, 104 Currie Street
192 1
WORKS
The Life &








The Life Works
Sir Arthur Sullivan
Frederick Be van
Adelaide
G. Hassell & Son, 104 Currie Street
1921


The contents of the following pages formed the
substance of a series of Extension Lectures given
in the University of Adelaide in 1908, and repeated
in the Town Hall in the following year.
They afterwards appeared in the columns of
The Register under the heading “The Composer
of ‘Pinafore.’”
They are now reproduced, substantially in their
original form, at the request of friends who were
interested in the original delivery.
FREDERICK BEVAJST.
Adelaide, 1921.


PERIOD I
Early Days—The Chapel Royal —The Royal Academy
—Leipzig.
In his most interesting volume, entitled “Sir Arthur
Sullivan: His Life and Music,” Mr. B. W. Findon says:
“Among the composers of the Victorian Era, there is none
who achieved more widespread popularity or is more
genuinely entitled to respectful notice than Arthur Seymour
Sullivan. Distinguished alike for a refined and spontaneous
melodic gift and a complete mastery of the technical re-
sources of his art, he has left behind him a number of
strongly contrasted works, which sufficiently indicate the
versatility of his talent and the catholicity of his mind.”
Sullivan appears to have been singled out by fortune for
the great position he was eventually to occupy. By nature
he was endowed with a sensitive musical organism, his
infancy was passed in an atmosphere saturated with musical
sound, his youth was lived amid associations which were
specially inclined to favour his bent, and he came before
the world at a period when English music was at its lowest
ebb. His course lay clear before him, and, apart from the
first few years of early manhood, his career was one of un-
interrupted prosperity. We have not to note any of those
stormy vicissitudes which dogged the footsteps of Mozart,
and drove to the verge of distraction the impetuous Berlioz.
We have not to linger regretfully over days of neglect, as
in the case of Schubert, or sorrowfully recall the misunder-
standing that embittered the greater part of Wagner’s
career. Even as he was in his art, so Sullivan was in him-
self: he inspired in all who came in contact with him or
his work a spirit of tranquil happiness, and an exquisite
appreciation of the joy of living.


EARLY HISTORY.
Arthur Seymour Sullivan was born in London, at No. 8
Boswell Terrace, a small thoroughfare near Lambeth Walk,
on the Surrey side of the Thames, on May 13, 1842. His
father, Thomas Sullivan (an Irishman and a musician), was
at this time engaged as first clarionetist in the orchestra of
the Surrey Theatre, and his mother (Mary Clementina, a
daughter of James Coghlan) was a young lady descended
on her mother’s side from an old Italian family of the name
of Righi. Three years after Arthur’s birth, Thomas Sul-
livan was appointed bandmaster at the Royal Military Col-
lege at Sandhurst. It will thus be seen that Sullivan was
cradled to the sound of the military band, his baby footsteps
took him to the practice room of his father’s soldier musi-
cians, where his presence was encouraged by his father and
the players, and his precocious talent quickly made itself
apparent. With extraordinary facility he mastered the
rudimentary principles of the various instruments, many
of which he learned to play. In his own words, his know-
ledge of the flute, clarionet, horn, cornet, trombone, and
euphonium “was not a mere passing acquaintance, but a
lifelong and intimate friendship.” It was, indeed, an ac-
quirement by no means necessarily included in the curri-
culum of every would-be composer. In this way he learnt
the peculiarities of each instrument, where it was weak, and
where it was strong, an acquisition which was to prove
eventually of most exceptional value. While he was thus
being initiated in the technicalities of music, his general
education was carefully looked after by his mother, and
after a time it was thought better for his future that he
should be removed from the dominating influence of music.
Accordingly he was sent to a private boarding school at
Bayswater, where he remained until he was nearly 12 years
of age. There can be no doubt, however, that his tendencies,
his aptitudes, as well as his professed inclinations, pre-
vented any sort of parental uncertainty regarding the
future of the boy, and the ambition of his young life was
fulfilled when on the Tuesday in Holy Week, 1854, he was
admitted as one of the children (choristers) of the Chapel
Royal.


A CHILDHOOD OP MUSIC.
It really seemed that the gods were determined to add
to the gift of a great natural talent all the accessories of
musical art for daily consumption, for following the initia-
tion he received in his father’s practice room in the ’tech-
nicalities of instrumental music, no training could have been
better adapted to Sullivan’s characteristic bent than that
he received as a chorister of the Chapel Royal. Spread
before him were the masterpieces of Tallis, Gibbons, and
the immortal Purcell, of Boyce, Attwood, and a score of
others, and with these glorious examples before him it was
only to be expected that young Sullivan would try his
prentice hand at imitation, so we soon find him writing an
anthem of which he speaks in a letter to his father: 11 When
I composed my anthem I showed it to Sir George Smart,
who told me it did me great credit, and also told me to get
the parts copied out, and he would see what could be done
with it. So I copied them out, and he desired the sub-Dean
to have it sung, and it was sung. The Dean (this was
Bishop Blomfield) was there in the evening, and he called
me up to him in the vestry, and said it was very
clever, and said that perhaps I should be writing an oratorio
some day. But he said there was something higher to attend
to, and then Mr. Helmore said I was a very good boy in-
deed, whereupon the Bishop shook hands with me and gave
me half a sovereign.” In another letter comes a glimpse
of the lighter side of his school life: ‘ ‘ Every time I have
made up my mind to sit down and write to you, some fellow
or other is sure to turn me away from it by asking me to
come and lead our band, which, by the way, consists of two
French squeakers (which by singing through them produce
a twangy sound like the oboe), two combs, and the cover
of a book for a drum, and I am organist; or else they ask
me to go on composing something for the band.”
A REMARKABLE EFFORT OP MEMORY.
It could not but happen that the enthusiasm and ac-
tivity of the young chorister should attract just the sort of
attention which was destined to prove most useful to him.


One instance of Ms precocious ability is worth relating.
When he was 13 he came home from the Chapel Royal much
exercised in his mind concerning a work by Sir Frederick
Gore Ouseley, “The Martyrdom of Saint Polycarp.” Sir
Frederick had written this as an exercise for his Degree of
Doctor of Music, and young Sullivan had been sent down
to Oxford to sing the soprano solo, and he came back think-
ing there never was such music. As soon as he reached
home he said to his father: ‘ ‘ There is a splendid march in
( Saint Polycarp;’ you ought to get it for the band.” Mr.
Sullivan replied that he could do nothing, as the music had
not been published. However, the boy was not to be over-
come by a difficult} 7 " of that sort, and, beginning w’ork early
one morning, by night time he had written out the march
from memory in full military band score, and it was played
with great success by the band at Sandhurst.
A LASTING FRIENDSHIP.
The success of this experiment, a wonderful effort of
memory for a boy of thirteen, reached the ears of Sir
Frederick, and the pleasure which he expressed was no
doubt mixed with some gratification at what was in fact,
though not in intention, most practical flattery. This early
association with Sir Frederick ripened into a lasting friend-
ship ; and one of' Sullivan’s good stories in later years told
how he and Sir Frederick were invited to dine at the mess
of the officers of the Grenadier Guards on a certain Sunday
evening. Sir Frederick was naturally of a shy and retiring
disposition, and, being a clergyman, had certain qualms of
conscience regarding the propriety of accepting such an
invitation; but on being assured that everything would be
quiet and sedate his scruples were overcome. After dinner
someone started talking “music,” and Sir Frederick soon
became vivacious and eloquent, and for a considerable time
he entertained the company with his musical experiences.
The officers listened with the utmost attention and defer-
ence, although possibly none of them understood the tech-
nicalities he employed, or what he was talking about. He
ended his discourse with a description of the humorous
points in an exercise for the degree of Doctor of Music that


had come before him in his capacity of Professor of Music
in the University of Oxford. Addressing the colonel, he
said: “And you’ll scarcely believe me, colonel, when I tell
you that the whole movement—the whole movement —was
in the ‘ hypomyxolydian mode. ’ ” “ God bless my soul, you
don’t say so!” said the colonel. “It is a fact,” said Sir
Frederick.
A WELL-WON SCHOLARSHIP.
Sullivan had been two years at the Chapel Royal when
in the early part of 1856 the Mendelssohn Scholarship was
thrown open for competition, and it would seem that the
suggestion that he should compete emanated from his
parents, for in one of his letters he writes: “I should like
above all things to try for the Mendelssohn Scholarship, but
you had better speak to Mr. Helmore first about it. ’ ’ While
in another, dated June 24, he says: “Saturday is the exam-
ination day for the Mendelssohn Scholarship. There are 17
candidates —all clever fellows, so Mr. Potter says—so that
I stand a poor chance. ” It is one of the conditions of the
scholarship that no pupil under the age of 14 may compete,
and luckily for Sullivan he escaped disqualification by the
narrow margin of five or six weeks. When it came to the
last day of the examination it was announced that the
scholarship lay between the eldest and the youngest of the
competitors : the eldest was Joseph Barnby and the youngest
Arthur Sullivan. The result was a tie between them, and
it was decided to put them both through a severe final test,
and at the close of that long summer day which must have
been a terrible ordeal for both the competitors the judges
reserved their decision. The next day was one of feverish
excitement for the chorister of the Chapel Royal. This was
a prize that could not be reckoned out at any definite money
value. To young Sullivan it meant a continuation of his
musical education under the most favourable conditions,
and it also meant that the winner of the first Mendelssohn
Scholarship in England would receive just that amount of
publicity that would prove of immediate advantage: it
would mean the friendly attention of those best able to help
him, and, not the least, infinite pleasure to his best of good


friends, the people at home. The letter he received giving
the result, and the first paragraph in the “Illustrated
London News” announcing that result to the public, were
promptly framed, and were treasured among his most
cherished possessions. He remained at the Chapel Royal
for some time after gaining the scholarship, and did his
work at the Royal Academy of Music concurrently. His
masters at the academy were Sterndale Bennett and Arthur
O’Leary for pianoforte, and John Goss for harmony and
composition, and he made such progress that the committee
awarded him an extension of the scholarship for two years
in succession.
END OF CHAPEL ROYAL DAYS.
In June, 1857, his voice “broke,” and so ended his
period as one of the children of the Chapel Royal. He had
been there for nearly four years: had become first boy,
having first as “fag” and then as second boy, Alfred
Cellier, who afterwards became famous as the composer of
“Dorothy” and other light operas, and whose friendship
and affection ceased only with death. He had written two
or three anthems, one of which had been sung in the chapel,
and for which he received his first earnings (the 10s. given
him by the Dean when the anthem was sung). He had
divided his spare time between the “Catch Club,” the
cricket club, and the wonderful choir band, of which he
was at once conductor, organist, and composer, and the boy
had made many friends. He left the chapel and the Royal
Academy well equipped in the rudiments of his profession.
Nor was this all, for better still, he had acquired much the
same practical knowledge of the voice and how to use it,
and the requirements of choral music, that he had already
gained in regard to instrumental music from the military
band which his father controlled at Sandhurst.
A MERRY PRODIGY.
An interesting sidelight is thrown on his character by
a fellow-student at the Academy, w r ho says: ‘‘ My chief com-
panion at the Academy was Arthur Sullivan. Six years
my junior, he came fresh from the Chapel Royal as merry


and as mischievous a boy as can well be imagined. Although
a huge favourite among the students, he was a sad thorn
in the sides of some of the professors, and to none more than
to Charles Lucas, the conductor of the Academy orchestra.
It was no unusual thing at rehearsal to hear at times the
most unearthly noises produced first from one instrument
and then another, and the reason was usually summed up
in Lucas’s exclamation, “Now, Sullivan, you are at it
again!” Sullivan’s mastery over orchestral instruments
even at 14 years of age was marvellous. He played them
all with apparent ease; as a matter of fact he was one of
the most gifted prodigies known to fame, and his facility
in every department was simply stupendous. He could
read anything at sight, play from formidable score, could
clearly distinguish any and all combinations of sounds, even
at the very top of the piano without seeing the notes struck,
and he accomplished in the line of study in five minutes
what others could not succeed in doing in five months. As
an instance of the development of his critical faculty, a
quotation from a letter dated May 20, 1857, has some in-
terest owing to its decided expression of opinion: “I enjoyed
the philharmonic concert very much last Monday: all except
Rubinstein. He has wonderful strength in his wrists, and
particularly so in octave passages, but there is a good deal
of claptrap about him, and as to his composition it was a
disgrace to the Philharmonic. I never heard such wretched
nonsensical rubbish: not two bars of melody or harmony
together throughout, and yet Mr. E thinks him won-
derful.”
AT LEIPZIG.
In 1858 the provisions of the scholarship took him to
Leipzig, and the fact that he was the first Mendelssohn
scholar gained him some attention in the Conservatorium.
Here he worked hard for three years, having as his masters
Moscheles and Plaidy for pianoforte, Rietz for composition,
and Ferdinand David for orchestral playing and conduct-
ing. Among his fellow-students were John Francis Barnet,
Franklin Taylor, Dannreuther, Carl Rosa, and Grieg.
Writing to his father in September, 1859, he says: “I have


written a Romance for stringed instruments, which I will
send von over to play, if you will promise to observe the
‘pianos,’ ‘fortes,” and ‘staccatos’ in a marked manner, as
the thing loses its effect without them.” Then in a letter
to his brother in the following December he alludes jocu-
larly to his student importance: “I was writing a little
piece for the ’cello in honour of your twenty-second birth-
day, but was obliged to give it up on account of my impor-
tant public duties in connection with the Conservatorium
festivities. I have been unanimously elected president of
our music committee. The opera, one of Reinecke’s, is only
written for pianoforte accompaniment, and as that is not
strong enough I am obliged to arrange a great part of it
for stringed instruments; and, besides that, I have to con-
duct the whole piece. I anticipate great fun at the re-
hearsals. The dresses have been lent us by the theatre. My
orchestra consists of three first violins, two seconds, one
’cello, and one contrabass, with the grand piano, and per-
haps I shall have two or three more violins and another
’cello. We have 18 in the chorus, and six solo singers, so
I shall have enough to do to keep them all together.” It
was a favourite trick of his at this time to append to his
signature some sort of title, and here he proudly adds
“Conductor of the Royal Opera at Leipzig.”
HTS LITTLE HEAET DIDN’T BEAT.
In June, 1860, he writes: “I enclose you a programme
of our last Priifung. You wall doubtless, on looking over
it, recognize one of the names. Translated, the thing stands
as follows: Overture to T. Moore’s poem, ‘The feast of
roses,’ from ‘Lalla Rookh’ (E major), composed by A. S.,
from London (conducted by the composer). The ‘feast
of roses ’ is the German name for ‘ The light of the harem. ’
It was such fun standing up there and conducting that large
orchestra. I can fancy mother saying ‘Bless his little heart;
how it must have beaten!’ But his little heart didn’t beat
at all. I wasn’t in the least nervous, only in one part, where
the drum would come in wrong at rehearsal, but he did it
all right in the evening. I was called forward three times
at the end, and most enthusiastically cheered. I ‘shot the


bird, ’ as Mr. Schlemitz said; that is, I had the greatest suc-
cess in the whole priifung. The newspapers have also
treated me favourably, much better than I expected, for the
overture, being written in the Mendelssohn style, and there
being such a clique against Mendelssohn, I thought they
would have treated me roughly.” In September, 1860, he
wrote to his father; “How shall I thank you sufficiently,
my dearest father, for the opportunity you have given me
of continuing my studies here ? I am, indeed, grateful, and
will work very hard, in order that you may soon see that
all your sacrifices (which I know you made) have not been
to no purpose, and I will try to make the end of your days
happy and comfortable. I had given up the idea of stay-
ing longer, and, indeed, was making preparation for my
journey home; therefore the surprise was greater for me.”
Then, again, on October 28: “The director has exempted
me from paying fees for the Conservatorium during the
next six months. When I went up to thank him for it he
said, ‘ Oh, yes; we will let that be entirely. You are a splen-
did fellow, and very useful. We all like you so much, we
can’t let you go.’ Is it not very kind of him?” On Feb-
ruary 10, 1861, he says: “Very much occupied with my
‘Tempest’ music, which does not proceed as quickly as I
could wish. I have already completed two entr’actes, two
dances, and a song; but it is in the overture that I have
come to grief, for I cannot get it into form to please me.
lam anxious to know if you will like my music. It is very
different from any you have heard. For instance (bar
quoted). But, of course, it is not often Igo into extremes
like that. At first it may sound harsh, but you will soon
grow accustomed to it, and most probably like it very
much.” On April 11, 1861, he writes home saying that his
“Tempest” was performed with great success in Leipzig
the previous Saturday, and that he will be in London on the
following Monday or Tuesday.


PERIOD II
A London Triumph.
On his return from Leipzig Sullivan attended his old
school, the Chapel Royal, on four afternoons a week as an.
assistant master to Mr. Helmore, not to give the Chapel
Royal choristers music lessons, but to teach them the “three
R’s, ” and during this period he added several numbers to
his “Tempest” music. The work was performed at the
Crystal Palace on April 5, 1862, and proved a veritable
triumph. The musical critics were enthusiastic, and the
directors of the concerts decided to repeat the performance
on the following Saturday. On that occasion there was a
record attendance: all musical London went to hear the
work. After the performance was over Charles Dickens
waited in the artists’ room until Sullivan came out, and
with a grip of the hand said, “I don’t profess to be a musical
critic, but I do know that I have listened to a very remark-
able work. ’ ’ This was the beginning of a firm friendship
between them.
PAYMENTS FOE FIEST COMPOSITIONS.
From this date Sullivan’s public career as a
composer may fairly be said to have begun. He
was ready to undertake anything that came in his
way: symphonies, overtures, ballets, anthems, hymn
tunes, songs, part-songs, a concerto for the ’cello,
and eventually comic and light operas. Nothing came
amiss to him, and he gladly accepted whatever the pub-
lishers offered, so long as he could get the things published.
He composed six Shakespearean songs for Messrs. Metzler.
“Orpheus with his lute” and “The willow song” were
among them, and for these he received five guineas each.
“If doughty deeds” and others were sold to Messrs. Chap-


pell for 10 guineas each. For the next song, “Will he
come ?’ ’ published by Boosey & Co., a royalty system was
arranged, and the result was much more satisfactory to the
composer.
ACQUAINTANCE WITH OPERA.
Toward the end of 1862 he made his first visit to Paris
in company with Charles Dickens, and there he met Rossini
and heard Madame "V iardot Garcia in a performance of
Gluck’s “Orfeo.” His intimacy with Rossini and the im-
pression made by Madame Viardot Garcia had the imme-
diate effect of making him desirous of knowing more about
the opera and things operatic, and on his return to London
he secured the post of organist in the opera at Covent Gar-
den. Here he learnt many valuable lessons, and at the
conductor’s request he wrote a “ballet” for the opera,
which proved most successful.
AS CHURCH ORGANIST.
At about the same time, he was appointed organist and
choirmaster of St. Michael’s Church, Chester Square. In
regard to this appointment Sullivan has said: “ When I was
organist at St. Michael’s my friend Francis Byng was ap-
pointed vicar of a new church, and I designed the new
organ for him, and undertook to find an organist. When
the day arrived for the consecration I hadn’t obtained the
organist, so I volunteered to play for two or three Sundays
until I could find someone eise, with the result, however,
that 1 played there for two or three years. I remember
at the consecration of the church by the then Bishop of
Loudon the hour fixed was 12 0 ’clock. By some misunder-
standing the Bishop didn’t arrive until 1. As the minutes
went by and the Bishop didn’t turn up, I began to play
appropriate music. First I played ‘I waited for the Lord,’
and then went on with a song of mine which is entitled
* Will he come?’ The appropriateness of the pieces was
perfectly apprehended by the congregation.”
ENTHUSIASTIC POLICEMEN.
Apropos of his work at St. Michael’s, it is well known
that he piocured the tenors and basses of his choir from


the ranks of the policemen at the neighbouring police station
in Cottage Row, and Mr. Joseph Bennett (the eminent
musical critic of the London “Daily Telegraph”) has said
that it was wonderful at his choir practices to see the Avay
in which he kept the constables at the boiling point of en-
thusiasm, as well as on the brink of laughter. The organist’s
good spirits were infectious; and though, as Mr. Gilbert
said in after years, ‘ ‘ taking one consideration with another,
a policeman’s life is not a happy one,” I am sure the able-
bodied choirmen of St. Michael’s were, during rehearsal,
as cheerful as all the birds in the air. They could not help
it, neither could their chief help it, so ebullient was his
good nature and so everlasting his charm.
HA ED WOEK.
Choir practices and Covent Garden rehearsals filled up
a great part of his time at this period, and, although his
output was not large during the four years which succeeded
the production of the ‘ ‘ Tempest, ’ ’ he was by no means idle,
for, in addition to certain songs, part-songs, and anthems,
he was occupied with an opera, “The Sapphire Necklace,”
and the cantata “Kenilworth,” which was given at the
Birmingham Festival in 1864. To this period also belongs
the composition of his symphony in E, a work conceived
and sketched out during a visit to Ireland. Though he was
but 22 years of age at the time of its composition, there is
every evidence that Sullivan was a complete master of
classic design. The orchestral colouring is rich with thought
and poetic fancy, and the language it speaks is eloquent to
a degree. With regard to the title of the symphony, the
following extract from a letter addressed to his friend Mr.
B. W. Findon, many years after its production, has its
points of interest, if only as evidence of the innate modesty
of the man. He says: “It is a mistake to say ‘erroneously’
called the Irish symphony. It is the Irish symphony, and
was always called so by myself and all about me when I
wrote it; but my modesty prevented me publicly naming it
so: after the ‘Scotch’ symphony (Mendelssohn). Had I
foreseen, however, that Stanford would name his work an
Irish symphony I think I should have knocked my modesty
on the head.” The symphony was eventually produced at


the Crystal Palace in 1866. This was a year of great musical
activity, for, in addition to about half a dozen songs, he
wrote a Te Deum and Jubilate, a concerto for violoncello,
and his immortal “In Memoriam” overture. He was also
occupied conducting at ballad concerts and tilling the posi-
tion of professor of composition at the Royal Academy of
Music.
THE STORY OE “IN MEMORIAM.”
The story of the ‘ ‘ In Memoriam ” is at once tragic and
pathetic. He had accepted an invitation to write a work
for the Norwich Festival, and as the time approached for
its completion he had written nothing which was in any
degree satisfactory to himself. About a month before the
festival he told his father that he really felt he would have
to give up the Norwich work. “No, my boy, don’t give it
up,” said his father; “don’t give it up. Something is sure
to occur to put new vigour and fresh thought into you.
Don’t give it up.” Three days after this discussion his
father died, and the fresh thoughts are to be found in the
“In Memoriam” overture. The work was completed within
a week of the date of his father’s funeral, and when it was
produced at the Norwich Festival it provoked not less
emotion in those who were ignorant of the origin of the
overture than in those who knew.
THE GERM OE COMIC OPERA.
By a singular coincidence the year which was remark-
able for Sullivan’s finest achievement in abstract music saw
also the foundation laid for the wonderful series of comic
operas associated with his name. Sir Frank Burnand tells
the story of the writing of “Cox and Box” as follows;
“Wishing to present something novel to my guests at a
musical and dramatic supper party at my own house, the
notion suddenly occurred to me to turn our old friend
Maddison Morton’s farce ‘Box and Cox’ into an opera.
Meeting Arthur Sullivan in Bond Street, I confided to him
the happy thought. He took to it enthusiastically. I went
to work at once, topsy-turvied ‘Box and Cox’ into ‘Cox
and Box,’ and metamorphosed Mrs. Bouncer into Sergeant
Bouncer, so as to give an opportunity for a martial air. I


took my words as each of the numbers was finished to
Sullivan, who lived at the time close at hand, and in a few
days his work was completed. Then came the rehearsals,
always at my house. The operetta was performed for the
first time on April 27, 1867, by Messrs. George du
Maurier (Box), Harold Power (Cox), and Johnny Forster
(Bouncer). It made a great hit. The death of an artist
on the staff of ‘Punch,' and the pecuniary straits of his
widow and children at this time, led to a benefit at the
Adelphi Theatre, and the operetta was selected for per-
formance. At the last moment Sullivan added the overture.
It was afterwards transferred to the German Reed’s Enter-
tainment, where it ran for 300 nights. When it achieved
public success and fees were received for its performance,
the author of the original farce (Maddison Morton) was
taken into partnership. ’ ’ All this is of historical interest,
inasmuch as that, in so far as the music is concerned, it was
the germ from which sprang the remarkable series of comic
operas which have delighted the English-speaking race dur-
ing the last 40 years.
SCHUBERT MANUSCRIPTS AND TENNYSON.
In the autumn of 1867 Sullivan accompanied Sir
George Grove to Vienna for the purpose of discovering
some Schubert MS. Sir George has described in his ap-
pendix to Kriesler’s “Life of Schubert” the way in which
the then almost forgotten music to “Rosamunde” was dis-
covered, how delighted both were at the unearthing of this
practically buried treasure, and the good time he and
Sullivan had in playing over the dusty manuscripts to-
gether. The owner would not permit them to be taken
away, so the two sat up all night copying the parts. On
his Avay back to England Sullivan was invited by the Leipzig
Concert Direction to conduct a performance of his “In
Memoriam ’ ’ overture, than which they could have paid him
no greater compliment. “Contrabandista” (a comic opera),
an overture entitled “Marmion,” and a number of songs,
part-songs, hymn tunes, and minor pieces represent his work
for the next year or two. Not the least of his good fortune
at this period was the friendship of Tennyson. Writing


home from the Isle of Wight in February, 1867, he says:
“When I got here I had a cup of tea, and then went and
smoked with Tennyson until dinner time. He read all the
songs, which are absolutely lovely, but I fear there will be
a great difficulty in getting them from him. He thinks they
are too light and will damage his reputation. All this I
have been combating, whether successfully or not I shall
be able to tell you to-morrow.” This refers to an idea
Sullivan had of producing a work which should be the com-
bined efforts of poet, painter, and musician. For this he
had secured the co-operation of Tennyson and Millais, the
former of whom, for this purpose, wrote “The window, or
the song of the wrens. ’ ’ Millais finished one drawing,
but he became irritated at the difficulties and delay
in publishing the work, and declined to go on with
it. In speaking of Tennyson, Sullivan said, “I really owed
much to his gentleness and patience. I actually had the
audacity to lecture him about rhythm. ‘Don’t mix your
iambics and spondees, ’ I would tell him, and then continue
my dissertation in much the same strain. Of course, one
reason of his good nature in this matter was that he knew
I was not discussing his verse from the points of view of
a critic of poetry, but merely in regard to certain musical
difficulties.” And Sullivan would tell a story relating to
Tennyson’s remarkable personal appearance and extra-
ordinary mode of dress. It was Tennyson’s invariable habit
to wear a black cloak and a large slouch hat, and he looked
something like a conspirator in an Italian or Spanish play.
On one occasion he came to dine with Sullivan to meet
Millais and discuss the proposed collaboration in “The
songs of the wrens,” and his extraordinary appearance
quite startled the maidservant who admitted him on his
arrival. When the guests had departed, the servant, who
had been with the family many years, exclaimed, “Is that
really the great poet, Master Arthur f ” “ Certainly, ’ ’ said
Sullivan. “Well, he do wear clothes!” “Of course, all
poets do,” replied Sullivan; “and besides, you forget, he
is the poet-laureate. ’ ’ The maid departed murmuring,
What a queer uniform! ’ ’


“ONWARD, CHRISTIAN SOLDIERS,
In 1869 his first important choral work, “The Prodi-
gal Son,” was produced at the Worcester Festival, and in
1870 one of the most beautiful of his lighter works, 4 4 Over-
ture di hallo,” was written for the Birmingham Festival.
It should be observed that since 1863, when he was asked
to compose the music on the occasion of the wedding of
King Edward, Sullivan had held the unofficial position of
musician-laureate. 44 0 n Sea and Shore” was written for
the opening of the International Exhibition at South Ken-
sington in 1871, and in 1872 he wrote the festival 44 Te
Deum” in celebration of the recovery of the Prince from
his serious illness. These years also saw the production of
a comic opera, 44 Thespis, or the gods grown old,” and
many songs and hymns, notably 44 Once again,” 44 Golden
days,” 44 The sailor’s grave,” and that great hymn 44On-
ward, Christian soldiers,” well described by Mr. B. W.
Findon as the war song of the English Church militant of
the nineteenth century. Apropos of this tune, Sullivan has
said: 44 1 t is perhaps a curious fact that one of my best-
known hymn tunes was written as the result of a quarrel.
The quarrel was between the proprietors of 4 Hymns,
Ancient and Modern,’ and the firm of Novello & Co., who
printed it, and who gave way to Messrs. Clowes, who still
print it. Novello’s then proceeded to compile a collection
of hymns, and for that hymnary I wrote 4 Onward, Christian
soldiers,’ which, you see, was thus the indirect outcome of
a quarrel.” During these years he had travelled a good
deal on the Continent, and had met with some thrilling
adventures in Paris, in company with Sir George Grove,
in the days of the Commune.
A GREAT ORATORIO.
In 1873 he wrote his great oratorio, 4 4 The Light of the
World.” This was produced at the Birmingham Musical
Festival in August. It created tremendous enthusiasm and
record attendances wherever performed. It must be remem-
bered that it was barely nine months since he had written
the music to the light and fantastic 44 Thespis,” which was


produced in the December of the preceding year; and
although the critics greeted the new oratorio with almost
unanimous approval, there were some who seemed to be
somewhat irritated by the fact that both productions were
the work of one man. Here was the composer of ‘ ‘ Cox and
Box,” “ Contrabandista, ” and “Thespis” taking the
grandest possible theme for his work, and apparently chal-
lenging comparison with Handel, Bach, and Mendelssohn.
The general feeling, however, would seem to have been
fairly indicated by the critic of the “Standard” when he
wrote: ‘ ‘ After due reflection, the general opinion is that in
his oratorio Mr. Arthur Sullivan has enriched the world’s
musical library with a fine work, distinctly representative
of the modern school of composition, and calculated to exist
in that sphere, where it holds a prominent position as a
specimen of the new type of oratorio, the dignity of which
it upholds. Considering the difficulties of precedent with
which Mr. Sullivan had to deal in Handel’s ‘Messiah’ and
Bach’s ‘Passion Music,’ not to mention Mendelssohn’s un-
finished ‘Christus, ’ he may be said to have entered the
lists against an array of giants. To say that in face of these
he has held his own ground, if he has not encroached on
theirs, is to bestow praise of the highest significance, and
to Mr. Sullivan belongs the acknowledgment that he has
incontestably secured great honours to himself without
robbing his predecessors of a single laurel. The ‘Light of
the World’ has nothing whatever in common with ‘The
Messiah.’ It borrows neither style nor ideas from ‘The
Passion Music,’ and it even steers clear of that magnetic
rock, Mendelssohn, upon which so many fair and well-
freighted barques have been lured to their doom.” Another
work dating from 1873 is the incidental music to “The
Merchant of Venice.” At the end of the year Sullivan
received from the University of Cambridge, in company
with his old master, Sir John Goss, the honorary degree of
Doctor of Music, and here for the present we will leave
him, firmly established in the good graces of the public and
society, an honoured guest of royalty, the intimate friend
of the Duke of Edinburgh, admitted to every social advan-
tage open to a man of genius and fashion, and dearly loved
by all with whom he came in contact.


PERIOD 111
How the Royal College of Music was Founded.
In 1874 Sullivan seems to have been mainly occupied in
compiling and editing a collection of church hymns for the
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. For this he
wrote 26 original tunes, and to this year also belong six or
seven songs, notably “Sleep, my love, sleep,” “The distant
shore,” and “Living poems.”
The summer of this year was spent in Germany with
his friends Sir Contts and Lady Lindsay, and it was about
this time that he accepted the position of principal of the
newly instituted National Training School of Music. It was
a post he accepted unwillingly, and not until great pressure
had been brought to bear on him. He appears to have
experienced a good deal of difficulty in the initial stages of
the institution. The committee seemed to think that the
work could be carried on as if the art of music were an exact
science, and Sullivan did not approve of the principles
which had been adopted. However, concessions were made,
and Sullivan held the post for six years. Difficulties pre-
sently arose with reference to the establishment of the school
on a* permanent basis, and eventually King Edward and
the then Duke of Edinburgh took the matter up with great
zeal, and so the Royal College of Music was founded on the
basis of the Training School which Sullivan had directed.
It was to all intents and purposes the same institution. The
new college took over the building, the library, and the
teaching staff. Sir George Grove was appointed director,
and carried on the work on the lines which Sullivan had
already laid down, so that the National Training School was
really the forerunner and parent of the Royal College of
Music.


ANOTHER COLLABORATION WITH GILBERT.
Although Sullivan had met Gilbert so long ago as 1871,
and they had written “Thespis” together in 1872, it was
not until the beginning of 1875 that Mr. D’Oyley Carte
approached them for another work, and the result was the
extravaganza “Trial by Jury.” Sullivan tells the story as
follows: “It was on a cold morning, with the snow falling
heavily, that Gilbert came around to my place, clad in a
heavy fur coat. He had called to read over to me the
manuscript of ‘Trial by Jury.’ He read it through, as it
seemed to me, in a perturbed sort of way, with a gradual
crescendo of indignation, in the manner of a man consider-
ably disappointed with what he had written. As soon as
he had come to the last word, he closed the manuscript
violently, apparently unconscious of the fact that he had
achieved his purpose as far as I was concerned, inasmuch as
I was screaming with laughter the whole time.” The words
and music were written, and all the rehearsals completed,
within the space of three weeks, and all London went to see
it. As the “Times” said, “Mr. Sullivan, in fact, has accom-
plished his part in the extravaganza so happily that —to
ascend some steps higher towards the Empyrean—it seems,
as in the great Wagnerian operas, as though poem and
music had proceeded simultaneously from one and the same
brain. ” “ Trial by Jury ’ ’ was produced on March 25, 1875.
The run of the comic “Trial by Jury” was practically con-
temporaneous with another trial of a more serious character,
that of the notorious Tichborne claimant. Sir Alexander
Cockburn was Lord Chief Justice at that time, and Sullivan
used to go and sit on the bench with him during the famous
trial, and occasionally would sleep at his house overnight,
so that he might be in time in the morning to drive down
with him to the court. Cockburn would appear to have
been completely absorbed by the Tichborne case, for Sul-
livan tells how they missed a Monday popular concert they
had arranged to attend, in consequence of sitting late after
dinner discussing some tine old port and the Tichborne case
at the same time, and on another occasion when some dis-
tinguished foreigners were at the dinner table, Cockburn


gave an entire resume of the whole case in French, in a
discourse that lasted upwards of two hours. Lord Cockburn
was Very fond of Sullivan, and very fond of music, but he
didn’t like the idea of “Trial by Jury” at all, as he thought
the piece w T as calculated to bring the bench into contempt.
He went to see the piece once, remarking that it was pretty
and clever, and all that sort of thing, but he would not go
again for fear he should seem to encourage it.
“THE LOST CHORD.”
In the winter of this year (1875) he was conducting
the Choral Union orchestral concerts in Glasgow, and this,
with his work at the National Training School, seems to
have taken up a good deal of his time, for it is significant
that beyond a couple of songs no work of importance came
from his pen during the whole of 1876. The early days of
1877 were saddened by the death of his brother, Fred.
Sullivan, who, although he had been educated and brought
up as an architect, had adopted the career of an actor and
had achieved great success as the judge in “Trial by Jury,”
It was in the first weeks of this year, mainly occupied by
watching at the beside of his brother, that Sullivan wrote
“The Lost Chord.” The account of the way in which it
was written will bear repetition. One night—the end was
not very far off then —while the sick brother had fallen
into a peaceful sleep, and Arthur was sitting, as usual, by
the bedside, he chanced to come across some verses by Ade-
laide Procter, with which he had five years previously been
struck. He had then tried to set them to music, but with-
out satisfaction. Now, in the stillness of the night, he read
them over again, and almost as he did so he conceived their
musical equivalent. A sheet of music paper was at hand,
and he began to write. Slowly the music grew and took
shape, and he determined to finish the song; even if in the
coM light of day it were to prove worthless it would at least
have helped to while away the hours of watching. So he
worked on, and as he progressed he felt sure that this was
what he had sought for and failed to find on the occasion
of his first attempt to “set” the words. In a short time
it was complete, and soon afterwards it was in the pub-


lisher’s hands. Thus was written “The Lost Chord,” per-
haps the most successful song of modern times, and as
popular now as when it was written. It is the fashion among
quidnuncs to decry this great song, but the fact remains
that it has gone to the heart of a great nation, and this it
could not have done unless it throbbed with the lifeblood
of humanity.
“H.M.S. PINAFORE.”
In November, 1877, “The Sorcerer,” the first of the
long series of comic operas written in collaboration with
Gilbert, was produced at the Opera Comique. This was
written at the instigation of a small syndicate formed by
Mr. D’Oyley Carte, and proved an immediate success, for it
ran for six months. It was regarded as another attempt to
establish native opera as a legitimate and permanent insti-
tution, and the public were delighted at the rare combina-
tion of humorous and scholarly music, with the fun of a
skilful libretto, with clever parodies of conventionality in
serious opera, skilfully interwoven with purely original
melody, allied to good taste, fancifulness, and command over
orchestral resources. In the early days of 1878 we find him
taking a holiday in Italy, but he is in London again in May,
superintending the production of “H.M.S. Pinafore.” This
work had been written against time, as, in fact, were many
of his works, and during a period of prostration and acute
suffering from an agonizing malady. Strangely enough,
“Pinafore,” eventually so tremendously popular, at first
failed to attract. There was a crowded and enthusiastic
audience on the first night, and the press cried approval,
but there were the usual grumbles at “our representative
English composer” setting his hand to light opera, and
suggestions that he should confine himself to more serious
work, and after a week or two the business done at the
theatre became so unremunerative that the management
decided to withdraw the piece. At this time Sullivan was
conducting a series of promenade concerts at the Covent
Garden Theatre, and one night he put into the programme
an arrangement of the “Pinafore” for the orchestra and
military band. His judgment proved sound, for although


the piece was running to poor houses at the theatre this
selection from the music created quite a sensation. It was
invariably encored, and parts of it sometimes were played
over three or four times. As a result of this success the
receipts at the Opera Comique gradually crept up, and
two years afterwards “H.M.S. Pinafore” was still in the
bill and flourishing hugely.
RETURNED WITH INTEREST.
Apropos of these promenade concerts, which were con-
trolled by Messrs. Gatti, the proprietors of a famous
restaurant in the Strand, the “Captious Critic” of “The
Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News” of the time says;
“It was, I believe, the custom of at least a few of the Chapel
Royal boys—those little bee-flaters who dispense sweet music
for the saving of high-born souls —to proceed from St.
James’ to Hungerford Market to waste their substance in
the consumption of Gatti’s far-famed ices. Among these
ardent devotees of Gatti were little Arthur and little Alfred,
and their pocket-money was quickly consumed in the form
of cool and refreshing ice. These two little boys are grown
up, and are now receiving those pennies spent in reckless
frigidity back from the coffers of the Gatti family, for they
are none other than Mr. Arthur Sullivan and Mr. Alfred
Cellier, the conductors of the promenade concerts.” If he
had known a little more, the ‘ ‘ Captious Critic ’ ’ might have
made a trio of the party by adding the name of little
Johnnie Stainer, who was at the time a chorister of St.
Paul’s Cathedral, a chum of Sullivan’s boyhood, an intimate
friend through life, and his successor as principal of the
National Training School.
A TREMENDOUS SUCCESS.
It is interesting at this point to note how near the world
was to missing the wonderful series of Gilbert and Sullivan
operas, for, indeed, “H.M.S. Pinafore” would have been a
disastrous failure at the Opera Comique if the exuberant
youth that attended the promenade concerts at Covent
Garden had not caught up its breezy strains and whistled
them into popularity, and so saved the good ship “Pinafore”


from foundering. If the success of “Pinafore” in London
may be described as phenomenal, that in America was a
perfect furore. Church choirs added it to their repertoire,
and thousands of sturdy Puritans who had never been inside
a theatre before, went to see the performances. It is on
record that 100,000 barrel organs were constructed to play
nothing else, and for a season the remarkable spectacle was
presented of every theatre and concert company of import-
ance in the big cities producing the same piece. Here is
one of many similar notices, given in all seriousness: “The
Church Choir Pinafore Company have prefaced their
‘Pinafore’ performance with the ‘Gloria’ from Mozart’s
‘Twelfth Mass’ and Handel’s ‘Hallelujah Chorus.’ ” And
again: “At present there are forty-two companies playing
‘Pinafore’ about the country, companies formed after 6 p.m.
yesterday not included.” Philadelphia boasted a coloured
“Pinafore” Company, and in Boston “Pinafore” is an-
nounced to be given at the music hall on a certain date, when
“the leading characters will be sung by prominent soloists
of the Catholic choirs of the city, and the chorus will consist
of fifty voices from various Catholic churches. ’ ’ Meanwhile
there were two points which forced themselves on the notice
of Messrs. Arthur Sullivan and W. S. Gilbert. On the one
hand, the extreme popularity the piece was enjoying in the
States, and, on the other hand, that this unique popularity
had not produced one halfpenny for the benefit of the joint
authors of the production. There being no international
copyright at the time, the authors felt something must be
done to protect their interests, and they determined to take
over their own company and play the opera themselves.
This was done, and proved a revelation to the American
public. “Last evening,” writes one reporter, “ ‘H.M.S.
Pinafore’ was under the command of its builders. Mr.
Arthur Sullivan conducted, and the master hand was clearly
discernible in the result. It seemed as though human in-
genuity had been exhausted to provide appropriate business
for the opera, that everything thinkable had been thought
of. Last night’s performance was, however, everywhere
studded with new points, but the most noticeable difference
in the interpretation was the orchestration. There was a


breadth, colour, and tone, together with a harmonious blend-
ing with the vocalization which was utterly wanting in what
may be called the home-made £ Pinafores. ’ ’ ’
‘‘PIRATES OF PENZANCE.”
Although “The Pirates of Penzance” was partly
written in America, and was produced in New York on
December 31, 1879, its first performance really took place at
the small theatre at Paignton, in Devonshire, on December
30 in that year. At this time, Messrs. Gilbert, Sullivan, and
Carte were all in New York, and Mrs. Carte, who had been
left in charge at the Opera Comique, only received the
words and music on December 29. Hurrying with them to
Torquay, where the D’Oyley Carte Touring Company was
then playing, she called a rehearsal at the Torquay Theatre
for that night, to take place after the evening’s customary
performance. Next morning the members of the company
were driven over to Paignton, where the country lanes had
already been adorned by yellow bills announcing
the presentation “for one day only,” of an entirely
new and original opera by W. S. Gilbert and Arthur
Sullivan. Doors open at 1.30. Commence at 2. Sofa
stalls, 35.; second seats, 25.; area, Is.; gallery, 6d. ’ ’ The
performance was much enjoyed by the small audience pre-
sent, although the artists had to hold the parts in their
hands and wore their “Pinafore” dresses. The Paignton
caste included the part of James, a Pirate (played by Mr.
John le Hay), which has not since been heard of. The
Major-General was represented by the late Mr. Richard
Mansfield, who afterwards became one of the great dramatic
stars of America; and the Sergeant of Police by Mr. Fred
Billington, who still plays the part with the D ’Oyley Carte
Repertoire Company in England, and has done so continu-
ously since that day in December, 1879. This was one of
the many expedients resorted to to combat the music pirates
of America in the production of each succeeding opera.
“The Pirates of Penzance” was eventually presented in
London, at the Opera Comique, on the evening of April 3,
1880, and with this performance began that series of
fashionable first nights which were the envy of those unable


to gain admission to the theatre, and the pride of all who
were fortunate enough to have their names included in Mr.
Carte’s list. For a year the public listened to the wail of
the policeman—whose lot, taking one consideration with
another, was not a happy one—to the duet where the lovers
are singing in valse rhythm, and the chorus of girls are
chattering about the weather in two-four time, to “Poor
Wandering One,” and the song in which Ruth, the piratical
maid-of-all-work, tells of her unfortunate mistake. “Trial
by Jury,” “The Sorcerer,” “Pinafore,” and “The
Pirates” had firmly established the Gilbert and Sullivan
vogue, and their captivating melodies and exquisite humour
had made gay the drawing-room, and cheered the man in
the street, as he unconsciously hummed one or other of the
many airs which winged their way through the doors of the
theatre to the four corners of the earth. To this period also
belongs the incidental music to “Henry YIII,” written for
the Theatre Royal, Manchester, and several songs, notably
“I would I were a king,” “St. Agnes’ Eve,” and “Edward
Gray.”


PERIOD IV
It was while Sullivan was conducting a complimentary
concert, consisting of selections from his own works, at
Baltimore, that a cablegram was handed to him offering
him the condnctorship of the Leeds Festival. This position
he accepted and held for a period of twenty years. Of
his election in 1880, a writer in a local paper, in referring
to the fact that the other candidates for the position were
Sir Michael Costa and Sir Charles Halle, says: “There is
one point, however, in the election of Mr. Sullivan about
which lam particularly pleased. It is the fact that for an
English Festival we are to have an English conductor. Too
long have we in this country bowed down to foreign talent,
even when it has been inferior to English. On the selection
of an Englishman over Costa and Halle as conductor, an
admirer of 'Pinafore’ sends me the following from that
work, slightly altered:
We might have had a Russian,
A French, or Turk, or Prussian,
Or else I-tal-i-an.
But in spite of all temptations
To go to other nations
We select an Englishman.
For the Festival of 1880 Sullivan wrote his glorious
work, 4 4 The Martyr of Antioch, ’ ’ and this marked an epoch,
for here Sullivan abandoned the field of oratorio and took
a subject which gave his inventive faculty free play, and
permitted him to indulge to the full his dramatic instincts.
Dean Milman’s poem, which had been adapted by W. S.
Gilbert, allowed him to follow the dictates of his fancy and
to colour his music with the hues which suggested themselves
to his imagination, and those who are familiar with the
work will remember the rich beauty of the choral writing,
the orchestral colouring and ever-changing harmonies, the


peculiar attraction of the “10-poean,” with its quaint
accompaniment, and the extraordinary pathos and sadness
of “Brother, thou art gone before us.” Many good judges
consider this the finest work Sullivan produced, and it is
certainly worthy of the greatest composer that ever lived.
The dramatic quality of “The Martyr of Antioch” was
recognized by the Carl Rosa Opera Company, who produced
an operatic version of it at Liverpool in 1899. Sullivan was
asked to write a symphony for the next Leeds Festival, and
after giving the matter full consideration he declined on the
ground that “he had his turn at the previous festival, and
hoped the committee would secure the services of some other
English musician.”
UNHAPPY DAYS AT LEEDS.
Sullivan’s interest and genius went far towards making
the Leeds Festival the first in importance in England, and
his popularity was unprecedented all through the eighties,
and far into the nineties, but the last few years of his
association with Leeds were not altogether happy. There
had sprung up a clique which was inimical to him in every
way. Nothing that did not emanate from Kensington Gore
was to its liking. Sullivan was a thorn in its side in con-
sequence of his unbounded popularity, and the clique sought
to undermine his influence with the festival committee and
prejudice his standing with the public. In the course of
time Stanford was freely named as his possible successor,
and immediately after the festival of 1898 the partisans of
Stanford made it clear that they were going to do their best
to secure the election of their man for the next festival. In
due course the final rupture came, and Sullivan was allowed
to sever his connection with Leeds without even an official
letter of thanks or the least recognition of the splendid work
he had done during the twenty years he had been the musical
director of the festival. His great social influence had
brought royalty to the concerts, and given them a Royal
president. The profits of his first festival in 1880 were
more than £1,500 in excess of its predecessor, and in 1889
the net profits were nearly half the sum of the total receipts
in 1877. To Leeds he gave the honour of producing the


finest and most popular cantata ever composed by an Eng-
lishman, and in face of all this there was not sufficient
gratitude to honour him at parting in any manner whatever.
At the festival the year following his death the only tribute
to his memory was the performance of the 4 4 In Memoriam ’ ’
overture. In no other way did his name figure on the pro-
gramme. Verdi’s 44 Requiem” was performed to com-
memorate the death of its composer; Glazanow ’s 4 4 Memorial
Cantata ’ ’ was chosen to celebrate the centenary of the birth
of the Russian poet Pushkin; but for the man who had
laboured to such good purpose for Leeds, and who had done
so much for English art, it was deemed sufficient that he
should be represented by one short orchestral work. How
appropriate it would have been if, after the overture, the
committee had arranged for the performance of 4 4 The
Martyr of Antioch.” How intensely pathetic 44 Brother,
thou art gone before us,” would have sounded, and with
what heartfelt devotion the choristers, who had so frequently
cheered him to the echo, would have given expression to its
mournful and suggestive strains!
SULLIVAN AS A CONDUCTOR.
Of Sullivan as a conductor, Mr. B. W. Findon says;
4 He was alert and watchful as the proverbial weasel; his
sensitive ear was alive to the faintest sound; his eyes were
all over the orchestra. The players knew him, and a single
look from him expressed to them more than all the contor-
tions of the modern melodramatic conductor. He understood
every instrument in the orchestra, and had such a lucid
method of expressing himself at rehearsal that a few words
quietly spoken would always secure him the end he had in
view. His beat was quiet, but firm as a rock, and clear cut
as polished crystal. He was never known to lose his head,
and no conductor ever inspired more confidence or affection
in those under him. ” That he knew his own powers and the
futility of gymnastic displays is shown by the following
anecdote. It was after the visit of Mr. Joseph Barnby to
Leeds to rehearse a new work of his that some unfavourable
comparisons were made, Barnby being a vigorous user of
the baton. These remarks reached Sullivan’s ears, and


were received with characteristic good humour; in fact, he
declared that at the next rehearsal he would show how
he could benefit by criticism, and “beat time like a wind-
mill”! This he certainly did. His arms were upraised,
thrown around in full swing and vigorously used, while he
loudly stamped his feet, and his eyes sparkled with fun.
After the first chorus there were audible expressions of
pleased surprise. ‘‘ By gow !’ ’ one singer was heard to say,
“Sullivan has improved!” and never after was a word
heard about Sullivan’s lethargy.
‘‘PATIENCE.”
In 1881 “Patience, or Bunthorne’s Bride,” was pro-
duced at the Opera Comique, and in the October of that year
the newly-built Savoy Theatre was opened with ‘ ‘ Patience ’ ’
as its first-night production. Sullivan conducted on that
occasion, and after changing his clothes went down to Nor-
wich by the midnight train and conducted the rehearsal
of the Festival in that city at 10 o ’clock next morning, much
to the surprise of those who were then reading the account
in the morning papers of the opening night at the Savoy.
DARK DAYS.
On May 27, 1882, his mother died. This good lady
lived to see her dearly-loved son become the idol of the
public and possibly the most popular composer England
ever produced, but success had never in the least degree
abated his love for home, and his mother’s fifteen years of
widowhood had brought mother and son the closer together.
The year 1882, it may be remarked, was the darkest in
Sullivan’s history. On the very evening that he was to
conduct the first performance of “lolanthe” information
reached him that all the savings of a lifetime had disap-
peared in the bankruptcy of Cooper, Hall & Co., with whom
all his securities had been deposited. Nothing now remained
of his fortune save a few pounds which he happened to have
at his bank at the moment. Financially, he was now little
better off than at the time he was a student at Leipzig, and
from a monetary point of view he had to make a beginning
once again. It was a dark day, that left him poor indeed;
but, unmoved by his ill-fortune, he conducted the first per-


formance of ‘ ‘ lolanthe ’ ’ that evening. ‘‘ lolanthe ’ ’ was re-
ceived with no less enthusiasm than its predecessors, and it
came as a surprise that any music at all could be written to
certain songs found in the libretto. In the ‘‘Nightmare”
song, for instance, ‘ ‘ When you ’re lying awake with a dismal
headache,” Sullivan showed himself incomparable. A writer
at the time said: “Mr. Sullivan might have been content
with mere chords of accompaniment, since the audiences in
such cases listen only to the words, but the orchestral part
is one of singular elaboration and effect. We know of
nothing like it.”
KNIGHTHOOD.
On May 3, 1883, Sullivan received the following letter
from Mr. Gladstone; “Dear Mr. Sullivan —I have the
pleasure to inform you that I am permitted by Her Majesty
to propose that you should receive the honour of knighthood
in recognition of your distinguished talents as a composer,
and the services which you have rendered to the promotion
of the art of music generally in this country. I hope it may
be agreeable to you to accept the proposal.—l remain, faith-
fully yours, W. E. Gladstone.” In speaking of this knight-
hood, a writer in “The Musical Review” expressed himself
as follows: ‘ ‘ Some things that Mr. Arthur Sullivan may
do, Sir Arthur Sullivan ought not to do. In other words,
it will look rather more than odd to see it announced in the
papers that a new comic opera is in preparation, the book
by W. S. Gilbert and the music by Sir Arthur Sullivan.
A musical knight can hardly write shop ballads either; he
must not dare to soil his hands with anything less than an
anthem or a madrigal; oratorio, in which he has so con-
spicuously shone, and symphony must now be his line. Here
is not only an opportunity, but a positive obligation for him
to return to the sphere from which he has too long des-
cended. Again, we would beg him to remember that he
alone of all his brother knights possesses youth and strength,
and therefore it is to him that we look to wield the knightly
sword —to do battle for the honour of English art. Let him
with all his native activity and energy, with that scorn of
the ‘dolce far niente’ which characterizes him, stand forth


as our champion and leader against all foreign rivals, and
arouse us thoroughly from our present half-torpid condi-
tion. Let our musical daze be broken by our musical knight,
and that night prove the forerunner of brighter days.”
“lolanthe” was succeeded by “Princess Ida” in 1884.
Although this opera did not attain the success of some of its
predecessors, I happen to know that Sullivan was particu-
larly fond of the work, and in it we find page after page of
the most delightful music.
“THE MIKADO.”
In the production of “The Mikado,” on March 14,
1885, Sullivan showed that there was no falling off in his
wonderful flow of melody, and that the fountain of his
inspiration was as fresh and profuse as ever. In this work,
both author and composer may be said to have touched the
high-water mark of success. Of the never-to-be-forgotten
first night Mr. Findon says: “At the end of the first act it
was supposed there must be a drop in the interest in the
second—that it would be impossible to maintain that won-
derful flow of wit and melody—but as number succeeded
number the surprise and delight of the audience increased
until the climax was reached, and with the fall of the cur-
tain the house became wildly enthusiastic. ” “ The Mikado ’ ’
was produced in New York in the following August, and
there its success was immediate and triumphant, and after-
wards the bold experiment was tried of performing the work
by an English company in Berlin, and here again it was
greeted with delight as a masterpiece, and this notwithstand-
ing the fact that the English dialogue was unintelligible to
the bulk of the audience. Eighteen years after this the
following appeared in the columns of ‘ ‘ The Musical
Courier ’ ’ from its German correspondent, under date May
26, 1903: “For the benefit of the pension fund of the
members of the Leipzig theatres a performance of £ The
Mikado ’ was recently given in that city. It was in so far a
memorable affair, as all parts of the opera had been en-
trusted to first-class opera singers only, and that no less
a conductor than Professor Arthur Nikisch was the wielder
of the baton. A more splendid performance of Sir Arthur


Sullivan’s justly most popular operetta is probably not on
record, and all parties concerned in it, especially Professor
Nikisch, were made the objects of stormy applause and most
enthusiastic ovations on the part of an audience that filled
every seat and all the standing room in the spacious
theatre.” How Sullivan would have liked to have heard
that performance! “The Mikado” ran at the Savoy Theatre
for over two years; to be exact, for 672 nights.
ZENITH OF POPULARITY.
Sullivan was at this time practically at the zenith of his
popularity and success. With society at his feet, and sur-
rounded by the highest in the land, it would not have been
surprising if he had affected airs of vulgar superiority, but
to his credit he remained always the same. He was as cour-
teous and considerate to a girl in the Savoy chorus as he
was to a patrician dame of Mayfair. As his position im-
proved so he rose with it, and took his place as to the
manner born. For many years he enjoyed the revenue of a
prince, and he bestowed hospitality with a lavish hand. His
drawing-room contained valuable souvenirs from most of the
crowned heads of Europe and people of European distinc-
tion, and, better than all, he enjoyed the intimate friendship
of the aristocracy of -genius. As one thinks of all this, one
almost smiles when one remembers that there was once a
vain mother who thought the young composer was not good
enough for her daughter to take in marriage, and whose
skill in match-making eventually left the daughter very
poor. It was the one serious love affair of Sullivan’s life.
Better, perhaps, for him that he had had another, and had
sacrificed the joys of existence “en garcon” for the more
tranquil state of matrimony. If, however, he had no family
obligations of his own, he took upon himself those of his
dead brother, to whose children he stood in the light of a
parent, and whose welfare was his dearest concern. The
eldest of them, Herbert, was his constant companion in his
later years, and to him he eventually bequeathed his
fortune.


DEVOTION TO HIS MOTHEE.
Still more beautiful was Sullivan’s devotion to his
mother, and every Sunday he was in town he would drive
down to her house at Fulham and spend the day with her.
Frequently he was accompanied by friends, such as Fred
Clay, the composer of “She wandered down the mountain
side, ” “ The sands of Dee, ” “ ITI sing thee songs of Araby, ’ ’
and others, and Alfred Cellier, and on such occasions very
happy times were spent. His mother was ever in his
thoughts. Never had a son a more adoring and devoted
mother, and never had a mother a more tender and con-
siderate son. He knew that she and his father had denied
themselves many things during his youth to further his
advancement, and that sacred debt he tried to discharge
with true filial piety. Happily she was spared to witness
the public appreciation of his talent.


PERIOD V
It was shortly after the production of “The Mikado”
in 1885 that Sullivan paid his second visit to America. In
speaking of this visit, Mr. Arthur Lawrence, in his reminis-
cences, quotes the following anecdote as told by Sullivan:
“I was travelling on a stage in rather a wild part of Cali-
fornia, and arrived at a mining camp, where we had to get
down for refreshments. As we drove up, the driver said,
‘They are expecting you here, Mr. Sullivan.’ I was much
pleased, and when I reached the place I came across a knot
of prominent citizens at the store. The foremost of them
came up to a burly man at my side and said, ‘Are you Mr.
Sullivan?’ The man said, ‘No.’ and pointed to me. The
citizen looked at me rather contemptuously, and after a
while said, ‘Why, how much do you weigh ? ’ I thought this
was rather a curious way of testing the power of a composer,
but I answered, ‘About 162 lb.’ ‘Well,’ said the man,
‘that’s odd to me, anyhow; do you mean to say that you
gave fits to John S. Blackmore down in Kansas City?’ ‘No,’
I said, ‘I didn’t give him fits.’ He then said, ‘Who are
you?’ I replied, ‘My name is Sullivan. ’ ‘Well, ain’t you
John L., the slogger?’ I disclaimed all title to that, and
told him I was Arthur Sullivan. ‘Oh, Arthur Sullivan!
Are you the man as put “Pinafore” together?’ I said,
‘Yes.’ ‘Well,’ returned the citizen, ‘l’m sorry you ain’t
John L., but still I’m glad to see you, anyway. Let’s have
a drink.’ ”
AVOIDING ARREST.
Sir Arthur continues: “It was on the occasion of this
second visit that I was compelled to slip out of the States
to avoid being arrested. Merely to annoy me, and not
because there was the slightest excuse for requiring my
testimony, an order had been issued against me to secure
me as a witness in one of the inevitable lawsuits over the


copyright. It would have been exceedingly awkward for
me to have remained longer in the States, and, of course, it
was their intention to cause me this inconvenience. How-
ever, it having been given out that I intended leaving by a
certain Cunard steamer which was being watched, I slipped
away by a German Lloyd steamer the day before.”
“THE GOLDEN LEGEND.”
Sullivan’s next great work, “The Golden Legend,”
was written for the Leeds Festival of 1886. It is interesting
to notice how the light works, and the greater and more
serious works, are continually sandwiched throughout his
life. “The Light of the World” was immediately after
Thespis. ’ ’ The year that ‘ ‘ The Pirates of Penzance ’ ’ was
presented at the Opera Comique was the year of the pro-
duction of “The Martyr of Antioch” at Leeds. “The
Golden Legend” came immediately upon the heels of “The
Mikado,” and, later on, his last work, the “Te Deum”
for the thanksgiving services at St. Paul’s Cathedral, at the
conclusion of the South African War, went hand in hand
with “The Emerald Isle.” The effect of “The Golden
Legend ’ ’ upon the feelings of the audience, on its first pro-
duction, was tremendous. From the time of the splendidly-
descriptive introduction, in which the roaring of the tem-
pest, the clang of the cathedral bells, the defiant shouts of
the demon, and the answering voices of the spirits of the air,
are blended with such striking effect, to the no less magni-
ficent epilogue, which closes the work; then the pent-up
enthusiasm of the vast assemblage burst forth like a torrent.
Cheer followed cheer, the whole audience upstanding, hand-
kerchiefs, books, or anything else that came handy were
waved aloft, and the over-powered composer was subjected
to a bombardment of flowers, which the principal vocalists
and ladies of the chorus showered on him.
AN OVATION.
Never was there a more heartfelt ovation. As a
writer in ‘ ‘ The Leeds Mercury ’ ’ put it: “ Ovation ? Nay, it
was the greater triumph, such as once acclaimed the suc-
cessful soldiers of Rome.” “The Golden Legend” was


hailed then, and is recognized now, as the finest English
choral composition of the century which saw its birth. It
rivals the masterpieces of Handel and Mendelssohn, and
whatever else of Sullivan’s may perish, it is safe to assume
that “The Golden Legend” will remain as a perpetual
reminder of the genius of its composer. In speaking of this
work, in the course of some lectures on Sullivan given at
the Royal Institution, Sir Alexander Mackenzie said:
“From the elaborate, vivid, and exciting prologue, painted
in the strongest colours of modern instrumentation, to the
touching finale, which brings tears to the eyes (as I confess
it did to mine), the composer has availed himself in a
masterly manner of all the resources at the musician’s
command and the gathered experience of a lifetime. In
the journey to Salerno, leading to the scene by the sea,
culminating in the soprano solo, ‘The night is calm and
cloudless, ’he reaches a height which—l say it deliberately—
touches the sublime.” And in a lecture before the Musical
Association in March, 1902, Dr. Charles Maclean said; “In
‘The Golden Legend’ Sullivan brought up purely English
art to a level never dreamed of before.”
During the seasons of 1885-6-7 he directed and
conducted the concerts of the Philharmonic Society
—in all about eighteen—and here his modesty is
once more displayed, for it is remarkable that
during the whole of that period his name appears in the
programmes as a composer four times only, two of these
being vocal pieces and the other two orchestral selections.
In 1887 “Ruddigore” was produced, and although it con-
tained some of Sullivan’s best work, its grim satire and
parody of lurid melodrama were never understood. It was
the least successful of the series, and has never been revived.
“THE YEOMEN OF THE GUARD.”
“The Yeomen of the Guard” marked a new departure
in the work of “the heavenly twins,” as Gilbert and Sul-
livan were sometimes called. In this work “ topsey-turvey-
dom ’ ’ and fairies have no place, and in their place we have
smiles and tears, comedy and pathos. Indeed, it is a de-
liberate effort to give the British public a higher grade of
musical art, and to engage the same serious sympathy for


the light opera stage that is given to legitimate drama. Here
we have a genuine dramatic story, the composer has fair
scope for his genius, and the entire work is at once masterly
and fascinating. Sullivan considered “The Yeomen” the
best of the operas he had written.
ABOUT MUSIC.
On October 19, 1888, in his capacity as President of
the Birmingham and Midland Institute, Sullivan delivered
an address at the Birmingham Town Hall. He began; “It
has come to my good fortune to have to address you as
president of this institute, and I naturally choose the sub-
ject of music. I can choose no other. Music has been my
incessant occupation since I was eight years old. All my
energies, all my affections, have been bestowed upon it, and
it has for long been to me a second nature. The interests
and triumphs of my art are dearer to me than any other
interests or triumphs can be. Music is to me a mistress
in every sense of the word—a mistress whose commands I
obey, whose smiles I love, whose wrongs move me as no
others do.” He then goes on to trace the history of music
in England from the time of King Alfred, “who instituted
a Professorship of Music at Oxford in 866, and there must
have been concerted music in those Anglo-Saxon times, for
in the British Museum there is an old picture of a concert
party, consisting of a six-stringed harp, a four-stringed
fiddle, a trumpet, and a crooked horn. Long before the
Conquest, three-part harmony was practised. Thomas
a’Beckett, on his visit to France to negotiate the marriage
of King Henry 11, took with him 250 boys, who sang in
harmony of three parts, which is expressly recorded to have
been in the English manner, and till then unheard of in
Prance. It is a satisfaction to know that in those days
musicians were well paid, for at the wedding of the daughter
of King Edward I every King’s minstrel received 405.,
equal at least to £2O in these days. Chaucer, in his Prin-
cesses ’ Tale, mentions approvingly that young children were
taught to sing as much as they were taught to read, but he
somewhat weakens the value of his judgment in my eyes by
expressing elsewhere the opinion that every country squire


should be taught to play the flute. Later on he quotes
Darwin in his “Descent of Man,” who says: “Neither the
enjoyment nor the capacity of producing musical notes is a
faculty of the least direct use to man in reference to his
ordinary habits of life. ’ ’ Sullivan then said :‘ ‘ Physiologic-
ally he is probably correct, but as soon as mere rudimentary
actions are left, as soon as existence becomes life, his state-
ment is completely false.”
MUSIC, THE SALT OF THE MIND.
Tndeed, music is, as the same philosopher says else-
where, bound up in daily life, and a necessity of existence;
it enters into the chemistry of the mind, as salt does into
the chemistry of the body. Here and there you meet with
a person who says, “I never eat salt; I don’t require it.”
Well, you are sorry for him; there is evidently something
wrong in his physical constitution; So when anyone assumes
a tone of lofty superiority and boasts that he knows nothing
about music, and pretends not to be able to distinguish one
tune from another, you may either accept his statement with
a considerable amount of reserve, or conclude that there is
something wrong in his physical or mental faculties, and
recommend him to consult an aurist. In the account of the
origin of mankind, as given in the Book of Genesis, we find
society divided into three great divisions: 1. Agriculturists,
“those that dwell in tents and have cattle.” 2. Manufac-
turers, “artificers in brass and iron.” 3. Musicians, “such
as handle the harp and pipe,” that is, strings and wind.
Music is thus put on a level with such essential pursuits as
agriculture and manufactures, and this equal share in the
economy of the world music has maintained, but, belonging
as it does to the inmost part of man’s nature, its presence is
often overlooked, and we are as unconscious of it as we are
of the air we breathe, the speech we utter, the natural motion
of our muscles, or the beating of our hearts. It is co-exten-
sive with human life. Prom the soft lullaby of the mother
that soothes our cradle life, to the dirge that is sung over
the grave, music enters into our existence; it marks periods
and epochs in our life, stimulates our exertions, strengthens
our faith, speaks both words of peace and war, and exercises


over us a charm and an indefinite power which we all can
feel, though we cannot explain. I repeat, it is a necessity
to the mind, as salt is to the body.
THE INFLUENCE OF MUSIC.
When we come to the question of the influence of music
we arrive at its most important function: the area of its
greatest powder. Who shall measure the boundless influence
of music on human feeling ? Who shall gainsay the mighty
power it exercises over human passion, or deny the dyna-
mical force which it has exerted in history ? The enormous
power exercised by the Welsh bards of old caused their
extirpation. Readers of Carlyle’s history of Cromwell will
recollect his account of the Battle of Dunbar, and the
emotion that forced that silent and undemonstrative man
into urging his soldiers forward by shouting and making
them shout the 117th Psalm to the version still used in the
Church of Scotland and to a still existing tune. Well, this
is all sentiment many may be disposed to say. Yes, but he
who refuses to accept the force of sentiment on human
nature is a blind fool! ” I have made these few quotations
to emphasize the splendid sincerity of the man, and here I
shall briefly allude to a letter he wrote to £ £ The Times ’ ’ on
July 19, 1897, on the subject of ££ Music and the Jubilee.”
OUE LACK OF PATRIOTISM IN MUSIC.
In the course of the letter he says: ££ One would think
that on such a thoroughly national occasion as the jubilee our
military authorities would gladly display some amount of
national feeling in their selections of music, but such was not
the case. For instance, at the review of colonial troops at
Buckingham Palace I noticed that the programme of the
Grenadier Guards Band was as follows; A march by F.
Wagner, the overture to £ Zampa’ (Herold), a selection of
Offenbach, and two waltzes by Gung T. This might perhaps
be an appropriate selection of music for a military review in
Berlin or Paris, but it is not so apparent why such pieces
should be chosen to welcome our colonial kinsmen to their
fatherland. I have examined many other programmes, and
find to my astonishment that British music on these occa-


sions has been totally ignored. It is only in England that
such an anomaly would be possible. It is inconceivable
that at a national fete in Berlin the German mili-
tary bands would confine themselves to performances
of French and Italian tunes, or that on a similar
occasion in Paris songs from the German Father-
land would alone be heard.” This question of our
lack of patriotism in music and the neglect of British music
was the one topic on which he was at all disposed to speak
with any degree of irritation, and for many years he did his
utmost to advance not only British music but British musi-
cians. For the State concerts under his direction he would
choose British singers, and he would point with pride to the
117 men comprising his orchestra at Leeds —every man an
Englishman—and he considered that for pure beauty of
tone that band Avas unequalled all the world over.
“THE GONDOLIERS.”
In “The Gondoliers,” produced in 1889, a return is
made to the regions of pure fancy and imagination. The
music overflows with the joy of life, and represents Sullivan
in his most sparkling and vivacious humour. There is sun-
shine in every bar, and Sullivan never wielded his magi-
cian’s wand to better purpose. It would seem as if fate,
foreseeing that “The Gondoliers” was to break the happy
partnership that had existed for so many years between
Gilbert and Sullivan, was determined that the farewell
should be said amidst an unprecedented outburst of mirth
and melody. It is wrong to assume that there was any
quarrel between Gilbert and Sullivan. Sullivan was not in
any way concerned in the dispute between Gilbert and
D ’Oyley Carte, but it is obvious that he had to associate him-
self with one or the other, and he decided to throw in his lot
with D ’Oyley Carte. No doubt this was a matter of regret
to Mr. Gilbert; but of actual quarrel there was none—they
dissolved partnership, and there was an end of it. The
bother between Gilbert and D’Oyley Carte was, I believe,
over a carpet for the theatre. D’Oyley Carte thought a
new one was necessary and ordered one; Gilbert thought
differently, and objected to the account.


PERIOD VI
‘ ‘ IVANHOE. ’ ’
We are now brought up to the period of the production
of “Ivanhoe.” This was Sullivan’s most ambitious opera-
tic effort, and one which, owing to various circumstances,
attracted more general attention than any other of his
works. A most gorgeous opera house had been built at
enormous expense in the heart of London for its reception,
and there is no doubt that Sullivan hoped to find there a
home for the higher form of lyric drama, and he believed in
the possibility of its winning for itself a place in the esti-
mation of all lovers of music equal to that of the Savoy
Theatre, which at the time was a household word. The
music of “Ivanhoe” is as Sullivanesque as any of the
Savoy operas—it is as personal to himself as “The Martyr
of Antioch” or “The Golden Legend;” full of exquisite
melody and dramatic force and intensity, it stands supreme
in the whole range of English opera. In Rebecca’s exquisite
song in Act iii, ‘ ‘ Ah, would that thou and I might lead our
sheep!” in her beautiful prayer, “Lord of our chosen
race;” in the Templar’s soliloquy, “Woo thou thy snow-
flake,” and in the great duet which ends Act ii Sullivan
attained to a pinnacle which few writers of opera have
reached.
A WORLD’S RECORD.
On its first presentation 168 consecutive performances
were given of “Ivanhoe.” This is in itself a world’s record,
for no grand opera by any composer ever did anything like
it; but the enormous cost of presentation—it was necessary
to duplicate the principal parts, in consequence of the
severe demand the music made on the voices of the chief
characters, and two complete companies were consequently
on the salary list—this, and other causes over which the


composer had little or no control, led to its withdrawal, and
eventually to the abandonment by Sullivan of his aspira-
tions in the direction of grand opera. The opera house was
afterwards acquired by a syndicate, and is now flourishing
as The Palace Theatre of Varieties.
METHODS OF WORK.
Of his methods of work Sullivan has himself given
an interesting and concise description of Mr. Laurence’s
Reminiscences. He says: ‘ ‘ Musical composition, like every-
thing else, is the outcome of hard work; and, although I
admit that sometimes a happy phrase will occur to one quite
unexpectedly, there is really nothing speculative or spas-
modic; moreover, the happy thoughts which seem to come
to one only occur after hard work and steady persistence.
One day work is hard, and another day it is easy; but if I
had waited for inspiration I am afraid I should have done
nothing. The miner does not sit at the top of the shaft
waiting for the coal to come bubbling up to the surface.
One must go deep down and work out every vein carefully. ’ ’
When once an idea had fixed itself on his mind, he had no
difficulty in putting it on paper. He scored his operas with
the readiness and facility of a man writing a chatty letter
to a friend. His method was to leave the orchestration until
the scene had been finally fixed at rehearsal; by that time
he had penetrated to the depths of its humour or sentiment,
and with an unerring touch he was able to give exactly the
required colouring to his instrumentation.
QUICK WORK.
He scored quickly, and with what certainty he worked
may be estimated from the fact that “Cox and Box” was
scored, and the parts written out, within five days. ‘ ‘ Contra-
bandista,” that succeeded “Cox and Box,” was composed,
scored, and rehearsed within 16 days from the time he re-
ceived the manuscript libretto. The overture to “lolanthe”
was begun at 9 p.m. and finished at 7 o’clock the next morn-
ing; that to “The Yeoman of the Guard” was composed
and scored in twelve hours; while the splendid epilogue to
‘ ‘ The Golden Legend ’ ’ was begun and finished, scoring and


everything complete, in the space of twenty-four hours. To
merely write the number of notes in such a composition as
this would be a feat to most men, but when all is perfection,
as it is here, it is nothing short of prodigious. In 1892 he
wrote the music to Tennyson’s woodland play, “The Fores-
ters,” and of this the musical critic of “The World” wrote:
“It is by far the most beautiful that he (Sullivan) has ever
given to the poetic and pastoral drama. His musical ode
‘To sleep,’ his forest songs, and his manly English carols
will live and endure long after the ‘Woodland Masque’ as
an acting play is dead, buried, and forgotten. ’ ’ An eminent
American said of it when the piece was being performed in
New T York: “The atmosphere is so real, and we fall into it
so completely, that, Americans though we be through and
through, we can listen with hearty assent to the chorus
‘Thereis no land like England,’ and that ‘There are no
wives like English wives’: nay, come to think of it, that song
was encored. It was charming, charming from beginning
to end.’ To 1892 also belongs a comic opera, “Haddon
Hall,” written in collaboration with Mr. Sydney Grundy,
and produced at the Savoy.
THE ENGLISH MOZART
Sullivan has been variously styled the English Mozart,
the English Mendelssohn, the English Auber, and, by his
detractors, the English Offenbach. This latter epithet was
first given him in a burst of ill-natured spleen by Sir George
Alexander Macfarren, and it was used in his article on
music in the Eneyelopoedia Britannica produced by “The
Times. ’ ’ It was never used as a compliment, and was only
employed by Macfarren and his satellites at the time of the
disagreement between the National Training School and the
Royal Academy of Music. These were Sullivan’s owui w’ords
in the autumn of 1899, and we may conclude that he smarted
under the injustice of the epithet to the end, for certainly
there was never a more unjust criticism perpetrated on a
man’s work. The words used by Macfarren in his judgment
011 the compositions of Offenbach are as follow: ‘ ‘ They con-
sist of an intermingling of the lightest and most frivolous
music with spoken dialogue, and depend as much on literary


sprightliness as on musical tunefulness for success. It may
be described as burlesque, sometimes of stories that have
held mankind’s respect for ages, sometimes of modern social
absurdities, but having the ridiculous for its main quality
and extravagant in every detail.” He (Offenbach) is
represented in England by Sir Arthur Sullivan.” Had
Macfarren’s depreciation of his successful contemporary
appeared in an ephemeral publication it might have been
allowed to pass unnoticed, but as it stands in the represen-
tative reference work of the nation the libel must remain.
Leaving this matter out of consideration, it seems to me that
neither of the other comparisons 1 have named is sufficiently
comprehensive, that each fails to exactly fit the case. To
me there is but one Sullivan: he stands apart.
THE TRUE COMPOSER.
The true poet is he who can penetrate the mysteries of
nature and by his power of expression act as an interpreter
to his less divinely endowed fellow-men. The true composer
is he who can put into concrete form the music of our
souls, the tunes of our imaginations. It is he who gives us
the songs that go direct to a nation’s heart, the melodies
that become associated with the innermost history of our
lives. Within this hallowed circle is Arthur Sullivan. His
melodies have winged their way to the furthermost ends of
the earth; his songs are known to the hardy pioneers of
civilization all the world over, and here is contemporary
fame almost or absolutely unparalleled in musical history.
In 1893 the “heavenly twins” once more joined forces
and produced “Utopia, Limited.” For some time the opera
drew crowded houses, but there came a whisper that certain
distinguished personages were not altogether pleased with
its satire on the grand ducal courts, and the faithful imita-
tion of the procedure of a royal drawing-room, and the piece
did not enjoy an extended run.
CHARACTER.
Of Sullivan’s character as a man, the following quota-
tion from the letter of a one-time fellow-student speaks more
eloquently: “Although he and I are now separated by an


almost impassable gulf, both socially and musically, he is
one of the best friends I have in the world; and amid all
the pressure of work and, I regret to say, under the burden
of much sickness, he continues to this day to write me the
cheeriest and kindest of letters: letters that are alike a
credit to his head and heart. I happen to know, too,
that his goodness of heart and generosity of dis-
position extend to the whole brotherhood of musi-
cians and hundreds of the poorer brethren have
good cause to bless the name of Arthur Seymour
Sullivan.” This was the Arthur Sullivan that I knew. I
could, of course, enlarge on my own associations with him,
associations which covered a period of more than twenty
years. I might even tell how a great operatic baritone was
possibly lost to fame, when family considerations and so
forth prompted me to decline a proposition that I should
become “The captain of the Pinafore,” but I shall do no
more than refer to the last occasion we were together on
the same platform; I refer to the Chapel Royal concert
given at Bridgewater House, St. James’s, on May 13, 1897.
This happened to be Sullivan’s fifty-fifth birthday, and the
keen enjoyment he displayed in taking part in certain items
in the programme and the delightful spirit of camaraderie
he showed to all concerned, and especially to the boys of the
Chapel Royal, are to me a beautiful memory.
THE PARTNERSHIP ENDS.
In 1894 a revised and elaborated version of his early
work, “Contrabandista,” rechristened “The Chieftain,”
was produced at the Savoy, and in this year he did the
incidental music to “King Arthur” for the Lyceum, and
in 1896 he was once more in collaboration with W. S. Gilbert
in “The Grand Duke.” With this work, the partnership,
which with the exception of one break had existed for
twenty-five years, terminated. In 1897 he wrote a ballet
of a national description in honour of Queen Victoria’s
diamond jubilee. This was entitled “Victoria and Merrie
England. ’ ’ It was a delightful imitation of old-time music
and at the same time abounded in characteristic touches, in-
cluding a fugue most cleverly and humorously arranged as a


comic dance, and the representative airs of England, Ire-
land, and Scotland combined in a manner most interesting
to the student of contrapuntal writing. The hymn, ‘‘ 0 King
of Kings” was written by royal command, and ordered to
be sung in every church and chapel in England and Wales,
and in the town of Berwick-on-Tweed, on Sunday, June 20,
1897. It is interesting to note that this tune was sung at
the great service in St. Paul’s Cathedral in connection with
the recent Pan-Anglican Congress, to the words “Great
Lord of Wisdom, Light, and Life.” In 1898 he wrote “The
Beauty Stone.” The librettists were A. W. Pinero and
Comyns Carr, and the association was not altogether happy,
for neither Mr. Pinero nor Mr. Carr had any practical
knowledge of the art of writing for the lyric stage, and
they refused to accept Sullivan’s advice and suggestions.
Twice Sullivan declined to proceed with the work, and only
out of regard for his lifelong friends, Mr. and Mrs. D ’Oyley
Carte, and in the interests of those whose daily bread de-
pended on the successful maintenance of the Savoy Theatre,
did he consent to complete his task.
“THE ABSENT-MINDED BBGGAE. >’
In 1899 was written ‘ ‘ The absent-minded beggar. ’ ’ This
setting of Rudyard Kipling’s verses is interesting as show-
ing how Sullivan could adapt himself to the spirit of the
moment. It was a song written for “the man in the street, ’’
and intended to be whistled in the street; but certain critics,
in whose eyes Sullivan could do no right, took serious objec-
tion to it on account of what they called its vulgarity. In
the postscript to a letter he wrote: “I am glad you appre-
ciate the spirit in which ‘The absent-minded beggar’ is
written. I have no doubt the academicals turn up their
noses at it: they don’t like a tune that the people can sing. ’ ’
How well the song fulfilled its mission may be judged by
the fact that an unkempt child in the street, on seeing the
announcement of Sullivan’s death on a news bill, was heard
to exclaim, with bated breath: ‘ ‘ That’s him as wrote ‘ The
absent-minded beggar.’ ” In 1899, too, came his Swan song
in comic opera. Never did he sing more sweetly or with
greater refinement of utterance than in “The Rose of


Persia,’’ and many excellent judges regard this as the
masterpiece of the whole series of operas.
PREJUDICED CRITICISM.
I feel it would be unwise did I not, before closing this
rough sketch of the life and works of Sullivan, refer to the
frequently expressed opinion of some, who claim to be re-
garded as leaders of musical thought, that Sullivan gave
too much attention to purely secular and light music, and
that he seriously neglected the so-called higher branches of
his art, and it is well for a moment to consider their point
of view. No young composer ever made a more brilliant
debut than he did at the Crystal Palace, when his “Tem-
pest” music was performed. His “Symphony in B,” which
was produced at the same place five years later, was even
more indicative of exceptional talent, and the surmise that
did he choose to confine himself to the more laborious branch
of his art he would at least become the English Mendelssohn
was perfectly justifiable. Fortune, however, smiled on the
young composer, and it became Arthur Sullivan’s end to
minister to the happiness of the greatest number, instead
of gratifying the exacting desires of the comparative few,
and, much as they may have lost in the process, there is no
doubt the world at large has gained. Still, the genius that
produced “The Tempest” most certainly foreshadowed the
‘ln Memoriam,” “The Light of the World,” “The Martyr
of Antioch,” “The Golden Legend,” and “Ivanhoe,” even
as the pen that wrote“ Cox and Box” was predestined to
write “The Mikado.”
SULLIVAN’S MISSION.
It was just as much Sullivan’s mission to write such
music as it was Brahms’s to put forth symphonies and
sonatas, but in Sullivan’s case it was an easier matter for
him (as he proved) to write a symphony which should com-
mand the respectful admiration of critical and exacting
minds than it would have been for the two or three men
who have composed successful symphonies during the last
forty or fifty years to have accomplished a comic opera of
the excellence of, say, “The Yeomen of the Guard.” Had


he never written a comic opera, he would still be the greatest
musician of his generation, and if we have ground for regret
it is that, having the opportunity, he did not give us more
serious compositions. The extraordinary success of the
operas put him in possession of a princely income, and, so
far as personal reputation and popularity went, he had as
much of both as the heart of man could desire. When we
remember the physical suffering which he endured for over
thirty years, with few intervals of complete absence from
pain, we may well forgive what the austere critic might
consider a dereliction of duty, and be thankful he accom-
plished so much.
A DISCIPLE OF THE BEAUTIFUL.
A comparison of the scores of his comic operas with
those of his serious works will show any competent judge
that he took the same loving care with the one that he did
with the other; his nature was so eminently refined that
he shuddered at a vulgarism, and his knowledge of music
was so profound that he never strayed from the direct path
of beauty. Twenty years have elapsed since the death of
Sullivan, and his work is still a signal factor in the musical
world; all his works have in them the breath of life, and
their vitality is unimpaired. Since they were first heard
other men have produced much, and most of it is forgotten.
There has been ample time for forgetfulness in his case, but
the present generation at least is not disposed to allow his
music to fade away into the mists of the past, for it has in
it the quality which goes straight to the heart—it requires
no connoisseur to appreciate its beauty or estimate its worth.
Sullivan was a disciple of the beautiful; by the mysterious
lights which illumine the soul of inspired man, he was able
to preach its gospel to the rvorld; his language is spon-
taneous and clear, and, like all great language, is easily
understood of the people. It was the consummate mastery
of his art as a whole that enabled Sullivan to achieve the
success he did in his lighter music. The great public was
quick to realize and appreciate the wealth of delight laid
open for them, and musicians were ready to comprehend
the marvellous merit of this light music of his; but some


superior persons affect toward it a patronizing air, and
pityingly express their regret that Sullivan should have
wasted his time on such ephemeral work, and in other ways
they have sought to give evidence of their superior intel-
lectual equipment, their admiration being only for that
which is severe and lofty in art; while others have been
known to boast of their entire ignorance of the works in
question. A prominent critic has said that such people are
the curse of the musical world, and he regrets that some pied
piper does not periodically pipe them away to the cavernous
depths of a specially appointed Koppenberg, where their
punishment would be to listen to the eternal playing of
neglected masterpieces by unknown composers. For my
own part, I fail to see that there is anything particularly
precious about any form of art, because it appeals to the
few; on the contrary, if the work of art, be it book, music,
or painting, is such that it can never be popular, its un-
popularity is in some measure an indication of its limita-
tions, and besides it is much less difficult to compose music
which nobody understands (and many people do it) than
to give forth strains on which there can be no shadow of
doubt—no possible doubt whatever. Sullivan might have
gone on writing symphonies and quartettes his whole life
through, but would the final result have compensated us for
the possible loss of the wealth of beautiful music which is
now familiar to the whole world! We probably have more
to thank the Sullivan who was for, than the Sullivan some
would have wished him to be, and I say advisedly that the
world is sadly in want of another Sullivan.
In 1900 he was occupied with an opera, “The Emerald
Isle,” but he only lived to finish the first two numbers,
although he had sketched out the form and written the
melodies of fifteen others out of the twenty-eight lyrics in
the opera. He, however, completed a festival Te Deum,
which was performed at St. Paul’s Cathedral on the occa-
sion of the national thanksgiving for the termination of the
war in South Africa. Thus he ended his musical life as he
began it—in the service of the church. He died on Novem-
ber 22, 1900 (St. Cecilia’s Day), from the effects of a chill


contracted by exposing himself to a piercing wind in order
to see the return of the troops from South Africa.
PUBLIC SORROW.
The genuineness of the public sorrow was to be seen on
the day of his funeral, for all along the route from St.
James’ to St. Paul’s, as the funeral cortege passed, the
people stood in their thousands, bareheaded, and flags were
flying half mast high. By the Queen’s command, the first
part of the burial service took place in the Chapel Royal,
where the deceased composer began his career as a boy, and
the remains were then taken in stately procession to St.
Paul’s Cathedral. Here the service was completed, and
after the Benediction the members of the Savoy Opera
Company sang “Brother, thou art gone before us,” from
‘ ‘ The Martyr of Antioch. ’ ’ Sullivan rests near to William
Boyce, and close by are the caskets of Dean Milman, Canon
Liddon, and Sir John Millais. He was but fifty-eight when
he died, and physical suffering had been associated with all
his best work. “If, however,” in the language of the
eminent critic whom I have so frequently quoted, “if there
be music in the celestial sphere, then should his soul rest in
smiling peacefulness for all eternity.”
Q. HASSELL & SON.
PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS,
CURRIE ST„ ADELAIDE.^




