

Ft3ikf g
THE CHURCH SOCIETY FOR THE
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
When persons are asked to subscribe to the Church Society,
they often reply—Tell me something about the Society. What
is it ? What does it propose to do? How does it carry out its
designs ? And what good has it done ?
We propose in this paper to answer these questions.
I.—What is the Church Society?
It is an Association of Members of the Church of England,
which helps to provide Parishes and Districts needing assistance
with the Ministry and Ordinances of the Church.
ll.—What does it purpose to do?
It undertakes to pay part of the Minister’s stipend. If the
district is unable to support a Clergyman, and can raise half of a
Catechist’s stipend, the Society undertakes to pay the other half.
It also pays the expenses of Clergymen and Catechists when they
are sent to remote parts of the diocese.
It gives help towards the erection and the repair of Churches
and Parsonages. It proposes also to provide some Endowment
for Parishes, when the fund for that purpose will admit of it.
It seeks further to evangelize the Aborigines ; and as no mission
to them exists in this colony, it helps one which is carried on
successfully in Victoria, at Lake Tyers and Lake Condah.
lll.—How does it carry out its designs?
By the aid of a Committee which consists of twelve laymen
elected annually by the Synod, together with Eepresentatives
chosen by the Auxiliary Associations, such clergymen as are
subscribers to its funds, and the Bishop as President. A


Sub-Committee of Finance is elected every year by the General
Committee to whom every application for aid is referred, to be
■considered and reported on, before the grant is made.
It depends for means to carry out its designs, upon voluntary
■contributions, collections in Churches, and the funds supplied by
Auxiliary Associations.
IV.—What has it done ?
It would take a long time to tell of all that the Society has
done during the last 21 years, since its formation ; and all the
good which has resulted from its labours. Much of this will
never be known until the day when all things shall be made
manifest. But this we do know: scores of place where there
was no Church, no minister of Christ, no Sabbath rest, no Sunday
School, nor means of grace, are now blest with these through its
instrumentality, and in these Districts the moral and spiritual
aspect of things has been entirely changed. The foundation has
been laid of great and lasting blessings to the community.
Taking the year 1876 we find that in 28 parishes the stipends
of the clergy were supplemented with sums, generally of £lOO.
In ten parishes the salaries of Catechists were similarly aided.
Grants to the extent of £125 were made towards the building of
churches, and £290 towards three parsonages. £5O was granted
tow r ards the Church of England mission to the aborigines in
Victoria. The northern portion of Queensland also received
some assistance.
May we not then ask you to be helpers in a work which God
has so signally blessed? You can do it with your money, your
time, your interest, and your prayers.
With youe Money. —Twelve Shillings a year is the small
amount which constitutes a member. But it is hoped none will
be content with this sum, if they can give more. Smaller sums
will not be refused; but the Christian rule of giving is ‘ according
to your several ability.’’ Your subscription may be monthly,
quarterly, or annually, as most convenient.


s-3 rr
With your Time. —This may be employed in collecting for
the Society ; in making known its objects, and in attending the
meetings which are held on its behalf.
With your Interest in its Proceedings. —Making yourself
more fully acquainted with what it is doing in different parishes,
endeavouring to stir up others to help, and showing a lively con-
cern in its progress. And, above all, aid it—
With your Prayers.— Remember the Society in your daily
supplication for the spread of the Gospel, and the salvation of
men. Pray that God will bless those who are labouring in the
diocese for this end; and join heartily with your brethren in
their meetings, that the God of all grace will vouchsafe larger
blessings upon every effort of the Society to promote the know-
ledge of Christ and His salvation in the land.
Joseph. Cook & Co., Printers, 370, Georgo-street, Sydney.


