

THE
Occurrence of Opals
IN
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA AND QUEENSLAND.
! PRINTER’S SECOND PROOF.
Paper read before the Glasgow Geological Society and Chemical Section
of the Philosophical Society , 23rd January, 1882 .
BY
James R. M. Robertson, M.D., F.G.S., F.R.G.S.


THE
OCCURRENCE OF OPALS
IN CENTRAL AUSTRALIA AND QUEENSLAND.
At the request of your Secretary, and some of the older members of
this society, I have prepared a few remarks upon “The Occurrence of
Opal in the Colony of Queensland,” and the geological and physical
aspects of the country in which they are found.
Very few of those to whom I speak on Queensland are aware that
its surface area is about times that of Great Britain; that 30 years
ago, there were not more than 1,800 white people settled in this vast
extent of country; or that at present, it can only boast of a population
of 217,000, or rather less than one person to every three square
miles.
The northern territory of Queensland is mountainous; it is covered
by dense tropical vegetation, and is peopled by hostile tribes of
aborigines. Of this region, very little indeed of a positive character
is known.
The east coast of the Colony is fringed over its whole length by a
high mountain chain, for the most part composed of granite. In parts,
these mountains are highly metalliferous—copper being extensively
distributed around Mount Perry and Rawbelle, and at Copperfield;
and gold—both alluvial and in quartz reefs—is found over the whole
extent of these ranges. The principal gold mining localities are—
Gympie in the south, around Mount Perry, Rockampton and Mori-
nish, Charters Towers, and Nebo, inland from Bowen. The Palmer
and Hodgkinson districts in the north, while in the mountain ranges
that join the east coast with the Gulf of Carpentaria, the Etheridge,
Woolgar, and Gilberton gold fields have been opened up. In the far
west the Cloncurry copper and gold fields (that I had occasion to
visit) exist among the outliers of the M‘Kinlay ranges, and from this
field the richest ores of copper and the finest gold in all Australia is
obtained.
Queensland minerals are all of a high order in respect to quality
and productiveness; but, up to the present moment, they have not
received that attention from capitalists that they deserve. Its quartz
reefs carry a higher average of gold than any iu Australia; yet, from
the rudeness of the manipulative processes, and the perfunctory methods
of mining practices, their working has not been attended with the
success that better systems would have insured. lam pleased to be
able to make an exception to this general statement in favour of
Charters Towers, and Gympie, where several complete recovery plants
have of late been erected.
The coast ranges rise to an average altitude of 2,000 feet. From
this elevation, plateauxs, or tablelands, extend inland.. The granite
formation has been pierced by great belts of volcanic or intrusive
rocks; and very large areas of these tablelands are covered. by slabs
of vesicular basalt in process of decay—the decomposition giving rise
to deep black soils. It is a curious circumstance, that these basaltic
blocks are confined to the top, or seem to float upon the surface;


the soil underlying them being entirely destitute of stones. Other
portions of the plains are composed of chocolate-coloured or red
soils, resulting from the decay of intrusive rocks containing iron.
Further inland, these black and red soils give place to extensive
Downs, composed of deep, darkish grey soil, overlying rocks, evidently
of oolitic or cretaceous age, and exhibiting in parts a peculiar cone-
in-cone structure. All these plains are covered by a great variety of
the most nourishing and permanent grasses. These plains, over several
degrees of latitude and longitude, are perfectly level, and, for the
most part, are featureless and destitute of trees, and innocent of roads
or tracks. Over them, the traveller rides- often guided by the com-
pass—with no landmarks or milestones to relieve the tedium. He
looks constantly over an apparently illimitable sea of luxuriant grass.
In the morning, he sees the sun rise out of the grassy sea; he watches
it ascend into the blue vault of a cloudless sky, again to set, with
gorgeous splendour, to illuminate a similar expanse of verdure.
From the Gulf of Carpentaria, a midrib of hill-ranges run south
through the continent. 250 miles south of the gulf, the M‘Kinlay
ranges branch off to the east, and from these ranges run south to
form the Grey, Coleman, M‘Gregor, and Cheviots, that determine the
several water-sheds of the interior.
'The southern division of Australia, bounding upon Victoria, New
South Wales, and South Australia, is more park-like in character than
the central division just referred to. A large portion of it is covered
by stunted tress or a scrub of peculiar description; its stunted cha-
racter being due, no doubt, to the uncertainty of the seasons, and
the protracted droughts to which this part of the colony is subject.
The country is covered by recent rocks, chiefly of soft, friable, un-
bedded sandstones and indurated clay. It is intersected by low
ridges or belts of porphyritic or quartoze rocks. On one of these
hard vitreous ridges, I noticed a rather curious circumstance. On the
very apex of the flinty ridge, with a perfectly arid landscape all around,
the savage natives had dug, at a great expenditure of labour, very
possibly with rude stone implements, three small holes, or native wells.
In these wells, water is at all times found, and they have never been
known to overflow. They have possibly been sunk upon some small
crack or fissure that exudes water.
The River systems of this part of the colony are peculiar. In the
dry season they appear to be composed of connected lines of water
holes, known as “ Billabongs.” During times of drought these are
so many reservoirs for the storage of water; but during the rains,
they overflow, and are often 20 miles broad. Such are the Maranoa,
Warrego, Paroo Bulloo, Blackwater, and Cooper’s Creek River
systems.
The stunted scrub that covers large areas of country, is called
Mulga. Its leaves are small, fleshy, unctuous, and lanceolate, and
of a dark olive green colour. Where the soil is particularly deep and
rich, open plains occur; that while moisture remains, are covered,
with abundant and luxurious grasses. This is the principal cattle
rearing district of Southern Queensland, where great mobs of
bullocks roam at will “ on a thousand hills and bosky dells,” living
solely on the grasses and nutritious shrubs that abound, until they
are collected, and travelled for hundreds of miles, to the Adelaide or
Melbourne markets.


The district is subject to droughts. It was near to this that the
explorers “ Burke and Wills,” with their party, perished many years
ago. When I rode through it in July of last year, not a drop of rain
had fallen for over 22 months; and then, there was no sign of a
change. The grass during such prolonged droughts gets scarce, and
burnt up, while incalculable quantities are annually consumed by
bush fires. At these times cattle enter the Mulga scrub and live,
and fatten upon the leaves, travelling once a day, to the nearest
waterhole, to slake their thirst; or they feed upon the cotton, or salt
bush, that, instead of grass, covers some of the plains.
Very few Marsupials are found in this region, their numbers are
probably kept down by the swarms of “ Dingoes,” or native dogs
that abound. To cattle these dogs do little damage; but among
sheep they cause such destruction, that squatters systematically poison
them with strychnine. After nightfall, the discordant howl of these
pests, around the camp fires, is quite loud enough to awaken any-
thing human, save the easy-minded bushman, who, exhausted by a
long ride, has rolled himself in his blanket, and with his head on
his saddle, has shut his eyes on the twinkling constellations, and with
half open mouth is snoring in a manner that speaks volumes for the
simple diet of bush life, and the invigorating freshness of the air.
The climate is salubrious and healthy. During the summer
months of November, December, January, it is hot, but dry, the
thermometer averaging 105° to 110° in the shade. The rainy season
occurs as a rule in February, when a large part of the country is
under water. During March, April, May, the air is cool, the skies
clear, the mornings cold, and the surface of the earth covered with
flowers and verdure. In June, July, and August, the days are bright
and cool, the nights being cold or frosty. September and October,
are the spring months, when the temperature increases, and showers
freshen the parched earth. In the pure atmosphere of these regions
there are no febrile ailments, and little disease of any description, save
the lesions, and the drivelling idiotcy, caused by drinking doctored
rum or 1 star brandy, at 17/6 per bottle. However excellent the
breed of cattle or sheep may be in the colony, there can, I think, be
little doubt that its present tendency is to breed a most depraved and
demoralised variety of the genus homo.
We had for days been riding through a broad belt of rough and
disconsolate scrub, breathing an atmosphere of pulverulent dust; but
after crossing the Grey range we enter a broad expanse of green and
grassy downs. Breathing the ethereal and invigorating brilliance of
the dry air, our spirits rise, and we strive to forget the rough usage,
the forbidding desolation, and the dust of the past week, borne, as we
suppose, with exemplary fortitude and Christian forbearance. The
silence is profound. As we ride onwards, the feeling increases that, as
far as the absence of life or habitation, or occupation is concerned,
we might be
“ the first that ever burst
Into that silent sea.”
Behind us the higher eminences of the Grey range rise as out of a
cloud of gleaming vapour, and these, from their appearance, are
known as the Hay Ricks . Around us, detached squadrons of Emu’s,
run in uncertain lines; and before us, over a sea of verdure, is the
mirage of a great lake. We cross stony ridges, or belts of vitreous


and highly transmuted siliceous rocks, over which our unshod horses
walk warily, and once again we cross the grassy plain, bearing almost
due west. Water is scarce, sometimes spaces of 25 miles separate
the water holes, in some of these a liquid is seen resembling in
colour, and consistency, thin white paint, and this decoction is imposed
upon strangers as water. It tastes strongly of “cow.”
We cross salt bush plains, and belts of flaggy sandstones, and at
last —above the horizon—the peculiar outline of the ranges, near the
locality where the explorers Burke and Wills perished, rise into view,
and lends variety to the scene.
Next morning, we collect our shivering horses by moonlight (the
grass and ground being covered with hoar frost, and the pools with
ice); and ere the orb of day had arisen, we were threading a devious
way over frightfully stony ridges; and through thick, prickly scrub,
that tear the emblems of our civilisation, and scratches our faces, to
emerge from it in a condition of doubtful respectability. We ascend
a range composed of gritty sandstone, with slopes, covered with
fallen blocks and decaying fragments, piled up in chaotic confusion.
Some of the hill masses are of blood red colour, and exude salts of
magnesia. Some are olive coloured, or ochrey yellow. Some re-
semble Bathstone and some are ablending of all these. The lithological
character of these rocks are by no means distinctive, but they are
evidently of tertiary age. Porphyritic dykes traverse, but do not
appear to disturb these rocks. High overhead are crumbling cliffs
of mottled sandstone of curious outline. Around us the heat quivers
in the air, and against their mural sides, the bright sun, dances with
a fierce delight. By dangerous paths, we continue to ride up the
slopes of these fantastic-shaped hills, and, by some unaccountable
accident, arrive in safety at the top.
Not a sound (save the panting of our horses) disturbs the solemn
and all-prevailing silence. We are alone with nature in the centre
of a great continent, and we feel that he, indeed, must possess a dull
and incurious mind, who is not impressed by the singularity and the
charming loveliness of the scene. Twenty miles off, across a grassy
and park-like plain, the Coleman and M‘Gregor ranges rise, clear
and distinct, amid the flood of light. The outline is wonderfully
lovely. In the foreground a number of cone-like and castellated
hills, of all colours , rise from the plain ; the more connected ranges
of the background appearing as if capped by numerous and enormous
fortifications. Some of the isolated conical hills terminate in sharp
apexs or spikes; others terminate with flat circular crests and per-
pendicular red sides, rising out of slopes of yellow or reddish earth
partially covered by struggling vegetation. The whole of the hills
have approximately the same level or elevation. Their contour being
entirely due to the effects of climate, operating over incalculable
periods of time. I have endeavoured to represent the outline of
these hills in sketch No. 1 ; but I regret that I cannot convey to you
any idea of their aspect, as I saw them, through the clear ambient
air—rising out of a carpet green, with the sun to illuminate them,
and distance to soften, and to heighten the effect.
Similar country, geologically, extends through about 3 parallels of
latitude, and about 2 of longitude; and within this area, siliceous
minerals, such as quartz in various forms, agates calcedony, carnelian,
and opals are found. With the latter only I propose to deal.


These rocks are evidently of Tertiary age; but they possess no
very distinct or typical characters. The component parts are gritty
sand, or earth. The bedding is obscure, or false; and the colour is
apparently due to the admixture of protoxide of iron in varying
quantities. The colour is, however, striking; blood red, grey, brick
red, cream coloured, olive, yellow, or-mottled. These colours may,
within a few yards, insensibly blend into one another, or they may
be separated by a distinct and sharp line of demarcation, as in the
specimen that I now show you.
In certain parts these loosely aggregated sandstones are held to-
gether, (as are the great sandstones that overly the coalformation of
N.5.W.,) by irregular mahogany-coloured feruginous bands. These
segregations of iron have, in some parts of the district, formed fissures
within themselves, and into these crevices a fine siliceous fluid has
been introduced, and become consolidated. In other localities, where
the necessary conditions have been present, these siliceous threads
have become opalised; and where these have absorbed infinitely
minute traces of nickel, or manganese, or iron, or all three; they
exhibit all the lovely play of colours distinctive of the precious or the
fire opal. The specimens will serve to illustrate this condition.
Again, while some of the more alumnious beds have been sub-
jected (we shall suppose) to the influence of heat, the plastic matrix
has been rendered vesicular, and a number of the cavities so formed
have (by subsequent infiltration) been filled by silica, which has
become opalised. Specimens labelled No. 17 simplifies this con-
dition.
Again, as we approached the margins of this district, we passed
over certain beds of indurated and transmuted schists, and in these,
small nodular concretions of siliceous ironstone can be picked out.
These little flattened spheres are about one inch in diameter. On
breaking them, numerous minute crevices are seen to radiate from a
centre, and these hair-like fissures have been filled by a plastic mass,
which has become opalised, but of no value whatever. In the reniform
nodules of C. B. ironstone that are found in the clays, or in the soft
shale beds of our coal measures identically the same appearances are
to be seen; only, in the latter case, the septaria are filled with ordi-
nary quartz.
Approaching the main ranges, almost every other ridge is covered
with splinters of a milky, or opaque variety of opal. Specimens, Nos.
1 and 5, illustrate this, and the last named variety of opal.
Without going more into detail, I must ask you to believe that it is
only within a certain very small area, of this extensive opal-bearing
country that opals of any commercial value have been found. I feel
that I need scarcely mention that opal is a siliceous mineral—an
analysis of precious opal showing 90% of silica and 10% of water.
That it is considered an unlucky stone by ignorant and superstitious
people; that its beautiful combination of colours probably depends
upon the presence of exceedingly minute proportions of some colour-
ing matter, such as those produced by iron, nickel, Or cobalt —the
colour being intensified by the presence of numerous invisible
fractures.
I may inform you that over very large tracts of country, in the
lower Bulloo, and Barcoo districts, opal is found filling the narrow and
irregular fissures of a feruginous matrix, or in delicate scales, so thin,


that they appear as if painted on to the matrix; but these, however
beautiful, cannot be utilised by the Lapidary (see specimens 3 and 4).
The comparatively small area, within which, opals of commercial
value—that is, in respect to quantity, colour, and thickness—have
been found, consists of castellated sandstone hills of curious con-
figuration. In Sketch, No. 2, I have attempted to delineate the
physical features of the two hills, under which the best opals have
been found. These hills, with their mines or openings, will hereafter
be designated “Aladdin.” As in certain localities, minerals occur in
certain distinctive forms, so each locality that I have named, can at
once be distinguished, by the characteristic form of its opals.
Instead of the thin, thread-like, or scaly patches that are found in
the liver-coloured matrix of the Bulloo, or the Barcoo country, it is
found in the Aladdin hills in all its most valuable and lovely forms as
precious opal, as fire opal (or girasol), as common opal, as wood opal,
and as hyalite. At Aladdin, it is found under the following con-
ditions :
First. Masses of laminated feruginous silica of some thickness are
found embedded among the gritty sandstone beds, and these masses
are occasionally divided into squares, by comparatively wide fissures.
When broken, some of these pieces, are found coated, with a layer of
opal from to of an inch thick. The opal is arranged in
bands of brilliant emerald green, or bluish green, yellow, or red. I
show you in Specimens No. 7, two large pieces, coated with opal on
three sides, which for beauty can scarcely be surpassed.
Second. In the country immediately adjoining Aladdin Hills, large
quantities of opaque opal or calcedony is found. Nearer Aladdin this
variety is found in a more refined and translucent form, showing a
little colour, as in specimen No. 2.
The Aladdin opal, is found on the slopes of the two hills referred to.
These hills rise out of a level, grassy, or scrubby plain. The slopes
are composed of loose, decaying pieces of soft sandstone. They
have an angle of 45 °. The top is a concretionary mass of gritty,
loosely aggregated sandstone, full of adventitious, or accessory
pebbles, and minute holes. The colour is redish or mottled, and is
due to the permeation of feruginous water. The crests are redder than
the underlying portions, and resemble badly burnt brick in appearance
and consistency. The top of one of the hills is circular, the other is
eliptical, and is several hundred feet in length. The crests are divided
by verticle joints formed during consolidation, and have broken off by
these, forming the perpendicular walls, and produce the castellated
appearance referred to. The strata underlying the crests is composed
of soft, grey, or yellow earthy layers, closely resembling bathbrick, ob-
scurely bedded, difficult to correlate, broken up by verticle joints, and
held together by irregular strings of feruginous sandstone.
Third. At intervals, soft, and somewhat irregular or strangulated
beds of steel grey, or chalky earth, about eight inches thick, separates
these beds; and embedded in this chalky earth, flattened nodules or
lenticular masses, of what I supposed at first sight were Ironstone,
are found. These nodules are of very uniform size and shape, about
10" x 6" x 5". They are found lying on their flat side. As these
nodular masses are the principal source of opals, I would desire to
describe them somwhat in detail. Diagram No. lis a front view,
and No. 2 represents a section of one bill, and No. 3 an enlarged


view of a bed illustrating the occurrence of the nodules. These
nodules consist of an external crust or shell, the thickness varying
from y. z" to i". This shell is built up of a number of thin concentric
layers, of feruginous silica, separated by fine lines of a light yellow
colour. On being broken these concentric layers are seen in section
to enclose a siliceous, somewhat splintery, cream-coloured
kernal that completely fills the shell. These kernals are the real
matrix of the opal. During the process of drying and consolidation,
cracks and cavities have formed, separating parts of the kernal from
the shell, but invariably reticulated throughout the mass of the kernal.
In the same manner, septaria (fissures and spaces) have formed in
the substance of the hard shell, seldom however, penetrating through
all the layers. These vermiform crevices, or septaria, have subse-
quently become filled with a plastic or gelatinous solution or silica,
which has become opal; the quality evidently being dependent on
the degree of compression, or the variety and amount of the colouring
absorbed, and the presence of other conditions to which I will after-
wards allude. I have remarked that the nodules are found lying on
one of their flattened sides. Now the thickest and best opal occurs as
a rule (but not invariably) on the lower surfaces, where from gravity
you would suppose a fluid would accumulate. The crevices, or
septaria occurring in the shell frequently exhibit opal, that emits rays
of blood-red, or emerald-green colour. Where the particles composing
the shell have been loosely aggregated, silica has been absorbed, and
the substance of the shell itself has become opalised.
The question naturally arises from whence, and in what manner,
were these nodules formed? Arranged as the shell is in layers similar
to an agate, one is inclined to think that their origin is due, to the
infiltration of siliceous water into a cavity, but the similarity in form
and size, and arrangement in beds, of these nodules, oppose certain
difficulties. If we adopt this view, we must account for the white
kernal wi,thin the shells.
If the shells have not been formed within a cavity (and I am
inclined to think they have not), they may possibly owe their origin
to segregation alone. The kernal is composed of material more
compact and siliceous, and contains less iron than the superincum-
bent strata. If one could imagine the iron or colouring matter
abstracted from that strata, while the mass was in solution, the
resultant, would, I think, present an appearance very much akin to
these kernals. As to which of these causes, if any, their origin may
be due, I am not prepared to say; but, I have laid out several forms
of these models for your inspection, along with about no illustrative
specimens, as I took them from the mine, that you may be enabled
to form some independent opinion on the subject.
To my mind, the origin of the opal itself is not veiled in so much
obscurity. On minute examination, I found that the soft, earthy,
superincumbent beds contained curious verticle rods of feruginous
silica, similar to the shells of the nodules. These rods appear to
lead from the layers of nodules, up through the superincumbent rocks.
On breaking one of these rods out, I found that in reality it was a pipe
containing, within siliceous walls, a small round channel. I show you
such a pipe, No. 13. The first of these that I picked out were either
empty, or contained a little powdery earth; and lat once recognised
in them a clue to the formation of the opal, if not the nodules them-


selves. While prosecuting my investigations among the shattered
fragments of a recently fallen cliff, I came upon additional bits of
these fractured pipes, with the channels filled with opal. I have laid
out several fragments of these pipes with the channels filled with opal
cores, (No. 12). One or two of these cores in specimen, No. 19
display throughout their whole body, the wonderful, and delicate play
of colours, characteristic of the oriental opal. There can, I think, be
little room to doubt that the matter that formed the opals, in the
kernals described, was conveyed down, through the mass of rock, by
means of these pipes; but whether these fulfilled the double purpose,
of conveying down the substance of the nodules themselves, as well
as the opal, and whether these were synchronous, or separated by a
period of time, must be left for future investigation.
So far as I could discover, there are several layers of these nodules
underlying—interstratified, if you will, with sandstone—the Aladdin
Hills. These beds or layers are separated from each other, by several
verticle feet of strata. The nodules are not all uniformly charged
with opal, some are of little value; others contain opal of great value.
The most valuable stones are broken by the act of smashing the
nodules. As there are no outward signs by which the opal value of
the nodules can be determined, each should in future be sawn across
in order, to discover the quantity, and quality of the contained gem.
To the right of Diagram No. 3 is an enlarged section of a nodule,
shewing the mode in which opal is found within its kernal. The pipe
that I have sketched must be considered imaginary, as I have not
been able to trace such a clear connection as is here shown. Those
of you who know the sequence of the chalk formation, will recognise
in the occurence of these nodules a close analogy with the layers of
flints found in some districts where chalk is found.
Fourth. I have on more than one occasion remarked that the
crests of these hills assumed a castellated or turret form, and were
composed of gritty, feruginous particles of brick like consistency and
colour; and that it was somewhat porous. It has all the appearance
of having been subjected to heat, and given passage to heated gases.
In examining this sandstone, I found the remains of pipes, or verticle
channels, with obscurely defined walls, filled with common, and precious
opal, or opal having a burnt, waxy, vitreous appearance. Opal is
found in this sandstone, occupying holes or cavities, or filling up
portions of the mass, where the sand has been loosely unpacked.
Portions of the substance of the sandstone have, in fact, become
opalised. You will find specimens in the table illustrating this con-
dition.
In the gritty, brick-like crest, opal is found of beautiful colour, in
irregular shoots, among the matrix; or pernecating the substance of
the matrix. (Specimens No. 10.)
So far,, the result of my investigations go to prove that the origin
of opal is due to the infiltration of opal forming material (siliceous
waters) from above; and that the subsequent elaboration, or the
formative process, has been encouraged under conditions of pressure
and heat; both of which I believe to be favourable, if not necessary,
for the solution, separation, and ultimate crystallisation of the silica’
that in so large a measure forms the opal.
These latter conditions, mark you ! I have not established so fully
as I would desire; but this I can say, that the two Aladdin Hills, are


separated from each other, and are situated between, 3 broad intrusive
dykes of compact grey and vitreous Felsite\ further; that the in-
durated clays are burnt in places, and bear evidence of having been
subjected to a high temperature; that portion of the sandstone bears
similar evidence; and that the finest quality of opal is (as a rule)
found within a reasonable distance of these “ Dykes.”
Nor have I been able to determine, whether or not, the gem exists
in like conditions under the level of the surface. There can, how-
ever, be no doubt that from all these sources large quantities of opal
will be obtained.
Whatever the extent of the resources in depth, or the exact condi-
tions favourable, or necessary, for the development or formation of
the opal, all evidence seems to point to the localisation of these con-
ditions. In other words —that valuable deposits of opal are not
widely distributed.
I have stated that the occurrence of these nodular masses in-
clined me to the belief that their origin was due to segregation; and
that it was probable that the opal found in the septaria, or filling the
fissures of these nodules, was due to infiltration. I wish you to
clearly understand that this is only an opinion ; I cannot say that I
have established it, even to my own satisfaction. My opinion is
based, upon finding opal in various forms, within the channels of the
verticle pipes, as may be seen in the several specimens laid out for
your inspection. It may be held by some of your number, that opal,
as well as the “ casing,” or shell of the kernal, have all been formed
by segtegation ; and that the pipes are due to the same cause. Dual
segregation in the one case, and the fact that the channel within the
pipes are sometimes empty, present to my mind certain difficulties to
the acceptation of such a cause. Still, lam not prepared to negative
it. It may be permissable to say a few words upon the nature and
origin of the material that has (by subsequent agencies) been con-
verted into opal. It is very probable that the material, was derived
from above, and from the rocks in which it occurs. Opal (as you
are no doubt aware) is an amorphous, and one of the many forms
of quartz. Roughly speaking, it is composed of 92 of silica and Bof
water, with certain colouring agents. You may consider opal as a
solidified mass of gilatinous silica, in which the proportion of silica
and water varies. You may recollect, that when describing the nature,
and colour of the rocks composing the hill ranges, that I remarked
that the surfaces of the rocks, was occasionally coated by an efflor-
escence of magnesia salts. It is probable, that the constituents
necessary for the formation of opal, may be obtained from the
decomposition of the silicate of magnesia by carbonic acid. Causes
that would at first sight appear to be trivial, and unimportant, are
often sufficient, to cause silica to pass from one condition to another
—from the amorphous to the crystalline state. The presence of car-
bonate of ammonia would be sufficient (under certain conditions of
silica) to precipitate silica and alumna; and ammonia may be pro-
duced by the presence of some nitrogenous organic substance in the
solution of silica. You are probably all aware, that many of the
forms of silica, do contain an organic substance, and this is proved
by the change of colour, that they undergo, when subjected to heat.
Chalcedony, rose quartz, carnelian and smoky topaz, are examples of
this condition. Probably, the reason why, opal is an amorphous, and


not in a crystalline form, (of quartz) is because of the presence in it
of iron or maganese.
The amount of water contained in opal varies considerably—from
3 per cent, to 10 per cent. Opal differs from quartz, in having a
lower specific gravity, and an inferior degree of hardness, in refrac-
tion, and, of course, in chemical properties. The beautiful combina-
tion and play of colours, exhibited by opals, are probably due to the
colouring ingredient present; and these may be influenced by the
presence of some invisible flaws. The colours are intensified by heat
and light.
Some observers affirm that the distinct bands of some varieties of
opals are caused by infusoria, and that the red fire of the noble opal,
is caused by the presence of minute particles of quartz.
In Hungary, and elsewhere, where opal is found, the gem is found
in Trachyte, and is considered, as the result of the decomposition
of that rock. The presence of siliceous rocks may be considered as
essential, to the formation of opal, and, like all mineral substances,
derived from adjoining rocks, it bears a definite relation to the con-
stituents of the rocks, from whence, by decomposition, it was
derived.
Dr Dobbie, of this Society, has very kindly furnished me with an
analysis—of the Opal of Alladdin of the feruginous crust of the
nodules—of the white matrix or kernal within this crust —of the
rock in which these are formed —and these are as follows:
I. Opal.
Water, - - - 6.43 per cent.
Silica, • - - 93.57 ~
100.00 ~
11. White Hemal.
Sesquioxide of Iron, 2.15 per cent.
Sesquioxide of Alumina, 30.94 ~
Silica, - - - 67.31 „
100.40 ~
111. Feruginous crust of Nodule.
Silica, - - - 35.89 per cent.
Sesquioxide of Alumina, 2.99 ~
Do. Iron, 47.72 ~
Protoxide of Iron, - 3.55 per cent.
Lime, - - - 46 ~
Magnesia, - 55 »
Water, - ~
00.00
IV. Sandstone of Hill.
Silica, - - - 65.94 per cent.
Sesquioxide of Alumina, 13. 54 »
Do. Iron, 14.04 ~
Lime, - - - 1.03 „
Carbonic Acid, - .37 ~
Water, - - - 1.03 ~
Alkalies by difference, 3.88 ~
100.00
In the flats immediately surrounding these remarkable hills are
several circular mounds, evidently marking the site of other conical
hills, slowly settling down, under the influence of the climate; the
earthy portion, has all been washed away into the plains; the feruginous
nodules have been broken up, by the powerful rays of the sun, the
rains, and the winter frosts. Amid the wreck of material, one has no
difficulty, in picking up pieces of opal, weathered by the sun-rays of
a thousand summers; and bushels of matrix, or shells, may be
gathered with the substance a net work, of brilliant green threads of
opal, which, when cut and polished, might be utilised as buttons, or
breastpins, or for inlaying, or in other useful ways. (Specimens No. 19).
I have taken up much of your time, and probably have succeeded
in exhausting as much of your patience, in describing the details of
the occurrence of opal ip Central Australia, My apology for so doing


rests in the circumstance, that I have not been able to discover any
work, in which the occurrence of these gems are minutely described.
Dana states that in Hungary, Bohemia, Saxony, Mexico, Iceland,
opals are found, and that in these countries, they are “found filling
the cavaties, or the seams, of iqueous rocks, or (like other quartz
concretions), embedded in flint and limestone. Ihe description is
certainly vague, and he might have added, Brazil, where it occurs in
connection with transmuted limestone, or in crevices of altered chalk.
So far as I can discover, Australian opals will in the future be more
heard of. They occur under totally different conditions to those he
alludes to, and to all appearance, in quantities that, should the gem
become as popular as from the beauty of its hues it deserves, these
lonely wilds of Central Australia ,will be the scene of an industry, as
lucrative as it is novel.
The recollection of the magnificent view from the top of the
Aladdin hills comes back as a green and pleasant reminiscence of a
long and wearisome journey. Though there is no soil on the top, a
few stunted honeysuckles and hardy flowering plants struggled
into existence to “waste their fragrance on the desert air.” Among
these we sit, to scan the illimitable landscape, and to watch the sun
set in an atmosphere of roseate glory. We see the light stealing over
the plain, colouring the scrub, and illuminating the curiously shaped
hills with golden hues. It vanishes from the plains, to play among
the lesser hills; wonderful effects of light and shade are visible.
Mounting upwards, bands of coloured rays are. projected
against the crests of the higher peaks, that shine for a
moment, like burnished gold. While yet the soft, and short twilight
of these regions lingers on the mountain slopes, and the valleys are
in partial darkness, we seek the genial warmth of the camp fires, and
the comfort of the “cup that cheers, but not inebriates/' and rolled
up, in our blankets, we fall asleep under —may I say the shadow of
the Southern cross. At an early hour, we had turned our back on
these quiet and sunny scenes, and (with our saddle bags heavily laden
with the spoils of the Aladdin hills) we jog steadily back, on our long
journey of well-nigh a thousand miles, towards Brisbane and the
rising sun, meditating all the while, on a further journey of 13,000 miles
through the land of the “ Spread Eagle ” towards home and friends.
I did°not at that time anticipate, that I should, so soon after my ar-
rival have the felicity of appearing before the members of this society,
to dilate, (as I have done) at no inconsiderable length, on the physical
geography of part of “Greater Britain”—the land of the Wallaby and
the °Kangaroo—and the geological aspects of the opal country of
Central Australia.








