



THE
Windows of our Heart
A COMPOSITION FOR CHILDREN
OLD AND YOUNG
JACK ELIOT
This little book was written one night between the
hours of seven and half past one. It needed then only
clearly copying out to be ready for the printer’s hands.
Without addition, without alteration, I give it to the world;
the reader can amplify the sentences for himself. It is the
work that I would wish to be remembered by.


_ _—- mmmm m


COPYRIGHT
All Rights Reserved.
A First Edition


TO READERS OF MY WORKS.
Perhaps the time is come when I ought to say
a few words in regard to much in my books
capable of misconstruction and misrepresentation.
To the pure all things are pure; yet will there be
many I fear to criticise my morality in publishing
lines capable of producing domestic infelicity. I
take this opportunity therefore of explaining that
even as I wrote such lines I believed subconsciously
with a high faith and courage that no eventual
harm could possibly result. For I believed that all
pure love must prove good rather than ill, and
that it is better to face than to cloak the truth,
since Truth, the Shining one, is the ineffably tender
guide and teacher. To err is portion of our mortal
lot; and yet I do not think I have ever once really
contemplated failing in the big things one conceives
to be one’s duty, however much I may have failed
in the manifold lesser things. Remember,
I have had to grope my way—for the Light is
hidden beneath heavy veilings of guile and
hypocrisy—yet Faith was mine, and Love I was
sure would not only eventually straighten every-
thing out for me, but would explain all I could not
understand, and point some splendid lesson.
Whether this has been consummated or no, may be
judged only when the whole of my life- has been
summed up. It has been the sense of Good, not
the feeling of Evil, that has impelled me through-
out; therefore I calmly await and expect the final
realization —not of evil—but of good. Meanwhile
I may say that I do verily believe that the spirit
of happiness and peace is come to dwell under my
roof. Further I do like to think that I have truly
attained a higher purity and perfection. Someday
there will be no giving and taking in marriage,
and so the jealousies and the unhappinesses of love
will fade away. Someday we shall share a higher,
purer love with all the world, and not with just
the one or two. Someday we shall gain to highest
purest love; and then we shall merge at last and
mingle into God.


JACK ELIOT—LYRICAL WORKS.
Says the Sydney “Sunday Times”
of 13/4/19:
“Looking over the whole body of
this unaffected singer’s output, we
are convinced that we spoke justly
when we said that this man is a
poet. Here is no album verse, no
easy trash of conventional sentiment;
here you have a very gentle fellow
brooding on life and offering stray
comments of song.”
WITH LYRE AND LUTE, —fourteen first edition
brochures in library case. Price one guinea.
Contents;
Dreams, Simply-Wove, of Youth. Disclosing a lad’s
heart and thoughts. Price 2/6.
Revised edition, pocket size. Price 3/6.
Three Golden Weeks of June. A Love Idyl. Price 3/-.
The Jumble. A Lyrical Pot-Pourri. Price 3/-.
Rhapsody! A Volume of Various Verse. Price 3/-.
“Heaven!” To the Memory of the Fallen of all
Nations; and to a World’s fallen Tears and
Sorrowing. A Message. Price 1/3.
The Roadway to the Skies! A Foreword and Four
Facile Steps. Price 1/3.
Spicy Bits. Verses for Sports. Price 1/3.
Penetration! Lyrics that exhale the whispered
answer to Life’s greatest question. Price 2/-.
Guiiredan. And Other Verses of Evil. Price 1/6.
The Rop*e. A Song of Big Cities. Price 9d.


Etherealities. Thoughts and Fancies Golden.
Price 2/-.
Beyond Earth’s Bourn. A Garland Plucked i’ the
Infinite Garden-Spaces. Price 2/-.
The C ross and Crown of Diomed. A Sequel to
“Three Golden Weeks of June.” Price, 1/6.
Conclusion. An exclusive edition, completing the
set entitled With Lyre and Lute.
THE NEW TOE A. A STEPPING-STONE FOR
ATHEISTS. First edition. Price 10/6.
THE SANER REGIME. AN ESSAY IN VERSE.
First edition. Price 9d.
THE WINDOWS OF OUR HEART. First edition.
Price 6d.


f
THE
Windows of our Heart
Prayers are not just words, but good thoughts,
high hopes, unselfish deeds, and the radiation of
God’s sunshine which means love.
“He prayeth best who loveth best.”
— Coleridge.


To Harry Gorton,
friend whom I esteem,
I dedicate
this little work.


THE WINDOWS OF OUR HEART.
Listen, oh my children; many little books have
I written, and some of these please me just a little
and others please me not at all, though each in its
way serves some humble purpose. But the little
book I am writing for you now, is going to be a joy
to me I know and a very great pleasure, for I am
going to write it from my heart alone, from a heart
full of all the wonder and beauty and glory of life;
and this beauty and wonder and glory of life, as
everyone ought to know, is just the glory of God.
This book will be no trouble to me to write, for
I do not have to bother my head about the planning
and ordering of its sentences and phrases. I have
only to write down such thoughts as come to me
from my heart; and as I shall always be asking
God to direct these thoughts, I shall know that
everything in the book will be quite right. There
is nothing ever to be achieved without God's help
whether we know it or not, my children; and this
each one of you will be able to prove for yourself
as you go upon your ways through life.


I am asking God to let me write this book for
children, a book such as all children may under-
stand. Some of you I know, sometimes wish that
Time had swifter wings so that you might the
more quickly grow into grown-ups. But the grown-
ups who are really wise, try to keep their hearts
quite quite young, just as young as yours, my chil-
dren. And so you see this book after all will not
be quite for you alone, but you will be able to share
it with others older than you. And whenever you
share anything with anybody, you will find a rule
you learn at school is not quite a rule, for by shar-
ing you will possess moye in the end than even
before you made the share. As you go through life
people will try to teach you many rules, and some
people will even try to prove to you that there can
be no God. Now you must always remember —just
as you may learn by sharing things and yet possess-
ing more than ever —that no rule is quite a rule,
and that God is above all rules. And this God is
really, always and always, quite close round each
one of us whatever rules may be brought along to
prove the contrary. All the very best men and
women, all those who have achieved anything, feel
this. And these are the people who are loved and
remembered all over the world for all time. That
alone is a very wonderful thing, isn't it? And


someday all people are going to learn to love one
another because they will all love God. Then all
people will be loved and remembered, and all
people will live for all time happy in God.
When I was a child I was always taught not to
stare at people or turn round to look back at them.
I was taught also that it was not a nice thing at
all to talk a lot of scandal or gossip about people.
I am afraid a lot of grown-ups have forgotten these
things they once were taught, for they are trying
very hard to stare at God and to look right through
Him, besides making all sorts of queer and ridicu-
lous statements concerning Him. Now there is
really not the slightest need to do this. All people,
in their hearts, feel God at one time or another.
Often, by their lives which they lead selfishly and
uselessly, they come to lose this feeling. Then
they cry out at once “There is no God!” When
you grow up you will understand that the windows
of their poor stunted hearts have grown all dulled
so that they see nothing now but gloom and dark-
ness and despair. These windows of their heart
have only to be cleaned and the sunshine of God’s
presence streams in again. Also, just as you must
not stare at people, so you must not want to know


too much about God all at once. It doesn’t really
matter whether God wears wings or not, or if He
really sits upon a golden throne. As you prove
yourself worthy, oh my children, so will He divulge
Himself to you. But there is just one thing about
Him that you can and must know. And that is,
that God is Love. All people who have kept the
windows of their heart clean, all through the long
long ages these people have felt God’s sunshine
and known what He is. They have known this
too in despite of all rules and regulations; for they
have come to know that there is no rule that is
quite a rule. And so they know that there is no
rule that can possibly ever throw any doubt upon
the reality of God. Children, I do hope you will
never hate anybody or anything! But if you do,
you wall soon come to find that you can never wan
anybody’s love by showing hate. When you hate
anything, everything becomes ugly, even to the ex-
pression of your face. You see how impossible it
must be for you to win love by such means as hate.
But if you love a person, you can win his love even
though that person began by hating you. And Love
always makes you more and more beautiful in the
sight of others. So you can see that of the two
Love is ever and ever so much more wonderful and
powerful than Hate. Hate can never win love of


itself; but Love can take away all the ugliness of
hate till only love is left in hate’s place. Now God
must either be Hate or Love. And so you see at
once that God is only Love, or else He could not
really be God at all. And when you see this one
thing, that God must be Love and not Hate, then
you will know that God is Truth and Purity and
Beauty and Joy and Health and Wealth and every-
thing else that is Good, for all these things are
just part and parcel of Love. And when you have
learnt all that, then you have learnt everything that
you need to know about God to-day. And this is
all that the greatest and wisest men and women
have been trying to teach us down through the long
long years. It seems so simple, that you children
will have to grow into quite grown-ups to realize
how hard a task it has been and still can be to
teach so simple and evident a truth.
My children, as you grow older you will be
taught all sorts of things, but I am afraid that the
one most useful thing will be forgotten, and that
is to be taught to “use” God. God wants to be
used. God is Love. And because God is Love,
He wants to share Himself with each one of us.
You cannot begin to learn too early in life to “use”


God. God is all so close about you, just as close
as ever you will let Him be, and if in all the little
things you do you will only ask Him to help you,
you will find all these things will be done much
better, and much more easily and quickly than you
could possibly do them by yourself. As soon as
you find that out for yourself by really trying it,
you will begin to see how there can be nothing to be
ashamed of in the idea of God. You will only see
that God is simply a great and real friend —Best of
Friends —ready to help us always in everything,
and through all our difficulties and troubles. God,
my children, is Love; and because he is Love, He
intends you to have all necessary good things and
the health to enjoy them. But you cannot expect
Him to give you all these things unless you love
Him in return, and show your love by keeping the
windows of your heart beautifully bright and clean.
Out of the clean windows of your heart you will
perceive that all that He expects of you is love in
return for Love. You must therefore love every-
thing and hate nothing, for that is the only way you
can ever prove your love for Him. You must
reflect God’s love in every little kindly deed and
word and way in which you can manage to help
others. You cannot begin to practise doing this
too soon in your life, for you will thereby find as


you grow older that there are all sorts of wonderful
things ahead of you, and that though you have all
Time before you, you will not want to delay being
able to reach out for them as quickly as possible.
Life always seems such a hopeless sort of waste to
everybody until they learn this quite simple thing.
Now, my children, I am going to tell you about
some of the wonderful truths that most of us grown-
ups have already found out for ourselves and which
you will be sure to learn each in your turn. And
the greatest truth of all is this, that you can never,
never, do one single good thing but what a better
thing results to you. If you have been given a
sixpence for your birthday and are on your way to
spend it and happen to see a poor blind man hold-
ing out a box, and a voice within you —which is
really God’s voice—whispers how the poor blind
man needs that sixpence, unless you are a very
foolish little child, you will run up to him at once
and put that sixpence into his box, and perhaps
you will do more than that, you will place your
hand upon his for a minute and speak to him just
a word about anything that is in your mind. If
you have God in your heart at that moment you are
quite sure to say the right and the very best thing.


And if that sixpence is truly a gift out of your
love and sympathy, you will find it will be given
back to you someday when you least expect it, a
hundred times over; and that is the wonderful true
thing about it. But you must never begrudge that
sixpence or be expecting the return. Again, when
you have shared some treasure with your playmates,
you may not have heard some grown-up remark
“What an unselfish little dear!” But someone is
sure to have said this, or would have said it if
they had seen it (which is just the same thing,
since God will have seen it and He counts more
than all), because everybody admits that Unselfish-
ness is a very beautiful and lovely thing. You will
find that if you are unselfish it will bring you a
great deal of love, for there is nobody who does not
love beautiful and lovely things. And just as you
gave the sixpence to the blind man out of the love
in your heart, so will God make people give you all
sorts of things out of the love that your unselfishness
puts in their hearts for you. And the opposite is
just as true; so that if you are selfish you will lose
all sorts of joys and unexpected pleasures that
would have been yours by right and which alas!
have now passed you altogether by. Every day
people are selling their birthright for a mess of
pottage. The older children will understand that


this mess is just the unsatisfactory pottage of their
selfishness.
I wonder, children, have you ever watched the
grown-ups on a Sunday, what sad and solemn
faces some of them wear. And yet this is not
necessary. When you are sitting on your father's
knee, you know he likes to see you smile and listen
to your talk and cheery laughter. It is the same
with God, who is the Father of us all. All the day
and everyday He wants us to wear a smile and be
happy as can be to show that we are really grateful
for all the good things He is giving us. Most of
all He wants us to enjoy ourselves, and this is right
as long as we always know that our enjoyment is
because of Him and His love. When you grow
older you will read how foolish people have pic-
tured a Hell as being a punishment God has in
store for the wicked. God never punishes anyone,
for God is Love, and Love has no need to punish.
Love conquers all things just by love. There is a
hell, but the only hell there is, is the one that foolish
people have made for themselves by dimming the
windows of their heart so that the sunshine of
God’s presence is lost to them and all becomes
gloom and darkness and despair. But the windows


of their heart are only sullied you must remember,
and someday you or I may help to brighten up
these windows again, and then God’s sunshine will
stream in and all the gloom and darkness be for-
gotten as though it had never been. The sunshine
of God is always upon us, and someday —if you
grow up loving God—you will be able to help
others into God’s sunshine too; and that will be a
very wonderful and splendid thing to be able to
do, do you not think so?
When you grow older you will also read all
about the cross, that is the Crucifixion of Christ.
Perhaps you will be expected to be very solemn
and very sad when you read about this, for you
may not have anyone to tell you that the sorrow of
it is nothing at all any more, just like a tiny cut on
your finger that was quite healed up ever so long
ago and quite quite forgotten and done away with.
So that there is no longer anything (tangibly) sad
or sorrowful about the crucifixion or about the
wounds of the martyrs. These things were very
sad just at the time, but now only the glory and
the gladness that is theirs remain to us. And so
you see that what some people call the saddest
cruellest things, are no longer really sad at all.


Someday ALL sad things will fade away and be
forgotten and only the brightness remain. And
this will be when you and I and others have taught
all the world just the one simple fact of the sun-
shine of God’s presence, and the need for all
people to “use” God as He is trying to make us
understand that He wants to be used. God wants
to give us joy and happiness, but we have got to
learn to understand this for ourselves, and to show
that we really understand and believe it by our-
selves giving joy and happiness to others. Oh my
children, when we once all really understand, what
a wonderful and glorious place the earth will be to
live in after all; nor can anybody quite picture
what further wonders and joys the good God will
be holding in store for us all thereafter.
All children in all ages have loved to hear about
the splendid princes who accomplished all sorts of
noble heroic deeds in a world full of ogres and
other terrible monsters. All children who really
are children mean someday to grow up to be
princes themselves and rescue princesses from all
sorts of cruel and desperate fates. And this is a
thing that as we grow older we find we not only
can and ought to do, but that we absolutely have


to do. Yes! We have all got to be splendid
princes, doing splendid deeds every day of our lives.
Now I am going to tell you something that you may
not quite understand at present, but which you will
understand more and more clearly as you grow
older. I want to tell you in a few words about the
power of your thoughts. Whenever you think a
good word or a good wish or any good thing about
anybody, you not only do good to yourself but you
do good to that other one also. But whenever you
think an evil thought or a wrong thought or even
an unkind thought about others, you injure them
as well as yourself unless they happen to be people
who are living close in the shelter of God’s love.
Nothing can harm such people. So you will see
how careful you will always have to be about even
your thoughts, for you have not only yourself to
think of, but you have also to consider the welfare
of others. It is yours to choose to be a prince
going about doing splendid service by giving power
to only thoughts of good, or it is yours to go through
life sowing a horrible brood of monsters and ogres
in wicked thoughts that will take a lot of time and
trouble for the good thoughts of others to overtake
and kill. And so instead of helping to rescue the
princess—who is really this world of ours—you
may quite unknowingly be one of those who are


enchaining her tighter and tighter in her terrible
dreary dungeon. All the sorrows and sadnesses in
the world, the poverties and the crimes, have come
about because foolish people have obscured the
windows of their heart, so that their good thoughts
which can only live in God’s sunshine, must all
die, and wicked and wrong thoughts be brought to
birth in their place. If, as you grow up, you will
only make up your mind to think good sweet loving
thoughts and never hate any of the many ugly
things you will have to meet, by knowing that once
upon a time all these ugly things were beautiful
too and that someday they must become beautiful
again as once they really were, you will be doing a
lot towards helping the world —towards rescuing
the princess. Always remember, children, that if
you can only love ugly things sufficiently, in the
end love will make them beautiful again like God
intended them to be.
Perhaps you will ask, as many people ask, “but
why do ugly things exist?” And that seems to be
a very hard thing to answer, doesn’t it? I think
the first thing you must make yourself quite sure
about is this, “do these ugly things really truly
exist?” And after all the answer to that question


must be “No!” Now you will want me to try to
explain this. Well, children, all people who have
really and truly found God are happy people. They
see only beauty in everything, they know that
everything is well, they feel everywhere around
them a perfect love and that means perfect joy and
wealth of all things. Those who do not know God
quite so well, only half perceive these things, but
still they do perceive a great deal of all this. Now
the people who really and truly feel God, these
people know that we have all Time before us. And
so these people know that however long it takes,
someday all the sad and sorrowful things in this
world must right themselves, for they know that
some time or other the power of good thoughts must
overtake them. Then all the sad and sorrowfui
and ugly things will have to fade away and only
joy and happiness remain for all time. That is,
the sad and sorrowful things will have no more
existence. So you can see that in the end they do
not really exist. But all good loving people, those
who feel and love God, want this to happen just
as soon as ever may be; and so these people are
teaching and training themselves and trying to
teach others to guard their thoughts, so that with
good thoughts they may hasten this end, that every
evil thought retards. Always remember, then, that


your thoughts have all the power of deeds.
Thoughts translate themselves into deeds.
Thoughts are born in your hearts; and I am sure,
my children, once you know what a big thing it
means, you will wish to try and keep the windows
of your hearts as bright as possible so that all the
sunshine of God, every little bit of it, may pene-
trate and make you rich and well and strong and
very glad indeed and filled with all the power of
good and beautiful thought.
Now I want to say just a few words about fear.
Fear and Hate go hand in hand. The things we
fear are generally the things we hate; thus if you
fear darkness, you hate the dark. Also what you
hate you mostly fear. If you did not fear it, there
would be so little occasion to hate it, you would
only take no notice of it or be sorry for it. As you
begin to love God and perform little acts of gra-
cicusness because of your love of Him, so you will
learn to lose all sense of fear. Why should you
fear anything when you know the God of Love is
close around you protecting and enveloping you.
He protects you just as much in the night as in the
day. There is nothing He cannot protect you
from; wild beasts, wicked thoughts, angry men,


storms and lightnings, poverties, ill-health, sudden
death. Why! He has done it over and over again.
He is doing it now and every day. Only, people
who have drawn down the blinds to the windows
of their heart, these people of course cannot believe
it or understand it to be possible. But it is under-
standable and possible, and it is for you to show
people this so clearly that even the darkest blinds
to the windows of, their heart will not be able to
shut out this proof of the sunshine of God. You —
can be a prince; and You—can show the world how
all horrible things have not the slightest power over
you, and so over others, because of God. That is
what this sad sad world is waiting for. The
princes to be up and proving these things in their
lives and by their deeds. Most of us grown-ups
are now so grown-up in our foolish ways as un-
happily to believe this beyond our powers. But it
is within the powers of even quite little folk; and
so you children can do them, and if you do not do
them you will have to let the honor and the glory
of it go to your children’s children. For it will be
a very glorious and splendid thing indeed to ac-
complish, this testing and proving your power by
God’s love over anything and everything that
seems at all terrible. But no one will ever accom-
plish this unless he really and truly feels God and


loves God and knows that he has God’s love and
God’s strength behind and around him, and until
he has trained himself heart and brain only to hold
good thoughts. Nobody really quite loves God all
the time unless his thoughts are all good. But once
you really love God all the time, all your thoughts
must become good. The only thing to remember is
that it is so easy to be careless and forget God and
so to lose God by allowing the dimness to gather
upon the windows of your heart.
There is one other thing perhaps you will ask.
You will say, but why doesn't God make us all
good and keep us all good and save us all this
trouble. Perhaps, my children, it is because God
is Love; because God so loves us that He wants,
that He needs, to feel that He can be proud of us.
And so maybe He requires us in the end to prove
ourselves, each one himself, each every one of us a
prince. God and the sunshine of His love is always
to our hand to help us. God unstintingly helps
whoever asks, whenever that help is asked for. So
after all what an easy thing it seems that He
wishes of us. Just to grow strong in His love and
worthy of His love so that He may rejoice and be
proud in us, who become indeed His children.


'


OUT OF THE ABYSS


ET it be understood that this little song-cycle
i is purely a myth. Yet even myths should
hold their hidden meaning. Thus Truth
but takes the stage in weird fantastic garb to-
clutch the idling soul and teach.


OUT OF THE ABYSS
A Legend of the Creation.
Woven round the Glory which is Woman.


PROLOGUE.
“Then Orpheus took the lyre, and sang of Chaos,
and the making of the wondrous World, and how
all things sprang from Love, who could not live
alone in the Abyss.”
The Heroes—Kingsley.
THE REIGN OF CHAOS.
In the bottomless pit, in the night-womb of
murk, sleeps Love the divine. Stirs in his sleep to
suddenly wake mid shuddering shade. Spreads
forth his wing, and racing aloft leaves lightnings
behind, till the summit is reached and he rests on
the break of th’ abyss all convulsed. Ev’rywhere
round to his infinite view is grey chaos exposed.
Lo! to a thought from his exquisite mind, con-
fusion dissolves. A thought from his mind —and
order and rule are establishing there. Such, the
great power of Love who had lain in the night-
womb of murk.


CREATION OF MAN.
Order achieved throughout the domain of Love’s
universe, he fashions a world, a wonderful world,
a labor of love: valleys and peaks, salt oceans and
ponds, all teeming with life, and splashed with a
color and fragrance withal of consummate art.
Song for the birds; and taste to the herb and the
ripening fruit; and man to enjoy and employ these
in use, he sets above all: but giving to man a sen-
tient heart that Love so might breathe, gratitude’s
incense winging aloft in praises and thanks, for
this marvellous work, for this wonderful world,
for this labor of love.
111.
LOVE’S GUILELESSNESS.
Surpassingly glad, tarried man in those hours
of absolute cheer —a sentient heart; with no know-
ledge of sex, its sadness, its sin. Perfection was
man, to perfection surrounding full-skilfully blent:
no zephyr of sorrow to ruffle the surface serene of
his bliss. Contented was Love with his work, for
he saw it was verily good. Yet lacked he one
thing: and his need was for gods, great like him-
self; to view the bright scene, to share the glad
joy, to affirm it all good. Ah! Love’s need was
gods, great like himself —to wonder —admire.


THE STIRIT LUCIFER.
So, to Love's need, by the thought of his mind,
were created the gods. So, to Love’s need, by the
thought of his mind, was Lucifer born. Lucifer,
dearest belov’d, yet crafty and filled with guile:
Lucifer, grudging to Love the sovereignty over the
spheres; seeking for self precedence supreme, and
to sit on Love’s throne. Sorry in sooth for man,
the desire that horned the gods; sorry in utter
sooth for hapless unfortunate man, Lucifer quick-
'ning belov’d, in the mind of celestial Love; to
loose on the bosoms of space with augmenting
untractable pride.
LYING LIPS.
Lucifer to Love.
“Verily, verily, hast thou accomplished, oh
Master, oh Love! Masses stupendous, appalling,
to intricate detail wrought! Verily hast thou
achieved, oh bountiful prodigal Lord! Love art
thou named? Thou art Joy! Thou art exquisite,
ultimate Bliss! Yet —in thine infinite scheme —
I mark but the paltriest flaw! This world—at our
feet —and man—dost possibly pride thee therein?
Verily hast thou accomplished, oh Master, oh
dexterous Lord! Yet this creature —this man —
Perceive ! —A sentient heart lacking brain !”


THE GIFT OF LUCIFER.
Chanced in such fashion the dower of brain was
accorded to man. Conferred upon man, the sen-
tient heart, by Lucifer’s guile. Lucifer, quiet,
exultant, dissembling his treacherous mirth: “A
favor, oh Lord, a boon! — A gift have I too, for
bestowal; to add to thy splendid gift, to join to
this dower of brain!” Then Lucifer, spreading
his arm, “Receive moreover my gift! Receive from
Me, oh man! the sense of the fact of flesh.”
VII.
THE GAGE OF LOVE.
Blazing, the Spirit of Love searches Lucifer
nakedly stript. “Clever thou deemest thyself,
Lucifer, ingrate accurst! Perish the one of us
twain: by mine work do I stand or I fall! And
the ultimate fate of man shall prove thy triumph
or mine!” Then a marvellous thing did Love, most
foolish or wondrous wise; for out of the rib of man
he fashioned a woman forthwith: staking in woman
his all, that his handiwork aye might endure;
chancing —by her! —the Abyss, and the womb of
eternal murk.


EPILOGUE.
THE GLORY WHICH IS WOMAN.
Woman with flesh so soft, with heart so tender to
tears,
Hark to the song that thrills and throbs down the
vanished years!
Hark to the song that yearns!— For the fate of a
hundred lands,
And the fate of the Lord of Love, is laid in your
dear frail hands!
Is laid in your mother-hands!
t. 2
£ A ' 2 (a A
KJ cQr j
'J • \~7
Sydney
The Kingston Press, 38-42 Oxford Street


3 1508 01256619 1


For a full and sympathetic understanding of the
set of volumes now first offered, is appended the
following
SHORT AUTOBIOGRAPHY.
Jack Eliot, born at Simla, India, on the 25th
September, 1878, was the eldest son of the late
Sir John Eliot, M.A., F.R.S., K.C.I.E. (see Encyclo-
pedia Britannica). He was educated at Malvern
College, England, with a view to entering the
Indian Civil Service; but never taking kindly to
book-learning, ran away to Canada, escaping his
examinations. Of an excessively shy and sensitive
disposition throughout his youth, yet reckless and
impulsive to a degree, he was led into many and
serious errors a more sociable, cautious lad would
have avoided. Breaking one arm in his boyhood,
which always remained weak and stiff at the elbow-
joint, he nevertheless spent several years at sea on
sailing ships, reaching to able seaman, and coming
into contact with much of the seamy side of life.
He first came to Australia in 1900; making Sydney
chiefly his home, and following any open-air avoca-
tion that offered.
Dreams, Simply-Wove, of Youth was composed
in his 18th to 20th years, but contains revisions
and new verses up to 1917.
Three Golden Weeks of June: A Love Idyl, had
its inception in June, 1917, and marks the phase
of his twelve-month platonic, often misgiving, and
wholly one-sided friendship with the lady he
endeavoured to idealize. The Jumble followed in
July; and the two were revised and completed
early the subsequent year.
Spicy Bits: Verses for Sports came to light in a
cynical mood between the first writing of June and
its completion.
Heaven was composed in May, 1918. Then came
Rhapsody; with The Roadway to the Skies follow-
ing in August of the same year.


3 1508 01256619 1
