

- -J -.,,, -,•• ,•.v v
■C-Jr *-%■ . .''t\ , i .«.-Mi' V
- V 4-. ■ ,v-.' ‘ 4£fc*‘. ®og jg£j. ;' **■
* iSMiI i w kb i|
-3 v ■3iA3^{ia;&SSp E «S
> mmi
I Wm - •
. ■ '
m r| Ml'Wt ' %<•
I H * •




FRONT ENTRANCE TO "THE RETREAT,"


Telephone No. 1944 City.
“THE retreat;
HAZELHURST,
MITTAGONG ...
For the Treatment and Cure of Gentlemen
SUFFERING FROM OVER-INDULGENCE IN THE USE
OF ALCOHOL AND THE DRUG HABIT.
Will be Opened on Ist JUNE, 1909, for the Reception of Patients.
THE RETREAT” Is not a hospital, nor an asylum, nor an “Institution,”
but a gentlemen’s home In every sense of the word.
The privacy of the patients Is secured by the area of the property-
-44 acres—and the situation of the buildings, there being nothing whatever to
distinguish It from any private gentleman’s residence.
There Is a first-class orchard and kitchen garden, ensuring a supply of
fresh fruit and vegetables; golf links; a first-class cemented tennis court,
ornamental trees and flower beds around the house. There Is ample room for
sport and exercise.


VIEW OF DRAWING-ROOM


The dwelling is well appointed throughout, splendidly furnished—drawing-
room. dining-room, breakfast-room, smoking and reading room. A full-sized
billiard table, a high-class Ronlsch piano. The bedrooms are large, airy and
well furnished.
An overhead hot and cold water service, with an ample supply of water
at every season.
Gentlemen taking up their residence in “The Retreat,” and wishing to
take advantage of the treatment, which Is the best known to medical science,
may rest assured that nothing will be left undone to effect a thorough and
permanent cure of the disease from which so many suffer from longer or
shorter periods, eventually going under, to the lasting grief of their friends, and
100 often ending In the ruin of their unfortunate families.
TREATMENT.
The proprietor wishes It to be understood that he has arranged with
a medical gentleman to act as consulting physician, who Is acknowledged
by members of the medical profession to be at the head of this particular
branch of medical science In the Stale.
The treatment will be given In every case under the Instructions of a
medical gentleman living in close proximity to “The Retreat.”
Total abstinence from alcoholic liquors will be Insisted upon from the
time of admission, except In cases where the Medical Officer deems it
necessary to allow certain doses to be given to the patient.


ANOTHER VIEW OF DRAWING-ROOM


At specified Intervals medicines suitable to the patient, hypodermic
and otherwise, will be administered—always under medical Instruction,
Hot air and vapour baths, plunge and shower baths, hot and cold
physical exercise and mental recreation receive special attention.
The medical treatment extends over six weeks, but may be prolonged
for a longer period.
By following out this treatment. Improvement In the patient Is observable
almost at once. In a short lime sleep returns, the appetite Is regained,
the mental and bodily vigour returns, and gradually the craving for alcohol
ceases, the WILL POWER Is built up, and the patient feels confident that
he will altogether abstain.
AMUSEMENTS.
Golf, tennis, billiards, cards, chess, draughts, dominoes, quoits, Indian
clubs, dumb-bells, &c.; works of fiction, best authors; music, a first-class
piano.
The proprietor wishes It to be distinctly understood that the treatment
Is cosily owing to expensive drugs; and the cost of maintenance is very
heavy considering the limited number that can be accommodated.
The entrance fee and the weekly maintenance charge Is cut down to
the lowest possible amount having due regard to the keeping of “The Retreat ’
up to the highest standard.




RULES FOR ADMISSION.
I. Satisfactory personal references are Indispensable before the admission
of any patient.
2. Persons suffering from any Infectious disease will not be admitted.
3. Each applicant must produce a medical certificate that he Is not
suffering from any communicable disease.
4. No person who has been convicted of crime or who has a bad
reputation will be admitted.
5. No person will be admitted until he has paid the entrance fee and
given a satisfactory written guarantee for the payment of the maintenance fees
as agreed upon.
6. Each applicant must sign an agreement to the effect that he will
abide by the rules laid down for the conduct of “The Retreat.”
7. Patients must not bring or cause to be brought Into “The Retreat”
intoxicating drinks.
8. No patient may leave "The Retreat” or Its precincts without the
express authority of the Medical Officer, or the proprietor, or his deputy.
9. Any patient whose conduct becomes objectionable to a majority
of the other patients may be expelled from “The Retreat,” and will thereby
forfeit all fees paid on entrance and for maintenance. (This Rule, It Is hoped,
will never have to be enforced.)


SIDE VIEW OF “THE RETREAT.”


10. Any patient wishing to consult his own medical attendant may do so
in consultation with one of the medical gentlemen attached to The Retreat,
but In all such cases the patient must bear all the expense of such
consultation.
All members of the medical profession agree that a “Retreat” of a
high-class kind is needed, where persons able to afford private treatment may
obtain it. Those who would shrink from entering a public Institution may rest
assured of absolute privacy, and the most confidential relations with patients
and their relatives and friends will be strictly observed.
All applications to be addressed to
THE SECRETARY OF
“THE RETREAT,”
Lyndhurst Chambers,
84 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.


BACK VIEW, APPROACHING ENTRANCE HALL.


THE ORCHARD.
