

THE
Randall Art Gallery.
AND
School of Painting
South Brisbane
Catalogue
of Works
IN
Oils, Water Colours,
Pastels, Black and
White &c., &c.
By the Late
R. J. Randall
ILLUSTRATED
Published by The South
Brisbane City Council
Price One Shilling


Palette of Artist.


THE
Randall Art Ballery
AND
School of Painting
South Brisbane
Catalogue
of Works
IN
Oils, Water Colours,
Pastels, Black and
White &C M &c.
By the Late
R.J. Randall
ILLUSTRATED
Published by The South
Brisbane City Council
Price One Shilling




ALDERMAN J. ALLEN,
Mayor of South Brisbane.




R. J. RANDALL,
The Australian Painter-Poet.
An Appreciation.
B. J M. J.
“ Grant but Memory Co us, and we can
lose nothing bg Death.”—
WHITTIER.
“He being dead, yet speaketh.” These pregnant words
have been ringing' through my mind ever since I was privileged
to view the collected works of the talented young Queens-
lander who was so suddenly taken from the scene of his
labours a few years ago. No one can look around this Art
Gallery, and gaze at the quality as well as the quantity of the
work he left behind him, and fail to realise the truth of the
potent words at the commencement of this paragraph, nor
to recognise the irreparable loss which Australian Art has
suffered by the untimely death of Richard J. Randall. Those
who were privileged to enjoy the friendship of the artist will
always miss the sparkling vitality which was such a character-
istic of his, but gazing on the scenes he .depicted with such
life-like fidelity to Nature will realise that he yet speaketh to
us with all the Truth that was within him.
Richard John Randall was the eldest son of George and
Naomi Randall, born in South Brisbane on February sth, 1869,
and died at Birkdale, near Cleveland, on October 15th, 1906.
A brief span, and yet what a wealth of work he managed to
cram into the short space of life that was given him on earth!
Educated at the State School, South Brisbane, he, at an early
age, showed distinct promise of artistic talent, and becoming
a pupil at the Technical School, carried off first prize in all
departments of work. Specimens of this early work form
part of the exhibits in this Gallery, as well as some examples
of his earliest efforts in Water Colour Painting from Nature.
These latter will be found especially valuable and interesting


as showing that our Queensland Artist never lost the distinct
individuality of his early, touch, either by nis travels in other
lands or the influence of his after training. A casual glance
at this early work will also show that the true artist within
him was then a living reality and seeking an avenue to reveal
itself.
The encomiums he thus early drew from those competent
to judge, induced his parents to assist him to still further
follow his bent, and with them, he left for England in April
1891. When he arrived in London, at the age of 22, he at
once made application to enter the famous Art School con-
ducted by Professor Herkomer at Bushev. It was a bold bid
for one from the Antipodes, for Hubert Herkomer was at this
time, and for many years after, the one master towards whom
all artistic eyes were turned, and to receive training from such
an one was in itself almost surely the hall-mark of future suc-
cess. While awaiting the result of the application though,
young Randall, with the earnestness and assiduity which was
his characteristic, went for a term under the artist Frank
Calderon, at St. John’s Wood.
In December, 1892, a letter was received from the secre-
tary of the Herkomer School, couched in the following terms:
“I have submitted the drawings sent by you a few days
since, to Professor Herkomer, and am pleased to be able to
inform you that he has accepted you as a Student in the pre-
liminary class of this school. The Professor accepted you on the
‘Study of a Man’s Head,’ the other drawing not being so
satisfactory.”
At last the door was opened to admit the young Queens-
lander to sit at the feet of the artistic Gamaliel, and receive
the tuition he was yearning for. And how well he absorbed
that tuition can be seen by the admirable specimens of his
art he left behind him, which now grace the walls of this
Art Gallery. Professor Herkomer has aptly described his
system as “A search for the personality of each student,”
and the many artists he developed by his method is amply
demonstrated by those who have won great distinction, and
not the least among them is the gifted son of Queensland
—the subject of this appreciation.
The death of Sir Hubert Von Herkomer a few months
ago, brought forth a flood of literature anent the great artist
and his methods of training, and the reading of this throws
an additional light on the atmosphere of the school where
young Randall received his training, and where the finishing
touches were put on his student career. Sir Hubert was
aptly described as “The King of Arts”; and “Lululaund,” his
picturesque home at Bushey, Herts, as “The House of Magic.”


This house was entirely designed by him, and as one critic
says: “To approach it on the Professor’s motor car, to see
the gates swing open unbidden, and ride rapidly to the door
to the welcoming tones of an organ, was like entering a
modern fairyland, with Sir Hubert as a kind of King' of the
Arts, in control.”
In planning the enchanting interior, Sir Hubert evidently
laid himself out to realise the words of Goethe: “From door
to door the beautiful should meet the eye,” and no one was
more capable than he of carrying this out. Is it any wonder,
therefore, that Bushey, heretofore an unknown country village,
became an important and world-known art centre, where many
famous painters w r ere produced? Not when the guiding
spirit was the creator of “The Last Muster,” which sent the
Academy Hanging Committee into raptures of delight, and
“A Lady in White,” which sent people into a perfect frenzy
of appreciation. It is related that on one occasion the Pro-
fessor was puzzled because the entire work of a room seemed
to be going wrong, and he greeted the students with words:
“1 am going to stay in this studio all the blessed day, and
watch every stroke you do, and then I shall find out what’s
wrong with you all.” He spent the entire day walking
leisurely round the studio, examining their work, but rarely,
if ever, making a remark. This only shows the thoroughness
of the man and the keen interest he displayed with his pupils.
The Professor further encouraged his students to establish
their studios near him, so that they might for some time
longer receive the benefit of his inspiring help.
Such was the man from whom Randall received his Art
training, and such was the School and the atmosphere in
which that tuition was given. At this great rendezvous of Art,
among some hundred students drawn from various parts of
the United Kingdom, the Continent of Europe, and the States
of America, many of them hailing from the most cultured
art centres of the world, and all animated by Art, ambition, and
aspirations—among these, our young Queensland artist, fresh
from the necessarily crude conditions of the new land he had
left, soon distinguished himself; and in an unprecedentedly
short time he was passed up into the life class, thus showing
the keenly receptive mind and natural talent he possessed.
Early in 1895, Mn Randall senr., and family, were return-
ing to Australia, and on the news of this being communi-
cated to the Professor he sent the following letter, which is
worth reproducing as it shows the watchful care and pride
the master took in what he must have considered a most
promising pupil, and evidences the wonderful strides the
young artist must have made in two years, to merit such
distinction:—


“Dear Randall,- —I think it a pity in every way
that you should now suddenly cease to get the benefit of the
life-painting in the school. If, after the summer term —when
you have been the full time to justify a free studentship in
the Autumn—l am quite prepared to give one to you. You
have improved very much, but there are some things in your
art that I should like to see eliminated before I shall be quite
content to let you go on your own hook, and I am perfectly
sure that these peculiarities are to be got rid of now. But
now is the time to work them out of your Nature. You
should go on with the school now, if you possibly can. until
the session is over; then work out of doors and show me the
work; and during the next session, which begins in October,
continue the work in the life, studiously, earnestly, under the
auspices of a free studentship. I think it would be well for
you to put this very strongly to your parents.
Yours sincerely,
HUBERT HERKOMER,”
Needless to say that, with this flattering indication
of the Professor’s personal interest in their son,
there was no hesitation on the part of the parents
in following this advice. and the young artist
remained in England to take up the scholarship, and work
upward to still greater proficiency and finish- By the time
his parents reached Brisbane, however, the news was to hand
that their son had obtained his first success at the Royal
Academy, where a Water Colour entitled “The Old Mill,”
was accepted and hung on the line. This was in 1895. Some
time later, when that famous landscape painter. David Murray,
R.A., happened to be at work in Hampshire, some examples
of the young Queenslander’s work which had found a local
purchaser, were brought under his notice and won unstinted
praise; the Royal Academician characterising the work as
“evincing plenty of artistic feeling, abundant facility, of being
fond of colour, a little too fond perhaps in places, but that is
largely a matter of opinion.” Of one picture, “The Windmill,”
he said “It is very good, really very good, capitally painted,
and worthy a place in the Academy- In the picture “Port
Said” the sails are splendidly done and the water too.” After
further favourable comments this eminent authority con-
cluded by remarking: “The painter of these pictures ought
to be alright; the work shows abundance of artistic facility
and certainly ought to make a very successful painter.” Truly
prophetic words, these, which time fully bore out. By
assiduous and diligent working throughout the term of his
scholarship, and satisfactorily accomplishing the hopes and
predictions of his beloved Master, Randall left Bushey.


The Artist next spent a few months with his mother’s
relatives in the Fen country of Lincolnshire. To this visit
we are indebted for that fine canvas, “In the Land of Here-
ward the AVake,” “A Fen Farm Yard,’’ “In Clover.” and
others, eminently characteristic of this “Dutch-like” country,
which possesses a strange beauty of its own.
In December, 1897, Mr. Randall, senr. having returned
to London in his official capacity representing the then Colony
of Queensland as its Emigration Commissioner, a Studio was
taken in Queensboro Terrace, Bayswater Road, and here the
young Queenslander remained until he returned to his native
country in August. 1899. During the eighteen months he
was then in London he received a commission from Sir P. N.
Russell to paint his Portrait. This gentleman’s town house
being close by. he became a frequent visitor to the young
Queenslander’s Studio, becoming greatly interested in his
work, and Randall received the benefit of much friendly criti-
cism and encouragement. It so happened that the painting of
this portrait took place at the identical moment that one of the
same subject was being painted by Orchardson, R.A., to the
order of the University of Sydney, this Institution desiring in
that way to perpetuate the memory of one of its most gener-
ous Patrons. Sir P. N. Russell expressed the utmost satis-
faction with the portrait painted by young Randall, and had
it hung in his Library. Other life-size portraits were painted
of Sir Hy. Wvlie Norman, G.C.M.G., etc., Sir James Garrick,
Q.C., K.C.M.G., Sir Arthur Hodgson, K.C.M.G-, Mr. Thos.
Archer, C.M.G.. Mr. Chas. Dicken, C-M.G.. and others.
From time to time, after taking the London Studio,
excursions were made to many picturesque spots of the old
Motherland, and these visits, with previous leisure or holiday
jaunts, are responsible for and have found expression in that
delightful collection of Water Colours so aptly described as
“In Rural England”—a collection which in themselves alone,
would constitute an intensely interesting Exhibition. One
critic, writing of this work, declared “That his sketches of
English rural scenery have, in their softness of tinture and
fine sense of colour, been often likened to those of Mrs. William
Allingham” (an eminent English artist who has gained name
and fame bv devoting her life's energies to this special subject
and work). The Portraits and Collections of Water Colours
of Rural England, as they were from time to time painted,
were shown through the medium of “At Homes” at the
Queensboro Studio, finding purchasers, and winning most
favourable and flattering criticism from visitors. These
included many Australians, London Art Connoisseurs, and
Judges, and Press representatives. Professor Herkomer him


self, also favourably criticised the work, and made his pupil
from the Antipodes a Life Member of the famous Bushey Art
Schools —in itself no small tribute to his ability and accom-
plishments.
A short visit was paid to Paris for the purpose of further
study and experience, and then, after nearly four years’
successful study and work, and when everything pointed to
Randall making a niche for himself in the highest realms of
Art in the Motherland, he returned to Queensland to carry
out his father’s patriotic wish, that, having obtained wider
training and experience, he should go back and use these
gifts and advantages in an effort to lift and advance Art mat-
ters in his native country.
On his arrival in Queensland he exhibited some of the
work he had brought back at the Annual Exhibition of the
Queensland Art Society, and henceforth, year by year con-
tinued to enrich these gatherings by contributions from his
brush and pencil of surpassing excellence and interest. At
the Annual Exhibition of 1901 the Brisbane “Courier” thus
speaks of the work shown: —“Mr. R. J. Randall’s influence
is stronger in this Exhibition than any other Artist. Most
of the younger painters have followed him in the use of the
brush, and with distinct advantage.” And again, on another
occasion: “His influence on Art in Queensland is strongly
marked. His examples in colouring and in breadth of style
have been followed by many with success, and at the last
Exhibition of the Art Society (1905) it was noticeable that
works which were among the best on the walls, were in the
Randall Style.”
Shortly after his return, he set about and personally
superintended the erection of a building in Cordelia Street,
South Brisbane, which is said to be the finest private Studio
in the Commonwealth, and which had every equipment for
the Artist carrying out his work.
On its completion, in 1900, he invited pupils, and estab-
lished Art classes, gathering round him a constantly increasing
number of aspiring students attracted by his style of work,
and also by his modest and unassuming personality and
generous method of teaching. From the day of his return
to Australia, at every available opportunity between intervals,
of teaching, Randall began and continued the painting of his
own country (winning the eulogy that they indicated careful
and loving work and are peculiarly Australian in their
character) until September, 1906, when the skilful hand and
busy brain were stilled forever by his almost tragically sudden
death.
One has only to look around this Gallery, and remember
that practically the whole of the work representing Australian


scenes and subjects, both in Oils and Water Colours, were
executed from the date of his return, to realise what an inde-
fatigable and rapid worker the young artist must have been,
and how richly Nature had endowed him with Art faculties.
How abundantly the earlier appraisement of his talents in
this regard by David Murray was borne out!
Any commonplace spot in the bush near Brwbane; by
our winding river bank; at and about the coast at Tweed
Heads and Southport; the sombre Blackall Ranges, Maroochy
River, and Coast at Maroochydore and Caloundra; round the
shores of Moreton Bay, and the bush about his own home at
Birkdale. in the Cleveland district; all afforded him ready and
abundant scope and material for his prolific brush and artistic
eye.
And it is not only the quantity of work which was exe-
cuted, but the ever-increasing quality, which more and more
stamped him as an example of the true artist, who, like the
poet, is born, not made. It has been a reproach to us in this
Island Continent for a long time, that we do not thoroughly
appreciate all the beauties with which we are surrounded,
and the Rev. Douglas Price, M.A., in an article in the Press,
gave expression to this when he said: “Just as Australia
needs her own poets to voice her national aspirations and
sentiments, so she needs her own painters to present in its
true colours that peculiar charm of her distinctly strange
scenery and wonderful atmospheres, and make interesting
many "phases of the every-day life of its inhabitants. As the
one needs the born poet to pitch the highest note of song, so
the other needs the born painter to give us canvases that are
readily recognised as the work of a master hand- I have been
led to make these observations through a happy and very
accidental chance taking me to the studio of the late R. J.
Randall. Here I saw what made me feel that to Queensland
had come the honour of producing the first painter with a
genius to make us understand and realise the glory of this
Southern Continent. To R. J. Randall must belong the
honour of opening a new chapter in the book of Art, and
that chapter is called “The Australian Bush.” Never were
gum trees and wattle blossoms painted so wonderfully, and
the peculiar effects of local scenery so happily caught. No
one who had ever seen these pictures would again speak
disparagingly of the Bush. Exhibited in England, they
would remove a hundred false impressions, and dissipate at
once and forever that all too prevalent impression that Aus-
tralia is a country of eternal sameness. Exhibited in Aus-
tralia, they would teach those of us who know the Bush
familiarly to see much that we had never seen before, and to
realise for the first time the marvellous diversity, as well as


the surpassing beauty of the scenery of our own country . . .
. . .No one, we believe, has ever so successfully unveiled
the beauty that lies at our own doors, or caught with wizard’s
brush, so much of the poetry and spirit of the Australian
Bush.”
That this is not vain flattery, but simply the expression
of the bare Truth, is amply evidenced by the many pictures
now for the first time on view at this Gallery, and the wealth
of beauty which our scenery carries must impress even the
most casual observer when depicted on Canvas with the
skilful hand and brain of a Painter-Poet like Randall. It has
been well and wisely said that painting is the adaptation of
poetry to the eye; the concentration of natural imagery; the
skilful combination, in a limited space, of the idea of infinity,
with the perception of objects that are visible at a glance; and
who avill say that Randall has not achieved that consummation.
And just as Britain grieved and mourns the untimely death
of her boy-poet, Keats, so will Australia, through the years
to come, never cease her regret, as she realises more and moie
the loss she sustained by the early death of this gifted son —
the } 7 oung Queenslander whose hand transferred with so
easy a skill, the infinite glories of our world-unique Bush, and
the beauties of the sapphire seas eternally breaking on our
sunlit shores.
When young Randall decided to return to his native land,
many were the regrets expressed by those who knew him, and
of him and his work; and the ‘‘Glasgow Weekly Herald” made
the following remarks : “Mr. Randall has acquired a consider-
able share of the fine draftmanship and clear colouring of
his master. Professor Herkomer. That so promising an artist
should have relinquished the prospect of artistic distinction
in London, and gone back to his native Colony, there to
practice his pencil in depicting the scenes of his childhood,
speaks well for the patriotism which Queensland inspires, and
the future of Queensland Art-” That such praise should be
evoked through seeing a few Water Colour Sketches of the
Australian Bush, hurriedly sent to give added interest to the
Queensland Court at the Glasgow International Exhibition,
and coming from the leading journal of a city possessing an
Art Gallery which from an architectural point of view ranks
among the finest in the world, stored with the masterpieces
of the greatest painters—surely speaks volumes for the talent
and the certain touch of genius displayed in the work by our
native-born artist, all unostentatiously shown in close prox-
imity to pictures with their splendid housing. One picture
dealer and art critic, whose judgment was availed of by some
of the wealthy magnates of Glasgow in the purchase of pic-
tures for their private collections, on looking at a small sketch


of a Queensland Coast scene at once remarked: “The man
who put in the bit of colour on that headland could do any-
thing- he liked’’; whilst a leading- artist in this Northern Art
centre, whose attention had been directed to the young Aus-
tralian's work, could not refrain from repeated expressions
of admiration at “the boldness and daring of the man,” dis-
played in the painting of those “bare, straight trunks” of
our giant gum trees!
Seeing that Randall possessed so much native talent, and
that his life was so suddenly shortened, it seems that it was
almost Divine inspiration which prompted his return to his
native land, to devote himself so assiduously to the portraying
of his beloved Australian Bush, and thus give us these wonder-
ful and imperishable paintings of his, of our glorious heritage;
leaving in the minds of those who view them the ever-longing
feeling and hungering for more, to still further delight us.
This will be especially so when viewing a number of striking,
but unfinished Water Colours which have found a place in
the ante-room of the Gallery. These will be of great interest
to the public, and of service and value to those pursuing their
studies in the same branch of Art. Few will, however, look
on these paintings without having awakened in them, feelings
of poignant regret that the master-hand who began them can-
not complete them with his finishing touches ! And it will only
be when looking round this Gallery, and seeing what was
accomplished in the short time at his disposal, that we can
measure what the Painter would have given us and the world,
had a few more years of life been vouchsafed him !
On seeing some of the Artist’s work in England, over-
tures were made by the Managers of Messrs. Graves Galleries,
Pall Mall, and Modern Gallery, Bond St., London, to exhibit
collections in the form of “a one-man show.” After Randall
had been working here for some time, collections were for-
warded and placed on view in this way. A number of these
pictures found purchasers among Anglo-Australians and
British Art Connoisseurs, and the work as a whole was favour-
ably noticed in the Press, not only as evincing great skill, but as
conveying to the mind of the average Britisher “a more pleasing
and favourable impression of the Australian Bush and Scenery
than had hitherto been entertained.” In accomplishing this,
the genius of the Artist unconsciously, was asisting to advance
the material interests of the Commonwealth. At the Bond
Street Gallery, the pictures which remained there at the time
of the Artist’s death, were immediately withdrawn from sale
by his parents. A portion of these were subsequently brought
back to the State, and form a valuable addition to the Water
Colour section of this Gallery; the balance, still in England
in care of a relative, Mr. Randall hopes to add to the collection
m Brisbane later on. Among these paintings is a full length,


almost life-size Oil of an old Swagman out in the Western
Country, just in the act of drinking from his billy the last
drop of water. A full size black and white of this subject was
published, and a Water Colour sketch will also be found in the
Gallery-
A fine collection of both Oils and Water Colours was
accepted and hung at the British Colonial Art Exhibition,
Royal Institute Galleries, Piccadilly, held under Royal patron-
age ; and at other Exhibitions in the Old Land.
o *
About eighteen months before he died, Randall went to
Sydney, taking with him some examples of his work, among
them being the Monotype, “An Idyll—The Swineherd” (a
replica of which appears in this Gallery), and which was imme-
diately purchased by the Trustees of the N.S.W. Aft Gallery.
A number of his paintings were accepted and hung at the
Annual Exhibition of the New South Wales Art Society,
several finding purchasers, thus pointing at once to the fact
that the work was fully appreciated where Art tastes were
the most cultivated.
Some little time after the tragically sudden death of the
young Artist, and as soon as the bereaved father was able to
face the ordeal of visiting the deserted studio and making an
attempt to go through the accumulation of work stored there,
it was discovered that this represented some 800 works in
various mediums, and included a considerable number of
large and important canvases. It was a labour of many months
to get this mass of works even imperfectly classified and
arranged; and it has been a task of much greater magnitude—
and involving both time and money—to get the various works
suitably mounted and framed. At the moment of writing, we
believe every scrap of this work has been lovingly and religi-
ously dealt with so as to ensure preservation ; some 600 finding
a place in this Galleiy, filled to its utmost capacity; the balance
finding a resting- place at the home at Birkdale, or on the
walls of the Studio in Cordelia Street—enough, in conjunction,
to furnish another interesting Art Gallery. When engaged
in the work of going through the dead one’s treasure-house,
the father was only mindful of perpetuating the memory of
his lost son, and though advised by many competent judges
and distinguished visitors to the Studio to take the collection
to the capitals of the other States or to London for disposal,
assured of the realisation of a large sum of money and the
vvork falling into the hands of people well able to appreciate
the fine art in the Avork, Mr. Randall could not bring himself
to part with, and see the collection distributed. He finally
decided and made known through the Press, his willingness
to transfer the entire collection to any corporate body willing
to undertake its proper housing and up-keep, its being kept


intact, and maintained in perpetuity as a memorial of his son—
the donor undertaking to spend up to £250 111 the work of fur-
ther framing and preparing the paintings for hanging. After the
lapse of some time, the desirability of the offer of this great
gift being accepted by the South Brisbane City Council, was
mooted by one of the Aldermen (Mr. James Dowrie), and in
a few months the matter was arranged and action decided
upon. This was during the Mayorality of Alderman Savage.
A Deed of Trust in accordance with the terms asked, was
executed the following year, and signed by the then Mayor
(Alderman Gillespie).
On the question of housing, Mr. Randall offered to convey
the freehold of a Jj-acre of vacant land adjoining the Studio
of his late son, valued at £3OO. It was then suggested that
Musgrave Park would be the most suitable place. As most
of the classes were removed from the Technical College build-
ing, which enabled the Library to be brought down to the
ground floor, the entire space of the second floor of the building
became vacant, and this was offered; the Council under-
taking to make all suitable alterations, such as lighting
from the top, etc. These were carried out under the direction
of Mr. Payne, the well-known Architect.
After considerable delay these alterations were proceeded
with, and the work of arranging and hanging the pictures
begun- Whatever delays have occurred, avoidable or unavoid-
able, it comes as a fitting climax that the Randall Art Gallery
should be formally opened during the term of office of the
present Mayor (Alderman J. Allen), who has been a consis-
tent and whole-hearted supporter of the scheme from the
commencement; and that it is to be officially opened by His
Excellency the Governor (Sir Wm. MacGregor), who, after
visiting the late Artist’s Studio soon after his arrival in
Queensland, expressed the hope “that the collection would
soon be made available to the general public, so that his
fellow-countrymen could see this beautiful work by one of
their own.’’
The Gallery may justly be regarded as a fine National
asset —a unique collection of work, at once interesting and
educative—giving pleasure to every lover of Art, and grati-
fying that love of the beautiful (in pictures as in music)
implanted in human nature, and felt by every man and woman ;
to say nothing of its serving a high purpose by rousing the
ambition of others of our young men and women to emulate
the work they see before them, done by one of themselves;
and in fostering that love and admiration of their own country
which is the mainspring and root of all patriotism. The
South Brisbane City Council deserve well of their country
for their action in this matter. They deserve the thanks, not


only of every Queenslander, but of every Australian. They
have proved that they can appreciate the value to the commun-
ity of elevating- influences, and like their compeers of the Old
Land who have given to Liverpool its world-renowned Walker
Gallery, and Glasgow its veritable Palace of Art, followed by
so many other Provincial Towns; in providing its Municipal
Art Gallery for the pleasure and recreation of its towns-people,
and the encouragement of what is, after all, a branch of our
higher education.
Passing once more to the subject of this appreciation,
and his great work for us, we feel confident no one will look
round this Gallery without being struck by the extraordinary
versatility of the Painter; so much so, that with many it will
be difficult to believe that the entire work in the Gallery can
be that of one man.. Portraits in Oils, Picture-Portraits in
Pastils, Landscapes and Seascapes in Oils and Water Colours;
of quaint and quiet English countryside, or the very opposite
in atmosphere and foliage characteristic of Australia, the
same mastery of treatment is seen. Certain it is, and this
will be readily acknowledged, that whether among the straw-
thatched cottages and farmsteads of Hampshire, the meander-
ing silver streams, green meadowlands, and winding lanes of his
father’s county of Hertfordshire; or the country of the old
Vikings of dykes and fens, with its boundless expanse of sky
and land, marsh and dyke; or whether in the faithful delinea-
tion of his beloved Australian bush, its luxuriant scrubs, sombre
mountain ranges, delicate and ever-changing forest shades, or
the glint of sunshine tipping the trembling leaves of its fresh,
dew-steeped undergrowth; in all these phases of work and
conditions, the genius of our Queensland-born artist is equally
happy and at home in the exercise of his art.
A pathetic incident in connection with the Artist, was the
fact that a short time before he died, he sent to England three
of his Water Colours for Exhibition, but they arrived in
London too late for sending-in day at the Royal Academy.
The following year, however, his friends in England decided
to submit the pictures, and as a result two were accepted and
one was hung on the line, this being entitled, “An Australian
Homestead.” This picture was viewed by some very compe-
tent judges and proclaimed a very fine piece of work. So that,
even in death, the recognition of his merit was not witheld!
How true is it that:—
“ Blest be the skill which thus enshrines the great,
And rescues virtue from oblivion’s fate!
Which seems to fire the falling stars of mind,
And still preserves their lustre to mankind.
Immortal Art! Whose torch embalms the brave,
Discomforts Death, and triumphs o’er the grave.”


The City Hall Buildings.


Interior View of the Gallery, Looking from the Entrance.


Interior View of Annex to Gallery




R. J. RANDALL,
At Herkomer School.


Interior View of Artist’s Studio.


Interior View of Artist’s Studio.


Interior View of Artist’s Studio.


Exterior of Artist’s Studio, Cordelia St., South Brisbane.




The Randall Art Gallery.
Water Colours (English)
“In Rural England.”
1. “For Many a Year Hath Stood the Mill.”
2. An Autumn Day — Ploughing.
“The Rich Brown strips of upturned soil.”
3. In a Garden Fair.
4. “ Nestling ’mid Kindly Sheltering Trees.”
5. Malt-houses on the Lea: Ware, Hertfordshire.
6. Cottage Homes by the Stream.
7. “Laughing its way through Meadows Green.”
8. Hampshire Trout Stream.
9. Where Waters Meet
10. A Village Street.
11. Old Church-yard.
“Each in his narrow cell forever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.”
12; Homeward Bound.
“Flow on, flow on, fair, happy stream
By copse and grove and glade.”


13. England’s Cottage Homes.
“Three happy little maidens homeward
wend their way.”
14. Old Thatched Cottage.
15. The Old Bridge by the Wood.
“And woods around have put their glory on.”
16. “The New Mown Hay that Scents the Morning
Breeze.”
“In every field, in every lawn and mead,
The rousing voice of industry is heard;
The haycock rises, and the frequent rake
Sweeps on the fragrant hay in heavy wreaths.”
17. Old Mill near Rottingdean; overlooking
English Channel, Sussex.
18. A Village Inn: “The Crown.”
“Where the sign of the Crown
Swings from the old oak tree.”
19. “The Clee’s” near Longparish, Hampshire.
“Twixt reedy marsh and meadow flat
The winding stream flows on.”
20. A Street in our Village.
“When the toil of day is ended.”
21. A Roadside Cottage Home.
22. Tenantless; A Wayside Inn, Relic of the Old
Coaching Days.
23. The Broadning Stream.
24. Autumn Tints.
25. Travelling to Market; Road after rainy night.
26. May Blossom; A Study.
27. “Soft. Soft the River Flows-”


28. Clustering Russet Roofs.
"The Moss that, like a tender grief,
Around an English ruin clings.”
29. The Royal Oak of Old England.
"There needs no crown to mark the forest
King.”
“Where the Royal Oak expands its knotty
arms.”
30. I n the Springtime of Life.
31. An Old Inn Yard-
-32. The Old Farm by the Church.
33. By the Sedgey Mere.
34. The Carrier’s Cottage.
35. Malt Houses by the Eddying Stream.
36. “Andover Ale Sold Here-”
37. The Gardener’s Cottage Home.
“ . . . . Whose fragrant flowers,
Clothes the rough walls and scents
the passing breeze.”
38. Back of an old Village Street.
39. A Cottage Garden.
40. A Farm Labourer’s Home.
41. The White Cliffs of Albion (English Channel).
42. The Mill Stream and Miller’s House.
“Clasped here by ivy clinging trails.”


43. A Rural Home.
“How picturesque its moss and weather
stain.”
44. A Lonely Wayside Inn.
45. Green Willows by the Gliding Stream.
46. “Convalescent.”
47. By Flowery Meadowlands.
“In the fields and meads I know,
Where buttercups and daisies grow.”
48. W here the Willows cast their shade across
the stream.
49. A Cottage Home.
50. A Wet Day.
51. “Over the Hills and Far Away.”
52. Old Thatched Homes.
“Their golden thatch, whose squared
eves shadows throw
On white-washed walls and deep sunk
lattice pane.”
53. In an English Park.
54. The Stream by the Farm.
“For to fetch the summer home.”
55. The Back Road Home.
56. Tranquil Waters.
57. Old Bridge, Shoreham. Sussex.
58. At the Foot of the Hill.


59. In the Valley of the Test.
60 T owing Path, River Lea, Ware, Hertfordshire.
61. Village Dairy.
62. An Upper Reach of the River Lea, Hertford-
shire-
-63. Old Windmill on the Moors.
“I look down over the farms:
In the fields of grain I see
The harvest that is to he;
And I fling to the air my arms,
For I know it is all for me."
64. Labourers' Cottages —Village Street,
Wherwell, Hants.
“By the old cottages thatch’d and warm.”
65. W hen Rainy Clouds are in the Sky.
66. G reen Meads and Crystal Stream.
67 A bit of Rural England.
“The well-worn step that from the
threshold goes,
The bee skips and their buzzing swarm."
68. Summer Evening.
“Slow from the sky the light of day declines."
69. Pleasant Eields and Meadows by the Lea.
“Where smiling Spring its earliest visit
paid."
70. The Inn beside the Stream.
71. A Haunt of Isaak Walton.
“I, in these flowery meads would be;
These crystal streams should solace me;
To whose harmonious, bubbling noise
I, with my angle, would rejoice.”
Isaak Walton.


72. Laden Barges on the Thames.
73. Reflections.
74. Grey Morning.
75. A Gently Winding Stream.
76. Shepherd’s Home.
77. In Fenland —A Lonely Farm.
78. A Fair Land is England
‘‘l’ll take the path that goes by the Mill,
I’ll take the beaten track that winds round
the hill.”
79. Clustering Roofs around the old Church Tower
80. “And Sweet is all the Land about.”
“Pale Autumn wreaths his latest, loveliest
flowers;
The rich luxuriance of every view,
The mild and modest tint, the splendid hue!”
81. Old Flour Mill on the Lea, at Ware,
Hertfordshire.
82. Chalk Hill Farm.
83. H orses at the Pond.
“When at eve the weary team.
With loosened traces, seek the stream.”
84. A Rush-girt Stream.
85. Old Bridge at Shoreham, Sussex.
86. Sketch —Evening Effect.
87. Sketch —On the Moors.
88. Sketch —English Hedgerow.


89. Sketch—Old Cottage.
90. Sketch —I n the Fens.
91 . Sketch —The Farmstead.
92. Sketch—Windmill on the Wolds.
93. Sketch —FTaymaking.
94. Sketch —The Golden Gorse.
95. A Rocky Coastline.
“Roll on thou deep and dark blue ocean,
• Roll!”
96. Sombre Eve.
“When night conies creeping on.”
97. A Stormy Sky.
98. Autumn in English Woods.
“When the dead leaves softly fall.”
99. Sketch —Moonlight Effect.
100. Leading to my Cottage door.
101. Sketch.
102. The May Bush by the Stream.
103. Sketch —At close of Day.
104. Flowers of the Forest.


105. English Woodland Scenes (3).
106. \
107.
108.
109.
\ Leaves from the Artist’s Pocket Book.
( (15)
111.
112.
113. /
114. Some Early Sketches —Red Sea (2).
115. Springtime of the Year.
“When fields are green and skies are
bright.
To walk on flowers together.”
116. W arm and Sunny Summertime.
117. Sketches (3).


No. 127 The Australian Bush.


Water Colours (Australian).
118. Contentment.
119. Wh ere the Scrub Land Starts.
120. Peacefulness.
121. Selector’s Homestead—Maroochy River.
“Like picture in a leafy frame, looms the
distant peak.’
122. Bush Sentinels.
“Where gums renew their fresh attire.”
123. Our “Bush Beautiful.”
“Boast not of the wanton woods of Europe,
Defiled with cloven feet: fed on the fat of men;
Flaunting furious colours as women of Moab;
Their beauty such as he who runs may see;
For me, our austere Bush, repelling whom
she may,
To her true lover teeming with tenderness.”
124. On the Maroochy—Blackall Range in the
distance.
125. “In Forest Glades of our Beloved Bush.”
126. Road on the Blackall Range.
127. The Australian Bush.
“The great, masterful Australian Bush, beloved
theatre of manhood’s pioneering victories.”
“Welcome, the unhampered freedom of the
Bush!”
128. On a Gray Day—Road to Mount Cotton.
“A Wintry Sunset fades along the sky.”
129. Road to the Homestead.
130. View—Blackall Range.


131. The Road by the Creek.
132. Timber Getting.
133. The Selector’s Track.
■‘How beautiful our Bush can be!”
134. The Road Round the Hill.
135. A Road Through the Scrub.
136. Brisbane River.
“Bathed in sunlight, languorous stretch the
winding reaches of the stream.”
137. Australian Pastorale.
“Where the undethroned Forest’s Royal Tent,
Broods with its hush o’er half a continent.”
138. Where the White Gums Flourish.
“In the cloisters beneath, what grace of gold
and gums.”
139. View in Dutton Park.
140. A Mountain Track.
“The fading, many-coloured wood;
Shade deepening over shade.”
141. Old Slab Humpy, Ipswich Road.
142. A Glimpse of the Blackall Range.
143. The Old Track —Gympie Road.
144. On the Edge of the Scrub.
“Sombre darkness of massed foliage and
interlacing vines.”
145. A Ferny Glen (near Nambour).
146. One Tree Hill (from Dutton Park).


No. 153 Nature’s Mirror.


147. A Forest Giant.
“In the dark, primeval forest.”
148. View of Mount Gravatt.
“Evening’s soft sunset glow.”
149. The Old Home (near Brisbane).
150. Glimpse of Nambour Township.
151. Dim Looms the Distant Mountain Range.
152. Golf Links, Yerongpilly.
153. Nature’s Mirror.
“Where the glorious sunset breaks.”
154. At the mouth of Nerang Creek.
155. Subduing the Wilderness.
156. A Bush Idyll.
157. “Now Fades the Glimmering Landscape.”
158. Hamilton Reach.
159. A Bush Homestead—Blackall Range.
160. A Sunlit Beach—Caloundra.
161. An Unfinished Bush Symphony.
162. An Australian Idyll.
163. By the Shingly Beach.
164. A Flowery Bank.


165. At the Foot of the Range.
166. Peach Blossom.
167. A Valley Fair, with Purpling Hills Beyond.
“A bit of golden, grassy plain.”
168. A Rock-bound Bay.
169. A Teamster’s Home.
170. An Fmerald Sea.
171. Lengthening Shadows—A Sketch-
-172. Twilight on the River.
“Twilight! I love thee; let thy glooms increase
Till every feeling, every pulse, is peace.”
173. Macpherson’s Rugged Peaks.
“The great, dark bulk of the distant Mountain
Range.”
174. A Selector’s Mountain Home.
175. By the Sandy Margin of the Sea.
“Where the surf is echoing.”
176. Caloundra—Mount Coulomb in the distance.
177. Feeding Time—Unfinished Sketch.
178. The Brisbane River, Yeronga.
179. Sunshine and Shower.
180. Shadows on the Beach.
181. Australian Moorland.


182. A Sloping- Headland.
183. River Sketch.
184. Sheltering Rocks.
185. A Beauty Spot—Mowbray Park.
186. Old Jetty —Nerang Creek.
187. Macphersom’s Range, from Tweed Heads—
A Sketch.
188. “With Mountain Ranges Dim in Distance
Seen-”
189. “My Model”—A Sketch from Life.
190. Hillside Cottage—Yeerongpilly.
191. The Ebbing Tide—Caloundra.
192. Scott’s Point—Redcliffe.
193. A Sunny Vista.
194. Twin Gums.
195. A Lily Pond.
196. A Calm Day at Redcliffe.
197. Nestling ’neath the Mountain Range.
198. Nature’s Wealth of River Fringe.
199. By Sheltering Woods and Glancing Streams.


200. At the Golf Links—Yeerongpilly.
201 . Big Burleigh.
202. Noonday Rest by the Cooling Stream.
203. A Selector’s Home.
204. A Sun-steeped Plain—Yeerongpilly.
205. Far o’er the Bounding Plain.
206. The Fruitful Earth.
“When the earth is grateful to the teeming
clouds.”
207. View on the Brisbane River.
208. A Fairy Dell—Where the Ferns and Bracken
Grow.
203. Where the Sparkling Woodland Torrent
comes'tb Rest.
210. On the. Edge of the Forest.
211. A Study.
212. View of Mount Linderry from the Maroochy
River.
213. A Pool in the Nambour Scrub.
“Here Nature reigns in grand solemnity.”
214. Lone Sentinels by the Sea.
215. Boulders, Sea and Knoll.
216. A Road over the Hill.
217. Rocky Headland —Caloundra.


No. 232 Won from the Wilderness.


218. Road to the Sea.
219. Wattle Blossom—Dutton Park.
220. The Winding River.
221. A Scrub Farm.
222. Where the Rocks bar the Sett.
223. The Deserted Hut—Near Nambour.
224 Bit of Old Brisbane—Near Pettigrew’s Saw
Mill.
225 ‘‘And the Wilderness shall Blossom as the
Rose.”
226. A Misty Morning.
“The chilling morning mists remain.”
227. Luxuriant, Fertile Srublands.
“Our glorious heritage! Awaiting but the
husbandman’s coming,”
228. St. Lucia Point.
229. The Sundowner.
230. At a Bend in the River.
231. At the Dawn.
232. Won from the Wilderness.
“Broad acres, held in Fee for ever more.”
233. A Road over the Blackall Range.


234 Receding Tide.
235. Port Said.
236. At the Wharf —Batavia.
237. Off Colombo.
238. On Petrie’s Creek—Blackall Range in the
distance.
239. ‘‘Where the Lillies lift their Faces to the Sun.”
240. Monklands, Gympic.
“Wresting from earth its golden treasure.”


No. 242 “By the Long Wash of Australasian Seas.”


Oils (Australian).
241. Light and Shadow on the Pool.
242. “By the longwash of Australasian Seas.”—
Point on the Coast near Coolangatta.
243. The Evening Meal.
“Yes, you watch the billy boil,
For you’ve done your daily toil;
It is pleasant in the sunset
T ' st to watch the billy boil.”
244. In the Shade of the Trees.
245. A Surveyor’s Camp.
“In the dim and tangled Forest,
Virgin to the foot of man.”
246. Sunshine on the Sands.
247. A Track to the Ocean.
248. A Bush Homestead.
“Making the wilderness kind and hospitable”—
The advance guard of civilization.
“How the waste places of the earth are filled.”
“They take their share of danger, and a double
share of toil!”
“The multiplication of mankind has no limit but
the world itself. The Pioneer is the agent of
Providence in carrying out its greatest work.”’
249. A Sunny Shore.
250. When the Tide is in.
“The creeping tide steals up along the sand.”
251. Bold Stands the Headland.


No. 248 A Bush Homestead.


No. 249 A Sunny Shore.


252. A Track through the Bush.
“When deepening shadows come.”
253. The Path to the Sea.
254. On the Wallaby.
255. A Valley Fair.
“With mountain ranges dim in distance seen.”
256. Camping in the Bush.
257. A Rocky Bank.
258. At the Stockyard.
259. Denmark Hill, Ipswich —Mount Flinders in
the distance.
260. A Cottage Home.
261. When the Clouds Portend a Storm.
262. “A Wintry Sunset fades along the Sky.”
263. Wattle Blossom.
264. In the Bright Summertime of Life.
“Here might fancy dream.”
265. “Where Ocean’s Blue Waters Meet the
Shining Sand.”—Coolangatta Headland.


No. 266 A Settler’s Home on the Maroochy River


266. A Settler’s Home on the Maroochy River—
The initial work of Empire Building.
“Give us a million prosperous settlers, rooted
to the soil of their 160-acre freeholds—men
with hearths and homes to fight for—and you
secure a bulwark against any daring aggres-
sor.”
“View them here, at home, where all their
worth and pride is placed.
Where the hospitable fire burns clear, and
where the lowliest farm-house is graced
With manly hearts; in piety sincere,
In friendship loyal and true, in danger
brave;
Beloved in life and sainted in the grave.”
267. Where Shimmering Waves Steal up to 1 Kiss
the Shore.
268. The Soft Sea Murmur that you Hear.
269. A Glimpse of the Sea.
270. Glinting through the overhanging boughs.
The changing shadows play.
271. The Browsing Kine.
“Kine, knee-deep in the luscious grass.”
272. Sweet Sylvan Shades.
273. Pioneering.
“Here life the undiminished man demands;
New faculties stretch out to meet new wants;
What Nature asks; that Nature also-grants;
Here man is lord, not drudge.”
274. Old Cottage—lpswich Road.
“Where wattle-scented breezes sweep o’er
hill and dale.”
275. The Bushman.
276. What Time near Home, Content the Cattle
Stay.


No. 274 Old Cottage, Ipswich Road.


277. View across the Bay—Cleveland Lighthouse
in the distance.
278. Dancing Blue Waves Break on the Sunlit
Strand.
279. Pacific Rollers.
‘‘Full of sunlight, dazzling white rollers
break upon the shore.”
'‘The shoreward billows streaming white.”
280. Seascape.
281 . Shadow on the Sand.
282. Denmark Hill, Ipswich—Cunningham’s Gap in
the distance.
283. At Eventide.
284. Sketch.
285. Marine Sketch (unfinished).
286. On the Hillside.
287. A Bend in the River.
288. ‘‘Come! Let us adore at the Shrine of the
Bush.”
289. The Old Slab Hut.
290. Sand and Sea.
“Lone by the beach of far resounding seas.”
291. Where Sea and Land in Beauty Meet.
292. The Selector’s Start.
“And the waste places shall be glad for them ”


No. 279 Pacific Rollers.


293. From Mountain Top my Far, Fair Land I see-
-294. Where the Surge Echoes among the Head-
lands Bold.
295. Sombre Evening’s Shade.
296. Where Tireless Ocean Beats upon the Shore,
297. The Shepherd—A Bush Idyll.
“Far off in thought he’s wandering,
Through the years of long ago;
And who shall say what faces
He sees in the fire’s bright glow?
Who knows what memories, happy
Or sad, throng through his breast;
As he watches the billy boiling,
And takes his evening rest?”
298. Range on Range Rearing Dark Crests to Sky,
299. Where Ocean’s Tumbling Billows Mark the
Coast.
300. Evening Glow.
“Yet luminous with sunset’s fading glow.”
301. A Still Summer Afternoon —Tweed Heads,
302. A Lonely Cottage.
303. Summer Clouds.
304. Tangled, Foliaged Margin of the Sea.
305. A Shaded Pathway to the Sea.
306. Point Danger, Tweed Heads.—Pinacle Rock,
“Where headlands bold repel the stormy
sea.”
307. Responsive Mother Earth—Reward of the
Husbandman.
“Where the ploughman ploughs the furrow
In the fields he calls his own.”


No. 297 The Shepherd.


308. By the Sapphire Sea—Caloundra.
309. A Sea Idyll—Caloundra.
310. A Rock Bound Shore.
311. The Drinking Pool.
“A herd of cows
Seek a still and sheltered pool.
Rush begert and dark, and cool.”
“Reflecting like a mirror
The scrub that cloths its bank.”
312. A Rock Strewn Spot—Tambourine Mountain.
“From Darkest Shades come Brightest
Streams.”
“List to the music of cascades which pour
Their liquid silver tribute down the steep
Moss-clad boulders, where they bubble o’er.”
313. A Selector’s Home.
314. A Study.
315. Sailing Ship and Tug Boat.
316. A F aim.
317. Toil —A Bullock Team Ploughing.
318. A Bush ‘Tub.”
319. In Cattle Country.
320. Speed the Plough.
321. A Seascape—Caloundra.
322. A Threatening Sky.
“When the shadows deepen over land and sea."


No. 317 Toil — A Bullock Team Ploughing.


323. When the World was Young.
324. The Fallen Monarch.
No. 326
325. Soft Dreamland Light.
323. Portrait.


327. The Sundowner —While the Billy Boils.
“While the ruby coals in the dull grey dust,
Shine bright as the daylight dies:
When into our mouths our pipes we thrust.
And we watch the moon arise.
While the leaves that cackle and hiss and sigh
Feed the flames with their scented oils;
In a calm content by the fire we sit.
And watch while the Billy Boils.”
No. 327 The Sundowner; or, “While the Billy Boils.”


328. Sunday Morning in the Bush.


329. The Adoration of the Shepherds.
“And there were in the same country Shep-
herds abiding in the field, keeping watch over
their flock by night
And as the angels were gone away from them
.... the Shepherds said one to another,
‘Let us now go .... . and see this thing
which has come to pass’.”


Oils (English).
330. Study of a Head (Water Colour).
331. Echo and the God Pan.
332. A Study in Tones.
333. The Wood Nymph.
“Where Pan might hide, and nymphs disport
themselves.”
334. A Bush Fay.
“The Bush Fays lean over to whisper,
Their long hair kissed by the passing water.”
335. A Study in the Nude (executed in the
Herkomer School).
336. In an English Orchard.
“When the trees, all beautiful,
Their wealth of blossom show.”
337. The Pedlar,
“With measured tread and melancholy mein,
From door to door with trifling wares is seen
The Pedlar; grumbling and begging ever as
she goes.”
338. Village Politicians (an unfinished study).
“Where village statesmen talked, with looks
profound.”
339. An English Peasant in Ploliday Attire.
An Unfinished Study.
“Truth, simple truth, was written in his face;
Pride in the power that guards his country’s
coast,
And all that Englishmen enjoy and boast.”
340. “Fraught heavily with Cloud, dull, cold
withal.”


No. 341 On the Banks of the Test: Hampshire.


341. On the Hanks of the Test, Hampshire-
“ Where fragrant herbage in the lush, dewy
grass abounds.”
342. In the Apple Blossoms Shade.
343. In the Lincolnshire Fens.
344. H aymaking on the Banks of the River Lea.
345. Vagrants—Tramps on the Road at Night.
346. A Study in Willow Trunks.
347. Road after Rain.
348. An old English Farmstead.
349. “Happy as a Queen."
350. Wending Homeward.— (Unfinished).
“Fast falls the dew, the night comes on
apace;
To shelter of home and fold our footsteps
we must haste."
351. Old Hampshire Farm.
352. The Road to the Farm —In the Valley of the
Test, Hants.
353. Farmyard, Lincolnshire Fens —The Morning
Meal.
354. Age and Youth at the Village Cross.


355. Golden Autumn.
“What time, the wan. autumnal leaf!”
356. The Wheat Field turning to a Ruddy Gold —
Evening Effect.
357. Moonlight Effect.
“The softening shades of eventide
O’erspread the landscape far and wide.”
358. Summer.
“A Summer day,
’Mid blooms and sweets to wear the hours
away!”
359. Beneath the Spreading Tree.
“For talking age and whispering lovers made.”
“When softening sunset shades come creeping
on.”
360. In the Bleak and Cheerless Fens.
“When the Wintry sky
Is heavy with snow-laden clouds.”
361 . The L ast Faint Pulse of Quivering Light.
“When the farewell kiss of daylight lingers.”
362. Going Fiome for the Night.
363. The Road through the Village.
364. “The Black Drove”—Lincolnshire Fens.
365. A Weird Moonrise.
366. Apple Blossom.


No. 370 At the Cottage Door.


367. The Winding Path—A Study.
368. On the Deep Blue Sea.
369. A Summer Day in the Fen Country.
370. At the Cottage Door,
“And, wondering man could want a larger
pile,
Exults, and owns his cottage with a smile.”
“The swallow oft, beneath my thatch
Shall twitter from her clay-built nest;
Oft shall the pilgrim lift the latch,
And share my meal, a welcome guest.”
371. A Pair of Plough Horses.
372. It is the Winter-time of Year.
373. “In Clover.”
374. In the Land of Here ward the Wake.
“Land where for freedom our fathers fought
and bled,
Afield in peace the ploughman’s team is led.”
“Where the windmill’s sweeping sails far off
are seen.”
“A beauty as of the sea—of boundless
expanse and freedom,
Stretches the illimitable flat of fen.”


Pastils.
375. Portrait (Miss Fisher).
Executed to the order of Dr. W. Fisher.
Since presented to the collection.
376. “Bound Shoreward, the line of Frosty Foam
(Water Colour).
377. Blackfriars Bridge. London —St. Paul’s
Cathedral in the distance.
378. Portrait of a Lady.
379. Porti ■ait of a Lady.
380. The Red Sunshade.
38t. Portrait of a Lady.
382. The Art Student.
383. A Green Headland.
384. Denmark Hill, Ipswich—Looking toward the
Main Range.




Pencil Work.
385. Child’s Head.
386. A Child Sitting.
387. Sketches (3).
388. Studies of Heads (5).
389. Studies of Heads (4).
390. Study for “The Sundowner”—Pen and Ink.
391. Studies of Heads (3).
392. Studies of Heads (3).
393. Studies of Heads (3).
394. Figure Sewing.
395. Studies in Heads and Figure (3).
396. Designs for Post Cards (6).
397. Studies of Heads (5.)
398. Designs for Post cards (6).
399. The Street Musician and his Wife.
400. Woodland Sketches (2).


401. Studies of Heads (2).
402. Cottage in Ruin.
403. Street and Mill (2).
404. Figure Study.
405- Nude Study.
406. Study of Young Girl.
407. Study of Head (Pastil).
408. Study—" When the World was Young.”
See No. 323, Oil.
409. Study of Young Girl.
410. The Newspaper in the Bush.
A Study in Blue, Black, and White.
411. The Swineherd.
Reproduction on smaller scale, of Monotype
purchased by Trustees of the National Art
Gallery, Sydney.
412. Study of Old Man in Chair.
413. Study of Man’s Head and Shoulders.
The two foregoing being Class-room studies
from life—Herkomer School.
414. Study for “The Shepherd.”
Large painting in Oils—See No. 297.
415. Among the Pigs.
416. The Street Musician—Alone.
417. Boiling the Billy.


The Annex.
Water Colours (Australian.)
418. By the Winding Sunlit River.
419. Sunshine on the Sands —Mouth of the
Maroochy River.
420. The Evening Meal.
421. On the Shining River Bank.
422. The Wild, Free Bush, and Unman’d, Stifled
Places.
423. ‘‘No matter how humble, there’s no place like
Ido me.”
424. Heaven’s Glorious Light on Land and Sea
and Rock.—Mitre Rock, Currumbin.
425. Milking Time.
“Where sweet scented wattles grow."
426. A View in Dutton Park.
427. L ion-like, the Rocky Headland Frowns—
Little Burleigh.
428. In Time of Storm and Stress.
429. The Sandspit.


430. The River Steeped in Silvery Light—View
from Yeronga.
431. Deep Shadow on an Emerald Sea—Maroochy
432. B ringing Forth a Hundredfold.
433. The App roach of Winter-time.
434. Scott’s Point, Redcliffe.
435. On Petrie’s Creek.
436. View of Mount Cootha from Dutton Park.
437. The Sunlit Margin of the Sea.
438. The Be ginning of a Township.
439. The Sundowner—A Sketch.
440. At Redcliffe.
441 . Where Silence Reigns.
442. ddie H oneysuckle by the Sea.
443. On Oxley Creek.
444. In Light and Shade.
445. "Where all before him stretches furrowless and
lone :
ddie unmap’d Bush-land he may fence and
own.”
446. The Lighthouse at Caloundra.


447. Humbug Reach.
448. Cloud Effect—Caloundra.
449. “Shy, Virginal, Mysterious; the Bush’s
loveliness is but for her true lover.”
450. Hill and Vale.
451. The Bushman—A Study.
452. A Glimpse of the Pacific.
453. The ever restless, ever heaving sea.
454. Off to the Paddocks.—A Dusty Day.
455. The Boundless Main.
456. Big Burleigh—A Sketch.
457. A Beauty Spot—Near Brisbane.
458. “Mystery and Brooding Glamour of the
Distant Range.”
459. “Makes network of the Dark Blue Light of
day.”
460. Dark, Beetling, and Defiant.
461. A Colour Harmony of Rock and Sea.
462. By the Murmuring Sea.
463. In Noontide Glare.


464. Old Jetty, Cleveland.
465. Soft Dreamland Light on Land and Sea.
466. The Last Drop.
467. The Rising Generation—Where Young Gums
Flourish.
466. Where Radient Golden Sunlight Lies.
469. Soft the Whisper of the Water as it Glides
away.
470. Little Burleigh—A Sketch.
471. Old Slab Hut (unfinished).
472. A Sheltered Bay, Caloundra (unfinished).
473. “What are the Wild Waves Saying?”
“The boundless main that rolls from land
to land.”
474. Where the Sea Breaks in Angry Foam.
475. The Incoming Tide.
476. The Shrimper (Pastil).
477. The Homestead ’neath the Range.
478. The Sand and Rock that skirts the Bay
(unfinished sketch).
179. Sand, Scrub, and Range.
180. An Impending Storm.


481. The Faint Pale Light of Closing - Day.
482. A Lake-like Reach —Brisbane River.
483. The Wreck.
484. The Reach at Wellington Point.
485. The Hamilton Reach.
486. At the Turn of the Tide.
487. At Pinkenba.
488. The Tireless Sea.
489. Mount Coulomb from Maroochy.
490. The Bullock Plough.


Water Colours (English).
491. Back of a Village Street.
492. The Morning Gossip.
493. The First Touch of Autumn.
494. The Fresh, Bright Green of English Spring.
495. Waning Summer.
496. In Pastures Green.
497. A Shaded Farmstead—H ampshire.
498. Far over Hills and Dales I see —A Sketch.
499.
Autumnal Tints.—“ And Mellow
500. v Shades her Autumn brings."
Unfinished Sketches (3).
501.
4
502. Weary Wayfarer at the Village Cross.
503. At Full Moon.
504. A Glimpse of the River (Australian Water
Colour).
505. Sweet Sylvan Shades.
“By the riverside where the shadows play."


506. The Boat (Pen and Ink).
507. By T ranquil Waters.
508. "Where in Youth he Played, in Age he Rests.’
509. Rich Autumn Shades.
510. Verdant Meadows by the Silver Brook
511. H ere by the Reedy Stream.
512. Placid Waters.
“The stream, all beautiful and bright,
Reflects the morning sky.”
513. On the Breezy Moorland.
“Where the nibbling flocks do stray.”
514. Harvest Time is Nearing.
“When the summer sun is shining on fields
of golden grain.”
515. Sweet Umbraged Spot where Sun and
Shadows Play.
516. Cool, Shadowing Willows with their Fresh,
Green Boughs.
517. “The Grey Field Path, that to the Upland Farm
Winds o’er the Lea Dotted with Feeding
Sheep.”
518. “I Steal by Lawns and Grassy Plots.”
\
519.
520. \ L eaves from the Artist’s Sketch Book
521.


522
523.
524.
525.
526.
527.
528.
529.
530.
\ Leaves from the Artist’s Sketch Book.
531.
532.
533.
534.
535.
536.
537.
538.
539.
540. “In the Rosebud Garden of Girls.’’ —Daughters
of the Hon. L. E. Groom (Pastil).


Black and White.
541. Boy With Spade.
542. Study of Head.
543. A Girl.
544. Study of Plead.
Portraits in Oils.
545. “My Country Cousin.”
546. John McMaster, Esq.
Mayor of Brisbane 1884-1890 —3 and 7. Also
M.L.A. from 1887-99; again from T 902-4.
Painted from life, Brisbane, 1905.
547. Thos. Archer, Esq., C.M.G., of Gracemere.
Pioneer and Explorer of the Central District
of Queensland; and Agent-General in London.
Painted from life, London, 1898.
548. Sir Arthur Hodgson, K.C.M.G.
One of the early Pioneers of the Darling-
Downs. Member of the Legislative Assembly
and Colonial Secretary for Queensland.
Mayor of Stratford-on-Avon, England.
Painted from life, London, 1898.
549. Field -Marshal, General Sir Henry Wylie
Norman, G.C.8., G.C.M.G., etc., Governor
of Queensland, Governor of Chelsea Hos-
pital, etc.
Painted from life, London, 1898,


Water Colours (English).
550. Where Willows Fringe the Gliding Stream.
551. Safe in the Fold for the Coming Night.
552. The Aged Willow Trunk Bends O’er the
Stream.
Anti-room.
553.
Examples of earliest attempts in Black
and White, and Water Colour Painting
.
from Nature. —Previous to proceeding to
556 England to study.
557.
558.
559. ■ Unfinished Water Colour Paintings-
-560.


561 a
562.
563.
564.
565.
566.
567.
568.
569.
} Unfinished Water Colour Paintings.
57°.
571.
572.
573.
574.
575.
576.
577.
578.
579. The Friar.


580.
581.
582. Work Obtaining - First Prize, Technical
College, Brisbane.
583.
584.
J
585.
586.
587 Some Eastern Studies on the way to
England.
588.
589.
J
590. Study of Head,
591.
592. Portrait of Sir Hubert Von Herkomer, R.A.,
Founder of Bushev Art School. Presented
to the Artist by the Professor.
593. Study of Heads.
594. Pen and Ink Sketches (9) —Maryborough,
Rockhampton, Bundaberg, Mackay, Towns-
ville, etc.
595. Pen and Ink Sketches (6) —Illustrating Re-
cruiting Kanakas, South Sea Islands.


596. Figure Study.
597. Study of Head (Pastil).
598. Coming Through the Bush.
599. Study of Head—“My Model."
600. Study of Head.
601. Study of Girl’s Head.
602. Pen and Ink Sketches—For “Queenslander”
Newspaper.
603. Study in the Nude.
604.
■ Still Life Studies.
605.
)
606.. Old Lady with Frill.


Artist’s Last Water Colour Sketch.


In Memoriam
R. J. R.
Died 15th October, 1906.
Ah ! who shall guess what beauties all unseen
By us, he saw in every changing sky,
In flowing tide, or streamlet hurrying by,
In grateful shaded pool with margin green?—
In light and shadow of each tree and scene
In forest glades of his beloved bush,
In towering gums, or flowering wattle bush,
Or mountain ranges dim in distance seen?
With God-given gifts earth’s beauties to transpose,
In all fidelity his brush he plied
With facile touch, that only genius knows.
And truth to Nature for his only guide!
Heaven’s gorgeous colours, lent earth, sea, and sky
He caught for us to see, as seen by painter’s eye!
G. R.
Birkdale, Oct, 1907.


PRINTED BY
WATSON, FERGUSON & CO. LTD..
Stanley St. Sth. Brisbane.
