

For Circulation Among Adults Only.
THE
"ANSWER."
BY
W. J. CHIDLEY.
PRICE 2/6 NETT
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR




Fig. 3
Fig. 4
BORGIA
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 8
A “ LUNATIC "
Fig. 7
Fig. 5
Fig. 6
A “CRIMINAL”


THE ANSWER.
A PHILOSOPHICAL ESSAY
By
W. J. CHIDLEY.
THIRD EDITION-REVISED.
PRINTED FOR THE PUBLISHER AND AUTHOR
By
A. J. Tomnlin. General Printer, 97-00 Pyrmont-etraet, Pyrmont.


“What has rendered the act of generation—an act so
natural, bo necessary and so just—a thing not to be
spoken of without blushing, and to be excluded from all
polite discourse?”
MONTAIGNE.
“In a pur© society the subject of marriage would not
be so often avoided from shame and not from reverence.
If it cannot be spoken of for shame, how can it be
acted of? . . ”
THOREAU.
“Who knows but evil spirits might corrupt the
flowers themselves,”
IBID.
“Motherhood is beautiful—fatherhood is beautiful—
but the approaches to motherhood and fatherhood are
not beautiful.”
ANNIE GILCHRIST.




Chapter I.




CHAPTER I.
THIS book is written for lovers. The world will
be saved by true lovers who consummate their
marriage in the natural way described in this
book. For many years the writer has seen that the
way the human race has coitus is unnatural —is a per-
verted and secondary mode of coition. He was forced
to this conclusion in the first place by noticing that a
certain amount of recovery is necessary after even one
act of coition.
It is a subject people seldom care to speak of. Par-
ents even will let their children grow up in ignorance,
or be taught by strangers in the street, rather than
speak of it. This shame and silence, which are caused
really by our false coition, must come to an end.
The popular opinion that “excess” is the cause of
our ills is a mistake. Appetite is our only criterion .
Nature relies on appetite for the exercise of function,
and we rely on Nature for joy and life. The idea that
a function can be natural, but the repetition of it
at times in some way unnatural, or “to excess,” is ab-
surd ; you cannot thus separate a natural function from
the times of its performance, for the simple reason that
a function or pleasure is a time relation through and
through.
The same with eating to excess. Here at first
sight, you may say, is a case that contradicts
my assertion. Or you may say, as others have said


to me: “I can eat to excess for a wager, or I can
breathe to' excess, or walk to excess, or drink to excess,
or do anything to excess.” I still say you are not
performing a natural function, because you are no
longer doing them for the pleasure of the functions them-
selves. The point is there—the -pleasure of a natural
function, and the time this pleasure begins and ceases,
this being entirely nature’s concern. 'As to the notori-
ous pleasure taken by some people in eating and drink-
ing to excess, these are admitted by you to be abnormal,
and like coitus to excess—or to injure—in reality the
problem for solution. How our appetites became per-
verted, in other words why we take pleasure in eating
to injure, or in coition to injure, instead of to bring
joy and life, is a matter for investigation, but man
is the only animal that, in its natural state, injures itself
with “excess.”
What, then, you ask, is our error? There is only
one answer. The erection of male organ and forcible
entrance is unnatural. The female womb and vagina
when active and erect, with the sphincter closed, has
the power of sucking the unerect penis in, there mani-
pulating it naturally to erection and emission, which
is a passing phase normally. This is the simple secret
that solves all our troubles. Man fell when through
tampering he cultivated an erection strong enough to
force an entrance to female, in season and out of sea-
son, and always out of nature. And on investigation
without prejudice you will find that all animals have
connection in this way. An entire e.g., does not force
■an entrance to the mare. Ilis organ is curved, and
would bend on itself if pressed with force against any-
thing. He lightly touches the mare here and there
until he touches the right spot, when—if she is “ready”


—you can see her organ play open and receive his. If
she is not “ready” no coition takes place.*
We can reach the same conclusion in another way>
namely, by a consideration of our joys or pleasures,
which conflict, defeat their own end (content) —com-
mit suicide, so to speak. “Revenge is sweet,” is a
household word, yet the joy of revenge is short-lived,
it changes to remorse, and it contradicts the greater
and lasting joy of love. All our trouble is that we—
all of us—cannot love; that we find envy, hatred and
malice in our hearts instead of love. The same with
pride and ambition—ambition and content are contra-
dictory notions. Both revenge and ambition are very
strong motives with some—not with all.
Our pleasures contradict, and they are not shared
in equally by all. They cannot in any way bo called
universal joys. But this shows they are not natural,
the individual contains the universal, and consistency
is our axiom. How can this be? Again there is
only one answer. Joy being the exercise of some func-
tion, we, the human race, must have tampered with and
perverted some function, and one perversion has led to
others. The shame we feel of our sexual act at once
suggests it as the one.
To fully understand the importance of my discovery
it is necessary to know the pass to which the human
race has come. Wrote an English physician ten years
*1 am confirmed in this by Professor Gilruth, who writes:
“Mr. Chidley’s statements regarding coition between the
stallion and mare is correct, anobroadly speaking the state-
ment holds good for most animals in a state of nature.”
This alone would prove that I am right. Nature never has
two ways of doing a thing.


ago: —“Tuberculous, gout, cancer, epilepsy, and every
species of neurosis arc, despite our immensely improved
conditions and knowledge, increasing to an alarming
extent.”
Another physician wrote, in reference to the increase
in the percentage of lunatics:—“lt is a simple sum in
rule of three to ascertain when England will be one vast
Bedlam.”
In other words, “degeneracy” is on the increase; the
human race is dying out. It was this that led Scho-
penhauer to say : “The world must be the result of some
mistake.” But instead of trying to find the mistake,
he thought it ultimate, or in the essence of things;
which is to contradict our faith in Nature that is the
axiom of all thought.
Let us consider our present sexual act more atten-
tively then. The first thing that strikes one is the
passive part played by the woman. She is queen of
the universe, her mission the more sacred —that of
giving birth—yet in our present sexual act she is made
the passive instrument of man’s Just. Spring-tide love
must have led to the act with primitive men and
women. Love is not only unnecessary now, but every
true lover and maid are instinctively afraid of the act.
A virgin lover approaches the bridal bed with the same
instinctive dread as the "bride. Every man and woman
now has to be told what he or she has to do or
suffer, and the male organ has to be guided into posi-
tion, etc., all of which requires reason, language and a
knowledge of our anatomy primitive, ignorant men and
women could not have had. The act with them must
have been entirely an automatic and instinctive one,
the same as with all other animals. And joy being
10
THE ANSWER.


our only motive, coition must have been a series of in-
stinctive acts gradually increasing in joy. 1 need not
point out how our present coition fails to fulfil this
condition, and the forcible entrance, rupture of hymen,
elc., cause a maid pain instead of pleasure.
Primitive men and women could not have had con-
nection at first as wo do now, which is the same as
saying we have fallen into a secondary and, to that ex-
tent, unnatural mode of coition. It is to be noted that
the natural act will be an involuntary one, not actually
within the control of either man or woman, but de-
pending more on the “readiness” of the woman, on the
state of her womb. In the love embrace it will of
course come about in the Spring, as with other animals.
Boys of two and three years old have erections.
Babies have erections. This proves that erections are
not natural. They can serve no purpose (they very
often ruin the boy’s life), but that Nature never does
anything without a purpose is our axiom—the basis of
all rasoning. If juvenile erections differed in any way
from adult ones there might be some room for dis-
pute. But they do not; it is the same lack of tone,
or loss of tone —the same weak rush of blood to the
penis. It is an inherited weakness.
If i.< tin false idea or theory now that does all the
mischief. Our thoughts cause dilation of the blood
vessels, as is seen in blushing. A thought can cause
an erection now, but a true thought can control it,
and I have noticed that healthy tone of body and
mind is in inverse ratio to facility of erection.
Prejudice blinds us to the facts before us, to the very
words we use; otherwise how could the writer of the
following fail to see the conclusion plainly to be drawn
from his own admissions? E. A. Schafer says:


“Although in both sexes coitus is attended by a high
degree of excitement, yet it is essentially a reflex act,
and can be carried out when all impulses from the
higher centres are cut off by section of the cord in the
dorsal region. The centre presiding over this act is
situated in the lumbar spinal cord.”
Now, “reflex” act means an involuntary act. Schafer
continues; —“The high degree of nervous excitement
which the act of coition involves produces a depression
to a corresponding amount, and the too frequent repi-
tion of it is productive of consequences very injurious
to the general health.”
This doctrine you often hear, and can read in every
manual. It shows a lask of consistency to our faith
in Nature and joy. As I have said, it is not possible
to repeat a natural function to excess at all. The “ex-
cess” doctrine, though a very ancient one, is a fallacy.
By excess is meant a too frequent repetition; namely, it
is a time relation. But natural functions are timed
by Nature herself. When a man is hungry he eats —
and must eat—and when his system has ‘“enough,”
as we say, the pleasure of eating ceases (under normal
conditions), and pleasure being our only motive, he
ceases eating. But the time this pleasure begins and
ceases is entirely Nature’s concern—beyond our control.
It is the same with ali other relations and functions
—drinking (thirst), exercise, the birth of maternal
love, friendship, etc. It is absurd to suppose it can
be otherwise with coition—natural coition, that is. In
other words, the very fact that it is possible to repeat
coition to “excess” now—or to injure—proves that the
act itself, not its repetition, is unnatural.
If the reader will think the above out in connection


with a function between two, or that involves two
people, he will find that an involuntary act not actually
within the power of either at any time, both parties
being ready however (not one only, as often happens
now), is the only possible solution. Actual coition is
a secondary stage of “falling in love” and of the love
embrace. It is the position a loving woman puts
herself in—by throwing her arms around the man’s
neck to kiss him—that brings their organs into contact
unconsciously, and ensures the act. A kiss is really
the commencement of coition, or it ought to be. The
habit lovers have now of kissing with their clothes on is
injurious.
“Excess” is an inevitable and progressive disease
(0 Socrates) or there are no hard and fast distinctions
between Satyriasis and “proper coition” just now, but
a scale of slight differences only. The “too fre-
quent" repetition above of Schafer’s like Shaf-
tesbury’s “excess” and “improper” can only
mean "unnatural repetition.” What else indeed can
it mean!
So far as the woman is concerned, it is easy to prove
our present mode of coition to be unnatural or
acquired. A woman feels her uterus and vagina mov-
ing and becoming erect when she is in the arms of the
man she loves (Aristotle knew this), and if her vagina
becomes erect with the sphincter closed, it must form a
vacuum. Now in nature everything has a purpose,
and the purpose of a vacuum is suction. It is the same
sphincter however that has the power of suddenly open-
ing and closing; the “winking of the vulva” it has been
called. It is interesting in this connection to read the
13
THE ANSWER.


letter a woman—a physician —sent me ten years ago
from England:
“Dear Sin —1 have read your M.S. with attention
and interest, for the conviction and sincerity of its views.
Physiologically speaking it amounts to this, that sex
should be duly and properly cultivated in woman, not
suppressed and dwarfed as it is liable to be under our
present upbringing—which includes corsets and many
other fallacies. ... I fear you will fail to get
your book published as it stands, but I think your views
could be written in a popular form, omitting the pre-
liminary systems of philosophy which, though interest-
ing, do not bear directly upon your main thesis. Wish-
ing you success, I remain yours, etc., .”
It was at this lady’s suggestion that I wrote “The
Answer.’’ Another lady physician (in Melbourne)
wrote me;—“Dear Sir, —I have read your MS. What
you say may be correct. Judging by analogy from the
lower animals it is correct. If so it would be better
for all that it should be acted on, and in that case it is
the mm that should be converted, as assuredly the wives
often suffer.”
It is strange we have not thought before that our ugly
and violent coition is unnatural. The crowbar has no
place in physiology, its place is in physics. To force a
wooden cylinder into the vagina is no function of the
vagina—if you know what function means, To stretch


the vagina as one stretches a glove finger is no func-
tion of the vagina.
Nature never uses violence, but is always gentle and
flowing, using the forces that exist—gravitation, pres-
sure of air, and peristaltic action. It is no wonder that
half the married women have uterine complaints.




Chapter II.




CHAPTER II.
-IDID not make this discovery on the above lines, but
the mode of my discovery is additional proof of
the truth of my theory. It is now over twenty
years since I first noticed that the sexual act made me
more vain, or more fond of admiration, and also that
the same act made my hands and nails ugly. My first
theory was —the usual one —that I had been indulging
too much or “to excess,” when in a happy moment I
connected these things —theoretically at first. I had
not thought out "the excess” doctrine then.
I resolved to abstain and watch myself for any im-
provement. I had found a motive strong enough to
make me abstain for a time. Unmistakably as time
went on, my hands improved in shape, I became less
selfconscious, and my tone and joy in life increased.
But my attention having been thus drawn to the mat-
ter, what was my surprise to find that even one act of
coition now has a degrading effect. And on looking
round I soon saw this to be the case with everyone. At
however long intervals, with however much love for a
start, coition now always impairs beauty, love, health
and tone. A certain amount of recovery is always
necessary.
I remember the day this truth forced itself on me at


last, and that 1 laughed when the next thought came to
me, “You must not do it at all then.” But the next
second I felt I was on the brink of a great discovery.
Reason’s next message was, 'Leave it to Nature,” and
although I could make nothing of this for a long.time)
it had to become my text —for the rest of my days.
Now the fact that coition always degrades has been
noticed by others, even by novelists like Tourgenief,
Bourget, and Maupassant,* but it is accepted. It is
this acceptance I challenge. In the series of faces of
my drawing you see the changes a face undergoes after
marriage—or after the sexual habit has been formed—
and these changes exactly correspond to those we know
would ensue if unnatural shocks were given to the brain
and nervous .system, were accumulated by the brain
All the muscles, glands, and nerves of the body would
suffer lesions and perversions of course, but the delicate
network of muscles on face, and the eyes, show it more
plainly than any other part of the body.
If thine eye be single, thine whole body shall be single.
In recovering from the shocks of coition, during a
time extending over months, I noticed that my brain
or mind went through successive moods of (1) rage or
malvolence, (2) of dread or nervousness, (3) of a tend-
ency to hilarity, and (4)' of melancholy. I saw this also
to be the case with everyone who has coition. It did
not occur to me at first, but it dawned on me in time,
that beside vanity, and the actual injury to body (dis-
ease), the above moods comprise the evils of the world.
People not suspecting the real cause, however, attri-
*And, as we have seen (p. 14), by scientists like Schafer.


but© their misery to external causes, and fret, fume
and fight over their affairs; hence crimes, feuds, war
and “worry.” The mood of nervousness or dread may-
be only slight, as when married women say they “feet
that something is going to happen”; or it may become
the “dread” of the neurotic and insane.”
The sequence of the moods cannot in all cases be fore-
told, seeing that the brain is recovering from many
shocks perhaps, and “contraction remainders” inherited
and acquired. Nor the intensity of the moods, for the
same reason; they may be slight, or they may render
the patient unfit to be at large.
Suppose it takes four months to recover from one act
of coition, and that at the end of a month coition occurs
again; there would then be about seven months to run
before recovery. And so on, at one time the brain re-
covering, at another accumulating shocks. In the har-
lot, criminal, deformed, outcast, insane and. persons
hung on gallows, you have the martyrs to our error,
to the fall of man through his unnatural coition.
The attitude of the “respectable” (or less injured)
towards the “criminal” springs, I think, mainly from
ignorance of the above facts; but partly also from the
opinion that a given man or woman in a given situation
can act in two ways; an idea shown to be false by Scho-
penhauer. “Pardon is the word to all,” he said, re-
peating the words of Jesus. One spoke from his intel-
lect, the other from His heart, the loving heart of a man
uninjured by coition.
Clothing is another result of our injury. Coitus impairs
the proper function of the skin—of the nerves of the
21
THE ANSWER.


skin (which are more wonderful than is supposed), and
heat and cold become a serious consideration. The
nerves of taste are perverted also, tho wish for our natu-
ral food —fruit and nuts-—is destroyed, and the taste for
meat, oysters, etc., acquired. Now no food makes such
pure blood as fruit, nor strengthens the body so well (in
this I speak from experience), and clothes react on the
nerves of taste, on all nerves—including the sexual cen-
tres —more and more perverting natural function, ex-
citing the sexual centres, and giving all sorts of fantas-
tic tastes. The taste for white bread or cooked flour
is artificial, and, I believe, caused by clothing. White
bread will not even keep a man alive. It is tho “van-
ity’ of food.
Clothes affect the lungs and kidneys—give them too
muck work; and the lungs have to oxidise more and
more impure blood. It is only a matter of time—of a
few generations—for consumption to set in, especially,
if tho lung centres in the brain arc receiving more than
their share of the shocks, as happens with some. 1
knew one man, a Hindoo, who always had a severe attack
of asthma after coitus.
As I suppose you know, if the human skin is covered
up altogether, death ensues. Tho proper function of
the skin in wind, rain and sun is a joy—a joy we have
lost, but which will return on perseverance in tho fruit
diet and total abstinence from our present coition. In
I his also I speak from experiment. There is even some
direct connection between the function of the skin, tho
joy of the skin, and a fruit diet. Doubtless abstin-
ence from hot foods and drinks has something to do with
it; for of course the fruit must be eaten raw. So far
22
THE ANSWER.


trom N J.ure being bad (as Hegel said) our onlw hope is
to return to Nature in every way. When the body is
• heated solely by the ferments and oxidations of diges-
tion, nourishment and circulation, clothes become un-
bearable. At the same time the fruit diet has an exalt-
ing effect; it exalts without intoxicating; it makes alco-
hol in the system naturally. Any alcohol put into the
stomach is unnatural and more or less at the expense
of the head; as I dare say you have noticed. The
whole “drink” question” is there in a nutshell. All
the whisky stills, breweries, and wine-presses in the
world are hard at work trying to supply the lack of
alcohol in our present food. And the reader knows
the cruel and nameless suffering in the world through
drink alone.
To say “a beautiful face” is to say simply a face free
from lesions. We ought all to be beautiful—and lov-
ing—and our problem is to find out why we arc not, and
also to show the gradual,transition from the beautiful to
the ugly.
Now iu a beautiful, normal face the two hemi-
spheres of brain and the division between are delicately
but clearly indicated on the forehead by a change of
plane (Fig. I. a and b), thus giving structural breadth,
without which there is no beauty. The eyebrows are
level and serene, following «ith an infinite line the two
frontal lobes. The hair of the eyebrows has a lovely
oven plait. The eyes are well-spaced, more than the
width of an eye separating them. The eyes are clear
and bright in the iris, and the pupil easily varying.
Of all the network of muscles underneath the skin
23
THE ANSWER.


there is no sign. The blood flows through its chan-
nels, but its outward expression is a fruitlike colour and
contour. There is withal a certain simplicity in a nor-
mal face.
Give mo the look, the face
That makes simplicity a grace.
The same remark applies to the whole human figure,
iiay discovered ihe same law in the proportions of a hue
figure as in a musical harmony, the harmony of form
and melody of motion.
The texture ol the radiant nude ngurc in the sun
can only be compared to the sky—or the rose. Love-
lace calls the rose “beautiful, sky-like flower,’’ and tc
all who retain some instinct for Paradise, his meaning
will come home, I think. Roses, sky and naked men,
women and children are all in harmony, enhancing each
other’s beauty.
Constant shocks or perversions to the brain or nervous
system would destroy all this. The brain itself would
contract, and this alone would destroy its lino planes.
Now the round, oily appearance of forehead, and small-
ness of head, are very uoticeabo after coition, and one
of the things that had to be accounted for.
Thou as time went on and the shocks were accumu-
lated, lesions would appear in the brain itself, in tbo
blood, and in all the glands and secretions. The nor-
mal waste and repair would become perverted, and
either excessive fat or consumption ensue. That is why
people get fat and thin, and the only possible reason
why. And that is why people get bald and wrinkled
24
THE ANSWER.


and blind and deaf and pigeon-toed and epileptic and
criminal and, finally, mad; and the only possible reason
why.
But to confine myself just now to the outward ap-
pearance. Shocks to the nerves of face would cause
the muscles to become visible under the skin, the more
so as the circulation would be impeded and the blood
impure. As I have said, the forehead would become
rounder, even the bones degenerating in time, and the
ancient Greeks rccognisd roundnss as a “form of death,”
as they did also what they called “snail eyebrows,” or
eyebrows whose natural plait is lost, and whose con-
tours are distorted.
Now coition always distorts the eyebrows.* Every
married man and woman has distorted eyebrows, and
those lines of knitted corrugator muscle called “Jealousy
bars.” This is another mysterious fact that had to be
accounted for. The delicate fibres of the iris would be-
come injured and blurred, and the pupil no longer able
to vary easily.
As time went on, proximity, disease and, finally
blindness would ensue; or—as some muscles of the orbit
received more than their share of shocks—“squinting”
and “casts.” Now coition always has these effects.
The injury to the eye and iris in its change from Fig. I.
to Fig. 11. is very marked—it has been noticed by boys
even—but my attention having been drawn to the mat-
*Tbs eyebrows become first distorted and “bushy” and
then tend to disappear. See Frontispiece.
25
THE ANSWER.


tor, I found that people who squint recover when the}
abstain from coition for a long time.
All the other changes of my drawing down to Fig. t
are only further stages of the same injuries or lesions —
as Fig. 2; and no man or woman loses his or her virgin-
ity, or indulges in regular coition, without showing these
changes, namely ,as from Fig. 1 to Fig. 2, and from Fig.
2to Fig. 3, and so on. We never are the same really
for two days together when we indulge in coition.
There is no face you meet that you cannot tally with
one of the faces of my drawing, and there is nothing
sadder than to turn up old albums and see what people
once were. I found family albums and old photos very
useful when first on the trail.
The only difficulty the reader will find, in comparing
faces with my drawing, is in the nose. The nose —like
the cheekbones—may become too large or nearly disap-
pear, for the reasons mentioned above. The fault of
my drawing is that the faces are too few. There
should be more of them to show the gradual change:
better. But the transition is, 1 think, indicated. These
drawings can be measured.
1 do not say that one woman or man in her or his
own lifetime will change as from Fig. 1 to Fig. 8,
although many go well down the line; but children in-
herit the lesions of their parents, and though there is
great recovery up to puberty, it is telling on us.. Hence
Degeneracy, of which you hear so much nowadays.
That age has not anything to do with the changes I
wish to point out is proved by the fact that fat school-
girls often look like Fig. 4, and I saw a young woman of
26
THE ANSWER.


eighteen being taken to the asylum the other day whose
forehead, eyebrows and eyes looked very much like Fig
8. Fig. Bis not an old woman necessarily. There is
much hasty generalising on the ailments and appear-
ances attributed to “old age.’’ Some old people are
more beautiful, healthy and active than the young. We
ought all to live to a hundred and thirty or more; the
average age now is twenty-eiyht.
Fat destroys any tissue in which it is formed, and then
you have the consumptive and insane stage. The “four
temperaments” will occur to the reader. We ought all
to have the'“poetic” temperament, the perfect one. Just
how much truth there is in “phrenology” also will be
now evident. The head of a man or woman who has
coition is changing shape every day.
The skin, the hair, the muscles, the ears (hearing),
the teeth (1 have met many cases of young married
women losing all their teeth), the eyes, the nails, the
knees, the wrists, the hands, the feet, the back, the
thighs and hips, all degenerate visibly. .That mine is
the true explanation of heart-disease, paralysis, epilepsy,
diabetes, rheumatism, neuralgia, asthma, consumption,
madness,* and —directly or indirectly—all disease and
deformity, I am sure, from over twenty years’ close ob-
servation, and for the reason mentioned by Acton, i,r.
that all these improve on abstinence and get worse on
indulgence. The hand shows the injury of coition very
plainly. The knuckles become swollen—through the
*And cancer I am convinced. Only men and women who
have accumulated the shocks of our coition for twenty or
thirty years—until they are one mass of perverted functions
caneer.
27
THE ANSWER.


“up and down flow of change’’ being impeded —the
muscles become drawn, so that spaces occur between the
fingers you can see through, and the nails become thin
and ugly.
In one case 1 traced epilepsy to coition. A fit docs
not occur immediately, but some time, some three weeks
after. Coition w'ill ward off a fit for a time. It is
this peculiarity of the brain’s remaining in a compara-
tively quiescent state before actively recovering, per
haps for some time, that has, I think, helped to blind
us to the real cause of our troubles. We expect the
effect to immediately follow the “cause.” And this if
of interest also as bearing on heart action during
“crises” and —in the “neurotic”—on the days even of
alternate depression and exaltation {folic circulairc)
through complications of old shocks, partial recoveries,
“contraction remainders,” etc.
Children inherit the lesions of their parents, and
have narrow, round foreheads (and consequent “narrow
mindedness”), distorted limbs, pale faces and injured
eyes; and they arc vain, cruel, bad-tempered—often ill
—but through it all improve, recover, up to puberty,
when they in their turn accumulate fresh shocks. Some
children, the pale and neurotic ones always, are more
eager for praise or notice than others—the handsome
and healthy ones, who find life and love sufficient.
The immediate sense of injury and lost paradise, the
anguish, is great and cruel when a pure-minded virgin
loses her virginity. This also has been noticed by
others, and accepted. The brain becomes callous in
time, but the golden dreams of youth and love have


fled for ever —in many cases. A young man or woman’s
beauty before marriage is very often “romantic.” But
one act of coition destroys this romantic beauty, colour
and joy, I have noticed times without number. The
character, beauty, health and joy slowly deteriorate.
Love is replaced by lust, pride, ill-temper, and worldli-
ness. ' The memory of youth is a sigh.
We can see this change in others, but not so readily
in ourselves. That is part of the tragedy, especially
with women; they cannot see themselves as they were.
There is a certain insanity in every woman after the act.
So you see that Xenophon and Shakespeare were right
in thinking that men and women deteriorate after mar-
riage. The lesions in my drawing are nearly the same
on both sides, but sometimes one hemisphere of brain is
injured more than the other, and then one side will be
paralysed, perhaps, and not the other; one leg shorter
than the other, etc. My theory is the only explana-
etion of these phenomena. Disease germs are every-
where; they do not affect healthy people, but people
whose nerves are injured and unable to throw off dis-
ease. Even fear renders people more liable to some
forms of disease.
Dr. Acton has left it on record that he was surprised
at the improvement in his patients, without distinction,
when they abstained from coition. The italics are Ac-
ton’s too. Had he followed up that clue he would
have anticipated my discovery. Cullen said, “All dis-
ease is neurosis.” He might have added, “All ugli-
ness also.”
29
THE ANSWER.




Chapter III.




CHAPTER III.
A SLIGHT petulance, a passing mood of ill-temper
in a young wife, is caused by the same act that,
repeated for centuries, makes the “criminal”
and harlot. it is well to note these beginnings of le-
sion and degeneracy, and also to find examples of the
other extreme. Krafft-Ebbing in his valuable work on
inversion mentions cases he calls “lust-murderers.” To
murder a female satisfies the murderer's sexual appetite,
portions of his victim being then taken away to eat. The
connection here between the mood of rage or murder,
lust, and the taste for meat is very marked, but it is a
modified form of the same disease that keeps our abat-
toirs going, and that keeps us at feuds, war and quarrels.
But you will find that all the dreary, loveless misery,
the sameness, gloom, irritability, family and marital
bickering, ennui, illness, murders, suicides and discon-
tent of our homes are caused, directly or indirectly, by
our coition. Sometimes the wife suffers more than the
husband, sometimes the husband more than the wife.
It has been my fate, now for many years, to daily see
men and women going about in restless misery, in fear
of future want, of “obscurity,” of “ill-success”; their
labour, whether mental or manual, increased tenfold for
them in the “strug for existence,” when all the time it
is their brain that is injured, nervous and restless with
coition.


And when I try to make myself heard or venture to
suggest the truth, I am either thought mad or I am
told, “Of course, if they indulge 'to excess,’ etc.”
I have been trying for fifteen years to publish my
book. One man, a professor in a University, and a
mah who writes on philosophy himself, says in one of
his books, “If we could imagine a way out of our diffi-
culties* we should be justified in taking it; it would be
the only possible way.” He was quite right; but when
I sent him a reasoned treatise—without a flaw—giving
my discovery, he wrote back saying he does not think I
am right—giving no reasons. It would take m© too
long to give all the letters and rebuffs I have received.
They will make a strange volume some day. I wrote to
the woman —Dr. —who sent me that letter ten years
ago, asking her to publish my discovery among her own
sex at least; but I never heard that she did.
Our pathetic reliance on amusements, fiction, theatres
and “pastimes” is not the least evidence in proof of
our injury. A man or woman should have the repose of
the Alps, and be able to stand still for half a day—
content, entranced. As the young reader lives up to
my doctrine and corrects the thought of our coition, he
or she will find this lost tone return ; veils will fall
from their ©yes, they shall
Watch lights that break
Hear sounds as of a choir
and see for evermore unveiled the veiled God’s face.
To think even of our present act with desire destroys
♦Namely the inertaging, misery and degeneracy in the
world.
34
THE ANSWER.


the beauty of the eyes at once, whereas you can think
of the act as I describe it, the natural act, as long as you
like, and it will do you no harm whatever.
When vanity is not flattered (satisfied it never can be),
it changes to hate and revenge, ay, even unto murder
These are its own “others’' in the devil’s dialectic
There is no possibility of “sublation” with love here
The essence of love is natural content; the essence of
pride and revenge is eternal unrest. Vulgarity too is a
form of degeneracy and death. What terrible and.
without any clue, apparently motiveless crimes you
hear of every week. Every week some man kills his
wife and children : or perhaps the wife kills her bus-
band and children. So long as we continue our present
coition, so long will there be ever increasing crime, mis-
ery and despair.
You can tell how much you are injured, for on* thiug ;
by the amount of importance you attach to the cood
opinion of others, to what other people think. What
“other people think” is utterly beyond our knowledge,
nor does it matter, seeing that perhaps no two people
think or admire alike. Lombxoso, from experiments
with “criminals,” made the important discovery that
vanity or love of admiration is their strongest passion or
motive. In these extreme cases, as in those of Krafft-
Ebbing, you have clearly brought out the lesions, and
their relations—according to my theory; in this case
that of the close relation of coitus (or self-abuse) de-
generacy and vanity; and also the utter emptiness of
the last. Lombroso, in the interests of science, pre-
tends to admire the courage, strength or cunning of
those under his charge, and seta their blood dancing


through their veins, so that it is recorded by a machine
on their wrists. It is the same uncertain admiration
that sustains an Alexander or Napoleon.
if apes differed among themselves as much as human
beings, vve should have been curious about it long ago.
The same species cannot normally contain a Nightin-
gale and a Borgia, a Bruno and a Nero. The only
solution is then that Borgia and Nero must be injured
or perverted in some way from the normal standard.
The reason why there is such a great difference in hu-
man beings, is that the first-borns for all time inherit
comparatively little injury, nothing they cannot live
down before puberty, whereas with other children it is
different, then inherit more and more injury and
perverse tendencies themselves.
My theory is the only possible explanation of inver-
sion. The brain being in an unnatural tetanus, nerve
centres come into too close proximity, and like telephone
wires under similar conditions, carry strange, false mes-
sages. Inverts generally have one hemisphei'e lower in
the head than the other. But very few brains or faces
are symmetrical now. You will be surprised, when
your attention is drawn to the matter, to find how many
cases of this kind there are among people who pass for
“normal” and even “pretty.” But—and this is the
point—they are always improving, you will find, until
coition is indulged in again. Every face and figure,
and every soul, is always improving and trying to reach
the normal, perfect standard.
I remember, many years ago, when I first opened
Mcrcier’s book on insanity at random and saw those
two faces, I said to myself, “Surely, Merrcier has the




um« theory a» myself." Jdut although M. Mercier
recognises coitus as one of the causes of insanity, the
great secret did not occur to him. Yet his admissions
imply the truth of my theory. In the introduction to
his text-book, he says, “The causes of insanity have been
separately dealt with, and as 1 hold that there ar o not
insanities, but insanity only, this course is at once con-
venient and logical.” Morciar however never tells you
the “causes” of insanity, and if insanity is ono it fol-
lows that the cause is one; the cause is one with the
cifect. Insanity is on the increase.
The remarks Mercier makes on “epilepsy,” namely,
that the patient after the fits, or in the intervals, is in
a “normal” state, involve the truth of my theory. Thu*
it there is no change without a cause, each fit must have
a cause, and coitus—or selfabuse—is the only possible
one. That is to say, when you have satisfied yourself
that the fits are not caused by poison, by accident, or by
trouble, there only remains the sexual function. There
never are an indefinite number of possible explanations
of any lesion, as some suppose.
Mercier admits that there is a close and constant con-
nection between the sexual element, and insanity-
syphilis in paralysis, and masturbation in all cases,”
are his words. Also a “constant tendency to suicide.”
Suicide is a natural instinct to escape their sufferings
1 should say, and our present coition being only a form
of self-abuse really, the nearest and only alternative me-
thod is used to continue the habit, the obsession, that
has destroyed them. ’
That in tracing disease from its origin the reader will
38
THE ANSWER.


have to go back to the nude, can be proved, I think.
For perfect health, all the organs must function freely,
and ciolhing prevent? iht skin. We manage to get on
somehow with daily changes, but to keep warm by
means of enclosing our own exhalations is a poor substi-
tute for the clean, pure, nude life. A naked human
being is not naked, as a shorn lamb, >'.</■, is naked. The
skin is a function. Clothing must impair health of it-
self, and it keeps from us the great joy of the skin.
And clothes must contribute towards that restless ennui
and vague discontent which is not the least of our evils.
The nabit of false coition grows at compound interest.
It is a progressive disease, and the “happy mean” of
Plato, Spinoza and others is of course out if the ques-
tion. Drink, tobacco and dissipation are often re-
sorted to in the vain nope of assuaging the consequent
restlessness and injury. That is why people drink and
smoke and opium, in the first place, and the only possi-
ble reason why. Nothing can be worse than our pre-
sent blindness to the consequences of nicotine and alco-
hol. Anything unnatural must injure and finally de-
stroy all natural joy and love.
Childbirth being a natural function should be a great
joy instead of pain. But now not only is the sphincter
vaginae, which is naturally a very strong muscle, in a
loose, tired state, admitting an immense pressure of
air, but the nerves that function the muscles of the
womb—at their centre—are in a more or less unnatural
and perverted state by the time the child is born,
through the shocks of our coition,
A girl when she is arriving at puberty feels the growth
and movement of her womb and vagina, and it gives
39
THE ANSWER.


her —if she is pure-minded —an increased dignity and
pride —a true and holy pride, so to speak. But now she
has to suppress her natural inclinations, she is told—and
indeed feels —that the present sexual act is “shameful.”
An erect penis is a weakness, the same as a stiff neck
or knee. We are cultivating a weakness under a false
idea or theory, namely, that an erection is necessary for
coition.
Walt Whitman gives a fine description of the health
one regains when fully recovered from coition. He calls
it “Health —old style. in that state the whole body is
elevated to a state by others unknown—inwardly and
outwardly illuminated, purified, made solid, strong yet
buoyant. A singular charm, more than beauty, flick-
ers out of and over the face—a curious transparency
beams in the eyes, both in the iris and the white—the
temper partakes also. Nothing that happens —no
event, rencontre, weather, etc.—but it is confronted,
nothing but is subdued into sustenance—such is the
marvellous transformatieon from the old timorousness
and the old process of causes and effects. Sorrows and
disappointments cease, there is no more borrowing trou-
ble in advance. A man realises the venerable myth —
he is a god walking the earth, he sees new eligibilities,
powers and beauties everywhere, he himself has a new
eyesight and hearing. The play of the body in motion
takes a previously unknown grace. Merely to move
is then a happiness, a pleasure—to breathe, to see, is
also. All the beforehand gratifications, drink, spirits,
coffee, grease, stimulants, mixtures, late hours, luxuries,
deeds of the night, seem a vexatious dream, and now


the awakening. Many things fall into their natural
places, wholesome, conveying diviner joys.”
And in “Diana of the Crossways” George Meredith
gives a similar description of this change in a woman,
strangely enough some eighteen months after she has
left her husband. It is at such limes, I have often no-
ticed, that some women regain their lost youth. Both
descriptions are wonderfully close—even to the purity of
palate—of the joy in life one regains when fully recover-
ed from coition. It comes with a certain amount of
suddenness, and it is the sign or token of such recovery.
People who see the truth of what I say and try to live
up to it, will have to keep away from temptation for a
time. There is an element of madness in our present
sexual act; that is to say, the sensations of coitus,
although now perverted, retain their supremacy with
some as in the natural act, which is a spring joy over and
above all others. But by constantly correcting the
theory or thought of coition, rapid progress will bo
made, and your health, tone and joy in life improve
every day.
Tho injury done b) our present coition shows very
plainly in young men and women about town. Their
evil passions—vanity; rage and jealousy -very often
verge on madness. What I claim is (hat natural coition
will not have these effects; that young men and women
will retain their unity of character. And (heir Divine
Beauty.
There are children of fourteen on the (own and
worse. I can’t say here the things they do, but it is noto-
rious. And there are women of fifty and over on the
41
THE ANSWER.


town—but none of them are sane. It is time my book
was published.
My hypothesis is really a proved one. A proved
hypothesis is one that accounts for all the facts to be ex-
plained. This Ido to the minutest detail. And a
proved hypothesis must be the only possible solution.
This of course is partly implied in the first. If the
contents of my book were not true, there would be no
other escape from Schopenhauer’s pessimism and the
blackest despair. We never are really the same for
two weeks—for two days —together. “Criminals’’
have better days, I notice, and look better, and the
“good” have bad days and moods they are ashamed of
and try to hide. But the time comes when “decency”
no longer restrains, if not in one generation—then in
the next.
42
THE ANSWER.


Chapter IV.


CHAPTER IV.
OUR fall was inevitable, considering the suscepti-
bility of the penis to tampering, the evolution of
the hand and woman’s growing curiosity, or
rather the growing curiosity or love of knwledge of prim-
itive man. When primitive woman put forward her hand
in childish curiosity and tampered with her mate, pro-
ducing an erection thus, and he used force, knowing now
from Nature where to force an entrance —they fell. They
acquired a secondary mode of coition, unnatural to that
extent, and sure to have injurious consequences as time
went on. An erection may not have followed on the
first tampering, and there may have been at times a re-
turn to the natural mode of coition, although this would
rarely be the case,as the very recovery or replacement
of the brain from the sexual centre—wherever it is—
would cause another erection in the man and, in both
man and woman, desire, on the man’s part with vio-
lence ; indeed, all violence dates from this time.
But when men first theorised about it, when, know-
ing nothing of function or suction, they formed the
theory, repeated now in every manual, that an erection
is necessary for the act; then indeed did they fall past
hope until they had acquired knowledge. Nothing is
less open to suspicion than a universally accepted theory.


The best way to meet the difficulty will be candid
discussion between the sexes. Candour alone will clear
away half our troubles. Children should be taught
the truth in schools, and books on physiology should not
leave out the sexual organs in the way they do now.
That only fosters a secret and unhealthy curiosity. Par-
ents should accustom their children to see each other
naked, and expose them as much as possible to sun, rain
and wind. And let them live on fruit only, where pos-
sible. At least wean them off meat, and brown bread
is preferable to white. Some day, before long now 1
hope, man will Jive on fruit only. Fruit trees should
>be planted everywhere. You cannot plant too many
nor begin too soon. No children should have to buy
fruit. All fruit trees and vines should be nationalised.
That will be the beginning of better things. I hope
Australia will be the first to do so.
There is no way of gaining knowledge except by mak-
ing mistakes,and there is no way out of a mistake except
by findimj it out —with increased nowledge. Had we
never fallen we should never have become human beings
at all, possessing reason and language. According to
Lazarus Geiger, language arose from the sounds used
at work or primitive labour, such as sailors use to the
present day. They were invitations to come to a cer-
tain kind of work. Now all labour is to satisfy second-
ary wants. The natural man needs fruit only.
The publication of this book can do nothing but good.
It upholds the best in everything. It is opposed to
nothing good. It upholds the best in Christianity;
people will be oetter and more consistent Christians for
following its teachings. A great peace will descend
45
THE ANSWER.


on the world when it is fully recognised that coition,
natural coition, cannot be indulged at will, that it is
an involuntary reflex act.
A word to young men and women. Everything de-
pends on them, and sexual love really affects them
more than their elders. The first thing they must do
is to Jive on their natural food.t Says Gustav Schlick-
eysen, in his work entitled “Natural Diet, Fruit and
Nuts/’ translated by Dr. Holbrook, of New York*;
"The objections urged against natural diet are very
numerous, and relate especially to the seeming aversion
of the stomach to simple and non-stimulating foods, yet
I have known many, and especially young people, to
adopt it with enthusiasm and complete success, and it
is here worthy of note that those who have most readily
adapted themselves to it, and who have derived the most
advantages from it, have been persons of good habits
and of moral tendencies. There seems indeed to be
necessary to it a certain simplicity and purity of char-
acter. In not a few cases I have learned that persons
whose habits of life have been long corrupt—and especi-
ally those who have been sexually diseased—find it very
difficult to exchange their stimulating diet for a simple
and natural one. The true test of a proposed system
of diet is, however, its adaptation to the requirements
of those who are sound and healthy. Such will in no
11 a the South Sea Islands, suggestively enough, meat is
not oaten till after marriage. By eating meat young
people make themselves more prone to fall into the' error
this book is written to expose.
"The late Dr. Abramowski of Melbourne taught a similar
doctrine.
46
THE ANSWER.


case find the food which Nature has designed for man
otherwise than agreeable and strengthening, and one
whose system has been corrupted and whose appetite has
been perverted (sic) by evil habits, will find such food*
agreeable just in proportion as the system is cleansed
and the whole life improved.”
As you presevere in your fruit diet, drinking no hot
teas nor doing anything unnatural, you will find your
clothes becoming irksome. You can then pass on to
life in the open air—return to Paradise —and in the
Spring, if you fall in love, you will find that coition will
come about quite simply and naturally, and do you no
harm whatever, but a world of good. Young women
in love, when this happy, holy time arrives, must be bold
and loving. Let them follow their instincts simply. So
long as there is no erection there is no danger.
I will conclude this chapter by giving twenty-one
good reasons why our present coition is unnatural.
1. It is impossible that a function can be at once the
most sacred and the most shameful.
2. We must have some basis of argument, and this is
really that a function should increase joy and life,
whereas one act of our coition injures; a certain amount
of recovery is always necessary. You can see the injury
in the eye®, the colour, and the distorted muscles of
face—to go no further,
3. Primitive men and women could not have had coi-
tion at first as we do now, because it entails a knowledge
of anatomy.
4. All a maiden’s instincts are opposed to it. She is


afraid of the act, and it hurts and injures her,* whereas
her love is the beginning of the natural act.
5. Every true virgin lover approaches the bridal bed
with the same instinctive dread as the bride.
6. To stretch the vagina is no function of the vagina.
7. Nature is never violent, but always gentle, flowing
and economical, utilising pressure of air, gravitation and
peristaltic action.
8. There are no straight lines in Nature , whereas an
erect penis is quite straight; it is an ugly thing, and we
are all ashamed of it.
9. Women’s wombs and vaginas become erect and
distended when they are sexually excited, but with the
strong sphincter closed they must thus form a vacuum,
and the purpose of a vacuum is suction.
10. The opening and closing of the sphincter vaginae
is well known to physiologists. It has been called the
“winking of the vulva.” This also must have a pur-
pose and function.
11. All other animals, on close observation, have coi-
tion by means of the not fully erect organ of the male
being drawn into the female. With other animals
there is a muscle, the retractor penis (man has not), to
bring the male organ up to the female, which it touches
here and there until it touches the right spot, when by
*ln a recent work on medical jurisprudence the young
practitioner is warned that he must not take “an inflamed
vulva and injured vagina” as a sign of rape because thes*
appear whtn there is consent-


means of reflex action the female orifice flashes open,
and it is sucked in, manipulated naturally, and then ex-
pelled in a collapsed state.
12. ll was inevitable that primitive ignorant men and
women should tamper with the generative organ*; and
this being so, it was also inevitable that an erection
should follow.
13. Our false coiion demonstrably account# for all
disease, crime and deformity, for all the cruel enigma*
and contradictions of spirit.
14. It is a physiological law that the completion of one
function starts another, one following on the other,
whereas a man with erection will wait on hour some-
times before effecting his purpose.
15. Most virgin youths become so excited the first
time of coition (now) as to have an emission before en-
trance to vagina at all. I do not mean virgin
young men in love. They find it difficult to have an
erection at all; the greater the love the greater the diffi-
culty. It is only because they have been told it is ex-
pected of them that, in their case, the miserable busi
ness is consummated. A young virgin woman in love,
on the other hand, is eager for union—all her instincts,
nature and soul centre in conception. Yet she is faced
by the cruel enigma now that even the thought of our
present act seems a sacrilege to her.
16. All other functions have an end which i* alway*
attained, whereas the end or aim of coition—with hu-
man beings—is in many cases entirely ignored and frus-
trated .


17. Once man fell through tampering, it was inevit-
able that a thought should cause another erection. Our
thoughts and emotions influence the vaso-dilators, as is
seen in blushing and pallor. The most important fac-
tor in erection is active dilation of the arteries of the
penis. After the first fall, there would even be a me-
chanical pressure on the sexual centre in the brain.
This is inherited. Any simple excitation of nervi
erigentes will cause dilation of arteries of penis.
18. Those who oppose my theory have to show in what
natural erection differs from the following lesions:
(1) erections through disease of the spine and cerebrum;
(2) juvenile erections, in babies and boys two and three
years old; (3) erections of the onanist— (4) erections of
the invert; (5) nocturnal emissions; (6) erections caused
by lewd thoughts or pictures—a thousand miles from
any woman, may be.
19. It has sometimes happened by accident, so tc
speak, that coitus has taken place naturally between
young lovers embracing naked. It did so with the
waiter in his youth, when he had no theory. From
time to time since he has heard of others. Doubtless
investigation would disclose more.
20. Coition as I describe it, the natural coition, ex-
plains for the first time the generative organs, both
male and female. It explains the erection of vagina.
It explains the erect clitoris, i.e., to report the presence
of penis. It explains the hymen, which should not be
ruptured at all. It explains the "winking of the vul-
va,” the sudden flashing open of the sphincter vaginae.
It explains the peculiar shape of the head of penis,


namely, to secure its passage in the rugae of vagina. It
explains the rugae. It explains the movement of the
womb, and the fertilisation of ovum.
E. A. Schafer says:—“On stimulating the nerves of
the vagina and uterus, two effects are produced, namely,
a contraction of the small arteries, leading to pallor of
the organs, and a strong contraction of the muscular
coat. In the vagina the con traction-can usually be seen
to start from on© end and spread to the other. The
whole then remains for a time in a state of powerful
tonic contractions, which effects both longitudinal as well
as circular muscles.”
You would think to read the following that Schafer
was writing from my point of view. (The italics are
mine.):
“The fibres from the sacral nerves can be divided into
two classes—visceral and somatic. The visceral branches
run in the pelvic nerves or nervi erigentes. Stimula-
tion of these fibres produce active dilation of the arteries
of the penis or vulva, and also inhibition of the un-
striated muscle or body of the penis, the retractor muscle
when present, and of the vulva muscles. The somatic
branches supply motor nervea to the ischio and bulbo-
cavernosus, as well as the constrictor urethrae. In
the female, they supply the analogous muscles, namely
the erector elitoridis and the.sphincter vaginae. Both
these sets of fibres are therefore involved in the erection
of the generative organs which accompanies coitus.”
But all this delicate mechanism is ignored and in-
jured in our present violent coition.
21. Physician's manuals —Acton’s and Carpenter’s,


e.g. —tell you that when you find coition is injuring
your health you must be more “moderate.” But this
is plainly begging the question.—the mischief is done.
Such reasoning contradicts our faith in Nature that i»
the axiom of all thought. The contradiction in my
reasoning, i.e., that the Nature we trust should make
or evolve an organ capable of being tampered with is,
I think, only a seeming one. There are other instances
to prove that Nature cannot meet all possible contin-
gencies—in this case that of the evolution of the hand
and curiosity. We must take Nature as a whole or on
the whole.
52
THE ANSWER.


Chapter V




IN the “twenty-one good reasons” of last chapter I
have not sufficiently dwelt on the proof from Love,
as it may be called. It is recognised that true
Love does, and should, precede the coupling of young
people in the Spring, but that coitus is its real purpose
and end. All the poetry, music and romance in the
world centre round this Spring-tide Live. And all is
well—frank, open and lovely—until the great end of it
all approaches; when there is darkness, shame,secrecy,,
fear and injury.
To be true to our axiom that Nature does nothing in
vain, the Spring Love is there, what is it for? In
other words, how is it that it is not always necessary
now ?
It is a well known law that if you multiply the age
it takes an animal to arrive at maturity by five, you get
the age it lives to. Man cannot be an exception to this
rule. Some men have not stopped growing at twenty-
five ; a man cannot be said to have reached maturity
until he is thirty. That will make his longevity a
hundred and fifty. Unless you bear this in mind you
cannot fully understand my philosophy. In other
words, one of our problems was to account for the fact
that a man feels and looks "old” at seventy—about
half the age he should live to. Now and then you hear
CHAPTER V.


of a womau living to a hundred and teu or twenty ;
and Mosso speaks of a man living to a hundred and
ninety, but those are exceptions. A man should be
in his prime at a hundred.
Our meat diet docs not improve things. Nor, of
course, do tobacco and alcohol 1 ' Physiologists know
that animal ferments are easily affected by change of
temperature, yet they do not seem to see that hot
meats and drinks must therefore do a lot of harm.
And do we know how much injury is done by hot tea?
Does anyone know ? I know that when you live on
fruit and nuts you are never thirsty —you do not want
to drink at all. Tea and coffee must make the blood
too th : n, they sluice the bowels, and they probably in-
jure the kidneys. Besides shortening our lives and
spoiling our beauty, all these things make us more rest-
less and “discontented."
The world has not it true, Divine aura. I could cite
many writers whoso curiosity was aroused at this;
that the glimpses of a heaven on earth they had in
their youth vanish after marriage. Pierre Loti, Mrs.
Campbell Praod, Half Boldrewood, John Gilchrist (in
his “Life of Blake”), are a few that occur to me. And
the Divine colour of healthy girls before marriage is so
different to their colour—or lack of colour—after, that
it is a wonder no one has noticed it before.
It is when the brain has recovered from coition, and
when it is fed by pure fruit blood (so to speak) that
*lt is suggestive—in connection with our increasing de-
generacy—that tobacco and whisky firms rent the best shops
and spend fortunes in advertising. To cater to a vice is
more “profitable” than to cater to natural wants.


one feels a Divine content. As a young man said to
me the other day, “fruit is the kind of fuel our body
needs.” When the brain receives the shock or perver-
sion of our forcible coition, that injures it in the first
place. Then the meat diet clogs the body with wasle
nitrogenous matter, urea, etc., and that tells on the feel-
ings, on the tone and joy in life. Then alcohol is
put direcly into the stomach —still more lowering tone,
joy and love. All the affections are perverted, hate i»
born (hate has a purely subjective origin), and things
one should think are just about as bad and “degene-
rate” as possible. Not so; tobacco or opium are now re-
sorted to, to try to remedy this restless misery. Then
perhaps this coition-injured, meat and alcohol poisoned,
nicotine solution of a man is called upon to give his de-
cision on some vital question, such as a declaration of
war, or of the best way to treat the “criminal,” the
poor, outcast, widow or orphan. Or perhaps some
woman loves him, and looks in vain for any sign of na-
tural feeling from him. The very look and walk—the
vain look and aggressive walk—of these men betray
their injury—their inhuman state.
The birth of vanity and ambition is not the least of
the evil effects of our present coition—ambition and its
perverted use of money. “Interest” on money means
robbery. Money sanely is, and can only be a conveni-
ent means of exchange. And then selling land is
another robbery,—why not sell the sky and air ?
When Captain Cook visited Tahiti every child was
an end in itself to the whole community. Do you think
a sweater now cares what the life or happiness of his
“girls’ are, so long as they earn him so much a week?


But he would care if his brain were not injured and
perverted. There is the point. And then it gives
employment, “puts in the time,’’ makes our restlessness
less noticable, to be “making money.’’ And money
seems to minister to ambition—to the wish to shine or
to be thought “better” than others. There is the
vicious circle.
Those who try to live up to the doctrine contained in
this book will find it impossible— -unless they make it
a rule never to allow themselves to commence thinking
of our present coition. They must make it a religious
observance to shun the first thought of it like the plague,
otherwise they will be continually falling. You can
think of other things—whether to do them or not —
and perhaps finally decide not to, but you cannot if you
commence o think of our present coition with desire. It
poisons the mind and paralyses all better motives. That
is the “Brazen Serpent” in this wilderness of sin and
evil, which, if people will keep in view, will bring them
on to better things.
In conclusion, I want to disabuse my readers of the
idea that any deep knowledge is required to form a
judgment on this book. This is a mistake some of my
correspondents make. Everyone can and must form
their own judgment on it. All that is necessary to
know is that stimulation of the nervi erigentes causes
active dilation of the arteries of penis. Any stimula-
leation can do this now—a thought even. A little boy
has only to think of our coition and he gets an erection.
It is what you see in the facts that tells. It has
been known for some time that the womb and vagina be-
come distended and erect when the woman is sexually
excited. What was not seen is that if they become thus


erect with the sphincter closed they must form a vacuum
with a very strong power of suction. This in itself
would prove lam right. As Sir Thomas Browne said:
“That Nature does nothing in vain is the only indisput-
able axiom in Philosophy.’’
Anyone who has seen a few generations grow up need
not study statistics to know that degeneracy is on the
increase. I have known men and women who have gone
out of their mind through coition, many who have died
prematurely, many who have been paralysed, many who
have “gone to the dogs.” It is no slight injury or
change, but a great and cruel one. If the reader will
collect the portraits of people at different periods of their
livesand put them side by side ) he will find that every
one who marries goes through the same changes as the
faces of my plate. Not only “criminals,” but “the
best” in the land. These collections always repay the
trouble.
Young people in love want to go into training for the
act of generation. They want to feel the sacredness
of it, and that it has a purpose , namely, the creation of
healthy children. The world will be saved by true
lovers who live up to the doctrine of “The Answer.”
• After living on fruit for a time they will find a glow
and fragrance all over their skin. If when they get
into this normal condition of health and happiness—
for the mind is peaceful, cool, and contented also—they
should consummate their marriage in the usual, present
way, all this glow and fragrance will disappear, the
peace of mind and Divine happiness vanish, the skin
cease to function, and suffer from heat and cold, the
eyes become injured, the fruit-diet hateful, and a sue-
59
THE ANSWER.


cession of evil' moods devastate the soul. In all this
I speak from experience and observation.
If asked what I claim for my discovery, I should aay,
in a few words: “I claim that men and women, virgin
and uninjured by our coition, will have a certain unity
of character and content they have not now,, and a
beauty and health they have not now. That vanity,
envy and hatred will be unknown to them. That is to
say, the presence of a man, woman or child, or any num-
ber or nation of men, women and children, will give
them nothing but joy and love. But that as a matter
of observation, so soon as a young man or woman has
coition now, he or she slowly changes. Their appear-
ance changes exactly like the faces on my . plate, and
their loving character changes, giving rise to all sorts of
perversions and peculiarities. The presence of a man,
woman or child no longer gives the simple joy it did:
but the injured one commences to wonder what im-
pression he or she is making on others , and to have
moods. Vanity and ambition are born—the unity of
character and joy is broken up and perverted. If van-
ity is “flattered” it gives a sort of mad “joy,” which
shows in an ugly gleam of the eye, but the appetite for
flattery is insatiable, it never can be satisfied; ambition
and content are contradictory notions. And then if
vanity is not flattered, the latent rage and hatred show
forth. There is no content anywhere. That is so far as
the character and appearance are concerned, but you
cannot separate health, appearance and character.
Every nerve, organ and secretion of the body are
slightly perverted by our present mode of coition. The
■kin no longer functioning, clothes are resorted to.
When you think that every pore of the skin wants as


much oxygen as it can get, it is impossible to say how
much injury is done by clothing, or where it will end.*
It makes an artificial animal of a man at once. Every
pore of the skin is surrounded by muscle fibre supplied
by nerves, that can regulate the temperature for heat
and cold when the skin is healthy and normal, but the
peculiar look of “goose-flesh” in tho cold shows that the
skin has lost this power, either through direct injury to
nerves or because the skin has become weak through
being smothered up in clothes and carbonic acid.
There are certain glands in the body whose secretions
are supposed to regulate growth. If these are perverted
it would acccount for the stunted growth of some people
and the weedy height of others. The purity of the
blood depends on the integrity of the nervous system as
well as on the kind of food eaten. Our present coition
always —judging by the change of colour—injures the
blood and lymph, and there is no saying where this will
end either. I have long seen the connection between
boils, abscesses, etc., —and our coition. The secretions
of the supra-renal bodies play an important part in
building up tissue, and if perverted people waste away.
And all these things act and react, and they all tend to
make male erections easier.
Native men and women of all countries seem to have
“fallen.” Havelock Ellis mentions a tribe in Africa
who have coition in the natural way—if I understand
*And it is not for nothing that the veins are put on the
surface of the body—even at the risk of injury. The papers
were noticing the good temper of people when bathing for an
hour or two. They attributed it to the social gathering
and holiday: it is really through there being less _ carbon
dioxide in their blood. In a crowded hall people are inclined
to quarrel.


him.* But all others 1 have read of have lustful orgies
at times, which must greatly injure both men and wom-
en. The stupid, “low,” cowardly type of aboriginals
in Australia is due solely, in my opinion, to the initia-
tion ceremonies of young girls hardly arrived at puber-
ty. I should say the native girls never recovered from
it.
If two children, male and female, were put on an
island where there was fruit to keep them, they would,
on arriving at puberty, have connection in the natural
way. But curiosity would soon lead to tampering—
with the inevitable result. Indeed, the woman would
have a false idea of it from the start. To penetrate
anything comes within animal perception, whereas
function, suction and pressure of air do not. They re-
quire knowledge. The idea the woman would have
would therefore be that the man was doing it volun-
tarily. The man probably, that the woman could
“take him” if she liked. Such a double mistake would
bo sure to lead to tampering. I have seen monkeys in
captivity make the same mistake, apparently. That is
to say, when embracing in the way they do, I have seen
the female put her hand between her legs and hold the
penis of her mate to her vulva, and when nothing came
of it —coition really depending on neither of them—a
look of comical disappointment and curiosity would come
over her face. Monkeys never have erections.
I will conclude by asking my readers to do what they
can to rescue the “fallen.” Do not preach to them—
tell them simply that what they are doing is unnatural
The state of injury prostitutes go about in for a little
while is something cruel. One effect this book should
Studies in the Psychology cf Sex. Vol V. Havelock EllisJ
62
THE ANSWER.


have it to make up all more tolerant and kind —to every-
one; to take money-making, “pride” and "ambition”
less seriously; and to try to think of the joys and sorrows
of others.
The last word of Ethics is put by Hoffding thus:
“Everything which is really to have power over us must
manifest itself as emotion or passion. Mere “reason”
has no power in mental life, where the struggle is always
between feelings. The frequent talk of the conflict of
reason with the passions is incorrect. No such conflict
can take place directly. A thought can suppress a
feeling only by exciting another feeling which is in a
position to set aside the first.”
It follows from this that all “blame,” “praise” and
“punishment” are beside the mark, for if there is one
thing certain it is that a man cannot help his feelings
and emotions. We are easily misled and imposed on
by a word, it is high time to think out what “pun-
ishment” means. It if means revenge, then surely all
Christian nations will have none of it. If it does not
mean revenge, it is hard to say what it does mean. Its
origin, etymology, is the same poena, poin, I believe.
It is that; but then reasonless pain is revenge. If it
means improvement or reform, then narrow, dark cells,
and long, solitary hours do not spell that. On the con-
trary, they tend to made a man or woman morose
stupid, and, finally, mad.
I admit that some restraint is necessary at times
But we should never forget that “criminals” are pati-
ents really. It is well to remember also that we are all
criminal to some extent now. I suggest that prisoners
should live in cents, in company, be clothed in light
clotnmg, and fed on fruit and nuts. No man whe eats


me&t can lead a strictly moral life, ae prisoners are
supposed to do —even long sentence men.
A quixotic dream, you say ? Not at all. They will
be better and happier men for it, and may form healthy
habits of life they will continue when they come out.
And women and children should visit them, for kind-
nett, and to keep tuem sane. To live without the com-
cany of men, women or children, for any time, is dis-
tinctly injurious—even leads to insanity.
It follows also from Hoffding’s statement, that perver-
sions and peculiarities of character had to be traced to
their origin; which I have done. You cannot be too
kind to the criminal and fallen. They bear the brunt
of our battle to regain Paradise and Peace.
The first shall be last and the last first.
THB IND.
N.B.—The writer wants help to publish his larger,
complete work—the last word of Philosophy.
