

The
Bushman’s
Companion.




THE BUSHMAN’S
COMPANION.
a ibanOful of ibtnts for ©utbacfcers.
Prepared by
Rev. JOHN FLYNN,
Inland Superintendent of the Presbyterian
Church of Australia.
1916 EDITION.
Melbourne :
BROWN, PRIOR & CO.,
Presbyterian Church Printers,
165, 167, 171 Queen Street.
A
Published by
The Australian Inland Mission.
Gen. Secretary, Box 100, G.P.0., Sydney.


" To the stalwart men who are stoutly fighting
With the heat and the drought, and the dust-storm
smiting.
Yet whose life, somehow, has a strange inviting.
When once to the work they have put their hand.”


CONTENTS.
Open Letter to Bushmen, by the Editor .... 5
First Aid to the Injured 8
Bandaging 9
How to Stop Bleeding 11
What to do about Broken Bones .... 15
Dislocations, Sprains, Strains, etc 22
Unconsciousness, Fits, Sunstroke, &c. .. 23
How to Dress Wounds 27
What to do in Case of Snakebite, &c. .. 31
Drowning, Choking, &c 32
What to do in Case of Poisoning .... 34
About Trouble in Eye, Ear, and Nose .. ,35
How to Carry the Injured 35
Treatment for Common Sicknesses .. 39
Diets, &c. 42
Home Medicine Chest ' 43
Directions for Making Will 46
“ A Ramble Among Ideals ” 49
Our Mailbag Department 66
Some Selections from Scripture 69
Hymns 78
Prayers 89
A Form of Church Service for the Young .... 93
Service for the Burial of the Dead 97
Memoranda 102
Cash Account 106
Addresses 108
Postal Information 110
Calendar .. ‘lll




Open Letter to Bushmen.
By the Editor.
Comrades,
Some of you will look upon me as not altogether
a stranger, although we have met only once; but to
you all, known and unknown, let me extend the
heartiest of greetings.
After all, it is not necessary to have met face to
face to feel a sense of comradeship. We have a
mutual love of the bush, and along with that,
perhaps, a certain dread of it. If we have not shared
discomforts and joys shoulder to shoulder, we have
shared some of them, nevertheless, though widely
separated. I trust that we will share them further
occasionally in the future.
In helping to send forth this little handbook, I
would ask you to accept it in the spirit in which
it is offered. We do urge you to pass on any
benefits received to all who need them. For
there are so many gaps in out-back life—Material,
Medical, Social, Religious. Of those gaps, we pro-
fessed followers of the Christ have been all too long
more or less neglectful, but we do wish to see them
filled in so far as circumstances will allow. The
pioneers always have had, and always will have, a
very heavy burden, but they should at least be given
friendly cheers along the way, and practical ex-
pression of sympathy now and then.
This particular expression is feeble enough, but I
trust that it is good so far as it goes.
To all who agree in this, let me make an appeal.
Join hands to make it less feeble! Send along any
hints which you consider ought to be in the book.
Send along address of solitary bushmen, or groups
of bushmen, who you think would be glad to get the
“ Companion."


As to the information contained in the book—Do
practise First Aid before trouble comes! Make a
fad of it in every shearing hut and splitting camp!
Stopping the most dangerous bleeding in many cases
is mere child’s play. Then, dpn’t let it baffle you!
You need materials also. A, list of necessities
will be found later. Get them from the nearest
chemist. For the benefit of you who are remote from
towns, we hope later to arrange special help.
You who are so much alone, far away from many
social helps, have your own temptations, though
perhaps not more than others. The attempt has been
made to pass on a few ideals from various sources.
“Work out your own salvation!” Don’t be ashamed
to swim straight, even where the stream runs
crooked! Don’t cry, in words of H. Susman;—
“ My real life is that which I
Have never dared to lead.”
And, what’s more, don’t act this where you would be
ashamed to own it in words!
Some passages of Scripture have been included,
but only a few. Carry your own Bibles.
It is sad work including Form of Will and Burial
Service, but, alas! they may be needed all too soon!
The Order for a Children’s Service was not
originally intended, yet perhaps some day, some-
where, friends o'f bush children will be glad to
follow its leading.
Now, it has seemed that more might be attempted
to help the Out-backers. Your attention is specially
drawn to our Mailbag Department (see page 66)-
Please read all about it; think hard about it; and
"get a move on” about it, if a chance comes!
We seek no denominational glory; we welcome any
rivals in the field—God knows they are needed!—
but, meantime, while we appeal especially to Presby-
terians to help us, or let us help them, we extend
the same invitation to all unprovided for, and the
less religion you’ve got the gladder will we be to
hear from you.
I will look forward to letters giving suggestions
and information, and telling of your needs. If this
effort has helped you, help it to grow! The address


below will always do, as letters can be forwarded
at any time.
Then, while you wait, we at this end will try and
work out something further, striving to live in har-
mony with Bracken’s prayer—
“ O God, that men would draw a little nearer
To one another! Then they’d be nearer Thee,
And understood.”
Faithfully yours,
J. FLYNN.
Box 100, G.P.0., Sydney.
PREFACE TO A.I.M. EDITION, 1916.
Since this handbook was first published in 1910
by the Home Mission Committees of Victoria and
New South Wales a good deal of water has flowed
under the bridge.
From the Outbacker’s point of view one of the
chief events has been the foundation of the
Australian Inland Mission.
Much remains to be done, and perhaps this little
book will one day be bigger and more useful. Each
reader may help to make it so.
The Editor is always glad to receive suggestions,
which should be sent to the above address. He
thanks the many who are joining hands to help on
the men, women, and children of our frontiers.


First Aid.
BRIEF HINTS ON FIRST AID TO THE
INJURED.
Handy books for reference are—“ First Aid to the
Injured” (St. John’s Ambulance Association),
“First Aid” (St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association),
“ First Aid ” (Allman & Son), “ Elementary Bandag-
ing and Surgical Dressing” (Pye), “Home Nursing
and Hygiene” (St. John’s Ambulance Association).
INTRODUCTION.
The aim of this sketch is to provide mere jerky
hints of what to do in emergencies.
Remember, at the outset, that the body is, after
all, a machine. It has its power house, where fuel is
converted into energy; rods and cables, by which
that energy is applied; a signal system, by which
all is controlled; means for heating and cooling the
organism as circumstances demand; and necessary
provision for removal of waste.
But the body is the most delicate and mysterious
of machines, and on its satisfactory working depend
to a very large extent man’s efficiency, happiness,
and life itself.
From which facts it will follow:
1. Common-sense will not altogether fail when a
breakdown occurs. The man who can splint up the
shaft of a dray should surely be able to splint up a
broken leg! He will use different splints and band-
ages, and will pad everything in the most careful
way; but the main principle is really similar.
If a waterpipe bursts by chance in the back yard,
every man knows enough to walk out and turn off
the tap near the street main. Checking bleeding is
often almost as simple—yet every year many bleed
to death with crowds looking on!
2. Since the body is so delicate a machine, one
cannot be too careful in interfering with it. The
roughest amateur will not open his watch in a dusty
place, or with unclean hands. So in treating acci-
dents one must be almost ridiculously careful to se


cure surgical cleanliness, remembering that in earth,
air and water abound not only common dirt—which
is trifling enough, as it is visible—but germs innum-
erable and unseen, which set up festering, blood-
poisoning, or even lockjaw.
Further, while every thoughtful man will strive to
render assistance in emergency, and even endeavour
to learn how to carry a case forward for several days,
if necessary, he will insist on qualified medical
attendance at the earliest possible moment.
Some unfortunates, on finding that an amateur can
relieve them, are ready to trust him with their very
lives. This is very flattering indeed, but—beware!
Your scanty smattering of knowledge of the real
state of affairs will, if you are true, compel you to
obtain immediate expert treatment.
It is likely, however, that some of these books will
one day be looked into for guidance in a spot where
no trained skill is obtainable for weeks, and so the
doctor who assisted in the preparation of these notes
has added a few directions not usual in “ First Aid,”
which may give ease to distant sufferers, and per-
haps even save life. May you be delivered from such
desperate cases; but if they do come about, God
speed your effort!
BANDAGING.
The general “ field ” bandage is the triangular
bandage, which is used for all kinds of work. This
bandage is simply made. Get a strip of calico, 28 or
30 inches wide; mark off 4ft. 6in. along the selvedge
edge, and cut in at angle of 45 degrees (see Fig. 1).
By cutting out a number of bandages from the same
strip, waste is avoided.
(Sometimes direction is given to cut a square of
calico diagonally; this is useless, as the long side
thus obtained will never stand the strain.)
FIG. 1.


The bandage is used open for various applica-
tions, especially the “ large ” annsling.
FIG. 2.
“Large” Armsling.
FIG. 3.
For injuries to scalp, temple and jawl
FIG. 4—For scalp wounds.
To fold, bring point (right angle corner) down
to middle of long side. Then double for broad
bandage—used as “ small ” armsling, for bandaging


trunk of body, &c.—or fold into three for narrow
bandage for general use.
Most applications of this bandage can be worked
out with a little practice. We give three illustrations
here, which can be followed without explanation.
HOW TO STOP BLEEDING.
Blood flows from the heart through the arteries,
which “ pump ” it along by pulse movement. The
arteries end in tiny capillaries, through which the
blood enters the veins. The vein lead back to the
heart, and have no pulse movement.
Bleeding is generally from capillaries, and often
small veins will be cut. A cut artery is very danger-
ous, as the flow of blood is so strong. As a rule,
in this case, the blood is “jerked” out by pulse
movement; but, if wound is deep, the jerk may not
be noticeable,
TREATMENT.
A—lf bleeding be not very troublesome, but too
strong to stop after ordinary bathing with cold
water—
(l) Make a “ pad ” of size to cover wound well.
(Fold a handkerchief corners to centre several times
till good thick pad results; or fold very clean cloth
to make a nice square pad covering wound; over
this lay several other pads, each a little larger than
the one below.)
(2) Tie down firmly.
(3) If wound is on limb, raise that limb to ease
pressure of blood.
B—Where bleeding is serious, the artery must be
checked.
(1) At once stop artery by hand between wound
and heart, at nearest “ get-at able ” point to wound
(see below).
(2) Still keeping your grip, get others to bring
bandages, stick for lever, and firm pad. Then apply
“ twitch ” to take the place of your hand on artery.
N.B.—On no account let go your grip until the
twitch is safely fixed. A bad case of bleeding may
cause death in less than five minutes. In any case,
loss of blood brings on severe shock.
(3) Dress wound.
N.B. —Wounds are often treacherous; e.g., gun
explosion wounds seldom bleed much at the time;
11
FIRST AID TO THE INJURED.


FIG. 5.


but bleeding may commence some hours later, per-
haps while patient is sleeping. Keep a watch over the
patient!
Figure 5 shows the course of main arteries, and
marks the points where they may be “ cut out.”
The two points by far most important are at the
biceps (1) and in the thigh (2).
Every child over seven years—and certainly every
grown man—should know these 13 points like his
A B C.
Bleeding drill once a month at “ turn in ” would
save many a life.
Following this sketch alone, half-an-hour’s feeling
round will show how to control all ordinary arterial
bleeding.
HINTS FOR “ BLEEDING PRACTICE.”
(1) Get whole party arranged in threes—A,
“dummy;” B, “doctor;” C, “judge.”
(2) A now strips to waist; C takes A’s wrist and
finds pulse (3 or 4); B works round until he can
grip artery at point 1. C can say when he finds it,
because pulse instantly stops. If there is any doubt
it can soon be settled by B gripping and letting go
in turn. The pulse will be perfectly under control
once the right grip is obtained.
(3) “ Shuffle class till each has passed as
“ doctor” on point 1.
(4) Practice putting on “ twitch ” at 1.
(5) Practice finding 5 and 8, which are both tested
by pulse at 3 or 4.
(6) Find pulse at 9, 10, 12. There is no test for
this. Just find where the pulse is. It is simply a
case of pressing to stop the artery.
(7) Above will probably be enough for one drill.
Next time C finds pulse at 6. B “ cuts out ” artery
at 2, then at 7 and 11. Practice twitch on 2.
NOTES.
(1) It will be well at first to practice on a “dummy”
who has not too much flesh, and a good strong pulse.
Later on take someone who has big muscles, among
which the artery may not be so easily found.
(2) Point 1 lies along line of inner seam of coat,
half-way from elbow to shoulder. 2 is easily found
after 1.
5 lies just inside collar bone. Ram the thumb into


natural hollow there, so as to press against top of
ribs. Artery will be squeezed between—if you touch
the spot. 11 lies deep also in the groin. These two
holds (and also 13), if ever seriously needed, have to
be kept entirely by hand. Only most elaborate
apparatus could meet such awkward cases. 9 lies
half-way along jaw. 10 is easily found at temple.
12 and 13 are both deep down.
7 and 8 are very simple. By bending limb slightly,
ramming in a firm pad, then “trussing up” tightly,
a complete stopping of artery is obtained. The result
is somewhat clumsy, however, and may interfere
with dressing of wound.
(3) It will already have been seen that in each
case method is to find artery at point where it
passes over a bone, and apply firm pressure there.
(4) For twitch use a bandage not too narrow. A
rounded stone or a cork makes an excellent pad.
Be careful not to pinch flesh in twisting up the lever.
Fig. 6 will best explain how twitch is applied.
Note.—A twitch (or “ turniquet,” as it is technic-
ally called) is always more or less painful. After
half-ap-hour it may be eased somewhat, but do not
take it off until all danger is past. The moment
bleeding threatens to recommence twist up tight
again.
FIG. 6.


WHAT TO DO ABOUT BROKEN BONES.
ROUGH RULES FOR ALL CASES.
1. Make three sections permanently still—broken
bone and joint each side; otherwise movement in
neighbouring joint is sure to displace afresh the
broken bone, causing pain and further harm.
2. Always have padding of some kind under splints.
3. If not sure, treat as a break. Rest is the
natural condition of cure for most injuries to muscle
or bone, and splints are often necessary when the
former only is damaged.
4. Don’t go feeling about too much to make sure
of a break. It isn’t safe.
5. Don’t move patient at all until temporary splints
have been applied. If you do, the ends of broken
bone arc almost certain to cut into surrounding
muscles. They may even penetrate a blood-vessel,
or cut through skin.
KINDS OF BREAK (OF “FRACTURE”).
1. Simple: bone only.
2. Complicated: broken bone has punctured
artery, lung, &c.
3. Compound: skin is broken at break, leaving an
open wound.
Note.—Careless handling often converts 1 into 2
or 3.
SIGNS OF BREAK.
1. Loss of power.
2. Pain.
3. “ Kink ” in limb.
4. Shortening of limb through broken pieces of
bone overlapping.
5. Swelling.
SPLINTS.
Anything stiff and long enough for three sections,
as explained above.
A flat splint is better than a round one, such as
broom-handle, &c.
For small breaks, the best splint is a strip of per-
forated zinc bent to fit round limb, for it combines
perfect fit and ventilation.


A folded newspaper is excellent, also stout card-
board, strip of bark, &c.
If nothing can be obtained, bind broken limb to the
other leg or body, as the case may be.
BANDAGES.
Anything that will tie or buckle. If soft and fairly
broad, so much the better. String and rope should
be used only as a last resource; they cut into the
flesh so as to cause pain and interfere with the
circulation.
FOREARM.
Forearm has two bones. When one only is broken,
signs may not be quite so evident, but they will be
there.
TREATMENT IN ALL CASES.
1. Bend forearm at right angles to arm across
body, palm in, thumb up.
3. Apply one splint inside, stretching from elbow
to fingers; one in front, elbow to back of hand. Bind
with three bandages. Rest in large sling (see Fig.
2).
BONE OF HAND (one or more).
1. Place in palm a pad, e.g., small book.
2. Bend fingers round it, and bind hand securely.
3. Place in,large arm-sling.
BONE IN FINGER.
Gently draw finger into position.
1. Apply narrow splint to front, and bind with tape.
(If several fingers are broken, treat each separately.)
3. Bind hand flat down on suitable wide splint.
3. Place in large arm-sling.
SHOULDER BLADE.
1. Apply broad bandage round body over blade,
and close up to armpits. Tie in front towards sound
side.
2. Put arm on injured side in large sling.
Ring in the valiant man and free,
The larger heart, the kindlier hand;


ARM (Upper).
(a) If break is close to shoulder joint;
Apply broad bandage with centre above middle of
arm; carry round body, and tie at other side. Put
forearm in small sling (as in Fig, 7).
(b) When break is near middle of arm;
Apply one splint in front and one behind; bind
firmly. Put forearm in small sling, supporting it
near wrist (Fig. 7).
(This gives a downward drag at elbow, and tends
to keep broken ends from overlapping through con-
traction of muscles.)
(c) When break is near elbow:
(1) Make a right-angle splint with two flat pieces
of wood nailed or bound together like a carpenter’s
“square,” one piece long enough to reach from arm-
pit to elbow, and the other from elbow to tips of
fingers.
(2) Lay this in front of arm bent across body as
before, and bind with two bandages for each section.
(3) Place in large arm-sling (see Fig 2).
Ring out the darkness of the land,
Ring in the Christ that is to be.
FIG. 7.


FRACTURE OF SKULL.
SPECIAL SIGNS POSSIBLY PRESENT.
Blood or clear fluid running from ear or nose.
Eyes discoloured. Blood vomited after having run
from nose into stomach.
TREATMENT.
1. Send for doctor.
3. Place patient in easy position to breathe, and
undo any tight clothing.
3. If delay is likely in arrival of doctor, carry
indoors, and apply cold water pad to head.
4. Don’t give anything by mouth if insensible.
BROKEN LOWER JAW.
SIGNS.
Patient may be dumb.
1. Place palm of hand beneath, press gently against
jaw.
2. Tie up with narrow bandage (Fig. 3).
A better bandage in this case is applied as follows;
Take a strip of strong calico, about a yard long and
4 inches wide. Split this from both ends, but leave
about 4 inches untouched at half-way. This makes
what is known as the “fourtailed bandage.” Apply
the middle of this bandage to point of jaw, carry
back pair of tails over top of head, and tie, then carry
front pair behind head, cross, and tie over forehead.
BROKEN RIB.
SPECIAL SIGNS.
Breathing short and painful; bright frothy blood
may be coughed up if lung is pierced.
TREATMENT.
(a) When lung is not injured.
1. Bind chest firmly with two broad bandages over-
lapping so that half the width of each will be over
broken rib. Tie at back towards opposite side of
body. This prevents movement of ribs during
breathing, and so eases pain considerably.
18
THE BUSHMAN’S COMPANION.


2. Put arm on injured side into a large sling.
(b) When lung is injured:
Lay patient on back inclined a little towards in-
jured side, so as to give more play to sound half of
lungs; loosen clothing; give sips of coldest water,
failing ice to suck. Apply cold over break.
FRACTURE OF COLLAR BONE.
SPECIAL SIGNS.
Arm on injured side is partly helpless; head may
lean to injured side; shoulder drops and inclines
inwards.
1. Carefully remove coat, sound side first.
2. Place pad about size of an egg in armpit; bend
up forearm, keeping elbow well back. Apply large
arm-sling as in Fig. 8, so as to leave broken collar-
bone quite clear of any pressure. This is of special
importance where a wound is present.
3. Tie bandage round body to keep elbow close in
(see dotted line).
Principle Sling lifts drooping shoulder to proper
level. Pad acts as a fulcrum, and so body bandage,
in pressing elbow in, forces shoulder out into natural
position again.
FIG. 8.
19
FIRST AID TO THE INJURED.


BROKEN BACK.
Do nothing. If no hope of doctor in reasonable
time, remove to shelter. Get 4 bearers and rigid
stretcher. Use the most extreme care. (See under
“ Carrying the Injured.”)
BREAK OF PELVIS (Haunch Bone).
SIGNS. '
No ordinary signs of deformity as a rule. Great
pain on pressing hips together. Patient unable to
stand or even move legs.
Great danger of injuring internal organs, especially
bladder. There may be blood in urine.
TREATMENT.
1. Place in easiest position.
2. Bind (tight enough to support, but not more
than that) with broad bandage round hips.
3. Bend or straighten legs according to comfort.
4. If necessary to remove, use extreme care.
BROKEN THIGH.
(Sometimes a bad bruising of the hip is mistaken
for a broken thigh. It patient can lift heel slightly
while lying on his back, there is no break. Even so,
however, if necessary to remove, apply a splint full
length of body.
Two or three helpers are desirable.
1. Gently draw feet into line—broken leg is often
shortened. Let one man now keep feet in this posi-
tion until bandaging is finished.
2. Place long splint to reach from armpit to a little
below the foot.
3. Place shorter splint, reaching from fork to
knee, on inner side of leg.
4. Bandage up (compare Fig. 9).
N.B.—(a) A deal is often said about using brooms,
guns, &c„ for a long splint in case of this break.
Give them a wide berth if you can —far too “wobbly.”
Use a nice width of paling: if slightly warped, so
much the better.
(b) If single-handed, begin by binding feet to-
gether, and don’t trouble about inside splint.
Why say Christianity is a failure? It has never yet been tried.


BROKEN KNEECAP.
SIGNS.
Limb helpless; can be felt generally.
TREATMENT.
1. Place patient on back, head and shoulders
raised, and comfortably supported.
2. Raise leg slightly, and keep it raised. Place
splint underneath, from hip to heel.
3. Lay bandage over leg above kneecap; cross
undernjath splint; bring up and tie below kneecap.
(This tends to work broken parts together.) A
second bandage may be placed in same way, but
starting below kneecap.
4. Bind splint also at thigh and foot.
BROKEN LEG.
SIGNS.
If shin-bone is broken, it can generally be felt. If
one bone only, there may not be any shortening.
TREATMENT.
1. Get feet into line.
2. Apply spints: outside, from hip to below foot;
inside, from knee down. Bind as in Fig. 9.
(If single-handed, tie feet at first, and omit inside
splint, as in case of thigh.)
BROKEN BONES OF FOOT.
TREATMENT.
Make a kind of “ square,” with long board (say, 3
inches wide), to go behind leg; shorter piece to fit
below foot, and a “ brace ” to keep firm.
Bind foot and leg carefully on this support.
Before honour gocth humility.
FIG. 9.
21
FIRST AID TO THE INJURED.


DISLOCATIONS.
1. Don’t on any account attempt to put things
fight.
2. Severe sickening pain.
3. Joint is rigid. (Break generally gives extra
movement).
TREATMENT.
SIGNS.
1. “ Kink ” and swelling.
2. Bind carefully and gently, so as to prevent
further distortion, and carry indoors.
3. Once inside, make as comfortable as possible
with cushions.
4. Apply cold to joint.
5. When this fails to ease, change to warmth.
SPRAINS.
SIGNS.
Severe pain; limb crippled; swelling and bruising.
TREATMENT.
If ankle, as is most common, don’t remove boot
if away from house.
1. Pass bandage below foot, cross over instep, and
tie firmly behind ankle. If possible, now wet the
bandage, to tighten.
2. (Having reached shelter.) Remove boot and
stocking carefully, cutting away if necessary,
3. Make as comfortable as possible. Apply cold
until it ceases to relieve, then change to heat. Bran
poultice may be used.
Sprains in other joints are treated much the same
as dislocation in first stage.
STRAINS.
SIGNS.
Sharp, sudden pain at the time. If in back, patient
may be unable to stand straight or breathe without
suffering. In a limb, cramping pains may follow.
; r '' TREATMENT.
Make as. comfortable as possible. Apply hot
fomentations, &c., if pain is too severe.
Christ leaves mystery, but He does remove mockery.


UNCONSCIOUSNESS.
GENERAL TREATMENT.
1. Stop any bleeding.
2. Send for doctor.
3. Lay in best position to breathe—as a rule, on
the back.
4. Undo tight clothing at neck, chest and waist.
Keep crowd away.
5. If face is pale, keep head low. If flushed, raise.
6. Don’t leave patient.
7. If pulse is very feeble, or absent altogether,
and if patient is able to swallow, give stimulant—
half-teaspoon of sal volatile or teaspoon of brandy
in wineglass of water. If pulse is fairly strong,
give no stimulant.
SHOCK AFTER ACCIDENTS, &c.
SIGNS.
Cold, perhaps shivering; skin pale and clammy;
pulse and breathing weak; temperature low. Patient
may be conscious or delirious; very quiet or very
restless.
TREATMENT.
At once get to bed. Use hot flannels and hot
water bottles. If conscious, give hot milk or tea.
(Be careful to wrap hot bottles well to prevent
burns, especially if patient is unconscious.)
APOPLEXY.
Generally victim is elderly.
Cause: Blood vessel burst on brain.
SIGNS.
Insensibility; full, slow pulse; loud puffing
breathing; unequal pupils in eyes; skin pallid; one
side of body limp, other ordinary.
TREATMENT.
1. Loosen all clothing; see to fresh air.
2. Raise head slightly; apply cold to it.
3. Keep feet warm with hot bottles or mustard
plaster, &c. (Be very careful not to burn.)
4. Give nothing by mouth.
Anything worth rises into heights of mystery.
23
FIRST AID TO THE INJURED.


CONCUSSION OF BRAIN.
SIGNS.
Insensibility; weak pulse; pupils fixed, and gene-
rally equal; breathing shallow.
TREATMENT.
Same as apoplexy.
COMPRESSION OF BRAIN.
(May develop after simple concussion.)
Cause; Either skull forced in, or internal bleeding
m brain.
SIGNS.
Unconsciousness; pulse slow, strong; loud breath-
ing; unequal pupils, fixed if bad case.
TREATMENT,
Same as apoplexy.
PHYSICAL COLLAPSE FROM ALCOHOL.
Such cases as a rule are in those weak for want of
proper food. They may be caused by a very small
quantity of drink.
SIGNS.
Similar in the main to apoplexy; but—
(a) Pulse is weak instead of full.
(b) Skin is pale and pinched.
N.B. —Smell of alcohol in unconscious person is
not necessarily a sign of this trouble, as people with
ordinary faintness coming on so often take stimulant.
TREATMENT.
1. Usual preliminaries for insensibility.
2. Warm bed, hot flannels, &c. Rub down.
3. When roused, give warm tea or coffee.
4. When pulse is strong again, give an emetic (say
dessertspoon of mustard in tumbler of warm water).
5. (Later) Beef tea, soup, &c. (If brandy, very
slight doses).
If his heart at high floods
Swamped his brain now and then.


DELIRIUM TREMENS
is a state of insanity produced by the action of
poisoning by alcohol.
SYMPTOMS.
1. Sleeplessness.
2. Aversion to food.
3. Craving for more drink.
4. Feeling of terror.
5. Visions of live insects and animals which
threaten to attack the patient.
6. In terror the patient, to avoid the horrors which
threaten him, will sometimes run amok or kill him-
self.
TREATMENT.
1. Cut off all alcohol.
2. Give coffee and tea and food in liquid form.
3. Cold to the head.
4. Keep bowels free with salts.
5. Keep patient warm and in bed.
6. Do not leave a D.T. patient alone for one
minute.
EPILEPSY.
SIGNS.
Sudden fall; insensibility and convulsions; pupils
equal and large; face pale at first; then darkness;
may be froth at mouth and nostrils; danger of
tongue being bitten.
TREATMENT.
1. General.
2. Drag into open; kneel and support head.
3. Wrap, say, a knife in cloth, and hold between
teeth to save tongue.
4. Steady convulsions, but allow body to play fairly
freely, else muscles may be injured internally.
5. Give nothing by mouth.
6. (Afterwards). See to rest and sleep.
’Twas but richer for that
When the tide ebbed again.


FAINTING.
SIGNS.
Paleness; giddiness; feeble pulse and breath; sight
blurred; collapse.
(If noticed in time, and in room, bend down
patient till head is between knees. Sometimes this
will in a few minutes restore strength enough to
walk out to air.)
TREATMENT.
1. General.
2. Lay patient on couch or form, with head falling
a little lower than body; raise feet a little.
3. Fan; smelling salts to nose.
4. After a few minutes, carry out to air, whether
recovered or not.
SUNSTROKE OR HEATSTROKE.
SIGNS.
Sudden sickness; faintness; giddiness; difficult
breathing; thirst; dry skin; flushed face; quick pulse;
may pass into insensibility, with loud breathing,
and end in collapse.
TREATMENT.
1. Strip to waist; take to coolest spot; fan vigo-
rously; keep lying down, with head and shoulders
well raised; keep pouring cold water on head and
shoulders; use cold even for some hours after con-
scious again.
2. Allow only cold water to drink. On no account
give stimulants.
CASES STRUCK BY LIGHTNING (AND ANY
ELECTRIC SHOCK).
TREATMENT.
1. General.
2. Flick face and chest with cold wet towel,
3. Artificial breathing, as for drowning,
4. Treat burns, if any.
He who builds according to every man’s advice will have a
crooked house.


HYSTERICS.
In young girls as a rule.
SIGNS.
Patient gets into comfortable position, then begins
laughing, crying, kicking, and generally “ letting her-
self go.” Eyeballs may be turned upward; froth
may appear at mouth; not properly unconscious.
TREATMENT.
1. Be very firm; if threats fail, flood with cold
water.
2. Afterwards see that a doctor is consulted, with-
out long delay. Something is wrong.
CONVULSIONS IN CHILDREN.
SIGNS.
Spasms; face livid; insensibility; breath suspended;
sometimes froth at mouth.
TREATMENT.
Place up to waist in bath warmed up to body heat.
Put cold sponge on top of head. When conscious,
give dose of castor oil.
HOW TO DRESS WOUNDS.
If far afield without any supplies, a clean sheet of
paper (say, an opened envelope, inside against
wound) may be laid over wound, and bound down
with any bandage which may be more or less soiled.
Then make for home.
1. Wash in water that has been boiled and allowed
to cool. Add to water permanganate of potash (half-
teaspoon to pint) or boracic acid (three teaspoons
to pint) or carbolic acid (1 in 40). Parts around
wound to be washed with soap and water. After-
wards, it is a good plan to mop all round with
whisky.
2. Dust wound with boracic acid.
3. Apply a few fold,? of lint, wet or dry, as desired
(fluffy side away from wound). Lay over all a pad
of cotton wool, and bandage up.
4. Keep part still. If arm, use sling; sometimes
a splint will be needed.
It ain’t never no use puttin’ up ycr umbrell’ till it rains.
27
FIRST AID TO THE INJURED.


NOTES.
1. Always wash your own hands, and attend to
nails most carefully before commencing. Give final
rinse in water and antiseptic as for washing wound.
2. Never let new cloth touch a wound. If lint is
not available, use old cloth which has been carefully
washed, and afterwards boiled.
3. If there is any doubt about the dressings, place
them in a hot oven for half an hour before using.
4. Don’t touch dressings with the hand, except at
extreme edge.
If blood has crusted over wound, do not disturb
it unless you know wound to be dirty.
BRUISES.
Cold water dressings. Raw meat is as good—but
not even a little bit better. Keep it for internal use.
SPECIAL TREATMENT FOR WOUNDS.
Clean cut wounds may be drawn together with
plaster, after being thoroughly cleansed.
FIG. 10.
Best way is: 1. Cut pieces of plaster, as many
pairs as may be required (see Fig. 10). 2. Stick
down one end of either “ mate ” in each pair very
carefully, and see that they get well warmed, so
as to grip properly. 3. Gently pull loose ends jf
pairs, so as to draw edges. of wound together.
When they meet, smooth down plaster carefully.
If properly put on, plaster will hold 3 to 5 days,
by which time wound will be healed enough to do
without support.
To the wise, the way of life goeth upward.


Result should give bars of plaster across wound,
each about one-eighth of an inch wide, with equal
open space between.
(A wound must never be closed up with a big
sheet of plaster. Leave ample spaces for discharge.)
WOUNDS MUCH TORN.
Such wounds seldom bleed much at first, but they
frequently begin to bleed hours after, sometimes
seriously. Always watch such cases carefully for
first half-day,
N.B.—Needles, bullets, fishhooks and shot must
always be left for a professional man to extract.
FROSTBITE.
Patient must be rubbed into circulation and feeling
with soft snow before being allowed into a warm
room. Neglect of this precaution may cost him a
limb. 60 deg. Fahr. is as warm as is safe even then.
BURNS AND SCALDS.
1. Cut away clothing. If foot, cut boot down back,
after unlacing; cut stocking away also.
2. At once cover up all burnt part from air.
(a) If only reddened, dust thickly with flour, bind
down with cotton wool, and make as comfortable as
possible.
(b) If blistered or charred, soak lint in oil (olive,
salad, linseed, cod liver, vaseline, etc.), and apply.
Don’t use one large piece for large burn, but manv
narrow strips (reason, see below). Cover as before
(a), with cotton wool or flannel.
If face is burned, cut out eye-holes, etc., to make
a mask of lint; soak in oil, and apply. Then cover
as much as possible with cotton wool, as before.
NOTES.
1. If hand or foot, place in warm water while
dressings are being prepared. A dessertspoon of
baking soda to the basin soothes the burn.
2. In changing dressing of large burn, follow on
with fresh strips as you remove the old. The main
thing is never to expose a burn to the air a single
moment longer than necessary.
Best is Best.


3. Every burn of any size causes severe shock.
See that whole body is kept warm. Give warm
drinks (see Shock).
4. Even slight burns on the neck are dangerous.
TWO PRECAUTIONS WORTH WHILE.
1. Every house should have in handy place a bottle
of “ Carron oil.” This is simply made by mixing
equal parts of olive oil (or linseed) and lime water.
Have at least a pint.
Better still is 1 per cent, solution of picric acid;'
soak lint in the solution, and apply it at blood heat.
2. Every girl and woman should know what to do
if dress catches fire.
Drop on floor at once.
Scream for help.
Roll on the burning clothing.
Seize table cover, hearthrug, or anything handy,
and smother flames. Hundreds of lives have been
lost by victims rushing out into the open air.
If one woman goes to help another on fire, she
must be careful to hold a rug or blanket in front
of her own dress.
WOUNDS OF THE LUNG.
Caused often by broken rib.
SIGNS.
Breathing difficult; shock; pain in chest; spitting
of frothy, bright red blood.
Bleeding may be into cavity of chest. Signs—
pallor; slow breath; eyesight blurred; pulse weak;
yawning; delirium and unconsciousness.
TREATMENT.
1. Don’t bandage ribs in such a case, or you may
drive broken end further in.
2. Lay patient on back, head low; give cold water
(or ice) to drink. Apply cold water to wound, and
dress the same.
3. See that there is good circulation of cool air.
Don’t stop the plough to catch a mouse 1


WOUNDS OF ABDOMEN.
TREATMENT.
1. If vertical, lay patient flat, with legs straight.
Cover wound with dry lint, and bandage round body
fairly tight.
2. If across, bend up knees and raise shoulders.
Apply pad, etc., as before.
3. If intestines, etc., are projecting, bend knees and
raise shoulders. Wring out lint, etc., in warm water,
and spread over. Keep warm till doctor arrives.
Amateurs can do practically nothing in abdominal
injuries.
Stomach. —Lay on back. Apply cold to pit of
stomach. Give nothing by mouth.
Liver. —Signs; Great pain and swelling; signs of
internal bleeding (see lung). Lay on right side.
Apply cold externally, and give a little to sip.
Intestines. —Keep quiet, and lying on back. Apply
flannel to abdomen. Give nothing by mouth.
Kidneys and Bladder. —Hot fomentations, and
quiet.
Rupture. —Apply hot foments for 20 minutes, and
then suddenly apply cold. Have patient lying on,
back, with head end of body low and leg end high,
to allow bowel to gravitate back into abdominal
cavity.
SNAKE BITE.
Have a Lauder-Bruntort Lancet for every vest
pocket. Keep a length of tape wrapped round it.
1. Without delaying a fraction of a second—(a) in
case of leg or arm, put a twitch on upper arm or
thigh, as the case may be. (Forearm and leg have
each two bones. Blood might pass between these
two bones where pressure of twitch cannot reach
effectively. Remember, twitch is simple in this case
—not with a pad to stop artery only, as in stoppage
of bleeding. All blood must be kept from returning
to the heart.)
(b) If finger, put twitch on joint against hand.
Don’t chop it off!
(c) If face or body, pinch up round bite.
2. Quickly examine bite. Poisonous snakes make
two punctures, though fangs may drag and make
Ignorance costs more than education.


scratches. Non-poisonous snakes may make 6 or 8
punctures.
3. If bite is of a poisonous snake, which is most
likely, stab in with knife all round bite. Quarter of
an inch will be deep enough.
4. Suck for dear life. Do not swallow any blood.
5. Rub in permanganate of potash, moistened with
a very little pure water.
6. Start off for doctor, if within reach at all. Take
patient to him.
7. After half an hour, ease ligature, and promote
circulation for three or four minutes. Repeat this
every twenty minutes for a couple of hours, then
throw off altogether.
8. Don’t allow patient to sleep, but don’t use tiring
methods to gain this end, such as running up and
down.
9. Stimulants may be used. Best is black coffee,
very strong.
Dr. Tidswell, of Sydney Board of Health, says:—■
“ The result in 190 cases about which definite infor-
mation was obtainable gave these results:—Deaths
from death adder, 50 per cent.; tiger snake, 45 per
cent.; brown snake, 18 per cent.; black snake, no
death from 87 cases.”
Fatal cases may linger less than three hours, but
sometimes last as long as three days.
BITES FROM BEES AND “BEASTIES”
GENERALLY.
TREATMENT,
1. Remove sting.
2. Mop freely with liquid ammonia, alcohol, blue-
bag.
In serious case, as when a swarm of bees has been
at work, stimulants may be given with fair freedom.
DROWNING.
There is hope for cases under wafer for even
quarter of an hour.
As to treatment. We cannot do better than quote
“The Argus” on the Schaefer system as used by the
surf bathers at Manly Beach;—
“A dozen plans for the recovery of people who are
apparently drowned have been suggested with infi-
“ An outside saint and a fireside devil ”•


nite detail as to getting the water out of the lungs
and restoring warmth to the body, but they can all
be narrowed down into the simple modern method
known as the Schaefer system. A very slight know-
ledge of physiology shows us that the best way of
warming the body is to restore the fleeting breath.
The lungs and heart, in their subtle mechanism, their
perfect chemistry, do all the rest—so that to rub the
body, to force spirits down the throat, to do the
score of things that convention has impressed upon
us for generations, is just waste of time until breath
has been given back. It is very simple, the Schaefer
plan, and yet in the first treatment of critical cases
it does all that is required. You just place the
patient face downwards, his arms extended outward
and upward at an angle of 45 deg. from the shoulder,
and turn the head slightly to one side, so that the
mouth is open and free to breathe. In that attitude,
don’t trouble about the tongue. It drops forward
into its natural position, and does not clog the wind-
pipe. Then get behind the patient, place your palms
open and widespread over the elastic lower ribs of
the body, the thumbs a few inches apart, and close
to the backbone. Press downward and forward with
the whole weight of your body, gently and firmly,
and the elastic ribs are squeezed inward against the
lungs. The first motion frees them of water, because
with the body in that position there is natural down-
ward drainage from the lungs to the mouth. When
you have pressed the ribs in, release the pressure
suddenly, so that they spring back again into their
natural position. Count up to four fairly quickly,
and then apply the pressure again. Keep on in this
way till you have reached twelve pressures, then
rest for ten seconds, and go on again. Don’t give
up for an hour at least. (Cases have succeeded even
after two hours’ work.) There may be still a spark
of life flickering under your hands—a human soul
on the edge of eternity. So simple a plan cannot be
too widely known, because a resolute boy can apply
it to the strongest man; but, if a woman is under
treatment, it is just as well to loosen some of the
tight clothing about the waist and chest.”
B
Have you met him?


Not till after breathing is restored must circulation
be thought of. Then place patient in dry, warm
blankets. Rub limbs well, always towards the heart.
Use hot bottles, etc. Give hot coffee, etc. Hot poul-
tices on chest, front and back, may assist breath-
ing. Patient must be watched carefully for some
time. Breathing may fail, and call for another course
of “pumping.”
CHOKING.
TREATMENT.
Open mouth, even if force is needed.
Try and clear by passing forefinger right to back
of throat. This may cause vomiting, which is a
good thing. Failing this, thump back hard between
the shoulders, with head bent forward.
Patient may be unconi cious before obstruction is
cleared. If so, proceed as in case of apparently
drowned.
POISONING.
1. At once give milk, which clots in stomach, and
may enclose poison. A couple of beaten up raw
eggs may be added to the milk.
3. Give a little vegetable or animal oil.
3. Unless lips and mouth are stained and burnt by
acids, &c., give an emetic-
fa) A dessertspoonful of mustard in a mmbler of
luke-warm water.
(b) A tablespoonful of salt in same water.
(c) Tickle back of throat with finger or feather.
4. Afterwards, more milk and egg may be given,
with a little oil. Then give very strong tea.
5. If lips and mouth are stained, give no emetic,
but do all the rest.
6. If acid has been swallowed, give a soda, and
if an alkali has been taken, give an acid.
7. Treat for shock, if necessary. Dont allow sleep.
N. 8.—1. In all cases vomited matter, and anything
suspected of containing the poison, should be pre-
served for inspection by expert.
2. In case of phosphorus poisoning, give no oil.
Wisdom is too high for a fool.


3. If breathing threatens to cease, treat as in
drowning.
N.B.—Put tinned food on a plate as soon as tin is
opened. Tinned foods, on account of their pro-
longed boiling, most rapidly become affected with
ptomaine germs. Do not eat any tinned food which
Has been opened for more than a couple of hours.
FOREIGN MATTER IN EYE.
1. Don’t allow patient to rub. If child, tie hands
when necessary.
2. If under lower eyelid, simply pull down and
remove with corner of handkerchief.
3. If under upper eyelid—
(a) Lift upper lid and pull down; push lower lid
up underneath. Then let go, and lower lashes
may sweep out the grit. Try this several times if
first is not a success
(b) If (a) does not succeed in the end, and no
doctor is available, place quill (or slate pencil, &c.)
on eyelid; catch lashes, and roll back, so as to ex-
pose the inside of lid. Grit may then be seen as a
rule.
In case of bit of steel, etc., being embedded in eye—
1. Drop in a little olive or castor oil.
2. Place pad of cotton wool over closed eye, and
bind gently, but firmly enough to keep eyeball
steady. Then take case to doctor.
FOREIGN BODY IN EAR.
If an insect, fill ear with oil, and visitor will prob-
ably float out.
Syringe ear, but do not probe.
FOREIGN BODY IN NOSE.
Blow violently. Use snuff or pepper. There is no
immediate danger.
CARRYING THE INJURED.
Space forbids lengthy explanations. -
WITHOUT STRETCHER.
One bearer.—We give illustration of the “ Fire-
man’s Grip.” (Fig. 11.) Work it out on an uninjured
friend (or enemy) until you can pick him up and set
Where there is no vision, the people cast off restraint.
35
FIRST AID TO THE INJURED,


him down again without jolt. By this method it is
simple to carry a man more than your own weight, but
picking him up from the ground is a task at first.
FIG. 11.
Two bearers. —Face; clasp hands on one side;
fondle one another's necks with the other pair of
hands. Patient thus has seat and back, and easily
takes his place when you stoop.
(A four-handed seat may be used if patient has use
■of his arms to support himself. To make it, bearers
face; each grasps his own left wrist with his right
hand, then the other’s right wrist with his left hand.)
WITH STRETCHER.
Usual bush bunk of two bags on poles is excellent.
A rough substitute may be made by pushing poles
Better is open rebuke than love that is hidden.


through sleeves of a couple of buttoned-up coats
(with sleeves turned inside), but it is-on!y a poor sub-
stitute. Much better to unhinge a door, if one is near.
NOTES ON CARRYING.
1. Always test your stretcher with someone who
can stand a fall before using with patient.
2. Unless you are experts, always practise picking
up the" injured with a sound man before attempting
the serious task.
3. Never carry stretcher on shoulders—too rough.
4. Carry feet foremost, except when on a slope.
In such a case, keep injured end “up.”
5. Be very careful at fences and ditches to avoid
jolts and upendings; same in placing stretcher in
vehicle.
6. Keep “odd” step; i.e., front man, right foot
forward; back man, left foot forward. (Get in
stretcher while odd and even ways are tried, and
reason will be apparent.)
FIG. 12.
TO PLACE PATIENT ON OR OFF
STRETCHER.
Two bearers. —Very useful in mines. Work out
from illustration. Shuffle gently in moving forward.
The man with a new idea is a crank—until the idea succeeds.


FIG. 13.
With three bearers (Fig. 13):
1. Place stretcher alongside patient.
2. AH three kneel on opposite side. See that knees
are so placed as to take weight to best advantage'
3. Gently work hands under patient. At command
of man at head, lift carefully up and slide on fo knees
as comfortably as possible.
4. Shuffle slowly and carefully up to stretcher in
that position.
- 5. Lower at command.
With four bearers: (To be used wherever possible).
1. Have stretcher, well out of way. A, B and C
kneel, as in Fig. 13, close up to patient. D goes
“ captain,” and kneels opposite B (middle).
2. On word of D, all get grip as before, but D
joins hands with B. These two must be careful to
take as much of the weight as possible. At another
command from D, all lift carefully, and slide on
knees as before.
3. D leaves others holding on; brings stretcher to
position, then kneels again, joins hands with B as
before, and gives order to lower.
With practice, a patient can be kept as stiff as a
board throughout this handling.
Here’s to the steadfast, reliable man,
The man with the tongue that’s true,


HINTS FOR TREATMENT OF SOME COM-
MON AILMENTS.
Inflammation of any part of the body produces a
rise in temperature called fever. Fever may be also
produced by certain kinds of germs in the blood,
e.g., typhoid fever, influenza, etc. Fever of any kind
produces the following effects on the body: 1. Thirst
and loss of appetite. 2. Headache. 3. Listlessness
and distaste for any effort, whether physical or
mental. 4, Restlessness at night time, talking in
sleep, and sometimes delirium. 5. Quick pulse.
6. Coated tongue.
Some of the diseases associated with fever have
these previously mentioned symptoms as well as
symptoms peculiar to that particular disease. Some
of the most important are:—
Typhoid.—Nose bleeding, headache, vomiting,
pains in abdomen. Treatment; Liquid diet only; no
purgatives; send to hospital.
N.B.—The use of quinine is not advised in cases
of typhoid or influenza. In former it is of doubtful
value, and amateurs are likely to give an overdose.
Measles.—Sneezing and running at eyes and nose;
rash all over face and body, with swelling of throat
and face. Treatment; Light diet; keep in bed;
opening medicine.
Chicken Pox.—Rash on back at first, and after-
wards all over body, at first like small water blisters,
then like scabs. Treatment: As for measles.
Scarlet Fever.—Sore throat, headache, rash all
over body, first seen on neck and chest. Treatment:
As for measles.
Influenza. —Pains in limbs and back; shivering
attacks; cold in head and chest; feeling of great
depression. Treatment: Keep in bed; light diet;
opening medicine; and when pains are better feed
Patient up.
Pneumonia and Inflammation of the Lungs.—Pain
>n chest, with quick, grunting breathing, following
an attack of shivering; cough, and tough, rusty, red
spit. Treatment: Keep in bed; poultice over pain;
liquid diet.
Who won’t promise to do any more than he can.
But who’ll do what he says he’ll do.


Pleurisy.—Pain in chest, catching the breath; use-
less cough, bringing up no spit. Treatment as for
pneumonia.
Appendicitis.—Vomiting; pain in right hand side
of the lower part of the abdomen; tender in same
region, as pain. Pain made worse by pressing.
Treatment: Foment abdomen; give enema, and send
for doctor; give no food.
Swelling in. any part of body.—Foment frequently
is a good general rule. Between times keep part
comfortably suspended in a sling.
Inflammation of Kidneys.—Urine scanty and
bloody; puffiness of face extending all over body;
vomiting. Treatment: Hot applications over kid-
neys; give hot barley or rice or oatmeal water to
drink; no solid food.
Stoppage of Water.—Sit in bath of hot water for
20 minutes, and endeavour to pass water into the
bath. If constipated, give opening medicine.
Gastritis, Acute Dyspepsia, Inflammation of
Stomach. —Vomiting, tenderness 'in pit of stomach;
foul breath and dirty tongue; retching (this condi-
tion is often the result of excess in drinking alcoholic
liquors). Treatment: No food until vomiting ceases;
copious drinks of warm water in which cooking soda
has been dissolved (teaspoonful to a pint of water).
This encourages the vomiting for a while. Mustard
plaster over pit of stomach. Be very careful of diet
for some days after the attack is over.
Inflamed Eyes.—Bathe frequently in boiled water,
in which someboracic acid has been dissolved (tea-
spoonful to pint). If eye is discharging, wear a
shade; do not bandage it up.
Acute Rheumatism or Rheumatic Fever.—Ankles,
wrists, knees and elbow joints swell and become’
painful and red. Patient sweats a good deal, and
looks pale. Treatment: Hot foments to inflamed
joints, keeping them absolutely at rest and patient in
bed. Opening medicine if constipated. Nourish-
ing liquid diet, gradually becoming solid as attack
improves.
A thousand years are not enough for you tb know your most
intimate friend—nay, to know yourself—


Inflamed Piles.—Pain in back passage, with blood
in stool. If the piles come down? replace them with
soft, clean rag, and then lie down on stomach for a
while. Avoid alcohol, constipation, and over-eating.
Keep parts clean to prevent itching.
Sores on any part of the body must be frequently
washed until a medical man can be consulted.
Dysentery.—Frequent diarrhoea, with blood and
matter. Treatment; Cold liquid diet only. Keep
quiet in bed.
Hives.—A skin disease. Itchy, raised patches of
white and pink. Take doses of opening medicine and
bathe skin with lime water or soda and water (one
teaspoonful of soda or lime to pint of water).
Heart Disease.—Shortness of breath oh exertion.
Swelling of the feet, and passing very little water.
Treatment: Absolute rest in bed; light diet; bowels
free.
DIPHTHERIA.
SYMPTOMS.
Due to a kind of scum growing on the inner coat-
ing of the windpipe or throat, blocking it up, and
causing at the same time symptoms of intense blood
poisoning; usually with children, but not always.
1. Child is out of sorts, vomiting, etc.
2. Has a croupy cough and difficulty in breathing,
and glands of neck all swell.
3. Back of throat painful, and shows a white scum
on a very red background.
TREATMENT.
Place child in steam tent. Send for doctor, and
meantime put compresses on throat and keep tent
full of steam, and the fumes of eucalyptus oil or
Friar’s balsam. Give stimulating nourishment of
liquid nature.
And you will judge of a stranger!


LIQUID DIET.
Milk, beaten up with an egg or two, is nourishing.
Cocoa, coffee, tea, thin gravy, beef tea, barley water,
oatmeal water, rice water flavoured with lemon juice.
(To make barley water, rice water, etc., put a des-
sertspoonful of barley into half-pint cold water;
boil, throw away water; then add half-pint water,
boil for half an hour, and then use the water, after
flavouring to suit palate.)
LIGHT DIET.
Sago, rice, gruel, custard, bread and milk, boiled
tripe, chicken, yeast bread and butter.
FOMENT.
Wring out gently piece of soft cloth soaked in
boracic acid lotion (as for eyes), or, if no drugs avail-
able, in boiled water only. Put it on patient as hot
as can be endured; then cover completely with some-
thing to keep in the moisture, such as oil silk,
mackintosh, or brown paper. Wrap wool around
this and then bandage up.
POULTICE.
Make a stiff porridge out of bran, linseed, oatmeal
or wheatmeal. Apply it hot to the skin after first
spreading it on a piece of cloth, (Test the heat on
the back of your own hand, first, so as not to burn
the patient.) Wrap it well up with spare shirts and
bandages, to keep the heat in.
MUSTARD PLASTER.
Mix some mustard powder and hike warm water to
consistency of cream. Smear this on to piece of thick
brown paper or blotting paper until saturated; then
scrape off all mustard and apply the moistened paper
to the part required. Take off when the skin is quite
red, and then apply a little vaseline or ointment on a
soft cloth.
I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would
that thou wert cold or hot.
So because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will
spew thee out of my mouth.


Home Medicine Chest.
Every house in the country, particularly far inland,
should have its own medical supplies, especially “First
Aid.’’
The minimum supply—kept in d convenient box out
of the children’s reach-should be ; — triangular bandage,
roller bandages, oiled silk, scissors, pins, safety pins,
cotton, needles ( already threaded with white cotton), lint,
cotton wool, sticking plaster, permanganate of potash, bo-
racic acid, vaseline, sal volatile, quinine. Friar’s balsam, a
pint of carron oil (see page 30). Also carbolic soap, nail-
brush, hand towel, an enema, and a Lauder-Brunton
lancet for snakebite.


IMPORTANT.
Every man and every woman should endeavour, even at some
expense and inconvenience, to take a FIRST AID COURSE in
a regularly constituted class.
Valuable work, shamefully ignored by the public, is being
done by St. John Ambulance Association, which organises such
classes wherever possible.
As an instance of apathy, one case may be quoted. It was
in an industrial community of about 15,000 people that a “ First
Aid ” class was organised by this Association. Less than 30
men responded, and of these only about 12 were novices.
The course lasts about three months, with fortnightly meet-
ings. Gatherings for practice, at which attendance is optional,
are generally held in between. The cost, including fee, a
very excellent book—which has helped us largely in these
brief notes—-bandage and badge, is only a little over ten shillings.
You have the advantage of lectures from a sympathetic
doctor, and the co-operation of others as interested as yourself,
some of whom have been through the course once or twice be-
fore, and have had, perhaps, considerable personal experience in
accidents.
Thus an insight may be gained such as is possible in no other
way, and this insight develops a wonderful capacity for “ soak-
ing up ” all sorts of helpful ideas which the ordinary man passes
by. Certificates are given to those who pass an examination
(Theory, 40 per cent.; Practice, 60 per cent.) at the close.
One who sometimes poses as a cynic says he never attaches
much weight to the neglect of religious truth—as an evidence,
for he has observed that people invariably despise “ First Aid ”
knowledge, the great value of which has never been questioned.
He maintains that trutih is valued in inverse ratio to its
importance.
There is just too much force in his remarks; but perhaps
better times are in store. Do your share.




Directions for Making a
Will.
Something has been said to the effect that the
man who makes his own will is the lawyer’s best
friend.
It is certainly unwise not to arrange the disposi-
tion of one’s property under the guidance of a
thoroughly qualified legal practitioner.
In the case of an emergency, the best plan, where
it can safely be done, is to will everything to the
wife or nearest relative, and leave a separate letter
asking her to carry out wishes in detail.
A well-known Melbourne solicitor has been kind
enough to supply the following directions which give
certain guidance for such a case, and hints in general
as well:—
A person cannot make a Will unless he or she is
of the full age of twenty-one years. The language
used in making a Will should be as simple and clear
as possible. The Will must he written with ink, on
paper or parchment, and if contained on one sheet
must be signed at the end by the Testator
No part of the Will should come after the signature
of the testator). The testator must sign in the
presence of two or more witnesses, and if the Will is
written on two or more sheets, the testator and
witnesses must sign each sheet. A person who is
to receive anything under the Will should not be a
witness thereto, but a person who receives some-
thing under the Will may be appointed executor, and
an executor, if he receives nothing under a Will, may
act as a witness. An executor must be appointed in
every case to carry out the provisions of a Will,


The following form of Will, by which the testator
leaves all his property to his wife, may be used as
a guide;—
mm
THIS IS THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT
of me, A. 8., of (address and occupation). I hereby
revoke all Wills or other testamentary writings here-
tofore made by me, and declare this to be my true
last Will and Testament. I appoint C. D. (address
and occupation) to be the executor of this my Will.
I give, devise and bequeath the whole of my pro-
perty, both real and personal, whatsoever and where-
soever situate, to my wife absolutely.
IN WITNESS whereof I have hereunto set my
hand this day of 19
Signed by the said A. 8., the ■ Testator, as ■
and for his last Will and Testament, in'
the presence of us both present at the
same time, who in his presence, at his A. B.
request, and in the presence of each other,
have hereunto subscribed our names as
attesting witnesses.
F. G. Witnesses
H. I.
Note.—Obliterations or alterations of any sort in
t Will ought, if possible, to be avoided; -when they
are made they must be signed by the testator and
the witnesses in the margin of the Will, as near the
alteration or obliteration as possible.


Work while yet the daylight shines,
Man of strength and will!
Never does the streamlet glide
Useless by the mill;
Wait not till to-morrow’s sun
Beams upon thy way,
All that that thou canst call thine own
Lies in thy tp-day;
Power and intellect and health
May not always last
“ The mill cannot grind
With the water that is past.”
Sarah Doudney.


A Ramble among Ideals.
“ Let me make the songs of a nation, and
I care not who makes its laws!”
There is but one ideal for us who accept the
Nazarene. But,' just as the light from the sun
comes in innumerable rays, many of which reach us
indirectly, so the influence of the Supreme Life steals
over us in countless ways.
The plan has suggested itself of throwing together
miscellaneous extracts in the form of a set of lesser
ideals which may help along. These extracts are
of tested worth. It is hoped that, thus grouped,
they will in no wise lose their effectiveness.
THE MAN WHO TRIES AGAIN.
Someone has said, “ Every man makes a fool of
himself ten times a day. The art lies in not exceed-
ing that number.”
Be that as it may, the essential thing in life is
to survive failure. For failure is certain to come.
It makes the man—it kills the weed.
Said a young man to his old minister, “ It’s no
use. It’s all upj I’m a damned fool!”
But the gentle answer came: “ No. You’ve been
a fool, but you’re not a damned fool yet.”
That’s it! There’s always time to try again this
side of the last post!
Hear Burns;—
“ O, why the deuce should I repine,
And be an ill foreboder?
I’m twenty-three and five feet nine;
I’ll go and be ”
The world is open to that fellow!


And Lawson:—
“ But what avails the ache of
Remorse or vain regret?
We’ll battle for the sake of
The men we might be yet!
We’ll strive to keep in sight of
The brave, the true, and clean,
Arid triumph yet in spite of
The men we might have been.”
A good, rollicking echo, this, of matured senti-
ment—■“ One thing I do, forgetting the things which
are behind, and stretching forward to the things
which are before, I press on toward the goal.”
“THE MAN WHO AIMS HIGH.”
“ How dull it is to pause, to make an end,
To rest unburnish’d, not to shine, in use!
As tho’ to breathe were life.”
Browning knew him, and his picture seems com-
plete. After all, it is ours to aim high. So the
shaft discharged may be carried on to its mark by
a Higher Power; but, if our aim is low !
Such, at any rate, was the faith of the Gram-
marian;—-
“Was it not great? Did he not throw on God
(He loves the burthen),-
God’s task to make the heavenly period
Perfect the earthen?
He ventured neck or nothing—heaven's success
Found, or earth’s failure;
“Wilt thou trust death or not?” he answered “Yes;”
Hence with life’s pale lure!” -
That low man seeks a little thing to do,
Sees it and does it;
This high man, with a great thing to pursue,
Dies ere he knows it.
That low man goes on adding one to one,
His hundreds soon hit:
This high man, aiming at a million,
Misses an unit.
That, has the world here—should he need the next,
Let the world mind him!
This, throws himself on God, and unperplexed
Seeking shall find Him.”
—(From “ The Grammarian’s Funeral.”)


And the aim must grow higher with the years.
“Man is not God, but hath God’s end to serve,
A Master to obey, a course to take.
Somewhat to cast off, somewhat to become.
Grant this, then man must pass from old to new,
From vain to real, from mistake to fact,
From what once seemed good to what now proves
best.”
THE MAN WHO PLODS EVER FORWARD.
“ He that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved.” —Jesus Christ.
” God gives nothing to our acceptance, but all
things only to our acquisition.”—.Bishop Butler.
Perhaps we meet him oftener than we think. He
seldom talks much about himself, nor does he get
others to blow his trumpet for him. We agree
heartily with Lawson:—■
“They make a great sensation
About famous men who fail,
That sink a world of chances
In the city morgue or gaol;
That drink, or blow their brains out,
Because of ‘ Fortune’s Frown,’
But we hear far too little
Of the men who won’t go down.
“ The world is full of trouble,
And the world is full of wrong,
But the heart of man is noble,
And the heart of man is strong!
They say the sea sings dirges,
But I would say to you
That the wild waves’ song’s a paean
For the men that battle through.”
(From “The Ships That Don’t Go Down.”)
May Quinlan has penned some good lines on
character-building:—
“ Not in a day do men grow great; nor is the
saint made perfect in an hour. The tiny tivulet
thdt draws its strength from the heart of the distant
ranges, trickling unseen throught the tangled fern
and the sheltering grasses, gathering force and
intensity as it goes, both from the night’s rain and
the morning’s dew, is only mindful of the ope thing
necessary, namely, to respond to the summons of
immensity, and become absorbed in the might of
the ocean into which all streams flow.


“ Such is the way of man’s spirit whose life is
the breath of God The spirit of generosity
and the sacrifice of self need to be daily fostered
and exercised, if they are to be of use in times
of emergency. The sudden act of bravery, whicli
proclaims the hero, the flash of reckless daring
which makes the human pulse beat faster, is not the
result of a moment’s thought and quick decision. It
is the natural and logical sequence of a man’s life.
It is, consciously or unconsciously, the result of
years of preparation.”
But this running fight, which lasts as long as
life, is not easily sustained.
When the' tide turns against us how hard it is!
How strong the temptation then to let breast and
back quietly change places!
God grant that the years may prove us each:—
“ One who never turned his back, but marched
breast forward,
Never doubted clouds would break,
Never dreamed, tho’ right were worsted, wrong
would triumph.
Held, we fall to rise, are baffled to fight better,
Sleep to wake.
‘ No, at noonday in the bustle of man’s worktime,
Greet the unseen with a cheer!
Bid him forward, breast and back as either should
be,
‘ Strive and thrive ’ cry ‘ Speed, fight on, fare
ever
There as here!’”—Browning.
I like the spirit of Ulysses, who refused to give
up plodding even in old age:—
“The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks;
The long day wanes; the slow moon climbs; the
deep
Moans round with many voices. Come my
friends,
’Tis not too late to seek a newer world.
Push off, and sitting well in order smite
The sounding furrows: for my purpose holds
To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
Of all the western stars, until I die.


‘‘Tho’ much is taken; much abides; and tho’
We are not now that strength which in old days
Moved earth and heaven; that which we are we
are;
One equal temper of heroic hearts,
Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.”
THE MAN WHO RULES HIS SPIRIT.
Here are some good ones: —
He that is slow to anger is better than the
mighty;
And he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh
a city.
The discretion of a man maketh him slow to
anger;
And it is his glory to pass over a transgression.
He whose spirit is without restraint
Is like a city that is broken down and hath no
wall.
A fool uttereth all his anger,
But a wise mart keepeth it back and stilleth it.
By appearances, there’s often a glut in the fool
market!
“ It is easy enough to be pleasant
When life flows along like a song,
But the man worth while is the man who will smile
When everything goes dead wrong.”
the man who remembers the other
FELLOW.
“ Friends electrify each other; there is a dulling
down when they part."
“ A tender heart with wounds is better than
woodenness without.”—R. W. Barbour.
Can he really call himself a man if he doesn’t?
Surely man is pre-eminently an animal that lives not
to himself! And if he show no such mark has he


not failed? Some anonymous lines which have
strayed along seem to hit truth, whatever the world’s
verdict may be:—
“ The man who wins is the man who stays
In the unsought paths and the rocky ways;
And perhaps, who lingers, now and then,
To help some failure to rise again,
Ah! he is the man who wins!”
So the call comes to all, “ Join hands, and ‘ shore
up’ the tottering!”
Bad Luck, or whatever less common name you
give it, is claiming victims.
There’s nothing more noble to behold than such
fighters as that Outbacker of whom Paterson wrote:
“Facing it yet! Oh, my friend stout-hearted,
What does it matter for rain or shine,
For the hopes deferred and the gain departed?
Nothing could conquer that heart of thine.
And thy health and strength are beyond con-
fessing.
As the only joys that are worth possessing.
May the days to come be as rich in blessing
As the days we spent in the Auld Lang Syne.”
And there is no sadder sight than such a strong
man who becomes haunted with the fear that he is
beaten after all. “The spirit of "a man will sustain
his infirmity; but a broken spirit who can bear?”
Then there’s Monotony. Do you remember
Kipling’s “Tommy?”
“ We —can —stick—out ’unger, thirst, an’ weariness,
But —not —not—not —not the chronic sight of ’em—-
Boots —boots—boots —boots, movin’ up an’ down
again,'
An’ there’s no discharge in the war!”
There are : more causes of monotony than “ boots,”
and we have a few of them in Australia.
Shall we add the “ Monotony Cure ” which for
once at any rate meets the old saying by being worse
than the disease, if freely applied!
Is if not time that we extended some of the great
principles beyond politics into ordinary life? “Every
man l!is birthright. One man, one vote!”
:' : -:Spleadid! but, even before, the vote surely comes
“ Every man a clear head and healthy body!”


We look upon the man who lets his vote lapse as
not a man at all—then we run after him and compel
him to assert what scrap of manhood he has left.
If the hunt is worth while in politics, why not in
general life? If the responsibility is real re voting,
why not aggressively real re living?
There’s a movement going on in Ireland just now
known as the “ Catch-my-Pal.” Space forbids enter-
ing into details, but what a world of suggestion is in
that name!
“What should he live for? A dull despair!
Drink is his master, and drags him down,
Water of Lethe that drowns all care, •
Gentleman Jim has a lot to drown,
And he reigns as king with a drunken crew,
Sinking to misery, Jim Carew.”
(From “Jim Carew” : Paterson.)
We’ve all met poor old Jim, but there are others
just as badly “ downed ” —perhaps more so—by bad
times, monotony, impurity, or even opium and other
drugs.
Don’t say it’s not worth while! I like that line
from “ Brother Charles,” late of Dubbo:
“It is a good rule to make never to condemn
anyone whom you have not tried to the utmost
o£ your power to save.”
Even if many cases prove failures in the end, what
of that?
“ Have ye looked
At Edyrn? Have ye seen how nobly changed?
This work of his is great and wonderftll.
His very face with change of heart is changed.
The world will not believe a man repents:
And this wise world of ours is mainly right.
Full seldom doth a man repent, or use
Both grace and will to pick the vicious quitch
Of blood and custom wholly out of him
And make all clean, and plant himself afresh.
Edyrn has done it.”—Tennyson.
Don’t say it’s not worth while! Not, at any rate,
so long as you admit the beauty in the life of One
who made Himself notorious in His day, becoming
known as the “ Friend of Sinners.”


Above all, don’t say it’s the parson’s business,
and don’t let anyone else say so either!
Perhaps it is—but not to exclude your responsi-
bility.
Why is it that those superior gentlemen who
“ wouldn’t touch a parson with a forty foot
pole ” are always turning over such important work
to him?
And even really good men are always pointing out
fine work for the parson. Hear this:—
“Only a jockey-boy! foul-mouthed and bad, you
see,
Ignorant, heathenish, gone to his rest.
Parson or Presbyter, Pharisee, Sadducee,
What did you do for him?—bad was the best.
Negroes and foreigners, all have a claim on you;
Yearly you send your well-advertised hoard,
But that poor jockey-boy—shame on him, shame
on you,
‘ Feed ye my little ones ’ —what saith the Lord?”
Well, we parsons may give you that point against
us. And there are few more contemptible creatures
in this world than a minister of the Gospel of Christ
who passes the weaklings by unaided. But of those
few even more contemptible there are many, many
specimens of one type; the man who sees the parson
pass by unheeding, loudly proclaims his baseness
for doing so, and — does likewise! _
THE MAN WHO MAINTAINS IN HIMSELF
WHAT HE DEMANDS IN WOMAN.
41 In God’s presence sin gets an infinite significance.”
“ If my body come from brutes, tho’ somewhat finer
than their own,
I am heir, and this my kingdom. Shall the
royal voice be mute?
No, but if the rebel subject seek to drag me from
the throne,
Hold the sceptre, human soul, and rule thy
Province of the brute.”
Surely it is a disgrace to our manhood that there
ever could be a suggestion of a double standard!
Yet it has been. It is still. Thank God, however,
it won’t be much longer!


We have struggled up to equal voting power.
We have almost struggled up to equal pay for equal
work. And just so surely will we some day demand
equal purity.
We do not for a moment decry ourselves as be-
neath others; but Birth Statistics, Literature, and
Common Knowledge all show our manhood “ below
par.”
Dare I quote from one who truly understands
Australian life, and has voiced some of its noblest
aspirations—yet he strikes this ugly undertone, intro-
ducing the “ mean white,” who boasts “ If they had
brains, poor animals! we’d teach them how to sin.”
We all know that there has been too much of that
unblushing shame.
Can we not escape where others sank? Shall we
not try to decrease the number of those who degrade
certain of our sisters to “animals?” God help us!
God deliver us from that deadly cancer.
Burns was not exactly “ unco guid.” In fact he
knew both sides of the question, and he speaks in
no uncertain voice;—
“ But never tempt th’ illicit rove,
Tho’ naethin’ should divulge it:
I wave the quantum o’ the sin,
The hazard o’ concealing;
But, och! it hardens a’ within
And petrifies the feeling!”
(From “Epistle to a Young Friend.”)
Would every lad who turns the pages of this book
with hands that are pure strive so to live as to
escape this wail:—
“ I lavished on each light love
What should have graced the true love;
I sought the lips of Pleasure,
I met the mouth of Shame.
I followed every new love,
And so I lost the true love;
I could not hold the real love,
The one love, when it came.”
—Marie Dember.
This brings us to another ideal which has proved
to many an one the key to victory. Love casts out
lust. That is truly a great force—“ The expulsive
power of a new affection!”
So to that ideal we turn from ugly thoughts as


from the dark shadows of midnight to the fairest
dawn, as from death and its repulsiveness to life
and its beauteous charm.
THE TWIN SOUL.
“ Every man carries in his heart the vision of one
with whom he will some day unite in a very
poetry of service, beautiful and radiant with
love, human and divine.”
After all, .the growls of the bald-headed cynics
have rumbled wearily into silence again, our youth
will still be found hugging that vision—if they are
not investigating a possible fulfilment thereof.
All honour to them, and all success! And may
each in due course present to one who is worthy
“ the white flower of a blameless life.”
“ All things transitory,
But as symbols are sent,
Earth’s insufficiency
Here grows to event.
The indescribable,
Here it is done.
The Woman Soul leads us upward and on!”
—Goethe.
This Twin Soul seems to sway even Kings, and it
is interesting to hear the great Arthur pouring out
his sentiments:—
“ What happiness to reign a lonely king,
Vext—O, ye stars that shudder over me,
O, earth that soundest hollow under me,
Vext with waste dreams? for saving I be join’d
To her that is the fairest under heaven,
I seem as nothing in the mighty world,
And cannot will my will, nor work my work
Wholly, nor make myself in mine our realm
Victor and lord. But were I join’d with her,
Then might we live together as one life,
And, reigning with one will in everything,
Have power on this dark world to lighten it,
And power on this dead world to make it live.”
—Tennyson: from “The Coming of Arthur.”
It seems to us, however, that Arthur goes just a
shade too far, and certainly his lady failed to come
up to expectations.
No man has a right to say he seems “as nothing
in the mighty world,” even if his twin-soul has tarried
overlong.


In fact, if he cannot learn to be a little more inde-
pendent of the inspiration of a low, sweet voice, he
is certain to prove a fairly thorough fool sooner or
later; and when he does meet that wonderful,
dark-world-lightening lady, she won’t think him
good enough.
In other words, no true girl can accept more than
second place in the life of the man who seeks her
favour.
This was just what Geraint failed to understand,
until the- first glorious matrimonial storm shattered
his dull dreams;—
“ He compassed her with sweet observances
And worship, never leaving her, and grew
Forgetful of his promise to the King,
Forgetful of the falcon and the hunt,
Forgetful of the .tilt and tournament,
Forgetful of his glory and his name.
Forgetful of his princedom and its cares.
And this forgetfulness was hateful to her.
And by and bye the people when they met
In twos and threes, or fuller companies,
Began to scoff and jeer and babble of him,
As of a prince whose manhood was all gone,
And molten down in mere uxoriousness,
And this she gathered from the people’s eyes.”
So at last this bitter lament was wrung from Enid:
0 noble breast and all-puissant arms,
Am I the cause, I the poor cause that men
Reproach you, saying all your, force is gone?
1 am the cause, because I dare not speak,
And tell him what I think and what they say.
And yet I hate that he should linger here;
I cannot love my lord, and not his name.
Far liefer had I gird his harness on him,
And ride with him to battle and stand by,
And watch his mightful hand striking great blows
At caitiffs and at wrongers of the world.
Far better were I -laid in the dark earth.
Not hearing any more his noble voice.
Not to be folded more in these dear arms,
And darken’d from the high light in his eyes,
Than that my lord thro' me should suffer shame.
O me, I fear that I am no true wife.”
—Tennyson, “The Marriage of Geraint.”


Perhaps this seems to be wandering far away from
Bushmen, but it is not. The fact is that bushmen,
more than most, have to fight alone. Home is for
many of you no more than a dim hope, perhaps not
even that. For others, it is a place hundreds of miles
beyond the horizon, where works a lonely woman
for her little ones, and where those little ones toil
and play, live—and sometimes die—without their
father near.
But bear up, though it is indeed hard! If Aus-
tralia is ever to be the home of a great people, such
a coveted result can be won only by stern fightings
and heavy sacrifices of brave men who, when called,
go forth alone, and by the devotion of brave women
who gird them for the fight, and freely send them
away into loneliness where they can seldom be
reached save by a broken prayer.
God send us the Enids who will nerve their lovers
and husbands and brothers for the task! God raise
up men worthy of such unselfish love! Then must
come success, and the poet of a later day, when our
names are no longer even memories, will write the
parallel of a tribute to that land as dear to her
people as Australia is fast becoming to us.—
“ Thou Land with love and freedom crowned,
In ilk wee cot, and lordly dwelling,
May manly-hearted youth be found
And maids in every grace excelling.
Thou land where Bruce and Wallace wight
For Freedom fought in days of danger,
Ne’er crouched to strong usurper’s might,
But foremost stood, wrong’s stern avenger.”
THE MAN WHO RECOGNISES POWER “ NOT
OURSELVES.”
“ Your powerlessness, honestly felt, is the greatest
argument for salvation. The call of God carries
with it the power to rise.”
“Noble examples are not enough to live upon: it
needs the same grace which produced them to
make their impress durable.”—R. W. Barbour.
There’s a grim truth in the confession of Lawson’s
rouseabout:—


“ I learned what college had to teach, and in the
world of men,
By camp-fires I have learned, or, say, unlearned it
all again;
But this I’ve learned, that truth is strong, and if
a man go straight,
He’ll live to see his enemy struck down by time
and fate.”
What is that truth? Simply this; The issues of
life are not entirely in our own hands. There is a
Power which descends with vengeance on the evil-
doer even after his victim is entirely removed. There
is a Power which enters and regenerates a man’s
life even after all his hope and the hopes of his
dearest friends have died utterly away.
That is why man is the whole that is greater
than the sum of his parts. For you never know
finally the value of a man’s life. The tyrant sud-
denly trembles and falls. The craven suddenly rises
and stands forth—a man. History, with all its
mystery, is the tale of the irresistible oncoming of
Enlightenment, and Liberty, and Right.
Let us rest in that Power! Let the feel of its
strong enfoldings teach us reverence meantime:—
“ Let knowledge grow from more to more,
But more of reverence in us dwell;
That mind and soul, according well,
May make one music as before.
“But vaster. We are fools and slight,
We mock thee when we do not fear;
But help thy foolish ones to bear;
Help thy vain worlds to bear thy light.”
After reverence comes obedience —that glad obedi-
ence which follows on the recognition of an Over-
soul which loves and plans better than we know.
Petition follows. We cannot feel and give way to
this great constraining Power without seeking
guidance and uplifting. Man will never accept that
Power as mere blind Force; instinct of the savage
and matured reason of the wise alike proclaim Him
—as He has already been revealed—an intelligent,
loving Person.
Whether you do or whether you do not accept the
Nazarene as verily Christ, you must make vour
Starting point that truth emphasised by Him,


“ If any man willeth to do His will, he shall know
of the teaching.”
Yes, seek the will of that Supreme Power, that
your life may be whirled in harmony with the eternal
wheels.
Dr. F. S. Hone, of Adelaide University, has some
very fine words on this point:—
“To pray is the most manly thing that we can
do. In physical exercise—in manual skill—in intel-
lectual culture, we are developing our capacities as
animals, quite rightly, for we have an animal nature
to care for—only we must not stop here, otherwise
we shall be stopping just at the point where our
best should begin. We have a capacity beyond, far
beyond, this,, a capacity which is the glory of our
manhood, and that needs cultivating and developing
beyond all else—the capacity for intercourse with
God.”
Yes, pray!—
“ For what are men better than sheep and goats,
That nourish a blind life within the brain,
If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer
Both for themselves and those that call them
friend?
For so the whole round world is every way
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God,”
Tennyson.
THE RESURRECTED SELF.
“ I am the resurrection and the life,” says Christ.
It is not easy for us to accept that statement.
But, once accepted, it brings before us, the vision
of another self, a vision which must deeply influence
the life of the beholder; and, if it is not strictly an
ideal, I beg leave to include the Resurrected Self
under that head as the last of the series.
For the confidence of resurrection does change the
whole outlook of life, and even give outlook where,
previously, it seemed to be utterly absent.
I.—lt brings Comfort.
One bears cheerfully with the stumblings, the chill
striking into the very bone, the damp fog which
shuts out all from view, so long as these are known
to belong to the weak hour of dawn; but if they be


long to the “ day,” so called, a day soon to draw in
to a still more dreary evening, and close in deep,
impenetrable night—then frail nature shrinks, and
courage gives way to despair. “If in this life only
we have hoped in Christ, we are of all men most
pitiable.”
Speaking of the value of the Resurrection hope,
Mill truly said: “The beneficial influence of such a
hope is far from trifling. It makes life and human
nature a far greater thing to the feelings, and gives
, greater strength, as well as greater solemnity, to all
the sentiments which are awakened in us by our
fellow-creatures, and by mankind at large. It allays
the sense of that irony of nature which is so pain-
fully felt when we see the exertions and sacrifices of
a life culminating in the formation of a wise and
noble mind, only to disappear from the world when
the time has just arrived at which the world seems
about to begin reaping the benefit of it; ... .
But the benefit consists less in the presence of any
specific hope than in the enlargement of the general
scale of the feelings; the loftier aspiration being no
longer kept down by a sense of the insignificance of
human life—by the disastrous feeling of ‘ not worth
while.’ ”
ll.—lt proves a Spur to effort in this life.
We shall rise again in Christ, but we shall not be
entirely re-made. We shall still be ourselves. Indi-
viduality persists even through the grave and resur-
rection. If we give up to God a self maimed by
only half-living, even His purification and energising
at the resurrection will not give that fulness which
is possible to the soul consecrated unreservedly on
earth.
How earnest, therefore, must we be, who look
upon our souls, yea, and in some mysterious sense
their visible wrappings also, as eternal!
There is in some quarters a strong opinion that
belief in another world robs man of his manhood,
and renders the life empty and dreamy.
Brush aside all such suggestion as so much shallow
misconception.
Never in any age could such a charge be fairly
made by the keen observer; and never perhaps with
less fairness than in our own day.
See Jesus feeding the multitudes—why? Because


His interest in them as immortals made Him so
much the more tender for their smallest and com-
monest needs.
And the men of that Society brought into being in
a very intoxication .of faith in the Risen Lord, and
hope of partaking in that resurrection in their own
time—what was their first step in organisation? It
was to appoint seven men who would make the
widows’ portions their chief care.
There was Paul the dreamer, who never tired of
emphasising the place of the resurrection hope. But
he earned his own bread very regularly, and ever
made it his care that material blessings should be
as widespread as mutual love could make them.
To be sure, in mediaeval times justification seems
at first sight to be given in the conduct of the most
devoted “ otherworldlings,” but surely such justifica-
tion of the charge is only apparent! We cannot
allow it to stand against those eccentric men who, in
an age of indifference and death, preserved for us
those very practical blessings of Literature, Art,
Science, Teaching of the Young, and Systematic
Philanthropy.
Later we find men who ardently cherished this
faith in Resurrection through Christ as the passion
of their lives, reshaping municipalities, reorganising
kingdoms, creating new forms of government, and,
across the Atlantic, founding one of the most power-
ful of modern nations.
And what of to-day? Who are most eager to spread
material blessings amid the barren stretches of earth?
There is no place for argument. Always those who
are most deeply moved by the Risen Jesus are found
in the front ranks. While others may exploit, and
throw aside, as a schoolboy tosses away the rind of
his fruit, or maybe neglect, neither helping nor
hindering, these modern otherworldlings will be
found striving after purified souls in such peoples,
it is true, but meantime doing more.
For, everywhere, to-day, the whole-hearted accept-
ance of this truth—that man will rise again—means
healthy minds and healthy bodies, as well as quick-
ened souls. Aye, and yet more: the leavening of the
people so that their organised government steadily
approximates to the ideal.
This must ever be so from the necessity of the


case. With confidence in a more glorious appear-
ance in the Great Day comes inevitably a deeper
reverence for the whole man as seen on earth, a
fiercer passion for the highest perfection, here and
now, of everything which God has committed to us,
spiritual, mental and material.
And that passion must call forth the fullest effort
of which the believer is capable. Obstacles and
persecution will only increase the heat, thus
intensifying the effort, and mid the deadliest flood of
adversity the believer will be found standing un-
moved, with a quiet smile of triumph on his face,
and in his heart a deep, abiding peace.
“ Doubt no longer that the Highest is the wisest
and the best,
Let not all that saddens Nature blight thy hope or
break thy rest;
Quail not at the fiery mountain, at the shipwreck,
or the rolling
Thunder, or the rending earthquake, or the famine
or the pest!
“ Neither mourn if human creeds be lower than the
hearts desire!
Thro’ the gates that bar the distance comes a
gleam of something higher.
Wait till Death has flung them open, when the
man will make the Maker
Dark no more with human hatreds in the glare of
deathless fire!”
Tennyson, “Faith.”
c


The A. I. M.
Our Mailbag Department.
For some years past we have been endeavouring
to establish “ mailbag ” friendships with those in
isolated places of the Commonwealth.
Of course, there are difficulties in the way, but
the way without those adornments never was. Per-
haps those who have not themselves faced the
Outback will not at once understand their far-away
neighbours, but what of that? All the more need to
begin right now! Besides, too much is made of
such differences. “ There’s a good deal of human
nature in man all the world over.” Sympathy will
soon bridge the gulf of distance.
The idea is to write occasionally, post magazines
and books, general as well as religious, and en-
deavour in all ways that suggest themselves to weld
truly strong tics between those who may never
meet face to face.
We are confident that endless ways of usefulness
will open up in time—God helps those that try to
help one another.
The effort need not be at all one-sided. While
some may have little opportunity to return benefits,
others will give back quite as much as they receive,
some even more.
It would seem that there is opportunity here for a
grand national work. Why is the Outback so un-
developed? Because it is so largely unknown. Why
are our pioneers so neglected? Partly, no doubt,
because of Southern carelessness; but, we hope,
chiefly because the nation fails to realise their case.
“ Out of sight, out of mind.”
We quote some significant words from the Mel-
bourne “Argus”:—
“ In this land, above all others, distance is of the
essence of the problem. What are the true difficul


ties in the way of the life of the Commonwealth but
the difficulties of distance? What is each State doing,
or leaving undone, but solving the one problem of
trying to overcome distance?
“ What does the average Melbourne man know of
the Gulf country, or of Port Darwin, or of Central
Australia, or of the backlands of Queensland and
New South Wales? What does he know of the
illimitable West, except that from it come gold and
Sir John Forrest? All the vast hinterland into which
men are boring along ten thousand tracks—all that
is hidden from the eyes of the average town dweller.
The capitalist knows something about it, and some-
times the working man knows something about it —
for he often wanders far afield—but the ordinary
man in between these two knows nothing and cares
nothing.”
“ Knows nothing and cares nothing!” All too
true! But we believe the latter fact is the fruit of
the former, and that if we teach the Southerners to
know they will soon begin to care.
If, then, we can link up the pioneer women with
their warmest-hearted sisters of the older established
places, surely the above defect would be largely
remedied; for, while one side sends snatches of
town news, the other can enlarge on the needs of the
Inland in the way of countless improvements,
and also on the charm of
“ . . . . the land where the cattle camps are,
On the edge of the plain.”
There is nothing original in the idea. The “Vic-
toria League ” has become quite a strong institution,
and is doing fine work in a somewhat similar way,
especially among schools and colleges widely
separated.
Where there are children who would like to corres-
pond with mates whom they have never seen, we
can gladly arrange that also. This plan has already
proved of splendid educational value. Let us extend
it!
And there is a work to be done between men on
the fringes and men in the centres. We must get
them in touch with one another, so that mutual
understanding may come about. There never can


be any propar policy of national development, or
any intelligent, strong, healthy public opinion about
the remote places, until the mass of our people is
leavened by the influence of those sympathetic ones
who know through letters and literature, as well
as of the few who know from personal experience.
It will be said that we cannot write to those we
have never met personally; we certainly have that
feeling at the outset. One city man, for instance,
wrote; —
" I have written a letter to Mr. Jack , whom
you mentioned, but you will understand how I feel
about taking a leap in the dark—like a shy man
who must talk to a girl whose tastes and interests
he has to guess at, or ask her point blank. I hope
I have not offended him straight off.”
We really believe, however, that our friend, in
spite of his shyness, would get along very happily
with the girl he had never met before. Some of
our most interesting conversations are with people
we have never met before, and whose tastes we have
to guess at. And once two good Australian men
get into touch, with the idea of mutual help, the rest
comes naturally.
We want hundreds of pairs of far-separated
citizens helping one another to understand this vast
land which is our home. And we want them to
exchange newspapers regularly. There may not be
big weeklies published in the north and nor’-west,
but there are local papers in which Southerners and
Easterners would be intensely interested. Let the
exchanges be established.
Our organisation is steadily growing, and we
need only strong co-operation on the frontiers to
make real success certain.
So will readers please help? Send along names
and addresses to
The General Secretary A.1.M.,
Box 100, G.P.0.,
Sydney.
We will do the rest.


Selections from Scripture.
GOD AND HIS OWN.
God’s Character.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth
iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the
remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger
for ever, because he delighteth in mercy. He will
turn again and have compassion upon us; he will
tread our iniquities under foot: and thou wilt cast
all their sins into the depths of the sea. Thou wilt
perform the truth to Jacob, and. the mercy to
Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers
from the days of old.—Micah 7 :18-20.
Marching Orders.
Now it came to pass after the death of Moses the
servant of the Lord, that the Lord spake unto
Joshua the son of Nun, Moses’ minister, saying,
Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go
over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto
the land which I do give to them, even to the chil-
dren of Israel. Every place that the sole of your
foot shall tread upon, to you have I given it, as I
spake unto Moses. From, the wilderness, and this
Lebanon, even unto the great river, the river
Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the
great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall
be your border. There shall not any man be able
to stand before thee all the days of thy life; as I
was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee. Be strong and of good
courage: for thou shalt cause this people to inherit
the land which I sware unto their fathers to give
them. Only be strong and very courageous, to
observe to do according to all the law, which Moses
my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to
the right hand nor to the left, that thou mayest have
good success whithersoever thou goest. This book
of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but


thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou
mayest observe to do according to all that is written
therein: for then thou,shalt make thy way prosper-
ous and then thou shalt have good success. Have
not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good
courage; be not affrighted, neither be thou dismayed:
for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever
thou goest.—Joshua 1 :1-9.
The Great Potter.
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord,
saying, Arise, and go down to the potter’s house,
and there I will cause thee to hear my words. Then
I went down to the potter’s house, and, behold, he
wrought his work on the wheels. And when the
vessel that he made of the clay was marred in the
hand of the potter, he made it again another vessel,
as seemed good to the potter to make it.
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,
O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this
potter? said the Lord. Behold, as the clay in the
potter’s hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house of
Israel. At what instant I shall speak concerning a
nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and
to break down and to destroy it; if that nation,
concerning which I have spoken, turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do
unto them. And at what instant I shall speak con-
cerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to
build and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that
it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good,
wherewith I said I would benefit them.—Jeremiah
18 : 1-10.
A Word to the Faint.
Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel,
My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is
passed away from my God? Hast thou not known?
hast thou not heard? the everlasting God, the Lord,
the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not,
neither is weary; there is no searching of his under-
standing. He giveth power to the faint; and to
him that hath no might he increaseth strength.
Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the
young men shall utterly fall; but they that wait upon


the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall
mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run,
and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint.—
Isaiah 40 ; 27-31.
GOD AND THE OUTSIDER.
His Pity.
And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made
it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shadow
over his head, to deliver him from his evil case.
So Jonah was exceeding glad because of the gourd.
But God prepared a worm when the morning rose
the next day, and it smote the gourd, that it with-
ered. And it came to pass, when the sun arose, that
God prepared a sultry east wind; and the sun beat
upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and re-
quested for himself that he might die, and said,
It is better for me to die than to live. And God
said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be angry for the
gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry even
unto death. And the Lord said, Thou hast had pity
on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured,
neither madest it grow; which came up in a night,
and perished in a night: and should not I have pity
on Nineveh, that great city; wherein are more than
sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern
between their right hand and their left hand; and
also much cattle.—Jonah 4 ; 6-11.
His Attracting Power.
And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, and
to return from following after thee: for whither
thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I
will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy
God my God: where thou diest, will I die, and
there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and
more also, if aught but death part thee and me.—
Ruth 1 : 16, 17.
CHRIST AND THE OUTSIDER.
The New Element.
Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shalt love
thy neighbour,, and hate thine enemy: but I say
unto you, Love your enemies, and pray for them
that persecute you; that ye may be sons of your
Father which is in heaven; for he maketh his sun
to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth rain


on the just and the unjust. For if ye love them that
love you, what reward have ye? do not even the
publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren
only, what do ye more than others? do not even the
Gentiles the same? Ye therefore shall be perfect,
as your heavenly Father is perfect.—Matt. 5 : 43-48.
One Qualification—Sincerity.
But what think ye? A man had two sons; and
he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to-day
in the vineyard. And he answered and said, I will
not: but afterward he repented himself, and went.
And he came to the second, and said likewise. And
he answered and said, I go, sir; and went not.
Whether of the twain did the will of his father?
They say, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily
I say unto you, that the publicans and the harlots
go into the kingdom of God before you. For John
came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye
believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots
believed him: and ye, when ye saw it, did not even
repent yourselves afterwards, that ye might believe
him.—Matt. 21 : 28-32.
Fresh Starts for All!
And early in the morning he came again into the
temple, and all the people came unto Him; and he
sat down, and taught them. And the scribes and
the Pharisees bring a woman taken in adultery;
and having set her in the midst, they say unto him,
Master, this woman hath been taken in adultery, in
the very act. Now in the law Moses commanded
us to stone such; what then sayest thou of her?
And this they said, tempting him, that they might
have whereof to accuse him. But Jesus stooped
down, and with his finger wrote on the ground. But
when they continued asking him, he lifted up him-
self and said unto them, He that is without sin
among you, let him first cast a stone at her. And
again he stooped down, and with his finger wrote
on the ground. And they, when they heard it,
went out one by one, beginning from the eldest, even
unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the
woman, where she was, in the midst. And Jesus
lifted up himself, and said unto her, Woman, where


are they? Did no man condemn thee? And she
said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said, Neither do I
condemn thee; go thy way; from henceforth sin no
more.—John 8 ; 2-11.
CHRIST AND HIS FOLLOWERS.
Followers “Found!” •
No man can serve two masters: for either he will
hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold
to one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God
and mammon. Therefore I say unto you, Be not
anxious for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall
put on. Is not the life more than the food, and the
body than the raiment? Behold the birds of the
heaven, that they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feedeth
them. Are not ye of much more value than they?
And which of you by being anxious can add one
cubic unto his stature? And why are ye anxious
concerning raiment? Consider the lilies of the
field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they
spin; yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all
his glory was not arrayed like one of these. But
if God doth so clothe, the grass of the field, which
to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, shall
he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?
Be not therefore anxious, saying, What shall we
eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall
we be clothed? For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek; for your heavenly Father knoweth
that ye have need of all these things. But seek ye
first his kingdom and his righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you.—Matt. 6 ; 24-33.
Active Service Conditions.
And there came a scribe, and said unto him,
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.
And Jesus saith unto him, The foxes have holes, and
the birds of the heaven have nests; but the Son of
man hath not where to lay his head. And another
of the disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first
to go and bury my father. But Jesus saith unto
him, Follow me; and leave the dead to bury their
own dead.


And when he was entered into a boat, his disciples
followed him. And behold, there arose a great tem-
pest in the sea, insomuch that the boat was covered
with the waves: but he was asleep. And they came
to him, and awoke him, saying, Save, Lord; we
perish. And he saith unto them. Why are ye
fearful, Oye of little faith? Then he arose, and
rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a
great calm. And the men marvelled, saying, What
manner of man is this, that even the winds and the
sea obey him?—Matt. 8 : 19-27.
About Humility.
But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye
know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over
them, and their great ones exercise authority over
them. Not so shall it be among you: but whoso-
ever would become great among you shall be your
minister; and whosoever would be first among you
shall be your servant: even as the Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
give his life a ransom for many.—Matt. 20 : 25-28.
THE WORK OF CHRIST FOR US.
In Gethsemane.
And he came out, and went, as his custom was,
unto the mount of Olives; and the disciples also
followed him. And when he was at the place, he
said unto them. Pray that ye enter not into tempta-
tion. And he was parted from them about a stone’s
cast; and he kneeled down and prayed, saying,
Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me:
nevertheless not my will, but thine be done. And
there appeared unto him' an angel from heaven,
strengthening him. And being in an agony he
prayed more earnestly; and his sweat became as it
were great drops of blood falling down upon the
ground. And when he rose up from his prayer, he
came unto the disciples, and found them sleeping
for sorrow, and said unto them, Why sleep ye?
rise and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.—■
Luke 22 ; 39-46.


Calvary.
And when they came unto the place which is called
The Skull, there they crucified him, and the malefac-
tors, one on the right hand and the other on the left.
And Jesus said. Father, forgive them; for they
know not what they do. And parting his garments
among them, they cast lots. And the people stood
beholding. And the rulers also scoffed at him,
saying, Ho saved others; let him save himself, if
this is the Christ of God, his chosen. And the
soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, offering
him vinegar, and saying, If thou art the King of the
Jews, save thyself. And there was also a super-
scription over him.
THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
And one of the malefactors which were hanged
railed on him, saying, Art not thou the Christ? save
thyself and us. But the other answered, and rebuk-
ing him said, Dost thou not even fear God, seeing
thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed
justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds;
but this man hath done nothing amiss. And he
said, Jesus, remember me when thou contest in thy
kingdom. And he said unto him, Verily I say
unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.
And it was now about the sixth hour, and a dark-
ness came over the whole .land until the ninth hour,
the sun’s light failing; and the veil of the temple
was rent in the midst. And when Jesus had cried
with a loud voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I
commend my spirit: and having said this, he gave
up the ghost. And when the centurion saw what
was done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this
was a righteous man.—Luke 23 ; 33-47.
Victory.
But on the first day of the week, at early dawn,
they came unto the tomb, bringing the spices which
they had prepared. And they found the stone
rolled away from the tomb. And they entered in,
and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. And it
came to pass, while they were perplexed there-
about, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling
apparel; and as they were affrighted, and bowed
down their faces to the earth, they said unto them,


Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not
here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you
when he was yet in Galilee, saying that the Son of
must must be delivered up into the hands of sinful
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.
And they remembered his words, and returned from
the tomb, and told all these things to the eleven,
and to all the rest. —Luke 24 :1-9.
OUR RETURN TO HIM.
Where To Begin.
Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also
loved the church, and gave himself up for it; that
he might sanctify it, having cleansed it by the wash-
ing ot water with the word, that he might present
the church to himself a glorious church, not having
spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it
should be holy and without blemish. Even so
ought husbands also to love their own wives as their
own bodies. He that loveth his own wife loveth
himself; for no man ever hated his own flesh; but
nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as Christ also the
Church; because we are members of his body. For
this cause shall a man leave his father and mother,
and shall cleave to his wife; and the twain shall
become one flesh. This mystery is great; but I
speak in regard of Christ and of the church. Never-
theless do ye also severally love each one his own
wife even as himself; and let the wife see that she
fear her husband.—Eph. 5 : 24-33.
A Serious Thought.
Know ye not that ye are a temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any
man destroyeth the temple of God, him shall God
destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple
ye are.—l. Cor. 3 ; 10, 17.
Life’s Fruit,
For ye, brethren, were called for freedom; only
use not your freedom for an occasion to the flesh,
but through love be servants one to another. For
the whole law is fulfilled in one word, even in this;
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. But if
ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye
be not consumed one of another.


But I say, Walk by the Spirit, and ye shall not
fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh;
for these are contrary the one to the other; that ye
may not do the things that ye would. But if ye
are led by the Spirit, ye are not under the law. Now
the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
sorcery, enmities, strife, jealousies, wraths, factions,
divisions, heresies, envyings, drunkenness, revellings,
and such like: of the which I forewarn you, even as
I did forewarn you, that they which practice such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suf-
fering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness,
self-restraint: against such there is no law. And
they that are of Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh
with the passions and the lusts thereof. —Gal.
5 : 13-24.
Not All for the Preacher Alone.
These things command and teach. Let no man
despise thy youth; but be thou an ensample to them
that believe, in word, in manner of life, in love, in
faith, in purity. Till I come, give heed to reading,
to exhortation, to teaching. Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy,
with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.
Be diligent in these things; give thyself wholly to
them; that thy progress may be manifest unto all.
Take heed to thyself, and to thy teaching. Con-
tinue in these things; for in doing this thou shalt
save both thyself and them that hear thee.—l. Tim.
4 ; 11-16.
A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master.
If then I be a FATHER, where is mine honour?
And if I be a MASTER, where is my fear?
saith the LORD of HOSTS unto you.
—Malachi 1: 6.


Hymns.
Abide with Me.
1 Abide with me; fast falls the eventide;
The darkness deepens, Lord with me abide;
When other helpers fail, and comforts flee,
Help of the helpless, O abide with me.
3 Come not in terrors, as the King of kings,
But kind and good, with healing in Thy wings,
Tears for all woes, a heart for every plea;
Come, Friend of sinners, thus abide with me.
3 Thou on my head in early youth didst smile;
And, though rebellious and perverse meanwhile,
Thou hast not left me, oft as I left Thee:
On to the close, O Lord, abide with me.
4 I need Thy presence every passing hour;
What but Thy grace can foil the tempter’s power?
Who like Thyself my guide and stay can be?
Through cloud and sunshine, O abide with me.
5 I fear no foe, with Thee at hand to bless;
Ills have no weight, and tears no bitterness:
Where is death’s sting? where, grave, thy victory?
I triumph still if Thou abide with me.
8 Hold Thou Thy cross before my closing eyes.
Shine through the gloom, and point me to the
skies;
Heaven’s morning breaks, and earth’s vain
shadows flee;
In life and death, O Lord, abide with me.
Amen.


Nearer, My God, to Thee.
1 Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!
Even though it be a cross
That raiseth me.
Still all my song would be,
“ Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!”
2 Though, like the wanderer,
The sun gone down,
Darkness be over me,
My rest a stone,
Yet in my dreams I’d be
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!
3 There let the way appear
Steps unto heaven,
All that Thou send’st to me
In mercy given,
Angels to beckon me
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!
4 Then, with my waking thoughts
Bright with Thy praise,
Out of my stony griefs
Bethel I’ll raise—
So by my woes to be
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!
5 Or if on joyful wing
Cleaving the sky,
Sun, moon, and stars forgot,
Upwards I fly,
Still all my song shall be,
“ Nearer, my God, to Thee,
Nearer to Thee!”
Amen.
HYMNS.


Work, for the Night is Coming.
1 Work, for the night is coming!
Work through the morning hours;
Work while the dew is sparkling;
Work ’mid springing flowers;
Work while the day grows brighter,
Under the glowing sun;
Work, for the night is coming,
When man’s work is done.
3 Work, for the night is coming!
Work through the sunny noon;
Fill the bright hours with labour;
Rest comes sure and soon.
Give to each flying minute
Something to keep in store;
Work, for the night is coming,
When man works no more.
3 Work, for the night is coming!
Under the sunset skies,
While their bright tints are' glowing,
Work, for daylight flies.
Work till the last beam fadeth,
Fadeth to shine no more;
Work, while the night is darkening,
When man’s work is o’er.
Amen.
Yield Not to Temptation.
1 Yield not to temptation, for yielding is sin;
Each victory will help you some other to win;
Fight manfully onward; dark passions subdue;
Look ever to Jesus, He will carry you through.
Ask the Saviour to help you,
Comfort, strengthen, and keep you;
He is willing to aid you;
He will carry you through.
2 Shun evil companions; bad language disdain;
God’s name hold in reverence, nor take it in vain;
Be thoughtful and earnest, kind-hearted and*true;
Look ever to Jesus, He will carry you through.


3 To him that o’ercometh God giveth a crown;
Through faith we shall conquer, though often cast
down;
He who is our Saviour our strength will renew;
Look ever to Jesus, He will carry you through.
Amen.
Psalm 23.
1 The Lord’s my Shepherd, I’ll not want.
2 He makes me down to lie
In pastures green: he leadeth me
the quiet waters by.
3 My soul he doth restore again;
and me to walk doth make
Within the paths of righteousness,
ev’n for his own name's sake.
4 Yea, though I walk in death’s dark vale,
yet will I fear none ill;
For thou art with me; and thy rod
and staff me comfort still.
5 My table thou hast furnished
in presence of my foes;
My head thou dost with oil anoint,
and my cup overflows.
6 Goodness and mercy all my life
shall surely follow me:
And in God’s house for evermore
My dwelling-place shall be.
Psalm 100.
1 All people that on earth do dwell,
Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice.
2 Him serve with mirth, his praise forth tell.
Come ye before him and rejoice.
3 Know that the Lord is God indeed;
Without our aid he did us make:
We are his flock, he doth us feed,
And for his sheep he doth us take.
4 O enter then his gates with praise,
Approach with joy his courts unto;
Praise, laud and bless his name always,
For it is seemly so to do.
5 For why? the Lord our God is good,
His mercy is for ever sure;
His truth at all times firmly stood,
And shall from age to age endure.


O God of Bethel.
1 O God of Bethel, by whose hand
Thy people still are fed,
Who through this weary pilgrimage
Hast all our fathers led,
3 Our vows, our prayers, we now present,
Before Thy throne of grace;
God of our fathers, be the God
Of their succeeding race.
3 Through each perplexing path of life
Our wandering footsteps guide;
Give us each day our daily bread,
And raiment fit provide.
4 O spread Thy covering wings around,
Till all our wanderings cease,
And at our Father’s loved abode
Our souls arrive in peace.
5 Such blessings from Thy gracious hand
Our humble prayers implore;
And Thou shalt be our chosen God,
And portion evermore.
Amen.
When I Survey the Wondrous Cross.
1 When I survey the wondrous cross,
On which the Prince of glory died,
My richest gain I count but loss,
And pour contempt on all my pride.
2 Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast,
Save in the death of Christ, my God;
All the vain things that charm me most,
I sacrifice them to His blood.
3 See! from His head, His hands, His feet,
Sorrow and love flow mingled down;
Did e’er such love and sorrow meet,
Or thorns compose so rich a crown?
4 Were the whole realm of nature mine,
That were an offering far too small;
Love so amazing, so divine,
Demands my soul, my life, my all.
Amen.
82
THE BUSHMAN’S COMPANION.


There is a Green Hill.
1 There is a green hill far away,
Without a city wall.
Where the dear Lord was crucified
Who died to save us all,
2 We may not know, we cannot tell
What pains He had to bear;
But we believe it was for us
He hung and suffered there.
3 He died that we might be forgiven,
He died to make us good,
That we might go at last to heaven,
Saved by His precious blood.
4 There was no other good enough
• To pay the price of sin;
He only could unlock the gate
Of heaven, and let us in.
5 O dearly, dearly has He loved,
And we must love Him too,
And trust in His redeeming blood,
And try His works to do.
Amen.
Lead, Kindly Light.
1 Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,
Lead Thou me on;
The night is dark, and I am far from home;
Lead Thou me on.
Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see
The distant scene—one step enough for me.
2 I was not ever thus, nor prayed that Thou
Shouldst lead me on;
I loved to choose and see my path, but now
Lead Thou me on;
. L loved the garish day, and, spite of fears,
Pride ruled my will; remember not past years.
3 So long Thy power hath blest me, sure it still
Will lead me on
O’er moor and fen, o’er crag and torrent, till
The night is gone,
And with the morn those angel faces smile
Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.
Amen.
83
HYMNS.


0 Love That Wilt Not Let Me Go.
1 O Love that wilt not let me go,
1 rest my weary soul in Thee;
I give Thee back the life I owe,
That in Thine ocean depths its flow
May richer, fuller be.
2 O Light that followest all my way,
I yield my flickering torch to Thee:
My heart restores its borrowed ray.
That in Thy sunshine’s blaze its day
May brighter, fairer be.
3 O Joy that seekest me through pain,
I cannot close my heart to Thee:
I trace the rainbow through the rain,
And feel the promise is not vain
That morn shall tearless be.
4 O Cross that liftest up my head,
I dare not ask to fly from Thee:
I lay in dust life’s glory dead,
And from the ground there blossoms red
Life that shall endless be.
Amen.
My Faith Looks up to Thee.
1 My faith looks up to Thee,
Thou Lamb of Calvary,
. Saviour Divine:
Now hear me while I pray;
Take all my guilt away;
O let me from this day
Be wholly Thine.
2 May Thy rich grace impart
Strength to my fainting heart,
My zeal inspire;
As Thou hast died for me,
O may my love to Thee
Pure, warm, and changeless be,
A living fire.
3 While life’s dark maze I tread,
And griefs around me spread,
Be Thou my Guide;
Bid darkness turn to day,
Wipe sorrow’s tear away,
Nor let me ever stray
From Thee aside.


4 When ends life’s transient dream,
When death’s cold, sullen stream
Shall o’er me roll.
Blest Saviour, then, in love,
Fear and distrust remove;
O bear me safe above,
A ransomed soul.
Amen.
Rock of Ages.
1 Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee;
Let the water and the blood,
From Thy riven side which flowed,
Be of sin the double cure:
Cleanse me from its guilt and power.
2 Not the labours of my hands
Can fulfil Thy law’s demands;
Could my zeal no respite know,
Could my tears for ever flow.
All for sin could not atone:
Thou must save, and Thou alone.
3 Nothing in my hand I bring,
Simply to Thy cross I cling;
Naked, come to Thee for dress;
Helpless, look to Thee for grace;
Foul, I to the fountain fly;
Wash me, Saviour, or I die,
4 While I draw this fleeting breath,
When my eyelids close in death,
When I soar through tracts unknown,
See Thee on Thy judgment throne,
Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee.
Amen.
What a Friend We Have in Jesus.
1 What a Friend we have in Jesus,
All our sins and griefs to bear!
What a privilege to carry
Everything to God in prayer!
Oh, what peace we often forfeit'^
Oh, what needless pain we bear!
All because we do not carry
Everything to God in prayer.


2 Have we trials or temptations?
Is there trouble anywhere?
We should never be discouraged;
Take it to the Lord in prayer.
Can we find a friend so faithful,
Who will all our sorrows share?
Jesus knows our every weakness;
Take it to the Lord in prayer.
3 Are we weak and heavy-laden,
Cumbered with a load of care?
Precious Saviour, still our refuge!
Take it to the Lord in prayer.
Do thy friends despise, forsake thee?
Take it to the Lord in prayer;
In His arms He’ll take and shield thee,
Thou wilt find a solace there.
Amen.
Shall We Gather at the River.
1 Shall we gather at the river,
Where bright angel-feet have trod,
With its crystal tide for ever
Flowing from the throne of God?
Yes, we’ll gather at the river,
The beautiful, the beautiful river,
Gather with the saints at the river
That flows from the throne of God.
2 Ere we reach the shining river
Lay we every burden down;
Grace our spirits will deliver,
And provide a robe and crown.
3 At the smiling of the river,
Mirror of the Saviour’s face,
Saints whom death will never sever
Lift their songs of saving grace.
i Soon we’ll reach the shining river;
Soon our pilgrimage will cease;
Soon hearts will quiver
With the melody of peace.
Amen.


Now the Day is Over.
1 Now the day is over,
Night is drawing nigh,
Shadows of the evening
Steal across the sky.
2 Now the darkness gathers,
Stars begin to peep,
Birds, and beasts, and flowers
Soon will be asleep.
3 Jesus, give the weary
Calm and sweet repose;
With Thy tender blessing
May mine eyelids close.
4 Grant to little children
Visions bright of Thee;
Guard the sailors tossing
On the deep blue sea.
5 Comfort every sufferer
Watching late in pain;
Those who plan some evil
From their sin restrain.
6 Through the long night-watches
May Thine angels spread
Their white wings above me,
Watching round my bed.
7 When the morning wakens,
Then may I arise
Pure, and fresh, and sinless
In Thy holy eyes.
8 Glory to the Father,
Glory to the Son,
And to Thee, blest Spirit,
Whilst all ages run.
Amen.


Crossing the Bar.
1 Sunset and evening star,
And one clear call for me!
And may there be no moaning of the bar
When I put out to sea.
But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
Too full for sound and foam,
When that which drew from out the boundless
deep
Turns again home.
2 Twilight and evening bell,
And after that the dark!
And may there be no sadness of farewell
When I embark;
For, though from out our bourne of time and place
The flood may bear me far,
I hope to see my Pilot face to face
When I have crossed the bar.
Amen.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
God save our gracious King;
Long live our noble King;
God save the King!
Send him victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us:
God save the King!
Thy choicest gifts in store
On him be pleased to pour;
Long may he reign;
May he defend our laws,
And ever give us cause
To sing with heart and voice,
“ God save the King!”
God save our splendid men;
Send them safe home again;
We love them so.
Make them victorious,
Patient and chivalrous;
They are so dear to us;
God save our men.


From “ The Church at Home.”
Prayers.
FOR THE SICK.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of all mercies and God of all
comfort; Who comforteth us in all our tribula-
tion, that we may be able to comfort them that
are in any trouble, through the comfort where-
with we ourselves are comforted of God. For,
as the sufferings of Christ abound unto us, even
so our consolation also aboundeth through
Christ.” —2 Cor. 1 : 3-5.
“ Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Shall tribulation or anguish?
Nay, in all these things we are more than con-
querors through Him that loved us.”
—Rom. 8 : 35, 37.
Our Heavenly Father, our present help in trouble:
we beseech Thee to look mercifully upon Thy servant
in this house, who is laid on the bed of sickness.
May this sickness be not unto death, but for the
glory of God, and that the Son of God may be
glorified thereby. May He who healed all manner of
diseases when He was on earth come to this sick-
bed, and speak words of healing, if it be Thy holy
will, and words of peace, that the heart of Thy ser-
vant may not be troubled nor made afraid. In pa-
tience may (he) possess (his), soul. May (his) days
and nights of suffering be lighted by the presence of
the Comforter, and the sharpness of (his) pain be
overcome by the power of Love and Faith.
And may this new lesson of our helplessness, and
of our daily and hourly need of Jesus Christ, not
pass away without our taking it to' heart, and sur-
rendering ourselves in fuller ■ submission to Thy
blessed will: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
89
PRAYERS.


FOR THE DYING.
O God, Eternal Father, our Help and Refuge, in
Whom we live and move and have our being: in
Thy hands is the breath of our life. We commit
unto Thee our brother (sister), who is nigh unto
death. Thou art calling him (her) to Thyself; do
Thou uphold him (her) in the last great change.
May he (she) not fall from Thy hands, nor fail of
Thy grace. When he (she) passes through the
waters, do Thou be with him (her). May the
Saviour’s voice be clearly heard, “It is I, be not
afraid.” So shall the light dawn at the darkest
hour, and life eternal come: through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
PRAYER FOR CONSOLATION IN
BEREAVEMENT AND TROUBLE.
“ O joy that seekest me through pain,
I cannot close my heart to Thee:
I trace the rainbow through the rain,
And feel the promise is not vain
That morn shall tearless be.”—Matheson.
O Jesus Christ, whose ministry of sorrow, and
whose bleeding hands and feet, have taught us that
it is Thine to heal all human woe —the tears that fall
upon a silent grave, the anguish of disappointment,
the sorrow of despair, the quenching of faith—for
these and all other times of trial grant us Thy solace,
and the knowledge of Thy steadfast love. So suc-
cour and help us that we, whose feet falter because
the way is dark, and the gloom of it lonesome, may,
with courage sent from God, pass on through all the
paths of this our pilgrimage, until—our faces at last
made bright, even through the rain of tears and
trouble, by the hopeful vision of Thy love and faith-
fulness —we attain to the company of Thy blessed
children; from whose faces every trace of sorrow
has been wiped away. We, Thy bond-servants,
sought for by Thee through pain, ask this for Thy
name’s sake. Amen.


FOR THE DESOLATE.
“ I will not leave you orphaned, I will come to you.”
—John 14 ; 18.
Almighty God, our Refuge and Strength, a present
Help in trouble: we thank Thee Thou hast revealed
Thyself as the Hearer of prayer, and hast called
upon us to remember before Thee all that are in sore
distress, and to weep with them that weep. We
pray Thee on behalf of those who, in the mystery of
Thy love and working, are placed amidst bitter loss,
bereavement and calamity. We believe in Thy love
through pain, and that Thou art infinite in Thy
power, and boundless in Thy compassion. Thou
art very near to Thy children; and the sorrows of
all sorrowing hearts are known to Thee. In the
day when the faith and the courage of Thy children
are tried, make them strong and patient, that their
sore affliction may be turned into new hope and
knowledge of Thy presence. May it bring them
nearer Thee, and into a deeper sense of the value
of the things which are unseen and eternal. May
children who are fatherless be kept and guided by
Thee. May hearts be touched to succour them. And
may all who are friendless, lonesome and sad, ,and
who need other and higher help than this world
affords or man can give, find Thee and the sufficiency
of Thy grace. O, Great Shepherd, may Thy rod and
Thy staff comfort them; through Jesus Christ Our
Lord. Amen.
THANKSGIVING.
Almighty God, Father of all mercies, we Thine
unworthy servants do give Thee most humble and
hearty thanks for all Thy goodness and loving
kindness to us, and to all men. We bless Thee for
our creation, preservation, and all the blessings of
this life; but, above all, for Thine inestimable love
in the redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus
Christ; for the means of grace, and for the hope of
glory. And, we beseech Thee, give us that due sense
of all Thy mercies, that our hearts may be un-
feignedly thankful, and that we show forth Thy
praise, not only with our lips, but in our lives; by


giving up ourselves to Thy service, and by walking
before Thee in holiness and righteousness all our
days; through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with
Thee and the Holy Ghost be all honour and glory,
world without end. Amen.
A FAMILY PRAYER.
Our Heavenly Father, whose tender mercies are
over all Thy works, look down upon us this morn-
ing, we beseech Thee, in Thy love and pity.
May the Spirit of grace and truth rest upon us,
and accompany us through all the events of this
day, enabling us to fulfil its duties, to bear its trials,
to resist its temptations, and to embrace the oppor-
tunities it brings of doing good. May Fie deepen
in our hearts the sense of sin, and make us hate it
with a stronger hatred.
May we, who dwell together under this roof, be
kindly affectionate one to another, with brotherly
love; forbearing and forgiving one another, even
as God for Christ’s sake hath forgiven us.’'
May our friends and relatives be cared for by
Thee, and, while in the world, be kept from the
evil of it. Hear the cry of the poor and the
afflicted; and imbue the hearts of Thy people with
a great compassion for their brothers and sisters
who are in need; and for the ignorant, and them that
are out of the way.
O send forth Thy light and Thy truth to the ends
of the earth; let all flesh see the salvation of our
God.
Our Father, etc.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ: the love of
God; and the communion of the Holy Spirit; abide
with us, evermore. Amen.


A Children’s Service.
Hymn of Praise.
Prayer.
Reader; O God, our Father in Heaven, whose Son
has said, “ Where two or three are gathered together
in My name, there am I in the midst of them,”
make our hearts pure and lowly, that we may
worship Thee, who art a Spirit, in our spirit and in
truth.
O, dear Lord and Master, Jesus Christ: who didst
say, “ Suffer the little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom
of God,” let us draw near, with our prayer and
praise, unto Thee now, to thank Thee for all Thy
love, and to ask strength from Thee, to honour Thee
with our deeds. We are glad, before Thee, that,
when Thou didst come into Thy city as the King,
meek and lowly, to die for Thy people, the children
at the temple cried before Thee, “ Hosannah to the
Son of David.” And Thou wast glad for their voices
of welcome, and didst say: “ Out of the mouths of
babes, God has perfected praise.” Accept now, we
beseech Thee, our worship, and our gratitude; and
receive us to be Thy children, and Thy true and
loyal followers; to love Thee with our .hearts, and
to serve Thee in our lives; to the praise of Thy
holy Name.
Children: Amen.
Hymn of Love.
O.T. Reading (e.g., Is. 11 ;9, or 1 Sam. 3 :1-10;
1 Kings 17 ; 8-24).
Psalm (to be read by Reader and Children, verse
about); e.g., 1; 19; 23; 104 (first 14 or last 13
verses).


Prayer (all kneeling).
O God, our Heavenly Father, who hast bound us
together as one family and home, accept our thanks
for Thy love and care. Thou hast guarded us
through the days, and watched over us through the
nights. Thou hast granted us health and joy, and
food and clothing, and the precious gifts of sight
and hearing, and speech and knowledge. Thou hast
surrounded us with friends, and the best and truest
friendship of our parents’ love, and constant defence
and help. Above all, Thou hast given us Thy
greatest gift, of Jesus Christ Thy Son, who loved us,
and gave Himself for us.
We confess to Thee our sin and faults; our wrong
thoughts; our selfish feelings; our false or cruel or
evil words; all the untrue things we have done; and
all the right things we have left undone.
Forgive us, dear Heavenly Father, we beseech
Thee, who art all-holy and pure. Send, also, into
our hearts love to Jesus Christ, and the help of Thy
Holy Spirit; to give us right thoughts, and to make
our wills strong, and true, and pure, to do good.
Save us from falling into temptation. Let us re-
member that we have been baptised into Thy holy
name, and have borne upon our brows the sign of a
sacred vow to be Thy children, pure and loyal to
Thee. Guide us by Thy truth in Thy way.
Make us use our knowledge and strength in being
kind, courteous, and helpful to others around us, and
obedient to those who are over us. So. by Thy
grace, may we win the “Well done, good and faith-
ful servant!” from Jesus Christ, our Lord.
(All shall say) Amen.
Hymn of Service.
N.T. Reading (e.g., Luke 3 : 40-53; 10 : 35-32; 1 Cor.
13; Rev. 7 : 9-17).
Prayer.
Reader: O God, we pray to Thee for the poor, the
toiling, and the friendless; asking Thee, O loving
Father, to succour them through Thy Son; who,
being rich, became poor, that He might be the
Saviour of the poor, and needy, and lost.
Defend and provide for all orphaned and fatherless
children; and all who are widowed and helpless.
Strengthen them with Thy sympathy, and help them
in their distress.


Show Thy mercy, O Father, to the children in
darkened lands, who have not heard of Christ’s love;
or, in cities or the lonely “ bush,” who have not
been taught of His gentleness and compassion. Let
Thy mission of grace go forth to win, and teach,
and save them.
Bless all who are wronged, oppressed, and en-
slaved. Enlighten the nations to set them free.
We pray for our friends everywhere. Keep their
feet from falling, their eyes from tears; and preserve
them and us in the land of the living.
(We pray Thee to keep, and guide, and bless our
dear parents, and our brothers and sisters; make
their hearts and lives glad with Thy peace and
i°y-)
Make us able to forgive and help others: even
as we would that they should forgive and help us.
Hear this, our prayer, through the love of Jesus
Christ, our Lord.
All ; Amen.
(All Repeat the Lord’s Prayer.)
Our Father, Who art in heaven: Hallowed be Thy
name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in
earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And forgive us our trespasses; As we forgive
them that trespass against us. And lead us not into
temptation; But deliver us from evil. For Thine is
the Kingdom, the power, and the glory: For ever
and ever. Amen.
Collection (for some object to stir children’s sym-
pathy—Mission, Home or Foreign, Hospital,
etc.).
Here, if available, a reading may be introduced;—
Children’s Sermon, or short Biographical Sketch, etc.
Parting Hymn.
Benediction.
Reader; The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ: and
the love of God: and the communion of the Holy
Spirit: be with you all, evermore.
Response; Amen.
Note. —With this form as a guide, it should not
be difficult for a “ volunteer ” to lead in a service
for adults. For that matter, this same form could
be very largely used. We must all come before God
is “ little children.”—Ed.


In the Dark.
Death doth make us draw together,
Like weary birds in the wild weather,
Till we scarcely know
The once dread difference of feather
We felt so much a little ago.
Death wins us from our week-day dress;
We can’t do common things; life seems less;
There has past away
That blessed use of littleness
We live in, day by day.
What cause for quarrelling (he speaks true),
Or talking loudly, as if we knew?
All that man saith
Hath been said to him long since. Very few
Have been found to answer Death.
Sit still together. The sunbeams pour
In on us, past the swinging door;
And, under our breath,
Say: Life’s not less, the Immortal’s more—
Be kind to us, Death!
R. W. Barbour.


Order of Service for the
Burial of the Dead.
Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in
God, believe also in me. In my Father’s house
are many .dwelling places; if it were not so I
would have told you; for I go to prepare a
place for you. And if I go to prepare a place
for you I come again, and will receive you unto
myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.
And whither I go ye know the way. John
xiv.: 1-4.
As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower
of the field, so he flourisheth. For the wind
passeth over it, and it is gone, and the place
thereof shall know it no more. But the mercy
of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him; and his righteousness
unto children’s children, to such as keep his cove-
nant, and to those that remember his command-
ments to do them. Ps.'ciii. : 15-18.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is
coming and now is, when the dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live. For as the Father hath life in him-
self, so hath he given to the Son to have life
in himself; and hath given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the Son
of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is com-
D


ing, in the which all that are in the graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that
have done good unto the resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil unto the resur-
rection of condemnation. John v.: 25-29.
(In case of a child, the next passage may be
introduced.)
(Suffer the little children to come unto me,
and forbid them not; for of such is the king-
dom of God. Verily, I say unto you, Whoso-
ever shall not receive the kingdom of God as
a little child, he shall not enter therein. And
he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon
them and blessed them. Mark x. : 14-16.)
Behold, I show you a mystery: we shall not
all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead
shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed. For this corruptible must put on incor-
ruption, and this mortal must put on immorta-
lity. So when this corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on
immortality, then shall be brought to pass the say-
ing that is written, Death is swallowed up in
victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin,
and the strength of sin is the law; but thanks be
to God, which giveth us the victory, through our
Lord Jesus Christ! 1 Cor. xv. : 51-5.7.
(After the coffin is lowered.)
I am the resurrection and the life: he that be-
lieveth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live. And whosoever liveth and believeth in
me shall never die. John xi. ; 25, 26.


Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty
God to take out of this world the soul of
our departed (brother), we therefore commit
(his) body to the ground; earth to earth, ashes
to ashes, dust to dust. And we look for the
general resurrection in the las. day, and the
life of the world to come, through our Lord
Jesus Christ; at whose second coming in
glorious majesty to judge the world the earth
and the sea shall give up their dead; and the
corruptible bodies of those who sleep in him
shall be changed and made like unto his
glorious body, according to the working
whereby he is able even to subdue all things
unto himself.
I would not have you to be ignorant,
brethren, concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not, even as others which have
no hope. For if we believe drat Jesus died
and rose again, even so them also that sleep
in Jesus will God bring with Him. I Thess.
iv. : 13, 14.
And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth;
for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away, and there was no more sea.
And I, John, saw the holy city, new Jerusalem,
coming down from God out of heaven, pre-
pared as a bride adorned for her husband.
And I heard a great voice out of heaven,
saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself shall
be with them and be their God. And God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain; for the former things are passed away.
Rev. xxi. ; 1-4.


And I heard a voice from heaven, saying
unto me, Write: Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, saith
the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them. Rev.
xiv. : 13.
Let us pray.
Almighty God, who by the death of thy
dear Son Jesus Christ hast destroyed death,
by his rest in the tomb hath sanctified the
graves of the saints, and by His glorious
resurrection hath brought life and incorruptible-
ness to light; receive, we beseech thee, our
unfeigned thanks for that victory over death
and the grave which he hath obtained for us
and for all who sleep in him; and keep us
in everlasting fellowship with all that wait
for thee on earth, and with all that are around
thee in heaven; in union with Him who is
the resurrection and the life, who liveth and
reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, ever
one God, world without end. Amen.
Almighty God, our heavenly Father, who
in Thy perfect wisdom and mercy, hast ended
for thy servant departed the voyage of this
troublous life, grant, we beseech thee, that
we who are still to continue our course amidst
earthly dangers, temptations and troubles
may evermore be protected by thy mercy, and
finally come to the haven of eternal salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, an,d
the love of God, and the fellowship of the
Holy Ghost be with you all, evermore. Amen.


Every man feels, and not strangely,
that there never were such experiences
of life as his own. No joy was ever
like our joy, no sorrow like our sorrow.
Indeed, there is a kind of indignation
excited in us when one likens our grief
to his own. The soul is jealous of its
experiences, and does not like its pride
to be humbled by the thought that they
are common. For, though we know
that the world groans and travails in
pain, and has done so for ages, yet a
groan heard by our ear is a very
different thing from a groan uttered
by our mouth. The sorrows of other
men seem to us like clouds of rain that
empty themselves in the distance, and
whose long-travelling thunder comes
to us mellowed and subdued; but our
own troubles are like a storm bursting
right overhead, and sending down its
bolts upon us with direct plunge.
Henry Ward Beecher.


MEMORANDA.


M EMO R AN DA,— continued


MEMORANDA. —CONTINUED


M EMORAN DA.— continued


-
CASH


j
i
ACCOUNT.


ADDRESSES.


Auld Lang Syne.
Should auld acquaintance be forgot.
And never brought to min’?
Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
And days o’ lang syne?
For auld lang syne, my dear,
For auld lang syne,
We’ll tak’ a cup o’ kindness yet,
For auld lang syne.
We twa hae run abou the braes,
And pu’d the gowans fine ;
But we’ve wandered mony a weary foot
Sin’ auld lang syne.
We twa! hae paidl’t i’ the bum
Frae mornin’ sun till dine :
But seas between us braid hae roar’d
Sin’ auld lang syne.
And here’s a hand my trusty frien’,
And gie’s a grup o’ thine;
And we’ll tak’ a cup o’ kindness yet.
For auld lang syne.


POSTAL INFORMATION.
Letters. —Within the Commonwealth and British Empire, Id. per \ oz-
All Other Places 2£d. per | oz-
Registered Newspapers.—
Within the Commonwealth, for each paper .... Jd. per 10 oz.
Printed Matter. —Within the Commonwealth |d. per 2 oz.
New Zealand, Fiji, New Hebrides, Solomon Islands,
Jd. per 2 oz. or part of 2 oz., with Id. minimum.
All Other Places, Id. per 2 oz. or part of 2 oz.
Commercial Papers.— Within the Commonwealth, N.Z.,
Fiji Id. per 2 oz-
Books. —Within the Commonwealth (Printed in Aus-
tralia) idj. per 8 oz-
Packets. —Within the Commonwealth Id. per 2 oz-
Parceis. —Within the State, 1 lb., 6d.; 3d. per lb. additional. Limit
11 lbs. Interstate, &c., 1 lb., Bd.; 6d. per lb. additional. Limit
11 lbs.
MONEY ORDERS.
The Commonwealth.—£s and under, 6d.; £lO, 1/-; £l5, 1/6; £2O, 2/--
New Zealand and Fiji.—Under £2, fid.; £5, 1/-; £7, 1/6; £lO, 2/-:
£l2, 2/6; £l5, 3/-; £l7, 3/6; £2O, 4/-.
British and Foreign.—fid. for any amount up to £2, and 3d. for each
additional £l.
TELEGRAPH RATES.
The following rates apply to all words appearing on Telegrams, viz-
Name and Address of person to whom sent, and Name and Address of
sender, as well as the actual contents of Telegram:—
Within a 15-Mile Radius of Sending Station 16 words, 6d-
Each additional word. Id.
Within the State 16 words 9d-
Each additional word, Id.
Interstate 16 words, 1/'
Each additional word, Id.


JANUARY
•
FEBRUARY.
MARCH.
APRIL.
S
-
2
9
16
22
30
S
-
6
13
20
27
-
5
12
19
26
s
-
2
9
16
23130
M
-
3
10
17
24
31
M
-
7
14
21
28
M
-
6
13
20
27
M
-
3
10
17
24
Tu
-
4
11
V
25
Tu
1
8
15
22
29
Tu
-
7
14
21
28
Tu
-
4
11
18
25
W
-
5
12
i:
26
W
2
9
16
23
M
W
1
8
1ft
22
29
W
-
ft
12
19
26
Th
_
6
13
20
27
Th
3
10
17
24
Th
2
9
16
23
30
Th
-
6
13
20
27
...
F
-
7
14
2:
2£
F
4
11
18
25
F
3
10
17
24
31
F
-
7
14
21
28
3
1
8
15
22
2S
,,,
S
5
12
19
26
S
4
11118
25
...
s 1
3
15
22
29
MAY.
JUNE.
JULY.
AUGUST.
3
_
7
14
21
28
«
-
4
11
18
25
s
-
2
<
16
23
30
S
-
6
13
20
27
M
1
15
22
29
M
-
ft
12
19
26
M
-
i
1(
17
24
31
M
-
7
14
21
28
Tu
2
9
16
23
30
Tu
-
6
13
20
27
Tu
-
4
1
U
25
...
Tu
8
15
22
29
W
3
in
17
94
31
W
-
7
14
21
28
VV
-
5
12
11
26
...
W
2
9
16
23
30
Th
4
11
18
25
Th
1
«
15
22
29
Th
-
i;
2(
27
...
Th
3
10
17
24
31
F
5
12
19
26
...
F
2
9
16
23
30
F
-
7
h.
21
28
F
4
11
18
25
...
8
6
13
20
27
S
3
10
17
24
...
S
1
8
15
22
29
S
5
12
19
26
...
SEPTEMBER.
OCTOBER.
NOVEMBER.
DECEMBER.
s
-
3
10
17
24
1
8
15
22
29
s
-
ft
12
19
26
s
-
3
10
17
24
33
M
-
4
11
18
25
M
2
9
16
23
30
M
-
6
13
2ft
27
M
-
4
11
13
25
...
Tu
-
5
12
19
26
Tu
3
1ft
17
24
31
Tu
-
7
14
21
28
Tu
-
5
12
11
26
...
W
-
6
13
20
27
W
4
11
18
25
W
i
8
15
22
29
W
-
6
13
21
27
Th
-
7
14
21
28
Th
5
12
19
26
Th
2
9
16
23
30
Th
-
7
14
21
2b
...
F
1
H
15
22
29
F
6
13
20
27
...
F
a
10
17
24
...
F
1
8
15
22
21
...
S
2
9
16
23
30
S
7
14
21
28
S
4
11
18
25
...
S
2
9
16
23
30
JANUARY.
FEBRUARY.
MARCH.
APRIL.
s
7
14
21
28
8
-
4
11
18
25
s
4
11
18
25
s
8
15
22
29
M
1
8
15
22
29
M
-
5
12
19
26
M
5
12
19
26
M
2
9
16
23
30
Tu
2
9
16
23
30
Tu
-
6
13
20
27
Tu
6
li
20
27
Tu
3
10
17
24
...
W
3
10
17
24
31
W
-
7
14
21
28
W
14
21
28
W
4
11
18
25
...
Th
4
11
18
25
Th
8
15
22
,,
Th
:
I
15
22
29
Th
5
12
19
26
...
F
5
12
19
26
F
2
9
16
23
...
F
2
\
16
23
30
F
6
13
20
27
...
6
13
20
27
...
S
3
10
17
24
S
10
17
24
31
S
7
14
21
28
...
MAY.
JUNE.
JULY.
AUGUST.
8
6
13
20
27
s
-
3
10
17
24
s
1
8
15
22
29
S
-
5
12
19
26
M
7
14
21
28
M
-
4
11
18
25
M
2
9
16
23
30
M
-
6
13
20
27
Tu
1
8
15
22
29
Tu
-
5
12
19
26
Tu
3
10
17
24
31
Tu
-
7
14
21
28
W
2
9
16
23
30
W
-
6
13
20
27
W
4
11
18
25
...
w
1
8
15
22
29
Th
3
10
17
24
31
Th
_
7
14
21
28
Th
5
12
19
26
...
Th
2
9
16
23
30
F
4
11
18
25
F
1
8
15
22
29
F
6
13
20
27
...
F
3
10
17
24
31
S
5
12
19
26
S
2
9
16
23
30
S
7
14
21
28
S
4
11
18
25
SEPTEMBER.
OCTOBER.
NOVEMBER.
DECEMBER.
8
_
9
9
16
23
30
8
-
7
14
21
28
s
-
4
11
18
25
S
-
2
9
16123
30
M
_
3
10
17
24
M
1
8
15
22
29
M
-
5
12
19
26
M
-
3
10
r
2 4
31
Tu
4
11
18
25
Tu
2
9
16
23
30
Tu
-
6
13
20
27
Tu
-
4
11
Li
25
...
W
_
5
12
19
26
...
W
3
10
17
24
31
W
-
7
14
21
28
W
-
5
12
11
26
...
Th
_
6
13
20
27
Th
4
11
18
25
Th
1
8
15
22
29
Th
-
3
13
21
27
...
F
_
7
14
21
28
...
F
5
12
19
26
...
F
2
9
16
23
30
F
•
7
14
2]
2*
S '
8
15
22
29
S
6
13
20
27
...
S
3
10
17
24
...
S
1
8
15
22
29
-i
CALENDAR for 1916.
CALENDAR for 1917.
