

THE
UNHAPPY TRANSPORT,
àt (he sorrowful sufferings of HENRY JENKINS, fully described ia a fetter to h»
Parents, and his lamentation» ■“*
Hear and honoured Parents,
Manifold are the sufferings which I have undergone since the sorrowful day of our parting Q>
the horrors of that dismal dav, that dismal parting» are engraven on my memory; time can never
efface it. How bitterly do I r.*w lament the errors of my past life, and bow keenly do I f»et the
punishment which my misconduct has brought upoa me. Dearest parents, upon’my knees I
crave your pardon for all the misery I have occasioned you ; often in the midst of my never-ceasimr
tod, does the recollection of your tender love and anxious concern for my welfare and hanoine«
rudi upon my distracted mind, then do 1 feel the pangs of remorse to such a degree that I raft
upon Heaven to ease me of my wretched existence. Oh ! happy England, Oh ! country favour!.!»
of the Lord, how docs my heart bleed at the recollection of thee compared with the misery around
me, bow great aie the comforts which even the meanest of he inhabitants enjoy. Here am I •
bondage in a foreign fand, far from thy blessed shores, from friends, kindred and home draLi
a chain, the emblem af infamy, and digging in a dark and cheerless quarry from the first
of morn till the dark night, then housed among scores of wretches lake myself, in a gloom vhaKb
•lion, where alter a coarse comfortless meat. I take such repose as a broken spirit and a Mlbo f
straw can afford- The only comfort I have is in conversing with Susannah Hoskin.who ial JZ °i
for 14 yeare; she ia living as a servant at the house of our Overseer. Remember me to «11
companions, and tell (hem although I have acted unworthy ©f their regard; that I hone th *
take warning by what lam come to, und my prayers are constantly for their bannines* Z: *
dear Parents* Yo«r unhappy Sou, 1 *
MENRY JEN£IN.
The Lamentation,
Come all you wild and wicked youths, «Sa It was at the Old Bailev
Wherever that you be, Ü? To the bar we did repair
J pray you g.ve a.tent, » m Where we with patience did awsi*
And fasten unto me. Jg To hear OMr £
1 he ta-e of us poor Irans, orts, We used the gamekeeper cruelly
As you shall understand <g& Which -made it very bard
And the hardships we undergo, Wh,„ * e for life was banished
Ad on Van Diemens Land *J|ï* And quickly sent abroad»
My parents ra-red me tenderly. W The ship- that bore ns from the land
Good learning gave to me, M The Metcalf was her name &
Until wi h bad company 1 was- beguil'd jP For fell three months- and upwards
Which proved my destiny ; M We ploughed the • P.J*
1 w »f s br ?; ,S . U .;i P •n MMk.ex,W Neither land or harbour coddle
A«mi UxbiK ge did dwell, Iff Believe mo what I sav
My name its Henry Jenkiu, «#> A boundless ocean all »round
At London Î m known well. And over us the sky.
wkh ‘ ive mOEe , l wcnt one nighfe Ä ©n the fourteenth day of Anri*
into a squire spark, W W e got m sight of land P
Mopmg to- get some game, jßh And then- we were soon landed
I fe night it proved- dark. M And chained hand to hand
But we were taken in the act, 'gg' To see our fellow creatures
To prison- sent with, speed, W We fee) we can’t tell how.
In iromr kept both day and night, §2?) Some chained torn Wägern-
hearts to bleed» And others to a plough. '
Wnfcfe S% 6mt St Andrew ftoeet..t Dtafife.
