

First Settlement on the Derwent.
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE ROYAL
SOCIETY OF TASMANIA,
— ~ * ~ 7
November 13, 1888,
JAMES BACKHOUSE WALKER.
HOBART, 1889.




THE FRENCH IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
AND THE FIRST SETTLEMENT AT THE
DERWENT.
JAMES B. WALKER.
Prefatory Note.
As the subject of the present Paper may appear to be
scarcely within the scope of the objects of the Royal
Society, it seems proper to state briefly the occasion of
its being written and submitted to the consideration of the
Fellows.
Some two years ago, the Tasmanian Government —of
which the Hon. James Wilson Agnew, Honorary Secretary
of the Royal Society, was Premier—following the good
example set by the Governments of New South Wales,
Victoria, South Australia, Queensland, and New Zealand,
directed search to be made in the English State Record
Office for papers relating to the settlement and early
history of this Colony. The idea originated in a suggestion
from Mr. James Bonwick, F.R.G.S., the well-known
writer on the Tasmanian Aborigines, who had been
employed for years on similar work for various Colonial
Governments, and to him the task was entrusted by Dr.
Agnew. Mr. Bonwick searched, not only the Record
Office, but the papers of the Admiralty, the Foreign
Office, the Privy Council, and the British Museum, and
discovered and copied a large mass of documents relating
to the early days of Tasmania. In the early part of
this year, these copies, extending over some 640 foolscap
pages, were received in Hobart, and the present Premier
—the Hon. Philip Oakley Fysh—obligingly allowed me
to peruse them. I found them to be of great interest.
They threw quite a new light on the causes which led to
the first occupation of this Island ; gave a complete
history of Bowen’s first settlement at Risdon Cove ;
and supplied materials for other hitherto unwritten


chapters of Tasmanian history. Upon informing Mr.
Fysh of the result of my examination, he entered warmly
into my proposal to put before the public in a narrative
form the information acquired, and placed the documents
at my disposal for that purpose. It is at Mr. Fysh’s
suggestion that this first paper on the subject is now sub-
mitted to the Royal Society. The introductory sketch
of the operations of the French in Tasmania has been
compiled from the original published narratives of the
expeditions. Some history of preceding events seemed
necessary for a proper understanding of the transactions
referred to in the documents under notice. My object
has been, not to give a history of the discovery and
early exploration of our island, but merely such an outline
of the rivalries of the French and English in these seas
as would suffice for a better apprehension of the motives
which prompted the first occupation of the Derwent.
The story of the first settlement of Tasmania, and of
Lieutenant Bowen’s little colony at Risdon Cove, has
never yet been told, so far as I can discover. West,
Fenton, and other authors give meagre, inaccurate, and
contradictory particulars. No writer records even the
date of Bowen’s landing:. Mr. Bonwick’s researches now,
o .... '
for the first time, enable us to give this missing first
chapter of Tasmanian history.
I.— The French in Van Diemen’s Land.
The Cambridge Professor of Modern History, in a
recent remarkable book, has shown that the great English
event of the 18th century, indeed, the greatest fact of
modern English History, has been the expansion of
England into lands beyond the seas—the foundation and
growth of a Greater Britain. Professor Seeley holds
that the great hundred years’ struggle between England
and France, lasting from the time of Louis XIV. to the
days of Napoleon, was, in the main, a duel between
the two nations for the possession of the New World.
Even in the English conquest of India the Professor
traces, not so much the ambition of conquest and the lust
of empire, as fear of the French and rivalry with them.
By the close of the last century the issue of the strife
was no longer doubtful. In India, Wellesley had anni-
hilated French influence, and was rapidly consolidating the
English dominion. France had lost for ever her finest


possessions in America, though she on her side had
dealt us a return blow in assisting to tear from England
her North American Colonies.
But the struggle was not over, and it was destined to
yield yet wider triumphs for the English race. The very
humiliation which France had helped to inflict on her
rival was to prove a potent factor in the further expansion
of “ Greater Britain.” It is probably no exaggeration
to say that it is to the hostility of France, and her action
in America, that we owe iu no small measure the British
colonisation of Australia—a work which must ever stand
as the most momentous event of our century.
The secession of her North American provinces had well
nigh left England without a colonial empire. English-
men straightway set themselves to search for a com-
pensation for their lost possessions, and to find a new
outlet for their energies and for their surplus population.
A new world lay ready to their hand. As David
Livingstone, in our own days, has called into existence
a new realm in the dark continent of Africa, so in the
days of our great grandfathers, the genius of Captain
Cook, England’s greatest circumnavigator, had opened
up a new realm in the unknown and mysterious seas
of the South. But in these Southern seas, as formerly
in America and India, England and France were, and
indeed still are, rivals. In exploration each nation can
boast of distinguished names. The English navigators,
Anson, Vancouver, Cook, Furneaux, and Flinders, had
active competitors in the Frenchmen, Bougainville,
Marion, Surville, La Pérouse, D’Entrecasteaux, and
Baudin. Nor were the English the first to entertain the
design of colonising the new lands. So far back as the
year 1756, an eminent and learned French advocate,
M. le President Charles de Brosses, in his Histoire des
Navigations aux Terres Australes , had strongly urged
upon the Government of France the wisdom of establishing
a French colony in the South Seas. In the work cited, the
author passes in review the relative advantages of various
portions of the Southern world, and concludes that some
part of Australasia* offers the best prospect for settle-
ment, the country being favourable, and access easy, with
*De Brosses was President of the Parliament of Dijon. To him
we owe the invention of the name Australasia. Nav. aux Terres
Aust.j i., 80.


Pondicherry as a base of operations.*' He rejects New
Zealand and Van Diemen’s Land as too remote; and
after hesitating for a while over Quiros’ Terre da St. Esprit
(the coast between Cooktown and Townsville), finally
inclines to New Britain as the most suitable locality.
With a sagacious foresight, since amply justified by events,
he declares that any colony planted in these regions would
hold Ariadne’s clew for the whole Southern world. From
such a centre, every part of this new realm could in
time be explored and conquered, from the Equator to the
Antarctic Circle. He elaborately discusses the best means
of forming such a settlement, and recommends that after
its first establishment a certain number of convicts, male
and female, should be sent to it every year to supply the
necessary labour, and to be in time transformed from a
danger and burden to the State into industrious and
useful citizens.f Still further to strengthen the new
colony, he would deport to it, as free citizens, numbers of
foundlings, who are in a sense the property of the State
which has reared them, and can therefore dispose of them
at its pleasure. He warns his countrymen against the
danger of waiting until some other nation had proved the
practicability of a colony by trying the experiment ; for
when once any nation has gained a foothold it will not
suffer another to share the territory to which it has thus
acquired a right by conquest. % Although various dis-
covery expeditions were despatched from France to the
South Seas after the days of De Brosses, the President’s
warning remained unheeded. France missed her oppor-
tunity, and it was left to England to take the first step,
and found a new empire in these southern seas, from
which—justifying the Frenchman’s forecast—she did not
scruple from the very first peremptorily to warn off all
intruders.
It was probably due to the fact of the coincidence of
Captain Cook’s discoveries with the loss of the American
colonies, quite as much as to her naval supremacy, that
England chanced to be beforehand with her rival. It
takes an effort of imagination to realise the New World
which Cook revealed, and how he opened up to men’s
minds the possibilities and promise of the new field for
enterprise. Until his time, New Holland —for as yet
*Nav. aux Terres Aust., ii., 367, et seq.
I Ibid., ii., 408.
t Ibid., i., 28, et seq.


Australia was not * had been little more than a
geographical expression. Parts of the Northern and
Western coasts, and one ominous Bay of Storms at the
South, were laid down more or less vaguely on the maps
from the reports of Dutch navigators of the preceding
century, and those old and infrequent voyagers had
brought back only reports of forbidding shores and
desolate territory. The right to these dreary coasts was
conceded without dispute to the Dutch, for it was a land
that no man desired. The English had no part in its
discovery. One Englishman, indeed, and one only—•
William Dampier—had touched on the Western coast
in the year 1688, had found a barren sandy soil, inhabited
by wretched savages, with no redeeming advantage, and
had left it gladly, thinking it the most miserable spot on
the face of the earth. Such was the state of affairs when
Cook appeared on the scene. In 1770, on his return from
the observation of the Transit of Venus at Tahiti, and in
pursuance of instructions to try to solve the mystery of the
great South Land, the Endeavour, after rediscovering and
surveying the islands of New Zealand, sailed west till the
eastern shore of New Holland was sighted. Cook
explored the coast from Cape Howe to Cape York ;
landed at Botany Bay, hoisted the English flag, took
possession of the country in the name of King George,
and returned home to report the existence of a fine and
fertile territory in a temperate climate, well suited for
English settlers. At home the growth of feeling in favour
of a milder penal code had rendered it necessary to devise
some scheme for disposing of criminals, and Pitt and the
English Government resolved to choose Botany Bay as
the field for a project which should relieve English diffi-
culties, and lay the foundation of a new colony. The first
fleet sailed from England, and in January, 1788, Governor
Phillip planted the first settlement in New Holland, sub-
stantially on the lines indicated in detail by the French
President more than a quarter of a century before.
* Quiros (1606) named his discovery Austrialia del Espiritu
Santo, in honor of Philip of Austria. Purchas, in his English
translation of Quiros’ voyage (1625) called it Australia Incognita—
(See Petherick’s Bibliography of Australasia). Dairymple, in his
Collection of Voyages (1770) suggests the name, and Flinders
revived it in the Introduction to his Voyage to Terra Australis,
1814, p. iii.


But the French had never ceased to turn longing eyes
towards the new Southern world. If the mind of Franec
had not been so fully occupied in the desperate effort to
maintain her naval power against the English in other
seas, it is quite possible that to her, and not to England,
would have fallen the dominion of Australia. And,
probably, suspicion of French designs had its effect in
hastening English action. Already, in 1785, the French
Government had despatched the celebrated La Pérouse
with an expedition to circumnavigate the world, and
explore the coasts of New Holland, doubtless with some
more or less definite design of settlement. When, on the
26th January, 1788, La Pérouse, with his ships, the
Boussole and the Astrolabe , sailed into Botany Bay, he
found an English fleet at anchor there, having arrived five
days before him. Governor Phillip had just left the Bay
in the Supply to find in Port Jackson a more suitable
site for a town ; and on the very day La Pérouse’s ships
came to an anchor the city of Sydney was founded. The
French remained in Botany Bay for six weeks, the
English and they maintaining a friendly and pleasant
intercourse. Collins says that, the French were very
unfavourably impressed with the prospects of the settle-
ment, the officers having been heard to declare that in
their whole voyage they had never found so poor a
country, or such wretched people as the natives of New
South Wales. On the 10th March La Pérouse sailed
from New South Wales to vanish into space—the mystery
which shrouded his fate not being solved until nearly 40
years had elapsed.
The English foothold on the Australian continent was
now securely established, and disregarding the western
half, to which the Dutch were still considered as having a
title—something like their present title to Western New
Guinea—England, by solemn proclamation, formally laid
claim to the whole eastern territory from Cape ïork to the
extreme South Cape of Van Diemen’s Land, and as far
west as the 135th degree of east longitude.
Still France did not relinquish her dreams of colonisa-
tion, but seemed to cherish the idea of disputing with
her great rival her exclusive possession of the new
territories. There is reason to think that the French
designs, if ever distinctly formulated, pointed to the
southern extremity of Van Diemen’s Land as the locality


for a settlement. The Terre tie Diemen and the Baie des
Tempêtes exercised a particular fascination over successive
French navigators, and excited the attention of the French
Government. It was a spot known only for a forbidding
rock-bound coast, washed by an angry sea, and lashed
by perpetual tempests. For more than a century after
its discovery by Abel Tasman in 1642 no European bad
invaded its solitudes, until on the 4th March, 1772, the
French navigator, Marion du Fresne, anchored his ships,
the Mascarin and the Castries, in the Frederic Hendric
Bay of Tasman*. He remained there six days, landed,
and attempted to establish intercourse with the natives,
the attempt resulting in an encounter in which the first
Tasmanian aborigine fell under the fire of European
muskets. After Marion, the English navigators Fur- 7
neaux (1773) Cook (1777), Cox (1789), and Bligh (1788
and 1792) paid”passing visits to Adventure Bay; but it
was a Frenchman, again, who made the first survey of the
approaches to the Derwent. The instructions to La
Fcrouse in 1785 had directed him to explore this, the
extreme southern point of New Plolland ; and the last i, a pcrouse,
letter written by him from Botany Bay, on 7 February,
1788, notes his intention to proceed there before his
return, —an intention there is some reason to believe he
executedt. The exploration was made four years later
by Admiral Bruny D’Entrecasteaux, Commander of the
expedition sent out by the National Assembly in 1791 to
search for the missing navigator. It. was to Storm Bay
that his ships, the Recherche and Espérance, first directed
their course from the Cape of Good Hope. The autumn
of 1792 was far advanced before the French Admiral
sighted the basaltic cliffs of Van Diemen’s Land.
Through an error of his pilot, Raoul, he missed
Adventure Bay, which he had intended to make, and on
21st April cast anchor at the entrance of the inlet after-
wards known to the English as Storm Bay Passage, but
which now more fittingly bears the name of D’Entre-
* This is not the Frederick Henry Bay of the colonists, but
that marked on the maps as Marion Bay, on the East Coast.
+ Bent’s Almanac for 1827 states that in the year 1809 Captain
Bunker, of the ship Venus, found, buried on the shore of Adventure
Bay, a bottle containing letters from La Pcrouse dated one month
after ids leaving Port Jackson. In the year 1826 Captain Peter
Dillon discovered traces of La Pérouse’s expedition at Yanikoro, in
the Santa Cruz Group.


casteaux Channel, after its discoverer. Recherche Bay,
close at hand, offered a safe and commodious harbour for
the ships ; and here they remained for a month, their
boats exploring and surveying the channel and the various
inlets on the coast, while the scientific men journeyed
inland, made observations, collected specimens of natural
history, and revelled in tiie examination of a new flora
and fauna. The natives, at first timid and distrustful,
were soon conciliated, and showed themselves most friendly
to the Europeans. On the 17th May the ships entered
the Channel, and the French viewed with astonishment
the extent of the harbours which unfolded themselves to
their delighted gaze, affording a secure shelter spacious
enough to contain easily the combined fleet of all the
maritime powers of Europe. After a fortnight employed
in examining the Channel, the Admiral sailed out of tin
Passage into Storm Bay, rounded the Pillar, and pro-
ceeded to New Caledonia. In the summer of the
following year he returned to Van Diemen’s Land, and
spent another five weeks in the Channel (21 January
to 28 February, 1793). During this second stay the
French completed the surveys which they had begun
in the preceding autumn, explored Norfolk Bay and
Frederick Henry Bay (Baie du Nord), and ascended
20 miles up the Derwent, which they named Rivière
du Nord. Flinders, with his usual generous recognition
of the work of previous navigators, says of the charts
of Beautems Beaupré, the hydrographer of the expedition,
“vo y , that “ they contain some of the finest specimens of
marine surveying perhaps ever made in a new country.”
Labillardière, the naturalist and historian of the expedition,
devotes more than 160 pages of his work to a description
Labiiiardière, of the Terre de Diemen. He speaks with enthusiasm of
recherche*do La the country and its productions, of its magnificent forests
£o r ?n! e ’ iv. pp ‘ of blue-gum and other timber, of its soil and fertility, and
116-194, and 1., p. o
428—a., p. so. of the amiability of its peaceful inhabitants, and dilates
with pardonable pride and satisfaction on the grandeur
and extent of the harbours which French enterprise had
discovered in this hitherto dreaded coast. The lengthened
stay of D’Entrecasteaux, the minute and elaborate nature
of his surveys, and the space his historian devotes to a
description of the country and its advantages, indicate
some further object than mere geographical research.
The names which stud our southern coast, and are


familial’ in our mouths as household words, —Bruny
Island, D’Entrecasteaux Channel, Recherche Bay, Port
Espérance, River Huon, Cape Raoul, and others, —stand
a perpetual monument to the memory of the French navi-
gators.
And now, at length, English explorers appear upon the
scene. In 1794, Lieut. John Hayes, of the Indian navy,
was despatched from India in the ships Duke of Clarence
and Duchess on a voyage of discovery, including the
exploration of the coasts of Van Diemen’s Land. He
sailed up the Riviere du Nord —which he re-christened
the Derwent—as far as Herdsman’s Cove. As the
admirable charts of D’Entrecasteaux were unknown to the
English until long years after, it was on Hayes’ sketch Flinders’ intro.,
that subsequent visitors had to rely, and in many cases p ‘
the names he gave have been substituted for those given
by the French.
In December, 1797, the adventurous Bass, leaving ?
Port Jackson in an open whaleboat, had solved the vexed
problem of the strait which bears the name and immortalises p —“***
the intrepid daring of its discoverer ; and late in the year <»•• - "
1798, Bass and Flinders, in the Norfolk, a little sloop of
25 tons, sailed through Bass’ Strait, explored Port Dai-
ry m pie, circumnavigated Tasmania, and made a careful
examination and survey of the Derwent and its approaches
and neighbourhood.
On the 19th October, 1800, when Bonaparte was First
Consul, an expedition, consisting of two ships, the Géo-
graphe and Naturaliste, sailed out of Havre, amidst great
demonstrations, for a voyage of discovery round the world.
Commodore Baudin, in tho Géographe, was chief of the
expedition ; Captain Hamelin commanded the Naturaliste.
Although fierce war was raging at the time between the
two nations, the English Admiralty granted a passport or
safe conduct to Baudin, on the ground that scientific
expeditions should be exempt from hostilities. Notwith-
standing these courtesies of the English Government to
the French commander, it was shrewdly suspected that
the real design of the expedition was to spy out the state
of the English possessions in New Holland, and, if _
practicable, hoist the standard of Bonaparte at some con-
venient point of tiie coast and establish a French colony. Eiiinhurgh,
Certain it is that Baudin’s instructions —afterwards pub-
fished in Pérou ’s account - of the voyage —give colour to PortPhilli i l >i’- 3 -


the belief. They direct the captain to proceed direct
from the Mauritius to the southern point of the Terre de
Diémen, double the South Cape, carefully examine the
Canal D’Entrecasteaux in eveiy part, ascend all the rivers
in this portion of the island as far as they were navigable,
explore all the eastern coast, carefully survey Banks’
Straits, sail through Bass’ Strait, and after exploring
Hunter’s Islands, proceed to the continent of New
Holland and search for the great strait which was sup-
posed to separate the eastern part occupied by the
English, from the western portion claimed by the Dutch.
All this certainly looks very like some further object than
geographical discovery. The French expedition doubtless
stirred the English to renewed activity, and through the
influence of Sir Joseph Banks, Earl Spencer (then at the
head of the Admiralty) consented, early in 180!, to
despatch the Investigator , a sloop of 334 tons, to make
a complete survey of the coast of New Holland. The
command was given to Lieut. Matthew Flinders, who had
already distinguished himself by some daring explorations
in company with Dr. George Bass : and amply did he
justify his appointment. The ship's complement was 88
persons, amongst whom served, as a midshipman, John
Franklin, afterwards destined, as Sir John Franklin, to
become the Governor of Tasmania, and to die in solving
the problem of the North-West Passage. The Investigator
sailed from Spithead on the 18th July, 1801, and sighted
Cape Leeuwin on 6th December following. Meantime
Commodore Baudin, deviating from his instructions, had
gone to the western coast of Australia, and it was not until
the 13th January, 1802, that he sighted the De Witts
Islands (known to our fishermen as The Witches ”), off
the south coast of this island. The French commander
anchored next day off Partridge Island, in the Channel ;
remained there until the 17th February—36 days ;
occupied the warm summer season in making a very
complete examination and survey of the Channel, the
River Huon and Port Cygnet, Frederick Henry and
Norfolk Bays, and exploring the Derwent carefully nearly
as far as Bridgewater. The French had many interviews
with the natives, doing everything in their power to con-
ciliate them, and with complete success. Pérou, the
naturalist, who wrote the history of the expedition,
devotes nearly 100 pages of* his first volume to Van


Diemen’s Land. He gives a glowing description of the
beauty and capabilities of the country, and a poetical and
highly-coloured picture of the kindliness and good qualities
of the aborigines. On leaving Storm Bay the Frenchmen
sailed for the east coast; they examined Maria Island, Puroa,i„pp.
visited the Schoutens and Freycinet’s Peninsula, and sur-
veyed the remainder of the coast until they reached Banks’
Strait. Here the ships were separated by a storm. The
Naturaliste surveyed Banks’ Strait, and explored the
Hunter Islands and other islands in Bass’ Strait; and the
Géographe sailed for the south coast of New Holland—
or, as Baudin christened it, Napoleon Land—to search for
the channel which was supposed to divide New Holland.
The French expedition had surveyed the whole coast-line
of Van Diemen’s Land, with the exception of the west
coast from Cape Grim to Port Davey.
On the Bth April, 1802, the ships of Baudin and Flinders,i,p.iß9.
Flinders met off Kangaroo Island. Flinders states that
Baudin was communicative of his discoveries in Van
Diemen’s Land, and declares that he, on his part, furnished
the French commander with every information as to his
own explorations of the coast, and gave him directions for
his guidance. Péron, in his brief notice of the interview Pérou, i.p.szs.
between the two commanders, simply remarks that
Flinders showed great reserve on the subject of his own
operations. The object of this suppression of facts by the
Frenchman will appear later on.
On the 25th April, 1802, Captain Hamelin, in the
Naturaliste, arrived off Port Jackson. His provisions
were exhausted, his crew prostrated by scurvy. He was ses.
in urgent need of succour. Yet he approached Port Jack-
son with many misgivings. War, so far as he knew, was
raging in all its bitterness and fury between France and
England, and though he bore a safe conduct from the
Admiralty, he fully anticipated that he would not be
allowed to enter the Port, or, if he was, that the aid
he so much needed would be refused him. But his doubts
were soon dispelled, for, as he says, he was instantly
welcomed by the English with magnanimous generosity.
Not only were all the resources of the country placed at
the disposal of the French captain, but the most dis-
tinguished houses of the colony were thrown open to
his officers, and during the whole time they remained they
“ experienced that delicate and affectionate hospitality


which is equally honorable to those who confer it and
to those who are its objects.” The news of the Peace
of Amiens (proclaimed 27 March, 1802,) which reached
Sydney a short time later, though it made intercourse
more pleasant, “could not,” Péron says, “increase the
kindness which the English displayed towards us.” A
fortnight later (May 9) Flinders, who had completed a
thorough survey of the South Coast, arrived at Port
Jackson in the Investigator.
Baudin, in the Géographe, had been some six weeks on
the South coast of New Holland, rediscovering and
renaming the discoveries already made by Flinders. His
crew were suffering terribly from scurvy, and his officers
urged his going to Port Jackson to recruit. Whether the
Commodore doubted the nature of his reception, or whether
the attractions of the Terre de Diémen proved irresistible,
does not appear, but Baudin disregarded their protests,
and to their intense chagrin, though winter was fast
approaching, headed his ship for the cold and stormy
south, and on 20th May once more cast anchor in
Adventure Bay. The state of his ship’s company, how-
ever, was such that after only two days’ stay he was
obliged to give orders to sail for Sydney. Baffled by
contrary winds, battered by violent storms, with a crew
unable, from illness, to handle the ship, it took him a
whole month to make the passage. On the 20th June
the Géographe approached ihe heads of Port Jackson.
Not only were they apprehensive respecting the fate of
the Naturaliste, and as to the nature of their own
reception, but the condition of the crew was most
deplorable. Flinders says “it was grievous to see the
miserable condition to which both officers and crew were
reduced by scurvy, there being, according to the Com-
mander’s account, out of 170 men not more than 12
capable of doing their duty.” Péron quotes the Com-
mander’s journal as stating that but four of the crew,
including a midshipman, were able to keep the deck, and
he adds there was not one on board who was free
from the disease. Many had died, and the surgeon,
M. Taillefer, gives a horrible description of the sufferings
of the survivor».* In fact, on arriving off Port Jackson
* The scurvy was at this period the scourge of the naval and
mercantile marine, and especially of discovery expeditions. Van-
couver attributes the high position England had attained, in a


the Géographe was unable to make the harbour, uati 1
Governor King had sent the Investigator s boat with a
number of hands to work the vessel into port. It is
hardly necessary to say that the distressed Frenchmen
were received with the greatest kindness. The numerous
sick were removed to the Colonial Hospital, and tenderly
cared for by the English surgeons. Whatever they had
need of that the place could furnish was placed at their
disposal, and the Governor gave the Commander an
unlimited credit at the Public Treasury to enable him to
revictual and refit, and also purchase a third vessel. More p<iron,p. 377.
than this: the Colony was at the time in great want of
fresh provisions, floods on the Hawkesbury having
destroyed the wheat harvest, salt meat was exceedingly
scarce, and fresh meat almost unprocurable ; yet so soon
as the strangers’ necessities were known, Government
oxen were killed, and by a common consent the ration of
wheat issued to garrison and inhabitants, including the
Governor and officers, was reduced one-half, so that the
scurvy-stricken crew might not want what was so essential
for their recovery. This statement is made on the authority Flinders voy,
of a letter written by Baudin himself. Both he and Péron
handsomely acknowledge the kindness they received, and
exhaust their phrases in describing the affectionate and
obliging care of Governor King and his unexampled
conduct, the courtesy and unremitting attention of the
inhabitants, the generosity of the Government, the absolute
freedom accorded to their movements, and the sentiments
of gratitude which these kindnesses inspired.
I have dwelt particularly on these incidents, not only
because it is matter of pardonable pride to record how
great degree, to the attention her captains paid to naval hygiene.
The French discovery crews always suffered terribly from want
of proper precautions, and from Péron’s account Baudin’s ships
were miserably victualled, and their commander culpably indifferent
to the health of his men. Out of 23 scientific men who left Franco
in the Géographe and Naturaliste only three returned to their
country. Out of 219 men who sailed with D’Entrecasteaux, 89 died
before the ships returned to Mauritius. The French voyages ol
discovery were singularly fatal to their commanders. Besides La
Pérouse, who perished with all his ship’s company, not one of the
commanders who visited Tasmania lived to return to his native
country. Marion du Fresne was killed at New Zealand. Admiral
D’Entrecasteaux died at sea off the Admiralty Isles, and his second
in command, Huon Kermadec, at New Caledonia. Baudin himself
died at Mauritius on the voyage home.


chivalrously Englishmen can behave towards an enemy
in distress, hut because of the striking contrast which the
aid and courtesies extended to the Frenchmen by Governor
King and the English colonists offer to the treatment
Flinders experienced from the Governor of a French
Colony within little more than a year of the arrival of
Baudin’s expedition at Sydney. In December, 1803, on
his way to England in the little Cumberland, Flinders was
obliged to put into Mauritius in distress ; when, in spite
of his safe conduct from the French Admiralty, his ship
was seized as a prize, he himself subjected to close
imprisonment, his papers and charts confiscated, and
when, after three years, tardy orders for his release came
from France, he was detained on one pretext or another
until 1810, six years and a half after his seizure. In the
meantime the narrative of Baudin’s voyage was published
in Paris, all mention of Flinders’ explorations being
suppressed, and the credit of his discoveries being claimed
by the French for themselves. In Sydney, at any rate,
the French officers had made no pretensions to priority of
discovery, for Flinders tells us that Lieut. Freycinet (the
joint editor of the history of the voyage), remarked to
him, in Governor King’s house—“ Captain, if we had
not been kept so long picking up shells and collecting
butterflies at Van Diemen’s Land, you would not have
discovered the South Coast [of New Holland] before us;”
and Flinders, in Péron’s presence, showed his chart to
Baudin and pointed out the limits of his discovery.
Flinders generously acquits Pérou of blame in the matter,
and says that he believes his candour to have been equal
to his acknowledged abilities, and that what he wrote was
from overruling authority, and smote him to the heart.
He attributes the suppressions in Péron’s work, and his
own treatment, to the secret instructions of the French
Government, and possibly to have “been intended as the
forerunner of a claim to the possession of the countries so
said to have been first discovered by French navigators.”
11. The first Settlement at the Derwent.
The foregoing sketch of the operations of the French
navigators in these waters will, I think, have made it
pretty plain that the French Government entertained
serious designs of planting a colony at the first convenient
opportunity somewhere in Tasmania, presumably in the


neighbourhood of the Derwent. How disastrous to the
English colonies in Australia the successful accomplish-
ment of such a design would have been w 7 e can partly
appreciate from our recent experience of the trouble and
vexation caused to the Australians by the existence of a
French penal settlement even so far removed from our
shores as New Caledonia.
The following particulars of the circumstances which
were the immediate occasion of the English occupation
of Van Diemen’s Land are drawn almost wholly from
unpublished documents preserved in the English State
Record Office, and which I have already referred to as
having been lately copied by Mr. Bonwick for the Tas-
manian Government. They will show that the colonisa-
tion of Tasmania was not an isolated or chance event, but
one link of a chain, —a ripple in the great current of
influence which has been shaping English and European
history.
On the 18th November, 1802, after a six months’ stay,
the two French ships sailed out of Port Jackson for Bass’
Straits. The Naturaliste was intended to take home the
sick, leaving the Géographe to complete her voyage of
discovery alone. Governor King had not been without
misgivings respecting the movements of the French, and
had given expression to them in a despatch to Lord King to iiobart,
Hobart written a few days before ; but his suspicions only j^ 1 * 0 '- 1802 , p.
proceeded from the circumstance of the long time they
were engaged in surveying at Storm Bay Passage.
Moreover, the recent discovery of Bass’ Straits, by
proving Van Diemen’s Land to be an island, had given
rise to a new cause for apprehension, since it might now
be fairly contended that the island could not form part of
the territory of New South Wales, and that the English,
having no prior right of discovery, could not make good
their claim, w'hile the French expeditions by their
explorations and surveys had established a superior title.
But a few hours after the French ships were out of ibid.
sight, a piece of gossip reached the Governor’s ears
which fairly startled him out of his equanimity. This
was a report that some of the French officers had stated,
in conversation with Lieut.-Colonel Paterson and others,
possibly in a convivial moment, that a principal object


of their voyage was to fix on a place at Van Die-
men’s Land for a settlement. The alarmed Governor
sent off forthwith to Colonel Paterson for more precise
information, and the answer he received, on that same
Tuesday morning on whicii the ships had sailed, more
than confirmed his worst fears. Not only had the talk
among the French officers been so general that the
Colonel could not understand how it was that the
Governor had not heard of it, hut one of the officers had
sent Paterson a chart, and had pointed out the very spot
selected —the place where they and D’Entrecasteaux also
had spent so much time—the Paie du Nord [now known
as Frederick Henry Bay], in Storm Bay Passage, or, as
the French called it, Le Canal D’Entrecasteaux. King,
of course, knew very well that Baudin could, at most,
take formal possession, for, with his small and sickly crew,
and without stores or provisions, he had not the means to
found a colony. There was no immediate danger on that
score, but he did not know what recommendations might
have been sent to the French Government, or how soon a
properly equipped expedition might be on its way from
France to plant a settlement, and, being a man of action,
accustomed to act promptly and on his own responsibility,
without waiting for instructions that might be twelve
months in reaching him, he proceeded forthwith to take
steps to prevent an invasion of His Majesty’s territory of
New South Wales, of which territory he was the guardian.
His first difficulty was to find a ship. The naval strength
at the command of the Governor of New South Wales
was not large. His Majesty’s ships in these seas were
few in number, small, and often unseaworthy, and there
was a constant difficulty in finding vessels that could be
spared for any special service. Of those under his orders
the Buffalo was essential at Port Jackson, the Lady
Nelson was off north with Flinders, the Porpoise, the
only other king’s ship, was away at Tahiti salting pork
for the necessities of the colony. But there was in Port
Jackson a little armed schooner called the Cumberland,
which had been built at Sydney a few years before for
the purpose of pursuing runaways. She was only 29 tons
burden, it is true, but she would do to checkmate French
designs. This little craft was therefore hastily prepared
for sea, a crew was selected, Lieut. Chas. Bobbins,
master’s mate of H.M.S. Buffalo, was put in command,


and in four days she was ready to sail. Robbins received King’s orde™ to
several sets of instructions, indicating the uncertainty into 1302, p. 65-72.
which the Governor was thrown. His general instructions
required him to proceed without loss of time to Storm
Bay Passage,—“ the dominion of which, and all Van
Diemen’s Land, being,” says King, “ within the limits
of His Majesty’s territory and my government,” and
to fix on the most eligible places in Frederick Henry
Bay and the River Derwent, agreeable to the separate
instructions on that head. If, however, Robbins met p. 66-72
with southerly or westerly winds, he was to go to King’s p- 78 -
Island and Port Phillip, for the examination and survey
of which places he had separate instructions, and after-
wards proceed to Storm Bay Passage. He was to hoist
the English flag whenever on shore, placing a guard at
each place, who were to turn up the ground and sow
seeds. As the Porpoise was intended to follow with
soldiers and settlers immediately on her return from
Tahiti, he was to keep the King’s colours flying to
indicate the intended settlement. Captain Robbins was
also charged with a letter from King to the French com-
mander, if he should happen to overtake him in Bass’
Straits; and he received very precise instructions respecting
the action he was to take to assert English rights if the
• . o o
French ventured to infringe them. Having his prepara-
tions made and his little vessel ready for sea, King sat
down to report to Lord Hobart the position of affairs.
He tells the Secretary for War # that, on hearing Colonel
Paterson’s report, he had lost no time in expediting the
Cumberland, armed colonial schooner; that she was on
the point of sailing, and that, from the arrangements he
had made, His Majesty’s claim to the threatened part of
this territory could not be disputed ; for, whatever might
bepn contemplation, it could not be performed by Baudin
in his present condition ; it was only necessary to guard
against any action of the French Government which
Baudin might have recommended. It was his intention,
therefore, when the Porpoise arrived from Tahiti, to
despatch her with a small establishment to the most
eligible spot at Storm Bay Passage, and also with one for
Port Phillip or King's Island.
* The Secretary for War was also at that time Minister for the
Colonies.


The Cumberland sailed the same day (23rd November).
She had on board Mr. Charles Grimes* (Acting Sur-
veyor-General), M‘Callum (the surgeon), Jas. Flemming
(the gardener), and three marines; with the crew, 17
persons. In the journal t kept by Flemming, the
gardener, who was sent to report on the soil and pro-
ductions of the almost unknown regions to which they
were going, we have a chronicle of their
They had a quick run of two days to Cape Howe, but,
baffled by contrary winds and calms, were nine days more
in reaching Kent’s Group, and it was not until the Bth
December—a fortnight after leaving Port Jackson—that
they made Sea Elephant Bay, on the east coast of King’s
Island. Here they found the French ships lying at
anchor, and at 5 o’clock on that summer evening the
little Cumberland dropped anchor alongside them. The
Naturaliste was on the point of sailing for France.
Captain Robbins boarded the (réographe, announced his
mission, and delivered to the Commodore the Governor’s
letter. It was short, and friendly in tone. King begins
by remarking that his intention to send a vessel to the
southward to fix on a place for a settlement was already
known to Baudin himself. He then mentions the report
that had led to the departure of this vessel being hastened,
and goes on to say that, while wholly disbelieving that
the French commander had any thought of such a design
as had been imputed to him, yet it seemed but proper that
he should be informed of the rumour, and of the orders the
captain of the Cumberland had received in consequence.
The version of the Governor’s letter given by Peron in
his history of the expedition represents it as couched in
more forcible and less conciliatory terms. Pérou says
that hardly had they anchored at King’s Island when
the little schooner Cumberland arrived from Port Jackson,
bringing Surveyor-General Grimes, who had been sent
by Governor King to make a declaration, as singular
in its form as it was remarkable in its object. “ A
report having reached me,” wrote Mr. King to our Com-
* Grimes was one of the first, if not the first, to cross Tasmania
from north to south.—See Flinders’ Chart, 1807.
t Flemming’s Journal was disinterred from the Records in the
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, by Mr. J. J. Shillinglaw, in
1877, and was printed in that gentleman’s “ Historical Records of
Port Phillip.” Melbourne, 1879. Î Ibid, pp. 15-30.


mander, “that you entertain a design of leaving some
people either at Diemen’s Land or on the south-west
coast of New South Wales, to found a French Colony
there, I deem it my duty to declare to you, Monsieur
le Commandant, that by virtue of the proclamation of
1788, whereby England formally took possession, all these
countries form an integral part of the British Empire,
and that you cannot occupy any part of them without
breaking the friendly relations which have been so recently
re-established between the two nations. I will not even
attempt to conceal from you that such is the nature of
my positive instructions on this point that it will be my
duty to oppose by every means in my power the execution
of the design you are supposed to have in view.
Accordingly, H.M.S. Cumberland has received orders
not to leave you until the officer in command of her is
convinced that your proceedings are wholly unconnected
with any attempt at invasion of the British territory in
these parts.”* With King’s own copy of his letter before
usf we can hardly accept Péron’s version as accurate.
Probably, while professing to give the letter textually,
he really relied on his memory, and interwove the
substance of the English Captain’s verbal communications
to the Commodore. It is sufficiently clear, however, that
Robbins, with the downrightness of a sailor, had left
nothing doubtful or ambiguous with respect to the object
of his mission. During the week after the arrival of the
Cumberland and the delivery of the despatches, the
representatives of the two nations fraternised and inter-
changed hospitalities on the disputed shores of King’s
Island. The French ■ meanwhile set up an observatory
on land, and pitched their tents near the beach. Perhaps
it was this proceeding that confirmed Robbins’ suspicions,
or perhaps the French Commander would not give him
the assurances he wanted ; at all events, before the end
of the week the Englishman made up his mind that the
time for decisive action had come; so on the 14th he
made a formal landing in full view of the Frenchmen,
marched his little party to the rear of the tents, hoisted
His Majesty’s colours on a large tree, posted at the foot of
the tree his guard of three marines with loaded muskets,
* Péron’s Voyage, 2nd ed., vol. 3, p. 11 ; and see Appendix B.
t See Appendix B.


fired three volleys, gave three cheers, and took formal
possession of the island in the name of King George.
This defiant assertion of British claims by a handful of
English sailors in the teeth of ten times their number of
traditional enemies, might well have wounded the vanity
of people less susceptible than Frenchmen, and we need
not therefore wonder that we hear of no more mutual
hospitalities. Péron remarks that “ such proceedings may
probably seem childish to people unacquainted with the
English policy, but to the statesman such formalities
have a more important and serious aspect. By these
repeated public declarations England continually aims at
strengthening her claim, and establishing her rights in a
positive fashion, and uses these pretexts to repel, even by
force of arms, all nations who may desire to form settle-
ments in these lands.”* Péron must often have recalled
to mind the warning of the President of the Parliament
* The high-handed and exclusive policy of the English is a
frequent topic of complaint in Péron’s work. Thus, he relates that
two days after leaving Port Jackson they fell in with a schooner,
on board of which was a M. Coxwell from the Isle of France, who
had accompanied another Frenchman, Lecorre, on a sealing cruise
to Bass’ Straits in the Enterprise , of Bordeaux. He goes on
to explain that while other nations had been indifferent to the
importance of New Holland, England had in 1788 despatched a fleet
thither and founded a Colony, and had, without remark from
European statesmen, taken possession of half the Continent.
Emboldened by the silence of other Governments, the British
Government had published the instructions to Governor Phillip
claiming the country from Cape York to the South Cape (lat. 10° to
43" S.), and as far to the West as the 135th parallel, besides all the
islands in the Pacific, and had established a policy of exclusion of
other nations from the fisheries. So that on the arrival of the
Enterprise , Governor King, although peace had been declared,
warned Lecorre off the coast under a threat of seizing his vessel,
and though he finally allowed the Frenchmen to fish at the Two
Sisters, it was only on the condition that he should undertake not
to enter Bass’ Straits, and that no vessels in future would be allowed
even so much indulgence. Lecorre’s vessel was wrecked at the Two
Sisters, and he himself and two-thirds of his crew perished. Péron
says it is plain that the intentions of the English Government
are so hostile that it will be dangerous for other speculators to
venture into these waters. (Péron’s Voyage, 2nd ed., vol. 3, p. 3.)
Governor King, in a despatch to the Admiralty (9th May, 1803),
states his intention of restricting seal fishing by foreigners ; and in
another despatch to Lord Hobart, referring to Lecorre’s vessel,
remarks with some satisfaction that the French schooner had been
wrecked at the Cape Barren Islands, “ which may stop more
adventurers from that quarter.”


of Dijon half a century before, and reflected with some
bitterness how amply the prophecy had been fulfilled.
The French Commander’s answer to Governor King’s
letter is worthy of notice as showing that the French had
by no means relinquished their claim to a share of
Australian territory. His letter is dated from the
Géographe, and bears date the 3rd of the month Nivose,
in the 11th year of the French Republic (23rd December,
1802). He tells King that the arrival of the Cumberland ,
and especially the letter which the Governor had done him
the honour to write, would have surprised him if Mr.
Robbins had not, by his conduct, made clear to him the
true motive of the expedition which had been despatched
after him in such headlong haste. “ Rut perhaps,” says
the Commodore, “ after all it may have come too late, for
several days before the gentleman who commands it
thought proper to hoist his flag above our tents, we had
taken care to place in four prominent parts of this island—
which I intend shall continue to bear your name—proofs
sufficient to show the priority of our visit.” He then
declares that the report —of which they suspected Captain
Anthony Fenn Kemp to have been the author—was
entirely without foundation, and he does not believe that
his officers or scientific men had by their conduct given
any ground for it. “ But,” he concludes, “in any case,
you ought to have been perfectly certain that if the French
Government had given me orders to establish myself in
any place, either at the north or at the south of Diemen’s
Land—discovered by Abel Tasman —I should have done
so without keeping it a secret from you.
A week after the date of his letter to King (31st
December), Baudin sailed from King’s Island for the
Gulf of Carpentaria, and from thence made his way to
Mauritius, where he died. Surveyor-General Grimes and
Flemming spent some six weeks in a thorough exploration
of King’s Island.f Their report of the island as a place
* See Appendix B for Baudin’s letter.
t The island was in those days a favourite resort of sealers.
Pérou says that when they reached Sea Elephant Bay the beach
was covered with sea elephants, their brown colour making them
strikingly visible on the white strand, where they lay like great
black rocks. At the approach of the French some of the animals
plunged into the sea, roaring frightfully, while others remained
motionless on the sand gazing on their visitors with a placid and
indifferent air, In the same year Captain Campbell, of the Sn'iw


for settlement was unfavourable. They then proceeded in
the Cumberland to Port Phillip, where they remained six
weeks, Grimes making an accurate survey of the Port
both by sea and land, discovering the River Yarra, and
bringing away a more favourable impression of the
King to Hobart country, but, as King says, with no very promising
p.'r/fic!* 113, hopes that either that place or King’s Island would ever
be found an eligible place for an agricultural settlement.
Flemming’s On leaving Port Phillip, Robbins sailed direct for Port
oi'ma . j ac k son> w here he arrived on 7th March, having been
absent about three months and a half. It does not appear
why he did not fulfil the rest of his instructions and go on
to Storm Bay Passage. Perhaps, having seen the French
ships sail away to the westward and fairly off the English
premises, he conceived the danger to be at an end.
King, at any rate, was perfectly satisfied, and writes to
the Admiralty that Robbins had conducted the service
entrusted to him very much to his satisfaction, and remarks
King o Nepean, that “ making the French Commander acquainted with
9 May, iso.,. nl y intention of settling Van Diemen’s Land was all I
sought by this voyage.”
The fear that the French might yet make a descent on
Van Diemen’s Land still weighed on King’s mind. As
we have seen, before the Cumberland sailed he had
determined to send the Porpoise, on her arrival from
Tahiti, to make a settlement. The return of Robbins
with unfavourable reports of King’s Island and Port
Phillip had satisfied him that neither of those places was
adapted for settlement, and he once more fixed his
attention on the point which, now that Baudin had left
Bass’ Straits, appeared to be most threatened. He
therefore resolved to limit his action to Storm Bay
Passage, and immediately took steps to carry out his
resolution.
King to Nepean, He reported his intention to the Admiralty, and says in
9May, isos,p.7o. pp, despatch, “ My reasons for making this settlement are
the necessity there appears of preventing the French
gaining a footing on the east side of these islands ; to
divide the convicts ; to secure another place for obtaining
timber with any other natural productions that may be
discovered and found useful ; the advantages that may
Harrington, at New Year’s Island, on the western side of King’s
Island, in 10 weeks (19th March to 27th May) killed 600 sea
elephants and 4300 seals.


be expected by raising grain ; and to promote the seal
fishery.”
There is no doubt that Governor King was in perfect
accord with the Home Government in his apprehension of
French designs, and in his policy of anticipating them by
occupying important points “ for political reasons.”*
Already, in January of this very year the Authorities in
Downing-street had determined to form a settlement at
Port Phillip, and had selected Lieut.-Col. David Collins
to be its Lieutenant-Governor, and the date corresponds
with the communications that King had made to the
English Government with respect to Baudin’s expedition.
Five months later (24th June, 1803), in consequence of See Memo of
King’s despatch of 23 November, 1802, informing the P .ik 8 ’ Su4 ’
Admiralty of the report that the French were about to
colonise Van Diemen’s Land, Lord Hobart instructed the
Governor to remove part of the establishment at Norfolk
Island to Port Dalrymple, “ the advantageous position of Hobart to King
which, upon the southern coast of Van Diemen’s Land and p , 42™ ’
near the eastern entrance of Bass’ Straits, renders it, in a
political view, peculiarly necessary that a settlement should
be formed there.” The amusing confusion of localities
does not say much for the state of geographical knowledge
at Downing-street, but the anxiety of the Government
to anticipate French action is very clearly indicated.
The Governor’s mind was now firmly made up to
establish a colony at the Derwent, but some months were
yet to elapse before he could carry out his plans. One of
his difficulties had been to find, out of the slender
establishment at Port Jackson, a competent officer to
whom he could entrust the command of the intended
settlement. The arrival of H.M.S. Glatton at Sydney,
in March, 1803, relieved him from this embarrassment.
There was on board the Glatton a Lieutenant who had
made several voyages to the colony, and so far back as
1792 had been engaged in conveying cattle and pro-
visions from Bengal to New South Wales in the Atlantic
storeship, at a time of great scarcity.t He was a son of
* See Professor Seeley on Napoleon’s intentions in Ahe war that
ensued on the rupture of the Peace of Amiens, 18th May, 1803.
Exp. of England, p. 34.
t So Mr. Bonwiok, who gives an extract of a letter from Bowen
to the Under-Secretary of State, dated from the storeship Atlantic ,
March 1792; Collins, however, gives the name of the Admiralty
Agent on board the Atlantic as Richard Bowen. Collins, New
South Wales, i., 174,


Commissioner Bowen,* and we have King’s testimony
that he came of a family various members of which,
including his father, had distinguished themselves in the
navy during the French wars. Peace had now been
declared, and Lieut. John Bowen saw little prospect of
King to Hobart, speedy promotion. When, therefore, the Governor spoke
iBM,°p!m r ’ of the difficulty he was in through not being able to find
Bowen to King, a man competent to take charge of the Derwent establisb-
p 6 U7. v ' lBo4 ’ ment, it occurred to Bowen that here was a chance for
him to earn a claim to notice as the founder of a new
colony, and so possibly win a promotion he could hardly
hope for as a junior lieutenant in time of peace. He
obtained Captain Colnett’s permission, and offered his
services to the Governor. King was glad to accept them,
Order 28 March, and Oil 28th March, 1803, he issued a Commission in
i ana n as 7 _ 1 .
1803 p 85 WIIU i j ■
which, after premising that it had become necessary to
establish His Majesty’s right to Van Diemen’s Land,
within the limits of the territory of IVew South Wales,
he directed Lieut. John Bowen to proceed in H.M.
armed tender Lady Nelson to choose a suitable place
for an establishment, and appointed him Commandant
instructions, 28 and Superintendent of the settlement. The more detailed
March, 1803, instructions to the new Commandant, bearing the same
date as the commission, direct him to proceed in H.M.
armed vessel Porpoise, or Lady Nelson tender, with
people and stores for a settlement, and fix on a proper
spot in the Derwent, about Risdon’s Cove ; to begin
immediately to clear ground and sow wheat and other
crops ; and to furnish full reports on the soil, timber,
capabilities, and productions of the country. He was to
have six months’ provisions; was to employ the convicts
in labour for the public good ; to hold religious services
every Sunday; and to enforce a due observance of
religion and good order. No trade or intercourse was to
be allowed with any ships touching at the port. Arrange-
ments were to be made for laying out a town, building
fortifications, and appropriating land for cultivation on
the public account. The free settlers who accompanied
him, in consideration of their being the first to volunteer,
were to have a location of 200 acres for each family, and
be allowed rations, the labour of two convicts each for
18 months, and such corn, seeds, and other stock as could
?*‘ erl “ a3 :-., be spared. Bowen also received sealed orders with
1803. D. 90. King J
to Collins, - -. .. . T-
p°m. t ' 18 ° 4 ’ * Jorgensen’s Shred of Autobiography in Ross’ Almanac, 1838.


respect to any French ships which might arrive ;he was
to inform them of His Majesty’s right to the whole of Van
Diemen’s Land, and w r as to repel any attempt to form
a settlement, —if possible, without recourse to hostile
measures.
Another three months elapsed after Bowen had received
his Commission before King had vessels at his disposal
which he could spare for the service. It was not until the King to Hoban,
30th June, 1803, that at last the Porpoise and Lady Ktagto%mer|
Nelson sailed from Port Jackson with the Commandant £9 sept, isw,
and people and stores for the Derwent. Yet even then P ' lindcrSj U>| 96>
the attempt was destined to be thwarted for a time. Both “
r , « . , 11 1 1 l lota, 11., 276,
ships were much out of repair ana sadly leaky, and on as to Porpoise,
leaving: Port Jackson they met with such strong head 276 '
winds that they were compelled to give up all idea oi md^m
proceeding on their voyage, and put back to the harbour,
arriving on the 4th July. The Porpoise was now required
to take Flinders to England, and after undergoing repairs,
she sailed on 10th August, only to be lost a week after-
wards, in company with the Cato, on Wreck Reef, to the
north of Rockhampton (Lat. 22° IP S.). King forth-
with ordered the Colonial vessel Francis to be fitted out to
accompany the Lady Nelson on a second attempt, and
wrote to Lord Hobart that he hoped these ships would King to Hobart,
complete the service, which he deemed the more essential 1803 '
from the inclination the French had shown to keep up a
correspondence with Port Jackson.
In those days the exigencies of the service compelled
Governors to take whatever offered to aid them in
accomplishing their plans. Many were the missions of
relief or mail despatch that were entrusted to whalers,
or even American sealers, and their remuneration was
sometimes odd enough. Thus, on one occasion Governor
King desired Governor Collins to pay for the despatches
sent to him by a sealing sloop going to King’s Island, by
giving the skipper 30 empty salt-meat casks—surely as
odd a postage as ever was paid. And it must be
admitted that at times the Yankees fleeced the Britishers
handsomely for the humane help they afforded—for a
consideration.
Let us be thankful that it was not a Yankee sealing
schooner that carried the first Governor of Tasmania to
the seat of his Government, but a British whaler, which
turned up at the right moment —the Albion, 326 tons —


whose skipper, Captain Ebor Banker, was afterwards well
known at the Derwent Settlement in early times*
On the 31st August, 1803, the Albion and Lady Nelson
set sail from Port Jackson. The Lady Nelson took the
bulk of the people and stores. She was a brig of 60 tons
burden, and had been originally sent out in 1800 under
the command of Lieutenant Grant to explore the newly
discovered Bass’ Straits. A little while before she had
been employed as a tender to Flinders’ vessel, the
Investigator, on the survey of the coast within the Great
Barrier Beef. She was commanded by Acting Lieutenant
C. G. Curtoys, and had for Chief Officer the redoubtable
Dane, Jorgen Jorgensen, the conqueror of Iceland. The
same plan of colonisation with convicts and a few free
settlers that had obtained in the planting of the settlement
at Port Jackson 15 years before, and in settling Norfolk
Island in 1788 by King himself, was followed in this little
offshoot from the parent colony. Governor Bowen’s Civil
Establishment consisted of three persons, including himself.
His subordinates were Dr. Jacob Mountgarret, Surgeon of
the Glatton, as Medical Officer, and Mr. Wilson as Store-
keeper. His military force consisted of one lance corporal
and 7 privates of the New South Wales Corps. There
were 21 male and 3 female convicts. Three free settlers
accompanied the party —Birt, who took his wife ; Clark,
a stonemason ; and another whose name is not given, who
was made overseer of convicts. Three other free persons,
a man and two women, also obtained leave to try their
fortunes in the new settlement. Thus the whole colony
consisted of 49 persons, of whom 13 were women and
children. They took about six months’ provisions and
some live stock—viz., 10 head of cattle and about 50
sheep—while the Governor had the only horse, and the
settlers a few goats, pigs, and fowls.
The Albion and Lady Nelson put to sea on the 31st
August; but Governor Bowen was invariably unlucky
at sea, and on the second day of their voyage they
encountered a heavy gale, which obliged the Albion to
* In 1809, when in the ship Venus , he put into Adventure Bay
and there found a bottle containing the last letters of the unfortunate
La Pérouse. And his name is yet perpetuated on a tombstone a
Crayfish Point, near Hobart, which records that under it lies buried
James Batchelor, Second Officer of the ship Venus, commanded by
E. Bunker, and that he died 28th January, 1810.


heave-to, and cost them heavy losses among the live
stock. Then it fell calm, for which, however, Captain
Bunker found consolation by catching three sperm whales.
The Albion had a reputation for fast sailing—having made
the passage from Spithead to Port Jackson in the then
unprecedented time of 108 days—but, baffled by light
unfavourable winds, she did not make Storm Bay until
the tenth day out. Even then she was two days beating
up the river against head winds, so that it was not until
Sunday, the 12th September, 1803, that, passing along
the lonely and thickly wooded banks of the Derwent, the
Albion, with the first Governor of Tasmania on board,
came to an anchor in Risdon Cove. Here they found the
Lady Nelson already lying at anchor, having arrived five
days before, on the 7th September.
I have searched in vain hitherto in printed accounts for
the correct date of Bowen's settlement. The dates given
vary from June to August, but I think we may henceforth
consider it settled, on the authority of official documents,
that the birthday of Tasmania was Tuesday, the 7th day
of September, 1803.
Here I must pause. On a future occasion I hope to be
able to draw further on the store of material which has
been provided by the wise liberality of the Government,
and to give some particulars of the history of Bowen s
abortive colony at Risdon, and of Collins’ settlement at
Sullivan’s Cove.
Appendix A.
Summary of Documents copied by Mr. Bonwick
for the Tasmanian Government.
1. British Museum Discovery Papers ; viz.—
Furneaux, in the Adventure, 1773 ;
Grant, in the Lady Nelson, 1800 ;
Flinders to Sir J. Banks, 1802 ; Sealers
in Bass’ Straits, 1802; Exploration of
River Huon, 1804 59 pages.


2. Despatches relating to supposed French
designs on Australia ; especially the pro-
ceedings of Baudin’s Expedition, and
the measures taken by Governor King
to anticipate the French in forming a
Settlement in Van Diemen’s Land,
1802-3 25 pages,
3. The Bowen Papers—First Settlement at
Risdon Cove, 1803 48 pages,
4. The Collins Papers—Settlement of Hobart
Town, 1804 300 pages,
5. Exploration of Port Dalrymple and River
Tamar—Settlement at York Town
under Colonel Paterson, 1804 124 pages
6. The Bass Papers 44 pages.
7. Papers on the Aborigines 37 pages.
Appendix B.
Governor King’s Letter to Commodore Baudin.
(From the copy in the Record Office, London.)
Sydney, November 23rd, 1802.
Sir,
You will be surprised to see a vessel so soon after you.
You know my intention of sending a vessel to the southward
to fix on a place for a Settlement, but this has been hastened
by a report communicated to me soon after your departure—
“ that the French intended to settle in Storm Bay Passage,
somewhere about what is now called Frederick Hendrick Bay,
and that it was recommended by you to the Republic,” as a
proof of which a chart pointing out the situation (Baye du
Nord) was, as Colonel Paterson informs me, given him a
short time before you sailed by a gentleman of your ship.
You will easily imagine that if any information of that
kind had reached me before your departure I should have
requested an explanation ; but, as I knew nothing of it, and
at present totally disbelieving anything of the kind ever being
thought of, I consider it but proper to give you this informa-
tion. In case the Cumberland should fall in with your ships
the Commander of that vessel has my directions to commu-
nicate to you the orders he is under.


Mjselfand family join in the kindest good wishes for your
health, and shall long remember the pleasure we enjoyed in
your society. We request you will offer our good wishes to
Captain Hamelin and all your officers.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient humble Servant,
PHILIP GIDLEY KING.
To Commodore Baudin, Commander-in-Chief
oj the French Expedition of Discoveries.
Peron’s Version of the above Letter.
[“ Voyage de Découvertes aux Terres Australes.” 2 de edition.
Tome 3 nle , p. 11.]
“ Le bruit s’étant répandu—ecrivoit M. King à notre com-
mandant—que votre projet est de laisser quelques hommes,
soit à la terre de Diémen, soit à la côte sud-ouest de la
Nouvelle-Galles, pour y jeter les fondemens d’une colonie
françoise, je crois devoir vous déclarer, monsieur le Com-
mandant, qu’en vertu de l’acte de prise de possession de 1788,
solennellement proclamé par l’Angleterre, toutes ces contrées
font partie intégrante de l’empire britannique, et que vous ne
sauriez en occuper aucun point sans briser les liens de l’amitié
qui vient si récemment d’être rétablie entre les deux nations.
Je ne chercherai pas même a vous dissimuler que telle est la
nature de mes instructions particulières à cet égard, que je dois
m’opposer, par tous les moyens qui sont en mon pouvoir, à
l’exécution du projet qu’on vous suppose ; en conséquence, le
navire de Sa Majesté le Cumberland a reçu l’ordre de ne
vous quitter qu’au moment où l’officier qui le commande
aura le certitude que vos opérations sont étrangères à toule
espèce d’envahissement du territoire britannique dans ces
parages . . .”
Commodore Baudin’s Reply to Governor Kino
[From the copy in the Becord Office, London.]
/
A Bord de la Corvette le Géographe, Isle King, le
3™* Nivôse, an ll me . [23 December, 1802.]
Le en Chef V Expédition de Découvertes
À Monsieur le Gouverneur King au Port Jackson.
Monsieur Le Gouverneur,
L’arrivée du Cumberland m’auroit surpris par le contenu de
la lettre que vous m’avez fait l’honneur de m’écrire, si Mr.


Robeu qui le commande n’avoit par sa conduite fait connoître
le véritable motif pour lequel il a été si précipitamment
expédié ; mais peut-être est il venu trop tard, car, plusieurs
jours avant qu’il arbora sur nos tentes son pavillon, nous
avions laissé dans les quatre points principaux de l’lsle à
laquelle je conserve votre nom des preuves de l’époque où
nous l’avons visitée.*
L’histoire qu’on vous à fait, et dont on soupçonne Mr.
Kemp, Capitaine Régiment de la Nouvelle-Galles du Sud,
être l’auteur, est sans fondement. Je ne crois pas non plus
que les officiera et naturaliste qui sont à bord puissent y avoir
donné lieu par leur discours, mais dans tous les cas vous deviez
être bien persuadé que si le Gouvernement françois m’avait
donné ordre de m’arrêter quelque part au Nord ou au Sud
de la terre de Diémen découverte par Abel Tasman j’y aurais
resté, et sans vous en faire un secret.
Le dix-sept le Naturaliste a mis à la voile et doit se rendre
droiture en France.
Malgré toutes mes recherches avant le départ il s’est trouve
trois hommes cachés à bord du Géographe ; cinq autres étoient
sur le Naturaliste, et trois sur le bâtiment Américain la Fanny
dont le mauvais temps nous a séparé. J’ai, comme nous en
étions convenus, mis sur ITsle King les huit hommes qui nous
concernoient,t on leur a donné un peu de pain et quelques
vêtements ; vous trouverez cy-joint leurs noms ou du moins
ceux qu’ils ont donnés.
J’ai l’honneur d’être avec la plus parfaite consideration,
Monsieur Le Gouverneur,
Votre Serviteur,
N. BAUDIN.
[Mr. Chapman, Colonial Secretary, certified the foregoing
as a true copy of the original letter.]
* Governor King has written in the margin :—“lf Monsieur
Baudin insinuates any claim from this visit—the island was first
discovered in 1798 by Mr. Heed in the Martha, afterwards seen by
Mr. Black in the Harbinger, and surveyed by Mr. Murray in
February, 1802.”
t King notes :—“ Most of these found means to go on board the
Géographe before she left the island.”




