

s
THE ADVENTUR
BILLY BEE




/A
/£7 C
J
/ 0
/
J
•
.




THE ADVENTURES
BILLY BEE




THE ADVENTURE
BILLY BEE
%
Margaret A. Carter
BACKGROUND BOOKS LIMITED
143 CANNON STREET, LONDON, E.C.4


Ist Impression (British)
November, 1946.
Printed by
Buckler & Webb, Limited,
Birmingham and London,
for the Publishers
Background Books Limited,
143 Camion St., London, E.C.4.
by arrangement with
The Domus Publishing Co.,
100 Queen Street, Melbourne,
Australia.


To M. T
1 Vfw was never too busy to
“TELL A STORY”


.


Contents
Billy’s Song ... ... ••• ••• 8
Introducing Billy Bee ... ... ••• 9
The Fairy Ball ... ... ••• ••• I 8
Down the Trap-door Spider’s Hole ... 24
Fairy Treasures ... ... ••• ••• 32
Billy Meets Glimp the Goblin ... ... 41
The Angry Butterfly ... ... ... 52
The Soldier Beetles ... ... ••• 64
Caught by the Magpie ... ... ... 74


fT7rr~7^r * { ” f 1 1
¥&' r r pyi ff j- ip
Billy’s
Song
Oh, I am Billy Bee,
I lead a life so free,
I always shirk
The hardest work,
But play all da} r
In a lazy way,
That’s me I’m Billy Bee.
Oh, I am Billy Bee,
So handsome you can see,
In black and yellow
A very fine fellow,
So neat and trim,
Though far from slim,
That’s me I’m Billy Bee.
Oh, I am Billy Bee,
The garden King, that's me,
I’m very brave
My friends I save
From enemies cruel,
I make it a rule.
That’s me I’m Billv Bee


Introducing Billy Bee
BILLY BEE was a very line bee, and he knew it! Billy was
also a very lazy bee, and he knew that too, and what was
more and worse, he was proud of it. The whole trouble
was that Billy had never been intended for a worker bee at all,
but through the carelessness of a very young bee nurse, he had
been put in the wrong nursery whilst still an egg. So Billy,
although he had the appearance of a worker bee just like any other
honey gatherer in the hive, at heart he was a drone. Gathering
honey and pollen from dawn to dusk, and sleeping from dusk to
dawn was not Billy’s idea of the right way to spend his life,
and the fact that he was meant to be a worker did not stop
him from living the life of a drone to the full—in fact he did far
less work than any drone !
Whilst the other workers were busy flying swiftly from
flower to flower gathering honey-dew and pollen, Billy would
be sound asleep inside a snap-dragon or under a drooping violet
leaf. In spite of this, when it was time for the bees to return
to the hive with the honey-dew and pollen they had so carefully
gathered throughout the long sunny day, Billy always had a
far greater load than any of the other workers; in fact it was
all he could do to stagger along, so laden was he with honey
bags. Now the reason for this very strange fact was that all
the garden flowers loved Billy far more than any of the other
bees, and Billy loved all the flowers as much as they loved him.
Billy never dashed up to the flowers, knocked briskly, buzzed
‘’Honey please,” shouldered the bags, said ‘‘Good Morning,” and
flew off to the next flower, in the approved bee manner as laid
down in the Queen Bee’s “Regulations for the Conduct of Honey
and Pollen Gatherers.” Not he !
When the sun was so high in the sky that every part of the
garden had been warned, and even the sleepiest violet was
awake, Billy would yawn, stretch and step daintily from beneath


his sheltering leaf, smooth his velvet black and gold waistcoat,
and his fat little brown turn beneath, and sail lazily into the
warm air. Then, after circling around the garden, he would
fly to the large bed of hollyhocks, by the old garden wall,
choose the prettiest flower and alight on her frilly petals.
‘‘Good morning, Miss Hollyhock,” he would say, “and how
are you to-day?”
“Hullo, Billy Bee,” replied the flower, nodding prettily in
the gentle breeze. “Do come in and sit down, you must be quite
tired, it is very warm.”
Billy always had a far greater load than any of the workers.
“Well, Hollyhock, dear, I would like to rest for a minute,
perhaps I will stop,” and in Billy would walk, sit comfortably
down, and stay there, sometimes all morning, exchanging
garden gossip. No one in the whole garden knew so much
about everybody’s business as Billy. He always had the latest
news about the lovely family of Mrs. Woolly Caterpillar, the
name Mrs. Worm intended to give the latest little worm, how
the magpie nearly caught Madam Butterfly last week, and a
thousand other little bits of gossip. When all the latest news
had been told Billy would sigh and say, “I really must go on with
my labours, sweet hollyhocks,” (for by this time all the hollyhock


flowers were leaning over to hear him) ’’Thank sTou5 T ou so much,
dear flowers, for letting a weary bee rest."
“We’ve some lovely honey, Billy,” all the delighted hollyhocks
would cry, “We’ve been keeping it for a special occasion, but
you are such a dear little bee, we can let you have some if you
would like it.
“Why that is sweet of you all to think of me, you dear
hollyhocks; there is no doubt, you are the very loveliest flowers
in the whole garden, there isn’t another flower so lovely or kind
as you are. I would be honoured if you would give me your
honey.” And Billy would go away laden with not onl\ the best
honey, but some of the hollyhocks’ best pollen as well! Then
off he would fly to the snap-dragons, the pansies, the columbines
or the roses, and do the same thing all over again. The garden
flowers kept all their best honey for little Billy, and when the
other hard working bees knocked briskly for admittance the
blossoms would all shut tight, and call out “No honey to-day,
busy bee, fly away.” But when lazy Billy arrived the flowers were
wide open to welcome him, the honey bags waiting, and Billy
was always a welcome visitor, for although they knew he broke
all the rules for a good Bee, they still loved him. He was never
too busy to talk, never too full of his own business to stop and
gossip, and so every flower and garden creature loved him. In
fact he was the uncrowned king of the garden.
Billy was never too busy to help any one in trouble, and
although he would not work for himself, he would do anything
to help a neighbour in distress.
Miss Zinnia, who was very stiff and proper, often tried to
make him work.
“It is disgraceful, William, the way you waste time. I never
see you doing any work ; you must try to be more like other bees !
“But Miss Zinnia, dear,” replied Billy, trying to look
humble, but not making a good job of it, because he would
chuckle. “I have so much more fun than other bees. I have
so very many friends, and I have such lovely adventures, too. No
other bee ever sees as many interesting things as I do. M ork
isn’t the only thing, there are lots more important things than
work. Now, aren’t I right?"


“That's not the point, William,” replied Miss Zinnia sternly.
“All bees are supposed to work. The fairies expect it. You’ll
get into awful trouble one day. I warn you !”
“Every bee is expected to work except me; the fairies are all
my friends, they like me to be lazy. Now, Miss Zinnia, you have
kept me here talking far too long, look at the sun, it is nearly
set, I can't possibly get any honey now, all the flowers are closing
for to-night. You’ll have to give me some of yours!”
“William, I will not encourage you to be lazy. No honey
from me.”
He would wind his little arms
round Zinnia's neck.
"Oh, Miss Zinnia, dear, you wouldn’t
like me to get into trouble with the Queen
Bee, would you, after what you have been
saying to me? Please, dear Miss Zinnia?”
and Billy would wind his little arms
round the Zinnia’s neck and kiss her
lovingly.
"Oh, all right, Billy. Here you are,
you bad bee, lam a very silly flower, I
suppose, but I can't let you get into
trouble," and the stiff Zinnia would smile
gently, and hand over several bags of
honey to the delighted little chap.
"Zinnia, you are a perfect dear, just
the sweetest flower in all the garden;
and you are so kind and good to me. I
know I am a bad little bee,” and Billy
would kiss the pleased Zinnia again and fly off quite gaily, and
with no idea of trying to be a good bee.
So Billy Bee led a happy, lazy life, full of adventures, and
was the envy of all the workers, who were too busy to make
friends or have adventures.
Billy’s garden was as lovely as any garden you can imagine.
All sorts of flowers grew there, and fairies lurked in every nook
and corner. Who knows, Billy's garden may be your garden,
and if you look carefully you may see him one day. If you
ever find a bee sleeping when all the others are working, or
lazing in a flower, then you will know that is Billy, the only
lazy bee in the whole garden world.


The Fairy Ball
AT the bottom of the garden, where the hollyhocks grow,
stands the bee hive where Billy Bee lives. Billy is no
bee, indeed he is the envy of every bee in the
hive, and he knows it, and is very proud about it too. The
reason is that Billy is the only bee who has ever seen a fairy
ball, or had a holiday, and this is how it happened.
Of course bees are never allowed to go to the fairies’ Balls,
which are held on warm moonlight nights in the dark garden,
because the bees are the workers, and must sleep at night so
that they can work hard during the day.
Now Billy hated work and longed to stay out all night and
dance at the fairy balls, like the butterflies and moths did. He
was so lazy that he was really too fat to dance, but that didn’t
worry him, not a bit; he thought himself a very handsome
fellow, just as good as the butterflies and moths.
On Midsummer Eve the fairies held a Grand Ball, and every
butterfly, moth, and glow-worm, not to mention all the fairies,
were invited, but, of course, all the bees received was a request
for a double supply of honey, best quality, which meant that
all the bees had to work harder than ever; even Billy, who didn’t
like it a bit.
By the time the sun set that Midsummer Eve he was very
tired of flying hurriedly from flower to flower, packing his honey
bags to bursting with lovely sweet honey. Billy didn’t believe
in collecting honey that way. He liked to drift lazily from
flower to flower, stopping at each one for a little gossip about
Madam Butterfly’s new gown, and the number of buds pink
rose had that year. He didn’t get to nearly so man} r flowers as
the other bees, but he collected more honey, for the flowers
were all so fond of him that they all brought out an extra bag of
honey for him. Of course the Queen Bee didn’t know this,
and always praised Billy for his industry.


“You are the most industrious bee in the hive,” she said
to him, and Billy would blush becomingly, rub one foot on the
other, nothing.
So when the sun set that Midsummer Eve, and all the bees
flew busily back to the hive, Billy led the way. But when he
reached the hive he didn’t go in immediately, but sat down on
a leaf and began to think. He had made up his mind whilst
he worked during the day that he would go to that Ball even
if he had to work for a week afterwards. Suddenly he jumped
up with a buzzy chuckle, and flew swiftly into the hhe. Once
inside he smoothed his gauzy wings, brushed down his black and
gold velvet waistcoat, and bowed himself into the presence of
the Queen Bee.
“Well, Billy, dear,” Her Majesty said kindly, “what do you
want?”
“Please, your Majesty, it is getting late, and I know where
I can get another load of honey for the ball, very fine honey
indeed, just what they want for the Fairy Queen’s supper table,
but I have to go to the other end of the garden to get it, and I
may be late back. Have I your permission to go?”
“You industrious little bee, all you think of is your work.
Many other bees, after the hard day’s work you have had, would
only be thinking of going to sleep. Of course you may go if you
wish, but, remember, Billy, to
He hid the bags beneath a violet leaf and
crawled in beside them.
be back by the time darkness
comes, for we must shut the
hive doors then.’*
Billy nearly buzzed for joy
on the spot, but luckily waited
until he was well out of the
hive. Then, because there
were still many late bees
about, he began industri-
ously to collect honey. By
dusk his bags were full; then,
carrying them carefully, he
flew as far from the hive as he


v\
could, hid the bags under a violet leaf, and crawled in beside
them, much to the surprise of a very sleepy violet.
“Why Billy,” she exclaimed “whatever are you doing here at
this time of night?”
“Oh, I have a special load of honey for the Fairy Ball,” replied
Billy, “but I have strict instructions to deliver it to one of the
elves in person, and, of course, they aren't there yet, so I thought
you wouldn't mind if I waited here.”
“Of course not, but you are a long way from the Ballroom
here —why didn't you go to a flower nearer the lawn?” enquired
the still-puzzled violet.
“Oh violet, dear, I thought you knew that I love you better
than any other flower in the garden. You are so modest and
shy, and you have such sweet honey. So of course when I
knew I had to wait, I came here.”
He stayed with the flattered violet until darkness had come,
then he crept quietly out, for the violet was sound asleep by
this. He found it was too dark to fly straight to the ballroom
without becoming lost, but he quickly made a plan to overcome
that.
“I shall go from one flower I
know to another, until I come to
some of those that grow near the
lawn; in that way I shall not
get lost. I can easily make up
an excuse for being out so late
at night,” and off he went
quietly through the sleeping
garden, towards the snapdragon
bed, which was near-by.
The snapdragons were all
fast asleep, but Billy quickly
climbed up the stem of his
special friend, the pink snap-
dragon, He tickled her under
When the Snapdragon tried to close her
mouth she found it full of bee.
the chin, and when she yawned, opening her little mouth wide,
in popped Billy. When the snapdragon tried to close her mouth
she found it full of bee.


“Good gracious Billy, whatever are you doing here? she
cried when she had discovered who the intruder was. Why
aren’t you home asleep at this hour?
“Oh dear, kind snapdragon, I’ve been locked out of the hive,
and I’m frightened and lonely 7; please let me stay' here the
night.”
“But Billy 7 , can't you wake them up and get in?
“Oh, no, the Queen would be so angry' with me for being out
so late, although I only 7 went to get some extra honey 7 for the
ball. Please, kind, dear snapdragon, y r ou can't turn me out, you
are the loveliest flower in the whole garden; yes, even lovelier
than the rose. Why I thought ymu knew that I loved y 7 ou more
than any 7 other flower in the garden! and that naughty' little
bee put his arms round the snapdragon and kissed her.
“Billy, do you really think lam lovelier than the rose? You
know she is Queen of all the flowers.”
“Of course you are, my beautiful snapdragon, there isn t a
flower in the garden to compare with you. If I had my way, you
would be the Queen of all the flowers ! But may I stay 7 ?"
“Certainly, Billy darling, and when you are ready to go
home in the morning I’ll give you some extra special honey I
have in store, and you can give it to the Queen Bee so that she
won’t be angry with you."
“Oh, snapdragon, you are a darling," whispered Billy, delighted
with his luck. “You are as good as you are beautiful. I do
love you so much!” and Billy snuggled down inside the snap-
dragon’s flower and pretended to go to sleep. But he didn’t
sleep, not a bit of it! As soon as the snapdragon was sleeping,
Billy slipped carefully out and flew down to the ground, for he
wanted to get to the Ballroom before the guests started to
arrive. He had decided to hide in one of the bells of a tall
Canterbury Bell whose topmost flowers hung right over the lawn.
So intent was Billy in getting to the lawn in time that he
didn’t see the leaves of the white daisy until he tripped over
one, and only saved himself from falling by throwing his arms
round the neck of the little flower, which, of course, woke her up.


J* J




“What ever is that?” she demanded in a sleepy voice.
“Only me,” said Billy in a small meek voice, “I’ve been left
out of the hive. Can I stay with you all night? I’m frightened
all by myself in this big shadowy garden.”
“Why Billy, you poor little chap, but how did it happen?”
Billy repeated his story, and then said, “Darling, pretty little
daisy, let me stay here. You know I love you best of all the
flowers, you are so pretty and neat with your white frills. I think
you are far prettier than any flower in the garden.”
“Oh, Billy, prettier than snapdragon? I always thought
you liked her best!” asked the daisy eagerly.
“Daisy, how could you? You are ever so much prettier
than her, why her flower reminds me of a funny face, she isn’t
7 */ v
a bit pretty, not compared with you.”
“Oh, Billy!” said the daisy again, and she blushed deep
pink. To this very day lots of the daisies are still pink at the
tips, because they remember what Billy said.
“But,” went on the daisy, “I am too small to shelter you,
although I’d love to. Go to Miss Zinnia further down the garden
bed. She is big and strong, and will take you in.”
Billy didn’t like Miss Zinnia, for she was very cold and stiff
and prim, and always sniffed at Billy when he stopped for a chat.
“You waste far too much time, William,” she would say, and
Billy felt so cross with her. However, he remembered that she
grew quite close to the Canterbury Bell, so he thanked the daisy,
and putting his arms round her neck he kissed her hard, then
off he went to the Zinnia.
He approached her timidly and woke her gently.
“William! You! I might have guessed! What are you
up to now?” she asked crossly.
“I’m not up to anything, Miss Zinnia, I’m lost,’ replied
Billy, and then he told her the same tale as he had told the
Snapdragon and the Daisy. Miss Zinnia, however, did not look
as if she believed his story, for she sniffed and then said; “Well,
William, what do you expect me to do. It’s your own fault


you were left out of the hive, and knowing how lazy you are
I don't believe you did come out to gather extra honey, at all. I
think you are up to some mischief !”
”Oh, Miss Zinnia,” sadly replied Billy, looking good, “How
could you? You know how much I think of you, and how I
respect you. Why, there isn't a flower in the garden to compare
with you. Look how straight and stiff you stand—even the
sunflower can't do that. And you’ve such a neat flower, not
all floppy petals like the rose, nor a lot of frills like that silly
daisy, nor humble and droopy like the violet. You should be
Queen, you look just like one.”
"Well, William, it's very good of you to say so : I’m really
fond of you. But Billy, I don't believe your story; however, I
suppose you intend to stick to your tale, so I will pretend to
believe you. You can stay here for as long as you wish, but
I don t suppose you will be here very long. I know what you
want, you wish to see the Ball. Well, I warn you, if that is what
you do you will get into trouble; still it’s not my business, so I
won't take any notice of you.” And with that Zinnia closed her
eyes and went to sleep, leaving a very puzzled and rather worried
Billy sitting on top of her flower.
By this time the moon was coming up, and Billy knew he
must hurry, for as soon as the moonlight reached the lawn the
revels would begin. However, it was lighter now, and he could
see where to go ; so slipping quietly down from Zinnia's very stiff
and rather uncomfortable flower, he flew straight across to
the Canterbury Bell, who stood gently swaying in the night
breeze.
Once more he repeated his story to the Canterbury Bell,
who being kind-hearted needed less persuasion than the others.
She just warned Billy to crawl up into her topmost bud (which
was just what he wanted if she only knew) and not to peep
out on any account, but to go straight to sleep. If she had not
been quite so excited about the ball, she might have suspected
something, but as it was, she took practically no notice of Billy,
and that suited him perfectly.
Up Billy went swiftly to the very top-most bud of the plant,
and crawled in. He wriggled well back into the flower, with


-9 ' *
■$
* -3
just his eyes over the edge, for he knew how angry the fairies
would be if they found him. Then he settled back to watch
everything.
Before long there were signs of great activity on the lawn.
Mushrooms and toadstools pushed their way through the grass,
and immediately they were the right height little elves set
supper on them, honey-dew and little cakes made of pollen flour.
Next came two very small mice
and juice of the fruit from the garden. Then the glow-worms
arrived, and their lights flickered hither and thither over
the lawn. They hung themselves on every bush and tree, until
the ballroom was as bright as day, and the moon grew sulky
and went behind the clouds.
Next came two very small mice with a large roll of green
moss, which they spread over the roots of a tree.
‘‘That’s for the Fairy Queen,” thought Billy excitedly.
When all the moss was down twelve furry caterpillars
crawled hurriedly up, and placed themselves for cushions for
the Queen. The spiders spread a soft, silken web over the moss
and the tree roots, turning it into a beautiful throne, whilst


the brightest glow-worms grouped themselves round the throne
and hung from the lowest branches of the tree.
In the meantime, the spiders had been busy in other parts
of the ballroom, and had hung dew-spangled webs between
every flower and plant until they looked like a lovely silver
tapestry.
Then came the crickets, they were the orchestra; and a
large frog, whose deep booming croak made a background of
drums for the lively music provided by the gay crickets. Such
a noise the orchestra made tuning up, and Billy thought ”A
little bee music is as good as that noise. If I was in their
orchestra I’d show them!”
Next came the butterflies and moths. They all stood round
the edge of the ballroom and kept the air cool with their wings.
“I could do that as well as they do,” said Billy to himself
crossly, “all the fuss they make because they come to the Fairy
Balls, and that’s all they do!”
Suddenly the moon burst out from the clouds, so brightly
that all the glow-worms had to turn their lights up, the crickets
started a merry tune, and from every bush and plant stepped
the fairies.
Billy nearly fell out of his flower, he was so excited. He
had never seen so many fairies, nor such lovely ones; they were so
beautiful they made every flower Billy had ever known seem
plain and faded, even the Queen Rose. They wore flower petal
frocks in every shade, some had cloaks of fine spider web, and
dew-diamonds in their hair. They all wore shoes of softest
green, and cobweb stockings, and their gauzy wings flashed as
they danced past.
Never in all his life had Billy seen anything to equal the
sight below him. Here was a fairy in a frock of palest pink
apple blossoms, with a cloak of furry thistledown. There was
one whose scarlet dress and green cloak came from the geraniums,
whilst another had a fluffy yellow gown of sallow, and a fourth
a gown from the silky apple blossoms.
The music grew faster and the fairies danced and twirled
so swiftly that Billy became quite dazzled. Then the butterflies


— rr\
< c r? ,
and moths commenced to dance too, and soon all the flowers
round the edge of the ballroom were swaying to the music.
Suddenly all the Canterbury Bells began to ring joyfully, the
Columbines blew a loud fanfare on their trumpets, and into the
ballroom came the Fairy Queen. Billy had to clutch the edge
of the flower to prevent himself tipping out as he craned his
little short neck to see her. She was more lovely than anything
he had ever imagined, in her white robe with flashing rainbow
wings and a crown of silver stars on her dark hair. In one hand
she carried her wand and in the other a bunch of moon flowers.
Round her shoulders and falling in a long train was a cloak of
moonbeams lined with a tiny pale pink dawn cloud. As she
seated herself on her throne and signalled for the dance to
continue, a nightingale joined in the music, singing a song of
praise to the beautiful Fairy Queen, who smiled so graciously.
The dancing became wilder, even the spiders danced up and
down their webs, the glow-worms set their lights swinging as
they jigged up and down, and even the toadstools, despite their
burdens of fairy supper, bobbed around. Louder and louder
grew the music, faster and faster
twirled the dancers, till the ball-
room was a mass of whirling
colour.
The Canterbury Bell, quite
forgetting Billy in her top bud,
swayed and nodded and curtseyed,
and Billy felt his toes tingle and
his legs twitch, he would have
given anything to have joined the
dancers. In his excitement he
forgot to hang on, and leaned
further and further out so that he
might see everything. Then the
Canterbury Bell gave an extra
deep curtsey and Billy felt himself
slip over the edge of the bell,
Billy felt himself slip over the edge of
the bell.
grabbed wildly and missed, and fell with a plop right into the
middle of the ballroom.


The fairies set up a shriek of rage, “A bee, a bee, at our ball!”
The glow-worms got such a fright they put out their lights, and
the lawn was plunged in darkness. Everyone tried to grab Billy,
but in the darkness he evaded them, and by the time the terrified
glow-worms coidd be persuaded to light their lamps again he
had vanished. Seizing the lights from the glow-worms the
enraged fairies set out to search the garden, determined to
punish the impudent bee who had dared to watch their revels.
Meanwhile, Billy, running and tripping and picking himself
up and then running on again, had left the Ballroom
far behind, but he was fat and lazy and not used to all this
running, so he soon began to puff and pant for breath. He dared
not fly, for he would probably fly straight into a band of fairies,
whose cries he could already hear growing louder and louder
behind him, so he staggered on. Then he tripped and found
himself clutching the stem of his old friend Pink Snapdragon.
With his last breath he scuttled up her stem, and tumbled into
her still open mouth. She didn't even know he'd gone! As
he lay puffing and painting the fairies ran past, waving lights
and calling to each other “The Bee, the wicked Bee, we will punish
him!”
The snapdragon yawned widely, nearly dropping Billy on
to the ground.
“What’s that?” she said sleepily
“I don't know,” fibbed Billy, as he still gasped for breath,
“I’ve just had an awful dream, I was being chased!"
“Never mind, Billy dear, go to sleep, it’s only those noisy
fairies, they were having a ball, you know.”
“Oh, yes,” yawned Billy, “I had quite forgotten!” and
stretching himself he settled comfortably down and went to
sleep.
At dawn he woke thanked the Snapdragon and collected
the special honey she had promised; then he flew off to the
Violet, who was still sleeping. So Billy picked up the honey bags
he had hidden under her leaves, and at sunrise presented himself
modestly to the Queen Bee.


“Your Majesty,” he said, “I have been out and collected
some special honey for you, just to show my devotion to our
lovely Queen.“
“Why, Billy, you good little Bee,” cried the delighted Queen
Bee “and after going out to collect that extra load last night,
too. There never was such a Bee as you. For your industry
I will reward you. The rest of the day is yours to do as you
like. I proclaim it a whole day's holiday for you.
“And I need it,” said Billy to himself as he stretched out in
the sun and went to sleep.
The fairies never discovered who the Bee was who spoiled
their grand Ball, but Miss Zinnia might have told them if she
had been so inclined.
And that is how Billy Bee came to be the only Bee who
ever saw a Fairy Ball or had a holiday.


' f 1 e ' ‘jh
< , a 7*hT W 1 ■**
■ l Ax,. /»-
Down the Trap-Door
Spider’s Hole
IT was a glorious day in early Spring. All the plants in the
garden were beginning to stretch and grow, put out new
shoots and blossoms, and get ready for the sunny days of
Spring and Summer. In fact, everybody was busy doing some-
thing, everybody, that is, except Billy. Lazy as ever, he felt
restless that morning, and had already flown twice round the
Why. it’s the trap-door spider’s hole
garden in search of gossip and excitement. But even the flowers
were too busy to talk to him, and he was beginning to feel
rather lonely.
11\ mg low under the almond trees, who were busy pushing
out buds ready to blossom into lovely flowers any day, Billy’s
sharp eyes spied something unusual on the little mossy path
below. Down he flew, all excitement.


“Why, it’s the trap-door spider’s hole, and the spider has
left the trap-door open a bit,” he cried in amazement. Billy
had long wanted to see down that hole, and indeed he had often
tried to open the trap-door, but it was always firmly locked on
the inside, and Billy had quite bent his sting sword trying to
get it underneath the edge of the door. Now, to his amazement,
here was the trap door not only unlocked but a tiny bit open
as well. Down on his knees on the mossy path went Billy and
applied one eye to the crack, but it was too dark inside to be
able to see anything.
Billy rose to his feet again, and looked carefully round, but
there was no one in sight, except the plants, and they hadn t
even seen him. Drawing his sting sword, just in case, he care-
fully raised the trap-door bit by bit, until it stood wide open,
and before him were a flight of steep steps cut in the earth and
carpeted with moss. Inside the lid of the trap-door was a tiny
lantern, cut out of a brown seed, with a very small glow-worm
inside it to give light. Billy looked about him once more, then
gripping his sword firmly, he stepped inside the hole and
cautiously lowered the trap-door. It fell into place with a
“click,” and the glow-worm inside the lantern lit up, shedding
a faint golden light down the little twisty stairs. Billy peered
down fearfully, but all he could see was the stairs, winding down
and down, faintly lit by more seed lanterns placed in little holes
in the wall.
Billy stepped carefully down a step or two, and then ran up
them again to push at the trap-door, just to make sure the way
of escape was clear. To his horror the little door was fast shut!
He remembered the click it had made when he lowered it, and he
knew he was locked in, with no possible hope of getting out that
way, unless he had a key, which he hadn't, or knew where to
find it, which he didn’t! The glow-worm in the lantern seemed
to chuckle at him, its light flickering up and down with mirth.
"Silly thing!” said Billy to it, and prodded it with his sword.
“Silly thing, silly thing, silly thing!” whispered the echoes
back at him.
”Oh dear,” thought Billy, “I am a silly thing true enough.
Now I've got myself in and I can't get out this way, and goodness


knows what is down there. Miss Zinnia is right, if only I'd do a
bit more work, I'd get on better. Now if I'd gone honey gathering
with the other bees, I wouldn't be in this fix. Still, I do hate
work, and I love adventures, and perhaps this is only a passage
and I'll find some way out the other end. I’d better go on down,
I suppose." He gripped his sword firmly, gave the glow-worm
in the lantern another prod, and said “Silly thing” again just to
show he wasn’t afraid, but he didn’t say it very loudly, because
somehow he didn't like the echo at all, but still it must have
heard him, for it replied very faintly “Silly th—.” Billy squared
his shoulders, folded his wings more comfortably, smoothed his
black and gold waistcoat, and his little brown turn beneath,
and then seeing he couldn’t put off the evil moment any longer,
began the descent.
Down and down and down he went, round and round and
round twisted the stairs, with a glow-worm in a seed lantern
at every sharp turn, and Billy began to feel giddy. He turned
round and went down backwards, just to relieve the monotony,
but that was no use, for the steps were very steep and worn,
and he kept slipping on the edges and bumping the walls with
his little fat sides. Finally the stairs began to widen, and the
light was brighter. “I must be near the bottom,” he thought,
and began to hurry, sheathing his sword as he went. Then, six
steps from the bottom, and right on the last turn, he missed the
step, and went bump, bump, bump, down three steps, and bump,
pump, bump again, down the next three, and there he was down
the stairs at last. He picked himself up, brushed himself down,
smoothed his black and gold waistcoat, and his little brown turn
beneath, and stared about him in amazement.
The narrow stairs ended in a huge, low, dimly lit, oddly
shaped hall. The rafters were twisted, gnarled tree roots, twined
into an intricate pattern, with tiny lanterns hung amongst the
rafters for light. Even with hundreds of these little lanterns
the hall was still shadowy, but despite that, the walls flashed and
glittered like silver. Billy looked at them in amazement, and
then stepped quietly over the mossy carpet to get a better look.
Then he saw that every wall of this huge cavern was hung
with silver spider web tapestries in the most beautiful patterns


imaginable. Billy had never dreamed the spiders could weave
such lovely designs, such fine threads, such glorious flashing
shades of silver and gold.
There was not just one tapestry on each wall either, but
six or seven, for Billy pulled them on one side to peer behind.
Here he found to his amazement shelves cut in the tree roots,
and each shelf stuffed with more tapestries, some of them richly
embroidered with dew diamonds.
To his surprise he found it was a tiny spinning wheel
44 Whew,' ’ gasped Billy, 4 ’l’ve stumbled on a treasure house,
and no mistake. It must be one of the fairies’ store rooms, and
I should say it was the Fairy Queen's own store house; there
are tapestries here lovely enough for any palace." He wandered
on down the long hall, his fear all forgotten in the amazement
lie felt at the beauties before him.
Intent on one particularly lovely tapestry, woven in a design
of bees and flowers, he nearly tumbled over something standing
in a nook in the long hall. Taking one of the lanterns off the
wall, curious Billy went to have a good look. To his surprise he
found it was a tiny spinning wheel, cunningly carved, which he
had nearly knocked over. Lying in a basket at one side was a


pile of spun silk, and ready for spinning lay a huge heap of
unspun silk. Evidently the spinner had gone off leaving the
work half done.
“Very careless,’' Billy muttered crossly, untangling some of
the unspun silk from around his feet. “People shouldn't leave
things like this in dark corners, anyone might fall over them. I
might have hurt myself.” He quite forgot that he really had
no business in the cave at all, “They ought to finish a job once
they start it,” he went on, speaking aloud to himself. “I wonder
how this thing works?” He gave the wheel a twirl or two, and
was delighted to find it quite easy to work.
“Think I’ll just try a bit,” he decided, and, placing the
lantern where it threw the best light, he sat down at the wheel
and began to spin. After one or two false starts, when the
thread broke and wound itself round the wheel and behaved
very queerly indeed, he got it going properly, and soon had quite
a pile of roughly (very roughly) spun spider silk lying around
him.
“This is good fun,” he thought, seizing another handful of
unspun silk, “and easy, too; why do spiders make such a fuss
about their old silk?” and off he went again, the wheel twirling
madly and humming as it turned. So busy was he with his
spinning that he failed to hear faint approaching footsteps,
heavy despite the mossy carpeting. He did not see a long
dancing shadow fall over the wheel, so when a deep gruff voice
sounded right in his ear, the shock was so great that he com-
pletely upset his basket of yarn.
‘’William Bee!” said the stern voice, “I might have known it!
And pray what are you doing here?”
At the sound of the gruff, stern voice, Billy went hot and
cold all over. After the first jump of surprise he was too terrified
to move and sat frozen to the seat.
”1 ve done it at last!'' he thought. “Here is the guardian
of the treasure found me. They’ll never believe I only came in
to have a look around. The fairies will think I’m going to
steal their treasures. I don’t know what will happen to me! Oh
how I wish I’d taken Miss Zinnia’s advice and worked like the
other bees instead of going adventuring!” Then a heavy hand,


hard and hairy, fell on poor frightened Billy’s shoulder, and he
jumped so hard and suddenly that all the black and gold stripes
on his waistcoat ran into each other and turned zig-zaggy. He
felt a most horrible sinking feeling in his little fat brown turn.
The gruff voice repeated in even sterner tones, “William Bee, v
what are you doing here?”
At last Bill} 7 turned his head
slowly and fearfully to find
himself looking straight into the
cold eyes of a huge grey hairy
spider, a truly terrifying sight.
Instead of being frightened,
however, Billy gave a loud
“Buzz” of relief, leapt off the
stool where he was sitting,
grabbed the great hairy hand
that was still gripping his
shoulder, and pumped it up and
down gaily.
“Sammy Spider!" he cried.
“Why, I haven’t seen you for
ages. Fancy meeting you here !
Then a heavy hand, hard and hairy, fell
on poor Billy's shoulder.
How is Sarah, and all the family, and ”
“Not so fast, William,” said Sammy, “not so fast. I’d like an
answer to my question first. WHAT ARE YOU DOING HERE?”
“Oh,” said Billy airily, his fears all gone on finding the dread
guardian of the treasure was none other than his old friend
Sammy Spider. “Well, as a matter of fact, I just found the
trap-door open, and came down to look round. Didn’t seem right
somehow, you know, the trap-door wide open like that. I
thought perhaps something was wrong, that thieves had broken
in.”
■‘Something is,” replied Sammy grimly. “Look at the mess
you have made of all that spider silk, first quality, special brand
it is, too. Really Billy, I cannot see that your concern for the
safety of the treasure made it necessary for you to waste all those
yards of precious silk. Any way I don’t believe that was the
reason you came down at all. You have always wanted to see


down here, haven’t you? Oh, it’s no use denying it,’’’as Billy
began to look hurt. “I’ve often seen you trying to open the trap-
door with your sword !’ *
“Oh!” said Billy, left without an answer. “Anyhow I
thought I was doing rather well with the spinning, still perhaps
I’d better leave it alone, as you aren’t pleased.”
“You had,” replied the spider, “Come, here’s the way out.
“Where do we start?” said Billy, not making any attempt
t) ov move.
? as “Start what?” enquired Sammy, turning back.
“"Looking to see that everything is safe, of course, answered
Biitern Termined not to be put out until he had seen everything
to see.
“Everything is perfectly safe, thank you. I have just
finished my rounds, as a matter of fact. My new assistant is
very careless, he’s only a young spider, and he probably forgot
to shut the trap-door properly when he went out a little while
ago. I shall certainly have something to say to him when he
comes back. He went out to collect a bag of dew diamonds for
embroidering a length of spider lace. We are making a special
robe for the Fairy Queen, I believe there is to be a big wedding
in the rose family in early Summer, and, of course, Her Majesty
will attend.” Then he went on, walking Billy back the way
he had come. “Now that’s enough time wasted in talking, here’s
the steps, Billy.”
“Well,” insisted Billy, hanging back, hoping that Sammy
would let him stay, “I’d just look around if I were you. After
all I came in, so might some other person, one of those nasty
boring beetles, perhaps; why if one of them got in, they’d have
the roof down on you before you knew it. Now I think almost
anything might be hiding behind the tapestries, you know.
Hadn’t I better stay and help you take them down and look
properly?”
The great grey spider began to shake with laughter. “Oh
Billy, you pest,” he gasped between chuckles, “you may as well
say you want to look round. I suppose I'll have to take some
time off and show you, for you’ll never go until I do, or if you


did you would always be trying to get in again. All right we’ll
look what was it you said might have got in? Oh, yes, a
boring beetle.“
Billy, with a grin so wide that it almost touched his two
feelers, trotted gaily after Sammy, to the farthest end of the
great hall. “I haven’t had time to look at anything down this
end, Sammy,” he confided, “but what I have seen is marvellous.”
So Billy and Sammy began their tour of the great under-
ground treasury of the Fairy Queen.


Fairy Treasures
“TT’VE never seen such beautiful tapestries, Sammy, said
Billy to his guide as Sammy led the way down the long hall
with its shimmering walls. ‘‘l’m sure they are the loveliest
in the whole of fairy land.”
“Should be,” Sammy replied, looking pleased, “we have the
best spinners in the garden down here spinning and weaving
all day, and I’m teaching the young spiders too. The fairies
use a lot of web, you know. All the ones in this room are
heavy tapestries as you can feel. They are used to hang on
the walls of the fairies’ castles and palaces, and to cover the
floors. Look at this one!”
Sammy took down some of the huge tapestries and laid
them on the floor for Billy to see. The little Bee walked round
them and crawled over them to see the lovely patterns. "‘Who
makes all the designs, Sammy?” he asked. “I never thought
spider web could be made into such lovely pictures! ’ ’
“Well, I do a lot of them myself,” replied Sammy modestly.
“All the most important ones I attend to, that is all those which
go to the Queen herself. Then I have a lot of clever young spiders
who are learning to make designs too.”
“Oh, Sammy, you are clever,” sighed Billy. “I wish I could
do things like that, but then I remember you always were a
wonderful spider.”
“Now that’s enough flattery, young Billy!” replied the
spider gruffly, but he looked pleased at Billy’s praise. “Come
and look at this design. It is one of the best, and is intended
for the Fairy Queen’s own throne room.”
One after another the Spider spread out before Billy dazzling,
beautiful tapestries until the Bee became quite dazed, and the
world seemed to be full of shimmering silver and gold, glittering
diamond embroidery, and intricate patterns. Here was one
woven in a design of daisies, there the gold and silver threads


had been cunningly worked in a pattern of flashing butterfly
wings, and another was entirely made of circular cobwebs, big
ones of silver, tiny ones of gold, stitched to palest pink rose
petals.
‘’And now,” said the Spider briskly, “I’ve shown you all the
best of these. Come and see some of the really fine weaving.
All these are beautiful, of course, but you haven’t seen the very
best we do. Come through here,” and he held aside a curtain
revealing a low arch-way. Through this door could be heard
a low hum of talk. The spider had to bend all his legs up nearly
double to get through the door-way, but Billy, being smaller,
slipped through with ease. He found himself in another odd
shaped room, smaller than the great hall, and more brightly lit.
Here, on long rows of tables, hundreds of young girl spiders
were busy folding lengths of the finest lacy cobweb, and neatly
packing silken fairy stockings into tiny little boxes made from
strong gum leaves.
“A rush order,” Sammy explained to the gaping Billy. “The
Fairy Queen wants special lace gowns for her Ladies-in-Waiting,
and, of course, cobweb stockings are always in demand for Spring
Balls; but we’ll be busier than this in a week or two, when all
the new flowers are out. Our dressmaking section hasn’t really
started yet, we are waiting for the first almond blossom, but
we are preparing. Come through here.” Another curtain
parted, another low doorway and brightly lit room, with more
little spiders, met Billy’s wondering gaze. These workers were
winding reels of spider silk, working at it furiously, too. Whilst
Billy and the Spider stood watching, another door opened and
a long line of busy ants entered, two at a time, one with a bundle
on its back, the other walking beside it to balance the huge load.
“Jonquil petals,” gasped the first, dropping his burden with
a heavy thump. The little spiders, seizing it, tore off the heavy
leaf wrappers and spread out lovely creamy jonquil petals, a
beautiful gown for mi-lady fairy. Other ants placed more heavy
bundles on the tables, one containing yellow jonquil petals,
another finest and softest baby moss.
“The moss is for velvet gowns and cloaks,” Sammy explained
to Billy. The Parade of the Ants seemed to be unending, and the


little spiders were tireless; already their needles were flying
through the delicate petal fabrics.
Bill} 7 moaned —more work! Then he whispered to Sammy,
“Let’s get out of here, they are too busy to need us,” and made
for the door. Sammy laughed, and followed the hurrying Billy
out, whilst Billy looked nervously over his shoulder at the
workers. He really feared that if they stayed much longer in
the busy room, he, too, would have a needle and thread thrust
into his hand. He hurried out.
They found themselves in a long corridor, glow-worm
lanterns along its length, shedding a soft golden light. Low
doors carved from tree roots opened off each side. The spider
opened the first door, revealing a tiny room full of more little
spiders.
“These are only apprentices,” he told Billy. “At present they
are rolling up ribbons. We use a lot of ribbon down here. Look
at this!” holding up a length of glowing, shimmering silver.
“That’s Spring moon-beam ribbon. It all goes to Her Majesty
the Fairy Queen, you know; so does this, it's made from the last
pink and gold sunset cloud. The elves go and catch these clouds
just as the sun sinks below the edge of the earth. But they are
difficult to get, and very precious.” Billy blinked at the beauties
before him. In the golden lantern glow the beautiful ribbons
flashed throught the spiders’ swift fingers. Sammy closed the
door quietly, only to open another, revealing rows of spiders
seated at spinning wheels, all whirling madly. The air was
full of the soft hum of the wheels.
“All busy, you see, Billy,” he remarked. Billy turned pale
with fear. “No place for you there, though,” the spider went on.
“Here’s where the beginners learn, and I believe we have a spare
wheel at present if you would care to be taught to work a spinning
wheel properly.” But as he went to open the door Billy hustled
him past. “I’ve seen enough spinning, I think, Sammy,” he
remarked in haste, “let’s look at something else, now.”
“All right, Billy, I’ll take you to the Nursery. You’ll like
that, for they aren’t a bit busy there.” He turned into a small
passage, heavily carpeted with moss so thick that Billy sank into
it up to his ankles. After the hustle and bustle of the other


rooms the place was restful and quiet. At the end of the passage
was a door with “Quiet, Nursery,”’ across it in plain letters. Over
the doorway a subdued glow-worm shone softly.
The Spider knocked gently and the door opened a tiny bit.
A small ant in fresh veil and apron stood in the doorway. “Yes?”
she asked in a whisper.
“Visitor to see the Nurseries,” replied Sammy quietly. The
ant nurse frowned, and looked as if she was going to shut the
door on them, but as Sammy was the guardian of all this
wonderful underground Treasury and workshop she had to let
him in.
“This is the second time you have been
here to-day, Mr. Spider,” she said crossly.
“Now mind, neither of you make any noise,
you know it‘s bad for the babies,” and the
ant stood aside to let them enter, shutting
the door softly behind them. This room
was very dimly lit, floor, walls and roof all
covered with moss, and down each side of
the room were rows and rows of mossy beds,
with a tiny sleeping baby caterpillar in each.
“Kittenpillars,” Sammy explained in a
low whisper. “You came just in time, they
go up into the garden next week. Come
through here, some of them are being fed.”
In the feeding room there were dozens
of white capped ant nurses, each one feed-
ing a tiny squeaking kittenpillar out of a
bottle made from a poppy seed.
Each one feeding a tiny
kittenpillar.
“What are they drinking?” Billy enquired, always interested
in things to eat and drink.
“Leaf juice and dew,” Sammy replied. “The} 7 love it, and
are quite ready to eat leaves when they get up into the garden.'
“It doesn’t sound very nice,” replied Billy doubtfully, *’but
I suppose they like it, they seem to, anyway.” Billy had forgotten
to lower his voice, and a frowning nurse came along to them.
“You’ll have to go,” she said sternly. “You are making far
too much noise !’ ’


The Spider showed Billy out, and closed the door firmly.
Billy yawned. “They make me feel so sleepy,’' he explained.
"Come on, Billy, no time to sleep, we’ve lots to see yet,” said
Sammy briskly, stalking down the corridor again. Billy trotted
after him obediently.
Then that elf pumps it up into the bushes.
After that the tour of the treasure house went on more
rapidly, until Billy became quite dazed. Endless lantern-lit
corridors, great dim store rooms, all piled up to the roof with
treasures rich and beautiful, brightly lit workshops, doors with
lanterns over them, doors with notices on them, steps and stairs
twisting and winding, tree roots forming pillars to support
curiously carved roofs—they all seemed to flash past Billy in
an endless procession.
One room held piles of caterpillar and grub skins.
We use them for fur coats, and making soft fairv shoes,”
said Sammy; “the moths bring them along to us. Once the
caterpillar changes into a moth he doesn’t need his old skin
any more, of course.”
Outside that room Billy suddenly sniffed. “Can I smell
lavender?” he asked Sammy.


“You should be able to,” said Sammy with a smile, “we are
right underneath the biggest lavender bush in the garden. Look,
see those elves? Well, they are perfuming the bushes. See those
pipes? They are made from tough grub skins, and carry the
perfume from those vats over there,” waving one of his long hairy
arms at huge vats half lost in the gloom of the vast room; “then
that elf pumps it up into the bushes. Most of the sweet-smelling
things are perfumed from down here. Of course the perfume
is all made by fairies, it’s their secret, and they pump it all into
the plants themselves, we do none of that, but all the perfumes
are stored down here, just like the lavender perfume.”
Passing through another vast hall, they saw hundreds of
gnomes and goblins at work in tiny eaves made by the twisted
tree roots, each cave brilliantly lit. “They are the fairy gold-
smiths, Billy,” said Sammy. “See, they make the fairy gold
and set the precious stones. This very old gnome,” pointing to a
gnome whose face was so wrinkled with age that it resembled the
tree roots amongst which he worked, “is the Queen’s favourite
goldsmith. He’s busy setting some dew diamonds in sallow gold
for her Spring crown.” Then Sammy took a huge key from a
bundle hanging round his waist, and going up to a huge old
iron bound door at the end of the jewellers’ hall, he unlocked it,
and turning to Billy said, “This is the real treasury, and I believe
you are the only person besides myself and the picked fairy guards
who has been inside. I really shouldn’t take you in at all, but
I know you are to be trusted, and I think this is the most amazing
sight in all this wonderful store house, so come along, only we
must be quick." With this the spider opened the door, and the
curious Billy entered a wonderful room. Huge piles of gold dust
collected from all the flowers and the dawn and sunset clouds,
rose up to the ceiling in mountains, and the walls and roof had
become so powdered with the fine dust that the} 7 seemed to be
of solid gold too, and they flashed and gleamed in the lantern
light. “This is the gold which melts away or turns to skeleton
leaves at human touch, but it is the most rare and precious thing
in Fairy Land," explained Sammy, “for it has great magic powers
if properly used.”
Besides the gold there were sacks of precious jewels spilling
all over the floor, and silver too, collected on moonlight nights.


-, fcdlfc. JSaI'Xl yfcM3g>
‘v2P i nfffir
The light from these treasures was so bright that Billy was
dazzled, and was quite pleased when Sammy led him out,
and closed and locked the door carefully. “It’s wonderful,”
breathed Billy, “but oh, Sammy, aren’t you afraid of someone
trying to steal it ? ”
“It would be the hardest
thing in the world to steal,”
replied Sammy. “This room is
right in the heart of the
treasury, and is well guarded.
Oh, I know you haven't seen any
guards, but that is because you
are with me. Just you try to get
beyond the first hall where I
found you and you would see
what I mean.”
At last, as the afternoon
wore on, Sammy led Billy back
into the great hall hung with
tapestries, where he had first
found the little Bee.
Besides the gold there were sacks of precious
jewels.
“Only one more thing to show you, Billy,” he said, and Billy
sighed, weary but happy, “That is the room where we keep the
Fairy Queen's own honey, honey-dew and pollen. This is where
the best of your labours come," and he opened one last door, to
reveal huge mountains of pollen and piles of honey sacks. Billy
gasped in amazement. Even though he was a bee, he had never
seen so much honey and pollen all together.
“Well, that’s the lot, and now, out you go, my lad,” Sammy
said, and turning, led the way out of the honey store. As soon
as his back was turned, Billy hastily grabbed six bags of honey,
and filled his pollen sacks; then dashed out after Sammy. He
knew he would have to have some honey and pollen to take
back to the hive, and he certainly would not have time to collect
any now unless he hurried far more than he ever did, or intended
to do. It was much easier to take some from the vast quantities
stored away, for as he told himself, it wasn’t as if he had really


/n
2L
stolen it, it was only a lend, for it would come back to the store
room finally !
As they passed through the main hall again, Sammy noticed
the pile of ill-spun silk, the result of Billy’s spinning.
“Here, William,” he said, “ you’d better take this, it’s certainly
no good to us. It’ll be a little memento of your visit.”
“Oh, thank you very much, Sammy,“ cried Billy in great
delight, and added to himself “Not the only thing I’m taking
either,” but he didn’t say that aloud !
He lost no time in making a neat coil of the silk and slung
it over his shoulder so that it hid the “borrowed" honey. He was
glad of the great coil of silk, for it completely hid any bulges
caused by honey bags. He knew there would be trouble if
Sammy saw those, and he had been keeping
behind Sammy and walking in the most
shadowy places ever since the}’ had left
the honey store. Now that he had the silk
arranged to his liking, he declared that
he was ready to go.
Up the twisty stairs they went, up and
up, round and round, Billy beginning to
puff and pant, for he was a very fat little
bee, and he had a heavy load, but he
refused all Sammy’s offers to help him
carry the silk. At last they reached the
top. The glow-worm in its lantern still
shone brightly.
“Silly thing,” said Billy cheekily, and
the echo replied “Silly thing,” but it did not
worry Billy this time. Sammy unlocked
the trap-door, and Billy scrambled out into
the glow of the late afternoon sunshine.
He was glad of the great
coil of silk.
He couldn’t see for a minute, and when he turned to speak
to Sammy, the Spider had vanished and the trap-door was
tight shut.
Billy sat down plop on top of the trap-door and wondered
if he had dreamt it or not, but no, the spider silk and the honey
was proof it had really happened. The little bee stood up,


smoothed his black and gold waistcoat and his little brown turn
beneath, and flew slowly back to the hive. On the way he
stopped by the pink-tipped Daisies, and hid his coil of precious
silk beneath their friendly leaves. Then he buzzed gaily back to
the hive with his honey.
He modestly presented both honey and pollen to the Queen
Bee, who was amazed at its flavour and quality. “You do work
hard, Billy dear, she said, "’that honey shall go straight to
the Fairy Queen and you shall have a holiday to-morrow, because
you work so hard,” and Billy rubbed one foot on the other,
smoothed his black and gold waistcoat, and his little brown turn
beneath, and said nothing.
The next day found him up early and down by the daisy
bed, busy for once, with his spider silk.
*"A\ illiam, said Miss Zinnia, peering stiffly over the heads of
the daisies to see what the naughty little bee was doing, “What
are you going to do with that spider web?”
“I’m making myself a hammock,” Billy replied, “and I’m
going to hang it between these two daisies, and lie in it in the
sun all day, with my book!” and so he did; and any sunny day
in Spring or Summer there he is to be found, swinging lazily
in his hammock, usually sound asleep, his book fallen from his
hands on to the grass.
Swinging lazily in his hammock.


-
> ■
-


. .v-f sr* 0 ***
wQtwSR. { S2fc?
Xy% V wf
.. _ I 5
--■- >l- - ■ a f . Jr
d IF^V
y%i( / x \
f ■■ * ‘ l^JU
/;■ %7, l/ %jt'W ! x , 7 ..^ s


Billy meets Glimp the
Goblin
THE early Spring morning was fine and sunny, and Billy
stood in the doorway of the hive, stretching himself in the
sunshine. He looked the very picture of a bee about to
be very busy, honey and pollen bags hanging from his arms and
legs, gauzy wings shining, gold and black waistcoat neatly
brushed.
“Just look at dear Billy,” murmured the Queen Bee, who
happened to pass through the main hallway of her hive castle
at that minute, “standing there in the sunshine, planning out
his day’s work, I’m sure. I never knew such a hard working bee.
The Queen had a soft spot in her heart for Billy. He always
brought in the finest pollen and the greatest quantity of the
best honey, and, of course, to the Queen Bee this was ample
proof of his hard work.
“Yes, Your Majesty,”
murmured her Lord High
Chancellor, “Planning some-
thing I’m sure. A very excel-
lent bee, if I may say so, Your
Majesty.” The Lord High
Chancellor always agreed
with the Queen Bee, of course,
but being a very wise and old
bee, he had great doubts about
the amount of work Billy ever
did. As they passed out of the
hall he muttered to himself,
“Billy Bee is planning some-
thing certainly, but I dont
believe it’s the day’s work!”
and the Lord High Chancellor
was right.
Billy stood stretching himself in the sunshine
Sunning himself on the hive doorstep, and completely
blocking up the door, nothing was further from Billy’s mind


than work. As a matter of fact he was just wondering if he
would call on the sunflowers first or go and see Miss Violet. The
sunflowers always had the most
gossip, for they were so tall and
curious that they saw everything
that happened in the garden, and
lots of things outside the garden
too, and the faintest whisperings
of the wind were heard by them.
Miss Violet, however, had promised
to keep her new store of Spring
honey for Billy, and as everyone
knows, violet honey is the sweetest
in the whole garden.
“I think I*ll visit the sun-
flowers first after all,” thought
Billy. “They are bound to have
some news to tell, and then if they
have I can tell Miss Violet when I
see her. It is very hard for her
having to be so modest and shy
all the time. She never sees any-
thing for herself,” and off he flew
to the end of the garden where
“ Yes, Your Majesty
the sunflowers grew, looking over the high garden wall to the
great world beyond. Billy loved to sit in the centre of a sunflower
and gossip, whilst his busy brown eyes took in every detail of
the strangest scenes beyond his own little garden world. Billy
had often told himelf that one day he would venture into the
great world and see for himself what happened there, but always
he was too lazy, and his own dear garden was too full of excite-
ment and adventure for him to have time to think much about
the land which lay beyond it.
This morning he found the sunflowers with their heads all
together, and all chattering at once. Billy buzzed up to the
largest sunflower with a happy “Zoom.”
’’Here I am, he cried, “how are you all this morning, sun-
flowers dear?”


“Why, it is little Billy,” laughed the jolly sunflowers, and
they all turned beaming yellow faces on him.
“How you all dazzle me,” said Billy, settling himself comfort-
ably on a flower right in the middle of the garden bed. “You
are just like dozens of little suns. Even if it was a grey day
you would still keep this garden sunny.”
“Why, Billy, what a lovely thing for you to say," they all
answered, and blushed a pretty shade of orange with pleasure.
“Now you little rascal,’ went on the biggest sunflower, I suppose
you want all the latest news of the garden ?
“Yes, please,” replied Billy. “Is there anything interesting
happened?”
“Well, those hollyhocks by the wall, you remember them,
the plain pink ones. Well, they’ve all got double flowers this yeai,
with frilled edges, such style, you’ve no idea.
“Yes, and the nasturtiums are the same. I declare, it’s
becoming quite common to be a double flower. I m very glad w€
are all single blooms,” and all the sunflowers tossed and nodded
their heads together at this. Indeed the big sunflower nodded
so hard she nearly shook Billy out.
“Of course,” agreed Billy, clutching tightly at the still-
nodding flowers, “you have nothing to fear from those sill\
double flowers. You need no frills to add to your beauty, you
must be the very loveliest flowers in the garden with your dazzling
golden petals,”
“Oh, Billy dear, do you really think so? cried all the
sunflowers together.
“Of course I do. You know I always have loved you best of
all the flowers in the whole garden. Don’t I always come to
see you every day, before I start to work?” replied Billy, patting
the round gold and brown flower face nearest to him.
“I’m afraid you only come to hear all the garden news from
us,” laughed another flower, but they all looked pleased just
the same, and began to bring out their bags of honey and
pollen for the sly little Bee.
“Why, there’s another bit of news we almost forgot,” cried
the sunflowers suddenly, just as Billy, honey and pollen bags
full, was preparing to go. “There's a new toadstool village sprung
up last night down by that old mossy stump, and there is a


great deal of bustle there this morning. I think some of the
fairy folk must be moving in.”
“A toadstool village?” repeated Billy. 4 * What fun. I shall
go and look at once, as soon as I’ve taken my honey back to the
hive. Good-bye, and thank you,” and off he flew, very excited.
A toadstool village usually meant pixies and elves, and Billy was
great friends with all these gay little fairy folk, who are so full
of fun and pranks. As soon as he had handed in his pollen
and honey at the store room door, he flew off down the garden
at a great rate, and the Queen Bee, who happened to
see him just as she set out on her morning parade of
the garden, murmured to her Lord High Chancellor, “That
darling Bee, how hard he works. He’s brought in one lot
of honey already this morning, and there he goes for more.
What a model bee he is, to be sure!”
Billy flew straight to the old mossy stump near the lark-
spurs, and as he approached he could see the roofs of a whole town
of creamy-fawn toadstool cottages. He alighted at the end of
the narrow mossy street which wound almost to the top of the
old stump, and was lined on either side by little houses with tall
round roofs and high narrow doorways. Already somebody had
erected a sign post at the beginning of this little street, and Billy,
peering up at it read the words, ‘‘Toadstool Town.”
Everywhere there was great activity, and Billy’s round eyes
" idened in surprise when he realised that the inhabitants of
the new cottages were goblins. Now the goblins are the workmen
and the craftsmen of Fairyland. It is they who are the fairy
cobblers, the goldsmiths, the perfume brewers, they build the
faiiv coaches, paint the wings of the butterflies, write the songs
the biids sing, help polish and string the dewdrops which appear
on every fence and tree in the early morning, collect the magic
gold dust for the fairy treasure houses; in fact they are the
hardest workers in all the Fairy kingdom, and like the bees, they
love to work. To Billy, that most unusual bee, the fact that he
found himself amongst such busy little people was nearly enough
to send him flying straight away again, but he wanted to see
more of the goblins, and so he stayed to stare in wonder.
The goblins are quaint little fellows, with faces as old and
wrinkled as twisted tree roots, and with eyes wise and bright in


their brown faces. They wear odd little clothes and they have
long fingers, both nimble and swift. They had only just taken
possession of their new homes, and were already busy moving
in their furniture and nailing up the signs of their trade over
each doorway.
There was one old goblin with a beard as white as the
petals of the snowdrops, putting up a sign which read “Fairy
Goldsmith, Finest Jewels polished and set." Another was busy
arranging pairs of tiny shoes in his shop window. Made from
grass and flower petals, many of them had a magic spell stitched
into their soles, to make the wearer invisible, or very small, or
very big, or else to help him travel swiftly. One little shop bore
the sign of a sword hanging over its door. This little goblin had
made swords for the brave fairy soldiers and handsome Princes
for more years than he could recall, as well as sharpening the
stings of mosquitoes, bees, wasps, and in fact all the garden
creatures who wear sting swords. Billy felt his own little sword
hanging in its sheath and thought, ‘l’ll have to bring mine along
to him. It really needs sharpening, I use it so little,” and to
tell the truth, Billy had never used it, being a peaceful sort of
Bee, and too lazy to sting anyone.
Along the twisty street Billy
wandered in a dream, so many
things were there for him to see.
The goblins, being very busy, took
no notice of him at all. Presently
as he was beginning to puff and
pant a little from the climb, he
came to a little toadstool cottage
apart from the others. It stood
back from the street, and had a
little patch of green moss before
its open door. Standing on a small
step ladder, hammering very busily
at a wobbly sign and trying to
balance the ladder as well, was
the quaintest goblin Billy had ever
seen. He was only a little goblin,
Nothing was further from Billy's mind
than work.


and looked younger than the others. His face, brown and wrinkled
like the gnarled roots of some old tree, was the setting for the
brightest, youngest eyes Billy had ever seen. As brown as the
heart of the sunflowers Billy had just left, they sparkled gaily,
and there was a wicked little twinkle in them. Sharp, pointed
ears sticking out from his long pointed cap reminded Billy of
dry brown gum leaves, and his hair blown in wisps from beneath
his cap, was like drifting leaves too. In fact, the little goblin
How you all dazzle me
was very like a leaf blown from the tree, and to anyone who didn't
have fairy eyes he would have been invisible. That's why so few
humans ever see fairies; to them the fairy folk always look just
like some garden flower or plant, it is the fairies’ best disguise.
As Billy stood gazing upwards and trying to make out what
was the sign the goblin was fixing, the ladder gave a big wobble
and the little man dropped his hammer with a “plop." It missed
Billy narrowly, but being a polite bee, he picked it up, and holding
it up said, “Don’t come down, I'll hand it up to you.”
The little goblin got such a shock at hearing Billy’s voice
that he nearly fell off the ladder a second time, and remarked
crossly, “You shouldn’t give people a fright like that; who are
you anyway ?’ ’


“I’m Billy Bee,” replied the bee, “and there is no need to be
cross. Here, take your hammer, and I’ll hold the ladder steady,
if you like.”
“Sorry I snapped at you, Mr. Bee,” replied the little fellow,
“But I’ve been trying to put this sign up for half an hour, that’s
the fourth time I’ve dropped my hammer, and many times I’ve
nearly fallen off this wobbly ladder, and only saved myself by
grabbing at the sign, and of course that pulls the nails out.” He
commenced to hammer again, and this time, with Billy holding
the ladder, managed to fix his sign securely. Then he came down
the ladder briskly.
“Thank you, Mr. Bee,” he said, and then at the sight of Billy's
friendly face he smiled, and his little wrinkled face lit up and
his little eyes danced, and Billy found himself smiling too. “My
name is Glimp the Goblin,” the merry little fellow said, “and
everyone just calls me Glimp. Do you mind if I call you Billy?”
“I wish you would,” replied Billy, delighted with this new
friend, “no one ever calls me anything else, either. But do tell
me, what is your trade? I’ve been trying to make out your sign
ever since I saw it. It looks like a huge pair of wings, but surely
it can’t be?”
“Oh, but it is,” said the Goblin, “that’s my job.*’
“Sorry, but I still don't understand,” answered Billy. “What
have wings to do with your job?”
“Well, you’d better come inside and I'll tell } r ou, or rather, I’ll
show you. I’m just about fixed up now, but I’ll be glad of an
excuse not to start work to-day,” and Glimp led the way into his
little home. Billy stared at him in amazement, and began to
wonder if he had heard correctly. Surely this quaint little man
had said he didn’t want to work, and yet Billy knew that Goblins
are as fond of work as bees, all bees, that is, except Billy. Could
Glimp by any chance be a Goblin who hated w f ork, just as Billy
was a bee who hated work?
Billy remarked cautiously as he stepped over the threshold
of the toadstool cottage, “Did you say you didn’t want to work
to-day?”
“I did,” replied Glimp cheerfully, and then seeing Billy’s
amazed face, he looked a little ashamed, but not very, and his


little brown eyes still twinkled merrily. “’Oh, I know that must
sound awful to a bee who works so hard, but I can't help it, I just
don’t like work.” But Billy had started to laugh, and his little
brown body was shaking all over, “Why, what have I said that s
so funny?” asked the Goblin.
“I’m sorry, said Billy, trying to stifle his chuckles, ’’but it
is funny. You see, I don't like work either ! I’m the only bee
in all the world I think, who doesn't love working. The others are
all so busy collecting honey and pollen they never have time for
fun and adventures, they never see how lovely the garden is, nor
how sweet all the flowers are, because they don’t stop to make
friends with the flowers as I do. To them the plants are just
the providers of honey, and it is their job to collect; but I like all
the flowers for themselves, and I hate working to get pollen
and honey. I never thought I'd meet another person like myself.
It is fun to be an adventurer bee, instead of a worker, but it is
lonely, ’cos I can’t tell anyone what I do instead of working,"
and Billy explained to Glimp how friendly he was with all the
flowers, who gave him all the Honey-dew he wanted because they
loved him. Then he told the eager Goblin of some of his adven-
tures, all about his spider web hammock and a dozen other
things. At the end of the tale he and Glimp were firm friends,
and then suddenly Billy remembered he didn’t even know what
Glimp did. Being a Goblin, Billy knew he must have some special
task.
“Yes, I have,” replied Glimp in answer to Billy’s question, “I
paint wings.”
“Paint wings? I still don’t understand,” said the puzzled
Bee.
“Look,” went on Glimp, “Come and see my work room—this
little room is only my shop,” and he led the way through a
doorway into a big round room lit by several long windows.
“You can see a lovely lot of the garden from here,” said
Billy. “Why, there’s our hive, see, over there? And just look
at Miss Zinnia. I’m sure she is lecturing someone!”
“From the other windows I can see all over the toadstool
village, as you can see,” said Glimp, and led Billy to the other
windows, where he could see all the busy little goblins running


' "


4


in and out of their new homes, and already a few curious fairies
and garden creatures were peering into the little windows of
the shops.
‘•But come and look at my work,” went on the Goblin. Billy
turned from the windows and went over to the high table Glimp
had set up in the best light, and just where he could see all the
lovely flowers in the garden. Spread out flat on the table were
a large pair of wings, gauzy and perfectly clear and colourless.
“You see,” Glimp explained, “All the wings come from
Fairyland like that, and it’s my job to paint them. First of all
I was taught to colour butterflies’ wings, and then the wings
of moths.”
“But,” interrupted Billy, “Surely butterflies’ wings are much
harder to paint than a motlrs wing?
“That shows that you have never really looked properly at
a moth’s wing,” said Glimp laughing. “The moth’s wings
are tinted with every shade of silver and gold, palest grey, fawn,
and many others, but a butterfly has wings of only two colours
usually—garden butterflies have, anyway. Then I painted wings
of dragon flies and bees, and when I could do all those properly
I was sent to live in this garden, so that I could paint wings for all
the creatures who live here, and repair their wings if they damage
them.”
“Paint bees’ wings,” cried Billy in amazement, ’’but there is
no colour in our wings.”
“No, not coloured like the moths and butterflies, replied
patient Glimp, 44 but they have lovely rainbow colourings that flash
in the light, haven’t they?”
“Yes,” replied Billy, 4 ‘that’s right. And do you have to put
all those colours in ? ”
“I do. Here’s a pair uncoloured. Look how dull they are
beside your own. But you just watch. Here is the special paint
I use; it comes from the rainbow fairies, and is very rare and
precious. They only use the tiny delicate rainbows for making
it. In fact the very best sort of rainbow for these colours is
the one made by sunlight on tears, but that sort is almost
impossible to get in Fairy Land, and human tears don t make
good rainbows, only the tears of very tiny babies, or little


'^j
children." As he spoke Glimp picked up his brush and dipped it in
the lovely liquid, which seemed as clear as dew, yet full of
flashing colours. Quickly and skilfully Glimp applied the magic
colour, and before Billy’s wondering eyes, the wings seemed to
come to life under the little man’s clever fingers.
“I’ll never say there isn’t colour in my wings again,” said
Billy with a smile, “but tell me more, Glimp.”
All afternoon Billy stayed with the little goblin, looking
at his lovely colours, the finished wings, and watching the tiny
The two new friends
went up the twisty stairs.
man as he applied the colours. Then
finally Glimp said, “I will show you
something I’ve never shown anyone else.
One day I hope they will let me make my
own designs for wings, instead of just
doing the same old sort over and over
again. Sometimes I get so tired of paint-
ing orange and black butterfly wings, and
garden butterflies won’t change their
wing colours for anything. Anyway, in
my spare time I’ve drawn some new
designs and I even tried painting some
of them on one or two pairs of wings.
Going to a cupboard, the little man took
out a book made of orange blossom petals
and neatly bound in green grass. He
opened it proudly, and laying it before
Billy, showed him page after page of
lovely designs. Gold and blue, silver and
crimson, green and orange, all the
colours flashed before Billy’s eyes, in
designs more lovely than he had ever
dreamed it was possible to see, as the little man turned the
pages of his treasured book.
“Oh, Glimp, said Billy almost in a whisper, “I’ve never
seen anything so lovely; if only the butterflies had wings like
that! ’ ’
”1 don't suppose I’ll ever use my designs,” replied the little
man sighing, as he put the book carefully back in its cupboard,


4 ’butterflies like to have just orange and black wings, I m sure.
But here is one of my designs which I tried out on a real pair o
wings. I think it looks rather nice, myself.” Unwrapping a
laro-e parcel neatly tied up with spider thread, he showed Billy
a pair of wings so beautiful that the little Bee could only blink in
wonder. They were of a heavenly shade of blue. “I mixed a little
night sky and summer sky blue together,” Glimp explained when
Billy marvelled at the colour, and they were patterned all over
with silver, so that they reminded Billy of a fine cobweb on a blue
morning glory.
‘•lt’s the loveliest thing Uve ever seen," Billy told the proud
Glimp, who blushed at this praise.
4 ’oh, well,” he said briskly, “let’s put it away. You’d better
stay and have tea with me, that’s if you would like to,” and
when Billy accepted happily the two new friends went up the
twisty stairs to Glimp’s little house over the wing shop.


The Angry Butterfly
A FTER the first day on which Billy met Glimp the
Goblin the little Bee spent many happy hours in Glimp’s
company. Often the Goblin was too busy painting
butterfly or moth wings to go out with Billy, but then the
little Bee would sit quietly in the workroom and watch the busy
Goblin at his work. Billy always loved to see someone else
working, so long as he wasn’t expected to do anything himself.
He never tired of seeing Glimp’s clever fingers using the paint
brush so swiftly, and often Billy thought the paint brush must
really be a wizard’s wand, so swiftly did the goblin colour even
the most difficult wing design.
The great crystal jars of colour which lined the walls of
the work room held much charm for Billy, with their contents
of summer-sky blue, sunset red, rose dawn, moonbeam silver,
cloud white, fairy white, night black and cobweb gray.
Sometimes when Glimp's work was done he and Billy would
go for a stroll in the garden, and Billy took Glimp to see all
his friends, the flowers, the spiders, all the insects, and the fairies,
and they soon became nearly as fond of the Goblin as they
were of Billy.
The other Goblins who lived in Toadstool Town round the
old stump did not approve of Glimp’s friendship with Billy. “No
good will come of it,” they all said, shaking their heads gravely,
as they watched Glimp and the gay little Bee going off together.
”A bee like that is not the right sort of friend for a serious
hard-working Goblin.”
’’But Glimp is not serious and hard-working, that’s the
trouble; if he was he wouldn’t go off like he does with that Bee,”
answered another Goblin.
A very old Goblin, who was the Mayor of Toadstool Town
looked thoughtful as he heard all this, but at last he said,
‘•Glimp’s work is just as good as it ever was, and he is never late


with an order. All his customers say that, and the butterflies
and moths are very pleased with the way in which he paints their
wings, and as long as they are satisfied he can do as he likes
in his spare time. Anyway there is no harm in Bdly, lam sure,
all the flowers and fairies love him; let Glimp alone, all of you.
So Billy and Glimp continued to be friends.
No good will come of it.
One afternoon Billy alighted on the green mossy patch before
Glimp’s front door, and strode into the shop in search of his
friend. He found him in his workroom, wrapping up a large
parcel. As Billy came in he tied the last knot of the spider
thread around it, and picked up his tall pointed cap, ready to
go out. Then he noticed Billy standing in the doorway.
4 *Hello, Billy,” he said, “I’m afraid I can’t come with you to-
day, I’ve a large order of flying ants’ wings to deliver at once.
You know how wildly they dance and play these warm nights
and they are always damaging or losing their wings. I've just
mended twenty pairs, and there are fifty more pairs of new
wings in this parcel as well, and I’ve promised them I will deliver


them to-day. Oh, dear,” he suddenly exclaimed, “I quite forgot,
Madam Butterfly is sending round for her new Summer wings
this afternoon, so I can’t go out until she comes; what a nuisance,
she might not send for them until quite late, and then it will be
dark before I get back. Madam Butterfly is very trying, she
makes such a fuss about her wings you'd think I’d never painted
a pair of wings in my life, and they are just the ordinary orange
and black design, of course, she won’t hear of anything else. In
fact she became most angry when I spoke of how nice it would
be if the butterflies would try some new colour or design. She
said butterflies in this garden had always worn orange and black,
and she saw no reason for making a change. I had hoped I might
be able to interest her in some of my new designs, but no, no such
luck.”
Billy laughed, “I could have told you that you would have
no luck with her,” he said, “she is such a cross old butterfly, I
don’t like her a bit. I think your only chance of being able to
use any of your own lovely designs is to send them to the Fairy
Queen. lam sure she would be interested in them.”
“Oh, I couldn't do that! I’d be far too frightened of her!”
cried Glimp, really scared at the thought of it.
"But why?” replied Billy in amazement. “She is gentle and
kind, I know, and would probably be very pleased with you.
Still if you £p*e afraid, there is nothing more to be said about it.
I could deliver the wings to the flying ants, if you like,” he added.
“No, I m afraid I'll have to take them myself, for they
probably want to see me about another supply, some have to
be mended and replaced every day, they are so careless,” replied
the little man, ’*but I know what you could do, Billy, if you
don't mind, and that’s stay here and mind the shop till I get
back, then I could take the parcel round at once. The only
one who is likely to call is the ant for Madam Butterfly’s wings,
and they are in that parcel on the shelf over there. Would you
do that for me?”
“Of course, I d love to,' replied Billy, who really had no
desire to go flying round delivering parcels during the hottest
part of the day, when he could be just as useful sitting com-


fortablv in (.limp’s cool little shop. “I’ve always wanted to look
after a shop,” he added, “so off you go, Glimp, and hum up,
and Glimp shouldered his parcel and went off briskly,
Billy in charge of the little shop.
First he strolled to the doorway, and stood under the gently
swaying sign of the painted wings, hands in the pockets of m
black and gold waistcoat, in the way he had often seen the
owners of the Fairy shops standing at the doors of then htt
stores. He could see all over the garden from the doorway, and
right down the street of Toadstool Town. He watched the
fairies and garden creatures about their day’s shopping with
interest; Billy was always interested in other people’s business.
Presently, coming up the road between the toadstool houses
he saw a little ant in a great hurry. -’Here comes the messenger
for Madam Butterfly’s wings,“ he thought, and went inside
and seated himself behind the counter in the correct way.
The little ant scurried over the door step, and enquired, very
rudely, Billy thought, “Where’s Mr. Glimp?”
“Mr. Glimp is out on business,'* replied Billy, frowning and
trying to look dignified, “but if you have come for a parcel
for Madam Butterfly, then I have
it here for you.”
“Yes, that’s what I want,
hurry up. Madam Butterfly is
waiting,'* the cheeky little ant
replied.
Billy got up slowly and went
into the workroom. “Now where
did Glimp say that parcel was?”
he thought. “Oh, this’ll be it on
the top of this cupboard,” and
taking the parcel he handed it
over to the ant, who immediate!}
rushed out of the shop without
even saying “Thanks.’
“Nasty little creature," Billy
said aloud to himself. “I hope
Glimp has been paid for those Hands j n the pockets of his black and
wings, for the ant didn’t make gold waistcoat.


1 j
any attempt to pay me,” and Billy strolled into Glimp's work-
room again to have a look at Glimp’s book of wing designs, which
he was always drawing. The Bee was nearly asleep and the
colours were beginning to blur before his eyes when Glimp came
in, and the last rays of the afternoon sun were streaming in
the window and lighting the room with gold.
“Sorry I was so long, Billy,” said Glimp cheerfully, “but
those flying ants are such terrible talkers, and from all the
instructions they give me you’d think I’d never seen a wing
in my life. They are as bad as Madam Butterfly ! Why, didn’t
she come for her wings after all?” he added in surprise.
“She sent a nasty little
ant for them,” replied Billy,
still lying in Glimp’s easy
chair, his hands clasped
over his little round brown
turn. “A cross little fellow
he was, too, and I hope you
have been paid for those
wings, because the ant
didn’t give me any money
for them. How about some
tea now ”
“Billy Bee,” interrupted
Glimp in such an awful
voice that the sound of it
Still lying in Glimp’s easy chair.
brought Billy straight up out of his chair, “Where did you get
the parcel you gave to that ant?”
Off the top of that cupboard, of course, where you left it,”
replied Billy, puzzled.
Oh, Billy, do you know what you have done? Oh, why
weren’t you more careful?” wailed Glimp, throwing himself down
in the chair.
“Why, Glimp, what’s the matter, didn't I give him the right
parcel? cried Billy, quite alarmed at Glimp’s manner.
-The right parcel? on silly, you did not. The parcel
with the wings for Madam Butterfly is on the shelf here, not
the cupboard. That parcel was a pair of wings I designed myself,


all blue and gold, nothing like Madam Butterfly’s. Oh, Billy,
what will I do, she will be so angry, for I showed them to her
when she was here the other day, and she didn’t like them a bit;
perhaps I’ll lose my job in this garden, no one will want my
wings after she has finished,” and the poor little goblin started
to cry. Billy could only watch him horrified, and try to say
he was sorry, for he remembered now that Glimp had told him
the parcel was on the shelf and not on the cupboard.
* 4 Glimp*, I’m so sorry, it’s all my fault, I’ll go to the Butterfly
at once and explain,” he said, but Glimp only sobbed louder.
’’She’ll go to the Fairy Queen,” he moaned, 44 and complain.
\ou know how the butterflies hate changes in their wings, and
she is such a bad tempered butterfly. If she goes out in those
wings and the other butterflies see her, they will laugh at her,
and she’ll never forgive me for that. Oh, why did it have to be
her pair that got muddled up?”
Billy decided that it was time he tried to do something to
clear up the muddle he had made, and as by this time Glimp’s
sobs had brought in quite a crowd of Goblins from nearby
cottages, who were all comforting Glimp and scolding Billy, the
little Bee slipped out of the noisy cottage and flew in the fast
fading light to the butterfly’s home.
As Billy drew near the butterfly’s home the sound of her
loud and angry voice greeted him. He stopped a little beetle
who was just leaving the house and asked him what had
happened.
The Beetle was only too eager to tell someone. 44 Madam
Butterfly got a new pair of wings from that Glimp the Goblin
uing painter to-day, to go to the butterfly ball in the rose garden
this afternoon, he expained. ”It was rather late when her
messenger returned with the wings and she just put them on
without looking at them at all, and flew straight off to the ball.
The other butterflies all kept staring at her and she noticed
several of them all giggling, but took no notice of them at all.
When she arrived home she happened to see herself in the big
dew mirror, and do you know what that dreadful little Goblin
had done? Well, he had given her a pair of blue and gold wings
instead of the orange and black ones she ordered. Madam


Butterfly is sure he did it on purpose, for he showed her those
very wings when she was in his shop, and she told him she didn t
like them at all.
“But,” said Billy as the little beetle paused to get a breath,
“if she didn't like them, Glimp wouldn't give them to her !
“Madam Butterfly says he doesn t like her, and wanted her
to look silly in front of all the other butterflies. Ihe little Beetle
giggled himself, “I think she did look silly, too, and she is ever so
wild. She is going to tell the Fairy Queen to-night, when she
comes to the garden for the flower fairies’ ball."
“Surely she wouldn’t interrupt the Fairy Queen at a ball just
because a mistake had been made over some wings ? cried Bilh
in horror. “The Queen won’t like that.
“That’s what she says she is going to do, they tell me,”
replied the little beetle, “but I can’t stay any longer talking to
you, I’m late home as it is," and off he scuttled.
Poor Billy’s knees were
shaking under him, but
bravely he rang Madam
Butterfly’s door bell, and
waited, although he would
have liked to turn tail and
fly away as fast as he could.
He heard the bell tinkle
above the raised voice of
Madam Butterfly, and then
rapid footsteps inside the
door, which was flung open
by the same ant who had
called for the parcel. The
Grabbing the Bee by the arm, pulled him inside. ant looked pale and Scared,
and Billy guessed that
Madam Butterfly had been scolding him too. At the sight of
Billy he gave a squeak of surprise, and then, grabbing the Bee by
the arm pulled him inside, banged the door shut and flung him-
self against it to prevent Billy escaping.
Just then an angry voice demanded "'W ho is this? and Billy,
looking up saw Madam Butterfly herself, still wearing the wings


Glimp had designed and which had caused so much trouble.
Even in the moment of his fright Billy could not help but admire
their beauty. These wings, flashing blue and gold, were the
loveliest he had ever seen, and at that moment an idea popped
into the little Bee’s head. It was a bold plan, but it might save
Glimp and help him at the same time.
The little ant explained rapidly to Madam Butterfly, “This
is the Bee who gave me the parcel in the shop to-day,'* he said.
“He might know something.'’
“You both shall be punished,” cried Madam Butterfly at the
top of her shrill voice. “I shall take you to the Fairy Queen
this very night, and that Glimp person too. He did it on purpose,
I know, and you probably helped him. I’ve heard all about Billy
Bee, and it’s just the sort of thing you would do.”
When Billy heard the Butterfly say that they were going to
the Fairy Queen he nearly cheered, for the Fairy Queen was the
very person he wanted to see, but instead, he said very quietly
and humbly, “Indeed, Madam Butterfly the fault is all mine, but
I think if you are going to take us to the Fairy Queen, Glimp
had better come, too, to defend himself.”
“Foit think! And who are you to tell me what to do?"
shouted the Butterfly more angry than ever. “Certainly that
Goblin shall come too, but not to defend himself, only to be
punished, and you too, as you both richly deserve." Then she
called loudly, and at her call a number of soldier ants came run-
ning in. “Come to the Goblin's house, and bring that Bee,” she
commanded, and the soldiers grabbed Billy firmly and marched
him out of the house.
By the time they reached Toadstool Town, the moon was
rising, and as they started to climb the steep street to Glimp’s
cottage they could hear the chattering of the Goblins who were
standing round in groups talking of what had happened. One
or two scowled at Billy, and shook their fists at him as he passed,
m ly field
to care, for the ants were pulling on him very heavily, and the
little bee was quite out of breath.
At Glimp s cottage they found a calm but very miserable
Glimp, far too upset to care whether he was arrested by Madam


Butterfly’s private soldiers or not. Suddenly, just as they were
preparing to leave the little house in search of the Fairy Queen,
Billy wriggled free of the grip of the ants, darted for Glimp’s
cupboard, pulled the door open and hopped inside, banging the
door behind him. The startled soldiers were almost too sur-
prised to move for a minute, but a shout from Madam Butterfly
soon sent them after Billy. In a few minutes they pulled him,
kicking and struggling, out of the cupboard, and the next
instant they were all marching down the street again, only this
time Billy had four large ants hanging on to him instead of two.
The queer little procession soon arrived at the big, smooth
lawn where the Fairy Queen held court amongst her flowers. The
Queen had just stepped from her rose petal coach, drawn by six
magic butterflies with the gayest wings Billy had ever seen. He
skipped with excitement when he saw these brilliant creatures.
His plan was going well! The ants, thinking he was trying to
escape again, called up two more of their friends to help hold
him.
Headed by Madam Butterfly the long procession stepped on
to the lawn. The assembled fairies stared in amazement at the
angry butterfly, who had so rudely dared to disturb their revels,
the sad little goblin and the very hot bee. The lovely little fairies
flew back to make way for them all, and the butterfly led them
right up the lawn to the very foot of the Queen’s throne, where
Her Majesty sat, surrounded by the prettiest fairies in the garden.
The. Queen looked at the butterfly coolly and asked, “Well,
Madam Butterfly, what matter of great importance leads you to
interrupt our dance?*’
The butterfly curtsied, and demanded, “Your Majesty, I insist
you punish this wicked Goblin and this evil Bee,” and then once
more she told her tale. The Queen said nothing until the
story was finished, and then she said, “ and so you insist I punish
these two?”
“I do, Your Majesty,” replied the angry butterfly.
“I think that is for me to decide, Madam Butterfly, and I
really think you could have kept this matter until the morning,
instead of wasting my Fairies’ dancing time. However, as it is,
I will deal with it now.” Then turning to one of her attendants,


she said, ‘‘Bring Madam Butterfly another pair of wings,” and
when the Butterfly had received them, the Queen went on. “Now,
Madam Butterfly, you and your attendants may withdraw. I
shall deal with the matter of punishment as you have requested
it.”
Madam Butterfly looked as if she would have liked to stay
and listen to the punishment, but the fairies kindly but firmly led
her out of the Royal presence and her protests were lost.
M hen she had gone the Queen turned to the wretched pair
kneeling before her, and gently asked them to tell their own
story. After they had finished, she said, “I knew, of course, that
it must have been an accident, although Madam Butterfly doesn’t
think so. Now Goblin Glimp, how did you come to paint such
wings at all? They are not like any butterflies’ wings I have ever
seen ! ’ ’
”If it please our Majesty, it
was just an idea I had. I get
so tired of painting orange and
black wings, and I have so many
lovely paints I never use, so in my
spare time draw new sorts of
wings, and I tried one of m\ r
designs on that pair.” Here Billy,
who had been struggling to undo
the buttons of his tight little
waistcoat for some minutes, sud-
denly held out a book to the
Queen —Glimp’s own book of de-
signs, drawn on orange blossoms.
Struggling to undo the buttons of his
waistcoat.
\ our Majesty’, said Billy, ’'Here are some of his other
designs, I brought them with me in my pocket,” and he did up
all his buttons again.
The Queen took the book and turned the pages, idly at first,
but soon with great interest. A deep hush fell over the waiting
fairies as she turned page after page, each one revealing some
new beauty’ of colour or pattern, and all draw r n by clever little
Glimp. At last, when she had shut the book, the Queen again
spoke.


‘•Little Goblin,” she said, “Madam Butterfly was indeed blind
if she could not see the beauty of her new wings. As she has
demanded I punish you, I intend to stop you painting wings for
garden creatures.” Here Glhnp’s poor little face wrinkled up and
a large tear fell with a splash before the Queen's throne. Billy
too, gave a great sigh, it seemed as if he had failed after all.
“But,” went on the Queen, with a smile at their misery, ‘'instead
Billy and Glimp joined hands and danced.
you shall do nothing but design and paint beautiful wings all
day. The butterflies who draw my royal carriage have no wings
half as lovely as these you have drawn. In Fairy Land we need
many such Goblins as you.
“Your Majesty” cried Glimp, all his tears gone and a
smile in their place, "Oh, our Majesty, I have always wanted
to do that, but please, can I stay in my little toadstool cottage
here in this garden, I have so many friends here, now.
“Of course, Little Glimp, and I shall send you a young Goblin
to learn the trade of wing painting from you. He can then paint
the wings for the butterflies and moths in your place," replied


the Queen. "And now, what of this naughty Billy, he was the
cause of all this trouble; shall I punish him?”
"Oh, no, our Majesty, begged Glimp, "rather reward him,
for Billy’s mistake was the best thing he ever did.”
"Very well,** replied the Queen with a laugh, “what reward
would you like, Billy Bee?”
"Please, Your Majesty, could I have a drink?” asked Billy. “I
have flown all over the place to-night, and those six ants were
very large and strong, and they all hung on me.”
"Poor little Bee,” said the Queen, “My fairies shall give you
a drink of the finest honey dew, and then off you both go, we
have wasted enough time to-night.”
Outside the lawn in the quiet dark garden, Billy and Glimp
joined hands and danced a wild dance up and down the path,
waking several cross little daisies in their excitement.
Oh Billy, so that s why you went into the cupboard, to get
my book of designs. I couldn’t understand why you did that, for
of course, there was no escaping that way.”
"I knew,” answered Billy, “that if the Fairy Queen could
°nl> see what you could do she would pardon and reward you,
as she did.”
"Billy, you are wonderful,” said Glimp, but Billy only shook
his head and replied, “I only hope the Queen Bee sees it like that,
I m dreadfully late, and I ve no honey as an excuse.”
The Queen Bee was in the great hall of the hive as Billy
walked in. He told his tale yet again, and then waited, eyes
downcast, for her answer. It was not at all what he had been
expecting.
•’Billy, you are a clever little Bee,” she said, “I don’t believe
it was a mistake at all. I think it was all part of a plan you had
to help Glimp, and punish that vain Madam Butterfly.” The
Queen Bee and Madam Butterfly never did get on well together.
law proud of you, Billy, we all are. Now go right up to bed and
don't get up to-morrow till you feel like it.”
“And, thought Billy as he finally went off to sleep, “if the
Queen thinks that, I can't argue with her.” And off to sleep he
went, knowing happily that he at least wouldn’t have to get up
at sunrise ! p


The Soldier Beetles
“T ET’S have a holiday to-day, Glimp,” begged Billy.
| “Look, it’s such a lovely sunny day, and you’ve done
—4 lots of work.”
“Well, I really shouldn’t, Billy. I may be sent for to go
to Fairy Land any time now, and the Fairy Queen will
expect me to have a lot of new designs to show her, replied
Glimp, but he sighed just the same as he looked over the lovely
garden from the big window in his workroom.
“But just one day won’t make any difference," coaxed Billy.
“Look, let’s go and explore the cave amongst the elm tree roots,
where the centipede lived. We always said we would go and
have a really good look."
The two friends set off.


J >tA «
f
li


; 5 i
>
. v


“It would be fun,” agreed Glimp, ‘‘and it really is far too
lovely to work inside. All right, we’ll go, but we d better take a
couple of lanterns I think; you said it was a very dark cave, didn t
you?”
“Yes, it is, very,” replied Billy. “We’ll take our lunch too,
and stay out all day, shall we?”
Glimp and Billy immediately went upstairs to Glimp’s little
house above his shop and workroom, and before long they had
neat parcels of food all ready for their picnic, and Glimp was
dusting two little lanterns. A little later the two friends set
off, lunch in Billy’s honey bags, and long sticks with seed lanterns
on the end, hung over their shoulders. Glimp banged the door
of his cottage behind them, and whistling merrily, he fell into
step beside Billy, and they danced off down the hill together.
As they passed the other Goblins, working busily in their little
shops or in the sunshine beside their front doors, looked up
from their work and frowned.
“Look at those two,” they said, shaking their heads at each
other, “going off again! I’d like to know when that Glimp
works,” but the two friends took no notice of them, they were
too pleased to be out in the sunshine to care what anyone said.
“Where are you going, William?” enquired Miss Zinnia as
they passed her garden bed. “You don t look as if you intend to
do much work to-day.”
“Oh, Zinnia, dear,” cried Billy, leaving Glimp and hurrying
over to the tall, stiff flower. “Please keep some of your delicious
honey. I have to go out for the day, so I mightn’t have time to
collect very much.”
“You mean you are going out for a day’s frisking as usual,
but you don’t want the Queen Bee to know! No, William, I won t
keep any honey for you.”
“Oh, dear Zinnia, indeed I know I ought to work harder, but
Glimp needs a day’s holiday, he works so very hard, you know,
and he doesn’t like going by himself, so I must go with him.”
“I don’t believe a word of it, William, but still, well I suppose
I’ll keep you some honey. You don’t deserve it, though, and I
won’t do it again. Now mind, I mean that!”


/ / / /
// ,
“Miss Zinnia, you’re a darling,” and Billy flew up to the flower
and threw his arms round her neek. “You are by far the most
beautiful flower in the garden, you know, and you have such
a sweet nature,” and Billy kissed the Zinnia joyfully, then he
skipped back to the waiting Glimp.
“Billy, Billy,” called Miss Zinnia after him, “If you are going
to the old elm tree, you’d better be careful, for the Magpie has
Come on, Glimp, get your lantern.
a nest there, and he and Mrs. Magpie are still dreadfully angry
with you for rescuing Mr. Worm from them, and they’ve
threatened to feed you to their babies, if they catch you.”
’’Thank you, Zinnia, but I’ll be careful,” replied Billy, and he
and Glimp trotted off on their way. They stopped so often to
speak to their many garden friends and to look at things that
it took them nearly all morning to cross the garden to the elm
tree. Little butterflies and insects would stop Glimp to ask
about repairs to their wings, jobs which his new assistant now
did, but the butterflies still went to Glimp with their damaged
wings. Every flower wanted to speak to Billy, and Billy was


always ready to joke with them and tease them. At last they
reached the rough steps, leading up into the cave at the roots
of the elm tree, and sat down on them to rest.
‘•lt’s getting late,’ said Billy, "and I m hungry, \ei\ hungry.
Let’s have lunch before we start to explore," and without waiting
for Glimp to make up his mind he began unpacking their lunch
and laying it out on a piece of bark. Glimp, like Bill\ , "as more
than ready for his meal, and very soon not a crumb was left.
The two friends lay back contentedly in the warm sun, well fed
and happy, and very sleepy, too. Billy "as too eager to exploie
the cave to fall asleep and he soon lit his lantern, and prepared
to set off.
“Come on, Glimp,” he said “get your lantern lit and we'll
begin,” but Glimp did not answer. Billy, standing on the top
step of the cave, turned round to see what had happened to his
friend. He looked hard at the Goblin, and then he chuckled
softly, for Glimp was fast asleep. The little Bee prodded the
Goblin once or twice, but Glimp only grunted a little and did
not wake up.
“Well, if he’s too lazy to explore I’ll go by myself. I know
Glimp, he’ll sleep until its time to go home, and only be cross if
I wake him,” and Billy, holding his lantern high on the end of
its stick, he plunged into the darkness of the cave. Before he
reached the far end of the dark cavern, however, a playful breeze
blew through, the glow-worm in the lantern shivered and then
curled itself up tight and put out its light. Immediately all was
dark except for a tiny pin point of light where the cave opened
into the garden.
“Oh, bother the thing,” cried Billy crossly. "Hey, glow-
worm, wake up. Come on, light up, you silly!” and he prodded the
glow-worm to wake it up, but the glow-worm was like Glimp
and preferred to sleep after lunch, and all Billy’s coaxing could
not rouse it. Billy began to stumble back in the direction of the
doorway, but suddenly the little point of light which he knew
was the door seemed to have vanished, and Billy guessed that
in the dark he had turned into some side passage. Immediately
he turned back, but after walking for some minutes, he knew
that he was properly lost. At one time the cave in the tree had


probably been the home of some elves or pixies, but they had
found other houses long ago and now the place was empty, dark
and deserted. Billy, trying in vain to find his way out in the
dark kept running into cobwebs, stumbling up and down steps
and knocking himself against the walls, whenever the passages
took a sudden sharp turn.
“ Halt ! Who goes there?”
stretch above him for some distance
“This is awful,” he told him-
self. “If only that wretched
lantern hadn’t gone out I would
have been all right, or if only
Glimp had not gone to sleep.”
Then he found his legs getting
caught round the stick with the
lantern on it, which he was still
carrying. “Silly thing!” he cried
aloud. “There, I’ll throw it away !”
and then he nearly jumped out of
his skin, for the echo replied quite
loudly “Throw it away!” Billy
hated echoes, and so he began to
run, stumbling, slipping to get
away from it. Suddenly his foot
caught on something and he fell
heavily on his face, where he lay
gasping for breath for a minute.
Then he found that it was the first
of a flight of steps which had
tripped him, and they seemed to
“Perhaps they lead somewhere,” he thought, “I’ll go and
see,’ and he began to climb bravely, but slowly; he didn’t want to
fall again in the darkness. The further he climbed, the more
angry he grew with the glow-worm lantern. “If I only had some
light!” he said.
“Halt! Who goes there?” cried a sharp voice suddenly out
of the blackness above Billy. At the sound of the unexpected
voice the little Bee gave such a huge jump that all the buttons
flew off his waistcoat, and he slipped down three steps before


he could stop himself. Again the voice called, "Who is it?
Answer! ’ ’
‘•lt’s m-m-m-me,” cried Billy in a trembling voice, "Billy
Bee.”
‘ 4 Come up and let me have a look at you, Bee,” said the voice,
‘‘and hurry up.”
Billy scrambled to his feet and hurriedly scuttled up the
steps. As he neared the top, the stairs twisted, and when he
reached the last step a bright beam of light from a lantern
suddenly fell full upon him.
The owner of the voice began to laugh, and then remarked,
“Well, of all the dusty, dirty insects I’ve ever seen, you’re the
worst! ’ ’
Billy, very cross, replied with great dignity, “I got lost, so
naturally I am a little soiled,” and then a piece of cobweb which
had wound itself round his head suddenly tickled him on the
nose, and he sneezed loud and hard, so hard, in fact, that all
the dust collected on him flew in a cloud.
When he had recovered and the dust had settled again he
asked, “Who are you, anyway?”
"I’m a soldier beetle, they call us Crusader beetles, because
we all took part in the crusade against the spiders when they
tried to take our tree away from us. We all wear crosses
on our backs to show we are Crusaders,” answered the voice,
and as Billy became used to the light, he could see the beetle,
dressed all in grey uniform with a black cross on his back. Billy
giggled at that.
“What’s the matter with you?” asked the beetle sharply.
“Why you’ve got a big kiss on your back,” laughed Billy,
and then he doubled up with laughter. The beetle, however,
did not share the joke.
“I‘m on guard here,” he said stiffly, “and you are my prisoner.
I think you are a spy from the spiders, so you have to come along
with me.”
“Oh, don't be so silly,” replied Billy, “do I look like a spy?”
And he certainly did not.
“Spies never do!” answered the beetle, “but I don’t suppose
you are. You must have come in by the old cave entrance. If


you did you’ve come a long way, we don't use that entrance at
all now.”
“Yes, that’s how I got in. I came to explore, but my lantern
went out, and somehow I took the wrong turn, and now I’m lost.
Please show me the way out.”
“Well, I could, of course, but I shan't. I mean I'm not
allowed to. You shouldn't be here at all, and I have orders to
capture all strange people and take them to my officer. You
must surrender your sword, too. Give it to me," demanded the
soldier.
“The whole thing seems very silly,” replied Billy, crossly,
for he was feeling very tired, and all the places which he had
bumped whilst wandering round in the dark were beginning to
ache. He had had quite enough of exploring for one day. "Still,
I suppose you are only doing as you are told. Here’s my sword,
and hurry up, do. I’ve left a friend outside asleep, and if he
wakes up and finds I’m gone he’ll be worried.”
The Crusader Beetle took Billy’s sword and marched the little
bee down a long corridor and then along several more passages,
all of which were lit by lanterns hanging from the ceiling. At
last they came to a great door. The soldier knocked, threw the
door open and pushed Billy across the threshold.
The Bee found himself in a big room, brightly lit and fidl of
hurrying soldiers, all dressed exactly like the one who had
captured him. Billy stood blinking in the light, and then he
felt a prod in his back and his guard said, “Hurry up, can’t keep
people waiting all day,” and Billy was marched down the long
room at a great pace. All the soldiers stopped and looked at him,
and then turned to each other and laughed. Billy felt him-
self getting very hot, and if he could have stopped he would
certainly have told the beetles just what he thought of their rude
behaviour, but his guard seemed to guess what was in his mind,
for Billy was grabbed by the coat collar, which quite prevented
him from either stopping or running away.
At the far end of the room stood a table, behind which sat
a large beetle, dressed in uniform, too, but his was red and
black, which showed that he was someone very important indeed,


I
and Billy knew that this Beetle must be in charge of all the
soldier beetles.
The officer was busily writing, spectacles on his nose, and
seined not to have seen either prisoner or guard.
“A prisoner, sir,” said Billy’s soldier, saluting. “Says he’s
Billy Bee, sir. Found him lurking in the old part of the tiee,
sir. Think he is a spy, sir.
All the soldiers stopped and looked at him.
“I am not,“ cried Billy angrily. “I told you I wasn’t. I m
Billy Bee, and I was only exploring. If you don’t believe me go
and get my friend, Glimp the Goblin. He’s asleep outside the
cave in the sun.”
The fat beetle at the table took no notice of the pair who
stood before him, and went on with his writing.
“I say,” went on Billy, feeling very angry indeed by this time,
“Must I stay here for ever?” but the beetle still went on writing.
“Is he deaf or just plain rude?” asked Billy of his guard, but the
soldier did not take any notice of him either; he just stared
straight ahead of him. Billy gave up trying to get someone to
listen to him, and looked curiously about him.


‘’They don't look much like soldiers,” he thought. “Much too
fat, it’s nearly as silly as turning me into a soldier. Nice I’d look
drilling, and saluting and marching like these creatures.”
Just then the officer laid down his pen, took off his glasses,
and looked Billy over carefully and slowly.
“What is it?” he asked the guard.
“A nasty bee, sir,” replied the soldier, but Billy did not
give the beetle time to say any more.
“I am Billy Bee,” he said angrily, “and I’ve told him,” pointing
to the guard, “over and over again that I got lost. I came into the
cave to explore, and I haven’t done any harm at all. I really can’t
see why there is any need to treat me so very rudely. If you don’t
believe my story go and get my friend Glimp, he’s outside, and
he’ll tell you that what I say is true ! ”
“Glimp, did you say? Not Glimp the Goblin surely, the
painter of wings?” cried the Beetle, suddenly sitting up in his
chair. “Did you say Glimp the Goblin was your friend?”
“Why, yes I did, and if you had been listening to me instead
of writing you would have heard me the first time!” answered
Billy, getting really angry with the beetle.
"Well then, Mr. William Bee, shake hands with me, Glimp
is my oldest friend. Surely he’s told you about Bertie Beetle?
I had no idea he was living in this garden.”
"Why, of course, Glimp often tells me about you, he’ll be
so pleased and surprised when he finds that you are here,” cried
Billy, whilst he and the beetle pumped each other’s arms up and
down, quite pleased with each other at last.
"I am really sorry I seemed so rude, Mr. Bee, but you see we
often get very queer people trying to get in here, and we have to
be very strict. And now, any friend of Glimp’s is a friend of
mine, and anything I can do for you I will be very 7 glad to do !”
“You certainly can do something for me,” answered Billy.
“Please set me free and have someone show me how to get out
again. I’ve had enough of exploring for one day 7.”
”Of course you can go free at once,” replied the beetle. “It
was very silly 7 of that stupid soldier to take you prisoner at all.
Hand back Mr. Bee’s sword immediately,” he snapped at the poor
guard, who could only stammer something about “My’ orders.”


“Orders? Rubbish, use your sense in future, and get back
to your post. You have no right to leave it at all. Why,
a whole army of spiders could get in whilst you are wasting your
time here. Go on, hurry!”
As the poor beetle scurried out Billy just had to laugh at him,
for he looked so scared, when only a few minutes before he had
been bullying his prisoner, sure that he would be praised for
capturing a very dangerous bee. Billy made a rude little face
at the guard, and then turned to Bertie Beetle, who said, “As for
taking you back to Glimp, I'll do it myself, it is the least I can
do to make up for all our rudeness. Besides I want to see my
old friend Glimp again.”
Down the long hall they went together, and Billy smiled at
the way all the beetles sprang to attention and saluted as they
went past. It was very different from the way they had sniggered
at his torn and grubby looks when he first entered the room, a
prisoner.
“You really aren’t far from the big cave, Billy. You don’t
mind if I call you Billy, do you?” asked Bertie Beetle, and as Billy
shook his head he went on, “You must have stumbled on the way
to our part of the tree quite by accident. It is really very hard
to find if you are looking for it. There are a lot of passages and
other caves in this old tree which you should explore one day, if
you like that sort of thing.”
"Indeed I do, and I must come back again, but I will have
to do something to prevent the lantern going out when it feels
cold,” replied Billy, and he told Bertie all about his bad luck with
the glow-worm. By the time the tale was told the two were quite
friendly and calling each other “Bertie” and “Billy” as if they
had known each other for years.
With Bertie to guide him Billy soon found himself back in
the big cave at the foot of the elm tree, and indeed they had
come so fast and talked so much on the way that Billy really
began to wonder just how they had travelled so quickly. He felt
sure he could never find the Beetles’ castle again, no matter how
hard he tried. As they reached the mouth of the cave he
saw Glimp with a very worried frown, and heard him call “Billy,
where are you?”


Caught by the Magpie
HEARING his friend calling him, Billy left the Beetle
and ran to the mouth of the cave shouting '‘Here,
Glimp, here I am.” The little Goblin heard him, and,
turning round hurried up the steps to the mouth of the eave.
“Billy, where have you been? You've been gone ages, and look
at the state you're in, what ” then he suddenly spied Bertie
Beetle, who had caught up to Billy, and leaping up the last step
towards him, cried in delight, “Bertie Beetle! What are you
doing here? And in uniform, too!” and he and Bertie jumped
round each other, patting themselves on the back, and indeed
were so pleased to see each other that Billy was forgotten.
The little Bee turned away, and went down the steps to pack
up the lunch bags, and then, with a piece of geranium leaf, he
tried to brush some of the dust and cobwebs off his little fat self.
“I’ll have to get Glimp to clean up my wings for me,” he
thought. “I can hardly move them, they have so much dust
on them,” and he twisted himself almost in knots trying to look
at them. So busy was he that
he did not see a heavy black
shadow fall across him.
The two old friends, still
sitting on the steps of the cave,
talking hard, didn’t see the
shadow either, and the first
warning they had of danger
was the sound of a loud and
terrified “Buzz” from Billy, and
his voice calling loudly, “Help,
help! Glimp, Bertie, help me!”
He twisted himself almost in knots


They sprang to their feet and there, to their horror, they
saw Billy floating high above them, firmly caught in the cruel
sharp beak of his enemy the Magpie!
Poor Billy, he had never been so frightened in all his life,
and he certainly had a very good reason. The wicked Magpie
had swooped down on him unseen and unheard, and now he
had Billy properly caught.
“I’ve got you now, you nasty bee,' he chuckled, an evil smile
on his black face, and a cruel glint in his little beady eyes. "I
shall take you home to Mrs. Magpie, and she will give you to my
babies for supper. Ha, ha!" and he laughed most cruelly. Poor
Billy was too frightened even to buzz, and could only flutter
feebly in the hard grip of the long, sharp bill. Up flew the
Magpie, high into the air, higher and swifter than Billy had ever
flown. Bark and tree trunk, branches and leaves seemed to
skim past Billy’s frightened eyes, and as he looked up he saw
blue sky and white fluffy clouds coming rapidly nearer. He
looked down, and there far below he could see two tiny specks
running wildly up and down —that was Bertie and Glimp. All
the garden swam before his eyes, and Billy shut them quickly,
whilst all his little turn felt as if it was going round and round.
Then his captor wheeled suddenly, and Billy opened his eyes
again only to find he was gazing straight into the open mouths
of three large, hungry, untidy baby Magpies. Billy had never
seen mouths so large and red, and once more he buzzed feebly
in protest. The Magpie shook him and then opened its bill, and
Billy felt himself falling straight into those gaping mouths. He
tried to open his wings, but before he could even shake them the
Magpie dived and the cruel bill closed on him again, sharply.
“Not so fast, William my lad," chuckled the Magpie, “You
are a dainty tit-bit. My babies must have something plain first."
Billy watched in horror whilst Mrs. Magpie fed all
manner of things into those three open beaks. Swiftly the last
morsel vanished, and Mr. Magpie said to his wife, “Now, my dear,
how about a nice fat bee? Which one of our babies shall
have him ? ’ ’
“Give him to me, Daddy!”
“I want it, I am the oldest.”


"It’s mine, I’m the hungriest,” cried all the greedy baby
Magpies together.
“You are all too greedy,” said their father sternly, “none
of you shall have him, I’ll keep such a juicy morsel for myself,”
and all the baby magpies began to cry loudly. Mrs. Magpie
pecked them sharply and began to bring out more food for
herself and her husband.
“Will you have the bee first or last, dear? she asked.
"First, I think,* replied her husband, and at that Billy, who
had already turned from a dark brown bee to a pale fawn one
with fright, now turned from pale fawn to pure white. The
worst had happened, he was about to be eaten. All the time he
had never really believed that the Magpie was going to eat
him; he thought that the bird would give him a good fright and
then let him go, but now he knew. He was going to be eaten.
But help was close at hand. Suddenly, just as the Magpie
was preparing to swallow Billy, the bee heard loud shouts from
among the branches of the elm tree. He glanced fearfully
over his shoulder to see what new danger was at hand, and to
his joy he saw the whole army of Crusader Beetles, armed with
swords, spears, bows and arrows, coming along the branches at
a run. There were hundreds and hundreds of them, and at their
head, running hardest of all was Glimp, his face a picture of fear,
and Major Bertie Beetle red faced and panting, for he had never
run so hard in his life.
'Halt,” he cried to his army, when they were close to the
nest. "Aim arrows!” and every beetle swung his bow off his
shoulder, fitted an arrow, and aimed it at the baby Magpies!
Then, stepping forward, Bertie called to the Magpie, “If you
don’t release Billy Bee at once, we shoot your babies,” and Glimp
interrupted him to shout at the Magpie, too.
“You wicked bird. The Fairy Queen shall hear of this. I’ll
have you banished from the garden. Let Billy go at once!”
"I 11 give you until I count ten, Magpie,” went on Bertie,
and if Billy isn t free by then I’ll give the order to my men to
shoot. Now one-two-three-four- ’ counted the beetle slowly and
loudly.


•'Oh all right, here’s your silly Bee,” answered the Magpie.
’’What all the fuss is about I don’t know. There are hundreds
of bees in the garden.”
‘‘But only one Billy,” replied Glimp.
Now, get out of here before I change my mind and come
and gobble you all up, said the angry Magpie, “and you too,
nasty little Goblin ! Tell the Fairy Queen, would you ! Squawk !’ ’
and as he squawked with rage he dropped poor pale Billy over
the edge of the nest.
Bertie and Glimp carried him off.
Bertie and Glimp caught him and carried him off to the
Ciusader Beetles home in the tree, where he soon revived and
turned gradually back from white to fawn and from fawn to
brown.
“Whew, that was a dreadfully narrow escape, Glimp,” he
said, as he recovered his breath and was able to sit up again.
“How did you and Bertie come along just in time?” asked Billy
as he took a long drink of honeydew.
As soon as we saw what had happened to you, Bertie
grabbed me, dashed up to the soldiers’ castle, sounded the alarm,


and raced up to the top of the tree with all his soldiers behind
him. I never knew beetles could move so swiftly, and, of course,
they’ve lots of stairways and short cuts inside the elm tree.
“Don't I know it!” Billy replied. “I got lost in them to-day,
and it was dreadfully dark.”
“Oh, they’ve glow worm lanterns in all the passages which
light up when needed. We were terrified we would be too late,
and if the Magpie had eaten you at once instead of playing with
you we would never have saved you at all!
“What I would like to know is whether Bertie would really
have shot the young Magpies if their father hadn t let me go,
said Billy, taking another drink of honey-dew. The very thought
of his narrow escape turned him quite pale again.
“Well, I don’t know, Billy,” answered Bertie. “You see, my
beetles don't know how to use bows and arrows >et, but, of
course, the Magpie didn't know that, and I was sure he would
give up his lunch rather than have his babies hurt. Why, what
ever is the matter?” for Billy had fainted away. The news that the
beetles couldn’t shoot at all had been too much for him !
“Anyway, all’s well now, Billy, and you are lucky I was
Glimp’s friend, or I wouldn’t have been there to save you, said
Bertie cheerfully, later in the day, when they were all safe in
Glimp’s little house in Toadstool Town.
“You're my friend now, if you will be, said Billy shyly.
“I'll be grateful to you for ever.”
“Oh, it was nothing," said the Goblin and the Beetle, but
they patted Billy on the back, “We would never get over it if
anything happened to you,"
Glimp insisted on telling the Fairy Queen about the Magpie s
bad behaviour, and the Queen ordered the bird to find another
nest outside the garden. All the flowers, fairies, and garden
creatures were horrified when they heard how nearly Billy had
been eaten.
“It was really all my fault,” said Mr. Worm when he heard
the tale. “If Billy hadn't angered the Magpie by saving me
one day, nothing would have happened to him.”


‘"Oh yes it would,” replied Miss Zinnia, who happened to hear
him. ‘‘Billy is always in trouble, and you know it! Still lam
very pleased he is safe. He is a dear little fellow really, even if
he is lazy!” But she didn't tell Billy what she thought, instead
she scolded him severely for not taking more notice of her
warning.
‘‘One day something dreadful will happen to you, William,
and there will be no one to save you,” she told him. But she
smiled as she said it, and Billy went back to the hive laden with
best Zinnia honey.
From that time on Bertie Beetle was a regular visitor at
the little toadstool cottage, and he and Billy were firm friends,
and the three, the Goblin, the Bee and the Beetle, spent many
happy days together.








ft%Z 3
C/}K


'
a
*
