

j
Reader
Recipes


A GOOD RECIPE
CAN ONLY BE AS GOOD AS
THE RANGE IT IS COOKED ON
FOR OUTSTANDING
RESULTS
YOU NEED A
SLOW - COMBUSTION
COOKER
AND WATER HEATER
w
RAYBURN
n
I
I
h
1
&
Burns Any Solid
Fuel.
Provides An
Abundant Supply
of Hoi Water.
Does Not Require a
Brick Chimney
SEE
(•■Mital
TODAY FOR
Expert Advice On
RAYBURN
Installation and
Operation.
MYERS (BENDIGO) foo^ *


Introduction...
“THE BENDIGO ADVERTISER” READER RECIPES
SECTION, inaugurated in July, 1954, and published each
Saturday, has proved outstandingly popular. It has attracted from
“Advertiser” readers contributions of recipes for a wide variety of
delicious cakes, many out-of-the-ordinary sweets, appetising meat
dishes and savories, as well as good plain everyday family fare.
From time to time “The Advertiser” has received numerous
requests for the publication of these recipes in handy book form.
It is with a great deal of pleasure, therefore, that it presents, in this
reader-inspired cookery book (the first of its kind published in this
city), a permanent collection from the many splendid recipes
contributed so generously by you, the reader !
TOORA.
CONTENTS
PAGES
Cakes (Family Cakes, Fruit, Chocolate, Party, Small Cakes, Sponges) .. .. 3 25
Biscuits, Cookies ' 27 30
Children’s Party Fare 31 —33
Meat Dishes (Hot and Cold) • • 35 —39
Pish 41 — 42
Savories, Snacks 43 —45
Meatless Dishes 47 —4B
Desserts (Hot and Cold) 49 — 37
Pastries and Tarts 59 — 6O
Scones, Buns, Loaves and Teacakes 61 —64
Jams, Chutneys, Pickles 65 66
Bottling 67
Make Your Own Candies 69 —7l
Plastic Icing And Its Uses 72
Another “Bendigo Advertiser” Production


Gosford Steak Casserole (above) takes on a special
occasion air and flavor with its topping of sliced
orange. See recipe page 36.
Above: Tall candles and a graceful, glowing floral centrepiece set on
a dainty hand-embroidered cloth lend charm to the simplest meal.
Fruit, arranged in a large vegetable dish or soup tureen, with a gay
circlet of multicolored flowers around the rim, or an elegant china
ornament placed on a “cushion” of mixed flowers fringed with fern
and flanked by two candlesticks are alternative decorative schemes
which achieve the maximum effect with the minimum of effort.


CAKES...
FAMILY CAKES
PAGE
Afternoon Cake (Halva-Greece) 3
Apple Fruit Cake 3
Banana Cake 3
Basic Cake Recipe 3
Canadian Orange Cake 4
Caramel Cake (1) 4
Caramel Cake (2) 4
Coconut Special 4
Coffee Sandwich .. 4
Coffee Walnut Cake 4
Columbia Cake 4
Date and Walnut Cake 4
Date and Walnut Rainbow Cake 4
Iced Date Cake 5
Delicate Cake 5
Devil’s Pood Cake 5
Dolly Varden Cake 5
German Apple Cake 5
Ginger Cake (1) 5
PAGE
Ginger Cake (2) 5
Ginger Sandwich 5
Nut Cake 7
One Egg Cake 7
Orange Cake .. .. .. 7
Orange Cake with Coconut Icing .... 7
Plain Cake with Coffee Icing 7
Plain Cake (1) 7
Plain Cake (2) 7
Raisin Cake 7
Rum Cake 7
Rum and Orange Layer Cake 7
Russian Cake (1) 8
Russian Cake (2) 8
Sponge Cake 8
Surprise Sandwich 8
Tutti Prutti Cake 8
Walnut Cake 8
Wattle Blossom Cake 8
AFTERNOON CAKE (HALVA) FROM GREECE
Five eggs, half lb. butter, one cup of sugar, one
cup chopped nuts, two cups digestive meal, one cup
S.B. flour, one teaspoon cinnamon.
Syrup: Three cups sugar, four cups of water and
boil for a quarter of an hour.
Cream butter and sugar; add nuts; sift digestive
meal together with S.R. flour and cinnamon and
mix well into creamed mixture. Add lightly beaten
eggs and stir well with wooden spoon. Grease a
meat dish and spread mixture in dish. Cook in
moderate oven for 25 to 30 minutes. When cooked,
pour prepared cold syrup over cake. Place dish in
oven for two or three minutes. After the cake
cools, cut In diamond shape slices.
Mrs. K. Pappos
Bendigo.
APPLE FRUIT CAKE
Two oz. margarine or butter, one cup of sugar,
one and a half cups cooked unsweetened apple pulp,
two teaspoons of bicarbonate of soda, half teaspoon
cinnamon, two teaspoons cocoa, half teaspoon nut-
meg, half cup walnut pieces, one cup seeded chopped
raisins, one cup of dates (chopped), two and a half
cups of plain flour.
Cream butter and sugar, stir soda into apple
pulp while still warm, add to creamed mixture. Stir
in raisins, dates and nuts and fold In sifted dry
ingredients making a soft mixture. Spill on to
greased slab tin and bake in a moderate oven from
40 to 45 minutes. When cold, ice with lemon-
flavored icing using the rind and juice of half a
lemon and sprinkle with chopped nuts to decorate.
Bendigo.
Mrs. L. W. Galvin
BANANA CAKE
Two tablespoons butter, one egg, one cup sugar,
three mashed bananas, one-and-a-half cups S.R.
flour, one tablespoon milk.
Cream butter and sugar. Add egg and beat well.
Add mashed bananas, the flour and lastly, milk. Mix
well together and bake in greased loaf tin in a mod-
erate oven for about 35 minutes. Ice the Banana
Cake with vanilla icing, or it may be eaten plain, as
a loaf, with butter.
Kangaroo Flat.
Mrs. E. C. Krieger
BASIC CAKE RECIPE
Two oz. butter, six oz. sugar. Cream together
and then add yolks of two eggs and half cup milk.
Fold in six oz. sifted S.R. flour and lastly fold in
two stiffly beaten egg whites, whisked with a pinch
of salt.
This cake can be vitamised if desired. To us;


this method, place sugar, egg yolks, milk and soft-
ened butter into vitamiser. Turn on and vitamise
one minute. Fold in S.R. flour and then fold in
stiffly beaten whites of eggs.
Bake for from 50 to 60 'minutes in a moderate
oven (sponge heat). To avoid danger of sticking,
place a layer of buttered paper on the bottom of
the tins. Use a rectangular tin 4in. x 81n. or for
a change a round tin, 7in. to 7iin. in diameter.
Variations:
PLAIN: Add grated rind of one fresh lemon and
lemon essence to taste. Ice with lemon icing when
cold.
ORANGE: Add grated rind of one orange and
tablespoon of orange juice. When cold, ice with
orange icing.
CHOCOLATE: Use only five oz. S.R. flour if
making into a chocolate cake and add one oz. of
dark cocoa, one teaspoonful of cinnamon and a
little vanilla. Ice with chocolate icing when cold.
COFFEE; Add one tablespoonful of unsweetened
coffee essence to basic mixture. When cold, ice
with coffee icing.
Mrs. R. F. Hyett
Bendigo.
CANADIAN ORANGE CAKE
For this you will need one cup sugar, half cup
butter, two eggs, one teaspoon vanilla, two cups
flour, salt, one teaspoon carbonate soda, three-
quarters cup of warm water, one cup raisins, half
cup walnuts, one whole seedless orange (use whole
orange including skin).
Cream butter and sugar, add well-beaten eggs,
vanilla and soda dissolved in the warm water. Stir
in flour and salt sifted together. Add the orange,
raisins and walnuts (which have previously been
put through a mincer). Bake in moderate oven
for three-quarters to one hour.
Mrs. H. Day
Bendigo.
CARAMEL CAKE (1)
Two oz. butter, three oz. sugar, one egg, one cup
S.R. flour, one tablespoon golden syrup, half tea-
spoon carbonate of soda, dissolved in half cup milk.
Beat butter, sugar and golden syrup to a cream.
Add egg and lastly, fold in flour and milk. Bake
for 25 minutes in a moderate oven and when cold,
ice with vanilla-flavored icing and sprinkle top
with chopped nuts.
Mrs. E. Kells
Golden Square.
CARAMEL CAKE (2)
Quarter 11). butter, melted and cooled, one cup
light brown sugar, one cup dates, three-quarters
cup v/alnuts, one egg, cne large cup S.R. flour. Mix
in usual manner and place in flat tin. Bake
slowly, cut in slices and cool.
Mrs. M. Murphy
Emu Creek.
COCONUT SPECIAL
Two oz. butter (soften), three-quarters cup cas-
tor sugar, one cup and one tablespoon of flour, three
eggs, one teaspoon vanilla essence, two tablespoons
coconut, three tablespoons milk.
Beat all together for 10 minutes. Then add one
teaspoon of cream of tartar, half teaspoon of car-
bonate of soda and beat for two minutes. Bake in
a greased and floured tin in a moderate oven for
20 minutes. Ice and sprinkle top with coconut.
Mrs. T. F. Perrow
Bendigo.
COFFEE SANDWICH
Six oz. butter, six oz. sugar, three eggs, six ox,
plain flour, one teaspoon baking powder, one table-
spoon warm water, two tablespoons coffee essence
and a little milk.
Mix butter and sugar to a cream. Add eggs then
coffee essence and warm water and finally flour
and baking powder sifted together. If too stiff,
add a little milk. Place in two greased and floured
sandwich tins and bake from 20 to 30 minutes.
Icing: Four oz. icing sugar, three oz. butter, two
dessertspoons coffee essence. Mix well together.
Use as filling for centre of the sandwich and also
ice sponge all over. Decorate with walnut halves.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
COFFEE WALNUT CAKE
Four oz. butter, four oz. sugar, two eggs, quarter
cup walnuts, one-and-a-quarter cups plain flour,
two teaspoons baking powder, pinch salt, two table-
spoons boiling water, one tablespoon coffee essence.
Cream butter and sugar well, add beaten ege--
and walnuts. Fold in sifted flour, salt and baking
powder, then add boiling water and coffee cssenc
Bake in a ring tin for 30 minutes in a moderate
oven. When cold, ice with coffee icing and decorate
with walnuts.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. J. L. Hicks
COLUMBIA CAKE
Two cups S.R. flour, three eggs, four oz. butter,
small cup of castor sugar, one gill milk, half cup
raisins, one dessertspoon treacle, one teaspoon mixed
spice, half teaspoon cinnamon, few pieces of can-
died peeL
Cream butter and sugar, add eggs one at a time.
Beat well. Add milk and lastly sifted flour. Divide
into two parts. Leave one plain add to the
other the raisins, treacle, spices and peel. Bake
in two prepared sandwich tins about 20 minutes in
moderate oven. Join together with raspberry jam
or a mock cream filling' and ice the top. Decorate
with walnuts or almonds.
Golden Square.
Mrs. J. Little
DATE AND WALNUT CAKE
Quarter cup walnuts, half cup chopped dates,
half lb. white sugar, one heaped tablespoon light
brown sugar, one egg, one cup S.R. flour, four oz.
butter, half cup milk.
Melt butter in medium-sized cake tin. Beat egg
and white sugar together. Add flour and milk
alternately. Pour half melted butter into mixture.
Put nuts, dates and brown sugar into remaining
butter in tin. Then put in cake mixture. Bake
for 45 minutes in a moderate oven. Turn out and
When cold, cover with cream, placing date and nut
side uppermost.
Quarry Hill.
Mrs. C. F. G. Ogier
DATE AND WALNUT RAINBOW CAKE
Three oz. butter, two eggs, one-and-a-half cups
S.R. flour, two-thirds cup sugar, half cup milk, 12
dates, 12 walnut halves, pink coloring, vanilla es-
sence, two dessertspoons cocoa blended to a smooth
paste with a little extra milk.
Wrap dates around walnuts. Cream butter and
sugar, add eggs one at a time. Fold in flour alter-
nately with the milk. Divide the mixture into three.


Color one portion chocolate, one section vanilla and
the other pink. Place alternate spoonsful of the
three colors in a greased Sin. ring tin. When half
the mixture is used, place the date-wrapped wal-
nuts around the cake mixture. Then place re-
mainder of mixture on top. Bake in a moderate
oven. When cold, ice with caramel icjng and chop-
ped walnuts.
Mrs. H. Lyne
Bendigo,
ICED DATE CAKE
Half lb. plain flour, half lb. butter, six oz. sugar,
three eggs, one dessertspoon cocoa, one dessertspoon
coconut, half teaspoon spice, one teaspoon carbonate
of soda, three-quarters lb. dates, one cup water.
Pour cup of water over dates and soak overnight.
Cream butter and sugar and beat in eggs one at a
time. Sieve flour, cocoa, soda and spice into mix-
ture. Then add coconut and mashed, soaked dates
in water. Mix all together well and bake in a mod-
erate oven for two hours.
When cold, ice with pink icing into which some
coconut has been mixed. Spread thickly on top
of cake, which will keep for weeks.
Mrs. R. Rowe
Golden Square.
DELICATE CAKE
Six oz. S.B. flour, pinch of salt, two oz. custard
powder, four oz. butter, four oz. castor sugar, three
eggs, four to five tablespoons milk.
Sift flour, salt and custard powder. Cream butter
and sugar. Beat in eggs one at a time, then mix
in sifted dry ingredients alternately with milk. Turn
into a greased tin lined on the bottom with greased
paper. Bake in a moderate oven for 35 to 40 min-
utes. When cold, ice with lemon icing.
Mrs. J. Little
Golden Square.
DEVIL’S FOOD CAKE
Six oz. (one and a half cups) plain flour, one
level teaspoon bi-carbonate of soda, two oz. (half
cup) cocoa, one cup brown sugar (flrmly packed),
one tablespoon vinegar, two eggs, two level table-
spoons golden syrup, four oz. copha, half cup milk,
vanilla.
Sift flour, salt, soda and cocoa and divide into
two. Place in basin sugar, eggs, golden syrup and
half sifted dry ingredients. Melt copha over gentle
heat—it should be warm, not hot—test with finger-
tip. Add milk, vanilla and vinegar to copha (the
vinegar will give it a curdled appearance). Pour
on to ingredients in basin and beat for four min-
utes. Add remaining dry ingredients and beat one
minute longer. Pour into greased and floured seven
inch sandwich tins and bake in a moderate oven
for 30 minutes.
Mrs. D. Martin
Bendigo.
DOLLY VARDEN CAKE
One-and-a-half cups S.B. flour, one cup sugar,
three eggs, quarter lb. butter, half cup warm milk,
half cup currants, half teaspoon cocoa, one teaspoon
cinnamon.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, beat the eggs
well and add them to the creamed mixture. Sift
the flour and mix in well but lightly. Divide the
mixture into two, and to one part add the currants,
cocoa and cinnamon. Place both parts into two
well-greased sandwich tins (it is a good idea to cover
the base of the tins with greased paper) and bake
in a moderate oven for from 15 to 20 minutes. Join
the two halves together with raspberry jam and ice
top with cinnamon or chocolate icing, sprinkled
with coconut.
Variation; The Dolly Varden Cake mixture also
makes a splendid rainbow cake. Adjust the ingred-
ients, using two cups SR. flour, one cup sugar, six
oz. butter, four eggs and half a cup of milk. Mix
as for Dolly Varden cake and separate into three
parts, coloring one pink, one chocolate and having
one plain. Bake as above and fill with mock cream.
Mock Whipped Cream: One teaspoon of gelatine,
quarter lb. butter, one-and-a-half tablespoons of
sugar, pinch of salt, three tablespoons of hot water,
half a saltspoon of cream of tartar, vanilla essence
to taste.
Dissolve gelatine in hot water. Place butter,
sugar, salt and flavoring in basin and cream slightly.
Add cream of tartar, then dissolved gelatine. Whip
well until the mixture achieves the consistency of
whipped cream.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. E. Munday
GERMAN APPLE CAKE
Half cup butter, one cup sugar, one-and-three-
quarter cups S.R. flour, four teaspoons cocoa, one
teaspoon cinnamon, half teaspoon salt, quarter tea-
spoon nutmeg, one cup apple pulp (well-drained),
half cup walnuts, one cup dates, one teaspoon car-
bonate of soda, dissolved in two tablespoons hot
water.
Cream butter and sugar. Sift dry ingredients
together and add to the creamed mixture. Stir in
the apple pulp, walnuts, dates and lastly the car-
bonate of soda in the hot water. Bake for one-
and-a-half hours in a moderate oven in two sand-
wich tins. When cool, join and ice with chocolate
butter icing and decorate top with walnuts.
White Hills.
Mrs. K. Kerr
GINGER CAKE (1)
Half a lb. of butter, one small cup of sugar, two
eggs, one good cup golden syrup, one cup of milk,
two and a half cups (level) plain flour, one teaspoon
cinnamon, three teaspoons ground ginger, two table-
spoons of cocoa.
Put butter, syrup and sugar in a saucepan and
melt all together. Do not boil. When cool, add
well-beaten eggs, then flour and other dry ingred-
ients mixed together. Lastly, add milk warmed,
with teaspoon of carbonate of soda dissolved in it.
Mixture should be of a running consistency. Place
in greased tin and bake for one and a half hours in
a moderate oven.
Bendigo.
Mrs. H. T. Francis.
GINGER CAKE (2)
Three-quarters cup butter, three-quarters cup
sugar, three-quarters cup golden syrup. Beat all
together. Then sift together two cups plain flour,
one teaspoon of ginger, one teaspoon cinnamon
and add to creamed mixture. Mix with one cup of
boiling water in which one teaspoon of carbonate of
soda has been dissolved. Finally, add two well-
beaten eggs. Place in greased tin and bake for one
hour in a moderate oven.
Newbridge.
Mrs. Burrows
GINGER SANDWICH
One tablespoon butter or margarine, one dessert-
spoon ground ginger, one dessertspoon cinnamon,
half cup golden syrup, half cup milk, one teaspoon


McKennas
offer you the ideal
Kitchen Setting
k
i i t l l
m
* k
*1
» m.
This Beautiful Setting will add to the Comfort and Convenience of your
Kitchen. Available on easy terms
l(y- WEEKLY
Over 20 Settings on Display for your
Inspection.
L A. McKENNA
Pall Mall Bendigo - Phone 30
The Store For Kitchen Furniture


carbonate of soda, one-and-a-half cups plain flour,
one egg.
Mix butter, sugar, cinnamon and ginger together.
Add egg, golden syrup and milk. Mix well. Then
add carbonate of soda dissolved in a teaspoon of
boiling water and flour. Place mixture in two pre-
pared sandwich tins and bake in a moderate oven
for 20 minutes.
Icing; Half cup icing sugar, small piece of but-
ter dissolved in a teaspoon of boiling water. Beat
well and spread between two layers of cake and
over top.
Mrs. A. Bryenton
Bendigo.
NUT CAKE
One large cup S.R. flour, one dessertspoon golden
syrup or treacle, half cup milk, half cup sugar, one
egg, one teaspoon cinnamon, one tablespoon butter,
nuts.
Cream butter and sugar well, then add egg, beat-
ing thoroughly. Add syrup, milk and flour. Place
in greased tin and bake in moderate oven for 20
minutes to half-an-hour. When cold, ice top and
sprinkle with chopped nuts.
Mrs. R. C. Allott
Mandurang.
ONE EGG CAKE
Four oz. butter, four oz. sugar, one egg, well-
beaten, half teaspoon salt, half cup milk, half tea-
spoon vanilla, one-and-a-half cups S.B. flour.
Cream shortening and half sugar. Add rest of
sugar to egg and beat well. Combine mixtures and
beat again. Add sifted flour and salt, alternately
with milk. Add vanilla. Bake in a moderate oven
for 30 minutes. When cool, ice with vanilla icing
and cover top with coconut lightly.
Mrs. B. Eskdale
Bendigo.
ORANGE CAKE
One heaped cup of S.R. flour, one cup sugar,
Juice and rind of one orange made up to half a
cup with milk, one tablespoon of melted butter and
one egg.
Place all ingredients together in above order in
basin and stir briskly for three minutes. Pour into
prepared orange cake tin and bake in a moderate
oven for 25-30 minutes. When cold; ice with butter
icing.
Mrs. E. Fithall
Golden Square.
ORANGE CAKE WITH COCONUT ICING
Three oz. (three tablespoons) butter, grated rind
of one orange, six oz. (breakfast cup) S.B. flour, six
oz. (one tea cup) castor sugar, two eggs, juice of
orange plus milk to make up to half a teacup.
Melt butter. Put all the other ingredients into
a large basin and pour the melted butter on top of
them. Beat well for three minutes. Bake in a
moderate oven for 30 minutes.
Icing or Filling: Four tablespoonsful icing sugar
mixed with juice of orange.
Spread on cake and sprinkle with coconut.
Mrs. D. Malloy
Golden Square.
PLAIN CAKE WITH COFFEE ICING
Half lb. of butter beaten well to a cream with
two cups sugar.. Beat in five eggs, one at a time,
till mixture is nice and creamy. Add one cup milk
and mix well, then add three cups flour to which
one teaspoonful of cream of tartar and half tea-
spoonful carbonate of soda have been added.
Sift dry ingredients in gradually and mix well.
Bake in a moderate oven for approximately half to
three-quarters of an hour. When cool ice top with
coffee icing.
Golden Square.
Mrs. Denis Oakes
PLAIN CAKE (1)
Six oz. butter, one cup sugar, four eggs, one-
and-a-half cups SB. flour, pinch salt, quarter cup
milk.
Beat butter and sugar to creamy smoothness.
Beat eggs well and add to creamed mixture. Then
add sifted flour and lastly milk and essence of
lemon. Bake in a greased and floured tin in a mod-
erate oven for three-quarters of an hour. Leave
plain or ice with lemon flavored icing as preferred.
Bendigo.
Mrs. S. M. Weeks
PLAIN CAKE (2)
Half a lb. of butter, 10 level tablespoons of sugar,
four eggs, essence of lemon to taste, three-quarters
of a lb. of S.B. flour, quarter lb. plain flour, one
cup cold water.
Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs and
essence, sifted flour and lastly, the cup of water,
Mix well. Place in greased tin and bake in mod-
erate oven for one-and-a-half hours.
Bendigo.
Mrs. H. T. Francis.
RAISIN CAKE
(Without butter or eggs).
Four cups S.B. flour, two tablespoons castor sugar,
two tablespoons golden syrup, two small cups milk,
two cups seeded raisins.
Sift flour and castor sugar into a bowl, add fruit.
Warm milk and add to syrup. Mix well, then add
to dry mixture. Thoroughly mix and bake In
greased and floured tins in a moderate oven for 40
minutes.
The cake can be varied with sultanas and peel
and, when served, spread with butter. The mix-
ture makes two good-sized cakes.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
RUM CAKE
Quarter lb. butter six oz. sugar. Beat to a
cream and add three eggs, one at a time. Then
fold in five oz, S.B. flour. Dissolve two dessert-
spoons of cocoa in three tablespoons of rum, add
four tablespoons of orange juice, two dessertspoons
of chopped almonds and add to the creamed mix-
ture. Mix well. If too stiff, add a little more
juice or milk. Bake in a greased (and floured
sandwich tin in a moderate oven for 25 to 30
minutes.
Bendigo.
Mrs. K. McKenzie
RUM AND ORANGE LAYER CAKE
Quarter lb. butter, half lb. S.B. flour, pinch salt,
two tablespoons rum, three tablespoons milk, three
eggs, six oz. castor sugar.
Grease tins and line with greased paper. Sift
flour and salt and beat eggs. Cream butter and
sugar together. Add beaten eggs gradually, then
rum and milk. Fold in sifted flour. Place in pre-
pared tins and cook from 15 to 20 minutes in a
moderate oven.
For filling and icing use a butter icing mixed with
a little rum and orange juice and flavored with
a little grated orange rind.
Mrs. W. Turner
Bendigo.


RUSSIAN CAKE (1)
Four oz. sugar, six oz. butter, eight oz. flour, four
eggs, one teaspoon cream of tartar, one-and-a-half
tablespoons rum, quarter cup milk, one cup mixed
fruit, half pkt. mixed spice, half teaspoon carbonate
of soda, pinch of salt.
Beat butter, sugar, eggs and salt for five minutes.
Stir in the well-sifted flour and cream of tartar,
then the milk in which the soda has been dissolved.
Divide the mixture into three parts.
Put two of these into round sandwich tins and
bake in a moderate oven. In the remaining part,
put the fruit, spice and rum, and bake separately
in a third sandwich tin the same size as the other
two tins.
Make a filling with four oz. butter, one wine glass
of rum and enough icing sugar to make the mixture
into a fairly stiff paste. With this, join the three
parts together, placing the fruity section in the
centre.
Mrs. E. Hawley
Bendigo.
RUSSIAN CAKE (2)
Sponge cake, jam, scraps of cake, two oz. sugar,
one-eighth pint water, rum, chocolate icing.
Any type of cake may be used for making this
Russian cake, but it will look more attractive if
several colors are combined, i.e. plain, chocolate,
pink.
Take a piece of thinly cut sponge cake of the
size required to fit into a square cake tin. Spread
with jam. Break up almost enough cake scraps to
fill the tin, and put the pieces into a basin. Dis-
solve the sugar in the water, boil the syrup for 10
minutes, then add sufficient rum to flavor well. Pour
enough syrup over the cake scraps to moisten and
bind them without making the mixture too wet.
Press it evenly into the tin and cover with the other
piece of the thinly cut sponge cake, spread with
jam. Allow to stand overnight, then turn the cake
out and coat it with chocolate icing. The best
effect is obtained if the top and bottom layers of
the cake are left plain and the centre portion the
combined pink and chocolate colors.
Mrs. E. Hawley
Bendigo.
SPONGE CAKE
One cup sugar, one cup plain flour, one teaspoon
cream of tartar, one teaspoon (level) carbonate of
soda, four eggs, seven tablespoons milk, one table-
spoon butter.
Beat eggs and sugar until thick. Add flour
sifted with cream of tartar. Heat milk and add
butter. When butter is dissolved, stir in car-
bonate of soda until it froths up. Add to mixture.
Place in prepared cake tin about seven inches in
diameter and bake for half an hour in moderate
oven. Ice with passionfruit icing. This cake is
particularly soft and can be baked in two sandwich
tins for 20 to 25 minutes, if preferred.
Mrs. W. Hillier
Quarry Bill.
SURPRISE SANDWICH
One tablespoon butter, half cup sugar, one egg,
half cup milk, half cup golden syrup, one dessert-
spoon cinnamon, one-and-a-haif cups plain flour,
half teaspoon carbonate of soda, one teaspoon lemon
juice.
Cream butter and sugar and beat in egg. Add
golden syrup and beat again. Then lightly mix in
flour sifted with cinnamon, lemon juice and lastly
milk, in which soda has been dissolved. Mix well
together and bake in greased and floured tins in a
sponge oven (commencing 350 deg. and lowering
to 325 deg.), for 20 to 25 minutes. When cool, fill
with whipped cream and ice with cinnamon icing,
or use lemon filling and icing.
Bendigo.
Mrs. B. Eskdale
TUTTI FBUTTI CAKE
One cup dates, one cup chopped pineapple, one
cup mixed peel, one cup S.R. flour, pinch salt, three
tablespoons melted butter, one cup walnuts, half a
cup of sugar, two eggs.
Beat eggs and sugar and add melted butter, then
fruit and flour. Cook on a buttered tray about one
inch deep for 40 minutes. When cooked, sprinkle
thickly with castor sugar and cut into small squares.
Bendigo.
Mrs. H. Day
WALNUT CAKE
Quarter lb. butter, one cup sugar, three eggs,
one-and-a-quarter cups of flour, half teaspoonful
of carbonate of soda, one teaspoon of cream of
tartar, quarter cup of milk, half lb. chopped wal-
nuts.
Beat the butter and sugar to a cream for ten
minutes. Add eggs one by one, and beat all to-
gether for a further 15 minutes. Next add flour
and cream of tartar and soda and lastly milk and
walnuts.
Bake mixture in two sandwich tins for 15 min-
utes in a moderate oven. Put cream between the
two sections when cold and ice top with coffee icing,
using half walnuts to decorate the top.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J. V. Schenck
WATTLE BLOSSOM CAKE
Three-quarters cup sugar, quarter lb. butter
(melted), two eggs, three-quarters cup milk, two
cups S.R. flour, flavoring according to preference.
Beat sugar, milk and melted butter together_ Add
egg yolks and flour and lastly the well-beaten egg
whites. Bake in two greased and floured sandwich
tins for approximately 20 minutes in a moderate
oven. When cold, ice with pale green icing and
arrange yellow jubes as wattle blossom and green
jubes for the leaves in a pattern on top. Fill with
cream or lemon butter.
Mrs. G. Glover
Bendigo.


FRUIT CAKES
V w PAGE
Birthday Cake 9
Boiled Fruit Cake 9
Inexpensive Christmas Cake 9
Rich Christmas Cake 9
Easy-to-Make Christmas Cake 9
Economical Fruit Cake 9
Eggless Fruit Cake 9
Fruit Cake 9
Wedding Cake 10
BIRTHDAY CAKE
One lb. butter, one lb. sugar, one lb. currants,
one lb. raisins, one lb. sultanas, one lb. of eggs
(weigh the eggs; eight or nine usually go to the
pound), one and a quarter lbs. of plain flour, tour
oz. S.B. flour, four oz. mixed peel, four oz. cherries,
four oz. almonds, four oz. of preserved ginger, two
tablespoonsful of almond meal, two tablespoonsful
of sherry, one teaspoon of cinnamon, one teaspoon
nutmeg, juice and; rind of one lemon, one teaspoon
salt, one teaspoon of vanilla, one teaspoon of coffee
essence.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, beating well.
Add eggs one at a time and beat in thoroughly. Add
sifted flour and spices, fruit, etc., and lastly the
sherry. Bake in a moderate oven for four and a
half to five hours. It is a good plan to line the
tin with stiff brown paper before putting the mix-
ture in. It usually makes one large or two nice-
sized small cakes.
Mrs. J. M. Boyle
Bendigo.
BOILED FRUIT CAKE
One lb. mixed fruit, quarter lb. margarine or
butter, one cup sugar, one cup of cold water.
Place all ingredients in a saucepan and allow to
boil for about 10 minutes. Take off fire and add
one teaspoon of carbonate of soda, two eggs, one
cup of S.R. flour, one cup of plain flour and essence
of vanilla to taste, also one teaspoon of spice if
liked. Mix well together, then bake in a moderate
oven for about one hour.
Mrs. F. J. Hoy
Bendigo.
INEXPENSIVE CHRISTMAS CAKE
Half lb. plain flour, two oz. S.R. flour, half lb.
butter, half Ibf sugar, three-quarters lb. sultanas,
half lb. currants, four oz. peel, quarter-cup almonds,
half lb. raisins, few drops of essence (vanilla or
caramel), half teaspoon ground ginger, quarter
teaspoon grated nutmeg, half teaspoon cinnamon,
half teaspoon mixed spice, five eggs, one teaspoon
treacle, one tablespoon brandy, pinch salt, quarter
teaspoon carbonate of soda, dissolved; in dessert-
spoon boiling water.
Cream butter and sugar, add eggs and treacle,
then dry ingredients and fruit that has previously
been floured with some of the flour. Lastly add soda
dissolved in water. Place mixture in a prepared tin
and bake for about three hours (from 300 deg. to 325
deg. in an electric stove). When cooked, turn cake
upside down and pour on brandy while hot. Replace
paper on bottom of cake and store until required.
Mrs. P. F. Griffin
Bendigo.
RICH CHRISTMAS CAKE
One lb. butter, 10 eggs, one lb. sugar, one lb.
sultanas, one lb. seeded raisins, one lb. currants,
half pkt. lemon peel, half lb. dates, two oz. shelled
almonds, two oz. cherries, one lb. plain flour, one
cup S.B. flour, one teaspoon cinnamon, spice and
vanilla essence, one teaspoon carbonate of soda, half
cup treacle, half cup brandy.
Cream butter and sugar, add eggs one at a time.
Then add flour sifted with soda and fruit alter-
nately, finally adding brandy and treacle. Line tin
with greased paper and bake for approximately five
hours.
Quarry Hill.
Mrs. V. Comte
EASY TO MAKE CHRISTMAS CAKE
Half lb. butter, four eggs, one-and-a-quarter
cups sugar, pinch of salt, tablespoon of treacle, a
little nutmeg, quarter teaspoon spice, quarter lb.
mixed peel, half lb. currants, half lb. sultanas,
quarter lb. seeded raisins, about a dozen cherries
cut small, about a dozen dates cut small, two-and-
a-half cups plain flour, a large teaspoon of baking
powder.
Beat butter, sugar, treacle and salt together,
add eggs and beat well again. Then add nutmeg,
spice, fruit, etc. Flour and baking powder should
be added last. Mix well and bake in a prepared
tin in a slow oven from two to three hours.
Golden Square.
Mrs. J. E. Little
ECONOMICAL FRUIT CAKE
Three cups plain flour, one cup margarine, onc-
and-a-half cups of sugar, three eggs, half a cup of
milk, one heaped teaspoon of cocoa, one teaspoon
of ginger, half nutmeg, half-cup treacle, half cup
currants, half cup raisins, half teaspoon cream of
tartar, half teaspoon carbonate of soda.
Cream margarine and sugar together well. Add
eggs, one at a time, beat well. Then stir in treacle.
Dissolve soda in the milk and add to the mixture,
stirring well. Next add the fruit and lastly the
sifted dry ingredients. Place in greased cake tin
lined with greased brown paper and bake in a
moderate oven for two-and-a-half hours.
Bendigo.
Mrs. S. A. Lloyd
EGGLESS FRUIT CAKE
Eight oz. flour, three oz. sugar, 10 oz. mixed fruit,
one cup milk, six oz. butter, pinch salt, one tea-
spoon carbonate of soda, one teaspoon each of cin-
namon and mixed spice.
Cream butter and sugar. Dissolve soda in milk
and add half the milk and half the flour, then the
fruit and the remaining flour, milk, together with the
cinnamon and spice. Mix well, place in prepared
cake tin and bake in a slow oven for two hours.
Golden Square.
Mrs. G. Packer
FRUIT CAKE
(Iced with Mock Almond Paste)
Quarter lb. butter or margarine, one cup sugar,
two eggs, one small cup of stewed apples in which
is dissolved one level teaspoon carbonate of soda,
one tablespoon coffee essence, two large cups plain
flour, about one-andi-a-half lb. assorted fruits (bits
of everything).
Cream butter and sugar, add eggs. When well
mixed, add fruit, flour, with a teaspoon each of


Ingredient
Measure
Weight
Weight
Measure
Breadcrumbs ..
2 oz.
1 oz.
3i
tablespoons.
Butter
7 oz.
1 oz.
1
flat tablespoon
Cheese, grated ..
2 oz.
1 oz.
3
tablespoons
Cocoa powder ..
4 oz.
1 oz.
3
dessertspoons
Cornflour
3 oz.
1 oz.
2
tablespoons
Currants ..“ ..
5 oz.
1 oz.
1
tablespoon
Curry powder ..
' —
1 oz.
2
tablespoons
Custard powder
.. .. 1 cup
4 oz.
1 oz.
3
dessertspoons
Dripping .. ..
7 oz.
1 oz.
1
flat tablespoon
Egg, fresh .. ..
new-laid egg weighs 2 oz.
Flour
4 oz.
1 oz.
1
rounded tablespoon
Gelatine, leaf ..
i oz.
1 oz.
3i
sheets
Gelatine, powder
.... 1 teaspoon
i oz.
1 oz.
1
heaped tablespoon
Ginger, ground ..
.. ..
—
1 oz.
1
teaspoon
Jam
i lb.
1 oz.
1
rounded tablespoon
Lard
6 oz.
1 oz.
1
tablespoon
Lentils
5 oz.
1 oz.
1
tablespoon
Margarine .. ..
6 oz.
1 oz.
1
tablespoon
Milk, dried ..
—
1 oz.
1
rounded tablespoon
(will make half a pint)
Oats, rolled .. . .
3 oz.
1 oz.
5
dessertspoons
Oatmeal .. ..
4 oz.
1 oz.
1
rounded tablespoon
Raisins
4 oz.
1 oz.
1
rounded tablespoon
Rice
6 oz.
1 oz.
1
tablespoon
Rice, ground ..
.. .. 1 cup
5 oz.
1 oz.
1
tablespoon
Salt
i oz.
Spice, mixed .. ..
—
1 oz.
3
teaspoons
Suet, shredded ..
5 oz.
1 oz.
1
tablespoon
Sugar, castor or
gran. 1 cup
7 oz.
1 oz.
1
tablespoon
(almost flat)
Sugar, lump ..
.. .. Seven average lumps approximately equal 1 oz.
Sultanas .. ..
4 oz.
1 oz.
1
rounded tablespoon
Syrup, golden ..
8 oz.
1 oz.
1
dessertspoon
cinnamon and spice sifted in it, and lastly, stewed
apples with soda in. Put in prepared tin lined with
greased paper and bake for approximately two-and-
a-half hours. Cover with Mock Almond Paste.
Mock Ahnond Paste:
One lb. icing sugar, four oz. sifted breadcrumbs,
four oz. coconut, two tablespoons melted butter,
two tablespoons lemon juice, one egg yolk, two tea-
spoons almond essence.
Mix all together and knead as for shortbread,
using icing-sugar for kneading. Brush the cake
with white of egg, roll out mock almond paste and
place on cake.
Mrs. Vera Washington
Rochester.
WEDDING CAKE
(1st prize and blne ribbon 1954 Bendigo Show.
Very moist)
One lb. butter, one lb. castor sugar, one lb. plain
flour, quarter lb. S.B. flour, eight eggs, three table-
spoons raspberry Jam, two tablespoons coffee es-
sence, one-and-a-half lbs. currants, one-and-a-half
lbs. sultanas, one lb. raisins, quarter lb. mixed peel,
quarter lb. shelled almonds, quarter lb. cherries,
quarter lb. preserved ginger, quarter lb. dates, half
teaspoon each of vanilla, lemon and almond essence,
half teaspoon each of nutmeg, cinnamon and mixed
spice, one small saltspoon salt, grated rind of orange
and lemon.
Prepare fruit the previous day. Wash sugar off
cherries, blanch almonds, shred citron peel and
grate orange and lemon rind. Place all together in
a basin with raspberry jam, coffee, essences and
spices. Cover and leave until needed.
Cream butter and sugar until thoroughly creamed.
Beat the eight eggs well in a large basin. Flours,
spices, salt should be well sifted. To the creamed
butter and sugar add one cup of sifted flours, spices,
etc. before you start adding beaten eggs (this is
to stop the curdling of the butter, sugar, and egg
mixture). Then gradually add some egg mixture
and flour alternately till eggs are all taken in. Then
add fruits with the remainder of flours.
Turn into prepared tin, carefully lined. Bake in
a slow oven, 325 deg for first hour, 300 deg. for sec-
ond hour, 275 deg. for three-and-a-half hours. For
the one lb. mix the entire baking time is six-and-a-
half hours; for half lb. mix (halve all measure-
ments), the time is three-and-a-half hours.
To keep cake moist steam-bake by placing cake
on a small stand in an aluminium casserole witn
lid on. After baking, pour over one tablespoon of
brandy. (If the brandy is included in the mixture
before it is baked, it is mostly lost in evaporation.)
CaL Gully.
Mrs. P. H. Johnson
STANDARD MEASUREMENTS


When the Duke of Gloucester was Governor-
General of Australia he, together with the Duchess,
enjoyed afternoon tea one day at a small town in
N.S.W. while on their way to Canberra. Their hos-
tess was the wife of a local police constable who
served her Royal guests with the delectable choco-
late cake pictured above. . For the recipe see “Mrs.
Flynn’s Chocolate Cake,” page 12).
LUSCIOUS CHOCOLATE CAKES
PAGE
Chocolate Cake 12
Chocolate Coconut Cake 12
Family Favorite Chocolate Cake 12
Five-Minute Chocolate Cake 12
Chocolate Pudge Cake 12
Mrs. Flynn’s Chocolate Cake 12
PAGE
Moist Chocolate Cake 12
Chocolate' Ripple Cake 12
Chocolate Sand Cake 12
Chocolate Ring Cake (with Butter) .... 13
Chocolate Ring Cake (without Butter) .. 13
Simplicity Chocolate Cake 13
Steamed Chocolate Cake (without Eggs) . 13
Read through your recipe so that you will become
familiar with the things you need, and prepare all
ingredients and utensils you will require before you
start.


LUSCIOUS CHOCOLATE CAKES
CHOCOLATE CAKE
Two tablespoons of butter or substitute, two level
tablespoons cocoa, two eggs, breakfast cup of sugar,
large cup S.B flour, half cup milk.
Melt butter. Place all other ingredients into
basin, pour the melted butter on top of them. Stir
well for three minutes, Place in two prepared
seven-inch sandwich tins and bake for 30 minutes
in a moderate oven. When cold, fill with cream or
a chocolate filling made by melting one tablespoon
butter with one tablespoon of milk. Pour whilst
warm on one cup of icing sugar sifted with one
tablespoon of cocoa.
Mrs. E. Fithall
Golden Square.
CHOCOLATE COCONUT CAKE
Quarter lb. butter, quarter lb. sugar, quarter lb.
S.B. flour, pinch salt, two tablespoons milk, two
tablespoons coconut, 1 tablespoon cocoa, essence of
vanilla to taste, two eggs.
Cream butter and sugar well (warm butter in
eold weather). Add eggs, one at a time and beat
well. Sift flour, salt and cocoa twice and add to
creamed mixture. Then add coconut and lastly,
milk and essence. Bake for 20 to 25 minutes in a
moderate oven. Ice when cold.
Mrs. S. M. Weeks
Bendigo.
FAMILY FAVORITE CHOCOLATE CAKE
Three-quarters of a cup (four-and-a-half oz.)
sugar, two eggs, two-and-a-half oz. butter, two
tablespoons milk, one tablespoon cocoa, three-
quarters teaspoon cinnamon, one cup (four oz.) S.B.
flour, vanilla.
Cream butter and sugar, add eggs (unbeaten),
then milk, spice, cocoa, essence (mixed together)
and lastly lightly fold in sifted flour. Put into two
small sandwich tins and bake in a moderate oven
for about 20 minutes. When cold, join with cream
or favorite filling and ice with chocolate icing.
Mrs. F Boys
Golden Square.
FIVE-MINUTE CHOCOLATE CAKE
One cup S.B. flour, three-quarters cup castor
sugar, pinch salt, three tablespoons sugar, half tea-
spoon carbonate of sccla, third-cup melted butter,
half cup cold water, one egg.
Dissolve soda in water. Sift dry ingredients into
bowl. Add melted butter and egg. Mix well. Add
water with soda and beat for three minutes. Bake
in greased and floured sandwich tins in a mode-
rate oven for 30 minutes. Pill and top with rasp-
berry cream and, when cream ii set, cover with
chocolate icing.
Raspberry Cream; Beat together two level table-
spoons melted table margarine and one tablespoon
butter with three tablespoons raspberry j~m. Add
two level tablespoons icing sugar, four tablespoons
non-fat powdered milk, one tablespoon hot water
and a few drops cochineal. Beat until light and
fluffy and use as required.
Mrs. B. Eskdale
Bendigo.
CHOCOLATE FUDGE CAKE
Two oz. butter or margarine, small cup of sugar,
one egg, one cup of boiling water, two cups of S B.
flour, two tablespoons of cocoa, essence of vanilla
to taste.
Cream butter and sugar well together and beat
in egg thoroughly. Mix all dry ingredients to-
gether (sifted) and add to the butter and sugar
mixture. Stir well then put in the cup of boiling
water and mix thoroughly. Place in greased tin,
lined with greased brown paper, and bake for half-
an-hour in a moderate oven.
Bendigo.
Mrs. S. A. Lloyd
MRS. FLYNN’S CHOCOLATE CAKE
(As served to H.R.H. Duke of Gloucester when
Governor-General of Australia)
Three-and-a-half oz. butter, three eggs, half cup
cocoa, one-and-a-quarter cups sugar, two cups S.B.
flour, half cup hot water, half teaspoon carbonate
of soda, one teaspoon cream of tartar, one tea-
spoon salt, one teaspoon vanilla, half cup milk.
Cream butter and sugar well. Add eggs and beat
well. Add flour mixed with cream of tartar, soda
and salt Stir in milk, and cocoa mixed with hot
water. Bake in a flat baking dish, size Sin. by 101 n,,
greased and floured, for 25-30 minutes in a moderate
oven. Decorate when cold with chocolate filling,
cream and nuts.
Bendigo.
Mrs. H. Nankivell
MOIST CHOCOLATE CAKE
One cup S.B. flour, three-quarters cup sugar, two
small tablespoonsful of cocoa, pinch salt, two eggs,
three oz. butter.
Sieve flour, sugar, cocoa and salt together. Melt
butter. Break two eggs into a cup (do not beat the
eggs). Fill cup with milk. Pour melted butter,
milk and eggs on to the dry ingredients and beat
well for five minutes. Place in greased tin and cook
in moderate oven (heat to 375 degrees for gas oven)
for about three-quarters of an hour. When cold,
ice with chocolate icing and decorate according to
preference.
Bendigo.
Mrs. P. H. Seeber
CHOCOLATE RIPPLE CAKE
Half lb. chocolate ripple biscuits, one teaspoon
castor sugar, three-quarters teaspoon gelatine, half
pint cream, vanilla essence, chopped nuts.
Add sugar, gelatine and a drop of vanilla essence
to the cream and whip until very stiff. Join bis-
cuits alternately with generous spreads of cream.
Cover thickly and entirely with cream. Sprinkle
with chopped walnuts or chocolate ripple crumbs.
If desired, decorate with crystallised cherries. Allow
cake to stand at least six hours to set. It will be
greatly improved if placed in the ice-box or refrig-
erator. Cut on an angle to ensure alternate layers
of cake and c-eam in each slice.
Bendigo.
Mrs. D. Martin
CHOCOLATE SAND CAKE
Four tablespoons of butter, three-quarters of a
cup of sugar, two eggs, vanilla essence, one cup
S.B. flour, pinch salt, heaped tablespoon cocoa, two
level tablespoons coconut, three or four tablespoons
of warm water.
Mix butter and sugar to a cream. Add eggs


(unbeaten) one at a time. Mix in sifted dry in-
gredients with the warm water. Place in a greased
and floured heart-shaped tin and bake for 30 to 40
minutes in a moderate oven. Turn out, and when
cool, ice with chocolate icing and decorate with nuts.
Mrs. S. R. Agates
Emu Creek.
CHOCOLATE RING CAKE
(With Butter)
Quarter lb. butter, one cup of sugar, three eggs,
one-and-a-half cups S.R. flour, four teaspoons
cocoa, six tablespoons of warm milk.
Cream butter and sugar, add eggs, one by one,
and beat well. Sift flour and cocoa and add. Grad-
ually add warm milk. Place mixture in well-greased
ring tin and bake in a fairly hot oven. Turn out
and when cold, ice with chocolate icing to which has
been added a drop of peppermint flavoring. Deco-
rate with nuts or coconut.
Mrs. E. C. Krieger
Kangaroo Flat.
CHOCOLATE RING CAKE
(Without Butter)
One cup S.R. flour, three-quarters cup of sugar,
one egg (whole), one full tablespoon of cocoa, pinch
salt, half cup of milk.
Sift flour, cocoa and salt. Beat all ingredients
together for three minutes. If too stiff, add a little
more milk. Pour in to greased and floured ring
tin and bake for 20 minutes in a hot oven.
Mrs. B. P. Blennerhassett
Golden Square.
SIMPLICITY CHOCOLATE CAKE
Three tablespoons butter, two level tablespoons
cocoa, one cup S.R. flour, one cup sugar, half cup
milk, two eggs, half teaspoon almond essence.
Melt butter. Put all other ingredients into a
large basin and pour melted butter on top of them.
Beat really hard for three minutes. Bake in a
greased tin in moderate oven for about 30 minutes.
When cold, ice with chocolate icing and decorate
with walnuts. For variety, split this cake in two
and fill with the icing.
Mrs. G. Hudson
East Bendigo.
STEAMED CHOCOLATE CAKE
(Without Eggs)
Well mix two cupsful plain flour, half teaspoon-
ful bi-carbonate of soda, one tablespoonful sugar,
one-and-a-half tablespoonsful cocoa or chocolate
powder; rub in two oz. fat, two tablespoonsful gol-
den syrup, milk (sweet or sour) to make into a stiff
batter.
Have ready a well-greased cake tin, put in mix-
ture, cover top with greased paper, place in steamer,
cook one-and-a-half hours; then place in warm
oven for 10 minutes to dry off the top. Not to be
cut until next day.
Mrs. A. Kingerlee
Kangaroo Flat.
PARTY CAKES
PAGE
Banana-flavored Chocolate Dainties .. .. 13
Banana Log, with Toffee Chips 13
Bumble Bees 15
Cheese Straws 15
Chocmallows 15
Cream Swans .. .. 15
Gateau Princess 15
Marshmallow Heart 15
Marshmallow Cake (1) 15
Marshmallow Cake (2) 15
Pavlova 16
Peppermint Marshmallow Sponge 16
Pineapple Upside Down Cake 16
Raspberry Meringues 16
Rum Rolls 16
Snow Cake 16
Strawberry Marshmallow Dainties 16
BANANA-FLAVORED CHOCOLATE DAINTIES
Quarter lb. butter, two large bananas, one level
tablespoon cocoa, scant three-quarters cup sugar,
one-and-a-half cups S.R flour, pinch baking soda,
two eggs, scant half cup milk, pinch salt.
Cream butter and sugar well. Add eggs one at
a time, beating each one in well. Add the mashed
bananas. Sift flour with soda and salt and add to
mixture alternately with milk and cocoa blended
together. Bake in well-greased and floured tin
(size llin. by seven in.) in a moderate oven for 25
minutes. When cool, cut into diamond shapes,
coat with chocolate icing and sprinkle sides with
chocolate shavings or sprinklers and decorate tops
with silver cachous.
Bendigo.
Mrs. H. Chellew
BANANA LOG WITH TOFFEE CHIPS
Cake: Quarter lb. butter or margarine, four oz.
sugar, pinch grated lemon rind, two eggs, quarter
pint milk, eight oz. S.R. flour, three bananas, one
teaspoon bicarbonate of soda
Cream shortening with sugar and lemon rind,
Add beaten eggs. Lightly fold in sifted flour, then
thoroughly mashed bananas. Lastly, fold in soda
dissolved in milk. Turn into greased log tin or loaf
tin and bake in a moderate oven from 50 to 55
minutes. Allow to stand in the tin for a few min-
utes before turning on to cake cooler. When cold,
spread over with icing, rough up with fork to repre-
sent bark and decorate with toffee chips.
Icing: For the icing you’ll need three dessert-
spoons butter, two cups icing sugar, one dessert-
spoon cocoa, pinch salt, one dessertspoon coffee es-
sence, half teaspoon vanilla.
Toffee Chips: One cup sugar, one cup water, one
teaspoon lemon juice.
Place sugar, water and lemon juice into sauce-
pan, stir over low heat until sugar is dissolved.
Bring to boil, cook till a pale amber color. Pour
into buttered tin. When cold and set, break into
pieces.
Emu Creek.
Mrs. F. J. Hargreaves


FOR
COOKING
PERFECTION
Us© Th© ~
Zp jC* Electric
*/y.c/.G>. Range
9 THREE Boiling Plates
These provide facilities for cooking a large
quantity and variety of food at the same time —
NO Power Wasted.
9 Grill Boiler Plate.
Boil on top whilst grilling at same time
Warms Plates.
9 OVEN CONTROL
Set the Thermostat for automatic Oven
Control.
9 SIMMERING CONTROL
Allows any heat between “Full On” and lowest
simmering Temp.
9 For Delightful Meals with a difference choose the B.G.E. Electric Range—From
Ron. Meurer
Sales & Service
258 Mitchell St. - Phones 19 - 3614.
m
m
9 Removable Oven Interior
Lift out side and bottom panels in
a few seconds for easy washing.
9 White or Cream
9 Low Deposits 9 Easy Terms.


BUMBLE BEES
Quarter lb. raisins, one cup of coconut, one cup
of dates, one cup of sultanas, half-cup walnuts,
half-cup almonds, half-rtin of condensed milk
Chop dates, raisins, nuts, sultanas, add coconut,
then mix all well together with the condensed milk.
Mould teaspoons of the mixture into balls and roll
in coconut. Place a half cherry on each ball and
bake in a moderate oven for 15 to 20 minutes.
Mrs. J. T. Straughair
Golden Square.
CHEESE STRAWS
Quarter lb. grated cheese, quarter lb. fresh bread-
crumbs, quarter lb. butter, quarter lb. plain flour,
half teaspoon salt, bare quarter teaspoon cayenne
pepper.
Rub butter into the flour, add crumbs, cheese and
salt, sprinkle in the pepper, work into a paste, then
roll out on a floured board and cut into desired
shapes (either sticks, small biscuits or flat, quarter-
inch wide by four inches long).
Mrs. J. T. Straughair
Golden Square.
CHOCMALLOWS
Chocolate portion; Three oz. butter, three os.
castor sugar, two eggs, six oz. S.R. flour, one table-
spoon cocoa, two teaspoons cinnamon, pinch salt,
two tablespoons milk.
Cream butter with sugar. Add eggs one at a
time and beat well. Fold in sifted dry ingredients
alternately with milk. Threequarters fill gem irons
and bake in hot oven approximately 15 minutes.
Allow to become cold and ice all but the tops with
chocolate icing.
Chocolate Icing: Three cups sifted icing sugar,
three dessertspoons cocoa, three teaspoons butter,
pinch of cream of tartar, half teaspoon vanilla, four
to five tablespoons milk, apricot jam.
Sift icing with cocoa, add vanilla, melted butter
and cream of tartar. Mix to a smooth thick cream
with milk. Warm until thin enough to coat cakes.
When set, brush un-iced tops with apricot jam and
press lightly on to mallow portion.
Mallow portion: One cup sugar, one cup water,
two dessertspoons gelatine, quarter teaspoon cream
of tartar, one dessertspoon lemon juice, one dessert-
spoon rosewater, coconut.
Place sugar, gelatine and cream of tartar in
saucepan. Boil steadily for 10 minutes. Allow to
cool, add lemon juice and rosewater. Pill into cold,
greased gem irons which have been lightly dusted
with icing sugar. Allow to set. Unmould, toss in
coconut (keeping flat top uncoated) before joining
to chocolate portion. Makes approximately two
dozen cakes.
Mrs. F. J. Hargreaves
Emu Creek.
CREAM SWANS
One cup plain flour, one cup boiling water, quar-
ter lb. butter, five large eggs.
Put water and butter in saucepan while boiling
(on fire), add flour, stir well. Add eggs one at a
time, mix each egg in well. Drop in spoonsful (as
for cream puffs) on greased baking sheet and bake
in a moderate to hot oven for four minutes. To
make necks for swans, force mixture through icing
pipe and make figure 2 (two).
Mrs. M. Murphy
Emu Creek.
GATEAU PRINCESS
Wafer biscuits, half basic sponge cake, scant cup
boiling water, small quantity of icing, half packet
pineapple jelly crystals, half cup fruit salad (or
pineapple or bananas), whipped cream, glazed
cherries to decorate.
Cut six small strips from sides of cake and ar-
range wafer biscuits around, fixing to sponge with
icing. Allow to set. Dissolve jelly crystals in the
hot water. Cool. When cold, but not set, beat until
fluffy and thickened. Add fruit salad or fruit to the
jelly and spoon on to the sponge in biscuit shape.
Chili until set. Decorate with cream and glazed
cherries.
Golden Square.
Mrs. R. Boland
MARSHMALLOW HEART
Two large egg whites or three small ones, pinch
salt, teaspoon vanilla or other desired flavoring,
sponge cake, rainbow cake or Swiss roll in inch
squares. Also, two heaped dessertspoonsful of
sugar, one heaped tablespoon of gelatine in eight
tablespoonsful of boiling water.
Icing; Cocoa dissolved in milk to make covering
consistency.
Beat egg whites and salt until firm. Add vanilla,
then sugar and beat a little longer. Add gelatine
which has been dissolved in the boiling water and
allowed to cool, but not set. Have ready a lightly
buttered and floured heart-shape tin and when
mixture is thick and glossy, spoon into tin and set
cake in quickly, in two layers. Turn out when set
and cover with chocolate icing and coconut. To
stop mixture from setting in cold weather, stand
over hot water while putting mixture in tin.
An attractive sweet can be made from the
marshmallow by setting suitable fruit or fruit salad
in jelly about an inch deep in a glass dish and
when set, spooning the marshmallow over it to the
same depth. Sprinkled with nuts and topped with
cream, it Is delicious.
White Hills.
Mrs. E. Schleiger
MARSHMALLOW CAKE (1)
One tin Carnation milk, three teaspoons gela-
tine, three tablespoons sugar, half cup boiling water,
coloring.
Dissolve gelatine in the boiling water. Add milk,
coloring and sugar and beat until stiff. Scrape into
an eight inch sandwich tin, lined on the bottom
with greased paper. Place in refrigerator until set.
Turn out on to plate and decorate top with cream
and passionfrult.
Bendigo.
Mrs. F. Harris
MARSHMALLOW CAKE (2)
Quarter lb. butter, one cup sugar, one well-beaten
egg, one-and-a-quarter cups S.R. flour, two dessert-
spoons gelatine, cup hot water, one cup icing sugar,
one cup sugar.
Cream butter and sugar, add well-beaten egg,
then flour. Arrange in Swiss roll tin and cook
until light brown. Mix gelatine, hot water and
sugar and boil for eight minutes. Allow to cool.
Beat icing sugar into the mixture. Pour over cooled
biscuit mixture and allow to set. When set, ice with
chocolate icing and sprinkle top with nuts.
Mrs. H. Chellew
Bendigo.


PAVLOVA
Whites of four eggs, one cup of white sugar, one-
and-a-haif teaspoons vinegar, vanilla flavoring if
desired.
Beat egg whites very stiffly, add sugar gradually,
beating all the time. Lastly, add the vinegar. Beat
a little longer until vinegar is completely absorbed.
If you like a slightly creamier mixture do not beat
until the mixture clings to a basin turned upside-
down. Cooking is all-important. Use a sandwich
tin, turned upside-down and greased on the bottom
with butter. Cut strips of white kitchen paper about
five Inches wide, grease and place round the out-
side of the tin. Secure firmly with string. This
provides the shell in which the meringue
is baked. Pile in the mixture lightly, level
top and bake very slowly in a fairly warm oven
(usual meringue heat). Cook meringue on a tray
placed about four inches from the bottom of the
oven, for about three-quarters to one hour, accord-
ing to oven heat. To remove the Pavlova from the
tin, tip it upside-down on to a plate and slip off
the tin with a knife. The crusty part is now under-
neath send the slightly moist section becomes the
top, which is decorated with whipped cream, bana-
nas, passionfruit, cherries or other fruit to taste.
Mrs. Dim Kerr
Bendigo.
PEPPERMINT MARSHMALLOW SPONGE
One half sponge sandwich for the foundation.
Marshmallow; One egg white, half cup sugar,
six tablespoons of water, on»-and-a-quarter dessert-
spoonsful of gelatine, a small half teaspoon of
essence of peppermint and green coloring.
Place sugar, water and gelatine in a saucepan.
Stir until it bolls and then boil for one minute.
Let mixture get cold but do not allow to set. Add
the essence of peppermint and enough green color-
ing to make a pale green color. Add all to the stiffly
beaten egg white and pour into a well-floured sand-
wich tin to set. (Have the tin a size smaller than
the sponge). Spread a layer of whipped cream on
the sponge. Place the marshmallow carefully on
top and then decorate with whipped cream.
Mrs. J. M. Boyle
Bendigo
PINEAPPLE UPSIDE DOWN CAKE
Melt' two tablespoons of butter in a seven inch
cake tin, add a quarter of a cup of light brown
sugar and spread evenly over bottom. Lay in
drained pineapple pieces and put tin where it will
keep warm while you mix the cake.
For the cake you’ll need a breakfastcup of SJR.
flour, one teaspoon of baking powder and a quarter
of a teapsoon of salt. Sift these ingredients to-
gether well. Beat two tablespoons of shortening
with a cup of light brown sugar. Beat one egg well
and add shortening. Then mix in the flour, using
a third of a cup of milk to give sufficient moisture.
Add flour and milk alternately. Beat until smooth.
Spoon batter over pineapple in the tin. Bake in a
moderate oven about 40 to 45 minutes (cooking until
cake is firm in the centre). Turn out of the tin at
once. Serve the pineapple upside-down cake either
warm for a pudding or cold as a rich afternoon tea
cake. Note: Both S.R. flour and baking powder
are needed to give an extra lightness to the mix-
ture for the pineapple.
Mrs. F. Mamouney
Bendigo.
RASPBERRY MERINGUES
Three egg whites, pinch salt. Beat until stiff
then add five tablespoons of ordinary sugar and one
tablespoon of raspberry jelly crystals. Beat until
stiff. Bake in a very slow oven on a waxed lunch
wrap.
The meringues can be used as cakes, filled with
whipped cream, or eaten with fruit and ice-cream
for sweets.
Bendigo East.
Miss Jean Osterfield
RUM ROLLS
Half lb. Marie biscuits, one tin condensed milk,
one dessertspoon cocoa, one dessertspoon ram, coco-
nut.
Crush biscuits, add condensed milk and mix well.
Then add cocoa and rum. Spoon out and form into
small rolls, rolling in coconut. Leave to set. Will
keep well in air-tight jar.
Golden Square.
Mrs J. T. Straughair
SNOW CAKE
Three oz. butter, four oz. sugar, six oz. flour, one-
and-a-half teaspoons cream of tartar, three-quar-
ters teaspoon carbonate of soda, one whole egg and
two yolks, quarter cup milk, half pint whipped
cream, quince jelly and chopped walnuts.
For the frosting: One cup quince jeHy and two
egg whites.
Sift flour, cream of tartar, carbonate of soda to-
gether and return to the sifter. Beat butter and
sugar to a cream. Beat eggs well and add half of
the beaten eggs to the creamed mixture and beat
thoroughly. Then add remaining beaten egg and
mix well together. Stir in the milk gradually and
add sifted flour. Turn the mixture into two but-
tered sandwich tins and bake 25 minutes. Allow
cakes to stand for a few minutes before turning on
rack to cool. When cold spread one half lightly
with quince jelly, sprinkle with chopped walnuts,
then add cream spread over the nuts. Place other
half of cake on top and stand on a flat plate.
Frosting: Place the egg whites and jelly in a
saucepan over a slow heat. Beat with a whisk until
light and frothy. Remove from Are and beat till
the mixture will stand in peaks. Spread all over
the cake thickly, finishing it off with swirls.
Bendigo.
Mrs T. Potter
STRAWBERRY MARSHMALLOW DAINTIES
For these you require a; piece of plain sponge cut
into two dozen pieces (one inch across by one inch
high).
Marshmallow; Two egg whites, one cup sugar,
half cup strawberry topping, one rounded table-
spoon of gelatine and one cup hot water.
Beat, egg whites until stiff, beat in sugar and top-
ping, lastly beat in gelatine which has been dissolved
in one cup hot water. Have ready two dozen greas-
ed patty tins. Cover bottom of each patty tin with
marshmallow mixture. Place piece of sponge on
mixture then cover' with more marshmallow and
allow to set. Turn out on to greaseproof paper and
roll each in coconut. Top with sweetened whipped
cream and fresh or preserved strawberry.
If marshmallow dainties are hard to remove from
tins allow warm water to run over the base of the
tins for just a moment and they will come out
easily. When making marshmallow and filling patty
pans allow to stand on the side of the stove so that
the mixture will not set too quickly.
Golden Square.
Mrs. R. Boland


Cream Kisses (pictured above) can be stored in an
air-tight tin until required for use. For recipe see
page 18.
SMALL CAKES
PAGE
Almond Cheese Tarts 18
Apple Cookies 18
Black Boys 18
Chocolate Cream Puffs 18
Chocolate Gems 18
Coburg Cakes 18
Coconut Macaroons 18
Ooffee Squares 18
Cream Kisses 18
Cream lilies 19
Bolairs .. 19
Ginger Cheese Oakes 19
Honey Cakes 19
PAGE
Lemon Slices .. .. 19
Margueritas 19
Marshmallow Cakes 19
Mushrooms 19
Orange Slices 19
Pineapple Chiffon Tartlets 21
Powder Putts 21
Queen Cakes 21
Raspberry Cream Tarts 21
Raspberry Tartlets 21
Raspberry Slice 21
Snowballs 21
Syrup Flapjack 21


SMALL CAKES
ALMOND CHEESE TARTS.
Biscuit Mixture: Quarter lb. butter, one cup sugar,
two eggs, three cups S.R. flour.
Cream butter and sugar. Add well-beaten eggs
then flour. Roll out thinly. Place rounds of the
paste in greased patty tins and fill with one tea-
spoon of a mixture of one egg (well-beaten), one
cup Icing sugar, three-quarters cup coconut, half-
teaspoon essence of almonds. Bake in moderate
oven for 15 minutes.
Mrs. H. Chellew
Bendigo.
APPLE COOKIES.
Quarter lb. butter, half cup sugar, one egg, two
tablespoons cold water, half lb. S.K. flour, stewed
apple.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add egg and
water, then flour. Roll mixture out thinly and line
small patty pans. Place a good teaspoon of fairly
dry stewed apple in each patty tin, cover with
another round of pastry, pinch edges together and
bake about 10 minutes. When cold, ice some of the
cookies with white icing and some with pink and
dust with cinnamon.
Mrs. G. Hudson
East Bendigo.
BLACK BOYS.
Cake mixture; Half lb. butter or good margarine,
one cupful sugar, two eggs, two cups of S.R. flour,
three-quarters cup milk and water mixed, vanilla
essence and pinch of salt.
Beat butter and sugar to a light cream, add
eggs one at a time and beat well. Add salt. Sift
flour and add alternately with the milk. Flavor
with the vanilla. Put teaspoonsful into paper patty
containers and cook in a fairly hot oven.
ICING: Three cups of sugar, two tablespoons
cocoa, one cup of water, one teaspoon of vanilla
essence, coconut.
Place sugar, water and cocoa into large saucepan.
Bring to the boil, stirring occasionally. When boil-
ing take oft fire and wipe down sides with damp
pastry brush or wet cloth, to stop graining. Return
to fire, but do not stir again (care should be taken
not to let it boil over). Add the vanilla and stir
well for one minute.
Have the little cakes already removed from then-
papers and quickly dip each one into the mixture
(using a carving fork to hold them). Roll in the
coconut and leave to dry. The quantity given makes
four-and-a-half dozen, but can be halved to make
two dozen cakes.
Mrs. V. Morey
Golden Square.
CHOCOLATE CREAM PUFFS.
Two oz. butter, one cup plain flour, one cup water,
three eggs.
Put butter and water on to boil and stir in flour
while boiling. Stir over fire until mixture leaves
sides of saucepan. Stir well. When cool, beat in
eggs, one at a time, till a smooth mixture is
achieved. Put on greased slide in long and narrow
shapes or place in greased eclair tins. Bake in hot
oven for about 20 minutes. Put chocolate Icing
(without butter) on top while hot. When cold,
split and fill with whipped cream.
Mrs. H. Nankivell
Bendigo.
CHOCOLATE GEMS.
Cream together two oz. butter and two oz. castor
sugar. Add one well-beaten egg. Then add half-
cup flour, sifted together with half-teaspoon baking
powder and one small teaspoon cocoa. Bake In
warm gem irons, well buttered, in a moderate oven.
When cold, ice the rounded surface with chocolate
icing. When icing has set, slit the tops off the
cakes, fill with whipped cream and replace tops.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
COBURG CAKES.
Six oz. flour, quarter teaspoon each of carbonate
of soda, ground ginger, cinnamon, and allspice, three
oz. butter, three oz. sugar, two eggs, one tablespoon
warm water, two dessertspoons golden syrup.
Sieve all dry ingredients, cream butter and sugar,
add egg and beat well. Add water and warm syrup
alternately with sieved dry Ingredients. Put mixture
into well-greased patty tins and bake in moderate
oven for 20 minutes.
Bendigo.
Mrs. A. J. Davey
COCONUT MACAROONS.
Five tablespoons castor sugar, pinch salt, two
egg whites, one-and-a-half to two cups coconut,
drop of almond essence.
Beat egg whites stiffly and gradually beat in
castor sugar and salt till meringue consistency Is
reached, then fold in coconut and essence. Bake in
dessertspoonsful on greaseproof paper on a tray in
a slow oven for about 20 minutes or until macaroons
are golden brown.
East Bendigo.
Mrs. G. Hudson
COFFEE SQUARES
(Eggless).
Three oz. sugar, four oz. butter, half-cup sultanas,
half-cup currants, half-cup chopped walnuts, one-
and three-quarter cups plain flour, one teaspoon spice
and one teaspoon of carbonate of soda dissolved in
half a cup of milk.
Cream butter and sugar well. Add flour, fruit
and nuts and lastly the soda dissolved in the milk.
Bake in a roll tin in moderate oven for 20 minutes
to half-an-hour. When cold, ice top and decorate
with chopped walnuts. Cut into squares.
Mandurang.
Mrs. R. C. Allott
CREAM KISSES.
One cup cornflour, four teaspoons flour, three
eggs, three-quarters cup castor sugar, one teaspoon
cream of tartar, half-teaspoon carbonate of soda,
pinch of salt.
Beat egg whites and pinch of salt until stiff.
Add sugar, mix in egg yolk, fold in sifted flour,
cornflour, carbonate of soda and cream of tartar.
Place teaspoonsful on hot greased slide and bake In
a fairly hot oven. Use a lunch wrap on the slide
to prevent risk of burning. Place two cakes together
with cream and sprinkle top with Icing sugar.
Mrs. T. F. Perrow
Bendigo.


CREAM LILIES.
Three eggs, three oz. castor sugar, three ox. S.R.
flour, a pinch of salt.
Separate egg whites and yolks. Put whites In a
bowl and whisk until very stiff. Gradually beat in
the sugar, then the yolks. Fold in the sifted flour
and salt. Bake in spoonsful on a greased tray
until a golden color. Roll into lily shapes while hot.
When cold, fill with whipped cream and jelly.
Miss Elva Eeles
Goornong.
ECLAIRS.
Four oz. plain flour, pinch of salt, quarter tea-
spoon icing sugar, two oz. bntter, one cup water,
three eggs.
Sift flour, salt and sugar on to a sheet of white
paper. Place the butter in a saucepan with the
water and when it is dissolved bring to the boil.
Add flour mixture, stirring all the time until it
becomes one smooth lump. Allow to cool. Beat in
eggs one at a time. Beat each egg in well. Use
icing forcer to shape mixture into (sausage-like
shapes on oven shelf. Bake in fairly hot oven for
from 25 to 30 minutes.
Mrs. E. Munday
Eaglehawk.
GINGER CHEESE CAKES.
One oz. sago or semolina, quarter teaspoon ground
ginger, quarter teaspoon baking powder, one oz. cas-
tor sugar, three-quarter os. margarine or butter, one
egg yolk, chopped preserved ginger, one tablespoon
milk.
Mix sago or semolina with sugar and ground
ginger and baking powder. Melt margarine. Beat
egg yolk well and mix with milk Stir into dry
Ingredients and mix all together. Drop teaspoonsful
of mixture on top of a piece of preserved ginger
in the bottom of a patty pastry (see recipe follow-
ing) and bake in fairly hot oven. Decorate with a
dab of icing on top of each.
Pastry Cases: Ttke three oz. flour, bare half
teaspoon of baking powder and one and a half oz.
shortening. Sieve baking powder with flour, rub in
shortening and roll out thinly. Cut to fit patty
papers and fill with ginger cheese.
Mrs. H. T. Francis
Bendigo.
HONEY CAKES.
Three oz. butter, three oz. sugar, seven oz. S.R.
flour, half-teaspoon carbonate of soda to darken,
two teaspoons ground ginger, two tablespoons honey,
two eggs.
Cream butter and sugar. Add eggs one by one,
then honey, flour, soda and ginger. If too stiff, add
one tablespoon milk, but mixture needs to be firm.
Half-fill some greased round patty tins with the
mixture. Bake about 15 minutes in a moderate
oven. When cold, place in an airtight tin until
next day. Turn upside down, split open and fill
with whipped cream and sift icing sugar over tops.
Mrs. G. Wilkinsom-Stewart
Eaglehawk.
LEMON SLICES.
First layer: Two tablespoons butter, one egg, one
onp sugar, one and a half cups S.R. flour.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add egg and
flour. Press into a greased tin and bake for 20
minutes in a moderate oven. Allow to cool in tin.
Second layer: Boil one cup of water with half
a cup sugar, juice of two lemons and thicken with
one tablespoon arrowroot. When cooked spread on
pastry. Allow to cool.
Third layer; Boil one-and-a-half cups milk and
thicken with one-and-a-half tablespoons of corn-
flour. Add one tablespoon sf butter and three
tablespoons icing sugar.
Beat to a cream and spread on top of the Jelly.
Sprinkle with coconut. When cool and set, cut into
slices.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. Robbins
MARGUERITAS.
Six oz. - butter, six oz. flour and one dessert -
spoonful of castor sugar.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add flour,
knead until firm. Roll out thinly and cut into rounds
to fit patty papers. Cut rounds of butter paper
and place in bottom of patty pans and put in some
grains of rice to prevent rising. Bake a pale golden
brown. Leave until cold and then remove papers
and rice.
Filling: For the filling, whip one cup of cream,
add one dessertspoon of gelatine dissolved in a little
hot water. Pill cases with this mixture; then ice with
Icing sugar, moistened with cream and tinted with
different pale flower colors.
Quambatook.
Mrs. W. Whitehead
MARSHMALLOW CAKES.
Beat three oz. butter and three ox. sugar to a
cream. Add one beaten egg, then add six oz. SB.
flour. Roll out, cut into required cases and bake
until a light golden color.
Place a little jam into each case in readiness
for the marshmallow topping.
Marshmallow: One cup sugar, one cup boil-
ing water, one heaped teaspoon gelatine, vanilla.
Boil all gently for 15 minutes. Cool slightly and
beat until light and fluffy. Pour over jam in pastry
cases and allow to set.
Golden Square.
Mrs. P. Gulley
MUSHROOMS.
Half lb. S.R. flour, quarter lb. butter, quarter lb.
sugar, one egg, half-teaspoon essence of vanilla.
Rub flour, butter and sugar well together. Add
the well-beaten egg and lastly the essence. Roll
out very thinly and cut with a biscuit cutter. Bake
in patty pans in a moderate oven for 10 or 16
minutes. Roll several small pieces of the mixture
and bake for the stems.
Whip cream, then add raspberry jam and when
cases are filled, sprinkle with cocoa.
Goomong.
Mrs. L. Eeles
ORANGE SLICES.
One tablespoon butter, one tablespoon sugar,
one tablespoon honey or syrup, one egg, two table-
spoons S.R. flour, two tablespoons cornflakes, a
little grated orange rind, one tablespoon chopped
nuts.
Cream butter and sugar. Add honey and beaten
egg gradually and mix well. Sift flour and add to
creamed mixture with orange rind, cornflakes and
chopped nuts. Bake in a flat tin for 25 minutes.
When cold, cut in slices, ice and decorate with nuts.
Mrs. T. Potter
Bendigo.


TRY
Roy Raggatt's
Sliced & Wrapped
BREAD
ITS DELICIOUS.
also
*
the New Reform
100 percent WHOLEMEAL
DEMAND THE BEST
obtainable at
132 LILY ST. BENDIGO


PINEAPPLE CHIFFON TARTLETS.
Four oz. shortening, eight oz. flour, quarter tea-
spoon baking powder, one egg, two oz. sugar, salt
to taste.
Cream butter and sugar well. Add egg and beat
mixture until evenly mixed. Fold in sifted flour
and salt to form a soft dough. Roll out thinly
and line small patty tins.
Filling; Three-quarters of a cup of pineapple pulp
(if using raw pineapple, it is necessary to cook the
pine), half a cup of sugar, one dessertspoonful of
butter, one egg, one large tablespoon S-B. flour.
Soften butter, add sugar and mix evenly with
butter. Then add the egg and beat well. Fold in
the flour and mix in the pineapple pulp. Fill the
uncooked pastry cases with the mixture and bake in
a moderate oven for 15 to 20 minutes.
Mrs. F. Mamouney
Bendigo.
POWDER PUFFS.
Three large or four small eggs, one cup sugar,
barely one cup of flour, and add one tablespoon of
cornflour to make full cup, one teaspoon cream of
tartar, half teaspoon bicarbonate of soda.
Separate whites from yolks of eggs. Beat whites
stiffly, then add yolks and beat well. Add sugar
gradually and beat until dissolved. Add flour, cream
of tartar and soda sifted together and fold in lightly.
Drop in small teaspoonsful on greased paper on tray.
Bake in a quick oven for from four to five minutes
until a pale brown. Turn out on to a cake cooler
and refill slide until all the mixture is used. Store
in an airtight tin and when needed join together
with whipped cream and dust with icing sugar.
Mrs. F. Boys
Golden Square.
QUEEN CAKES.
Three-quarters cup sugar, three tablespoons soft
butter, one-and-a-quarter cups S.B. flour, pinch
salt, two eggs, well-beaten, quarter cup milk, es-
sence of lemon.
Mix in the usual way and half-fill paper patty
pans. Sprinkle a few currants on the top and bake
for a quarter of an hour in a good oven.
Mrs. S. M. Weeks
Bendigo.
RASPBERRY CREAM TARTS.
Four oz. shortcrust pastry, half-cup water (or
milk), half-cup sugar, one level teaspoon cornflour,
and one dessertspoon raspberries. Whipped cream
to garnish.
Roll pastry into a thin sheet and cut rounds
with plain round cutter to line greased patty tins.
Prick well with fork and bake in a hot oven. Blend
sugar and cornflour with a little of the cold water
or milk. Place remainder of liquid in a saucepan
and boil, together with the raspberries. When boil-
ing, add the blended ingredients and cook well.
Cool slightly. Place mixture in forcing bag with
rope pipe and fill tarts. Decorate around filling
with whipped cream.
Mandurang.
Mrs. R. C. Allott
RASPBERRY TARTLETS.
Two oz. sugar, two oz. butter, one egg, four ez,
S.B. flour.
Cream butter and sugar. Add egg and beat well
in. Add S.R. flour to make a nice dough. Roll out
thinly, cut into rounds and line well-greased patty
pans. Place small teaspoon of raspberry jam in
each, then add a teaspoon of the following mix-
ture: Beat one egg lightly, then beat in half-cup
icing sugar, and stir in three-quarters cup coconut.
Bake in a moderate oven about 15 minutes. As a
variation, stewed apple, well drained, may be used
instead of jam.
Bendigo.
Mrs. F. Harris
RASPBERRY SLICE.
Beat quarter lb. butter and quarter-cup sugar to a
cream. Add one beaten egg, then one-and-a-half
cups S.R. 'flour. Grease a flat tin with butter. Put
mixture into tin and press flat with fingers. Spread
with raspberry jam. Beat together one egg, half-
cup sugar, one cup coconut, and spread on top of
jam with a fork. Bake slice for 15 minutes in a
moderately hot oven. When cool, cut into slices.
Bendigo.
Mrs. C. Neivandt
SNOWBALLS.
Quarter lb. butter, eight oz. S.B. flour, one gill
(nearly half a cup) of milk, three eggs, six oz. castor
sugar.
Cream butter and sugar together thoroughly.
Add well-beaten eggs, little by little. Then add the
milk and flour. Half-fill well-greased patty tins
(use the type with round bottoms) with the mixture.
Bake for about seven minutes. When cool, turn
upside down and cover with soft icing, making some
pale pink, others white and others chocolate.
Sprinkle with coconut. When about to be used
split and fill with whipped cream.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
SYRUP FLAPJACK.
Four oz. butter, one oz. sugar, two tablespoons
golden syrup, eight oz. rolled oats, quarter teaspoon
salt.
Beat butter and sugar till creamy. Stir in warm
syrup and work in oats and salt until well blended.
Put mixture into a small Yorkshire pudding tin,
pressing into position. Cook in moderate oven for
30-45 minutes until golden brown. Cut into strips
and leave in tin until cold. If the cakes are
removed while hot they are liable to crumble.
Bendigo.
Mrs. A. J. Davey
' To prevent brown sugar from hardening, remove from bag
when purchased and store in airtight jar. Do the same With
powdered and icing sugar.


Mayfair Menu
The Recipe
for the discerning housewives!
1. Take a Can
of “Mayfair”
Cooked Ready
to Use Ham.
2. Open Can with
the “Easy to
Open Key” and
turn out on plate
3. Slice Meat thin-
ly Add Cool
Summer Salad.
Garnish with
dressing.
4. Add, if you de-
sire, a few slices
of Delicious
Mayfair’ Poultry
n
m
n
Cv\
Sr
i
7)
«»t
V *-
Stp
V s
Result! I A Meal to Dream abut and so Easy to prepare.
-For Winter ? Why, - “Mayfair” Hams and Mild Cured Bacon -
can be used in many ways for the Cold Day Meal!
MAYFAIR GOODS ARE EASY TO OBTAIN AT ALL GOOD STORES
Packed in the City of Bendigo by ■
INTERCONTINENTAL PACKERS Phone 2992 - 7.


Sponges
...Rolls
Light as
thistledown is
this wonder-
ful Ginger
Fluff sand-
wich with its
whipped
cream filling
and topping of
chopped wal-
nuts. Recipe
Page 24.
PAGE
Basic Sponge 24
Beatrice Sponge 24
Chocolate Sponge 24
Cinnamon Sponge 24
Ginger Fluff 24
Ginger Sponge 24
Honey Roll 24
Honey or Syrup Sponge 24
Mock Cream Filling lor Honey Roll .... 24
SPONGES, ROLLS . . .
PAGE
Marshmallow-Iced Sponge 25
One-Egg Sponge 24
Raspberry Cream Roll 25
Sponge Sandwich (1) 26
Sponge Sandwich (2) 25
Simple Sponge Sandwich (3) 25
Syrup Roll 86
Three Minute Sponge 36


SPONGES, ROLLS
BASIC SPONGE
Four eggs, three-quarters cup sugar, half-cup
cornflour, third-cup S.R. flour.
Whisk the egg white to a stiff froth, adding the
sugar gradually and beating until thick and smooth.
Whisk in the yolks one at a time. Sift flours two
or three times and fold into mixture with an upward
and over movement (do not stir). Pour mixture
evenly into two eight-inch sandwich tins and bake
in moderate oven from 20 to 25 minutes. When
preparing sandwich tins, always grease them, then
cut a lunch wrap the same size as the tin and place
the paper smoothly on the bottom of the tin before
pouring mixture in. This helps the sponges to
come away cleanly without sticking to the tin and
the paper peels off the sponges very easily when
they are turned out.
Mrs. R. Boland
Golden Square.
BEATRICE SPONGE.
Four eggs, one small cup sugar, one cup S.B flour,
pinch of salt, lemon essence, three-and-a-half
tablespoons hot milk.
Beat whites of eggs well, then add sifted sugar
gradually. Add yolks and beat in, then add flour,
and lastly, milk and essence. Bake in two sandwich
tins for 20 minutes in a sponge oven. When cold
fill with cream and decorate top with passionfruit
icing.
Mrs. E. Munday
Eaglehawk.
CHOCOLATE SPONGE.
Four eggs, one cup S.B. flour, one cup sugar, two
tablespoons of butter, four tablespoons of water, two
tablespoons of cocoa.
Beat eggs, sugar until thick, then sift in S.R. flour.
Place butter, water and cocoa into a saucepan and
bring to the boll. Fold into mixture. Place in
greased and floured sandwich tins and bake for 20
minutes on the bottom of a brisk oven.
Mrs. R. Robbins
Bendigo.
CINNAMON SPONGE.
Beat four eggs with half-a-cup of sugar until
thick and creamy. Sift together one cup of flour,
one teaspoon cream of tartar, half-teaspoon car-
bonate of soda, two t.easpoons cocoa, two, tea-
spoons of cinnamon. Add to eggs and sugar.
Lastly, add two oz. butter melted in six
tablespoons of boiling milk. Mix all together
lightly and bake in greased sandwich tins in a
moderate oven for approximately 20 minutes. When
cold, fill with whipped cream and either decorate
the top with cream or ice. Top with nuts or
cherries.
Mrs. R. C. Ailott
Mandurang.
GINGER FLUFF.
Take four eggs and three-quarters of a cup of
white sugar and a pinch of salt. Beat for 20 min-
utes, then add one dessertspoon Of golden syrup.
Sift twice half a cup of arrowroot, two teaspoons
of ginger, two teaspoons of cinnamon, one tea-
spoon of cocoa and two dessertspoons of plain
flour. Lastly, fold in half a teaspoon of
cream of tartar and half teaspoon of bi-
carbonate of soda. Pour into greased sandwich
tins and bake in moderate oven for 15-20 minutes.
Place whipped cream between layers and top with
cream and walnuts.
Bendigo.
Mrs. D. A. Pain
GINGER SPONGE.
Four eggs, three-quarters cup sugar, half-cup
cornflour, third-cup S.B. flour and two teaspoons
each of cinnamon, cocoa and ginger.
Use the same method as set out above for the basic
sponge, sifting all dry ingredients together and fold-
ing into the mixture. (See under “Basic Sponge”).
Use only one tablespoonful of hot water
into which one dessertspoonful of golden
syrup has been dissolved. Fold this lastly
into the mixture, pour into two eight-inch sandwich
tins and cook 20 to 25 minutes as for basic sponge.
This mixture is rather thin, but this does not affect
the result.
Golden Square.
Mrs. R. Boland
HONEY ROLL.
Three eggs, half-cup sugar, one tablespoonful
honey, half-cup arrowroot, pinch salt, half-teaspoon
cinnamon, one level tablespoonful of flour, two level
teaspoons of baking powder, nutmeg to flavor.
Beat eggs until stiff, add sugar and beat again
until thick. Stir in honey. Fold in sifted flour,
arrowroot, baking powder, spices and salt. Bake in
a greased Swiss roll tin in a moderate oven 10-12
minutes. Turn out on sugared greaseproof paper.
Roll (do not roll the paper). When required un-
roll, spread with sweetened cream and re-roll.
Bendigo, and
Mrs. A. G. Unmack
Miss Elva Eeles
Goornong.
HONEY OR SYRUP SPONGE
Half cup sugar, half cup arrowroot, two large
teaspoons of flour, three eggs, one teaspoon cin-
namon, one teaspoon mixed spice, one teaspoon
cream of tartar, half teaspoon carbonate of soda,
one tablespoon of honey or golden syrup (golden
syrup for preference).
Beat sugar and eggs for 15 minutes. Add dry
ingredients sifted well together and, lastly, the
syrup. Bake 15 minutes in a moderate oven. This
is delicious with cream.
Newbridge.
Mrs. Burrows
MOCK CREAM FILLING FOR HONEY ROLL:
Half-cup milk, level dessertspoon cornflour, good
tablespoon butter (plenty of butter is the secret of
this recipe), two tablespoons castor sugar.
Warm milk, blend cornflour with a little extra
milk and stir into warm milk on stove, until it
thickens. Cook for a few minutes and allow to
become quite cold. Cream butter and sugar, then
very gradually add cornflour mixture, beating well
all the time. Flavor as desired. This filling will
keep for several days.
Goomong.
Miss Elva Eeles
ONE-EGG SPONGE.
One and three-quarter cups flour, one cup sugar,,
one cup milk, one egg, one teaspoonful soda, two
teaspoonsful of cream of tartar, one tablespoon
butter.
Cream butter and sugar well together. Add egg
and beat well. Dissolve soda in milk and mix with
dry ingredients. Bake in a moderate oven for half-
an-hour.
Long Gully.
Mrs. G. Kupka


MARSHMALLOW-ICED SPONGE.
Three eggs, four oz. sugar, four oz. S.R. flour, one
teaspoon cornflour, three ,tablespoons milk.
Separate whites from the yolks of the eggs and
beat the whites stiffly. Add yolks and sugar and
beat again until thick. Then add flour and cornflour,
folding in gently. Add the warmed milk last. Bake
for 20 minutes in a prepared slab tin in a moderate
oven. When cold spread with raspberry jam and
top with marshmallow.
Marshmallow: Place three tablespoons of water,
three tablespoons of orange juice three tablespoons
sugar and one level dessertspoon gelatine, with a
pinch of salt, in a saucepan and bring slowly to the
boll. Simmer for five minutes. Cool, and then beat
until fluffy. Spread immediately over the jam and
sprinkle lightly with coconut.
Mrs. E. Kells
Golden Square.
RASPBERRY CREAM ROLL.
Three eggs, four oz. sugar, one cup S.R. flour,
two tablespoons hot milk, raspberry jam, whipped
sweetened cream flavored with vanilla.
Separate egg whites and egg yolks. Beat the
whites until stiff and frothy, gradually add sugar,
beat until dissolved and mixture will hold its shape.
Add egg yolks, beat well. Fold in sifted flour, then
hot milk. Grease a Swiss roll tin, line base with
greased paper. Pour mixture in, tilt tin to spread
mixture evenly. Bake in a moderate oven 10 to 15
minutes. Turn out on to paper lightly coated with
castor sugar. Quickly cut off crusts at ends and
sides and roll up with the paper. Leave to cool on
cake cooler. Unroll carefully, remove paper, spread
with jam and cream and re-roll. Decorate top with
cream “striped” with jam.
Mrs. C. Neivandt
Bendigo.
SPONGE SANDWICH (1)
Four eggs, three-quarters cup sugar, one cup
S.R. flour, one tablespoon milk, two tablespoonsful
hot water with a small piece of butter melted in it.
Beat eggs and sugar until stiff enough to make
the figure fight and to remain in the figure while
you count up to five. Then mix in your sifted flour
and lastly the hot water, milk and butter. Bake
in two sandwich tins in a moderate oven.
Mrs. J. Smellie
Bendigo.
SPONGE SANDWICH (2)
Four eggs, one cup of sugar, one good cup of
flour, one teaspoon baking powder, four tablespoons
boiling milk.
Whisk the egg whites to a stiff froth, adding the
sugar gradually and beating until thick and smooth.
Whisk in the yolks one at a time. Fold in the flour
with an upward and over movement (do not stir).
Fold in the boiling milk. Pour the mixture into
two eight-inch sandwich tins and bake in a mode-
rate oven for 20 minutes. Join together with fav-
orite filling and top with icing.
Mrs. E. R. Osborne
Sedgwick.
SIMPLE SPONGE SANDWICH (3)
Four oz. sugar, three eggs, two oz. butter, four oz.
Hour, three-quarter teaspoon baking powder.
..Combine sugar and eggs and beat lightly until
thick and spongy, aft flour and baking powder
three times and fold into mixture, drizzling in the
warm butter last of all. Bake for 15 minutes in two
greased and floured tins in a fairly hot oven. When
cold fill with cream or preferred filling and ice as
liked.
Golden Square.
Mrs. S. Watkinson
SYRUP ROLE
Beat three eggs until light and frothy, then’ add
half cup sugar and beat for a quarter of an hour.
Stir in one tablespoon of partly melted (not heated)
golden syrup. Sift together: half cup arrowroot, fIU
cup with plain flour, two level teaspoons baking
powder, pinch salt, half teaspoon cinnamon and a
little grated nutmeg. Mix all well together. Pour
into a shallow Swiss Roll tin and bake 20 minutes.
Turn out on a damp cloth sprinkled with castor
sugar, then roll up.
Newbridge.
Mrs. Burrows
THREE-MINUTE SPONGE
Place in dish in following order: One cup S.R.
flour, one cup castor sugar( small), three eggs, just
broken into the dish, three tablespoons melted but-
ter, three tablespoons milk, a good pinch of salt.
Beat all well together for three minutes and bake
in a prepared tin ki a moderate oven for 25 min-
utes.
Variations:
Orange King Cake: Add the grated rind of one
orange. Bake in ring tin or orange cake tin.
Chocolate Bing Cake: Just add tablespoon of
cocoa.
Spice Cake: Add one teaspoon each of cinnamon,
spice and ginger.
Lamington Ring Cake; Bake in ring cake tin and
ice as lamingtons, or bake in square tin and cut into
traditional lamington squares and ice as usual.
Queen Cakes: Add two tablespoons of currants
and bake in well-greased patty tins.
Small Party Cakes: Leave plain and bake in patty
tins, icing and decorating as desired.
Raspberry Steamed Pudding: Grease pudding
basin well. Put three tablespoons of raspberry jam
in bottom of basin. Pour in cake mixture. Cover
top with greased paper and tie down well, or add
lid of basin. Place in boiling water and boil for
one-and-a-quarter hours. This mixture makes a
large-sized pudding.
Mrs. J. M. Boyle
Bendigo.


HOUSEWIVES!
The "English Electric"
RITEMP RANGE
NOW AVAILABLE FOR IMMEDIATE DELIVERY
COLORS CREAM OR WHITE.
&
19
9
li?
MODEL 2011.
FEATURES:
FLUORESCENT LIGHT.
AUTOMATIC OVEN TIMER.
Turns the oven on at just the right time,
turns the oven off at the time yon
order your meal cooked.
Ringing Time; Rings as a reminder any
time up to four hours. No spoils, no
spillovers on the hot-plates.
SIMMERSTAT CONTROL ON ALL
PLATES.
CASH or EASY TERMS.
MODEL 2009 D
FEATURES:
Ritemp Temperature Control.
Even distribution of heat in oven for
quick trouble-free cooking.
Hotplate Sinunerstat:
Sensitive Ritemp control allows gentle to
rapid simmering with full control.
Easy cleaning and servicing (plates simply
plug in and easily removed).
Vitreous enamel finish.
Large grill and hotplate compartment.
Vegetable storage compartment in base.
CASH OR EASY TERMS
I! - © ©
TK
SOLD AND SERVICED BY YOUR BENDIGO AGENT:
HESSE BROS. Electrical Service
LYTTLETON TERRACE, BENDIGO. PHONE 533.


Biscuits'n
Cookies
Coffee and Cookies—they go well together. Add interest to
your biscuit and cookie jars with the aid of these varied recipes.
PAGE
Almond Slices 27
Banana Cornflake Drops 27
Basic Biscuit Eeclpe 27
Brown Biscuits 28
Butter Biscuits 28
Butterscotch Fingers 28
Caramel Fingers 28
Chinese Chews 28
Chocolate Biscuits 28
Chocolate Slices 28
Coconut Bon-Bons 28
Coffee Moons 28
Coffee Venetian Biscuits 29
Cream Biscuits 29
Crunchies .. 29
Date Luncheon Biscuits 29
Date Nuttles 29
PAGE
Date and Walnut Slice 29
Four-Six-Fours 29
Ginger Nuts 29
Honey Joys 29
John Bull Oats Biscuits 29
Louisa Biscuits 29
Marshmallow Creams 30
Nut Cookies 30
Nutty Crisps SO
Peanut Biscuits 30
Peanut Crunchies 30
Pepper Koka Biscuits 30
Shortbread (1) 30
Scotch Shortbread (2) 30
Beal Scotch Shortbread (3) 30
Swedish Cakes 30
Vanilla Biscuits .. 30
ALMOND SLICES.
One tin sweetened condensed milk, one and a
half cups coconut, one and a half cups cornflakes,
one teaspoonful almond essence.
Mix together all ingredients and cook in a moder-
ate oven about 20 minutes, first pressing into a flat
tin. Cut in slices when cooked.
Mrs. D. Martin
Bendigo.
BANANA CORNFLAKE DROPS.
Four oz. good shortening, half ctip sugar, two ripe
bananas, juice of one small lemon, one egg, one-and-
a-half cups S.K. flour, pinch salt, two tablespoons
cornflour, two and a half cups cornflakes.
Cream shortening and sugar, add bananas well
mashed with lemon juice. Add egg and beat well.
Lastly, fold in sifted flour, salt and cornflour. Drop
teaspoonsful of the mixture into the cornflakes and
toss until well coated. Place on a well greased
biscuit tray and bake in a moderate oven till golden
brown (about 15 minutes).
Mrs. G. Maguire
Golden Square.
BASIC BISCUIT RECIPE.
Quarter lb. butter or margarine, half cup sugar,
one egg, one and a half cups flour, one teaspoon
cream of tartar, half teaspoon of carbonate of soda.
Cream butter .and sugar, add egg and beat well.
Then sift flour, carbonate of soda and cream of
tartar and add to creamed mixture, mixing in well.
Here are seven ways in which to vary basic bis-
cuit recipe:—
COCONUT RUFFS: To the basic mixture add
vanilla essence. 801 l pieces of mixture the size of a
walnut In coconut, then press flat with the fingers
and in the centre of each piece place a seeded raisin.
Bake in a moderate oven until a nice color.
COFFEE BISCUITS: To the basic mixture add one
tablespoon coffee essence. 801 l pieces about the
size of a walnut in castor sugar. Press flat with a
fork and bake. These may also be joined together
with butter icing and made into coffee kisses.
HONEY BISCUITS: To basic mixture add three


dessertspoonsful of honey. Drop in teaspoonsful on
slide and bake.
CURRANT AND SEED BISCUITS: To half of
basic mixture add lemon essence and currants. To
the other half add carraway seeds. Roll pieces of
the mixture about the size of a walnut in sugar.
Press flat with a fork and bake until a nice golden
color.
CHERRY DROPS: Using the basic recipe color
the mixture lightly with cochineal and add chopped
glace cherries. Roll walnut size pieces in castor
sugar and bake in moderate oven.
GINGER NUTS; Again use the basic recipe, but
add chopped preserved ginger and roll pieces the size
of a walnut in cornflakes. Press flat with the fingers,
then bake until a golden brown.
Mrs. V. Manlein
Eaglehawk.
BROWN BISCUITS.
Quarter lb. butter, one cup sugar (creamed toge-
ther), add one egg (well beaten), then one table-
spoon golden syrup, one tablespoon coconut and
one-and-a-half cups S.R. flour. Drop in teaspoonsful
on greased oven slide and bake in a moderate
oven. Store in an airtight tin.
Mrs. S. M. Weeks
Bendigo.
BUTTER BISCUITS.
Place four oz. butter or margarine in a medium-
sized saucepan. Allow to melt and continue to cook
gently over low heat until the butter turns a very
pale brown. Cool a little before stirring in four oz.
sugar. Blend well. When really cool, add one tea-
spoon of vanilla essence and one beaten egg. Then
work in five oz. S.R. flour. The mixture will prob-
ably still be sticky so leave until quite cold. Then
roll into little balls and space on a greased oven
tray. Stick a chubby piece of blanched almond in
the centre of each ball. Bake slowly until delicately
colored. Keep oven heat very moderate. Allow to
remain on trays for a minute or two after they leave
the oven.
Mrs. C. Neivandt
Bendigo.
BUTTERSCOTCH FINGERS.
Two oz. margarine, one cup brown sugar, one egg,
half teaspoon vanilla, three-quarters cup S.R. flour,
pinch salt, half cup coconut, half cup chopped wal-
nuts.
Melt margarine, do not boil. Add sugar, stir in
beaten egg, vanilla, sifted dry ingredients, coconut
and nuts. Spread in greased Swiss roll tin and bake
in moderate oven 25 to 30 minutes. Cut into fingers
while hot. Remove from tin when cold.
Mrs. H. Nankivell
Bendigo.
CARAMEL FINGERS.
Quarter lb. butter, quarter lb. sugar, one egg, one
cup S.R. flour, three-quarters cup of dates, three-
quarter cup of walnuts.
Heat butter and sugar and stir until dissolved.
Take off fire, add the egg, flour, dates and nuts.
Place in a greased tin and bake for 20 minutes in a
moderate oven. Turn out and when cold, cut into
fingers. Use a lamington tin and place greased paper
at the bottom. By doing this, the fingers turn out
much easier when cooked.
Mrs. J. L. Hicks
Eaglehawk.
CHINESE CHEWS.
Two oz. S.R. flour, four oz. plain flour, one cup
chopped dates, half cup chopped walnuts, one cup
sugar, one egg, pinch of salt, one tablespoon milk,
one teaspoon vanilla essence, four oz. butter.
Sift flour and salt. Add dates, walnuts and sugar.
Beat eggs, add milk and melted butter, then stir into
flour mixture. Spread in a greased Swiss roll tin
12 inches x 9 inches), and bake in a moderate oven
(350 deg. P.) about 40 minutes. Cut into fingers
while still hot and leave in tin to cool.
Golden Square.
Mrs. C. R. Phillips
CHOCOLATE BISCUITS
One cup S.R. flour, one tablespoon cocoa, three
crushed wheat biscuits, quarter lb. shortening, one
cup brown sugar, one cup coconut, vanilla.
Melt shortening, add to other ingredients and
mix well. Press into a shallow tin (size lOin. x 12in.)
and bake in a moderate oven for 15 minutes. Pour
a chocolate icing over biscuit while it is still hot and
cut into squares. Allow to cool.
Glace Icing; One cup icing sugar, dessertspoon
cocoa, one dessertspoon butter, half teaspoon vanilla,
one tablespoon liquid. Place over warm water until
of spreading consistency. Add vanilla and spread
quickly over biscuits.
Sedgwick.
Mrs. E. R. Oshorne
CHOCOLATE SLICES.
Quarter lb. butter, three-quarters cup sugar, one
egg, pinch salt, one cup S.R. flour, one teaspoon cin-
namon, one teaspoon cocoa, one good cup of raisins,
dates and preserved ginger mixed together (one cup
only).
Beat butter and sugar to a cream. Add egg and
beat well. Then add flour, cinnamon, cocoa and
salt sifted, then the cup of preserves. Spread evenly
on a greased slide and bake in a slow oven about
half-an-hour or until a nice brown color. Cool a
little and cut into slices.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
COCONUT BON-BONS.
Three ox. butter, two tablespoons sugar, yolk of
one egg, two handsful coconut, three ox. S.R. flour.
Cream butter and sugar well. Add egg yolk, then
coconut and flour. Roll out into a sheet quarter
inch thick and spread with the stiffly beaten egg
white and sprinkle with coconut. Cut into even
sized Angers and bake in a moderate oven until
light brown, join together with an icing made with
icing sugar, butter and lemon juice.
Golden Square.
Mrs. C. R. Phillips
COFFEE MOONS.
Two eggs, eight oz. flour, one-and-a-half tea-
spoons cream of tartar, three-quarters of a teaspoon
of carbonate of soda, one dessertspoon cinnamon,
four ox. butter, six ox. castor sugar, vanilla essence
to taste, three-quarters gill milk.
Add eggs slowly to butter and sugar, beating In
well. Add essence, then milk, and lastly the flour
and other dry ingredients. Mix well but lightly. Put
into a baking tin lined with greased paper. Spread
out smoothly. Bake in a moderate oven from 30 to
40 minutes. Next day cut into moons using a round
cutter. Make soft coffee icing and cover. Color
some yellow, using yolkine to color. Decorate with
choc, bits and yellow stars.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilklnson-Stewart


COFFEE VENETIAN BISCUITS.
Six oz. plain flour, one teaspoon cream of tartar,
half teaspoon carbonate soda, four oz. butter, four oz.
sugar, one egg yolk, one tablespoon coffee essence,
blanched almonds.
Cream butter and sugar, add yolk beaten with
coffee essence. Then add sifted dry ingredients.
Roll mixture into small balls, roll in castor sugar,
place on greased tray and stick almond on top. Bake
in a moderate oven, but do not allow to get too
brown.
Mrs. R. Randall
Golden Square.
CREAM BISCUITS.
Quarter lb. butter, three-quarters cup sugar, half cup
custard powder, one-and-a-half cups S.R. flour, two
eggs.
Sift S.R. flour and custard powder together.
Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs, then work
in S.R. flour and custard powder to make a firm
dough. Roll out thinly, cut into strips about 2|in.
by lin., with fancy cutter. Place on cold slide and
cook in moderate oven till a golden brown. When
cool, join in pairs with icing made as follows: One
knob of butter about the size of a walnut, one table-
spoon boiling water, few drops of vanilla, enough
sieved icing sugar to make a smooth paste.
Mrs. F. Harris
Bendigo.
CRUNCHIES.
Quarter lb. butter, one egg, half cup sugar, half
cup sultanas, one cup S.B. flour, weeties or corn-
flakes.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add the eggs
and beat well. Add the flour and sultanas lastly.
Take teaspoonsful and roll each in cornflakes. Bake
in a moderate oven.
Mrs. F. J. Hargreaves
Emu Creek.
DATE LUNCHEON BISCUITS.
Place a heaped cupful of dates in a pie dish.
Cover with boiling water and then mash to a smooth
paste. Take one lb. flour, three-quarters cup but-
ter or lard, half lb. sugar, small half-cup of milk,
half-teaspoon carbonate of soda, and one dessert-
spoon of vinegar.
Boil milk, sugar and soda for a few minutes. When
cold, add vinegar and pour into flour, into which the
butter has been rubbed. Roll out half the mixture
and spread dates over. Roll out the remaining half
of the mixture and cover with dates. Roll lightly
over with a rolling pin. . Cut into squares or fing-
ers and prick with a fork. Brush over top with
milk and bake in a moderate to quick oven until
light golden brown.
Mrs. L. Eeles
Goornong.
DATE NUTTIES.
Six oz. butter, one cup crushed peanuts (raw), one
cup sugar, one cup chopped dates, one egg, two cups
S.R. flour, one dessertspoon cocoa, one teaspoon car-
bonate of soda dissolved in one tablespoon boiling
water, pinch salt.
Cream shortening and sugar, add egg and beat
well. Add dry ingredients, dates and nuts, and
lastly the dissolved soda. Place in teaspoonsful on
a greased tray and bake in a moderate oven for 15
minutes.
Mrs. E. R. Osborne
Sedgwick.
DATE AND WALNUT SLICE.
Quarter lb. butter, three-quarters cup sugar, one
egg, one cup S.R. flour, one cup chopped dates, one
enp chopped walnuts, one dessertspoonful vanilla
essence.
Mix butter and sugar together until creamy. Add
eggs, beating well. Then add flour, dates, and wal-
nuts also essence. Spread evenly to about half-an-
inch thickness on a small sandwich tin. Bake for
20 minutes in moderate oven. When cool cut into
fingers.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
FOUR-SIX-FOURS
Four oz. butter, six oz. flaked oatmeal, four oz.
sugar, two tablespoons coconut.
Melt butter and sugar in a saucepan and stir in
oatmeal and coconut. Turn on to a greased oven
slide and spread as thinly as possible. Cook in a
moderate oven until light brown. When a little
cool, cut into blocks about four inches long and two
inches wide.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
GINGER NUTS.
Half lb. plain flour, one teaspoon of cream of tar-
tar, one teaspoon of carbonate of soda, one-andi-a-
half teaspoons of ginger, pinch salt, six oz. sugar,
one tablespoon of golden syrup, one egg, quarter lb.
butter.
Melt butter, golden syrup and sugar, but do not
boil. Add to sifted dry ingredients, mix well. Add
beaten egg. Drop in small teaspoonsful on to cold
greased tray. Flatten slightly and bake in moderate
oven.
Bendigo.
Mrs. W. Hampson
HONEY JOYS.
One tablespoon honey, two tablespoonsful sugar,
three tablespoonsful butter, four large cups corn
flakes.
Place honey, sugar and butter in a saucepan and
heat until melted and well mixed. Take off the
stove and add the cornflakes. Mix well. Spoon
into paper patty pans and bake in a moderate
oven for four to six minutes. Leave in papers until
nearly cold, then peel off patty pans which come
away easily when the cookies are still warm. •
Golden Square.
Mrs. R. Mellis
JOHN BULL OATS BISCUITS.
Two cups John Bull oats, one small cup plain
flour, half cup sugar. Mix together two dessert-
spoons golden syrup, two tablespoons boiling water,
half cup butter. Put in saucepan, bring almost to
boil, and add one teaspoon soda. While still frothing,
add dry ingredients. Drop by teaspoonsful on to
warm slide and cook in very slow oven about 20
minutes.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. Houston
LOUISA BISCUITS.
Two-and-a-half oz. margarine, two oz. sugar, one
egg, five oz. flour, one teaspoon baking powder, one
teaspoon lemon juice.
Cream margarine and sugar. Add egg yolk and
lemon juice. Then flour sifted with baking powder.
Roll out thinly and cut into rounds with a fancy cut-
ter. In the centre put a little raspberry jam. Beat
egg white with two tablespoons of sugar and three
tablespoons of coconut. Put this mixture on top of
the raspberry jam on each biscuit and bake until
a pale brown.
Mrs. V. Manlein
Eaglehawk.


MARSHMALLOW CREAMS.
Six oz. flour, one tablespoon golden syrup, pinch
salt, three oz. butter, three oz. sugar, one egg (sep-
arated), milk to mix, coloring and flavoring, jam,
nuts, or glace cherries to decorate.
Sieve flour and salt. Cream butter and sugar.
Beat in egg yolk and add dry ingredients. Stir in
enough milk to give a soft dough. Turn on to flour-
ed board, roll and cut in one-and-a-half inch
rounds with scone cutter. Prick well and bake for
10-15 minutes. Make marshmallow by whisking egg
white with the syrup over hot water until thick and
fluffy and quite stiff. Color arid flavor. Then sand-
wich the biscuits together with jam, coat tops with
marshamallow and decorate with nuts and cherries.
Mrs. A. J. Davey
Bendigo.
NUT COOKIES.
Two oz. butter, 1 oz. sugar, one level tablespoon
golden syrup, one level tablespoon coffee essence,
four oz. flour, one level teaspoon baking powder, two
oz. coarsely chopped walnuts.
Cream butter and sugar together well, until
creamy. Add syrup and coffee essence and beat
again. Sift in flour and baking powder and stir'
into mixture with half the nuts. Place the mixture
in teaspoonsful on a greased baking sheet, and
sprinkle with remainder of the nuts on top. Bake
in moderate oven for 15-20 minutes.
Mrs. A. J. Davey
Bendigo.
NUTTY CRISPS.
One cup plain flour, one cup sugar, one cup roll-
ed oats, one cup coconut, one cup chopped nuts,
quarter lb. butter, one tablespoon syrup, one small
teaspoon carbonate of soda, two tablespoons boiling
water.
Mix dry ingredients together. Melt butter, syrup,
and soda in boiling water, then add to dry ingredi-
ents. Drop by teaspoonsful on tray and bake in a
moderate oven for about 10 minutes.
Mrs. R. Houston
Bendigo.
PEANUT BISCUITS.
Quarter lb. butter, three oz. sugar, one egg, three
or four oz. chopped salted peanuts, six oz. S.R.
flour.
Cream butter and sugar, add egg, peanuts, and
sifted flour. Mix into a stiff dough. Drop in small
teaspoonsful on to a cold greased tray. Flatten
slightly and bake in a moderate oven until golden
brown. These keep well in airtight container.
Mrs. W. Hampson
Bendigo.
PEANUT CRUNCHIES.
One and a quarter cups plain flour, quarter level
teaspoon baking soda, half cup brown sugar, half
teaspoon vanilla, half level teaspoon cinnamon, four
oz. butter (or margarine), one small egg, one onp
salted peanuts.
Sift flour, soda, cinnamon. Cream butter and
sugar well together. Beat egg and take out one
good tablespoonful. Add remainder with the vanilla
to the creamed butter and sugar. Add peanuts and
sifted dry ingredients. Place in teaspoonsful on a
greased slide and glaze with egg. Cook in moderate
oven.
Mrs. R. G. Roberts
Golden Square.
PEPPER KOKA BISCUITS.
One-third cup each of brown sugar, golden syrup,
and margarine, half level teaspoon each of ground
cloves, cinnamon and ground ginger, half an egg,
two and a half cups of plain flour, one pinch salt,
half tablespoon of baking soda.
Heat brown sugar, syrup and spices In a sauce-
pan. Cool slightly and pour over margarine, which
has been broken up in a basin. Stir this mixture
until margarine is thoroughly melted and
well mixed. Add lightly beaten egg and then
sifted flour, salt and soda. Mix into a firm
dough, place in a refrigerator or ice chest
for at least one hour. Roll out thinly and cut
into shapes. Bake eight to 10 minutes in a slow
to moderate oven.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J. Bright
SHORTBREAD (1).
Ten oz. butter, four oz. castor sugar, one lb. plain
flour, pinch salt, little essence of lemon. Beat but-
ter and sugar together well, then work in flour, salt,
and essence. Roll out fairly thickly and cut Into
fancy shapes. Bake in a very moderate oven.
Long Gully.
Mrs. E. Harvey
SCOTCH SHORTBREAD (2).
(ORIGINAL RECIPE).
One and a half lbs. plain flour, half lb. castor
sugar, half lb. ground rice, one lb. butter.
Cream butter, sugar and rice very well together.
Slowly add flour. Cut into desired shapes or press
mixture into a flan tin, smooth the surface, and
mark off segments with light knife outs.
Emu Creek.
Mrs. M. Murphy
BEAL SCOTCH SHORTBREAD (3).
(FIRST PRIZE 1953 BENDIGO SHOW).
One lb. plain flour, quarter lb. S.B. flour, three-
quarters lb. ground rice, one lb, butter, half lb.
sugar.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add flours and
ground rice, mix well together. Make into thick
biscuits. Prick well all over and bake In a very
moderate oven until a nice pale golden brown color.
Golden Square.
Mrs. Dennis Oakes
SWEDISH CAKES.
One cup plain flour, half cup batter, quarter cup
sugar, one egg yolk (slightly beaten), one egg white
(unbeaten), three-quarters cup chopped nuts.
Cream butter well, add sugar slowly and cream
until light and fluffy. Add egg yolk, mix well and
blend in flour until all is absorbed. Form into inch
balls and dip in egg white, then roll in chopped
nuts. Put on to a greased slide, press flat and bake
in a slow oven five minutes. Take out. Press centres
down and bake a further 15 minutes. When cool,
fill centres with jam.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J. Bright
VANILLA BISCUITS.
Quarter lb. butter, quarter lb. sugar, half lb. flour,
pinch salt, one teaspoon (large) baking powder, two
well-beaten eggs, two tablespoons currants, essence
of vanilla to taste.
Mix in the usual way to fairly stiff dough. Roll
out thinly and cut into shapes. Bake in a moderate
oven.
Mrs. S. M. Weeks
Bendigo.


CHILDREN'S
PARTY FARE
The colorful
nursery - land
biscuits are sim-
ply made from
the Basic Bis-
cuit Recipe on
Page 32.
So popular proved the special Children’s Party Edition of
Reader Recipes when published in “The Bendigo Advertiser”
that it was decided to include in this “Advertiser” Cook Book, a
separate section devoted to recipes suitable for children’s parties.
PAGE
Basic Cake Mixture 32
Basic Sandwich Cake 32
Basic Biscuit Recipe 32
Baskets of Fruit 32
Chocolate Mice 32
Crinoline lady 32
Easter Bunnies 32
Flower Pots 32
PAGE
Progs in Pond .. .. 32
Fruit Eggs 33
Milady’s Hat .. 33
Nigger Minstrels .. 33
Peanut Butter Scones 33
Pear Mice 33
Picture Blocks 33
Sunbonnet Susies 33


CHILDREN’S PARTY FARE
BASIC CAKE MIXTURE.
Three-quarters cup sugar, four oz butter, two
eggs, one-and-a-quarter cups S.B. flour, quarter
cup milk, flavoring as desired.
Cream well the butter and sugar. Add eggs sep-
arately, beating each one in well. Then add sifted
flour and mix with some milk until a smooth tex-
ture. Add liquid flavoring now. (If cocoa, ginger or
other dry flavorings are desired, sift In with the
flour.) '
This mixture may be made into small cakes or
one large cake. For small cakes, bake in moderate
oven for about 15 minutes, A large cake will re-
quire about 30 minutes.
Mrs. E. Hawley
Bendigo.
BASIC SANDWICH CAKE
Four ez butter, four oz. sugar, two eggs, four oz.
S.R. flour, small quantity of milk, pinch of salt.
Cream butter and sugar until light and creamy,
then beat in the eggs one at a time. Add the sieved
flour and pinch of salt, together with a little milk
to give a soft dropping consistency. Place mixture
into two prepared seven-inch sandwich tins or one
oblong or square tin and bake in a moderate oven
for 25-30 minutes.
When catering for a party it is easier to bake
slabs of cake which can be easily and quickly decor-
ated and then cut up. The sandwich cake mix-
ture is a good basic recipe. With the addition of
cocoa, ground ginger, cinnamon and other flavorings,
many different varieties of sandwich cake may be
obtained. As the mixture contains butter it keeps
fresh longer than the true sponge mixture.
Mrs. E. Hawley
Bendigo.
BASIC BISCUIT RECIPE
One-and-a-half cups S.R. flour, two oz. castor
sugar, two tablespoons cold water, four oz. butter
and one egg.
Separate the egg and place white on one side.
Sift the flour into a basin and rub in the butter
lightly. Add the castor sugar and mix well. Beat
the egg yolk and blend with the water. Add this
to the other ingredients (all may not be required,
so add by degrees) to form a stiff dough. Knead
slightly on a sparsely-floured board and then roll
out to about one-eighth inch thick. Cut into shapes
and bake in a moderate oven until crisp, for about
15 minutes.
For children’s parties, use novelty biscuit cutters
such as those illustrated. For adult guests, cut the
biscuits into fingers or other shapes and ice before
putting in the oven, with the following icing:—
Using the white of the egg, beat it slightly then
thoroughly stir in five large tablespoons of Icing
sugar. Spread this evenly over the biscuit shapes,
then sprinkle with chopped nuts, coconut or non-
pareils. Bake as above in a moderate oven until
the biscuits are crisp and the icing a pale fawn
color.
A variety of biscuits may be made from this
basic mixture simply by adding various ingredients
such as cinnamon, cocoa or coconut. The mixture
can also be used to make the shells for mushrooms,
almond ruffles and similar delectable goodies.
Mrs. E. Hawley
Bendigo.
BASKETS OF FRUIT.
The basic cake mixture is cooked in deep patty
pans. Ice with white icing, use licorice for handles
and mould fruit from fondant icing.
Bendigo.
Mrs. E Hawley
CHOCOLATE MICE
Use sandwich cake mixture. Cut into mice shapes
and ice all over with chocolate icing, cover with
chocolate millions. When set, pipe eyes and nose
with white icing. Make tail with thin strips of
licorice and add pieces of almond for ears.
Bendigo.
Mrs. E Hawley
CRINOLINE LADY.
Bake the basic cake mixture, with the addition
of another quarter cup of S.R. flour and the grated
rind and juice of one orange, in an aluminium pud-
ding steamer, in a moderate oven for about three-
quarters of an hour. The extra time is needed for
the depth of the cake. When cold, cover with the
fondant icing and decorate with fondant flowers
and a simple design with the icing decorator. The
cake forms the skirt of the crinoline lady and the
top is merely an ornamental head which can be
purchased. However, the effect is delightful and
will charm even the smallest young lady at her
birthday.
Bendigo.
Mrs. E. Hawley
EASTER BUNNIES.
Four oz. butter, one cup sugar, one teaspoon
vanilla, one egg and one extra egg yolk (reserving
white for mock cream filling), two cups S.B. flour,
pinch salt, three-quarters cup milk.
Cream butter with sugar and vanilla. Add un-
beaten egg and egg-yolk, mix well. Fold in sifted
dry ingredients alternately with milk. Half fill
patty cases. Bake in hot oven 15-20 minutes.
When cold, cut a small round from top of each
cake, fill and decorate as follows: Dissolve one tea-
spoon gelatine in one tablespoon boiling water.
Cream two tablespoons margarine with five table-
spoons sifted icing sugar. Beat in dissolved gela-
tine, a little at a time, then half teaspoon vanilla
and lastly, stiffly beaten egg-white. Pile one tea-
spoonful on to each cake. Cut piece from top of
cake into two wedges. Press into cream like rab-
bits’ ears. Make currant eyes, cherry mouth and
use shredded coconut for whiskers. Makes two
dozen cakes.
Bendigo.
Mrs. H. Nankivell
FLOWERPOTS
Again use basic cake mixture. Cook in deep
patty tins. Ice and decorate with popcorns (for
flowers) and green jubes or angelica for leaves.
Bendigo.
Mrs. E Hawley
FROGS IN POND
Buy some waxed cardboard sweet containers, also
some white chocolate frogs, one for each child.
Make a green jelly and when cold, put into the
colorful sweets containers. When the jelly starts
to set, pop in a frog, just as though it were about


to hop out of a pond. The addition of a fondant
duck or bird adds another authentic touch and will
delight the small guests.
Mrs. E Hawley
Bendigo.
FRUIT EGGS.
Round of stale sponge cake, small tin of apricots,
half pint cornflour blancmange, whipped cream,
castor sugar and grated nutmeg.
Strain juice from fruit and cut sponge cake into
rounds. Pour a little strained fruit syrup over
them and coat with slightly warm blancmange.
When cold, place half an apricot downwards in
centre of each round. Pipe whipped cream round
apricot; then sprinkle with castor sugar and grated
nutmeg to resemble pepper and salt.
Mrs. R. Robbins
Bendigo.
MILADY’S HAT.
Another very simple design in birthday cakes is
“Milady’s Hat.” This is made from the sandwich
cake mixture. Bake the mixture in one small and
one large sandwich tin. Place small one on top of
the other. Cover with a soft butter icing and
when nearly set mark it all over with the imprint of
a fork to give the impression of “straw.” Swathe
with a red ribbon and a bunch of artificial or fresh
cherries, or any desired flower or fruit trim.
Mrs. E Hawley
Bendigo.
NIGGER MINSTRELS.
Use sandwich cake mixture for these. Cut into
shapes and cover with chocolate icing. When set,
use white icing and pipe on eyes, mouth, nose and
brows. Using a saw-edged knife, cut off a base
from an ice-cream cone using the top half for the
hat. Hold in position with icing, which will also
resemble hair.
Mrs. E Hawley
Bendigo.
PEANUT BUTTER SCONES.
Sift into a mixing bowl eight oz. (two cups) S.R.
flour, one teaspoon of sugar and small half teaspoon
of salt. Melt together over low heat one-and-a-
half oz. butter and one heaped tablespoon of peanut
butter. Combine these liquids with three-quarters
of a cup of cold milk and stir into the dry ingred-
ients with a knife. Turn out dough on floured
board, fold over and pat out six times, then press
or roll half an inch thick. Cut into small scones,
glaze with melted shortening, sprinkle with a few
chopped peanuts. Bake in a very hot oven for 10
to 12 minutes.
Bendigo.
Mrs. E Hawley
PEAR MICE.
Have ready a saucer and half a tinned pear for
each child. Place the pear halves, cut side down in
the saucers and pour a little red jelly into each
saucer. Allow to set. Push halves of blanched
almonds into the pointed ends of the pears to form
ears. Add two small pieces of crystallised cherries
to each pear for eyes and then cut thin strips of
licorice for the tails.
Kangaroo Fiat.
Mrs. E. C. Krieger
PICTURE BLOCKS.
These are made from the sandwich cake mixture
baked in a square tin. Ice on top with a white but-
ter icing and mark off into squares. Decorate
with name of each child in a square or with flowers,
fruit or animals, according to preference. This has
the advantage of being made in one piece and then
cut in squares while the party is in progress.
Bendigo.
Mrs. E Hawley
SUNBONNET SUSIES.
The basic cake mixture is baked in small patty
tins. When cold, ice with white butter icing. Allow
to set thoroughly then pipe on the face-features
using chocolate icing (for the mouth use red
icing). To make bonnets, simply fold colored paper
d’oyleys across the middle. Insert a wooden savory
pick through the ends of each bonnet and right
through the cake.
Bendigo.
Mrs. E Hawley
KEEP DECORATIONS SIMPLE
Novel table decorations add interest and charm
to a children’s party and can be simply made at
home It is a good plan to choose a two color
scheme and to keep to it You will get a more
attractive effect by having party caps identical
in shape but in alternate colors Take lor
example a green and lemon color scneme. Make
one cap green with lemon streamers, the next
one lemon with green streamers and place them
alternately round the table. This saves any cry
of “Mary has a prettier hat than mine.”


\
I I w ’>.
A
* QUALITY IJH t, ' St ?
r
I WS4
P
\ V ° U( L 1 '
LOVELY LONG WEARING
HANRO UNDIES
NIGHTS & ’JAMAS
TO THRILL YOUR HEART
SUPERB
IS THE WORD
FOR THESE
HANRO
GARMENTS
Hanro Woollens
NOW
Mothproofed
FOR LIFE
THE QUALITY IS A PROUD
TRADITION
f
•<
siii
i
•lIP
b.^ r p
/I
WMO:
QUALITY KNITWEAR
% ?


Fillets of Beef with
horseradish (right) is
a satisfying and at-
tractive dish, served
garnished with green
peas. See recipe,
page 36.
Hamburger Sausage
(below) has a crisp
coating of toasted
breadcrumbs. Recipe
on page 36.
...And Cold
PAGE
Beef Fillets, with Horseradish 36
Cabbage Rolls (Greece) 36
Gosford Steak 36
Grilled Steak with Pineapple 36
Hamburger Sausage 36
Imitation Jugged Hare 36
Jugged Hare (Suffolk) 37
Kidney Casserole 37
Lamb and Apple Casserole 37
Meats
... Hot
PAGE,
Meat Balls in Savory
Sauce 37
Potted Meat (1) 37
Potted Meat (2) 37
Rabbit Pie 37
Savory Casserole 39
Steak and Celery
Casserole 39
Stuffed Sausage Roll .. 39
Szegedin Gulas (Czecho-
slovakia) with
Bohemian Dumplings 39
“Tastee” Chops 39
Tripe ala France .. .. 39
To tenderise steaks or cutlets, pound with
wooden mallet; score edges slightly with sharp
knife and/or roll with rolling pin.


MEATS, HOT AND COLD
BEEF FILLETS WITH HORSERADISH
One lb. rump steak, two oz. butter or good drip-
ping, one dessertspoonful of grated horseradish, one
sour apple of medium size, two eggs, one tablespoon-
ful of cream, half to three-quarters lb. potatoes,
salt, pepper, breadcrumbs for coating, mushrooms
(one for each fillet).
Separate the yolk and white of one egg, beating
the white into the other egg for coating. Boil pota-
toes, mash until light and fluffy, add horseradish,
the beaten yolk of egg, and beat a little more. Cook
slowly for one minute or two, then add the cream,
salt and pepper to taste and spread on a plate to
cool, covering with greased paper.
When cold, place on lightly floured board, roll out
to half to three-quarter inch thickness and, using
a biscuit cutter (two and a half inches diameter)
cut into rounds. Roll each in seasoned flour, egg
and breadcrumbs and place in frying basket ready
for deep drying.
Using a little larger cutter (to allow for shrink-
age) cut the steak into rounds. Peel and core the
apple, cut in rings, quarter-inch thick and dip in
seasoned flour.
Heat deep frying fat until a blue flame rises and
cook the potatoes in this mixture until a golden
brown. Drain on to white paper. Heat butter in
pan and lightly fry steak and. then the slices of
apple until golden brown. On a suitable, heated
dish, place the potato rounds, add a round of steak
to each potato cake ard on top of the steak, a slice
of apple. Toss mushroom stalks in the remainder
of butter and place one stalk in the centre of each
ring of apple. The mushrooms are attractive used
as a garnish. If the mushrooms are not available,
cut pieces of apple into a suitable stalk shape, fry
and use instead of the mushroom stalks.
Mrs. V. Morey
Golden Square.
CABBAGE ROLLS (GREECE)
One lb. topside steak (minced), half cup of rice,
chopped parsley, salt and pepper to taste, one
minced onion.
Mix all these ingredients well together. 801 l
whole cabbage for a few minutes, then take out of
saucepan and allow to cool. When cool, separate
leaves and place one dessertspoonful of meat mixture
into each leaf and roll into an egg shape, making
sure that each one is rolled securely.
Pack the rolls well into a saucepan and place
a plate on top of the rolls to hold them down. Then
pour in enough warm water to reach the top of the
rolls, add a quarter of a lb. of butter and boil slowly
for a little over one hour. Watch closely that the
water does not boil away and if necessary add a
little more water.
Sauce: To make sauce, strain most of the juice
off the rolls when cooked, and place in a small
saucepan. Beat two eggs well and pour into them
the juice of half a lemon, stirring all the time. Pour
egg and lempn mixture into the warm juice in the
small saucepan. Boil until it thickens, stirring well.
If the sauce is too thin, add a teaspoonful of blend-
ed cornflour. Pour sauce over cabbage rolls and
ser a piping hot.
Mrs. K. Pappos
Bendigo.
GOSFORD STEAK
One and a half lbs. of bladebone steak, one green
apple, one orange, one medium-sized potato, one des-
sertspoon of golden syrup, three-quarters of a cup
of stock or water, one teaspoon vinegar, one tea-
spoon salt, pepper to taste, pinch herbs, parsley.
Trim steak into small pieces and coat with flour.
Place in casserole and cover with sliced green apple
then with a layer of sliced potato. Ppur over liquid
to which has been added syrup, vinegar and season-
ings. Top with sliced unpeeled orange and sprinkle
with brown sugar. Put on lid of casserole and
stand the casserole in a dish of boiling water. Cook
in a moderate oven from two and a half to three
hours. Serve hot, garnished with parsley.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. F. Hyett
GRILLED STEAK WITH PINEAPPLE
Grill the steak (preferably undercut) to liking,
and when ready to serve, place on top of each piece
a slice of fresh raw pineapple and send it to the
table garnished with beans or green peas and crisp
French potatoes.
The pineapple lends a wonderful elusive flavor
to the steak.
Bendigo.
Mrs. T. O. Hunter
HAMBURGER SAUSAGE
One lb. topside steak, half lb. lean bacon, half
lb. breadcrumbs, one level teaspoon salt, one level
teaspoon grated nutmeg, quarter teaspoon pepper,
three eggs.
Mince meat and bacon (discard rind and fat).
Mix all ingredients in a large basin and bind to-
gether with the three beaten eggs. Form into a
sausage and roll up in a well-floured cloth. Tie
securely each end and fasten centre with large
safety pin. Place in a saucepan of boiling water
and boll for two and a half hours. When cooked,
roll in toasted breadcrumbs.
Bendigo.
Mrs. F. Harris
IMITATION JUGGED HARE
A good imitation of jugged hare can be made
with shin of beef. Cut the meat into slices about the
size of the joints of hare, flour well and just fry
brown in a little dripping. Place in a casserole
with an onion stuck with four cloves, a strip of
lemon rind, a teaspoonful of mixed herbs, and
seasoning. Cook slowly for three hours. When fin-
ished, strain the gravy and thicken with one tea-
spoonful of flour mixed with a little ketchup. Put
meat on hot dish and pour gravy over. If served
with red currant jelly and forcemeat balls the illu-
sion is complete.
For forcemeat balls, mix two tablespoons bread-
crumbs, half oz. butter or chopped suet, half tea-
spoon parsley and herbs, quarter teaspoon grated
lemon rind, seasoning, one beaten egg to mix. Roll
into balls and “poach” in boiling water 10 minutes.
These are much more wholesome than fried, and
should be laid round the dish.
Kangaroo Flat.
Mrs. A. Kingerlee


JUGGED HARE (SUFFOLK)
One hare, a bunch of sweet herbs, two onions
(each stuck with three cloves), six whole allspice,
half teaspoon black pepper, a strip of’ lemon peel,
thickening of butter and flour, two tablespoons
ketchup, little port wine if liked.
Wash the hare and cut into small joints, flour-
ing each piece. Put these into a stew-pan with
herbs, onions, cloves, allspice, pepper and lemon
peel. Cover with hot water, and let it. simmer
until tender. Take out pieces of hare, thicken the
gravy with the butter and flour, and add ketchup
and port wine. Let this boil for 10 minutes, then
strain through a sieve over the hare and serve very
hot. Be sure to serve red currant jelly with it.
Mrs. A. Kingerlee
Kangaroo Flat.
KIDNEY CASSEROLE
One and a half lb. ox kidney, one onion, half-
pint of stock (or water with beef cube dissolved in
it), half lb. sausages, two carrots, one tablespoon
flour, one oz. dripping, salt, pepper.
Soak kidney, dry and cut into medium-sized
pieces, also cut sausages into four pieces. Roll
sausage pieces and kidney in flour, seasoned with
salt and pepper. Brown meat in hot dripping in
a pan. Drain and place in casserole. Add re-
maining flour to pan and brown. Then add stock
and stir, until boiling. Peel and slice carrots and
onion and arrange on top of meat. Add the gravy,
place lid on tightly and bake in a moderate oven
for two to two and a half hours. Serve with mashed
potatoes and green peas. To make this dish still
tastier, chop and fry a rasher of bacon with the
meat.
Mrs. B. Eskdale
Bendigo.
LAMB AND APPLE CASSEROLE
Four stewing chops, seasoning, one oz. fat, one
cup chopped onion, two cooking apples, one dessert-
spoon sugar, half-pint stock.
Trim chops and put in casserole or fireproof
dish. Season. Fry onions in fat until golden
brown, and cover chops with them. Add apples,
peeled, cored and sliced thinly. Sprinkle with
sugar and add stock. Cover casserole and cook in
moderate oven for about one and a half hours.
Serve with mashed potatoes and peas.
Mrs. R. Robbins
Bendigo.
MEAT BALLS IN SAVORY SAUCE
Two rashers of bacon, one onion, four tomatoes,
half small green pepper, two and a half cups water,
salt and pepper to taste, one and a half lbs. minced
steak, quarter cup flour, half cup soft breadcrumbs,
two eggs, one dessertspoon chopped parsley, pinch
herbs.
Remove rind from bacon and chop into small
pieces. Peel and chop onion, skin and chop toma-
toes. Remove stem end and all seeds from green
pepper, chop finely. Place bacon in saucepan and
cook in its own fat for five or six minutes over a
low heat until lightly browned. Add onion, toma-
toes, green pepper and water. Season with salt and
pepper. Cover and simmer over low heat until
tomatoes are soft and pulpy and green pepper is
soft. Rub through a coarse strainer or if preferred,
bacon and green pepper may be left in the.sauce.
Prepare meat balls by combining’ steak, salt,
pepper, flour and breadcrumbs. Mix well. Add
beaten eggs, parsley, and herbs. Shape a spoon
ful at a time into balls the size of a golf ball, using
floured Angers on a lightly-floured board. Place
in dish and pour sauce over. Place lid on dish and
bake in a moderate oven for about one hour.
Bendigo.
Mrs. D. Martin
POTTED MEAT (1)
One shin of beef, two raw pickled pork trotters.
Place in a saucepan and cover with water, salted
to taste. Boil until very tender and meat leaves
the bones. Remove all meat from bones and chop
up finely. Add the liquid, into which has been
mixed a dessertspoon of mixed' spice and some
chopped parsley if liked. Boil for a few minutes and
then put into basins.
Do not add any more water after the meat has
been cooked. To do so would spoil the setting of
the jelly. This makes a very large quantity and
the small amount of fat which gathers on top of
the basins helps to make the potted meat airtight
and to keep it for a considerable time. There is nq,
need to press the meat.
Bendigo.
Mrs. F. Canovan
POTTED MEAT (3)
Quarter lb. of any kind of meat, one and a half
m. butter, flavoring, which will vary according to,
the meat used.
Cut the meat into small pieces. Remove any
skin or gristle. Mix flavoring with it and put all
through a mincer. Warm one oz. of butter and
mix it with the meat, pounding it well with a
wooden spoon. Then put in a double saucepan
or in a jar, standing in hot water, and stir until It
is heated right through. Press into a basin, cover
the top with a thin coating of liquid butter and
keep in refrigerator until required.
Flavorings: Ham or bacon —a pinch of mace.
Veal—a pinch of grated lemon rind. Pork—leaf of
fresh sage, finely chopped, and a squeeze of lemon
juice. Beef —one teaspoon of tomato catsup. Lamb,
or mutton —one teaspoon mushroom catsup.
Bendigo.
Mrs. Iris Burns
RABBIT PIE
Soak one rabbit thoroughly and dry. Dissect
into pieces, dipping each piece into plain flour into
which has been mixed one teaspoon of mixed herbs,
salt and pepper to taste. Line the bottom of a pie
or baking dish with sliced onion. Place floured
pieces of rabbit on top, then add a layer of bacon
pieces, another layer of onion and sliced carrot
and parsnip. Almost cover with cold water. Place
over pie a thin short crust (about quarter inch
thick) and then cover pie completely with brown
paper, tying well down so that juices and steam
will not escape. Place pie in a moderate oven and
bake for two hours.
Leg chops or veal can be used in this pie in place
of the rabbit.
Mrs. L. W. Galvin
Bendigo.


STILWELLS
yilJ* Miy. t-
‘l WOULDNT BL
WITHOUT IT'
=s
B
m
FOWLERS
VACO 11 AN
BOTTLING
OUTFIT
if-fiouldhe m&Jety heme!
FOR ALL YOI
HOUSEHOLD
REQUIREMENT
Fowlers Outf
No. 1 Size :
No. 2 Size
FOWLERS BOTTLES IN ALL S
RINGS, COVERS, CUP
PLEASE ORDEF
NALLY WARE CANNISTERS 55/-,
NALLY CAKE BOXES
KENNET CARPET SWEEPERS 91
KITCHEN SCALES 23/6,32/6,41
GROUND BASE SAUCEPANS £lO/15/-, £l7/
Namco Pressure Cookers _ £6/18/6
Wringers _ £9/9/-
Dish Drainers __ 18/6
Glamor Cannisters 55/-
Pall Griddle Grills 19/6
I
WF AT SO STOCK


SAVORY CASSEROLE
Cut one and a half lbs. bladebone steak into
small pieces and roll in flour. Slice onion. Place
in a cup one dessertspoon of golden syrup, a tea-
spoon of vinegar, a teaspoon of Worcestershire
sauce, a tablespoon of tomato sauce and make up
to a full cup with hot water. Mix well, adding salt
and pepper to taste. Place steak, onion and liquid
in aluminium pudding basin. Cover with well-
fitting lid and cook as with the steak and celery
casserole. (See recipe following).
Mrs. R. F. Hyett
Bendigo.
STEAK AND CELERY CASSEROLE
One and a half lbs. bladebone steak, one onion,
small head celery.
Cut steak into small pieces and roll in flour
flavored with pepper and salt. Dice onion. String
and cut up celery. Place in aluminium pudding
basin until basin is full (this indicates the quan-
tity of celery required. NO LIQUID IS ADDED.
Place closely fitting lid on the basin and either
pressure cook for one hour or stand in a sauce-
pan of boiling water and allow to simmer for two
and a half hours. A rich gravy is formed. When
cooked, pour into entree dish and garnish with
green peas and rosettes of mashed creamed potato.
Mrs. R. F. Hyett
Bendigo.
STUFFED SAUSAGE ROLL
One and a half lb. sausage mince, one cup bread-
crumbs, one chopped onion, one chopped raw apple,
one tablespoon chopped parsley.
Flatten the meat on a sheet of greased paper to
form a long rectangle about half an inch thick.
Mix the other ingredients and spread evenly over
the meat. Roll up and pat it nicely into shape.
Then bake in fireproof dish In moderate even. When
cooked and brown (about 45 minutes), serve with
brown gravy or hot tomato sauce on a hot plate,
garnished with diced vegetables.
Mrs. G. Glover
Bendigo.
SZEGEDIN GULAS (CZECHOSLOVAKIA)
One and a half lbs. of gravy beef or pork, one
teaspoon of paprika, salt to taste, one large onion,
fat, one lb. sauerkraut, one cup of cream (sour
cream is best), one heaped tablespoon of flour.
Brown onion in the fat. Cut meat into inch
squares and add to onion. Sprinkle with paprika
and cook gently until juice evaporates. Cover with
hot water, add salt and cook until meat is soft.
Keep covered with water and put in sauerkraut.
Thicken with flour mixed to a smooth paste with
the cup of cream. Serve with slice of bread or
delicious Bohemian dumplings.
Bohemian Dumplings; Half lb. plain flour, half
lb. S.R. flour, salt to taste, one or two egg yolks, four
slices of bread cut into small squares.
Sieve flours with salt and mix all ingredients
together in order given. Mix with milk to smooth,
tough dough. Roll out on floured board in four
thin long rolls. Place in boiling water and cook
for 20 minutes. Cut into thin slices with a thread
to avoid sticking.
Eildon.
Mrs. Era M. Miniver
“TASTEE” CHOPS
One and a half lbs. of best neck chops, one large
onion, pepper and salt to taste.
Place chops in pie dish or casserole. Add finely
chopped onion and pour over following mixture:
One tablespoon plain flour, two tablespoons Wor-
cestershire sauce, one tablespoon vinegar and one
tablespoon sugar. Add enough water to cover chops.
Bake in a good oven for two hours and serve with
mashed potatoes and swedes.
Goomong.
Mrs. L. Eeles
TRIPE (A LA FRANCE)
Cut tripe in long fine strips and boil with onion
and salt. Drain well and have pan ready with hot
butter or good fat melted. Pry tripe quickly to a
golden brown with finely sliced onion. Drain off
excess fat and add a bottle of tomato puree or
serve with tomato sauce.
Bendigo East.
Miss Jean Osterlield


Wfestinghouse
YOUR BEST BUY
FOOD GRAFTER
£27/10/
Your Baking
Accessory
ENSURES PERFECTION.
MONA MASTER
Your Breakfast Accessory
*l2 Gns.
TERMS AVAILABLE.


FISH
PAGE
Delicious Pish Pie ~ 41
Lobster Cocktail (1) 41
Lobster Cocktail (2) 41
Lobster Cutlets 41
PAGE
Salmon Croquettes 41
Salmon Loaf 42
Salmon Pie 42
Salmon Shape .. 42
DELICIOUS FISH PIE.
Remove skin and bones and flake finely-cooked
cod or salmon. Put into a pan with three-quarters
of an oz. butter. Stir until mixed, then add one
gill of white sauce and one oz. grated cheese.
Season well and heat Line a pie dish with mashed
potatoes to which the yolk of an egg has been
added. Cover with alternate layers of sauce and
fish. Place a thick layer of potatoes on top, sprinkle
generously with grated cheese, dab a few pieces of
butter here and there and bake quickly in a hot
oven for 20 minutes.
Mrs. J. Svanosio
Bendigo.
LOBSTER COCKTAIL (1)
One cupful of lobster meat, half cup tomato
catsup, half teaspoon chopped chives, salt and
paprika to taste, juice of half a lemon, two tea-
spoons Worcestershire sauce, half teaspoon of
Tobasco (if this is not available use chilli sauce).
Flake lobster meat into a basin and add the other
ingredients. Mix all together lightly and serve
chilled in sundae glasses.
Mrs. H. T. Francis
Bendigo.
LOBSTER COCKTAIL (2)
One medium sized tin or a small lobster, one
tablespoon tomato catsup, one dessertspoon
lemon juice, salt to taste, and heart of a cabbage
lettuce.
See that the lobster is quite free of shell or bone.
Wash the lettuce heart and shake it dry. Shred
finely and put a little in each glass. Mix the catsup,
lemon juice and a sprinkling of salt with the lobster
pieces. Divide the mixture between the four glasses
and serve very cold.
If fresh lobster is used, arrange the tip of a claw
to stand upright in each glass, as a garnish.
Bendigo.
Mrs. Iris Burns
LOBSTER CUTLETS
One tin of lobster, one oz. butter or margarine,
one oz. flour, one gill cold water, salt and pepper to
taste, one pint aspic jelly.
Chop lobster finely. Melt the butter in sauce-
pan, stir in flour smoothly, then add the water and
stir until mixture boils. Add chopped lobster and
season with salt and pepper. Stir the mixture
over the Are for a few minutes, then turn on to a
plate and allow to cool. Divide into portions,
shape into cutlets and arrange on a dish. Melt
the aspic jelly and pour over the cutlets.' Leave
until cold and then cut out each cutlet with a sur-
round of jelly and serve on a bed of salad.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J. Svanosio
SALMON CROQUETTES.
Four cups of mashed potato (fairly dry), one half-
pound tin of salmon, one egg, two teaspoons anchovy
sauce, dried breadcrumbs.
Mash the potatoes well and beat In the salmon.
Mix well together then add sauce and yoke of egg,
salt and pepper to taste Whip white of egg to a
stiff froth (this gives a very stiff coating and saves
using a second egg). Take approximately one and a


half tablespoons of the mashed salmon and potato
mixture and form into sausage-like shapes three to
four Inches long. Roll in flour, dip into egg white,
and lastly roll in breadcrumbs. Allow to set for a
few minutes to prevent breaking and then fry in
the usual way. Serve with sliced lemon and salad.
Mrs. L. W. Galvin
Bendigo.
SALMON LOAF.
One lb. tin of salmon, one teaspoon dry mustard,
three-quarters oz. butter, four tablespoons vinegar,
a little cold water, dash of cayenne, one dessertspoon
flour, quarter oz. castor sugar, two beaten egg
yolks, half pint milk, quarter oz. gelatine, encumber
and beetroot to garnish.
Remove any skin and bones from salmon and
flake. Melt butter, sift flour, mustard, cayenne and
sugar. Stir into melted butter and milk and boil
for a few minutes. Cool, then add egg yolks. Turn
into top of a double saucepan and cook, stirring
constantly till thick. Cool. Stir in vinegar and
the gelatine dissolved in half a cup of hot water
and allow to cool. Before it begins to set, add
salmon. Mix well and pour into wet mould. When
set, turn out and serve garnished with overlapping
slices of cucumber and beetroot. Serves five or six
people.
Mrs. F. Turner, Bar Beach
Newcastle, N.S.W.
SALMON PIE
One cop breadcrumbs, two cups milk, two eggs,
pepper and salt, one small tin salmon.
801 l milk and pour over the breadcrumbs. Allow
to stand a while. Add beaten eggs, seasoning and
mashed salmon. Place mixture into a greased
dish, stand in dish of water and bake in a moderate
oven for about one hour, until firm.
Kangaroo Flat,
Mrs. E. C. Krieger
SALMON SHAPE.
Take a tin of salmon, turn into a strainer and
allow all the oil to drain off. Turn on to a plate
and remove all bones and skin. Break into very
small pieces with a fork, then add four tablespoons
fresh breadcrumbs, two eggs (yolks and whites
beaten separately). Beat the yolks of the
eggs with the breadcrumbs and fish and then
add the egg whites, pepper and salt to
taste and a dash of lemon juice. Place in a but-
tered mould and steam for three-quarters of an
hour. The oil previously drained from the salmon
makes a tasty sauce with a little tomato sauce,
butter, cornflour, salt and pepper to taste, added.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J. Svanosio


PAGE
Biscuits (Plain or Cheese) 43
Cheese Balls 43
Cheese and Onion Curls 43
Chicken Patties 43
Egg Puffs 43
Foundation Pastry lor Savory Boats .... 43
Hot Prune Savory 44
Mayonnaise 44
Sardine Canapes 44
Sardine Tartare 44
SAVORIES
...SNACKS
PAGE
Sausage Rolls 44
Savory Appetisers 44
Six-way Savory Boats 44
Savory Filling .. 44
Savory Puffs 45
Savory Tarts 4$
Tasty Sandwiches 4$
Tomatoes with Egg Filling (Holland) .... 46
White Sauce 45
BISCUITS (PLAIN OR CHEESE)
Half lb. flour, sifted with salt and pepper 10
taste. Rub into flour one heaped tablespoon or
butter. Make a well in centre of mixture and in it
put a teaspoonful of baking powder. Break an
egg into the well and mix the egg and baking pow-
der well together then gradually work in the flour
until a smooth paste is formed. Roll and cut into
biscuits, some round, some finger shape. Bake in
a quick oven for 10 minutes.
For cheese biscuits add as much cheese as desired
to the flour and, if paste is too stiff, add a small
quantity of milk. Use biscuits as savory bases.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
Eaglehawk.
CHEESE BALLS.
Three oz. S.B. flour, little salt and cayenne, two
oz. butter, two oz. grated cheese.
Melt butter, put in dry ingredients and mix. Roll
dough into balls. Toss into coconut and cook
for 15 to 20 minutes on greased tray. These savory
little cheese bolls will keep well in an airtight tin.
Mrs. H. Lyne
Bendigo.
CHEESE AND ONION CURLS.
Eight oz. flour, one egg yolk, three oz. lard, three
oz. margarine, squeeze of lemon juice, quarter pint
water.
Sift flour, break fat into lumps and mix to soft
dough with water and egg yolk and lemon juice.
Turn on to floured board and roll and fold into
three. Turn with fold to left always and roll and
fold four or five times.
Mix two oz. grated cheese, one small onion (grat-
ed) and one egg yolk, lemon juice and chopped
parsley. Spread on rolled pastry. Roll up and
cut like a Swiss roll and bake in brisk oven.
Mrs. G. Glover
Bendigo.
CHICKEN PATTIES.
Patty cases, one cup milk (bare), one heaped
dessertspoon flour, three oz. cold chicken, one or
two oz. ham, one oz. butter, one tablespoon cream,
squeeze lemon juice, finely chopped parsley, salt
and pepper.
Mince chicken and ham finely together. Melt
butter in a saucepan, add flour, and, using wooden
spoon, blend well over fire. Remove and add milk
gradually. Stirring all the time over a low heat,
boil the mixture for two minutes. Cool. Add the
creamed chicken and ham, mix well and season
with salt and pepper to taste. Add lemon juice
and about a dessertspoonful of finely chopped pars-
ley. Fill patty cases with mixture, set tops in
position and place on slide and heat in oven.
Mrs. G Wilkinson-Stewart
Eaglehawk.
EGG PUFFS.
Halve some hard-boiled eggs lengthwise. Dip
them in melted butter on a plate, and sprinkle them
with a mixture of finely-chopped parsley, a little
thyme, grated lemon rind, a few chopped capers,
a pinch of nutmeg, pepper and salt. Then roll
out some scraps of pastry very thinly and cut out
two ovals for each half egg. Place one under
and one over each piece, and pinch the edges to-
gether. Brush the puffs over with a little milk
or beaten egg, and sprinkle them with finely-grated
cheese. Bake in a good oven until brown and crisp.
Kangaroo Flat.
Mrs. A. Kingerlee
FOUNDATION PASTRY FOR SAVORY BOATS
Four oz. sifted flour, two tablespoons grated
cheese, pinch cayenne, half teaspoon salt, half
teaspoon mustard, one oz. butter, one egg yolk
and a little water.
Mix in usual way. Knead slightly and roll out
thinly. Line boat-shaped tins. Prick well all


over and bake in a moderate oven for 10 to 15 min-
utes. These shells may be stored for some time
in an air-tight tin. When required fill with one of
the following fillings:—
Diced lobster, flavored with lemon juice, salt
and cayenne and bound with white sauce or mayon-
naise and garnished with slices of lemon.
Cooked brains, add salt, cayenne and nutmeg and
bind with white sauce. Garnish with sprigs of
parsley.
Whitebait flavored with lemon juice, bound with
white sauce or mayonnaise. Garnish with lemon
slices or shredded lettuce.
Mushrooms, fried in butter, flavored with salt,
pepper and lemon juice, bound with white sauce.
Garnish with sprigs of parsley.
Minced chicken, grilled bacon with salt and
cayenne flavoring, bound with white sauce. Gar-
nish with parsley or cress.
Mrs G. Wilkinson-Stewart
Eaglehawk.
HOT PRUNE SAVORY
Remove the stones from dessert prunes and w.rap
each prune in a fine strip of bacon. Fix with a tooth
pick and fry. Devilled almonds may be added to
the prunes before wrapping in the bacon. These
are ideal for a buffet party or as an appetiser.
Miss Jean Osterfield
Bendigo East.
MAYONNAISE
One teaspoon mixed mustard, one level table-
spoonful of sugar, dash of cayenne pepper, one level
teaspoon of salt, two well-beaten eggs, quarter cup
of vinegar, quarter cup of water, one tablespoon
melted butter.
Combine Ingredients in order given above. Beat
well before cooking slowly over boiling water unto
mixture coats the spoon.
Mrs. H. Hyden
Golden Square
SARDINE CANAPES.
Spread round croutons with sardines rubbed to
a pgste with Worcestershire sauce and a little cay-
enne. Place in centre of each a stuffed olive made by
removing stone and filling cavity with sardine mix-
ture. Around olive arrange a border of finely
chopped white of hard-boiled egg.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
Eaglehawk.
SARDINE TARTARS.
Place a sardine on a finger-shaped crouton, coat
with tartare sauce (mayonnaise to which chopped
parsley, gherkins and capers have been added).
Decorate with rings of olive and sprinkle centre
with a little paprika.
Mrs G. Wilkinson-Stewart
Eaglehawk
SAUSAGE ROLLS.
When making sausage rolls try them this way.
Use half lb. sausage mince, half cup water, half tea-
spoon nutmeg and chopped parsley. Bring first
to boil. Allow to cool before making rolls in the
usual way.
Mrs. G. Glover
Bendigo.
SAVORY APPETISERS.
Use puff paste as a basis for hot savories, or
fried bread (fried in butter), plain wholemeal bread
cat into rounds and fingers and buttered, hot toast,
or an unsweetened shortbread pastry.
Fillings: Oysters mixed with white sauce and
chopped parsley; any fish, sardines, whitebait, sal-
mon, cooked, flaked and mixed with white sauce;
ham flavored with gherkin or capers, onions, olives
or pickled walnuts and bound with cream whipped
firm and spiced with a dash of cayenne. Try also
puff pastry shapes with the white of a hard-boiled
egg combined with cream, seasoned with salt and
pepper. Spread on top and decorate with grated
yolk of egg.
OR —Wainut, celery and apple bound with whip-
ped cream.
Buttered biscuits topped with a slice of tomato
and grated cheese and heated.
Buttered biscuits split and filled with a layer
of whipped cream and cheese, topped with cream
sprinkled with walnuts.
Eaglehawk
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
SIX-WAY SAVORY BOATS.
Blend together four oz. flour, one-and-a-half
teaspoons grated cheese, pinch cayenne, pinch salt,
quarter teaspoon mustard. Rub in one oz. butter
and make into a paste with one egg yolk and a little
water. Knead slightly, roll out thinly and line
boat-shaped patty tins.
Bake a golden brown in a moderate oven for 15
minutes. The cases should be pricked well before
baking.
Pill with the following fillings, preparing a few of
each for added variety:
Flaked salmon or whitebait flavored with lemon
juice and cayenne, bound together with white sauce
to which a little curry powder has been added.
Chopped ham, gherkins and French mustard,
mixed.
Few olives, prawns, cream cheese, red capsicum
mixed together with a little mayonnaise.
Cooked brains (mock oysters) with salt, cay-
enne, nutmeg flavoring, bound with white sauce.
Tinned crab, flavored with lemon juice, salt and
cayenne, bound with mayonnaise.
Diced pineapple, grated carrot, chopped salted
peanuts, with a mayonnaise made with lemon
juice, condensed milk, salt, pepper and mustard to
suit taste.
Golden Square.
Mrs. V Morey
SAVORY FILLING.
One carrot, boiled and diced, one small onion,
diced, two or three hard-boiled eggs, diced, six ok.
cooked ham, chopped finely, one tablespoon cooked
green peas, one teaspoon lemon juice, one pickled
cucumber, gherkin, one cup of mayonnaise.
Mix all well together, then it is ready to serve.
Note: When making the full quantity of savory
filling, use a cup-and-a-half of mayonnaise instead
of the one cupful stated in the recipe. Keep in an
airtight jar in the refrigerator.
The savory mixture can'be heaped on circles of
buttered bread or put in pastry cases or on but-
tered biscuits. Top with round of gherkin or a
black cherry, in season.
Golden Square.
Mrs. H. Hyden


SAVORY PUFFS.
Sift together two oz. flour with pinch of salt.
Place in a saucepan one oz. butter and three-
quarters gill of water (about seven tablespoons) and
two eggs. Throw flour into saucepan with water
and butter and stir over fire until mixture is one
thick lump. Cool slightly, add eggs and beat well
Into mixture. Put small teaspoonsful on a wet
tray and bake in a hot oven for 15 or 20 minutes. Do
not open the oven door for the first seven minutes.
.Fillings: Diced lobster flavored with lemon juice,
salt and cayenne and bound with white sauce or
mayonnaise.
Chopped ham, gherkins and French mustard
mixed well together.
Asparagus tips cut into small pieces in white
sauce, flavored with lemon juice, salt and cayenne,
bound with white sauce to which one teaspoon of
curry powder has been added.
Mrs. G, Wilkinson-Stewart
Eaglehawk.
SAVORY TARTS.
Short paste, bacon, onion, cheese, custard.
Short paste. For this you’ll need one pound of
flour, half pound of lard, one teaspoon of baking
powder, a pinch of salt. Sift flour, baking powder
and salt and rub in lard. Roll out thinly and cut
to line deep patty pans. Fill as follows:
Savory Pilling: Cut or mince bacon, chop onion
very finely, grate cheese.
Make a custard with one egg and one cup of
milk. Salt to taste.
Pill lined patty pans with cut bacon and onions.
Cover the mixture with about one tablespoonful of
custard and sprinkle thickly with grated cheese.
Bake until golden brown and the custard is set.
Serve hot.
Mrs. F. T. Amer
Bendigo.
TASTY SANDWICHES.
Sandwiches can be a bore, or they can be excit-
ing. Tempt your guests with some of these unusual
sandwich fillings.
Grated cheese, diced celery and chopped walnuts
mixed together with a little cream or dressing.
Honey and chopped nuts on brown bread.
Seeded raisins, finely chopped mixed with chop-
ped apple, pineapple and nuts.
Strawberries (sliced) and cream spread on brown
bread.
Curried eggs and chopped olives.
Almonds, walnuts and brazil nuts pounded to-
gether with a spoonful of cream, pinch of cayenne
and a grating of nutmeg added.
Cut very thin slices of bread, four slices put to-
gether and cut in diamond shapes; the bread is
spread in layers, with the following mixtures
green butter: One tablespoon butter creamed with
chopped parsley or mashed spinach to color; red
butter: Anchovy sauce creamed with tablespoon of
butter.
Prince of Wales Sandwiches; Three thin slices of
white or brown bread, buttered and spread as fol-
lows:
First slice: Finely chopped ham and a little
mustard.
Second slice: Placed on top with buttered side" next
to the ham. Butter top and spread with layer of
finely chopped hard-boiled eggs, moistened with
cream, seasoned with salt and pepper and sprinkled
with finely chopped parsley.
Third slice: Buttered and placed on top. Cut
whole into fingers and garnish with shredded let-
tuce.
Eaglehawk
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
TOMATOES WITH EGG FILLING (HOLLAND)
Four large firm tomatoes, three eggs, one table-
spoon of margarine, butter or cream, one small
teaspoon of salt, pinch of Pepper, half a teaspoon
of sugar, and, if liked, a little vinegar.
Cook the eggs for four minutes. Peel off shells
and rub the eggs down with a fork. Mix with them
the salt, pepper, sugar and melted butter, margar-
ine or cream. Cut the tomatoes into halves and
hollow them out. Pill with the savory egg filling
and arrange on a bed of lettuce leaves. The scoop-
ed out portion of tomatoes may be used in soup.
Bendigo.
Mrs. S. L. Lerk
WHITE SAUCE
Melt in a saucepan one tablespoon butter, add
two tablespoons flour, stir till smooth and cook
one minute. Add quarter to half a pint of milk
and stir until it boils. Cook for two minutes and
flavor to taste. Cream may be added to make the
sauce rich. Use as a basis for fillings.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. G. Wilkinson-Stewart
DO’S AND DON'TS
(For Sandwich Makers).
Trim sandwich crusts off with sharp scissors.
When cutting new bread, use a knife which has been dipped in hot water
for neat sandwiches.
Always spread inside of slices of bread for sandwiches with butter.
When you want to use seasoning for sandwiches mix it with the butter oi
margarine.
If you are going to keep sandwiches, wrap them in damp cloth or in a
plastic bag, and they will be just as fresh when you open them up.
Use a palette knife for spreading Sandwiches. It saves times.
Use as many different types of bread as possible Brown, white, wholemeal,
French, poppy-seed.
Mrs. R. Robbins
Bendigo.


FOR BETTER
COOKING
ONLY GAS GIVES \
Top Speed
Lower Costs
Perfect Control
Quality Co<
IN FACT
GAS is best for the
4 BIG JOBS
Automatic Cooking. Silent Refrigeration.
Instant Hot Water. Healthful Heating.
INSPECT THE DISPLAY OF MODERN
GAS APPLIANCES AT THE


MEATLESS
DISHES...
PAGE
Cauliflower With A Difference 47
Maltese Curry 47
Macaroni Special 47
Mock Sausages 47
Onion Flan 47
PAGE
Spanish Rice 47
Spinach with Glamor 48
Spinach Pie 48
Toads in a Hole 48
Vegetarian Sausage 48
CAULIFLOWER WITH A DIFFERENCE
To cook cauliflower in a different, delicious way,
boil the required quantity until tender. Have ready
a butter sauce. (To make the sauce, brown the
flour and butter in a saucepan, then add milk to
make it a nice smooth consistency). Mix in the
cauliflower with two or three eggs, three oz. chop-
ped cooked ham, pepper and salt to.taste. Turn
into a greased pie dish and top generously with
Shredded cheese. Bake until the cheese is a deep,
appetising brown. Serve very hot.
Mrs. H. Hyden
Golden Square.
MALTESE CURRY
Half lb. tomatoes, half lb. macaroni, half lb.
onions, butter the size of an egg, and pepper and
salt to taste.
Have the macaroni nicely boiled in salted water.
Heat the butter in a frying pan and cook the onions
which have been peeled and sliced. Do not brown
them. Cut tomatoes and fry gently with the onions.
When cooked, add macaroni and season with pep-
per and salt. Serve very hot.
Mrs. J. Svanosio
Bendigo.
MACARONI SPECIAL
Four oz. macaroni, two oz. mushrooms, one rasher
bacon, half oz. butter or margarine, half oz. flour,
half pint milk, pepper, salt, half teaspoon made
mustard, three oz. grated cheddar cheese.
Cook macaroni in boiling salted water until soft.
Strain and chop. Pare, trim and chop mushrooms;
remove rind from bacon and chop. Gently fry
mushrooms and bacon in the fat until soft, and stir
in flour. Cook for a minute or two; add milk
gradually. Stir and cook until smooth. Season and
add mustard. Mix cooked macaroni into this sauce
and transfer to fireproof dish. Sprinkle with grated
cheese and brown under grill. Serve at once, gar-
nished with parsley.
Mrs. R. Robbins
Bendigo.
MOCK SAUSAGES
Boil one cup of oatmeal in two and a half cups
of salted water, for 15 minutes. Mix in one or two
chopped onions. Allow to cool, then mix in one
cup of breadcrumbs, a pinch of seasoning, and beat
in one or two eggs. Form into patties and roll in
flour. Fry a golden brown in boiling fat. Serve
with rich, brown gravy. Serves six people.
Long Gully.
Mrs. G. Kupka
ONION FLAN
Pastry: Half lb. flour, three oz. margarine, one
uS. finely grated Cheddar cheese, water to mix.
Filling: Three large onions, half oz. butter, margar-
ine or good dripping, one breakfast cup milk, two
eggs, salt and pepper, one rasher bacon (optional).
Sieve flour and lightly rub in fat. Mix in grated
cheese and add sufficient cold water to make a
pliable dough. 801 l out on floured board and line
a greased flan or sandwich tin or fireproof plate
with pastry. Peel and chop onions. Put in covered
pan with fat; cook over gentle heat without brown-
ing for about 10 minutes. Drain off surplus fat, and
spread onions over pastry base. Beat eggs into ralik
and season well. (If adding bacon, remove rind
and cut into small pieces). Pour over onions. Bake
in a moderately hot oven for 20 minutes, then at
a cooler temperature for another 10 to 20 minutes,
or until pastry is cooked through and filling golden-
brown. Serve hot or cold.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. Robbins
SPANISH RICE
Pry six slices of chopped bacon. Remove the
bacon and drain some of the fat away. Add quarter
cup chopped onion and quarter cup chopped green
pepper to pan and cook slowly until onion is soft
and yellow. Add two cups tinned tomatoes and
three cups cooked rice, pepper and salt and the
cooked bacon. Place all in a greased casserole and
bake in a moderate oven for half an hour. Grated
cheese sprinkled on top Improves the flavor.
White Hills.
Mrs. K. Kerr


SPINACH WITH GLAMOR
Select tender leaves of spinach or silver beet.
Chop roughly and boil five minutes. Then put
leaves through a mincer. Have ready the butter
sauce (see under “Cauliflower With A Difference”),
break in two or three eggs, season with salt,
pepper and mixed herbs to taste, add silver
beet or spinach and simmer gently for about
10 minutes. Serve piping hot as a vegetable, or on
toast as a tasty snack.
Mrs. H. Hyden
Golden Square.
SPINACH PIE (GREECE)
Two bunches silver beet or spinach, one cup
grated cheese, six eggs, salt, pepper to taste, quar-
ter lb. butter, small bunch spring onions and one
and a half lbs. puff pastry.
Wash silver beet well, cutting off stalks. Use
only the green and steam it in a saucepan together
with the finely cut onions. When silver beet is
nearly cooked, strain off the juice. Place the silver
beet in a bowl and mix in cheese, eggs, salt, pepper
and melted butter. Mix well together. Have the
meat dish ready lined with the puff pastry. Spread
in the mixture, then cover with pastry as for an
apple pie. Beat egg and brush over top of pie.
Then cut the top slightly into diamond shapes and
cook in medium oven for half an hour or a little
longer. Spinach pie can be served hot or cold.
Bendigo.
Mrs. K. Fappos.
TOADS IN A HOLE
A medium-sized potato, one egg, salt, pepper,
walnut of butter and dash of tomato sauce for each
serve.
Scrub potatoes in jackets and bake in a moderate
oven on a tray. When cooked, remove the top of
potato (just enough to hold egg) and pop in a fried
or poached egg. Season with salt, pepper and but-
ter and a dash of tomato sauce and replace top
of potato. Serve hot.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J. Svanosio
VEGETARIAN SAUSAGE
One pint butter beans, one egg, quarter lb. bread-
crumbs, one teaspoon herbs.
Soak beans and boll. Mince the beans when
cooked and mash and add half the breadcrumbs,
herbs, pepper and salt te taste and half the egg.
Mix well and shape. Roll in the remainder of egg
and breadcrumbs and fry a nice brown.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J. Svanosio
AVOID WASTE
(Select Fresh Vegetables and Fruit)
Apples: Good color usually indicates full flavor.
Asparagus: Stalks should be tender and Arm, tips should be close and compact.
Choose the stalks with very little white —they are more tender.
Bananas: Buy brown speckled ones for immediate consumption. If green, keep
at room temperature until yellow and speckled. To prevent them from turning dark
when sliced in advance of eating, dip in citrus fruit juice.
Beans: Snap one. Those with small seeds inside the pods are best. Avoid beans
with dry-looking pods.
Berries: Select plump solid berries with good color. Avoid stained containers,
indicating wet or leaky berries. Berries such as blackberries and raspberries with
clinging caps may be underripe. Strawberries with clinging caps may be underripe.
Strawberries without caps may be too ripe.
Cauliflower: Flower clusters on cauliflower should be tight and close together.
Cabbage and Head Lettuce: Choose heads heavy for size. Avoid cabbage with
worm holes, lettuce with discoloration.
Cucumbers: Choose long, slender, dark green cucumbers for best quality.
Melons: In cantaloups, thick close netting on the rind indicates best quality.
Cantaloups are ripe when the stem scar is smooth and space between the netting
is yellow or yellow-green. They are best to eat when fully ripe with fruity odor. Ripe
watermelons have some yellow color on one s ; de. If melons are white or pale green
on one side, they are not ripe.
Onions: Size and color do not affect flavor or quality. Avoid onions with wet
necks. The Bermuda and Spanish types are milder than the very hard, long-keeping
varieties.
Oranges, Grapefruit and Lemons: Choose these heavy for their size. Smoother,
thinner skins usually indicate more juice. Avoid'citrus fruits showing withered, sunken,
or soft areas.
Peaches: Best to buy when firm, not bruised, and showing no green color.
Pears: Some pears, especially winter varieties, are marketed when slightly under-
ripe and need to be ripened at home, at room temperature. Pears are ripe and ready
to eat when they are slightly soft at stem end.
Potatoes: Avoid potatoes with wasteful deep eyes. Potatoes with green skins may
be bitter. Cook potatoes whenever possible in jackets to preserve minerals and
vitamins.
Root Vegetables: Should be smooth and firm. Very large carrots may have woody
cores, oversized radishes may be pithy, oversized turnips, beets and parsnips may be
woody. Fresh carrot tops usually mean fresh carrots, but condition of leaves on most
other root vegetables does not indicate degree of freshness.


DESSERTS—Hot
—And Cold
HOT DESSERTS
PAGE
Apple and Lemon Plan 50
Apple Scallop 50
Banana Popovers 50
Boston Pudding 50
Baked Caramel Pudding 50
Chocolate Cream Pie 50
Chocolate Pudge Pudding 50
Chocolate Steamed Pudding with
Orange and Lemon Sauce 50
Christmas Pudding 51
Coconut Pudding 51
Crumbletop Pudding 51
Delicious Tart 51
Finnish Apple Pudding 51
Ginger Pudding 51
Golden Dumplings 51
Golden Pudding 51
Golden Syrup Puffs 51
Jean Pudding (No Eggs) 53
Lemon Delicious Pudding 53
Lemon Meringue Pie 53
Lemon Pie 53
Lemon Sponge Castles 53
Plum Pudding 53
Plum Pudding or Cake 53
Plum Pudding (with Cold Tea) 53
Plum Pudding (Easy) 53
Plum Pudding (topped with Ice Cream) .. 54
Sponge Roly Poly 54
Steamed Pudding 54
Steamed Banana and Raisin Pudding .... 54
Syrup Dumplings 64
Syrup Pudding 54
COLD DESSERTS
PAGE
Angel Food 54
Apple Blossom Pie 54
Banana Marshmallow 54
Dutch Apple Meringue 54
Ice Cream (1) 55
Ice Cream (2) 55
Ice Cream Butterscotch 55
” ” Fruit Salad 55
” ” Delicious With 55
Lemon and Passionfruit Dessert 55
Mixed Fruit Tart 56
Orange Delight 56
Orange Souffle 55
Passionfruit Sweet 57
Pineapple Fluff 57
Pineapple Shortcake 57
Pineapple Sponge 57
Strawberry Delight 57
Strawberry Ice Cream Royale 57
Strawberry Marshmallow Dessert 57
Uncooked Sweet 57
To Blanch Nuts: Shell and put In boiling
water for two minutes. Skin slips off easily if
nut is pressed between thumb and index linger.
To Slice or Shred Nuts; Cover shelled nuts
with cold water and bring slowly to a boil.
Simmer 1 minute. Drain, pat dry and slice.
Will not crumble. Use when dry.
To Toast Nuts: Place in shallow pan and
hake in hot oven 20 minutes or until shells are
lightly browned. Shake pan occasionally to toast
evenly. Cool and shell.
To prevent nuts from sinking to bottom of
cake or custard, toast and roll lightly in flour
before adding to batter or custard.


HOT DESSERTS
APPLE AND LEMON FLAN
One pastry case made from either short crust
or puff paste; pne ripe apple, one lemon, one egg
one small cup of sugar.
Slice the raw apple very thinly. Mix together
the Juice of the lemon, beaten egg and sugar. Pour
this mixture lightly over the apple, arranged in
the pastry case, and fork the sliced apple into
position.
Cook in a moderate oven until 'the lemon filling
is firm and the apple is cooked. Serve warm, topped
with whipped cream.
Mrs. O. Goddard
Bendigo.
APPLE SCALLOP
Six green apples, six tablespoons sugar, half tea-
spoon cinnamon, one and a half cups breadcrumbs,
two tablespoons butter or substitute, one tablespoon
brown sugar, half cup water, one teaspoon lemon
juice.
Mix breadcrumbs and brown sugar together, fry
in butter until light brown and crisp. Peel, core
and slice apples. Place a layer of apples in thickly
greased dish, sprinkle with cinnamon and sugar
mixed together, then with fried crumbs. Repeat
until apples and crumbs are all used. Mix water
and lemon juice, pour carefully down side of dish.
Bake in moderate oven until apples are tender.
About three-quarters of an hour.
Mrs. D. Martin
Bendigo.
BANANA POPOVERS
Mix together one cupful of flour with one cupful
of milk, one unbeaten egg and a pinch of salt. Stir
thoroughly, using a wooden spoon. Butter some
cups and place them in the oven; and when hiss-
ing hot, pour in the batter, fill each cup half tv
Drop into each a piece of banana. Bake in a hot
oven until puffed and golden brown, then cover
with paper and finish baking.
Mrs. A. Kingrerlee
Kangaroo Flat.
BOSTON PUDDING
One and a half cups plain flour and pinch of
salt, half cnp sugar, one cup seeded raisins, one
cup milk, quarter lb. butter or good dripping, quar-
ter teaspoon nutmeg, one teaspoon soda.
Mix flour and sugar, then rubb in butter. Add
fruit, nutmeg and salt. Dissolve soda in milk and
add to the mixture. Place in basin and
steam for three hours. Serve with milk sauce or
thin boiled custard flavored with essence of vanilla.
Mrs. S. M. Weeks
Bendigo.
BAKED CARAMEL PUDDING
Third cnp white sugar, quarter cup cold water,
quarter cup boiling water, one and a half cups milk,
one cup stale breadcrumbs, two eggs (separate the
whites), half teaspoon vanilla, two ounces grated
chocolate or two full dessertspoons of cocoa, pinch
salt.
Caramelise the sugar and cold water in a sauce-
pan, stirring all the time until mixture becomes a
golden brown (the color of golden syrup). Add
boiling water and stir well until sugar is completely
dissolved. Cool and add milk and breadcrumbs.
Cover and leave stand for half an hour. Beat egg
yolks together with vanilla and salt and add to
milk mixture. Turn into a well-greased pie dish
and bake three-quarters of an hour or until quite
set.
Make a meringue with the egg whites and beat in
two tablespoons of brown sugar and grated choco-
late. Pile on top of custard and bake in moderate
oven until set.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J. Plim
CHOCOLATE CREAM PIE
(Serve Hot or Cold)
Basic recipe for pastry cases. The mixture makes
three cases. Four os. B.R. floor, four os. plain
flour, pinch of salt, four oz. butter, two tablespoons
sugar, one egg yolk, three tablespoons milk.
Sift the dry ingredients twice. Rub In butter,
add sugar. Mix to a dry dough with beaten egg
yolk and milk. Turn on to a floured board, knead
lightly. Roll out thinly. Prick all over with a fork.
Bake about 15 minutes in a moderate oven.
Chocolate Filling for Tart: One heaped dessert-
spoon butter, one tablespoon flour, two tablespoons
sugar, three oz. grated dark chocolate or three des-
sertspoons cocoa, one and three - quarter cups milk,
one egg, pinch salt.
Melt butter, add flour, stir well and cook two or
three minutes without browning. Add milk and
sugar, stir until mixture boils. Fold in grated
chocolate, or cocoa blended with little extra milk,
salt end beaten egg yolk. Pill into cooked pastry
case. Top with egg-white beaten with two extra
tablespoons of sugar, as a meringue, or decorate
with whipped cream.
East Bendigo.
Mrs. G. Hudson
CHOCOLATE FUDGE PUDDING
Sift one cup SIR. flour, three-quarters cup sugar,
one and a half teaspoons salt, two level tablespoons
cocoa, into a basin. Add two tablespoons melted
butter, half cup milk and a few drops of vanilla.
Mix all well together. Place in a greased pie dish
and sprinkle three-quarters cup sugar and one and
a half tablespoons of cocoa on top. Pour one-
and-a-half cups of hot water over the mixture. Bake
from 30 to 40 minutes in a moderate oven. When
cooked, this pudding is floating in a delicious choco-
late sauce. It is very rich and the quantity of cocoa
could be reduced if desired.
Bendigo.
Mrs. B. Eskdale
CHOCOLATE STEAMED PUDDING WITH
ORANGE AND LEMON SAUCE
One egg, half cnp sugar, one cnp S.R. flour, two
oz. butter, four teaspoons cocoa, half teaspoon van-
illa, half cup milk.
Cream butter and sugar, add eggs and mix well.
Sift flour and cocoa alternately with milk, add
vanilla. Steam one and a quarter hours.
Orange and Lemon Sauce: Take juice and grated
rind of one lemon, juice and grated rind of one
orange, two eggs, one-third cup sugar, salt. Sepa-
rate yolks from whites of eggs. Combine fruit
juices and rinds with sugar, salt and egg yolks.
Place in saucepan over low heat and stir gently
until thickened. Pour slowly over beaten egg whites.
Blend well.
Mrs. F. S. Hewitt
Bendigo.


CHRISTMAS PUDDING
One gill brandy, one lb. currants, one lb. sul-
tanas, one lb. raisins, half lb. peel, half lb. sugar,
half lb. plain flour, quarter lb. dried breadcrumbs,
few drops almond essence, two teaspoons cinna-
mon, two teaspoons nutmegs (grated), half lb.
grated suet, four tablespoons powdered milk; six
eggs, half cup water into which a teaspoon of car-
bonate of soda has been added.
Rub suet into flour sifted with powdered milk,
add breadcrumbs, sugar, spice and fruit, which has
been thoroughly cleaned and dried. Mix well to-
gether. Beat eggs well and add them to the brandy,
Stir well into other Ingredients and lastly, add
water and carbonate of soda. Mix all ingredients
well together. Pour into a well-greased mould or
into a dry, floured pudding cloth. Tie firmly and
plunge into boiling water to cook for six hours.
When cooked, stand in a cool, dry place until re-
quired. Care should be taken to keep the quantity
of boiling water in the saucepan and not allow it
to go off the boil When required, boil for two
hours longer. Serve with flaming brandy sauce or
hard sauce.
Flaming Brandy Sauce: Cook one cup of sugar
in half a cup of water until dark. Add two tea-
spoons of lemon Juice, half cup brandy, pour over
pudding and set alight before serving.
Hard Sauce: Half lb. icing sugar, quarter lb. but-
ter, flavoring, brandy, rum or vanilla.
Rub the icing sugar through a fine sieve. Beat
butter with half the sugar until creamed, then add
the remainder of the sugar and beat again. Flavor
with vanilla or a little rum or brandy.
Mrs. F. Turner Bar Beach
Newcastle, N.S.W.
COCONUT PUDDING
Half cup breadcrumbs, half cup moist coconut,
three tablespoons sugar, one tablespoon melted but-
ter, one egg and a pinch of salt.
Soak breadcrumbs and coconut in the milk for a
few minutes. Separate egg. Beat yolk, then add
sugar, salt and melted butter. Mix well and add to
milk mixture. Beat egg white stiffly and fold in to
mixture. Pour into a greased oven dish, set in a
pan of hot water and bake in a moderate oven (350
deg.) for 45 minutes. Serves four.
Mrs. H. Hyden
Golden Square.
CRUMBLETOP PUDDING
To beat the clock and make every member of the
family happy, simply top an oven dish filled with
hot stewed fruit with the following mixture: —Two
oz. margarine creamed with half cup sugar and half
teaspoon each vanilla and nutmeg and mixed with
a beaten egg and two cups of cornflakes. Bake for
about half-an-hour in a moderate oven.
Mrs. H. Beckerleg
Quarry Hill.
DELICIOUS TART.
Quarter lb. butter, three-quarters cup sugar, half
lb. S.R. flour, two eggs, pinch of salt, one lb. apples,
four bananas, four passion fruit, one dessertspoon
castor sugar.
Sift flour, add sugar and salt, rub in butter, add
yolks of eggs, well beaten, roll out on well-floured
board and cut into shape of deep tart plate. Bake
until a nice golden brown.
Cook apples with little sugar until tender. Place
on top of tart, then add bananas, thinly sliced and
squeeze of passion fruit on top.
Beat whites of eggs with castor sugar, till very
stiff. Pile on top of fruit and return to oven for
three or four minutes. Serve with whipped cream.
Golden Square.
Mrs V. Morey
FINNISH APPLE PUDDING.
One large cup stewed apples, two tablespoons but-
ter, two cups milk, three tablespoons sugar, five
tablespoons flour, half teaspoon finely grated lemon
rind, three eggs, pinch salt.
Melt butter in saucepan, add milk and sugar and
let come to boil. While still boiling, whisk in flour
gradually and cook three minutes, stirring all the
time. Put into a basin and cool. Separate yolks
from whites of eggs, and beat whites until stiff, with
salt. Stir in yolks one at a time into cooled milk
mixture and then fold in beaten whites. Pour
into a buttered pie dish and bake in moderate
oven Just before pudding is finished spread over
stewed apple and sprinkle with brown sugar. Re-
turn to oven and finish baking for a few minutes.
Bendigo.
Mrs. F. S. Hewitt
GINGER PUDDING.
(COOKED IN PRESSURE COOKER).
Two tablespoons butter, two tablespoons golden
syrup, half teaspoon carbonate of soda, dissolved
in half cup milk, half teaspoon ginger, one cup S.R~
flour and three cups water for pressure cooker.
Beat butter and syrup together. Add milk and
soda, then dry Ingredients (sifted). Pour into
greased bowl or basin but do not cover. Add water
to cooker, add rack and place bowl on rack. Cover
cooker and steam without indicator, on a low heat,
for 40 minutes.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. Houston
GOLDEN DUMPLINGS.
Place the following in a saucepan: two large
tablespoons golden syrup, one heaped dessertspoon
butter, quarter cup sugar and a large cup of water.
When boiling, add the following mixture, made into
dumplings.
Dumplings: One cup SR. flour, one dessertspoon
butter, rubbed in, one egg, a little milk. Beat egg
in cup and add milk until cup is full. Mix Into
flour and butter. Form into dumplings and boil
for 20 minutes in the syrup with the lid on. Serve
with cream. Quickly made, when lifted out, the
dumplings have the syrup clinging over them like
soft jelly and can be cooked while the first course
is being eaten.
Golden Square.
Mrs. V. Morey
GOLDEN PUDDING.
Two tablespoons butter, two tablespoons golden
syrup. Melt together in saucepan and add three-
quarters cup milk, half medium teaspoon of car-
bonate of soda and pinch of salt. Sift into mixture
one large cup S.R. flour and steam in greased mould
for one-and-a-half hours. Serve with caramel
sauce.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. Houston
GOLDEN SYRUP PUFFS.
One egg, one cup S.R. flour, one cup sugar, one
tablespoon golden syrup
Put Into saucepan two cups water and good taWe


Good Recipes
WILL BE BETTER
IF YOUR
KITCHEN
IS MADE
BEAUTIFUL
With
FITTINGS
FROM
HUME & ISER EK:
STAINLESS STEEL SINKS and CABINETS.
STOVES (Best Makes) - FUEL - COMBUSTION.
TABLE and BENCHTOPS in HORNITEX and LAM IN EX
In Beautiful Shades to Suit Your Color Scheme.
CALL, WRITE, or PHONE to _ . _
67 PALL MALL or CHARLESTON STREET.
PHONES; 48, 428, 470 -B E N DIG 0.


spoon golden syrup. Allow to boil. Now mix
flour, sugar and golden syrup with one egg into
balls. Drop into boiling water and syrup and boil
for about 15-20 minutes.
Mrs. R. Houston
Bendigo.
JEAN PUDDING (NO EGGS)
Two tablespoons of butter, two tablespoons of
sugar, two tablespoons of plum jam, one cup of
plain flour, half a cup of milk in which is dissolved
a small teaspoon carbonate of soda.
Cream butter and sugar, add plum jam (prune
jam may be used in place of the plum), then add
sifted flour, and mix well with the milk. Place
in greased pudding basin and steam for two to
two-and-a-half hours.
Mrs. S. R. Agates
Emu Creek.
LEMON DELICIOUS PUDDING.
One tablespoon shortening, three-quarters cup
of sugar, two tablespoons flour, rind and juice of
two lemons, two eggs, one cup of milk.
Cream together the shortening, sugar and flour.
Add the juice and rinds of lemons and beat in well.
Separate the eggs and then add the yolks to the
creamed mixture. Add the milk and lastly fold in
stiffly beaten egg whites. Pour into a greased pie
dish. Stand in a dish of water and bake in a mod-
erate oven for from 40 to 45 minutes.
Mrs. D. Martin
Bendigo.
LEMON MERINGUE PIE.
Half lb. pastry, one lemon, one tablespoon bat-
ter, six tablespoons water, four tablespoons sugar,
one tablespoon cornflour, two eggs, two tablespoons
castor sugar.
Melt butter in water. Add grated r.nd and
juice of lemon, mix cornflour with a little cold
water and when contents of saucepan are hot add
cornflour, sugar and well beaten yolks of eggs. Stir
well and bring to the boil, stirring all the time. Roll
out pastry and line deep flan tin. Pour in lemon
mixture and bake in moderate oven. Beat castor
sugar and white of eggs together stiffly Spread on
pie and return to oven for a few minutes until gol-
den brown.
Mrs. C Neivandt
Bendigo.
LEMON PIE.
Make a short crust using: three oz. plain flour,
three oz. S.B. flour, three oz. butter, enough water
to make a firm dough.
Filling: One cup breadcrumbs, three-quarters cup
sugar, one teaspoon butter, two teaspoons cornflour,
one cup hot water, two lemons, yolks of two eggs.
Put breadcrumbs, sugar, butter and cornflour in
basin and pour over hot water, then leave to cool.
Add yolks of eggs, and rind of one and juice of two
lemons. Mix well. Line a sandwich tin with short
crust. Pour mixture in and bake until set. Beat
whites of eggs stiffly, and gradually add three table-
spoons of sugar. Pile on tart and return to oven
until brown.
Mrs. F. S Hewitt
Bendigo.
LEMON SPONGE CASTLES.
Three oz. sugar, two oz. butter or margarine, one
egg, quarter teaspoon lemon rind, four tablespoons
milk, five oz. S.B. flour.
Cream butter and sugar, add egg and lemon rind
and lightly stir in flour and milk. Place in four
greased cups, cover with greased paper and steam
for 30 minutes. Serve with lemon and date sauce.
Lemon And Date Sauce: One tablespoon corn-
flour, one teaspoon lemon rind, two tablespoons
lemon juice, one cup sugar, one cup water, one tea-
spoon butter, half cup chopped dates.
Combine cornflour, sugar, lemon rind and juice
with the water. Stir over low heat until thick. Add
butter and dates and cook for five minutes.
Bendigo.
Mrs. G. Glover
PLUM PUDDING.
One lb. flour, one lb currants, one lb. raisins,
one lb. sultanas, quarter lb. mixed peel, three-
quarters lb. breadcrumbs, one lb. brown sugar, one
lb. finely chopped suet, two teaspoons spice, half
nutmeg, two oz. blanched almonds, three eggs, half
teaspoon salt, one good teaspoon baking soda in a
cup of milk.
Chop raisins and almonds. Place all dry ingre-
dients in mixing bowl and mix together well with
eggs, milk and soda. Put in cloth or steamer,
whichever is preferred and boil from three to four
hours. Before using boil three hours longer. Scald
cloth and flour well, leaving room for the pudding
to swell. Do not let the pudding go off the boil
or it will spoil. Hang up until needed, if making
before Christmas.
Long Gully.
Mrs. E. Harvey
PLUM PUDDING OR CAKE.
Place In A Saucepan: Half cup sugar, one cup
mixed fruit, one cup milk, one tablespoon butter,
one teaspoon spice. Bring to boil and add one
teaspoon carbonate of soda. Stir well and allow
to cool a little. Then add one-and-a-quarter cups
SR. flour, pinch salt. Steam for two hours or bake
for one-and-a-half hours in a moderate oven.
Golden Square.
Mrs. J. Qualtrough
PLUM PUDDING (WITH COLD TEA)
Two cups plain flour, two cups mixed fruit, one
teaspoon cinnamon, one-and-half teaspoons car-
bonate of soda, one cup brown sugar, one teaspoon
mixed spice, one cup strong black tea, one heaped
teaspoon butter.
Mix dry ingredients and butter; add tea with
soda in it. Put mixture into well floured cloth and
place in boiling water. Boil for two-and-a-half
hours.
Bendigo.
Mrs. H. Nankivell
PLUM PUDDING (EASY)
Two cups breadcrumbs, two cups mixed fruit,
one cup milk, one small teaspoon soda (dissolved
in milk), one mashed banana and squeeze of lemon
juice.
Mix all well together- and steam in a greased basin
for three hours.
Mrs. R. P. Biennerhassett, Golden Square


PLUM PUDDING.
TOPPED WITH ICE-CREAM.
Half lb. butter, half lb dark sugar, five eggs,
grated rind of an orange, one tablespoon treacle,
half cup grated carrot, half lb. each of currants,
sultanas, and raisins, quarter lb. each of dates,
shelled almonds, mixed peel and cherries, half lb.
plain flour, one level teaspoon carbonate of soda,
grated nutmeg and cinnamon, quarter teaspoon
salt, quarter lb. soft breadcrumbs, three tablespoons
orange juice, essence to taste.
Cream butter and sugar, add eggs, one at a time,
beating well after each one. Add fruit and grated
carrot, flour sifted with soda and salt, spices and
breadcrumbs, mixing well with orange juice, treacle
and essences. Turn into one large or two smaller
greased basins. Have mixture about two inches
from top of basins. Cover with well-floured pud-
ding cloth, tied securely over top or with two thick-
nesses of grease-proof paper tied firmly down.
Steam about four hours for two basins or six
hours for one large basin. Steam at least one
hour longer the day you serve. Top with ice-cream
when serving.
Mrs. Vera Washington.
Rochester.
SPONGE ROLY-POLY.
Make a pastry with two-thirds packet of pastry
mix, one beaten egg, two tablespoons sugar and
milk. Roll into oblong shape. Have ready In pie
dish one cup of boiling milk. Spread pastry with
raspberry jam and two bananas mashed with a
little lemon Juice. Roll up and place in pie dish.
Cook in moderate oven until milk is absorbed and
slightly browned on top. Serve with custard or
cream.
Mrs. B. Eskdale
Bendigo.
STEAMED PUDDING.
One cup of mixed fruit, one cup milk, half oup
sugar, one tablespoon butter.
Put all ingredients In a saucepan and bring to
boil. Take off and cool. Add one cup S.R. flour,
one teaspoon carbonate of soda and two teaspoon*
of mixed spice or cinnamon. Steam in a greased
basin or steamer for two-and-a-half hours.
Mrs. H. Lyne
Bendigo.
STEAMED BANANA AND RAISIN PUDDING
One cup mashed bananas, quarter cup seeded
raisins, one cup brown breadcrumbs, two well-
beaten eggs, half cup milk, juice of one lemon.
Mix together all the above ingredients, stirring
well. Pour mixture into a buttered mould and steam
for at least one hour.
Mrs. H. Beckerleg
Quarry Hill.
SYRUP DUMPLINGS.
Dumpling: One cup S.R. flour, one teaspoon but-
ter. little milk, one egg. Rub butter Into flour,
add well-beaten egg and little milk.
Syrup: One-and-a-half cups hot water, one
tablespoon butter, half cup sugar, two tablespoons
golden syrup. Place all ingredients In saucepan
and bring to boil. Add dumplings and cook for 20
minutes without lifting lid. Serve with cream
Mrs. R. Houston
Bendigo.
SYRUP PUDDING.
Two oz. butter, two tablespoons sugar, one table-
spoon golden syrup, one well-beaten egg, half cup
milk, one cup plain flour, one level teaspoon car-
bonate of soda.
Cream butter and sugar, add egg, syrup then milk
and soda and lastly flour. Place in greased basin
and steam for one-and-a-half hours. Serve with
white sauce flavored with vanilla.
Bendigo.
Mrs S. M. Weeks
COLD DESSERTS
ANGEL FOOD.
One tablespoon powdered gelatine, one-and-half
cups sugar dissolved in one cup cold water. Allow
to stand for some time before continuing. In an-
other basin, mix one tablespoon of plain flour with
one cup of cold water. Add the juice of one lemon
and two oranges. Boil all together for two or three
minutes stirring all the time. Allow to become
quite cold. Then whip for half-an-hour. Pile In a
dish and decorate top with strawberries or crystal-
lised cherries.
Mrs. E. Munday
Eagiehawk.
APPLE BLOSSOM PIE
Make a biscuit dough. .Roll out and line a deep
sandwich tin or round pie-tin. Fill as follows:
First Layer: Stew two or three apples with a
quarter of a cup of sugar and half a oup of water.
Strain, add one or two passionfruit, and when cool,
place In case.
Second Layer: Beat together one egg yolk, half
tin sweetened condensed milk and Juice of one lemon.
Spread on top of first layer in pastry case.
Third Layer: To three-quarters of a' cup of
apple juice heated, add one dessertspoon of gela-
tine, half teaspoon lemon juice, and allow to cool.
Whip an egg white stiffly, adding a pinch of salt
and coloring a delicate pink. Gradually add to
the gelatine and apple mixture and beat until it
thickens. Pile on top of the second layer and dec-
orate with whipped cream.
Eaglchawk.
Mrs. J. L. Hicks
BANANA MARSHMALLOW.
Half lb. marshmallow, half cup orange juice, one
cup cream (whipped), three bananas (sliced), half
cup nuts.
Cut marshmallow into pieces with wet scissors.
Add orange juice and allow to stand for 10 minutes.
Fold In whipped cream. Add sliced bananas and
nuts. Pour into mould and stand In refrigerator
for two hours to set. Turn out on dish and decor-
ate with sliced bananas and oranges.
Newcastle, N.S.W.
Mrs. F Turner Bar Beach
DUTCH APPLE-MERINGUE.
Half lb. dried or fresh apples, third cup butter,
half cup sugar, two eggs, grated rind and juice of
a lemon, pinch of salt, extra three tablespoons of
sugar, one uncooked shortcrust pastry case.
Soak apple (If dried), stew (if fresh fruit). Drain
off water. Cook gently until soft and pulpy. Add


butter, sugar, one whole egg and one egg yolk,
slightly beaten, then lemon rind, juice and salt. Pill
into lined tart plate (not too rich a pastry) and
cook in hot oven about 10 minutes. Reduce to
moderate heat and cook until filling is slightly
firm. Beat egg white to meringue consistency with
extra sugar. Spread over top of apple and bake
in slow oven until set and lightly browned. Dutch
apple-meringue is best when eaten cold. Add
cream if desired.
Mrs. C. F. G. Ogier
Quarry Hill
ICE-CREAM (1)
Bring to blood heat one cup of milk, add one
junket tablet crushed in one tablespoon of cold water,
slightly less than half a cup of sugar and vanilla or
other flavoring to taste. Pour into refrigerator tray
and stand in room temperature until set. Freeze
for half-an-hour. Remove to basin. Beat four
heaped tablespoons of powdered milk into one cup
of milk. Mix this gradually into the junket mix-
ture, beating well. Return to refrigerator tray and
freeze for one hour. Take out and beat again.
Leave until set. The ice-cream is then ready to
serve.
Bendigo.
Mrs. F. T Amer
ICE-CREAM (2)
Boil together four tablespoons of sugar, four
tablespoons water, one heaped teaspoon gelatine.
Cool, then whip until white and frothy. Add this
mixture to one pint of fresh milk in which four
heaped tablespoons of full cream milk powder have
been dissolved. Set in trays. When frozen suf-
ficiently, remove from trays and beat until soft
and light. Add vanilla to taste during last whipping.
It is preferable to whip half the mixture at a time.
Replace in freezing compartment. When nicely
frozen, turn control dial from fast freeze and hold
at normal temperature.
Mrs. Denis Oakes
Golden Square.
BUTTERSCOTCH ICE-CREAM.
One pint milk, one tin sweetened condensed milk,
one teaspoon vanilla, half cap chopped walnuts.
Place unopened tin of condensed milk in saucepan
and cover with water. Boil for three hours. Re-
move from saucepan and cool for about 10 minutes.
Then carefully open the tin and pour contents into
a basin. Gradually stir in the warmed fresh milk,
then add vanilla and walnuts. Beat well. Cool and
freeze. When the ice-cream begins to set around
the edges, turn into a basin and beat well. Return
to refrigerator and complete freezing.
Mrs. H. Lyne
Bendigo.
FRUIT SALAD ICE-CREAM.
One tin chilled Carnation or Ideal milk, three
level tablespoons sugar, one level teaspoon gelatine
dissolved in one tablespoon boiling water.
Whip milk until stiff. Add dissolved gelatine
and sugar and whip again till thoroughly mixed.
Add two mashed bananas, pulp of two passionfruit,
juice of one orange and one lemon. Freeze rapidly
in refrigerator trays.
Mrs. E. C. Krieger
Kangaroo Flat.
DELICIOUS WITH ICE-CREAM.
Here are some notions for serving delicious and
easily prepared summer sweets.
Double Crust Apple Pie. —Hot from the oven and
dusted with cinnamon. Spoon the ice-cream on at
the last moment.
Hollowed-out Cup Cakes—the ice-cream spooned
into the centre. Top with chocolate shavings or
chopped ginger and syrup.
Crushed Gingernut Biscuits—arranged in an
ice-cream dish with ice-cream spooned on top and
sprinkled with biscuit crumbs and grated candied
peel.
Chocolate Syrup—spooned over the ice-cream
and topped with raisins soaked in sherry.
Crushed Pineapple—spooned over ice-cream and
then topped with toasted coconut shreds. To
toast coconut, spread out on a piece of paper and
place in moderate oven until golden brown. Takes
about eight minutes.
Golden Square.
Mrs. R. Boland
LEMON AND PASSIONFRUIT DESSERT.
One pint lemon jelly, one egg, half cup sugar,
one cup milk, two or three passionfruit, whipped
cream, and nuts to decorate.
Make jelly and allow to cool but not set. Whip
up the whole egg with half a cup of sugar and one
cup of milk. Add to the cooled jelly and stir
together well. Then add two or three passionfruit
and allow to set. This makes an easy and attrac-
tive party dessert if the mixture is poured into
individual sweets dishes before setting and, when
set, decorated with roses of whipped cream, top-
ped with nuts or other party trimming^
Long Gully.
Mrs. E. Harvey
MIXED FRUIT TART.
Bake a pastry shell and when cold, fill with stewed
apple, then sliced bananas and finally passionfruit.
Make a meringue with egg whites and sugar, pile
on top of mixture and pop into the oven until
lightly browned.
Kangaroo Flat.
Mrs. E. C. Krieger
ORANGE DELIGHT.
One cup sugar, two heaped tablespoons corn-
flour, one pint water, two oranges, whites of two
eggs.
Bring sugar and water to the boil. Add the
cornflour blended with the orange juice and grated
rind of one orange. Cool a little, then beat in the
stiffly-beaten egg whites. Pour into a wet mould
and chill. Serve with a boiled custard made with
the egg yolks.
Golden Square.
Mrs. C. R. Phillips
ORANGE SOUFFLE
One cup orange juice, one cup boiling water, one
cup sugar, one dessertspoon gelatine, one dessert-
spoon cornflour, whites of two eggs.
Heat sugar and orange juice and add the corn-
flour previously dissolved in a little of the orange
Juice. Stir until mixture thickens slightly then add
the gelatine dissolved in the boiling water. Stir
well. Allow to cool, then beat in the egg whites
(the yolks may be used for a custard).
Mrs. F. F. Griffin
Bendigo.


FIT FOR A KING'S KITCHEN
AND YOURS TOO!
"ST GEORGE"
AUTOMATIC ELECTRICAL RANGE IS SENSATIONAL !
■
'mm
THE “ST. GEORGE” AUTOMATIC ELECTRIC RANGE
saves you time and money Created for better living, this wonderful labor-saving unit con-
tains every extra except cost. You can even pre-select your cooking time, and “hey
presto,” “St. George” does the rest. Seeing is believing, so call in and inspect Today
You Won’t Be Sorry.
OBTAINABLE FROM:
L. FAWSSETT & CO
363 HARGREAVES STREET, BENDIGO.


PASSIONFRUIT SWEET.
One tin of Carnation milk, two and a half tea-
spoons of gelatine dissolved in quarter-cup .of
boiling water, five tablespoons sugar, six passion-
fruit.
Put tin of milk in ice box for an hour before beat-
ing. Whip milk until thick, add sugar gradually,
then lastly add gelatine and fruit. Serve with
strawberry jelly and whipped cream.
Mrs. D. A. Pain
Bendigo.
PINEAPPLE FLUFF.
Make a fairly firm custard and place at the
bottom of a bowl, cover with a layer of pineapple
cubes and sliced bananas. Set a jelly with the juice
of pineapple and before quite set whip well until
frothy. Add to the custard and fruit. Serve with
whipped cream.
Mrs. T. Potter.
Bendigo.
PINEAPPLE SHORTCAKE.
One breakfast cup diced (cooked) pineapple, two
ez. butter, third-cup of sugar, one egg, one-and-a-
half cups S.R. flour.
Cream butter and sugar, add egg and beat well.
Then add pineapple from which all syrup has been
drained. Add flour and mix well. Bake in a shallow
dish for 30 to 45 minutes in a moderate oven. Serve
almost cold with ice-cream or pineapple sauce.
Peaches or finely-sliced raw apple can be used in
place of pineapple. If apple is used it will be
necessary to choose a quick cooking variety.
Pineapple Sauce: One cup of pineapple syrup,
one-and-a-half cups water, one dessertspoon honey.
Bring to boil and thicken with enough arrowroot
(mixed in a little cold water) to make a nice smooth
sauce consistency. Serve cool.
Mrs. Denis Oakes
Golden Square.
PINEAPPLE SPONGE.
One ripe pineapple, one cup sugar, one cup water,
two eggs, lemon juice, one tablespoon cornflour and
one tablespoon butter.
Break up the fresh ripe pineapple with a fork.
Place in a saucepan with sugar, cold water and
butter. Simmer until cooked, then add cornflour
dissolved in a little cold water. Add egg yolks
beaten with lemon Juice and cook for two minutes,
stirring all the time. Take off stove and when cold
add stiffly beaten egg whites. Chill and serve with
cream.
Mrs. R. C. Allott
Mandurang.
STRAWBERRY DELIGHT.
Two tablespoons batter, half-cup sugar, half-cup
milk, one egg, one full breakfast cup of S.R. flour.
Oream butter and sugar, add egg well beaten,
then milk and lastly the S.R. flour. Put into a flan
tin and bake lightly for 25 minutes. When cool,
fill the recess in the cake with any of the following
fruits. Place strawberries, pineapple cubes, sliced
banana and passionfruit, peaches or apricots in re-
cess, then pour a partly-set jelly over and leave to
set in an ice-chest or refrigerator. When set, put
whipped cream over all.
Bendigo.
Mrs. T. Potter
STRAWBERRY ICE-CREAM ROYALE.
For this you’ll need six circles of day-old sponge
cake, strawberry jelly, chopped strawberries, ice-
cream, cream, strawberry syrup (or topping), straw-
berries and mint leaves to decorate.
Set strawberry jelly and chopped strawberries in
small moulds. When set, unmould on to the circles
of sponge already placed in serving dishes. Place
scoop of ice-cream on top of each and pour over
cream and strawberry syrup. Decorate with mint-
leaves and whole strawberries.
Vary Ice-Cream Royale by using any diced tinned
fruit, pineapple, sliced banana or cooked cherries
in place of the fresh strawberries when these are
out of season. However, if using pineapple remem-
ber it must be cooked, as raw pineapple will prevent
jelly from setting.
Golden Square.
Mrs. R. Boland
STRAWBERRY MARSHMALLOW DESSERT.
Fifteen oz. sugar, one oz. gelatine, one dessert-
spoon of glucose, two egg whites, one and a half
cups of water.
Put half the water into a saucepan and add
gelatine. Heat slowly until gelatine is dissolved.
Boil remainder of water with glucose and sugar.
Pour both into a large mixing bowl. Whip for 15
minutes, add stiffly-beaten egg whites and whip for
another five minutes until stiff and spongy. Fold in
two cups of fresh strawberries, turn into sweet dish
and put into cool place to set. Serve with thin cus-
tard and whipped cream.
Use strawberries in season for this delightful party
sweet; substitute other fruits when strawberries are
unavailable.
Bendigo.
Mrs. D. A. Pain
UNCOOKED SWEET.
Soak two tablespoons sugar in juice of one lemon
and one orange. Beat four egg yolks with two table-
spoons of sugar. Dissolve one dessertspoon gelatine
in half-a-cup of hot water, and add to fruit juice.
Beat this well into egg yolks and sugar.
Beat the four egg whites with two tablespoons
sugar until stiff, then fold into other mixture. Chill
before serving and decorate with cream and passion-
fruit, or with chopped nuts sprinkled over the
cream.
Kangaroo Flat.
Mrs. E. C. Krieger


PURE
PASTEURISED MILK
is always a necessity
in the Kitchen-
and for Cooking.
Make Sure You Get
PURE
PASTEURISED
MILK
DELIVERED DAILY
by
SANDHURST
DAIRIES pty. LTD.
100 MITCHELL STREET, BENDIGO
Phone 18


PASTRIES
AND TARTS
PAGE
Coconut Tart 59
Covered Tart 59
Cream Horns 59
Dutch Cake 59
Old English Mincemeat 59
Puff Paste (Easy) 59
PAGE
Puff Paste (Rough) 60
Sweet Fruit Mince Pies 60
Spicy Mince Tarts 60
Tomato Tart 60
Viennese Tartlets 60
COCONUT TART
Cover a tart plate with a good short crust and
bake. When cooked, spread with jam and add the
following mixture: Two oz. butter, three oz. sugar,
four oz. dessicated coconut mixed well together with
one egg. Sprinkle coconut over mixture in tart
crust and bake until a golden brown. Serve hot or
cold.
Mrs. B. Winterbottom
Bendigo.
COVERED TART.
Pastry sufficient to make one pie shell and cover.
Filling for covered tart: One cup of white bread
crumbs, three-quarters cup of sugar, rind and juice
of one or two lemons, tablespoon of butter.
Mix all ingredients well together and fill pie shell
with the mixture. Cover shell with remaining
pastry. Bake in a moderate oven.
Mrs. H. Lyne
Bendigo.
CREAM HORNS (PUFF PASTRY).
One lb. flour, one teaspoon cream of tartar, two
egg yolks, one lb. butter, pinch of salt, enough water
to make firm dough. All ingredients must be cold.
Sift flour into basin and make well in centre. Add
egg yolks, cream tartar, salt and mix with water.
Knead well. Roll into small square. Put butter in
centre of square, fold four corners of dough over but-
ter. Roll out four times. For cream horns, cut
pastry into strips nine Inches by one inch and roll
around cream horn tin. Cook in hot oven for
20 minutes.
This quantity makes seven dozen pastries. Mar-
garine may be used instead of butter.
Mrs, M. Murphy
Emu Creek.
DUTCH CAKE.
For the Pastry: Half cup butter, one and a half
cups S.R. flour, quarter cup sugar, one egg, pinch
salt.
Cream butter and sugar. Add egg, flour and
salt. Roll out thinly and line two sandwich tins
Spread with raspberry jam.
For the Sponge: Two tablespoons butter, four
tablespoons milk, two eggs, one teaspoon each of
cinnamon, spice and cocoa, eight tablespoons S.B.
flour, a little vanilla, four tablespoons sugar, half
cup chopped walnuts.
Cream butter and sugar and add eggs one at f
time. Then add milk, flavoring and the dry in-
gredients which have all been sifted together. Lastly
add the walnuts. Pour mixture over pastry, put
strips of pastry criss-cross on top and bake in a
fairly hot oven for half an hour. Either glaze top
with sugar and milk or ice with thin white icing
and sprinkle with cinnamon.
Golden Square.
Mrs. C. R. Phillips
OLD ENGLISH MINCEMEAT.
One lb. each of raisins, currants and sultanas,
quarter lb. candied peel, one lb, suet, one and a half
lbs. sugar, six large sour apples, little spice, juice of
two lemons, one tablespoon marmalade, half cup
rum or brandy.
Peel, core and shred apples. Skin and shred suet,
chop finely or mince fruit. Mix all together, add
spice, marmalade, lemon juice, brandy. Bottle and
store until required. Mashed banana may be added
when using and gives an unusual flavor. Make into
large or small pies.
Quarry HilL
Mrs. B. Brownlee
PUFF PASTE (EASY)
Two cups of plain flour, quarter pound lard, half
pound butter, pinch of salt.
Sieve flour and salt. Rub in the lard and make
into a paste. Roll out and place on the paste, one-
third of the butter, dotted evenly in small pieces.
Sprinkle lightly with flour and fold like an envelope.
Roll out. Be sure to roll away from you. Place
another third of the butter on the paste, sprinkle
with flour and fold as previously. Roll out again,
continuing to roll away from you. Finally, place
remaining third of butter on the paste and roll out
thinly. Line patty pans and when cold, fill with
jam or desired filling.
Mrs. F. T. Amer
Bendigo.


PUFF PASTE (ROUGH)
One lb. flour, half lb. lard, teaspoon salt, squeeze
of lemon juice, cold water to mix.
Sift flour and salt, cut lard into thin slices into
flour and mix quickly with very cold water. Turn on
to a floured board and roll out, fold in edges, and roll
up. Repeat until pastry has been rolled and folded
three times. Put in a cool place and let the paste
stand for half-an-hour to one hour to cool. Then
bake as desired.
The secret of light pastry is cool mixing and a
hot oven for baking.
Miss Elva Eeies
Goornong.
SWEET FRUIT MINCE PIES.
One lb. raisins, one lb. sultanas, one lb. currants,
one and a half lbs. apples, one oz. mixed spice, half
lb. suet, half lb. candied peel, one lb. brown sugar,
one cup of wine or four tablespoons of brandy, one
teaspoon of nutmeg, one teaspoon of cinnamon.
Put all through a mincer and pack tightly in
airtight jars and seal. The mince keeps very well
and may be used as desired.
To make the mince pies: Make puff pastry, roll
out thinly and cut in circles. Place heap of fruit
mince in each circle. Moisten edges with water and
place another circle on top. Press edges together
and cut two or three small slits in the middle of the
top circle with a sharp knife. (Cut circles about
two or two and a half inches across).
Mrs. E. Harvey
Long Gully.
SPICY MINCE TARTS.
Biscuit Pastry. Half lb. flour, one teaspoon
baking powder, quarter teaspoon salt, one egg, three
and a half oz. butter, three oz. castor sugar.
Sift flour, baking powder and salt. Add sugar.
Rub in butter and beaten egg and mix well into a
stiff dough. Roll out to quarter inch thickness,
and cut in rounds to line patty tins.
Mince Filling for Two Dozen Tarts. One
cup sultanas, two tablespoons of sugar, one large
grated apple, one teaspoon spice, a few drops of
lemon juice. Mix all well together. Place a little
jam in the centre of each tart before' adding the
filling. Bake as usual.
Golden Square.
Mrs. C. A. Board
TOMATO TART
Melt one teaspoon of butter in a saucepan. Add
four sliced tomatoes and cook slowly for 10 minutes.
Add one cup minced cold meat, pepper and salt to
taste, one teaspoon sugar. Cook for a further five
minutes then thicken with flour and cook for a
further minute.
Line two sandwich tins with good short pastry,
fill with the mixture and cover with pastry. Cook
in moderate oven for 15 minutes. Leave in tins
until cold then cut into slices.
Bendiigo.
Mrs. B. Winterbottom
VIENNESE TARTLETS.
Pastry: Three oz. sugar, three oz. butter, one egg,
eight oz. plain flour, vanilla for flavoring.
Filling; Two egg whites, two oz. icing sugar, van-
illa, four oz. currants, two tablespoons sherry.
Beat butter and sugar well with two drops of
vanilla; then add lightly beaten egg and mix to a
stiff paste with the sifted flour. Roll out, cut into
rounds and place in patty tins.
PILLING: Beat the egg whites stiffly, gradually
add the sifted icing sugar and a drop of vanilla.
Place the currants and sherry in a small saucepan
and heat together for three minutes, then strain.
Add the currants to eggs and icing sugar by folding
in lightly. Place spoonsful of the mixture in the
lined patty pans and bake in a moderate oven for 20
minutes. Sprinkle with sifted icing sugar. Makes
two dozen.
White Hills.
Mrs. K. Kerr
WORTH TRYING
QUICK LEMON FILLING: Beat together half a cup of condensed milk,
one egg yolk, rind and juice of one lemon. Allow to stand until thick,
and use as required.
EGG SUBSTITUTE: A substitute for beaten egg used in dipping cutlets
and similar food can be made by blending one tablespoon of custard powder
with milk to the beaten egg consistency.
Mrs. B. Eskdale
Bendigo.
TO RECLAIM SUGARY JAM: Place bottles of jam in warm oven until
well heated and sugar has dissolved. Jam will not sugar again.
Mrs. N. Turner
Bendigo.


Good eating and good keeping are these tasty
loaves which, sliced and buttered, form a welcome
addition to school lunches or the afternoon tea table.
At left: Fruit and Coffee Loaf (see recipe page 62),
and right, Brown Nut Loaf (recipe page 62).
SCONES, BUNS, LOAVES AND TEACAKES
PAGE
All Bran Loaf 62
Brownie 62
Brown Bread 62
Brown Nut Loaf 62
Crisp Raisin Loaf 62
Eggless Brownie 62
Fruit and Coffee Loaf 62
Moist Potato Cake 62
Nut Loaf 62
Nutty Tea Cake 62
Orange, Fruit and Nut Loaf 63
Pikelets (1) 63
PAGE
Pikelets (2) 63
Prague Rolls * 63
San Bran Loaf 63
Scones (Plain) 63
Scones (Savory) 63
Scones (Syrup) 63
Sultana and Walnut Loaf 63
Swiss Tea Cake 64
Tea Cake 64
Tea Cake with Cinnamon Topping 64
White Bread 64
Yeast Buns 64


SCONES, BUNS, LOAVES AND
TEACAKES
ALL-BRAN LOAF
One cup All Bran, one egg, three-quarters tea-
spoon carbonate of soda dissolved in one cup of
milk. Mix these together, then add to one table-
spoon butter creamed with a good half cup of
sugar. Then add to the combined Ingredients one
cup of flour and one cup of dates with pinch of
salt.
Bake in greased and floured orange tin in a
slow oven for three-quarters of an hour.
Mrs. P. Williamson
Golden Square.
BROWNIE
Two cups S.R. flour, one cup brown sugar, one
tablespoon butter or margarine, one cup fruit (sul-
tanas, dates, raisins), one teaspoon spice, one table-
spoon cocoa, one cup milk, a good pinch of salt.
Sift together flour, spice, cocoa and salt. Rub
in butter or margarine with fingertips. Add fruit
and sugar and mix into a moist dough with the
milk. Bake in a greased bar tin in a moderate
oven (375 deg. electric) for about three-quarters
of an hour to one hour. When cold, slice and but-
ter. The Brownie is best cut the day after baking.
Mrs. J. H. O’Beirne
Bendigo.
BROWN BREAD
Three cups S.R. flour, one cup bran, one cup
boiling water, one cup milk, one tablespoon treacle
or golden syrup, pinch of salt.
Mix flour and bran thoroughly. Put treacle (or
syrup), boiling water and milk in a jug and stir
until all have been dissolved. Then stir into the
dry ingredients and place in a floured tin. Bake
one hour in a moderate oven.
Mrs. T. Potter
Bendigo.
BROWN NUT LOAF
One-and-a-half cups S.R. flour, half cup sugar,
one tablespoon butter, one egg, pinch salt, two oz.
walnuts, one cup dates, one teaspoon carbonate
soda, one cup boiling water.
Rub butter and sugar into flour and salt, then
add chopped walnuts. Add dates previously soaked
in cup of water to which has been added the car-
bonate of soda. Then add the beaten eggs. Mix
all together and hake slowly in moderate oven for
half-an-hour.
Mrs. F. Willman
Bagshot North.
CRISP RAISIN LOAF
One cup raisins, one cup sugar, one cup water,
two oz. butter, one teaspoon bicarbonate of soda,
vanilla, pinch salt, two-and-a-quarter cups S.R.
flour, one egg.
Place raisins, sugar, water and butter in sauce-
pan, together with carbonate of soda. Bring to
boil and cook for five minutes. Cool. Add beaten
egg, then vanilla. Lastly, fold in sifted dry in-
gredients. Place in two greased bar-tins or one
greased loaf tin and cook in moderate oven from
40-45 minutes for bar-tins and from 50-60 minutes
for loaf tin. Serve sliced and buttered.
Mrs. F. Willman
Bagshot North.
EGOLESS BROWNIE
Boil together two cups sugar, two cups water,
two tablespoons butter and two cups raisins or
sultanas, for five minutes. Leave until cold. Sift
together, four cups plain flour, half teaspoon salt,
two level teaspoons bicarbonate of soda and one
level teaspoon each of nutmeg, mixed spice and
cinnamon. Add to boiled mixture. Place in a
greased tin lined with greased paper. Bake in a
moderate oven for one hour. Leave until the fol-
lowing day before cutting and serve sliced, with
butter.
Bendigo.
Mrs. B. Eskdale
FRUIT AND COFFEE LOAF
Two-and-a-quarter cups flour, one cup pale
brown sugar, two eggs, third cup black coffee, half
cup minced peel, half cup chopped dates, half cup
currants, two heaped! teaspoons baking powder, half
cup butter, quarter cup milk, quarter teaspoon salt,
half cup sultanas.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs one
by one, then fruit, flour and baking powder sifted,
and lastly milk and black’ coffee. Pour into two
buttered loaf tins and bake for one hour.
Bagshot North
Mrs. F. Willman
MOIST POTATO CAKE
Three-quarters cup mashed potato, three-quarters
cup brown sugar, one-and-a-half cups S.R. flour,
one teaspoon spice, one teaspoon mixed! peel or
marmalade, three-quarters' cup sultanas, three-
quarters cup milk.
Cream potato and sugar, add milk, sultanas,
mixed peel or marmalade, then flour and spice.
Bake for about three-quarters of an hour in a
moderate oven. Serve sliced, with butter.
Golden Square.
Mrs. H. Sims
NUT LOAF
Quarter lb. butter, one cup brown sugar, three-
quarters of a lb. of dates, one cup boiling water,
one teaspoon carbonate of soda, one egg, two-and-
a-half cups S.R. flour, one cup of walnuts.
Place butter, brown sugar and dates in a sauce-
pan, pour over boiling water in which carbonate of
soda has been dissolved. Allow to cool. Add the
egg, flour and a cup of walnuts. Mix well together.
Place in nut loaf tins and bake approximately one
hour in moderate oven.
Eaglehawk.
Mrs. J. L. Hicks
NUTTY TEA CAKE
Cake: One tablespoon butter, half cup sugar, one
egg, half cup milk, one cup S.R. flour.
Top and Centre: Half cup brown sugar, half
cup walnuts, two teaspoons cinnamon, two table-
spoons plain flour, quarter cup coconut, two table-
spoons melted butter.
To make cake—beat butter and sugar well to-
gether, add egg and beat well, then add flour and
milk.
Mix the top and centre Ingredients well together.
Place half of the cake mixture in a log tin and
then add half of the top and centre mixture. Add
remainder of cake mixture and then finally place
rest of the top and centre mixture in the tin. Bake
for three-quarters of an hour in a moderate oven.
Mrs. J. V. Schenck
Bendigo.


ORANGE FRUIT AND NUT LOAF
Three oz. butter, three-quarters cup sugar, two
eggs, two cups plain flour, one level teaspoon car-
bonate of soda, quarter cup warm water, half cup
nuts, one cup sultanas or raisins, one whole small
orange, one teaspoon vanilla.
Cream butter and sugar, add beaten eggs mixing
well. Cut washed unpeeled orange, remove centre
pith and seeds and pul through mincer with raisins
or sultanas. Add to creamed mixture with chopped
nuts. Fold in sifted flour alternately with water
in which soda has been dissolved. Add vanilla and
mix well. Place in two greased nut loaf tins and
bake in moderate oven for one hour. Allow five
minutes before removing from tins.
Mrs. F. S. Hewitt
Bendigo.
PIKELETS (1)
Three eggs, one cup sugar, two-and-a-quarter
cups S.B. flour and one cup milk.
Beat eggs and sugar well, until frothy. Add flour,
then milk. Place greased girdle or slide on top of
stove and heat. Drop on spoonsful of the mixture.
When bubbles rise to the surface of the pikelets,
turn.
Mrs. P. F. Griffin
Bendigo.
SAN BRAN LOAF
One-and-a-balf cups San Bran, one-and-a-half
cups plain flour, three-quarters cup sugar, three-
quarters cup dates or raisins, one-and-a-half cups
milk, one-and-a-half teaspoons soda, one teaspoon
salt.
Mix all dry ingredients well together in a basin.
Heat milk and dissolve one tablespoon of golden
syrup in it. Mix into the dry ingredients, stirring
well. Place in nut loaf tins (you can use half lb.
cocoa tins). .Place the lids on and steam in a
saucepan half filled with water, for two hours.
Inglewood.
Mrs. A. Bell
SCONES (PLAIN)
Three cups S.R. flour, small pinch salt, piece of
butter the size of a walnut, enough milk to mix
to make a stiff dough.
Sift flour and salt, then rub butter into flour
lightly with the tips of the fingers. Mix with the
milk to a nice smooth dough. Roll out, cut into
shapes and bake in a hot oven for about seven
minutes. Place scones on the highest tray under
the browner.
Bendigo.
Mrs. J, Smellie
PIKELETS (2)
One egg, one tablespoon sugar, salt to taste, half
teaspoon carbonate of soda, one teaspoon cream of
tartar, one cup plain flour (S.B. flour may be used
instead of the plain flour and rising), quarter cup
milk, quarter cup water.
Beat egg and sugar well. Add dry ingredients
(sifted) then milk and water. Place greased slide
on top of stove and drop on spoonsful of the mix-
ture. When bubbling turn each pikelet.
Mrs. W. T. Coates
Bendigo.
PRAGUE ROLLS.
Half lb. plain flour, quarter lb. butter, two tea-
spoons of sugar, three-quarters of an. oz. of com-
pressed yeast, the juice of half a lemon, two tea-
spoons of rum.
Dissolve yeast in a little warm milk. Cream
butter and sugar thoroughly. Rub well into flour and
add lemon juice or rum. Mix to a smooth paste
with the milk and yeast mixture. Roll out thinly
and cut into approximately four inch squares.
Pill each square with nut or poppy seed filling and
bend into a crescent shape. Brush with beaten egg
and leave standing from one-and-a-half to two
hours in a warm place. Bake in a warm oven.
WALNUT FILLING: One cup of grated walnuts,
one egg, sugar to taste, tablespoon of rum, table-
spoon of breadcrumbs, cloves, spice to taste, and a
little milk.
Mix well together, nuts, sugar, breadcrumbs, rum,
spices and add egg and milk gradually mixing until
smooth.
POPPY SEED FILLING: Quarter lb. ground
poppy seeds, quarter cup sugar, cinnamon, grated
lemon rind.
Cook poppy seeds with the sugar and a little milk
until a thick paste. Spice with the cinnamon and
grated lemon rind. Cool and fill squares.
Mrs. Era M. Miniver
Eildon.
SCONES (SAVORY)
Plain scone mixture (for this—half lb. S.B. flour,
rub in one tablespoon butter and pinch salt. Make
Into soft dough with four tablespoons milk into
which one egg has been beaten). Also required are;
two hard boiled eggs, one tablespoon melted butter,
two tablespoons ham paste, salt, lemon juice and
pinch of cayenne.
Chop eggs very finely. Mix with them the ham
paste, butter, salt, lemon juice and cayenne. Roll
out the scone mixture very thinly into oblong sheet.
Spread mixture on half, fold over. Press down
firmly and cut into squares. Place on greased tray
and glaze. Bake in hot oven 15 to 20 minutes.
Golden Square.
Mrs. V. Morey
SCONES (SYRUP)
Eight oz. flour, half teaspoon cream of tartar,
half teaspoon carbonate of soda (small), one oz.
butter, one oz. golden syrup, pinch salt, milk.
Make the same as ordinary scones by mixing with
the syrup and milk. Roll out on lightly floured
board and cut with scone cutter three-quarters of
an inch thick. Bake in moderate oven taking care
that the scones do not scorch. Serve fresh and
warm with butter.
Bendigo.
Mrs. A. J. Davey
SULTANA AND WALNUT LOAF
One cup brown S.R. flour, half teaspoon salt, one
cup plain white flour, half cup sultanas, one cup
brown sugar, half cup chopped walnuts, quarter cup
golden syrup, half teaspoon bicarbonate of soda, one
cup of milk.
Sift flours, add sugar, salt, sultanas and walnuts.
Add golden syrup, then soda dissolved in milk. Turn
into greased loaf tin and bake in moderate oven
for approximately one hour. Slice and butter when
cold.
Emu Creek.
Mrs. F. J. Hargreaves


SWISS TEA CAKE
Paste; Four oz. butter, half cup sugar, one egg,
one-and-a-half cups S.R. flour.
Topping; Half cup flour, half cup sugar, half
cup butter, three-quarters cup coconut.
Beat butter, add sugar and beat again. Add
egg well beaten, then S.R. flour gradually. Knead
and roll out on a well-greased oven slide. Spread
with raspberry jam, then the topping (previously
mixed well together). Bake in a moderate oven
tor 20 to 25 minutes. Cut into fingers.
Mrs. K. Kerr
White Hills.
TEA CAKE
Beat one large tablespoon of butter with a bare
three-quarters of a cup of,sugar, add one egg and
beat well. Next add one-and-a-half cups of sifted
S.R. flour, half-cup of milk and vanilla to taste.
Place in deep sandwich tin, sprinkle with one tea-
spoon of cinnamon, one teaspoon sugar and one
teaspoon coconut. Bake for half-an-hour in a
moderate oven. When ready to serve, cut into
strips and butter.
Mrs. R. C. Allott
Mandurang.
TEACAKE WITH CINNAMON TOPPING
Six oz. (or one-and-a-half cups) of S.B. flour,
two oz. butter, three oz. (or half a cup) of castor
sugar, one egg, half cup milk.
Cream butter and sugar together well. Add egg
and beat in well. Mix in sifted flour and milk and
piece mixture in a well-greased tin. Bake in a
moderately hot oven for 20 to 30 minutes. When
cooked, brush top over with melted butter and
sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon.
Mrs. F. T. Perrow
Bendigo.
WHITE BREAD
12 cups flour, small handful salt, two dessert-
spoonsful of sugar, one oz. yeast, warm water.
Mix sugar, yeast and pinch salt with a little
warm water. Leave till spongy then put flour, etc.,
in a big bowl. Place yeast well into the centre of
the flour. Leave to rise for about 20 minutes. Then
mix and knead all well together, using enough warm
water to make a nice smooth dough. Allow this
dough to rise to twice its bulk (about two hours).
Knead again and make into loaves. Put in greased
tins and leave to rise again for a quarter of an
hour. Then place in a hot oven and bake for one
and a quarter hours.
The bread may be baked in the traditional loaf
shape. A nice crusty loaf can be made after the
final kneading by rolling the dough into long strips
and plaiting three strips together. The loaves may
be glazed with egg and milk or left plain.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. Hartley
YEAST BUNS
One oz. butter or substitute, one oz. sugar, pinch
salt, half cup hot milk, half oz. compressed yeast,
three tablespoonsful tepid water, one and three-
quarter cups flour, two oz. sultanas.
Add hot milk to butter, sugar and salt. Com-
bine yeast and tepid water. Cool milk mixture to
lukewarm and combine with yeast. Stand for 15
minutes in warm place to rise, then add sifted flour
and sultanas, mixing thoroughly. Cover and stand
until well risen (about 30 minutes). Take small
pieces and form into buns. Place on a well-greased
slide. Allow to rise again for about quarter of an
hour. Bake in a moderately hot oven for 20 min-
utes. Remove from oven and glaze with a mixture
of sugar and milk. Pop back in oven for a few
minutes. This gives the buns that nice shiny top.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. Hartley
A READER RECOMMENDS
When making a Sponge Roll wring out a cloth in warm water and turn
the baked roll on to the cloth. It will not crack or split. Spread roll with
filling (not too moist), roll up and cool a little. Then roll in waxed paper
to set. Follow this method and you will never have a failure.
Making Sponge Lilies ? When cakes are baked draw the oven slide
slightly forward and roll the cakes while they are in the oven. This
method is quick and easy and will help avoid cracking.
When placing the mixture for a fruit or other cake into a prepared tin
do not put the mixture scraped from the spoon into the centre of the cake.
It usually retains a certain amount of shortening, and will cause the oake
to sink.
Half a cup of golden syrup added to tomato pickles improves the flavor.
Mrs. R. O. Pederick
Bendigo.


JAMS, CHUTNEYS
AND PICKLES...
JAMS
PAGE
Apricot Jam 65
Pig Jam 65
Pig and Pineapple Jam 65
Grapefruit Marmalade 65
Lemon Butter .. 65
Lemon Marmalade 66
Mixed Fruit Marmalade 66
Orange Marmalade 66
Quince Honey 66
Raspberry Jam 66
CHUTNEYS, PICKLES
PAGE
Banana Chutney 66
Pickled Onions 66
Tomato Chutney 66
Tomato Relish 66
APRICOT JAM.
Six lbs. apricots, six lbs. sugar, one cup water.
Cut fruit open and remove stones. Crack some
of these, reserve kernels and blanch. Place fruit
in a large bowl, strew a quarter of the sugar over
the fruit and allow to stand overnight. Next day,
turn contents of bowl into a preserving pan. Add
water, stand over low heat, stirring constantly until
the sugar is dissolved. Bring to the boil. Add the
remaining sugar in two or three lots. Dissolve the
sugar each time before the jam boils. Cook until
it will set when tested. Add kernels to the jam
10 minutes before removing it from the fire. Stir
well and constantly as apricot jam burns easily.
White Hills.
Mrs. M. J. Rees
FIG JAM.
Six lbs. ripe figs, three lemons or two teacups
vinegar, half lb. preserved ginger, six lbs. sugar, one
pint water.
Slice the figs, lemons and ginger very thinly. Put
into preserving pan with water and simmer until
fruit is well cooked, then add the sugar and boil
until a good color and consistency. If the figs are
very dry, a little extra water may be required.
Mrs. H. J. McKenna
Bendigo.
FIG AND PINEAPPLE JAM.
Four-and-a-half lbs. figs (after being peeled), two-
and-a-half lbs. grated pineapple, three tablespoons
strained lemon juice, one pint water, seven lbs. sugar.
Peel and slice the figs and simmer with the
grated pineapple and water till tender, then add the
sugar and lemon juice and boil until of a good
consistency.
Bendigo.
Mrs. H. J. McKenna
GRAPEFRUIT MARMALADE
(First Prize 1954 Bendigo Show.)
One lb. grapefruit, one quart water, one lb. sugar
to every one lb. fruit.
Wash grapefruit, cut peel from outside with a
shredder. Place in basin with the water. Gut up
pulp roughly and tie in fine muslin; place in basin
with peel and soak overnight. Bring to boll and
cook gently until peel is tender. Remove bag of
pulp and add sugar. Boil steadily until the mar-
malade jells when tested.
White Hills.
Mrs. D. McLaughlin
LEMON BUTTER.
Three small eggs, two lemons, one cup sugar, one
piece butter size of an egg.
Beat eggs and sugar thoroughly, then add rind of
lemons (grated) and juice of lemons. Cook in a
double saucepan until the mixture becomes as thick
as boiled custard.
Mrs. J. Smellie
Bendigo.


LEMON MARMALADE
(First Prize 1954 Bendigo Show.)
Lemons, one lb. sugar to every lb. fruit, one pint
of water to every lb. fruit.
Wash lemons and cut them into very thin slices.
Weigh fruit and measure sugar and water. Cover
the fruit with the water, adding the pips tied in
muslin. Stand overnight. Bring to the boil and
simmer until tender. Remove pips, add the sugar
and boil until the marmalade jells.
Mrs. D. McLaughlin
White Hills.
MIXED FRUIT MARMALADE
(First Prize 1954 Bendigo Show.)
Two medium-sized oranges, two lemons, two grape-
fruit, water and sugar.
Peel grapefruit and remove seeds. Discard half
the rind and cut the remainder into fine shreds.
Cut up the pulp. Wash and dry oranges and lemons
and cut into fine slices. Place in basin and to every
cup of pulp add three cups of water. Soak over-
night. Bring to boil and simmer until rind is
soft. Cool. Measure again and to every cup of
pulp and liquid, add one cup of sugar. Boil until
the marmalade jells when tested.
Mrs. D. McLaughlin
White Hills.
ORANGE MARMALADE
(First Prize 1954 Bendigo Show.)
Two lbs. oranges, two pints water, two lbs. sugar.
Wash and dry the fruit. Cut into thin slices.
Remove pips and tie them in a thin muslin bag.
Place in basin with the fruit and add water. Soak
overnight. Next day, boil until rind is soft. Add
warmed sugar and stir until dissolved. Boil steadily
until the marmalade jells when tested.
Mrs. D. McLaughlin
White Hills.
QUINCE HONEY.
Six quinces, one pineapple (or tinned pine), four
lbs. sugar, one-and-a-half pints water.
Boil sugar and water to a syrup, add the grated
quinces, also pineapple (if using tinned pinapple
strain off syrup and use only fruit). 801 l for about
one hour. Then strain in usual way.
It is economical to use discarded cores and skins
to make quince jelly.
Mrs. M. J. Rees
White Hills.
RASPBERRY JAM (EARLY VARIETY).
Six lbs. raspberries, six lbs. sugar, half oz. butter,
quarter of a teaspoon of salt, two tablespoonsful
lemon juice.
Clean berries and put into well-buttered pan.
Crush to allow juice to fiow. Place in fire and bring
to boil. Boil for three nutes, slowly add sugar,
then lemon juice and bring to the boil again. Allow
to boil quickly for five minutes. Add butter, stir
until melted, boil an extra two minutes. Remove
from the fire, bottle and seal when cold.
Mrs. M. J. Rees
White Hills.
CHUTNEYS, PICKLES
BANANA CHUTNEY.
Eight bananas (not too ripe), one small onion,
three large green cooking apples, half lb. packet
stoned dates, one lb. demerara. sugar, one dessert-
spoon curry powder, half-teaspoon salt, one dessert-
spoon chopped preserved ginger, half-pint malt
vinegar, quarter-pint water.
Skin and slice bananas thinly. Peel onions; peel
and core apples. Mince onions, apples and dates.
Put bananas and minced ingredients into a deep
casserole. Add rest of ingredients and stir well.
Cook in a slow oven for about two-and-a-half hours
or until thick and a rich chocolate color. Pot up
the chutney in clean, warm jars and cover while
still warm.
Bendigo.
Mrs. R. Robbins
PICKLED ONIONS.
Take 10 lbs. skinned onions, a handful of salt, one
gallon vinegar, half oz. whole pepper, one-and-a-
half oz. whole spice, six cups sugar.
Cover skinned onions with water and salt.
Allow to stand for 24 hours. Strain and pour brine
away. Place onions in jars. Boil vinegar, pepper
and salt, spice and sugar for a quarter of an hour
and when cold, pour vinegar over the onions. If
liked hot, place a chilli in each jar. Leave for
about four weeks before using.
White Hills.
Mrs. M. J. Rees
TOMATO CHUTNEY.
Six lbs. of tomatoes, one-and-a-half lbs. sugar,
one lb. onions, three lbs. apples, one pint vinegar,
quarter f loves, quarter oz. allspice, little pepper,
half teas soon cayenne, half lb. sultanas or raisins,
salt to taste.
Boil tomatoes and strain. Peel onions and apples
and cut up into small pieces. Put these, together
with the strained tomatoes and other ingredients
into the preserving pan and cook for three hours.
Bottle hot and seal when cold.
White Hills.
Mrs. M. J. Rees
TOMATO RELISH (GREEN OR RIPE).
Twelve lbs. of tomatoes, three lbs. onions, three
lbs. sugar, three tablespoons of mustard, three table-
spoons curry powder, three handfuls of salt, vine-
gar, cayenne pepper to taste.
Cut tomatoes and onions up into small pieces.
Place in a dish, sprinkle with salt and leave over-
night. In the morning, pour off liquid, place in pan
with enough vinegar to cover. Bring to boil for 15
minutes. Mix mustard and curry powder with a
little cold vinegar, add to the tomatoes. Add sugar
and cayenne. Boil for about half-an-hour. Stir
well. Bottle hot and seal while still hot.
White Hills.
Mrs. M. J. Rees


BOTTLING
Here are some hints to better bottling, given by Mrs. Ern Watson
of Fairy Dell, via Rochester, a well-known exhibitor and cookery
judge and herself a prize-winner on many occasions.
As a general rule the best syrup for show pur-
poses is—one cup of sugar to two cups of water.
Bring to boil and boil live minutes. To ensure
brightness and freedom from sediment strain
through flannel or several thicknesses- of butter
muslin.
Peaches and cumquats require a heavy syrup—
one cup of sugar to one cup of water.
It is important to fill the jars to overflowing with
syrup.
To ensure the removal of air bubbles, either
bump on hand or on a cloth on table; paddle with a
slender spatula (a knife may damage the fruit)
or shake the bottle with lid on, then again fill to
overflowing. Process in your usual manner.
If your fruit fails to seal this may be caused by
(X) chipped top edge of jars; (2) damaged rings;
(3) weak clip; (4) crack in jar; (5) not putting on
lid correctly; (6) small rust holes through lids; (7)
pieces of fruit between lid and jar; (8) not screw-
ing down screw top. The remedy is to examine jars,
lids, rings carefully before using; reseal and steril-
ise goods again.
Poor color results from fading, unsuitable var-
ieties, under-ripe fruit, overheating. The remedy
is to store always in the dark, use correct varieties
of firm, ripe fruit and do not overheat.
If you find your fruit is not keeping well, check
these points: Too rapid heating, too short pro-
cessing, dirty fruit, dirty bottles, faulty rings or
lids. To remedy be sure you cook the required time,
wash fruit and bottles well and examine lids and
rings before use.
Fruit rising in bottles is due to over-ripe fruit,
loose pack, overheating, syrup too strong.
Fruit that sinks may be caused by the variety
(berry fruits naturally sink), loose packing, over-
ripe fruit or too rapid heating. Re-packing and
re-sterilising should help.
Receding liquid is caused by insufficient liquid in
bottles, excessive heating, fruit containing air
bubbles. Remedy by filling bottles to brim, making
sure air bubbles are released, heating to correct time
and pre-cooking.
Split skins can result from too rapid heating or
over-heating, or by the variety of fruit. Heat
slowly and correct time, also prick skins.
Cloudy or dull liquid is often caused by over-ripe
fruit, syrup not strained, fruit not washed when in
jar, over-heating or dirty fruit.
FRUIT MOST SUITABLE FOR BOTTLING
Apples: Granny Smith, Stewarts Seedling.
Apricots: Moorpark, Tilton, Trevatt.
Peaches: Golden Queen, Pullars Cling,
Pears: William Bon Chretien, Packham.
Gooseberries: Roaring Lion.
Nectarines: Goldmine.
Plums: Satsuma, Grand Duke, Greengage.
Grapes: Waltham Cross, Purple Cornichon.
Figs: Black Genoa.
Tomatoes: Grosse Lisse hold shape well; Tatinter,
Burwood Wonder, South Australian Dwarf.
Fruit-salad: Pears, peaches, apricots, pineapples,
passionfruit (banana causes clouding; oranges de-
velop small white crystals of nyringin).


'Uppl
APPLIANCE & HARDWARE MERCHANTS
modern supplies
172 WILLIAMSON ST . BENDIGO. TELEPHONE IBS6
INDUSTRIAL, RURAL & DOMESTIC
REQUIREMENTS
Q
o
Built by experts
to link perfection
with the specifications
required by Australian
women.
PLAN YOUR COOKING
AROUND THE
CARMICHAEL "400"
(as illustrated)
or the
520 HEAT STORAGE COOKER
Available At
modern supplies


Make Your Own
CANDIES
Candy-making is an easy and fascinating pastime. It can be
profitable too! However, in this branch of cooking, perhaps
more than in any other, care and accuracy must be exercised.
An aluminium saucepan holding about two
quarts is best for the cooking process. Almost any
good stove can be used for confectionery-making,
but great care must be exercised with regard to
the heat in order not to scorch the syrup before
the correct degree of boiling has been registered.
A steady even heat is an essential.
Accuracy in weighing Ingredients and the
careful following of general directions as to
boiling the sugar and maize syrup are also essen-
tials to success.
Always use the best essence and also take
great care in coloring. Many sweets can be
ruined by over-coloring. Raspberry red, used
sparingly, gives a nice shade of rose.
Take care of your thermometer. Always warm
the thermometer by placing it in a deep jug or
kettle of hot water before putting it right down
into the boiling syrup as far as it can go and
allowing it to rest on the side of the saucepan
until the required degree has been reached.
Remove it and place in the hot water again until
the syrup adhering to it is dissolved. Wash care-
fully in hot soapy water, rinse in clear hot water
and dry.
The same boiling degree is used for either
a large or small quantity when making sweets.
General directions for boiling sugar and maize
syrup (liquid glucose):—
Place sugar and maize syr-up (glucose) in the
saucepan and add half-a-cup of water to moisten.
Place on stove and stir until the sugar and maize
syrup are thoroughly dissolved and then bring
quickly to boiling point (212 degrees'). As soon
as the syrup starts to boll, place lid on saucepan
for two minutes so that the steam may condense
on the sides of the saucepan.
Remove lid, wash off with a brush dipped in
warm water any particles of sugar that may
have splashed on to the sides of the saucepan.
As soon as the syrup boils at its own level, put
in the thermometer (previously warmed in hot
water) and boil to degree required.
Sugar is always boiled in this way unless
otherwise stated. Always wait until the syrup
ceases to boil before adding essences and color-
ings. Glucose dissolves more quickly when warm
water is used to moisten the sugar and glucose.
CANDIES
PAGE
Barley Sugar 71
Butterscotch 71
Coconut Ice 71
PAGE
Jujubes 71
Luscious Creams 71


VITAMISERS! CAKE MIXERS!
Real Help - Real Value
In Your Kitchen -
Your Recipes Become
A Happy Reality
€
M
SEMAK VITAMISER
22 (ins.
SEMAK MIXER
£2l/10/-
ELCON CAKE MIXER
£25/10/=
■
SUNBEAM MIXMASTER . £27/6/-
DEPOSIT £3.
Blendor Attachment for SUNBEAM
£7/10/=
It’s CLEANER! QUICKER! ECONOMICAL!
Make Year Kitchen ELECTRICAL
For Expert Advice and Guidance, Ring or Call In at
HOMECRAFTS PTY. LTD.
c
ES3
booo
csa
oo
£3
VULCAN
STOVETTE
Cook for Six
RAPID-HEAT
Plate
LARGE OVEN
£32/10/-
Cupboard Stand
£6/10/-
Extra
ELECTRIC RANGES !
SIMPSON! METIERS! - From £72/5/-. Easy Terms
252 MITCHELL STREET
RING
422 1180 1840


BARLEY SUGAR.
One lb. sugar, four oz. liquid glucose (maize
syrup), essence of lemon.
Moisten the sugar and maize syrup with half a
breakfast cup of water. Put on fire. Do not stir
the mixture after the maize syrup is dissolved.
Bring to 310 degrees fahrenheit, then remove from
fire. Wait until syrup ceases boiling, stir in about
a dessertspoonful of pure essence of lemon, then
pour into well-buttered tin. Allow mixture to
cool, but before it gets cold, mark with a knife into
squares. The mixture may also be run into re-
quired shapes.
Mrs. P. F. Griffin
Bendigo.
BUTTERSCOTCH.
This is fundamentally the same recipe as for
barley sugar, but the mixture should be brought
up to 315 deg. fahr. Take off the fire and when it
has ceased to boil, add two oz. butter. Stir until
the butter is well worked into the mixture. Warm
again on fire if necessary, to prevent setting, and
pour out. Butterscotch should be cut into inch
squares and wrapped in wax papers.
The correct way to cut toffee is with a buttered
knife, when lukewarm. Mark the top into the
shapes required and then hit the knife straight
through. Never drag a knife across toffee and
always cut it when lukewarm. If toffee is cut when
hot it will lose its shape.
Mrs. P. F. Griffin
Bendigo.
COCONUT ICE.
One lb. sugar, five oz. maize syrup. Moisten and
boil to 235 degrees. Take off fire and beat up to
nearly white, adding about four oz. dessicated coco-
nut. Divide into two parts and pour one half on
greased slab or tin. Beat up the other half a
little more, adding rose pink color and a teaspoon
of vanilla essence. Pour on top of white ice.
When beating syrup for coconut ice, beat until it
is a nice thick and white consistency, before pouring
half out to set. Should the other half go a little
too stiff to pour out of the saucepan evenly, it may
be placed back over a very low fire and just thinned
sufficiently to be poured out evenly.
Bendigo.
Mrs. P. F. Griffin
JUJUBES.
One lb. sugar, four oz. maize syrup, one-and-a-
haif oz. sheet gelatine.
Moisten sugar and maize syrup with half a cup
of water and boil to 240 degrees. Take off fire and
add soaked gelatine, color and flavoring. Return to
lire and stir for one minute. Pour into a Swiss
roll tin moistened with water.
Always use best sheet gelatine when available
and let it soak for one-and-a-half hours in cold
water before using. If using powdered gelatine,
use in same proportion. It is important that care
is taken not to stir the mixture for more than one
minute after you have added the gelatine. Allow
the mixture to set until the next day. Remove
from tin, place on well-sugared white or grease-
proof paper, cut with scissors into neat squares and
roll in sugar.
Bendigo.
Mrs. P. F. Griffin
LUSCIOUS CREAMS.
Just add seven oz. sifted icing sugar to three
dessertspoons of hot milk, stirring smoothly all the
time. When sugar is mixed in well, add one-and-a-
half teaspoons of melted butter and three drops of
oil of peppermint. Work the mixture with your
hands until It is thick and creamy.
Cut small pieces of the mixture and shape them
around any desired filling—almonds, dates, crys-
tallized cherries. Roll other pieces into balls and
add a walnut or glace cherry to the top. For
variety, tint portions different colors before mould-
ing, by adding a drop of coloring and working in.
Drop some of the creams Into melted chocolate to
coat.
White Hills.
Mrs. K. Kerr
FIRST TEST YOUR EGG
How old is that egg in the pantry ? Before you
eat it, give it these simple tests. Drop it into a
small beaker full of water. New laid, it will sink to
the bottom and lie on its side. Three weeks old,
it will tilt at an angle. Three months old, it will
stand on end. Even older, it will float to the top.
Two ounces of salt in the water make the test
still more accurate. Up to two days old, the egg
will rise slightly. At three days, it will be half way
to the top. Any older, and it will almost jump from
the beaker!


Plastic Lcing...
And Its Use
To those who would like to try their hand at using plastic icing
to decorate cakes, an “Advertiser” reader, Mrs, P. H. Johnson,
Bendigo, an expert cake decorator and a prize-winner at the
Bendigo Show, gives these timely tips—and her own recipe for
plastic icing.
The worker should have a definite design in mind
before commencing to ice and decorate the cake. 'lt
is a good idea to work this design out on paper
first. Practice with the icing pipes is, of course,
of considerable importance as any weakness in tech-
nique will affect the general result.
When deciding upon a design, the shape of the
cake should be taken into consideration. It can be
made more regular and uniform by first covering
with almond paste. The surface of the icing should
be smooth and even and the color should also be
even throughout. When colors are used for the
main icing or for emphasis in design they should
be tastefully blended and just tints. The general
effect to aim for in cake decoration is attractiveness
and not over-crowding. In judging cakes decorated
for show purposes the judge will consider the result
in proportion to the amount of effort. Simplicity
of design is therefore a good point to remember.
PLASTIC ICING
(Sufficient Quantity for Two Cakes)
Three lbs. icing sugar, three-quarters of a lb. of
glucose, one tablespoon gelatine, half pound sugar,
half cup water.
Put gelatine to soak in enough hot water to cover
it. Place glucose, crystal sugar and water into a
saucepan and heat over slow flame. When all is
dissolved, increase the heat and bring mixture to
the boll. Do not stir while boiling. Boil for three
minutes. Remove from the fire and stir in
the gelatine. Leave cooling until just warm.
Sieve icing sugar into a bowl and stir just a little
icing sugar into the glucose mixture until it pours.
Make a well in the icing sugar left in the bowl and
pour the glucose mixture into the well. Work icing
sugar into the syrup until a fairly stiff dough is
formed, which may be rolled out to cover the cake
and also be of a suitable consistency for moulding
the decorations. (The dough is used for moulding
flowers as well as for icing the cake.) Brush the
cake with egg white prior to putting the icing on.
PLASTIC ICING
(Particularly Good)
One-and-a-half lbs. liquid glucose, one lb. sugar,
half cup water, one sheet gelatine (or one oz.), one
oz. copha. Icing sugar.
Bring to boil on a quick fire the glucose, sugar
and water. Allow to boil for one minute, stirring
all the time. (The gelatine should be soaked in
water for two hours before starting to make the
icing.) Add the gelatine and stir until thoroughly
dissolved. Add icing sugar a little at a time until
you get a stiff paste. Turn on to board, add more
icing sugar until you get a stiff dough. When mixed,
add one oz. copha and work well through. Add
flavoring and coloring to taste. These ingredients
make a large quantity of icing.
Emu Creek.
Mrs. M. Murphy
Printed by the Argus and Australasian Ltd., for The Bendigo Advertiser Newspapers


CONSULT
BENDIGO
RURAL ELECTRICS
Specialising in: - Leonard (Kelvinator) Refrigerators,
Snow Queen Pope
Wilkins Servis Hoover
Also Large Stocks of Hoover Labor Saving Appliances
Vacuum Cleaners Floor Polishers Steam Irons.
WE ARE AGENTS FOR:
S.T.C. and Stromberg Carlson Radios and Radiograms
For AD Electrical Repairs to your home appb'ances
1A King Street, BENDIGO.
PHONE 295 2.
For All Electrical Repairs to your home appliances.
Snow Queen (Westinghouse) Refrigerators
S.T.C. Refrigerators.
Washing Machines by
Malleys Simpson
SEE US FIRST


'pkon.ej^}-^ 7 16 63
172 WATTLE ST. BENDIGO
• _ f
jjtvX. SleAyzc^
SOLE MANUFACTURERS BENDIGO
AND DISTRICT.
rocerg
(h<^^US3M
Ask Fop The
RED
PACK
Sliced
and
Wrapped
THERE IS NOTHING
“JUST AS GOOD”
