

The
Early Struggle for Political
Freedom in Scotland
BY
J. O’CONNOR KESSACK.
A LECTURE DELIVERED IN 1907.
PRICE ONE PENNY.
PUBLISHED BY GLASGOW CLARION SCOUTS.
26 ELMBANK CRESCENT, GLASGOW.
1909.
CIVIC PRESS. LTD., 164 HOWARD STREET, GLARSOW


A delivered in /907-
Early Struggle for Political Freedom in Scotland.
Mb. Chaieman and Citizens,
In Scotland we are singularly ignorant of the political
struggles of the past. We have the franchise and the rights of
combination and free speech; but few of us know the suffering
endured and the cost in lives before these very elementary rights
were wrung from an unwilling Government, and a haughty, dom-
ineering, privileged class of aristocrats. As a people, we know
comparatively nothing of how ruthlessly and unmercifully the
pioneers of human rights were crushed down, murdered, and im-
prisoned, when they demanded the right to shape their own
destinies, to a share in the government of their own lives. History
of that kind is not taught in your Board Schools. To tell you of
the noble and heroic deeds and the self-sacrificing labours of the
old Radical weavers of Glasgow would inspire you with the same
impassioned zeal in the cause of human betterment, and the same
unquenchable love of freedom. That would be inconvenient teaching
for our wealth overlords to sanction. Compared with your grand-
fathers, you are politically dead. You are not alive to politics as
they were. You are mere animated political corpses; they were
political economists. It is because I want to see a revival of their
spirit that I address you on this subject to-night.
Going back in history a little over a hundred years, to the year
1792, we find the first definite movement for the extension of the
franchise to working men in Scotland. No one who knows the
electoral laws of that time can deny that Reform was urgently
necessary if the State was to prosper and gain strength enough
to rid itself of the unwieldy trammels of feudalism. No advance
was possible until the old order had been finally conquered and
subdued. A healthy State could not be built by a minority of its
inhabitants.
The total electorate of Scotland at this time, and down to 1832,
was hardly more than 5000; whilst that of Glasgow was not more
than 40 or 50. And although a rotten Borough like Old Sarum,
with only half a dozen house®, could send two members to Parlia-
ment, a big city like Glasgow was linked on to Rutherglen, Ren-
frew, and Dumbarton before they could have any representation
at all. Nor could the freeholders or voters vote directly for their
Parliamentary representative. The freeholders in each Burgh
elected an “independent delegate,” and if the election was due
to take place in Glasgow (it took place by turn in each of the
Burghs) the four precious privileged persons met in the Tolbooth
to elect the member for Parliament. There was always a crowd of


the legal fraternity, and a large number of other privileged per-
sons present. When they had elected the man, they invariably
began a great guzzling and junketing performance by drinking the
health of His Majesty the King. This done, they tossed the
glasses out into the street to be broken lest the lips of the common
ignoble herd should ever contaminate glasses which had been so
sacredly used. Such was their contempt for the common people.
Politics have never been so corrupt and bribery so open, un-
abashed and unashamed as in those “ good old days ” when the
franchise was the exclusive right of the Right Honourable Aristo-
crats and the other honourable wealthy persons. Votes were
bought and sold both in and out of Parliament. The men with
the longest purses were the rulers of the State. To some extent
that is still true. But at that time it was quite incomprehensible
to the privileged classes that working men should aspire to a share
of government. Working men were chattels without rights,
expected to be submissive and obedient, and devoid of aspiration.
Robert Burns has turned some luminous light on the human rela-
tionships of that period. See how they regarded the common man :
“ But then to see how ye’re negleckit,
How huffed and cuffed and disrespeckit!
Lord, man ! our gentry care as little
Por delvers, ditchers, and sic cattle :
They gang as saucy by poor folk
As I would by a stinkin’ brock.”
The spirit of Burns, and of revolt was abroad in the land.
A man was a man in spite of his poverty, and why should he
submit to be governed and oppressed by some “ birkie ca’d a lord” ?
It was when this just feeling of resentment at aristocratic insolence
and rapacity was taking hold and firm root that Thomas Muir,
a brilliant and rising advocate of 27 years, threw himself into the
reform agitation and gave it the organisation that hitherto it had
lacked. He formed the Reform Association in Glasgow, and
carried on in 1792 a vigorous and ceaseless campaign of oratory
in the cause of Reform. He had a fine voice, a refined and mag-
netic personality. People flocked to hear him, and hailed him
as their leader in a great cause. Woe unto that man whom the
common people hear gladly ! The uncommon people will do with
him, even now, if they had the power, as they did with the founder
of Christianity, curse him, revile him, call him a blasphemer, and
end by crucifying him as a common felon. Thomas Muir could
not escape that fate.
The news of his great meetings and the rapid spread of his
principles caused the gravest alarm among the wealthy classes;
and the Government sent the Lord Advocate, Henry Dundas, in
hot haste from London to put the machinery of the Government
in operation and smash this unholy (so they viewed it) movement
for Parliamentary Reform. When it became apparent that the
Government would deal ferociously with all who dared assert the


rights of the people, a few of Muir’s supporters, a lawyer and a
clergyman in particular, not only deserted him, but became active
agents of the Government in opposition to Reform.
Not so Robert Burns. He held on in the same course. He
formed the Ayrshire Branch of the Reform Association, and it
was not till the next year that he was compelled by relentless
pressure to desist from all activity in that direction. He was then
an exciseman; and when convenient opportunity occurred the
miserable flunkies of the Board of Excise were for turning him
out to starve. Here is his own version of the affair in a letter to
Erskine, of Mar:
“ Indeed but for the exertions of Mr. Graham, of Fintry,
who has ever been my warm and generous friend, I had without
so much as the slightest previous intimation, been turned adrift
with my helpless family to all the horrors of want.”
Yes; with great insolence they told this great man that his
business was to act, not to think, and that whatever might be,
men or measures, it was for him to be silent and obedient. For
the sake of his wife and little ones the greatest soul in Scotland
had to flagelate his spirit by suing for favours, by pleading to the
petty tyrants to remit their sentence of dismissal. But he was
incapable of absolute surrender. He stepped down under protest.
It was upon this occasion that the creed of poverty was written.
“If in politics thou would’st mix,
And mean thy fortunes be,
Bear this in mind— ‘ Be deaf and blind ;
Let great folks hear and see.’ ”
When Lord Advocate Dundas reached Edinburgh intent upon
the death of Radicalism, Thomas Muir, worn in body by his tire-
less efforts, and grieved in mind by the desertion of friends, had
decided to take a brief holiday. He went to London, where he
was honoured and feted by the members of the London bar; for
his fame as an advocate had preceded him. The Government made
no attempt to seize him there; to do so did not accord with their
murderous designs. They waited; and when he quit London for
Paris they promptly served an indictment and summons upon
him at the address of his parents in the Parish of Gadder, charging
him with delivering seditious speeches to weavers in Glasgow, Pais-
ley, and Kirkintilloch, and informing that he would be “ punished
with all the pains and penalties of the law, in order to deter others
from committing like crimes IN ALL TIME COMING,” Upon
pain of outlawry he was called to appear before the Lords of
Justice, on the 2nd of January, 1793, to answer those alleged
crimes.
Muir knew nothing of this terrific document till the Bth of
February. It was quite impossible for him to answer a summons
for the 2nd of January, of which he had no cognisance at that
date. Sentence of outlawry was passed; which meant that any
murderous wretch could shoot him, or stab him in the back, not


only with impunity, but with the blessing and favour of the
Government. In face of danger so great, Muir never hesitated,
but intimated his determination to return to Scotland and meet
his accusers face to face. “ I dare challenge,” he said in a letter,
“ the minutest investigation of my public and private conduct.
Armed with innocency I appeal to justice, and I disdain to sup-
plicate favours.”
To get out of France at that time was of some difficulty. That
country was in the grips of a mighty revolution. Muir had arrived
in Paris just the day before Louis XVI. had his head taken off.
His enemies at home did not fail to make use of this fact. It was
said, in order to frighten the timid, that he went to Paris as a
delegate from Scottish Radicals to accelerate the death of that
unhappy monarch. They knew that nothing could have been far-
ther from the truth; but the sinister ghouls of Government were
thirsting for vengeance on their victim. In addition to revolu-
tion, war had broken out between Britain and France, which made
it doubly difficult for Muir to leave for Scotland.
Ultimately, after much trouble, he secured his passport, which
commanded citizens of France to give him every assistance if in
want. He reached the coast and found a vessel bound for Balti-
more, which put him ashore at Belfast. He lost no time in hiring
a boat to carry him across the channel to Portpatrick. Arriving
there he posted on to Stranraer, put up in an inn, taking not the
slightest trouble to hide his identity. An idea that this slender-
built and refined young man was the fierce and terrible outlaw
wanted by the Government occurred to the Boniface of the inn.
He raised a hue and cry. The legal functionaries swarmed about
the place, and had it surrounded and guarded as if Muir had been
some powerful desperado. The Edinburgh authorities behaved no
better. They flung him in chains, and carried him off to Edin-
burgh, guarded by many soldiers. No felon, no murderer, was
treated with greater severity and cruelty. The greatest offence of
that time was to question the privileges of the wealthy.
Muir was thrown in a dungeon in Edinburgh, to be hauled
forth on the 30th day of August, 1793, to be tried before Lord.
Justice-Clerk M £ Queen, Lords Henderland, Dunsinan, Abercrom-
by, and Swinton, and a jury, such as it was.
The jury was packed. Just as so-called Constitutional Societies
and Property Defence Leagues spring up to oppose Socialism to-
day, so in that day an association called “ The Friends of the
Constitution in Church and State ’ ’ was organised to help the
Government crusade against the movement for Reform. The fif-
teen jurymen were all members of this “ patriotic ” society. In
vain did Muir protest. He was snubbed and insulted by the
judges. He then recognised that he was a doomed man.
The trial was a fraud and a mockery. They had previously
resolved to crush both Muir and the movement he represented.
The utterances of the Lord Justice Clerk indicated the mind of
the Government on this matter of Reform:


“ What,” said he, “ had these transient bodies of weavers
and manufacturers in these places to do with Reform, or this
prisoner’s philipics on the subject ? They might bundle them-
selves off in a jiffy. The Constitution was matchless, and
could not be improved on the face of time.”
Yes: what right had common people to think at all? Burns
once again put the case in words which much more forcefully
conveys his lordship’s meaning:
“ They and be ! what right ha’e they
To meat or sleep, or light o’ day ?
Far less to riches, power, or freedom.
But what your lordship likes to gi’e them?”
His lordship continued his harangue to the jury in this inter-
esting strain. Allow me to quote again :
‘ ‘ The panel might have known (a panel seems in legal
phraseology to be the person charged) that no attention could
be paid to the petitions of Rabbles. What right have they to
representation ? The panel should have told them that Par-
liament would never listen to their petitions. How could they
think of it? A government in every country should just be
like a corporation; and in this country it was made up of
the landed interest, who alone had a right to be represented.
As for the Rabble who had nothing but personal property,
what hold had the nation of them ? What security for the
payments of taxes ? They might pack up all their property on
their backs, and leave the country in the twinkling of an eye,
but landed property cannot be removed.”
What a pity it is that they cannot take Scotland away and
dump it down somewhere in the Pacific, and leave the Rabble
behind to perish in the sea! Having got rid of the Rabble, who
would produce their daily bread for them ? Who would comb their
hair and shine their shoes? Who would supply them with all the
luxuries of civilisation ? The poor aristocrats would have to work
or starve. That necessity should be imposed upon them in any
case. It # is not consistent with the economic health or with the
dignity of a great people that we should carry a lot of idle, lazy,
ornamental parasites on our shoulders. Calling themselves “ noble-
men ” makes them no less burdensome. We deserved to be called
the Rabble so long as we willingly pay homage to those mock
superiors.
It is noticeable, however, that we hear much less of the Rabble
in these days. When there is no election nigh, and you strike
against a reduction of wages, the newspapers discover that you
are a “riotous mob,” a “common herd,” a “rabble.” That is
when you ask for something. Alas ! what a transformation when
they ask something from you ! When they ask for your vote, you
are “ladies and gentlemen,” “sober and industrious citizens,”
Ihe “ backbone of the nation.” Their wives and daughters dis


cover that your babies are sweet and pretty. They kiss them and
then think of a disinfectant. We are slowly beginning to under-
stand.
I now want to show you what manner of man Thomas Muir
was. I will quote you one or two passages from his speech to the
jury. His noble and eloquent words contrast well with the fierce
and harsh utterances of the Lord Justice Clerk.
“ What, pray, is my offence? ” he said. “ I tell you that
I actively and sincerely embarked in the cause of Parliament-
ary Reform, in the vindication , and in the restoration of the
rights of the people. Nor do I hesitate to unfold to you my
motives. They are supported by their own intrinsic strength,
and they are sanctioned by the great and the venerable names
of the living and the dead. Gentlemen, I have boldly con-
tended for an EQUAL representation of the people, in what
I shall now call the House of the People, because I consider
it to be a measure essentially necessary to the salvation of the
State, and the stability of our boasted Constitution.”
He sought not the desolation of civil war; he sought to save
the State from impending ruin and blood} 7 insurrection, which he
clearly foresaw would come if the mass of the people were denied
their rights and an attempt made to keep them in perpetual sub-
servience and slavery. He was a real patriot and lover of his
country, and was pursued with the implacable vengeance of the
rulers because of it.
“ My crime,” he said, further on, “ is for having dared to-
be, according to the measure of my feeble abilities, a strenuous-
and active advocate for an equal representation of the people
in the House of the People. It is a good cause. It shall ulti-
mately prevail —it shall finally triumph. Say then openly by
your verdict, if you do condemn me, that it is for this cause
I suffer.”
And now allow me to quote the closing words of that great
speech.
‘ ‘ The time will come when men must stand or fall by
their actions ; when all human pageantry shall cease; when
the hearts of all shall be laid open. If you regard your most
important interests —if you wish that your conscience should
whisper to you words of consolation, or speak to you in the
terrible words of remorse—weigh well the verdict you are to
pronounce. As for me, I am careless and indifferent to my
fate. I can look danger, and I can look death in the face;
for I am shielded by the consciousness of my own rectitude.
1 may. be condemned to languish in the recesses of a dungeon
—I may be doomed to ascend the scaffold. Nothing can
deprive me of a recollection of the past—nothing can destroy
my inward peace of mind, arising from the remembrance of
having discharged my duty..”


That speech was begun at 10 p.m., and was finished at 1 a.m.
It needs no comment. The quotations I have made speak for the
man. He was flung back into his cell, and brought into court again
at mid-day for sentence. Each of the five judges addressed him
with the greatest insolence. They were in such haste to do the
will of their masters that they forgot it was “ cruelty to load a
falling man.” The Lord Chief Justice said he was sorry that the
law would not allow him to have Muir whipped through the streets
by the common hangman. The rabble wanted some blood-letting.
Meantime, Muir would be sent to Botany Bay for 14 years as a
common felon, and to be taken and hanged by the neck till dead if
found in this country within that time.
About the same time precisely the same sentence was passed
on William Skirving, Maurice Margarot, Joseph Gerald, and the
Rev. Fisher Palmer, for precisely the same offence, asking for the
people a right to a. share in the government of their country.
When Muir was being placed on the prison hulk at Leith, his
aged parents were not even permitted to shake hands with their
only son, so harsh and cruel were the oppressors. They managed,
however, to smuggle him a small pocket copy of the New Testa-
ment, on the first leaf of which these words were inscribed —“ To
Thomas Muir of Huntershill, from his aged and afflicted parents.”
From 1793 the remaining five years of his life makes stranger
reading than the liveliest fictions of the imagination. He was
carried to Botany Bay chained to a common murderer. The Rev.
Fisher Palmer was on the same hulk, and was treated with the
same harsh brutality. But the fame of Muir had spread far. One
of the mightiest men of the world—the first President of the
United States, George Washington—heard of his trial and sentence,
saw in Muir a man suffering in the cause of freedom and humanity,
and resolved to steal him away from the cruel tyranny of the
British Government, and carry him off to America, where he
hoped Muir would become an accomplished and brilliant member
of the Bar. Washington chartered the good ship “ Otter ” and
sent it all the way from New York to Botany Bay. Its sole
mission was to find Muir. When they reached the penal settle-
ment, the crew, on the pretence that they wanted water and a
holiday ashore, lingered about until they found and carried Muir
away. The ship met with gale after gale, and was finally wrecked
in Nootka Sound off Vancouver. Only Muir and two sailors man-
aged to get ashore. In their wanderings he lost the sailors and
was captured by Indians himself. They dressed him up in their
fantastic garb, and gave him of the best they had. His heart was
elsewhere, however. It was the amenities and liberties of civilisa-
tion that he longed for, not the freedom of barbarism. He con-
trived to escape, and with the sun to guide him, tramped
4000 miles down the Western Coast of America, feeding on roots
and herbs and shell-fish, with his pocket Testament as his only
companion, till he reached the City of Panama. Spain was at
war with Britain, but the Spanish Governor, upon hearing Muir’s


story of suffering and adventure, resolved to help him to reach the
New England States. He was sent to Vera Cruz in the hope of
finding a vessel. There was no north bound vessel there, and he
was sent on to Havana in hopes that at that port a boat would be
found bound for New York. The Havana Governor misunderstood
his instructions, and decided to send Muir on to Spain, and placed
him aboard one of two frigates heavily laden with precious metals.
They sailed for Cadiz. All was well as they crossed the Atlantic,
until the spires and towers of Cadiz hove in sight. Simultaneously
two British cruisers, the “ Emerald ” and the “ Irresistible,”
under Sir John Jervis, could be seen bearing down on them. , A
battle ensued. The cruisers soon battered the Spanish frigates into
submission, and when boarded by the British crews, Muir, who
had been hit by a bullet in the face, lay weltering in gore, and
to all appearance dead. Indeed, he was counted among the dead,
and Sir John Jervis in his despatch regarding this battle of 26th
September, 1797, specially mentions Muir as among the dead.
Of course they didn't look for him. They had it from the Span-
iards that he was aboard, and at close of battle he wasn’t among
the living.
An officer was having the bodies thrown overboard. Muir was
just about to be cast over when the officer noticed the Testament
which had fallen from his pocket. He read the inscription on the
inside page, and was staggered to discover that here was an old
school fellow with whom he had spent many happy days. The
body gave signs of life. That officer was a human being with
human sympathies. He knew that to take him aboard a British
ship was to take him home to die on the scaffold. He handed the
wounded man over to the Spaniards at Cadiz with a solemn request
that they nurse him back to life if possible.
The French Directory sent an urgent message to Cadiz asking
that everything possible might be done for him. Subsequently
they sent an ambassador to ask the Spanish authorities to allow
him to be brought to France, and become a French citizen. Every
country wanted him but his own; all men except his countrymen
recognised his peerless worth and great merit.
On the 14th of August, 1797, he wrote thus to Tom Paine:
“ Dear friend, since the memorable evening on which I took leave
of you at St. Cloud, my melancholy and agitated life has been a
continued series of extraordinary events. I hope to meet you
again in a few months. Contrary to my expectations, I am, at
last, nearly cured of my numerous wounds. The Directory have
shown me great kindness. Their solicitude for an unfortunate
being who has been so cruelly oppressed is a balm of consolation
which revives my drooping spirits.”
Thomas Muir.
He thought he was nearly cured. Alas ! it was not so. It was
merely temporary improvement. His progress northward was made
a great event in France. He was feted in every town, and in Paris


the welcome was overwhelming in its warmth. But he was finished.
His body could stand no more. He died on the 29th September,
1798, aged 33 years.
The movement for Reform was apparently crushed with the
removal of Muir, Skirving, Margarot, Gerald, and Palmer; but
it was not dead. The manifestations of life were few; but the
spirit was still there awaiting convenient opportunity to demon-
strate its power. There was peace; but it was the peace of Warsaw
at a later date, a peace of terror.
1812 there was a great strike of weavers, and at the same
time the demand for the franchise was renewed. Once again they
were crushed down unmercifully, many weavers being shot in the
Cal ton and Gallowgate of Glasgow. And it is worth noticing in
these days when money lords and landlords want to revive an
obsolete system of protection, that the weavers in 1812 and later
years invariably referred to the Corn Laws as “ accursed,” point-
ing out that meal was 3/ a peck and wages only 8/6 a week. It
took a long and hungry struggle to remove those laws, and yet we
find that the selfish rich are still prepared to make profit out of
hunger.
The Reformers again became active in 1816. In that year the
Glasgow Reformers wanted to hold a meeting to petition Parlia-
ment for reforms. The authorities told them that if they dared
hold their meeting on the Green the dragoons would be turned
upon them. They asked for the Trades Hall in Glassford Street.
That also was refused. The Committee turned then to Daniel
Caldwell of the Eagle Inn in Maxwell Street, for his stable yard.
Caldwell, being a “ Black Neb ” himself (such was one of the
names applied to the Radicals of that day) readily granted the
use of his stable yard. The magistrates, hearing of this, got hold
of his landlord and they went to Caldwell and informed him that
they would accomplish his ruin if he persisted. Such were the
amiable spirits who ruled this Christian City in 1816. Caldwell,
of course, had to call the meeting off. The Committee were in a
dilemma, when James Turner, a tobacconist on the High Street,
offered his field at Thrushgrove (then close by, now part of the
city) for the meeting. And this meeting on the 29th of October,
which the authorities would not allow in the Trades Hall or in
Caldwell’s Yard, where only about 1500 could have assembled,
became the biggest meeting ever held in Scotland. No fewer than
40,000 people attended. The meeting denounced the Corn Laws,
and called for an extension of the franchise, and then quietly
dispersed.
A Glasgow poet, Sandy Rogers, cleverly satirised the conduct
of the authorities upon that occasion in these verses:
“ Vile sooty Rabble, what d’ye mean
By raising a’ this dreadfu’ din ?
Do ye no’ ken what horrid sin
Ye are committing,


By haudin’ up your drafts sae thin
For sic a meeting ?
“Vile Black Nebs! doomed through life to drudge.
And howk amang your native sludge —
What is’t gives you the right to judge
0’ siccan matters ?
That ye maun grumble, grunt, and grudge
At us, your betters ?
“ Base Rads. ! whose ignorance surpasses
The dull stupidity of asses,
Think ye the privileged classes
Care aught about ye ?
If ony mair ye daur to fash us,
By George! we’ll shoot ye!
“ We’ve w’alth o’ sodgers in the toon ,
To keep sic ragamuffins doon;
An’ gin ye dinna settle soon,
By a’ that’s guid!
We’ll gar the common sewers rin
Wi’ your base bluid! ”
The size and determined spirit of that historic meeting showed
the Government that the Reform movement had grown to great
dimensions. It had grown quietly—almost secretly. They were
none the less resolved to crush it, and stooped to methods so
atrocious and infamous that they are only equalled by the acts of
the barbarous lunatic who now rules the destinies of the Russian
people. They were to discover the leading spirits of the Reform
movement and hang them, or keep them languishing in dungeons.
But how were they to find the master spirits ? Why, if you want
to betray Christ, you must find a Judas. This was what the-
Government did. They found the small-souled and craven-hearted
creatures among the Radicals, whose ideals were less bright to
them than the glitter of gold, and got them to spy upon, to deceive
and betray their fellows. The chief of these miscreants wa£ one
Richmond. He fabricated a treasonable oath in 1817, and got a
few weavers to sign it without having read the document, and
who were deceived as to its contents. Four men were at once-
arrested. Andrew M'Kinlay, Thomas Edgar, John Keith, and
John Campbell were plain, simple weavers; but they were marked
out for the vengeance of a great Government for all that.
Andrew M'Kinlay was to be tried first. If he was guilty they
were all guilty. The Sheriff of Edinburgh and the Advocate
Depute, Henry Home Drummond, visited John Campbell fre-
quently in goal. They wanted him to swear away the lives of his
fellows. They promised him money, and a Government sinecure'
for life. The agents for the defence were rigourously excluded
from any interview with Campbell. Yet this Cal ton weaver con-
trived to let them know what was going forward. He asked the


Prison Governor to be allowed to send a piece of tobacco to
M'Kinlay. The Governor consented. Campbell had rolled a
little bit of paper inside the tobacco. When M'Kinlay found it
he read these words: —“ They are wanting to bribe me to swear
your life away, but I’m true.”
On 23rd July the case was to be tried. John Campbell stepped
into the witness box. The Judge put the usual question as to
whether anybody had offered any reward or emolument to give-
evidence in this case. John Campbell staggered the Court by
bluntly answering “ Yes.” The Judge repeated the question, but
got the same reply. The prosecution dropped the case, and left
the Court in confusion. The execrable Richmond said that if the-
case had succeeded, 1500 warrants were ready for the arrest of
all the prominent men in the Reform movement. But the hand
and game of the prosecution was exposed, and for a time they
were compelled to cease from like activities.
Between 1817 and 1820 the spies accomplished nothing of im-
portance. Before I speak of the terrible events of 1820 in Glasgow
and Stirling, let me remind you of the massacre on St. Petersfield
at Manchester, in 1819. A meeting was being held, ask-
ing for Parliamentary Reform. As a token of peaceful intention,
both Avomen and children were there ; but the dragoons, well
primed Avith whisky and beer, came rushing down upon that help-
less crowd, trampling and cutting and slashing. The murder was
grim and great.
A Forfarshire laird, John Kinloch of Kinloch, denounced that
massacre with all the eloquence and fervour of a true Scot. To
avoid the murderous Avrath of the Government, he had to flee to
France. They made diabolical use of this fact the next year.
In Scotland in 1820 the Radical movement had grown very
powerful. The Government feared it, and crushed it once more
by grim and terrible plot and judicial murder. Shelley struck
that Government hard; but they deserved it.
“ I met Murder on the way —
He had a mask like Castlereagh—
Very smooth he looked yet grim;
Seven bloodhounds followed him.
All were fat, and well they might
Be in admirable plight,
For one by one and two by two,
He tossed them human hearts to chew.”
Yes; Castlereagh and his Cabinet were bloodhounds of a very
ferocious order. But ferocity cannot push back progress for ever.
You may murder a few of the people, but you cannot murder all
the people. You may crush an idea, but you cannot extinguish
it. If you persecute a cause you give it a glory and fascination,
and its advocates redoubled fervour and enthusiasm. If people
cannot propagate their cause in the open day, they will do it by


night; and the time always comes when the forces generated in
secret explode with disastrous results to the oppressors.
In face of the growing sentiment for reform, the design of the
Government, as the homely Peter Mackenzie says, was obviously
to impress fear upon the minds of the upper and middle classes,
and get them to unite as one man to maintain for the few at the
-expense of the many the huge Parliamentary monopoly, and to
suffer no man to enter the House by the help of working class
votes. The means they took to accomplish this end were damnably
atrocious. Richmond and the other spies were set to work. They
got a raw lad, an apprentice printer, to print a “ treasonable
address ” for £2. To remove all possibility of this lad, Pulton,
telling the truth about the production of this document, he was
packed off to America.
The “ treasonable address ” was posted throughout Glasgow
on Sunday, 2nd April. It had been posted during the night.
Panic, fright, and consternation ensued. Dr. Chalmers, who was
then a preacher in Glasgow, prayed at noon service, giving voice
to the feelings of most: —‘ ‘ 0 Mighty Lord and Governor of the
Universe! preserve this kingdom, we humbly beseech Thee, from
the horrors of Civil War, apparently approaching us in this city.”
But so well did the authorities know about this address that troops
poured into the city the same afternoon; they had been waiting
outside for the event which came so “ unexpectedly The Bank,
the Excise and Custom Offices were barricaded and garrisoned.
All were aghast! Fright and terror reigned supreme. The blood-
hounds of the Cabinet and their trusty spies alone knew that the
terror was manufactured for the sole purpose of extinguishing in
blood the movement for reform. They knew the “ treasonable
address ” ; it was not the work of the Reformers, but their own.
It begain in these words:
“ Friends and Countrymen,—Roused from the state in which
we have been sunk for so many years, we are at last compelled from
the extremity of our sufferings, and the contempt heaped upon
our petitions for redress, to assert our rights at the hazard of our
lives.” And it concluded thus:—“By order of the Committee
of Organisation for the formation of a Provisional Government.”
Had the thing been genuine, it clearly meant revolution by
force of arms. But it was a murderous swindle to decoy poor men
to death on the scaffold as “an example to others ” —to teach
working men obedience, humility, and long suffering under grossest
tyranny.
Richmond and his colleagues were very busy. They got a
muster of about 100 poor, starving weavers and mechanics in the
Fir Park —which is now an ugly graveyard, the Necropolis—at the
dead o'f night. The spies armed these men with pikes, old muskets
and pistols, and gave them all copies of the “ Treasonable Address.’
They declared' that England was up in arms—that Kinloch of
Kinloch was now returning from France with 50,000 troops, and
that 5000 of armed men under Marshal Macdonald would in a


day or so encamp on Cathkin Braes in order to command the city.
The bait took; and the poor men fell headlong into the trap
prepared for them.
Another meeting of a score or two gathered on the banks of
the Paisley Canal at Port Eglinton, and were harangued in
similar fashion. They were asked to march to Strathaven, there
to meet Field Marshal Macdonald with his troops coming to
Cathkin. But that was not the purpose of sending these men to
Strathaven. Why to Strathaven ? Because there was an old man
of 60 years there, and the Government had a grievance against
him of 27 years’ standing. When Thomas Muir was sentenced on
the 30th August, James Wilson, then 33 years of age, wrote a
long letter to Muir of commiseration, and denounced his sentence
as atrocious. That 30th of August was to be a fateful anniversary
for James Wilson. The ragged and hungry weavers arrived in
Strathaven, led by a spy called Shields. Wilson did not believe
the glowing story about insurrection, and refused to accompany
them. He was a plain, simple, pious man, who believed in work-
ing for reform on peaceful and constitutional lines. The spy put
a pistol to the old man’s head and told him that his brains would
be blown out if he did not consent to go. He was then armed
with an old rusty sword and took the road for Glasgow. The spy
disappeared; and when Wilson discovered it, he flung away his
sword and dropped the old Strathaven banner with the inscription
“ Scotland Free, or a Desert,” and returned to his home. But
he had been out in arms against the King. That was all they
wanted. Scarce had he got home when the military came up,
seized him, and carried him in chains to Glasgow. On 20th July
he was tried, found guilty, and sentenced to be hanged and be-
headed on the 30th August. While awaiting execution he wrote
a statement of his case. You may judge of the strong heart of
this old village weaver by these words:—“ I meet my fate in the
calmness and tranquility of a man who is decidedly conscious of
suffering innocently. ... I acknowledge that I die a patriot
for the cause of Freedom for my poor country, and I hope that
my countrymen will continue to see the necessity of a reform in
the way of the country being represented; and I hope my dear
countrymen will unite and stand firm to their rights.” These are
the words not of a traitor but a lover of the people and a hater
of tyranny.
On the fateful 30th August he was taken out and hanged, and
his head hacked from his body in the presence of a great crowd at
the old Jail Buildings, Saltxnarket. No judicial murder was ever
more unpopular. The people wept and shouted that it was murder.
So passed James Wilson of Strathaven. So died this old weaver
in the cause of Reform.
Let us now follow the ‘ ‘ Fir Park ’ ’ contingent. They were
instructed to march to Falkirk, where they would find strong
English reinforcements taking possession of the cannon stored at
the Carron Iron Works. With the guns they were to return to-


Glasgow and instal and protect the Provisional Government. On
the way to Falkirk they were to call at the village of Condorrat
and get John Baird, a man of 30 years and irreproachable charac-
ter, and well known as a quiet and decent reformer. He heard the
glowing story and fell, according to the wicked designs of the
plotters, into the trap. He declared himself ready to accompany
“ a band of brothers from Glasgow.” This was what was wanted.
They were luring the man on to doom. And the complicity of the
Government in this diabolical plot is clearly proven by the fact
that they had a regiment of soldiers in the Carron Ironworks ready
to receive the hungry and ragged few from Glasgow.
When this party of weavers and mechanics, hungry, ragged,
and ill-armed, reached Condorrat, they thought it necessary to
choose a leader. Andrew Hardie was the man selected. He was
young (26 years), brave, and enthusiastic. John Baird was placed
second in command.
As they approached the Carron Ironworks the}? - began anxiously
to consider their position. Their numbers had dwindled to thirty;
and the promised English troops were nowhere to be seen. The
spies had sneaked away on the plea of attending a meeting of the
Provisional Government. Onward to the heath and heather of
Bonnymuir, now the thriving village of Bonnybridge, the} 7 wearily
tramped. They lay down on the heather to rest their tired limbs.
The surrounding country was perfectly tranquil. There was no
help from Carron or Falkirk, no appearance of the promised
English army. They saw that they had been murderously swindled
and formed the unanimous resolution of throwing away their arms
and quietly returning to their homes.
Alas, they had decided too late! for a troop of the 7th Regi-
ment of Hussars with the Stirlingshire Yeomanry came galloping
down upon them, lances glittering and helmets flashing in the noon
day sun. Eighteen of the thirty v/ere left, and all of them wounded
in this great ‘ ‘ battle JJ of Bonnymuir ; some of them terribly cut
up, and all subdued and taken prisoners to Stirling Castle. When
the news reached London, an “ Extraordinary Edition of the
London Gazette ” was issued to inform the loyal subjects of His
Majesty, who has been aptly described as “ the last of the fools and
oppressors, called George,” that the “ Treasonable Provisional
Government,” rearing its hydra head in Scotland, had been com-
pletely defeated and utterly destroyed, and its chiefs imprisoned.
On the 6th of July the eighteen were arraigned on the capital
charge of high treason. No effort was spared to secure a convic-
tion. An eminent lawyer, Sergeant Hullock, was sent down from
London to take charge of the prosecution. The appearance of
English lawyers in a Scottish case was quite unprecedented. The
defence protested, but to no purpose. The Government wanted
the heads of those men, and nothing was left undone to accomplish
that end. The eighteen men were sentenced to be taken on the
Bth September, from prison, ” drawn on the hurdle to the place of
execution, and be there hanged by the neck till you be dead : and


that your heads shall.be severed from your bodies, and your bodies
shall be divided in four quarters, to be disposed of as His Majesty
shall think fit.”
Truly, a tender task for Royalty ! But the barbarous sentence
did not terrify those brave and simple weavers. Young Hardie
wrote to his grandfather —“ Although they take my bones and
grind them to powder, I await with great patience till my time
comes. The loss of my life gives me little concern.” In another
letter he showed that his awful doom did not make him swerve
one moment from the cause of Reform—
“ I die a martyr —
Firm to the Cause like a magnet to the Pole,
With undaunted spirit and unshaken soul.”
John Baird gave expression to similar sentiments in his letters.
As the day of execution approached the sentences on all except
Baird and Hardie were commuted to banishment to Botany Bay.
On the morning of the day of execution they both slept soundly
till six o’clock. The execution was fixed for two o’clock, and at
one they requested to have one last glimpse of their companions of
Bonnymuir. Hardie and Baird both addressed these men, im-
pressing upon them in words of great eloquence that the cause for
which they suffered would sooner or later prevail.
Outside the Castle gate the horrible black hurdle, with the
equally horrible executioner, awaited to convey the victims to the
place of execution in Broad Street. Nearly an hour on the way!
With courage still undaunted, Hardie mounted the scaffold nimbly,
exclaiming—“ Hail, Messenger of Eternal Rest!”
Both men knelt for a few moments in prayer; then Baird
addressed the great multitude that had assembled. His speech is
full of pathos, eloquence, and heroism. “ What I have hitherto
done was for the cause of Truth and Justice ” —so firm was hie
belief. Hardie stepped forward and began thus:—“ My dear
friends, I declare before God, I die a martyr in the cause of Truth
and Justice.”
The audience was thrilled, electrified. A great shout of
applause greeted the utterance. The military prepared for action,
the dragoons unsheathing and brandishing their swords. Official-
dom on and around the scaffold bustled about in great excitement
and terror. The Sheriff refused to allow Hardie to proceed fur-
ther, so he quietly said to the people—“ My friends, I hope none
of you have been hurt by this exhibition. Please, after this is
over, go quietly home, read your Bibles and remember the fate of
Baird and Hardie.”
They kissed and shook hands, as far as their cords would permit.
The bolt fell. Hanging had not reached the scientific precision of
to-day; and an eye-witness says;—“ The last moving sight of them
was swinging together and momentarily and convulsively trying to
catch each other by the hand.” Faithful and strong to the last!
Mighty hearts! Great souls! They are gone; yet they will live


for ever in the memory of all who love liberty and great and
heroic men. Even the Government wept, but what tears! Lord
Eldon was Lord Chancellor, and Shelley gives him an unenviable
immortality:
“ Next came Fraud, and he had on,
Like Lord E , an ermined gown;
His big tears—for he wept well—
Turned to millstones as they fell.
And the little children, who,
Round his feet played to and fro,
Thinking every tear a gem,
Had their brains knocked out by them.”
These men cemented the foundations of the rights we now
enjoy with their blood. Are we worthy descendants? They did
not fight for the abstraction called a vote. They wanted the
Franchise as a means to elevate their class and inaugurate an era
of Justice, Humanity, and Brotherhood. What are you doing
with this power so dearly bought ? Do you use it as they would
have used it ? or are you giving it back to the powers of oppression
on polling day ? If so, the Radical weavers might as well
have never fought, never sacrificed their lives and liberties on
scaffold and in dungeon. My friends, you have a great trust and
responsibility. Poverty and misery can be wiped away. Those
brave Radical working-men gave their lives, and found for you the
means to make life easier and sweeter for the aged, more gladsome
and joyous for the children, less racking and uncertain for the
able-bodied.
The work they set out to do is only partially accomplished; but
the army of freedom grows in strength, in organisation, and intelli-
gence. The day is near when the struggle between the privileged
and the oppressed will again be acute and fierce. Not on the hills
of Bonnymuir, with rusty swords and ancient musket, but on the
floor of the House of Commons. The fight has been raised to that
plane on the blood and suffering of such men as Muir, Baird,
Hardie, and Wilson. Let us never forget that they won us that
power that we might annihilate tyranny and elevate Justice and
Truth and Love of Man.
• • •
NOTE —Those who want to have the matter in the above address
in greater detail, should refer to Peter Mackenzie’s “ Re-
miniscences of Glasgow,” and his “ Expose of the Spy
System,.” For the information in the above address, lam
indebted almost entirely to Mackenzie’s work.
J. O’C. K.
