

Final Report
SECRET
AIRCRAFT DESIGN
MINISTRY OF AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION




FEDDEN MISSION REPORT
SECTION 3
Assigned to
Address
Copy No.
Date of issue
This report contains confidential information, and must
therefore be treated accordingly by the person to whom this copy
is issued. Anything contained in this report must only be cco-
municated to approved and accredited executives of Government de-
partments or firms undertaking the manufacture <f aircraft or ac-
cessories for His Majesty's Government; and must not be published
or disclosed to unauthorised persons.
There is a considerable amount of detailed information
in this report which may only be of interest to those specialising
on the particular problem. In order; therefore, to assist
this report has been so framed that at the beginning of each Part
a special coloured page has been provided which sets out as short-
ly as possible the broad policy conclusions of the Mission on this
particular subject, including the action that is advised.
By this means it is hoped that those concerned wih policy-
may have as concise a picture as possible of what is considered
should be done to put into effect the work of the Mission.
The purpose of the Mission was to learn what American
methods could be introduced into this country to improve our out-
put , and to investigate certain technical problems and new devel-
opments in America. The report is therefore mainly concerned
with those aspects in which the American industry is ahead of ars,
and with promising technical developments. No emphasis has been
laid on points where the Mission consider that British production
methods or technical develooment are ahead of American.
S.T.A.M.
Cook's Building,
40 Stratton Street, W.l.
June, 1943


This report is issued in seven separately bound Sections, as follows:
SECTION 1 CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY ANT) GENERAL CONCLUSIONS
OF THE MISSION
" 2 AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
" 3 AIRCRAFT DESIGN
" 4 ENGINES, PO7/ER PLANTS ANT) PROPELLERS
" 5 ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
" 6 EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
" 7 POST-VAR PROBLEMS
Each Section is divided into two or more Parts, and a list of
contents appears at the beginning of each p art. The P arts in a
section are lettered A, 3, C etc.
Each Part is divided into Chapters, the first of which (on a
coloured page) gives the broad policy conclusions for the The
Chapters are made up of Items, and each Item has a number indicating
the Chapter to which it belongs and its position within the Chapter*
For example:
2.03 indicates the third item of Chapter 2
3.12 M ” twelfth " " " 5
For specifying completely any item, it is also necessary to
quote the Section and ''art, and in the text, at the beginning of
each Item, its complete reference is given.
For example:
3A - 2.03 indicates Section } Part A, Chapter 2, third item.
4C - 3.12 indicates Section 4, Part C, Chapter 5, twelfth item.


CONTENTS OF THE WHOLE REPORT
SECTION 1 - CONSTITUTION, SUMMARY - AND GENERAL CQNCLUSICNS
PART A - OBJECTS OF THE MISSION. PERSONNEL AND ITINERARY
Chapter 1 Scope, object and general survey of the Mission
2 Itinerary, December 1942 to March 1943
" 3 Broad policy conclusions
" 4 Future policy in regard to Missions to America
PART B - AIfiERIQAN NATIONAL AIRCRAFT ORGANISATIONS
Chapter 1 General
” 2 Amy Air Force
H 3 Navy Department
” 4 War Production Board
” 5 Joint Aircraft Committee
" 6 Offioe of Scientific Research and Development
SECTION 2 - AIRCRAFT PRODUCT lON
PART A - ORGANISATION
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Engineering departments
" 3 Factory layout
4 General notes on organisation of airframe factories
" 3 Boeing Aircraft, Seattle
*’ 6 Consolidated Aircraft, San Diego
" 7 North American Aviation, Inglewood
n 8 Bell Aircraft, Buffalo
n 9 Curtiss Wright
" 10 Other aircraft firms
11 Data* on American airframe factories
" 12 Canadian aircraft industry
PART B - FACTORY LAYOUT AND PROCESSES
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
H 2 Special applications of lofting
3 Economy of floor space
" 4 Conveyors
w 5 Drop hammer
" 6 Rubber die press
n 7 Mechanical press
M 8 Stretcher
" 9 Special tools
" 10 Farnum rolls
" 11 Rivet sorting
" 12 Finishing and painting
" 13 Extrusion manipulation
" 14 Pipe bending
n 13 Glenn Martin 3lcin stretching process
" 16 Plaster moulds for light alloy casting
" 17 Powder metallurgy
” 18 Riveting
” 19 Spot welding
20 Flash welding of undercarriages and engine mountings
M 21 Heliarc welding
” 22 Cycleweld


SECTION 3 - AIRCRAFT DESIGN
BART A - GENERAL DESIGN TECHNIQUE
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Scope and organisation of engineering departments
3 Weight analysis
4 Factors and design requirements
" 5 American stressing technique
" 6 Aerodynamic design
* 7 Aerodynamic controls
8 Stressed skin construction
■ 9 Pressure cabins
" 10 Undercarriage design
" 11 Materials
" 12 Processes
" 13 Aircraft testxng procedure
PART B - REVIEW OF AMERICAN AIRCRAFT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Description of new North American p. 51
" 3 Description of,Curtiss P. 60
" 4 Description of Beil P. 63
" 5 Description of Douglas A. 26
6 The Boeing 8.29 and Consolidated 8.32
■ 7 Current fighters in production
8 Current heavy bombers in production
" 9 Transport types
" 10 Wooden aircraft
" 11 Flying boats
* 12 Tailless aircraft
* 13 Tabulated data
PART C - PHOTO LOFT TOC
Chapter 1 Board policy conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
" 3 Layout procedure
4 Alternative reproduction processes
" 5 Camera procedure
" 6 Miscellaneous
PART D - SEIF SEALING FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS AND FUEL HOSE
Chapter 1 Broad conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
" 3 Fuel tanks - American practice
* 4 Rose - American practice
SECTION 4 - ENGINES, POWER PLANTS AND PROPET.Tires
PART A - PRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Broad Policy conclusions
2 General design and production notes on firms visited
" 3 Organisation and output
4 Engine and propeller production processes and equipment
PART B - DESIGN
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
2 Technical review of American engine developments
* 3 Propeller design
" 4 Power plant policy and installation
" 5 Specific technical items


PART C - REGENERATIVE ENGINE TESTING PUJ7T.
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Technical summary
3 Methods of absorbing engine power
" 4 Speed control
■ 5 Relative merits of testing plant end methods
6 The Buick arrangements at Melrose Park, Chicago
PART D - FUEL ATT) OIL
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
■ 2 Fuel
* 3 Oil
SECTION 5 - ACCESSORIES AND EQUIPMENT
PART A - ELECTRIC WIRING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Summary and conclusions
3 Principles underlying American methods
" 4 American wiring practice
" 5 Maintenance and repair aspect
" & Comparative appraisement of British and American
practice.
7 Developments in relation to alternating current
8 Application to British development and production
PART B - AIRCRAFT ELECTRICS
Chapter 1* Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Conclusions
" 3 Present use of low pressure direct current
4 Effect of operating conditions on choice of system
5 Review of electrical services in relation to hydraulics
" 6 Manuals on installations
* 7 Design and production of electrical equipment
8 New developments in aircraft electrics
" 9 Approval and standardisation of equipment
" 10 Liaison with America on electrics
PART C - INSTRUMENTS AND RADIO INSTALLATIONS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 Aircraft instruments
" 3 Radio installations
PART D - AIRCRAFT VIBRATION TESTING AND EQUIPMENT
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Summary and conclusions
" 3 Introduction
" 4 Equipment
" 5 Application
" 6 Scope of activities
" 7 Review of technique
* 8 Equipment ordered for M.A.P.
" 9 Application to British development


PART E - INSTRUMENTATION OF TEST FLIGHTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
■ 2 Summary and conclusions
■ 3 Introduction
■ 4 Outline of installations
" 5 Organisation
• 6 Equipment
* 7 Review of technique
• 8 Application to British development
SECTION 6 - EDUCATION AND RESEARCH.
PART A - ENGINEERING STAFF
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
• 2 Economical use of present aircraft engineering
staff
• 3 American publications and engineering propaganda
* 4 Manuals prepared by firms for instruction of drawing
office staff etc.
• 5 Manuals prepared by films to explain administration and
define duties
* 6 Standardisation
PART B - INDUSTRIAL AND SERVICE TRAINING
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Technical manuals for part time study
■ 3 Schools for training industrial and service personnel
* 4 Instruction manuals prepared by firms on their products
■ 3 Instructional films
PART C - UNIVERSITY EDUCATION OF AERONAUTICAL ENGINEERS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
* 2 American education
PART D - RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 1 Broad policy conclusions
" 2 Need for increased researcu equipment in Britain
" 3 Langley Field
" 4 Canadian National Research Council
■ 5 American wind tunnels
■ 6 Engine research
SECTION 7 - POST WAR PROBLEMS.
Chapter 1 Review of the civil aviation position in America
■ 2 Training aircraft


AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART A GENERAL DESIGN TECHNIQUE
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item I.OX Size and scope of engineering departments
" 1.02 Short and long term testing
" 1.03 Tricycle undercarriages
w 1.04 Smooth wing surfaces
” 1.05 Action
CHAPTER 2 - SCOPS AND ORGANISATION OP ENGINEERING- DEPARTMENTS
Item 3.01 Size and conditions of work
" 2.02 General organisation
” 2.03 Liaison with Army and Navy
M 2.04 Administrative engineer
H 2.05 Design for production
" 2.06 Research
* 2.07 Recommendations
CHAPTER 3 - WEIGHT ANALYSIS
Item 3.6 l Weight sections
" 3*02 Comparison of British and American weights
" 3*03 Results achieved
•* 3*04 Recommendations
CHAPTER 4 - FACTORS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Item lf.ol Introductory
" 4*02 Main flight factors
B 4.03 Diving speed factors
■ 4*04 Stiffness requirements
” 4*05 Tailplane loading
" 4* 06 Undercarriages
" 4*07 Recommendations
CHAPTER 3 - AMERICAN STRESSING TECHNIQUE
Item 5.01 Stress analysis and mechanical testing
" 3*02 Static testing
" 5«03 Plight testing
M 5*04 Conditions at Wright Field
" 5*05 Conditions at Navy Bureau of Aeronautics
" 5.06 Work of N.A.C.A.
* 5.07 Knowledge of developments in Britain
" 5.08 Test history of the Bell XP.39
" 5*09 Recommendations
•' )
CHAPTER 6 - AERODYNAMIC DESIGN
Item £.Ol Laminar flow win g~sections
,f 6.02 Surface waviness
" 6.03 Construction for smoothness
" 6.04 N.A.C.A. tests
" 6.05 Smoothing rivet heads, fit of panels, etc.
” 6.06 Thickness, taper and aspect ratios
" 6.07 Recommendations
continued overleaf.*.


CHAPTER 7 ~ AERODYNAMIC CONTROLS
Item 7*ol Aircraft controls
" 7*02 Dive brakes
CHAPTER 8 - STRESSED SKIN CONSTRUCTION
Item B.oi Bomber wing design
" 8.02 Fighter wing design
w 8.03 Fuselage design
" 8.04 Unconventional wing design
H 8.05 Rib design
" 8.06 Recommendations
CHAPTER 9 - PRESSURE CABINS
Item 9.01 Pressure employed
n 9*02 Structural design
w 9.03 befresting and temperature control
" 9.04 Sealing
" 9.05 Boeing flight work
w 9.06 Decompression chambers
** 9.07 Recommendations
CHAPTER 10 - UNDERCARRIAGE DESIGN
Item 10.01 Nosewheel layout
n 10.02 Main undercarriage leg design v
H 10.03 Tyre pressures
" 10.04 Layout for large aircraft
" 10.05 Strength Motors
" 10.06 Brake design
** 10.07 Future trends
" 10.08 Recommendations
CHAPTER 11 - MATERIALS
Item 11*01 Aluminiuin alloy
" 11.02 Magnesium
* 11.03 Steel
* 11.04 Wood
* 11.05 Plastics
" 11.06 Recommendations
CHAPTER 12 ~ PROCESSES ~7
Item 12.01 Qycleweld
" 12.02 Spotwelding
* 12.03 Recommendations
CHAPTER 13 - AIRCRAFT TESTING PROCEDURE
APPENDIX - List of documents brought from America.


CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
3A-1.01 Size and scope of Engineering Departments. The American Engineering Depart-
ment corresponda broadly to the Design and” Drawing Offices and Development*
Department in a British firm but does not include any jigging or tooling
personnel. For a detailed description see Chapter 2. The size of the
Engineering Departments of American aircraft firms is most impressive, and is
such that the total number of design and drawing office staffs in Britain is
less than the number employed in the Engineering Departments of the two
largest firms in America. The result is speedier design of more types, a
large amount of research and ad hoc testing, and emphasis on work such as
lofting, weight control and production of manuals, which in Britain is done
on a much smaller scale. The engineering department includes a pool of
engineers and draughtsmen, who are available to tackle any urgent jobs, and
there is also sufficient staff to undertake much statistical work. Both these
are admittedly desirable, but the numbers employed appear extravagant by
British standards, and we have not the necessary man power.
While the design of a large number of types at one time is not in it-
self a good policy, the ability to produce a prototype quickly undoubtedly is.
Great importance is attached to weight matters, and the uniformly good
structure weights of American aircraft are almost certainly due to this
factor.
Apart from the matter of size, the organisation of American Engineering
Departments differs in many respects from our own. There is greater
delegation of responsibility, and as a result of their system of project
engineers a new design is pro ductionised and is the co-ordinated effort of
a team to an extent which in Britain is novel.
3A-1.02 Short and Long Term Testing. A 3 already mentioned, the facilities
available for research ano“ad hoc testing and the amount which is actually
done are impressive. This is helped by the fact that much of the work,
both short and long term, which in Britain would be undertaken by an official
establishment is carried out by the firms themselves, and this is mainly due
to a difference in outlook among British and American aeronautical engineers -
the American reliance on test and the British on theory. This difference is
fundamental, and has arisen through the essentially more practical training
which is given to American engineering students at their universities and
technical institutes, and the long term policy of providing the necessary
research equipment.
The use and development of the electrical strain gauge technique for
measuring stresses was the most striking individual feature of the test
work in progress, and there Is no doubt that by their use, on both static
and flight tests, most valuable knowledge is being obtained. When flight
testing the Constellation great use was made of strain gauges, and the
firm consider that during one flight alone information was obtained which
would have taken several months to collect by non-instrumented flight tests.
3A-1.03 Tricycle undercarriages. Nose wheel ’undercarriages have come to stay,
and perhaps to spread. The official view is that the qualitative advantages
of the tricycle more than offset the penalty to be paid in weight -
particularly in the case of heavy bombers. Of some 30 types of aeroplanes
seen by the Mission, 50$ had nose wheels; and with one exception all the *
firms who have adopted tricycle undercarriages expressed a distinct prefer-
ence for this type of layout.
3A-1.04 Smooth wing surfaces. The most striking constructional feature of the new
American types is the smoothness of the wing cover. For both fighters and
bombers the procurement of a surface which is clean and free from waviness
has been a dominant faotor behind the design, and the results obtained are
striking. On the bombers this has been achieved without loss of weight by
using a thick skin; while on fighters two types of construction have both
given excellent results. On the Mustang, a thick skin is used, and on the
new Bell and Curtiss fighters a moderately thick skin is reinforced by
chordwise instead of spanwise stiffeners. Unlike the Mustang, which retains
a large measure of its initial smoothness under service conditions, the
extent to which the magnificent finish of the Bell and Curtiss prototypes will


stand up to service conditions is not yet known. But any type of const ruc-
tion which promises greater wing surface smoothness without increase in
weight is a development of great importance.
Action
SA-1.05 Tillfegineering Departments (See Chapter 2) ,
(a) The creation in a British firm of a post similar to the American
Project Engineer would ease the position of the Chief Designer and
should lead to a more balanced design. Consideration should also
be given to the wider use of Administrative Engineers.
(b) When designing a new project, more emphasis should be laid on en-
suring that the project is easy to produce, and a much stricter
control should be kept on weight.
(c) Consideration should be given to the desirability of having M.A.P.
Project Engineers.
(ii) Weight Control (See Chapter 3)
(a) Where already in existence weight sections should be increased to
a reasonable sise; and where non-existent they should be brought
into being. The engineer in charge of weights should have the
same status as the head of the stress or aerodynamics groups.
(b) A small group of weight engineers should be appointed to prepare a
handbook of weight information.
(c) The M. A* P. and the S.3.A.C* should encourage the maximum interchange
of weight information.
(d) The M.A.P. should confer with the S.B.A.C. and arrange that the
firms prepare regular weight statements for all new types.
(e) For convenience in interchange of information, the M.A.P. should
put forward proposals for a standardised form of weight statement
for use in America and Britain.
(iii) Factors (See Chapter A)
(a) a close study should be made of the accident statistics for
American attack types flying with the K.A.F*, and if possible with
the U. S» Army Air Forces in order to d ecide whether their lower
factors are justified.
(b) A study of bomber and flying boat diving speed requirements should
be made to see whether a reduction of factor of safety would be
possible,
(o) The programme of work on measurements of loads on tailplane-s and
on fins and rudders should he expedited and expanded.
(d) Consideration should be given to raising the velocity of descent
for carrier based aircraft.
(iv) Stressing Technique (See Chapter 5)
(a) The technique of electrical resistance strain gauging, both for
static and flight testing, should be developed as rapidly as
possible and made available to the industry.
(b) Firms should be provided with increased facilities for moderate
scale mechanical testing.
(v) Aerodynamic Design (gee Chapter 6)
(a) A study of the construction of wave free wings should be made.
This would include the construction of sections for wind tunnel
test. Such sections should be built according to


the most advanced technical knowledge, but should not be built by
methods which are impossible or unreasonable from the production
aspect.
(») The technique of smoothing rivet heads should be studied and
suitable tools developed.
(c) In order to improve performance of existing production types, use
should be made of more closely spaced screws on panels, cowlings
and access doors.
(d) Even at the expense of some weight, more robust access doors and
cowlings should be used wherever possible.
(e) On new designs of high speed aircraft laminar flow aerofoil
sections should be adopted, coupled with a form of construction
giving the smoothest possible surface.
(f) The use of higher taper ratios should be encouraged.
(vi) Stressed Skin Construction (See Chapter 8)
(a) In the new design of both bombers and fighters, consideration
should be given to the heavy skin stiffener form of wing con-
struction; as compared to conventional British design it gives
a smoother surface, has greater torsional stiffness, and for
large aeroplanes may be slightly lighter.
(b) For new fighters designed on the heavy flange form of wing con-
struction, attention should be paid to the possibility of
having chordwise instead of spanwise stiffeners on acoount of
better wing surface smoothness.
(c) Owing to the successful use of stress bearing doors on .American
types, more importance should be attached to their development
and use in this country.
(d) Research into new types of construction should be encouraged, and
some work of this kind should be undertaken by official estab-
lishments.
(e) American fuselage frames are in general lighter than British, and
this difference should be investigated.
(f) As a possible source of weight saving, tier stowage of bombs
should be considered in the design of new bombers.
(vii) Pressure Cabin Aircraft (See Chapter 9)
American firms have far more experience of pressure cabins than
ours, and greater experience of flying large aircraft at high alti-
tudes* Close touch should be maintained on this subject.
(viii) Undercarriages (See Chapter 10)
(a) The contention that tricycle undercarriages reduce take off and
landing accidents should be investigated statistically for types
flown by the R.A.F. and by the U. 3. Army Air Foroe in Britain.
(b) British designs of tricycle undercarriages for large aircraft
should be encouraged.
(c) The survey, made some time ago, of bogging on grass aerodromes,
should be extended to cover American types with high tyre pressures,
since if higher pressures can be used, design problems will be
eased.


(ix) Materials (See Chapter 11)
(a) Britain*s insistence on being supplied with 233, when 24S is a
better material* no more expensive, and easier for America to
produce, should be investigated.
(b) More attention should be paid to improving magnesium, and to in-
vestigating its structural possibilities.
(c) A close watch should be kept on American developments on plastics
with glass cloth reinforcement.
(x) Processes (See Chapter 12)
(a) The tests now starting at firms and at the R.A.S. on the strength
and properties of spotw§lding and cycleweld, should be expedited
and extended on really high priority.
(b) M.A.P. should ensure that an adequate research programme is being
carried out by firms on developing the technique of cycleweld.
(c) Concurrently with (a), flight tests should be undertaken to invest!
gate the soundness under flight conditions of spotwelding and of
cycleweld in secondary and primary structures.


CHAPTER 2 - SCOPE AND ORGANISATION OF ENGINEERING DEPARTMENTS
3A"2.01 Size and conditions of work. The American Engineering Department repre-
sents a much larger proportion of the firm than does the corresponding
design and drawing office staff in Britain. Of the total personnel in a
firm, the per cent age in the Engineering Department may be anything between
'5% (as in the case of Bell) to &fo (as in the case of Boeing); and of this
percentage, which is on the average four or five times as large as for
design and drawing office staffs in Britain, about one third are College
trained engineers. Contrary to the belief in some quarters in this country,
the American Engineering Departments do not include tool design, planning,
processing, etc.
American Engineering Departments
Firm
Total Number
of
Saployeea
Number in
Engineering
Department
Gomments
Bell
31*500
900
The engineering dept, has pro-
bably expanded more rapidly
than that of any other firm in
America during the last 3 yrs.
Boeing
32,500
2,700
The largest engineering dept,
in America,
Consolidated
44,500
2,000
Curtiss-Wright
(St,Louis)
21,000
1,300
In engineering dept. J00 are
engineers, and about half of
these are college graduates.
Gurtiss-Wright
(Buffalo)
37,000
About 5%
of total
Douglas
(El Segundo)
22,500
1,100
About 30/$ of the engineering
dept.are college graduates.
Douglas
(Santa Monica)
30,000
*
1,600
Glenn Martin
53,000
2,000
lQ$s of design work sub-ocntractel
Horth American
22,000
1,100
In mvftst igating the reason for the sise of the American Engineering
Departments, it was found that this was influenced by;~
(a) The large number of types in the Design, Prototype or Production
stages at each factory. Consolidated have Engineering personnel now
working on 11 types.
(b) Most aircraft go into production straight from the Drawing Board and a
large staff is therefore necessary to complete the drawings in a short time.
(o) Lofting departments are included; in. engineering this centralises
work now duplicated by production departments, in British factories.
(d) The large number of modifications and amendments now being pat through
on existing types due to combat experience.
After examining the workings of these Engineering Departments in de-
tail, the Mission were left with no doubt whatever of their value; the
following are some of the main ways in which the large staffs are employed
to advantage


(a) On the speedier design of more types, In Britain and American firms
of the same size, the American is invariably engaged on designing a larger
number of types. Usually it is quite twice as many, and the difference
is further accentuated by the American emphasis on speed of design. For it
appears that the time taken from the department embarking on a new aero-
plane to the delivery of the first production aircraft is less than that
taken in Britain, being rodghly as followss-
■#
(i) Single seater fighter years.
(ii) Twin engine attack bomber - years.
(iii) 4 engine heavy bomber - 3i~4 years.
Examples of the above are: -
A. 26 (30,000 lb. Attack Bomber) Preliminary negotiations with
Douglas - April 1941.
Contract for first prototype signed - June, 1941-
First prototype flew - June, 1942
Production to start - January, 1944
B, 29 (110,000 lb. Heavy Bomber) Preliminary specification issued for
competitive designs from Boeing, Douglas, Lockheed and
Consolidated - January, 1940.
Specification considerably altered by Army Air Corps -
April, 1940.
Contract for first prototypes signed - September, 194-0
First prototype flew - September, 1942.
Production to start - May, 1943-
oo On more test work, both ad hoc and development. In America much of
the development work which, in Britain, would be done by an official
establishment is carried out by the firms themselves, and when judged by
British standards, the amount of research and ad hoc testing which is done
is very large. (See 3A-5 and Appendix to this chapter in which a des-
cription is given of some of the work in progress in the Boeing Research
Laboratory.)
(c) On a variety of work which in Britain is done on a much smaller scale ;-
(i) Weight analysis. The number of staff which an American firm
employs on weight analysis is often between 30 and 40, whereas in
a British firm of comparable size the number so engaged is
probably 3 or 4 (See Chapter 3)
(ii) Lofting (See Part C of this Section)
(iii) Preparation of Service manuals and departmental instruction books.
(So© Section 6).
Until recently American engineering departments have been rapidly ex-
panding, and in consequence a considerable proportion of their staff have
only been in the aircraft industry for a short time. This has meant using
large numbers of engineers with only limited experience, and in some firms,
owing to the time which has had to be given to guidance and supervision, a
lack of balance has resulted, and many of the newcomers have been more of a
liability than an asset. Now, however, the main expansion has oeased, the
balance is being rapidly restored, and in a year's time the general standard
of efficiency in engineering departments will be considerably higher than it
is now.
The conditions of work are good and careful consideration has been
given to everything that could make for improved efficiency. The fluorescent
neon lighting, air conditioning, and canteen arrangements are all excellent;


and the system whereby everyone, however junior, has their name set up on a
stand on the table where they work is sound psychology. Such a sbheme makes
for added self respect, and is of interest in showing the attention which the
management pay to matters of this kind.
SA-2.02 General Organisation. The American engineering department differs consid-
erably from the general ]%rout of the design and drawing office of a British
firm, and titles such as Chief Engineer and Chief Designer often describe
jobs which are appreciably different in the two countries. The chart
represents the basic organisation of a typical American engineering depart-
ment and a description follows of how it functions when a new project is
being developed.
The broad outlines of the new type* usually involve the Chief
Engineer, the Chief Designer and the preliminary design unit.
With the satisfactory completion and acceptance of the preliminary
design an Experimental Project Engineer is appointed and he co-ordinates all
the work on the new type, The Experimental Project Engineer and the heads
of the structures, aerodynamics and weight sections, form a small group
working together on a more or less equal footing, and the Chief Engineer
and/or Chief Designer are only called in for major decisions or in case of
difference of opinion.
In those firms which have a chief experimental project engineer, all
administrative work on new projects and many of the decisions which would
otherwise be referred by the project engineers to the chief designer are
dealt with by him. As a result of this delegation of responsibility, the
top executives have much more time to travel about and investigate new
developments than is usually possible here.
The Experimental Project Engineer is always an experienced member of
the department and has usually had previous experience in the structures
and aerodynamics sections. Sometimes he has been on the production side as
well, which is an added qualification, for the co-ordination of work on a
new type includes the important aspect of seeing that the design is good
for production. While the technical sections of the Engineering Department
are engaged on stress analysis, ad hoc testing, performance calculations, and
getting out the prototype drawings, the production department, or in some
cases the experimental shop in the engineering department, is building the
prototype, and it is only after this has been tested and found satisfactory,
that the job of the Experimental Project Engineer ends, and a Production
Project Engineer takes his place.
It sometimes happens that the same person continues in the new role,
but this is by no means always so.


Although in the above outline the Experimental Project Engineer is not
appointed until after the completion of the preliminary design, in a few
firms he is responsible for co-ordinating the work on that also, and so is
appointed right at the start.
Compared with our own, this type of organisation, which is built up
around the system of Project Engineers, has several important features.
(a) A new design is the co-ordinated effort of a small team, guided by the
Chief Engineer, and comprising the Project Engineer and the heads of the
structures, aerodynamics and weight sections. Compared to British practice
in which the specialists are usually in a more subordinate position, it is a
layout which is better adapted to achieve a balanced design. The British
arrangement largely depends for its success upon one or two men of all-round
brilliance, whereas the American system requires a number of men who will
knit together into a first rate team.
(b) A large proportion of the work is delegated by the Chief Engineer to
the Chief Designer and to the Project Engineers. The Chief Engineer is a
technical administrator, is concerned with policy, and in conjunction with
the Chief Designer decides on the best design for a new project. The Chief
Designer is responsible for developing new designs and methods of construc-
tion and often works in close liaison with the Research Section, He is not
usually however, an administrator, and in the case of a new project he is
far more concerned with its general design than with its detailed design mid
production. The Project Engineer is responsible for co-ordinating all the
work on a new type, and for seeing that its development and prototype
production proceed according to schedule.
(c) Great emphasis is placed on production, and the extent to which the
whole Department is production conscious. Although aided by
the existence of project Engineers, this is mainly due to the more practical
training of most of the staff. (See Section 6). As a result a design is
productionised right from the start. Moreover, the emphasis on, and tie-up
with production, continues until the type becomes obsolete, For- even when
a machine has been made for several years small parts are continuously being
redesigned for easier production, A particularly good example of this is at
Boeing, where 500 members of the Engineering Department are at work on the
8.17, and great efforts are still being made to productionise it further.
It was stated that 2,000,000 engineering hours have already been put into
this machine. Some 400 of the Consolidated Engineering Department arc
engaged on modifications, to the 3.24-.
3A-2.03 Liaison with Army and Navy. bright Field and the Navy Bureau both have
systems of Project Officers and these line up with the Project Engineers
at the firms. They are responsible for co-ordinating all the work in
progress on their own particular project and as all correspondence with the
firms must pass through them and have their sanction, they are very powerful
people. It should be noted that at Wright Field the Project Officer is
invariably a pilot. Each type has its own project Officer, who is experi-
mental or production, depending on the state of development of the type,
and as in the firms, it sometimes happens that the Experimental .Project
Officer continues as the Production Project Officer.
In fairness it should be pointed out that owing to the power which a
Project Officer possesses, much damage can be done if he is not sound and
dispassionate technically, but in the opinion of the Mission the principle
is good and worthy of consideration.
3A-2.04 Administrative Engineer. The Administrative Engineer relieves the Design
Executives of much of tbs routine work which they normally carry out here
to the detriment of their main functions. It is strongly recommended that,
where possible, this procedure should be followed by British firms, in order
that the highly skilled personnel may concentrate on their particular
technical problems.
3A-2.05 Desiffl for Production. Another innovation which is working well and which
it is recommended should be followed by firms in U.K. , was the inclusion of
several Tool Design Personnel in the Engineering Department in an advisory


capacity during the initial stages of detail design. Not only do they
assist the Project Engineer, hut they are able to pass information to their
own department at an earlier stage than would otherwise be possible.
Two outstanding examples of aircraft basically designed for ease of
production were the P. 51 Mustang Fighter and the Douglas A. 26 Attack
Bomoer and it is considered that these should be studied with a view to
iallowing a similar or Detter natural design breakdown on future British
types.
It is realised that alinough the layout of these airoraft make them
easy to assemble, they may present difficulties from the repair and
maintenance standpoint.
In the case of the 8*29 and 8*32, which are pressure cabin machines,
the same degree of design breakdown has not been followed.
3A-2.06 Research. The following is a brief resume of the programme of work and
expenditure in the Research Laboratory of one of the largest Bomber Firms.
The permanent laboratory staff number about 240, made up as follows *-
Workpeople and mechanics - 100
Test assistants - 100
Draughtsmen for plant
design and layout - 40
For 1943 the estimated cost of the Laboratory is #1,124,000, with an
additional sum of #160,000 for miscellaneous equipment.
Work in progress;-
1* Electrics. Several assistants have a full time job on the development
of equipment such as strain gauges and recording apparatus.
2. Safety glass, Strain gauges were being used to record the stresses on
double curvature safety glass under hydraulic pressure. Tests were being
carried out on two types of dome and a portion of the pilot's windscreen.
3* Landing Lights. The filaments of a particular landing light have a
working life of only sto 10 hours. To investigate the effect"of vibration,
an apparatus had been fitted up which would vibrate the lamp at varying
frequencies.
4* Spot Welding. Shear loads were being applied to aluminium alloy
sheet with spot welded stringers to determine the strength of the welds.
3* 3*29 Elevator, The stresses in an elevator, loaded by sandbags, were
being investigated by means of strain gauges.
6# B* 29 Bomb Doors» Trouble had. been experienced in the operation of bomb
doors at altitude, and the entire bomb door assembly and operating gear was
set up, with weights appended to simulate air loads, in order to study its
behaviour.
7* Astral Dome De-frosting. Tests were in progress with various arrange-
ments of hot air jets from a distributor ring,
8 * 3.17 Bomb Release Gear, A complete mock-up of the bomb bay and bomb
release system had been set up in order to study its operation.
9* Structural Castings. A routine torsional test to destruction was in
progress on a small structural casting.
3. Turbo installation. The entire twin turbo installation had been
reproduced, full scale, including wing ducts, turbos with electric motor
drive, intercoolers, mock-up,carburettor, ducting etc. The set-up was


supplied with air under pressure to the wing entries and was elaborately
equipped with 60 manometers and other apparatus for checking the velocity
and pressure distribution at all stations. Tests on this rig had resulted
in considerable detailed improvements in duct sections, curves, etc.
11. B« 29 Cabin Blower. Development of the Eclipse positive displacement
blower, driven by a "Mercury" engine had been in progress continuously since
1941.
12. Gold Chamber. A cork lined brick chamber with self-contained refri-
geration equipment to reduce the temperature to -80°P was equipped with two
remote drives from electric motors outside the chamber. Vibration tests
at low temperature were in progress on flexible joints of various types for
turbo blower ducts.
13. "Strato-chamber". This chamber was originally erected for training
flight crews, tut Is now devoted to the testing of equipment and instruments,
and a new chamber has been provided for crews. There are two "cabin"
chambers and the temperature can be reduced to -80°P. The chambers can be
exhausted at such a rate as to simulate a rate climb of 19,000 ft. per
minute at ground level and 3,000 ft. per minute at 10,000 ft.
14* hydraulics Test Board. A board had been provided with all services,
connections, controls, etc. for testing such items as turret control valves
and serves up to a pressure of 5,000 lb. per sq.in.
15. 3*29 Rudder Control. The entire pilot’s control system and all control
runs complete with the aircraft hydraulic pump and servos had been laid out
for test purposes.
16. Oil Frothing Tests. A 3.1? "hot pot" with standard connections had
been installed in a transparent tank and the circuit completed to the engine
pumps with transparent sections in the pipes. An air pump was provided to
vary the back pressure.
17. 3.17 Landing Gear. AB. 17 landing gear had been set up to investigate
"chatter' 1 under nand operation. The trouble had been cured by modification
of the jack screw clearances.
18. G-uh Turrets. A trailer truck, complete with a Waukesha motor and
generator, enabled turrets to be erected in the shop prior to firing trials
at places like Fort Louis.
19. Spot Welding . An assembly had been produced to allow alternating
hydraulic pressure to be applied to a spot welded panel to ascertain the
fatigue properties.
3A-2.07 Recommendations.
(i)When developing a new project in Britain, due consideration should be
given to American design organisation, in which greater responsibility is
delegated to the Project Engineer and his associates. The build up of
some such scheme as this would ease the position of the Chief Designer and
should lead to a more balanced design. Consideration should also be given
to the wider use of Administrative Engineers.
(ii) 7fhen designing a new project, more emphasis should be laid on ensuring
that the project is easy to produce, and a much stricter control should be
kept on weight.
(iii) Consideration should be given to the desirability of having M.A.P.Project
Engineers.
CHAPTER 3 - WEIGHT ANALYSIS
3A-3.01 Weight Sections. The group dealing with weight analysis and weight control
is usually a large one in U.S. Aircraft firms. The following figures are
typical:-


Bell 12
Boeing 75
Consolidated 20
Douglas
El Segundo 25
Santa Monica 45
Curtiss Wright
Buffalo 25
Lockheed 60
North American 12
Vega 15
As a percentage of the total engineering staff the weight group amounts
to about 2fc A large portion of the engineering staff is, of course,
clerical and, therefore, in terms of the purely technical staff the weight
section is of the order k-%. The majority of the weight personnel are
engaged in weight estimating and controlling in the engineering department,
the remainder are employed in the shops in weighing actual parts.
Status of weight engineer. The leader of the group usually has the same
standing in the firm as the head of the stress group or chief of aero-
dynamics group. As a result the weight action is in a strong position
comxjared to that of British weight staff who are not usually senior men.
Duties performed by Weight Sections. The work of the weight section
splits up as follows %
(a) Initial estimates for new types.
(b) Detailed estimates of weight and C.G. from detailed drawings.
(c) Provision of load distribution estimates for stress office.
(d) Routine checking and controlling of weight throughout life of a type.
(e) preparation of weight and loading manuals and computers for the
service.
(f) Propaganda aimed at producing weight consciousness in remainder of
engineering 3taff.
Weight estimating. The methods used in making initial design estimates
are no more advanced in TJ.S. than in Britain, empirical rules based on
analyses of previous types form the main bases for estimation. Detailed
weight estimation is done better for two reasons. First, the larger
weight staffs make it possible to spend more time on the laborious calcu-
lations necessary* Secondly, the weight sections have available collected
data giving the weights of all conceivable standard parts and proprietary
articles. This naturally renders weight estimating for quite a large
portion of the aeroplane a matter of rapid reference to a handbook* These
handbooks which have been prepared by the Society of Aeronautical Weight
Engineers are available throughout the industry and are extremely useful.
Routine control of weights. "Weight control" operates in the following
way. Once a month the weight section makes a detailed study of the weight
of types in the design stage. Items which have increased in weight beyond
the values permitted by the original estimate ©re subject to investigation
and re-design, if desirable. In this respect the strength of the weight
section is somewhat increased by the Array and Navy regulations which require
that a monthly return of weights be submitted to the authorities. There i 3
also a clause in the contract which levies a penalty on overweight. The
Navy is very firm about the contractor meeting the specified weights; the
Army takes a more lenient view, provided the aeroplane meets the required
performance characteristics. In each case, there is a very close check kept
on the weight of every part and any tendency to accumulate weight can gen-
erally be averted.
"Weight education". Perhaps the most important factor of all is the gen-
eral "weight consciousness" of the whole design and stress staff. This
has presumably been accomplished by the good work done by the weight section


in arousing general interest. At Loukheeds for example, a weekly news
sheet describes design details where weight has increased (and why), and how
saving should be possible. This comply has also issued a number of
pamphlets intended to cause interest it 'eight control. The Society of
Aeronautical Weight Engineers is playing a big part in promoting interest
in weight and distributing information. This Society which Ims a large
membership, has group headquarters at all local centres. Regular meetings
are held and papers discussed. 'Weight handbooks are also prepared by this
society. Another interesting fact of weight education is the running of a
course of 17 lectures on aeroplane weight matters by the University of
California. This last point is perhaps most indicative of the emphasis laid
on weight in general.
Value of U.S. system. The three main arguments in favour of the U.S.
weight control system - are:-
(a) With increasingly severe operational requirements, the difference
between a successful aeroplane and one which is a failure is
measured in terms of 1% or 2% difference in basic weights, hence
strict attention to weight control is of paramount importance.
(b) 3y regular weight checking, trouble due to growth in weight can be
foreseen and time saved thereby.
(c) The results in terms of the finished aircraft should be consistently
good. Reference to the table in 3.03 below shows that U.S. weights
are, in fact, of a consistently high standard, and the fifteen U.S.
type 3 listed are equal to the best British design.
3A-3.02 Comparison of British and American Weights. Considerable confusion has
always arisen in the past when comparing U.S. and British weights owing to
differences in definition. Tills point was studied and the following notes
clarify the major differences.
In the structure group, wing weights are similarly defined except that
the British wing weight includes such hydraulic systems as are located in the
wings. British "engines and nacelle mountings and cowlings” correspond ex-
actly to U.S. "engine section". The landing gear definitions are identical.
The British definition of fuselage includes also hydraulics in the fuselage
and "personnel accommodations" which the U.S. system lists separately, By
"personnel accommodations ,f is meant seats, instrument boards, floor covering,
lockers. The tail unit definitions are similar. The U.S. definition of
flying controls includes the automatic pilot, which is included in fixed
equipment in British sub-division,
In the power plant weights, propellers and cooling systems are similarly
defined. Hydraulic pumps and systems are termed engine accessories in
Britain and part of the hydraulic system in U.S. The generator is also
termed, an engine accessory in Britain and appears in the electrical group in
U.S.
The U.S, tank weights always include gun-fire protection (largely
because tanks are of the bag type and cannot conveniently be split) while
in the British form the protection is included in a general group.
The major differences between the two systems lies in the sub-division
of equipment into various groups. "Protection” is scattered under several
headings in the U.S. system. The terms used in the U.S, are self-
explanatory with the following exceptionsi
(a) "Communicating” includes radio, antenna, intercom.
(b) "Armament provisions” includes amour plate, bullet proof glass
and installations for support of guns, bombs, etc., bomb door
operation, turrets, etc.
(c) "Personnel accommodations” is described above.
(d) "Emergency accommodations” includes fire extinguishers, first aid,
pyrotechnic installation.


(e) "Provision for flight” includes installations for radio,
navigation, photographies, oxygen.
dross weight corresponds to our all up weight for take-off, ’’Design
gross weight” and "gross weight for stress analysis” are numerically the
same, and they are usually less than the final gross weight used operation-
ally, Performance figures are usually quoted in terms of design gross
weight. The total power plant weights are roughly parallel, and British
"Tare Weight *is nearly the same as U. 3. “Weight Empty" the Xa&er including
some items of equipment (e.g. radio) which the former does not.
In conclusion it seems fair to say that the confusion mentioned above
has been due to a difference in definition in the detailed weight split up.
There are several good points in the U.S. breakdown which might well be
considered by M. A. P* Ifc would be most useful if a form of weight breakdown
acceptable both to U.S. and Britain could be devised, Wright Field are
very keen on this.
A-3-03 Results achieved.
Weight results. The table below has been prepared to show the general
trend of American structure weights and to provide a rough basis for compari-
son of U.S, and British types, percentage structure weights are listed*for
several U.S. and a few British types. In a table of this kind, comparisons
are made difficult by the fact that external conditions (such as factors) vary
from type to type. The aeroplanes are therefore grouped as fighters, mis-
cellaneous, bombers, flying boats. With the exception of the miscellaneous
group, comparisons of weights within a group are reasonably fair. Generally,
the gross weight listed (and corresponding strength factor) are appropriate
to the latest operating conditions. For experimental types, the gross
weight can only be assessed roughly.
G
BNSRAL PARTI
C U L A R
s
SIR
3CIURJ W
SIGHT
s
(Weights
as percentage of all up ws
ight)
All up
Greses
Flight
Wing
Root
Undercarriage
A2RGP1ANB
weight
wing
Spaa
loading
Aspect
Taper
t/o
Tail
(iiain & Aux.)
Control
Total
lb.
factor
iba./
ratio
Wing
Fuselage
(N)Nose-ifheel
&
sq.ft
Sq. ft.
Ratio
Ratio
>
Bait
iype
Coals
Circuit
Structure
(T)Tail Wheel
Type
Bail P 39/ft!
iIncluded
Airsoobra
Curtiss 140 F
7655
213
34
11.6
36.0
5.4
2.0
15
12.4
6.8
1.5
7,0 (N)
fuselage )
1.5
31.2
Narhaai:
8838
236
37.3
10.5
37.5
5.9
3.6
15
12.7
7.2
1.7
6.2 (T)
2.1
31.0
North Asarioan
P51 B liU3ta.T!g
8664
2J3
37.0
11.1
37.0
5.9
2.0
14.5
5.0
2.0
6.2 (f)
3*2
Bail XF 63
7565
Z4S
36.3
12.0
30.5
5.9
13.8
7.9
1.8
7.8 (N)
(included
1.4
32.7
Curtiss'p60
10235
275
41.4
11.7
37.5
6.2
3.1
18
13.1
5.4
2.2
5-8 (T)
fuselage)
4.4
1.1
32.0
Spitfire 7.
6740
242
36.8
11 eppraK.
27.9
5*6
1.8
13
13-3
1.5
4.7 (T)
2.2
1*4
29.6
Spitfire IX.
7240
242
>6.8
10.5 -
30.0
5.6
1.8
13
13.8
5.9
1.3
4.6 (?)
2.8
1*2
Hurricane 11.
7600
258
40.0
10.7
29.5 .
6.2
1.7
19
16.6
7.3
2.1
m
2.4
0«9
34. r >
Typhoon I
11160
279
41 “6
10
40.0
6.2
1.9
19
14.75
8.65
1.9
6.1 (?)
2.0
0.65
Tampoat 1
11220
302
41.0
12
36.5
6.1
2.7
14.5
1o*5
10.3
2.1
6.5 (?)
2.2
0.65
38.3
North Ansrioan
B25 - Uttohell
>0000
610
67*5
4.8
49.0
7.5
-
_
10.0
1.7
6.0 (N)
3.2
1.4
26.8
Loclcheed 334
*»«*
Ventura
26500
551
65
5 -
48.0
7.8
4.4
18
10.3
7*8
1.6
3.9 (?)
4.8
1.2
29.6
Douglas A2fc
Curt las C46 -
32000
540
70
5i -
59.5
9.0
2.2
15
11.3
5,2
1.8
5.6 (N)
4.1
1.8
29.8
Com&jvdo
50000
1360
108
4s
33.0
8.6
2.7
-
12.2
9.6
2.0
5.7 (T)
2.9
0.7
>3.1
Boateg 317 ? -
Fortress
Consolidated
54000
1430
104
4.0
38.0
7.6
2.1
18
11.0
6.7
1.7
4.7 (?)
4.3
0.9
29.3
B2i» D -
Liberator
56000
1046
110
4.0
53.5
11.7
2,9
*•*«
11.6
5-8
1*4
5.3 Yjf)
2.8
28.0
Gonijolidasad
XB32
100000
1420
135
4.1
70.5
12.8
2.6
22
13.8
6.85
1.35
1.1
6.05 (H)
2*35
1.0
Boeing XB29
120000
1740
141
4.1
69.0
11.5
2.3
22
11.5
6.1
6.2 (N)’
3,6
0.6
29.1
Halifax
60000
1250
99
4.3
48.0
7.6
1.8
21
12.9
6.8
1.5
3*2
0.3
Iancaster
63000
1300
102
4.3
48.5
8.0
1.7
16
11,4
7.9
1.7
4.4 (?)
7.0 (?)
0.5
0.4
29.0
32.5
Stirling
7000c
1458
99
4.1
48.0
6.7
2.6
20
13.0
8.2
1.3
2.6
Consolidated
PBT-5 -
Catalina
Consolidated
32000
1400
104
4,0
23.0
7.8
1.3
20
13.7
9.6
1.6
1.4(FloatS9
1.5
1.4
29.2
FB2Y -
Cor oris do
66000
1780
115
4.4
37.0
7.4
2.0
17
15.3
10.7
1.6
0.9 *
2.3
1.0
51.6
I^rwiolt:
33500
875
60. 6
4.0
38.0
7.5
1.9
16
13.1
12*7
1.8
1*5 *
1.1 "
2.7
1.8
-
0.7
0.8
32.5
34=9
Sunderland
—
56000
1687
J
112. 6
J
4*4
33.0
7.5
2.5
20
. _
Jill
15.2
1.5
Comments on Table
( a ) li£SS " U -S- weights are about the same as the wing weights of the
best British types. It is striking that of the 15 aeroplanes listed.


which cover a wide range of types and manufacturers, there is no wing
which can be classed as bad from a weight point of view. It is also
of interest to note that method of construction appears to have little
influence on the weights achieved. For example, the vVarhawk, and
Mustang, with numerous spanwise stringers, are not greatly different
in weight from the P-60 and P-63 with no stringers, or the Airacobra
with heavy flanges and light stringers.
(b) In general, U.S. fuselages are about I.os of gross weight
lighter than British fuselages. This is partly a matter of definition,
some items of furnishing being included with the British fuselage
weight. However, even taking this into account there still remains a
difference of about 0.5 f0 which is associated with the lighter fuselage
ring design in U.S. types. As a specific example of this, Mustang
rings weigh Just half as much as Spitfire rings (other fuselage items
being similar).
(c) boat hull. On rather scanty evidence the U.S. types are appreci-
ably lighter than British, In the Catalina and Coronado the lightness
of the frames was particularly noteworthy and this partly accounts
for the good values achieved.
(d) unit. There is little difference between U.S. and British weights.
When the U.S. tail unit is a little on the heavy side, it can usually be
traced to more stringent mass balancing requirements.
(e) The whole subject of undercarriages is dealt with in
Chapter l6.The general conclusion is that the high weight of U.S.
fighter undercarriage is largely associated with the form of their
strength requirements,
(f) mounts and cowls. No special points.
(g) Control circuits. In the U.S. weights, automatic pilots are usually
included in the control circuit weight. This explains why the U.S.
bomber weights appear to be a little higher than the British.
3A-3.0A Recommendations. With present shortage of staff in British aircraft
factories, it is impracticable to institute weight control sections as large
as those in operation in America. Nevertheless some compromise could be
effected which would have the desired results. It is therefore proposed that:
(a) Where already in existence weight sections should be increased to a
reasonable size; and where non existent they should be brought into being.
(b) The engineer in charge of weights should have the same status as the
head of the stress or aerodynamics groups.
(c) The weight section should operate chiefly in encouraging weight
consciousness in the design staff and stressing staff.
(d) A small group of weight engineers should be appointed to prepare a
handbook of weight information.
(e) The M.A.P. and the S.B.A.C. should encourage the maximum interchange of
weight information.
w The Mission was impressed by the work done in America in the regular
preparation of weight statements, and believes British methods could be much
improved by the adoption of American practice.
(g) For convenience in interchange of information the M.A.P. should put
forward proposals for a standardised fom of weight statement for use in
U.S. and Britain.
CHAPTER 4 - FACTORS
3A-4.01 Introductory, A study of American strength factors and design requirements


Yfas made with a view to comparing them in broad outline with the British.
Owing to differences in the manner in which requirements are specified in
the two countries there have been inaccurate statements made in the past
regarding the overall strength and stiffness of U.S. types. It is hoped
that these notes, supplemented if desired by a study of the original
documents, will clarify the position. American design requirements are
issued by the Army, Navy and Civil Aeronautics Authority. Only the first
two are dealt with here.
The Army issues its main requirements in Air Force Specification
C.1803A, "Stress Analysis Criteria". This is supplemented by the parti-
cular aircraft specification and by Wright Field documents corresponding
roughly to A.D.M.S. The Navy issues its main requirements in the aircraft
specification supplemented by a series of detailed requirements in
"Specifications and Structures Bulletins". The Navy is at present
producing an excellent handbook summarising all main flight cases, and they
hope this may become a joint Army and Navy document. Some requirements,
the most important of which are those relating to undercarriages, have been
jointly agreed by Army, Navy and C.A.A. and are issued in the A.N.C.series.
The specification and observance of requirements in U.S. is much more
rigid than in Britain. Requirements are laid down in considerable detail,
(even when of an arbitrary nature),, and rigid adherence to these require-
ments is expected. This is considered to be less satisfactory than the
flexible conditions obtaining in Britain. A further point is the absence
of any procedure whereby the firms can discuss proposed requirements with
the authorities. An opportunity is afforded the firms to comment in
writing on proposed requirements by circulating the draft (sometimes
accompanied by a questionnaire) but the authorities then issue the require-
ment without further discussion. This has two effects; it increases the
rapidity of issue of requirements considerably, and saves labour; at the
same time it leads to embarrassing situations when the authorities issue a
badly conceived or impracticable requirement which could have been avoided
by discussion with the industry.
Both the U.S. authorities and the firms are ill-informed of British
requirements, their latest information being contained in a 1923 issue of
AP.970, British requirements reflecting wartime conditions are practically
unknown, as any recent copies of AP.970 are held by the R.T.0.5., and the
firms themselves appear to be unaware of their* existence.
Before discussing detailed strength requirements it is necessary to
consider differences in the overall conditions of approval. U.S. practice
is to attach much importance to strength tests, and these are invariably
called for on main components. If the specimen achieves 100$ of the
design factors it is accepted. In British practice however, testing is not
so frequent, but when it is done the component is required to withstand about
110$ of the design factors. (This is to allow for the fact that the test
specimen is ’typical* and is therefore, probably stronger than the minimum).
When approval is based on calculation it is customary in U.S. procedure to
calculate in terms of the average thickness of material. In Britain the
situation is not clearly defined, sometimes average thicknesses being used,
and sometimes minimum. Thus in many cases, though not in all cases, if
normally equal factors are quoted for a British and a U.S. aircraft, the
British type would be about 10$ stronger. This should be clearly borne in
mind when reading the remainder of these notes which are in terms of quoted
factors.
3A-4.Q2 Main flight factors. The Army and Navy classify their types according to
their operational function, e.g. "pursuit", "attack", "heavy bombardment".
For each class the factor is specified and therefore, classification of the
type determines the factor automatically.


TABLE 1
MANOEUVRING FLIGHT FACTORS
(Ultimate factors quoted)
U.S. ARMY
U.S. NAVY
BRITISH
Type
Factor
. T.2E?
Factor
Type
Factor
Pursuit
12
Fighter
12
Fighter
11 to
12
Dive Bomber
12
Attack
Attack bomber
8.5
6
- —
Fighter-
bomber
9 to
7
Torpedo
7.5
Torpedo
10 to
8
Bombardment
5.5
Medium bomber
7 to
6
Heavy bom-
bardment
4
Horizontal
bomber
4
Heavy bomber
4 to
4.5
Patrol boat
4
Flying boat
3.5 to
4
Note:- The British requirements are not laid down in detail but
the above values are roughly representative of current practice.
In Britain no rigid system exists but to a large extent the factor is deter-
mined by the weight and general manoeuvrability of the type. The figures
FIG. 1 FLIGHT FACTORS


entered in Table 1 show the general order of values specified for the
equivalent British class of aircraft. There is little difference between
U.S. and British fighters, heavy bombers, and flying boats. The British
requirements are rather more severe for the intermediate classes, fighter-
bomber, medium bomber and torpedo carrying types. Once the type is built
however, overloading reduces these factors and therefore, for fair com-
parison it is better to take the factors at which the fully developed types
are operating. In Fig.! the present quoted factors for a number of
American aircraft are shown plotted against all up weight. On this figure
two lines are drawn representing roughly the factors which are being
achieved by British types. The upper line applies to fighters and highly
manoeuvrable attack bombers. The lower line refers to heavy bombers, flying
boats and types Y/ith low manoeuvrability.
The conclusions to be drawn from this figure are -
(a) For fighters there is little difference between U.S. and British
quoted factors.
(b) For attack types U.S. practice is to achieve factors of about 5
whereas we should consider 6 to 7 necessary.
(c) For large bombers, there is little difference at present, but U.S.
are consdering reducing their factors to about 3.2 against our
minimum of 4*o.
As regards (b) this is a point of sufficient importance to merit a close
study of accident statistics of the types concerned. Referring to (c) the
proposal to use low factors on heavy bombers is partly associated with
operational conditions. In the Pacific theatre of war, evasive action is
not usually necessary in the early part of the flight when the aeroplane is
heavily loaded. It is doubtful whether the low factor mil be satisfactory
in flights over Europe.
3A-4.03 Diving Speeds. In Table II specified diving speeds as a proportion of top
speed level are listed.
TABLE II
DIVING SPEEDS
Diving speeds are quoted as the ratio allowable diving
speed/estimated top speed level.
U.S. ARMY
U.S. NAVY
BRITISH
Diving
Speed
®cee
Diving
Speed
Type
Diving
Speed
Pursuit
1.7*
Fighter
Terminal
velocity
Fighter
Terminal
velocity
— .. . .... ..
T 1 li 'I 1
Dive bomber
Attack
1.3
Fighter-
bomber
1 * to
1.3
Torpedo
1.3
Torpedo
1,9 to
1.5
Bombardment
1.2.5
Medium bomber
1.3
Heavy Bombard-
ment
1.15
Horizontal
bomber
1.2
Heavy
bomber
1.3
•
Patrol boat
1.2
Flying boat
1,25
•- - !
Mote;- British requirements are not laid down in detail but the above
values are roughly representative of current practice.
Terminal velocity is used if this is less than 1.7 V. (This
usually applies nowadays).


This table is not quite representative of practice, as the achieved level
top speed is generally less than the estimated value. Thus the diving
speed as a percentage of level top speed is greater in practice than that
originally estimated. Since U.S. optimism in, regard to top speed is a
little greater than British, this increases the allowable diving speed/top
speed ratio more for U.S. types than British types. The overall result is
that for bombers and flying boats there is little difference in the
achieved values of diving speed/top speed ratio obtained in the two
countries. For torpedo types the British speeds are much higher and this i 3
probably unnecessary. For fighters the diving speed of U.S.types are often
rather higher owing to differences in the specification of terminal velocity.
Referring again to bombers and flying boats a point to consider is the
difference in the factor of safety on allowable diving speed conditions;
U.S. requires a factor of 1.5* Britain a factor of 2.0. It has been found
in this country that pilots occasionally exceed the allowable diving speed
by a considerable margin and this has been thought to be ample justification
for the factor of 2.0. The noteworthy feature is that U.S. claim to have
experienced no trouble as a result of their lower factor. They consider
this is because the loads which occur in steady dives are not critical in the
design of the structure. They also consider that if the pilot does exceed
the allowable diving speed, provided he refrains from violent use of the
controls, the aircraft will be perfectly safe. This point merits a closer
study than it was possible to devote to it during the tour, but the tentative
conclusion is that 3ritish bombers and flying boats may have greater strength
than is necessary under diving conditions.
A direct comparison is difficult owing to the fact that the strength is
a function of -
•(a) Diving speed which is specified rather differently in the two
countries.
(b) Compressibility corrections which also differ.
(c) Factor of safety.
Both countries have recently revised their requirements and-thus the newer
types of aircraft differ somewhat from the older. Dealing with pre-war
types, for which compressibility conditions were not specified, U.S. used to
require rather higher diving speeds but accepted a lower factor of safety.
As a result there was little difference in the absolute strength of British
and American aircraft in dives, Recently the Britinh factor of safety has
been reduced to equal the U.S. factor (I*s). At the same time both countries
introduced compressible flow corrections. The British merely called for what
is known as the Glanert correction. The U.S. went much further and although
their original rather premature requirements have been rescinded,they still
are more stringent than the British. As a whole the U.S. industry accept the
British requirements as being reasonable and still consider their own
unduly severe. Finally, owing to an apparently small difference in the
manner in which terminal velocity is specified (the heights differing) the
British specified diving speeds are a little less than U.S. The net result
is that future U.S. fighters will have rather greater strength in straight
dives than corresponding British types.
3A-4.04 Stiffness requirements. Requirements closely connected with diving speeds
are those associated with wing stiffness. Here the Americans have been in
the fortunate position that with their thicker wing covering, there has been
little need to consider stiffness conditions as they are frequently covered
automatically. Thus little design calculation is done and the finished
aircraft is then thoroughly tested, statically and dynamically, (sometimes
in flight) to obtain its aero-elastic properties.
3A-4.05 Tailplane Loading. In view of the accidents which have occurred recently
in this country, this point was discussed with most of the firms and Govern-
ment bodies. This question is everywhere reviewed as the most outstanding
problem in the whole field of strength matters. Existing requirements are
regarded as completely unreal. Some firms are making individual investi-
gations and the official bodies are carrying out programmes of flight tests,


wind tunnel tests and calculations. This widespread concern has arisen
from numerous tailplane and rear fuselage failures and there is a feeling
that Britain has been lucky rather than clever in avoiding more trouble
than has already been encountered.
The three main problems under review are: -
(a) Compressibility effects.
(b) Unsymmetrical loading on tailplanes.
(c) Upward loading during pullouts eto.
With regard to (a) there is little factual information available which is
not already known in Britain. Designers are allowing generous margins
pending further data. It is considered that the worst conditions occur
during pullouts; in this condition when high speed is combined with high
incidence the wing may be well above its critical speed. It is therefore
argued that the pitching moments, and hence tail loads,may be very severe in
addition to dangers of buffet ting. Theoretical work is in hand regarding
critical speeds at high incidences. It is considered that smoothness of
the wing cover is an essential feature in delaying shock stall at high
incidence.
Tailplanes have failed assymetrically and Langley Field view this as a
major effect. Assymetrical loading is associated mainly with yaw. On the
P.47> cutting the engine produces 17° yaw at 280 m.p.h. indicated. From
tunnel tests on other types this is expected to cause a severely unsyramet-
rical distribution. In passing it may be noted that this is also severe for
the fin and rudder and is about three times the angle of yaw allowed for in
British design, U.S. are considering revising their requirements for fins
and rudders to come into line with P. 47 experience.
It is appreciated that up loads are higher during pull out manoeuvres
than existing requirements imply. Curtiss Wright have developed a method
of oalculating manoeuvring tail loads. Gust conditions are also being
found to be critical in tailplane design.
To conclude there is little possibility of comparing directly U,S.tail-
plane strengths with British, since both countries admit that their knowledge
of the loads occurring is limited. It is felt, possibly more strongly in
U.S. than in Britain, that work should be done immediately to increase the
fund of knowledge, if* disasters are to be avoided in new designs.
3A-4. 06 Undercarriage s
Energy absorption. The Army Air Corps, until recently, specified a drop
height, for testing undercarriage shock absorption, of 24” to 36” according
to the class of aeroplane (corresponding vertical velocities feet, per
sec. to 14 ft. per sec.). This compares with the British drop height of
l8~jy” to 27”. (10 ft. per sec. to 12 ft. per sec.). The Army Air Corps
specified a "dead drop” whereas we specified an "airborne drop" and the U.S.
conditions were correspondingly more severe. The Navy Bureau specify 42”
(13 ft. per sec.) for carrier based aircraft and 3b" for land based aircraft.
Both U.S. authorities have specified greater velocities for the tail wheel.
Recently the Army Air Force, as a result of operational experience,
have re-written their requirements and are now specifying an airborne drop
of 27” (12 ft. per sec.) regardless of class of aircraft. This brings the
Army practically into line with the British.
It will be seen that U.S. types have had some 33% - 50% greater shock
absorption than British in the past; the future Army types will be the same
as British and the Navy will continue to be about 50% greater for carrier
based types. In view of the troubles experienced with the B eafire when used
on carriers it is suggested that the Navy Bureau requirements should be
considered in relation to our carrier types.


Strength. The strength required, is linked with the reactions occurring
when the oleo system is absorbing the specified energy. Broadly, the Army
have aimed at achieving a factor of safety of 1,5 on the reactions involved
and the .Navy have required a factor of 1.3 compared with British practice of
1.35. The Array specify the maximum M g H acceptable for each type, and the
undercarriage designer is left to provide sufficient stroke to meet the
conditions. The Navy leave the choice of !9 g ts and corresponding stroke to
the designer. The tendency in U.S. has been towards the provision of
•harsh’ undercarriages for fighters and trainers and ’soft* undercarriages
for bombers. The former naturally develop greater accelerations and greater
strength is necessarily provided. The order of values for ultimate strength
are listed below; -
U.S, Bomber 4.0
U.S. Medium bomber 4.5
U.S. Trainer 6.0
U.S. Fighter 7.0
British All types 3.5 - 4.0
There is in U.S. a good deal of confused thinking about these strengths, the
tendency being to associate with the high ,s g” undercarriages a greater
degree of safety. This is of course not fundamentally the case; the degree
of sal sty is purely a function of the available shock absorption capacity,
and of the margin of strength over and above the reactions developed. The
U.S. fighter types have no doubt been safer than British but it is more
correct to associate this with the greater energy absorption rather than the
greater strength.
Recently the U.S. Army, in the process of revising undercarriage
requirements, have in effect reduced the allowable accelerations developed
by the undercarriage during landing. Thus the fighter which used to be
designed to develop 4#2/3 g is now reduced to 3.2/3„. The heavy bomber
originally designed to develop 2.2/3 g is now down to 1.2/3 g , Thus with
the new standards of shock absorption and allowable acceleration the U.S.
Army are approaching closer to British conditions. Unfortunately the*"
requirements have not yet been revised, and there is thus a serious
inconsistency, the strength still being appropriate to high accelerations,
while the allowable accelerations themselves have been reduced. No doubt
this will be remedied in time.
So far as drag load on undercarriages is concerned the Americans use
a backward component oi 0.33 times the vertical component, compared with
0.4 in British requirements. The side load requirement, which has always
been a bugbear to the American designer is under consideration by the Army
and may be reduced by to bring it into line with present British require-
ments.
Nose wheel undercarriages. The original U.S, Army requirements for nose
wheels proved to be inadequate and resulted in failures of the nose wheel.
The firms (in particular Bell and Martin ) did considerable development work
including strain gauge measurements of landing loads. A revised set of
requirements in A.N.C®2 were then produced which took account of the firms'
investigations. These are generally considered by the firms and Wright Field
to be satisfactory. No direct comparison can be made with the strengths of
British tricycle undercarriages, owing to the absence of British requirements,
and the scarcity of British nose wheel types.
3 A -4* 07 Recommendations. A close study should be made of the accident statistics
for U.S# attack types flying with the R.A.F., and if possible with the U.S.
Army Air Force, in order to decide whether their lower factors are justified.
A study of bomber and flying boat diving speed requirements should be
made to see whether a reduction of factor of safety would be possible.
The programme of work on measurements of loads on tailplanes and on
fins and rudders should be expedited and expanded. It is felt that this -*s
a most outstanding gap in our knowledge of loads in flight, and that unless
the work is done quickly and adequately, the risk of failures on flight on
new types is serious.


Consideration should be given to raising the velocity of descent for
carrier based aircraft.
CHAPTER 5 - AMERICAN STRESSING TECHNIQUE.
This chapter is concerned with methods of estimating the internal
stresses due to given air loads* The determination of the air loads them-
selves is outside the scope of this report*
3A-s*ol Stress Analysis and Mechanical Testing* "A detailed stress analysis
satisfies trie stressman’s ego, but does not produce better aeroplanes*"
This statement was made by the head of the structures section at Bell, and
among most of the firms visited it aptly describes the stressman's
attitude* for in general, theory is used for the primary stress analysis
only, and secondary effects are investigated by test or estimated in the
light of past test experience*
To illustrate how much theory is used in America in a primary stress
analysis, it is convenient to consider a wing. Simple standard methods
are used for calculating the bending and shear stresses, and only rarely is
theoretical work done on such effects as shear lag, the stress distribution
round cut outs, or the stress due to end constraint at the root of a wing
which is subjected to torsion* The stressing problems involved in these
effects are of course fully realised, but instead of calculating.the
stresses theoretically as wo aid normally be done over here, in America
they are either found directly from test or estimated in the light of
part test experience. In this connection it is important to note that
American firms do all their own ad hoc and development testing, and hardly
ever refer to an official establishment* The stressing methods used for
the primary stress analysis are based on simple engineering theory, and
are described by the firms in their structures bulletins* As regards
amount of detail and mode of presentation, these vary considerably, but the
theory they contain is essentially the same.
A further illustration of the extent to which American firms make
use of test rather than theory is afforded by fuselage francs* In America
fuselage frames are designed as a result of test and are lightj whereas in
Britain they are designed on the basis of theory and are heavy, (See Chap-
ter 8).
Besides methods of analysis, the firms* structures bulletins also
include summaries of test results, but until 18 months ago this information
was jealously guarded as between one firm and another* Since then, however,
there has been a big change* The firms on the West Coast have grouped them-
selves together and set up "The Aircraft War Production Council"; and there
is now an exchange of information and spirit of co-operation which is
striking* A similar development is taking place on the Bast Coast, but
owing to the greater distances involved, progress has been less rapid*
(It is understood that since this Report was written, the two Committees
have been welded together).
The American emphasis on test and the British on theory is fundamental*
While it is fostered by the very practical and intensely competitive outlook
of American industry, it is primarily due to the type of training which is
given to American engineers in their Universities and Technical Institutes,
Compared to our own, the courses contain more practice and less theory, and
the difference in outlook just mentioned is a natural result*
3A-5»02 Static Testing* All the firms visited have excellent facilities for
routine and development testing, and before handing over a prototype to be
tested officially by the Army or Navy, many firms carry out their own full
scale static test* Boeing are outstanding in this respect, as they have
put up a special building for testing the 13* 29* One or two firms are using
tension patches and a linkage system of loading, but these are exceptions,
and the usual method is by lead bars and shot bags* Compared to British
practice the amount of test work done is impressive and on nearly HI large
tests electrical resistance strain gauges are used extensively* One
particularly useful application for them is to show up unexpected weaknesses
and thus enable appropriate reinforcemsnt to be added before premature
failure occurs* In strain gauge technique Glenn 'Martin and the West Coast


firms are the most advanced, and the majority have adapted the Brown
Potentiometer to record the results automatically (See Section s)* In
this way the readings of one or two hupdred gauges can “be recorded very
quickly, and at Lockfeeds over 1,500 gauges were recently used on a single
fuselage test. Although this is exceptional and few firms have the
necessary staff to analyse suoh a large number of readings, Langley Field,
Wright Field and all the firms visited are using strain gauges extensively.
The gauges used are almost entirely of the I**, 120 ohm resistance type which
some of the firms are producing themselves, but most are now buying from
the Brown Instrument Go,, of Philadelphia. When the direct stress in a
particular direction is all that is required, the gauges are used singly;
but if at any point a complete stress determination is wanted, use is made
of "rosettes”. These consist of three gauges inclined at 120° to each
other, and from them it is possible to deduce the magnitude and direction of
the principal stresses. At times difficulty has been experienced in
sticking the gauges to the surface under test, but this has usually been
overcome by ensuring that the surface affected is really clean. The actual
fixing of the gauges is often done by women, and in the case of North
American the job is being done apparently quite satisfactorily by women with
no previous engineering experience and after only six weeks' training.
3A-5*03 Flight Testing. At present the use of strain gauges in flight is mainly
confined to Glenn Martin, Douglas, Lockheed and Boeing, but developments
are taking place so rapidly in the other firms visited, that it will be
only a short time before strain gauges are as universally used for tests in
flight as they now are for tests on the ground. Their application is
really two-fold. For they can be used either to obtain basic data which
will supplement design requirements, or to check the stressing assumptions
which have been made for a particular design. The work done at Langley
Field on gusts is an example of the former, and the tests carried out by
Lockheed on the undercarriage of the Constellation of the latter.
3A-5.04 Conditions at Wright Field. In America there is no '’approved firm”
system analogous to ours and the stress analyses of all Army prototypes are
sent to, and nominally checked by Wright Field. In practice however, the
staff set aside for this purpose is wholly inadequate and checking is limited
to verifying the fundamental assumptions. The details of the analyses are
not checked, and reliance is placed on full scale static test to show whether
or not the machine has been properly stressed. Although these tests are
generally carried out at Wright Field, they occasionally take place at the
firms in the presence of an official observer. The firms themselves prefer
this arrangement as it enables them to use large numbers of strain gauges,
and thus obtain from the test much more information than is possible in the
short time available at Wright Field. Owing to the understanding that no
service pilot shall be asked to fly a machine which has not been thoroughly
tested, strength tests at Wright Field have to be carried out in the shortest
possible time. To achieve this, two eight hour shifts are worked regu-
larly, and in general there is no instrumentation* and the specimen is loaded
by lead bars and shot bags. That this method of loading is not so good as
tension patches (these are of rubber, and 12 in. x 8 in. x 2/3 in. in size),
and a linkage arrangement is admitted, but the disadvantages are accepted
as the price to be paid for a quick method of test. To show how far this
object us attained, part of the test record of the XP/39 is reproduced baicxr.
The structures section at Wright Field is heavily engaged on work of a
routine or administrative character, and little opportunity exists for
improving current methods of stress analysis or of developing new types of
construction.
3A-5.05 Conditions at Navy Bureau of Aeronautics. The attitude of the Navy to-
wards stress analyses* and the importance which they attach to full scale
static tests,is similar to that of the Army. They have, however, no test
laboratory analogous to that at Wright Field, so all their tests are carried
out at the firms under official supervision.
Although the structures group at the Bureau is predominantly engaged on
work of a routine or administrative character, there is a small section very
actively interested in research. Its two main tasks are the investigation


of new types of wing design, with special reference to the use of magnesium
(See Chapter 11), and the production of a handbook on stressing'methods.
Although ultimately the latter job will involve the co-operation of the Army
and Civil Aeronautics Administration as the handbook is being published as
A.N.C.4, all the work has so far been done by the Navy. They feel very
strongly that the present need is not for mote detailed theoretical know-
ledge, but for disseminating to the firms existing knowledge in a form which
is more readily usable.
3A-5.0& Work of N,A.C.A. A considerable volume of sound long term structural
research is in progress, and there is little work on hand of an ad hoc
character which comes direct from the industry. As the firms have the
necessary facilities, it is felt that all such work is better done by them.
Such an arrangement has the obvious advantage that research can proceed
without interruption, although there is always the danger that the research
will become academic owing to lack of contact with the firms. To meet
this danger by trying to foresee what new work will be of use in the future,
Langley Field are now sending out one or two of their number to make a
periodical tour of the industry. This scheme is considered by the firms
to be excellent, as they feel that in the past much of the structural work
of the N.A.C.A. has been either too late, by being on problems which the
firms have already had to solve for themselves, or not in a form which was
useful without further work. While it is evident that this criticism is
exaggerated and that firms make use of the work done at Langley Field to a
greater extent than they realise, or are willing to admit, it does show up
the large gap which exists between the fundamental work done by the N.A.C.A.
and what the firms are prepared to use. In particular it shows the great
need for a handbook of stressing methods such as the Navy is producing in
A.N.C.4.
3A-5#07 Knowledge of Developments in Britain
Firms. In the Structures and/or Research Sections of the firms visited,
most have copies of pre-war R & M.s. Only two, however, have reasonably
complete and up to date sets of the Royal Aeronautical Society data sheets,
and none are familiar with the recent work of the A.R.C.
Wright Field and Navy Bureau. The situation here is almost as bad as at
the firms, although from time to time they do receive a few R.A.E. and N.P.L.
reports.
Langley Field. This is dealt with in detail in Section 6.
3A-5•08 Test history of the Bell XP.39
Date of arrival in Laboratory 13. 3*42
Tests started ‘ 20. 3.42
Required tests completed 11. 4.42
Destruction tests completed 7. 5.42
SUMMARY OF TESTS CARRIED OUT
D.L. = Design Load
P.L.A.A. = Positive Low Angle of Attack
N.L.A.A. = Negative Low Angle of Attack
P.H.A.A. = Positive High Angle of Attack
1. 20.3*42 Horizontal tail balancing condition test; no failure at 100% D.L.
2. 20.3.42 Horizontal tail pull-up condition test; no failure at 100% D.L.
3. 20.3.42 Elevator trim tab test; failed at 94% D.L.
4. 21.3.42 Fuselage (P.L.A.A. most forward C.G. condition) test; no
failure at 100% D.L.
5. 23.3.42 Vertical tail; balancing condition test; no failure at 100% D.L.
6 J 23.3.42 Vertical tail; pull-up condition test; no failure at 100% D.L.
7. 24.3.42 Vertical tail; gust condition test; no failure at 100% D.L.
8. 25.3.42 Elastic axis determination.
9. 26.3.42 Torsional rigidity test.
10. 26.3.42 Vibration test.
11. 26.3.42 Aileron down load test; no failure at 100% D.L.


12, 27*3*42 Wing K.L.A.A. test; no failure at D.L.
13* 20,3*42 Wing P.H.A.A. test; no failure at 100$ D.L*
14. 31*3*42 Aileron up load test; no failure*
15* 31*3*42 Wing P.L.A.A. test; no failure at 100$ D*L.
16. 1,4*42 Flaps ?45° open); no failure at 100$ D.L.
17* 1*4*42 Flaps (30° open); no failure at 100$ D.L.
18 , 3,4.42 4,4*42 , 6,4*42 , 7*4.42 Drop tests; no failure at 100$ D.L.
19. 6*4*42 New elevator tab; no failure at 100$ D.L.
20. 6.4.42 Aileron tab; no failure at 100$ D.L.
21. 7*4.42 Main landing gear drift landing fin); no failure.
22. 8,4.42 Main landing gear drift landing (out); no failure.
23. 8.4.42 Nose landing gear static tests,
1. Towing load
2. Aft load
3* Drift landing
24. 11.4,42 Vertical tail gust load test for fuselage torsional deflection
(New tail loads); no failure at 100$.
25. 11.4*42 Combined vertical and horizontal tail pull-up loads (Both
original and new vertical tail loads); no failure at 100$.
26. 13.4*42 Horizontal tail destruction test; pull-up condition;
failure at 145$ D.L.
27* 15.4*42 Second torsional rigidity test.
28. 15.4.42 Wing destruction test; P.L.A.A. condition; failure at 120$,
D.L. of left wing panel at joint; tension failures of
fittings,
29. 17*4*42 Fuselage destruction test; P.L.A.A. most forward C*G.
condition; tests stopped after structure supported 145$ D, L.
30. 17*4.42 Nose gear tests
(a) Drift landing
(b) Fore and aft loads; gear and supporting
structure satisfactory for 100$ D.L.
31. 18.4.42 Landing gear static tests; inward and outward pull.
Structure satisfactory for 100$ 33. L. although deflections
excessive.
32. 18.4,42 Aileron destruction test; down load; aileron failed between
140 and 150$ D.L.
33. 21.4.42 Rudder tab test; failure of control push-pull tube at 100$ D.L.
34* 25.4*42 IX)or pressure test; door satisfactory for 100$ D.L. but
auxiliary latch alignment poor.
35, 26.4.42 Upper canopy test: glass satisfactory for 100$ D.L,
36. 7.5.42 Turnover structure test. Structure failed between 80 and 90$
D.L, No further testing to be required.
3 A-5 *O9 Recommendations*
(i) On account of the value and extent of the information which can be
obtained by using electrical resistance strain gauges, whether in static or
flight testing, the Mission feel that the greatest effort should be made to
develop the technique and to disseminate it among the industry.
(ii) After witnessing the developments due to the large amount of mech-
anical testing done by American firms, the Mission recommend that British
firms should be provided with additional facilities for moderate scale ad hoc
testing. Besides being beneficial for the firms, this would lessen the
pressure on official establishments and thus enable them
(a) to deal more expeditiously with the remaining large scale ad hoc
structural work,
(b) to devote more time to structural work of a fundamental nature,
(iii) The N.A.C.A. receive a copy of British reports which cceae up
before the A.R.C., and might with advantage arrange for a wider distribution
in America,


CHAPTER 6 - AERODYNAMIC DESIGN
3A-6*ol Laminar flow wing sections. A number of new and existing types includ-
XP* 63 and XP*f7> the Curtiss P*6o, the North American P. 31 and
the Douglas A*26 employ laminar flow sections** with maximum thickness far
aft. The usual choice is the NACA 65 or 66 family. On the West Coast
the precise form of low drag section is considered to be a matter of less
importance than the effort to obtain wing surfaces free from waves. On the
East Coast however, the choice of section is considered with great care.
The N.A. C.A. have taken the lead in this matter, and their view is that if
the construction is free from surface waviness and is coated with a smooth
finish, drag co-efficients of 0.003 to o*oo4 are attainable with wing
sections which are reasonable in other respects.
The Navy Bureau is not convinced that, with existing laminar flow
sections, there is any overall saving in drag. Their argument is that the
maximum lift co-efficient is reduced, leading to a larger wing (in order to
maintain constant landing and take off conditions). The quantities are
such that the drag of the normal wing is not much greater than that of the
low drag section when applied to the necessarily larger v/ing. Langley
Field does not accept this view and considers the decrease in drag more than
offsets the decrease in lift. It should also be remarked that as speeds
increase the '’optimum aerofoil” taking into account both lift and drag,
tends more towards the low drag sections.
It seems fair to conclude that although at present the low drag section
offers fairly small gains, with increasing knowledge of the possibilities
of the low drag sections, with increasing speeds, and with construction
more appropriate to wave-free surfaces, the low drag section will become
xnox’e and more valuable
3A-6.02 Surface waviness. The basic form of construction of u.S. aeroplanes,
using thicker wing coverings is more favourable to smoothness (in the
sense of being free from waves and dents) than is British constriction.
This is evident by comparing drags of Hurricane, Spitfire and Mustang, the
latter not being a particularly smooth aircraft by U.S. standards. These
drags are approximately in the ratios I*4 to I*2 to I*o. On existing
production types the wings are not usually up to the exceedingly high
standards of smoothness now required. However, great emphasis is being
laid in new types on freedom from wavine 3% and excellent results are being
achieved.
There is no precise definition of the necessary degree of smoothness
but Eastman Jacobs has devised a simple test of rolling a straight edge
chordwise over the wing. Any flats are immediately obvious by the thudding
noise produced and in practice this test works very well. From figures
quoted for the P.pl wing, it seems likely that the maximum depth of dent
should not exceed 0.002” in a wave length of 3" if the flow is to be laminar,
3A-6.03 Con struct ion of smoothness. With current methods of manufacture and with
existing knowledge of 5 what Is required there are two main methods of con-
struction aimed at giving smoothness.
The first of these, employed by the East Coast firms, is as follows
(a) use thick skin - this should be of the order 0.064 !< and certainly
not less than 0.046” over the first of the chord of the wing.
(b) avoid use of spanwise stringers, but employ fairly closely spaced
chordwise stiffeners to delay buckling -until moderate accelera-
tions are reached.
(c) place front spar as far back as possible.
(d) use a polishing tool to smooth off rivet head®.
(e) use a filler to level out small local depressions.
(f) use a normal camouflage paint lightly sanded.


This form of construction is based on the supposition that any buckles
which form in the skin between the ribs at high loads will be elastic and
that the wing will resume its original smoothness when the loading is
reduced. Unfortunately it is not known whether, after repeated loading,
this will be the case, but N.A.C.A. tests are to be made on this point.
The second method is the more or less conventional U.S. West Coast
construction employing heavy skin and heavy spanwise stringers such that
buckling and local failures are delayed until the ultimate load is nearly
reached. This leads to a good degree of smoothness,but to raise the level
to the standards now required some refinement is probably necessary. The
N.A.C.A. consider that the ultimate solution probably lies in this form of
construction and their formula for success is as follows:-
(a) use a thick skin with spanwise stringers such that buckling does
not occur until ultimate conditions are nearly reached.
(b) choose the stringer size and skin thickness so that the skin is
not distorted by its attachment to the stringer (as an alter-
native to stringers corrugations might be used).
(c) design spar skin attachments such that any flat areas can readily
be removed - position of spars is then of less importance aero-
dynamically.
(d) (e) and (f) as before.
It is considered that either form of U.S. construction (heavy stringers,
thick skin and light spars, or alternatively no stringers, medium gauges of
skin and heavy spars) is superior in smoothness to the British construction
using heavy spars, thin skin and light stiffeners. For immediate applica-
tion the adoption of the heavy stringer, thick skin construction is a safer
course to take. There is less experience with the construction using no
stringers and its full value may not be achieved immediately.
3A-6.04 N.A.C.A. Tests. On existing structures wind tunnel tests at N.A.C.A.give
the following qualitative results
Construction Smoothness
Bell P 63 - Thick skin (0.08") no stringers, Excellent (Cj)o = 0.0032 at
R-30 x 10 6 )
Curtiss P6O - Slightly thinner skin than p 63 Very good
no stringers, spar well back.
Experimental Magnesium wing - Skin 0.125" thick Very good
spar at chord - ribs 18"
pitch (aerofoil section tended
to vary along length) - no
stringers.
Douglas A 26 - Moderately thick skin - no Good
stringers, twin spar
arrangement.
Conventional design - with corrugated Moderate
reinforcement and a spar
well forward and fairly
thin 3kin.
Conventional design - with closely Moderate (Ck = 0.0006 at
spaced stringers and thin R = 10 x 10°)
skin.
3A-6.05 Smoothing rivet heads, fit of panels, etc. The technique of smoothing
rivet heads was initiated by the N.A.C.A. and has been developed by Bell.
The procedure is to use a countersunk rivet, the head of which stands proud


(on the external surface). The rivet is snapped over on the inside. The
projecting head, on the external surface is then ground down until it is
precisely flush with the wing cover. The reason for purposely leaving a
projecting head during the riveting operation is to avoid ’‘working” the
surrounding sheet with the riveting tools. This in turn avoids the little
dimple which so frequently surrounds the rivet head. A further point in
favour of this technique is that it avoids the occurrence of rivets which
bed down too low in their seating and which are subsequently drilled out
if noticed by the inspection department.
The fit of panels, access doors, power unit cowlings is generally very
good and leak drag is thus reduced. The use of thick or well reinforced
panels, has helped in this respect, in addition to providing smoother
aerodynamic shape. Where quick release panels are used the attachment
screws are relatively closely spaced. The considerable use of stressed
door 3 with very closely spaced screws which are necessary to carry the loads
involved, has also assisted in reducing leaks.
3A-6.G6 Thickness, Taper and Aspect Ratios. Opinions are not greatly different
in Britain and America, For present fighters a 15% root thickbess/chord is
U3ed. There is a growing feeling, however, that if we are to avoid most
serious troubles, the root section thickness will have to be chosen with
great care. For large bombers and flying boats the structural advantages
of a high root thickness chord ratio of 20% - 21% is considered worth while.
Values of 22% - 23% are thought to be not unreasonable.
An interesting point is the use of wings which maintain a reasonable
thickness out to the tip section with consequent structural advantages.
The Douglas A. 26 for example has a thickness chord ratio of 13% all along
the spar from root to tip. The Curtiss P. 60 is 16% thick at the tip.
These aeroplanes are reported to have very good aileron control, so
apparently the high tip thickness doe 3 not affect the aerodynamic features
adversely.
Experiments have recently been made by Boeing which show that wing
taper ratios of 5; 1 may be used without tip stalling troubles. The test
wing has a thickness/chord of 20% ail along the span and there is no aero-
dynamic twist. A low drag section with concave trailing edge is used. A
rather large rudder with a dorsal fin is fitted. The lateral stability
and control are said to be good. In view of the considerable structural
advantages of high taper this development merits consideration.
A study of the wing weights of Consolidated types with aspect ratios
of 11 and 12 shows that the rate of increase of weight with aspect ratio is
not necessarily so serious as has been frequently supposed. This is an
encouragement towards greater use of high aspect ratio for long range
classes of aircraft.
3A-6,0? Recommendations.
Short term (a) A study of the construction of wave free wings should be
made. This would include the construction of sections for wind tunnel
test. Such sections should be built according to the most advanced tech-
nical knowledge, but should not be built by methods which are impossible or
unreasonable from the production aspect. The sections should be subjected
to repeat loading prior to drag tests.
(b) The technique of smoothing rivet heads should be studied and suitable
tools developed.
(c) In order to Improve performance of existing production types use
should be made of more closely spaced screws on panels, cowlings and access
doors.
(d) Even at the expense of some weight more robust access doors and
cowlings should be used wherever possible.
Long term (a) On new designs of high speed aircraft laminar flow aerofoil
sections should be adopted, coupled with a form of construction giving the
snootnest possible surface.
(b) The use of high taper ratios should be encouraged.


CHAPTER 7 - AERODYNAMIC CONTROLS
3A-7.01 Aircraft Controls. The problem of providing satisfactory controls, which
are light and effective at all speeds, smooth in action, free from snatch,
without any sign of overbalance; and yet in the case of the rudder of a multi-
engined aircraft, powerful enough to provide sufficient yawing moment to
counteract the effect of one engine failing on take-off, is causing just about
the same amount of trouble in America as we are experiencing in this country.
Broadly speaking they are still fitting the types of control similar to
those in general use in this country; Frise type ailerons, and set back hinges
or shielded horn balances for rudders and elevators. American designers have
however produced an aile’ron control which is giving very good results indeed
on the Curtiss
XP,60,8e1l XP.63
and Douglas A. 26;
tne ailerons are
provided with a
set back hinge
and a shrouded
balance which is
sealed by a loose
strip of flex-
ible material
secured to the
nose of the aileron
at one end end to
the wing at the
other (Fig,2), The
seal extends the
full length of the
aileron end is made
FIG. 2. SHROUDED SEALED AILERON BALANCE.
effective at the hinges and the ends of the control surface.
The balance area in front of the hinge extends for the whole length of
the aileron, and its area is as much as 37h% of the total aileron area,
compared with about 27 % which is average for the Frise type balance. The
effective chord of the aileron is small, about 15$ of the mean chord of the
wing, end the span is ratner more than 50$ of the semi wing span.
The Bell end Curtiss Organisations are very enthusiastic about tnis-
control and on the Curtiss X?,6o and Bell XP .63 it is fitted to an N.A.C.A.
bb low drag laminar flow wing section. We are given to understand that the
aileron controls on these machines were exceptionally light and effective at
all speeds, very smooth in action, entirely free fron any form of snatch, and
there was no sign of overbalance. The lateral control of these machines at
high speed are quite equal to that of the Mustang, end much better at slow
speeds, in fact the ailerons aro very effective with flaps up or down. On
the XP.60 a linked tab was fitted to the ailerons in the event of any adjust-
ment to the hinge moments being required, but after flight tests this was
found to be unnecessary.
The ailerons on
the Boeing 8.29 have
the hinges set back
at 30% of the total
surface chord; the
cross section of the
aileron is approxi-
mately symmetrical*
and the balance sec-
tion forward of the
hinge is semi-
elliptical in shape
with a fairly blunt
nose, and this com-
bination appears to
FIG. 3. B.29 SEALED AILERON BALANCE.
work very well. (Fig. 3). The elevators and rudders mostly in use on large
macnines are provided with set back hinges similar to the 8.29 aileron in
which the hinge is from 77% to of the total surface chord, a flexible
seal is fitted between the nose of the control surface and the tail plana
or fin, similar to that fitted, to XP,6o and XP.63. They have resorted to
tins type of balance chiefly because the tail and fin ere not thick enough


to provide sufficient space for the angular movement of the nose of a
shrouded balance.
There is a general tendency towards the complete mass balancing of
all controls along the whole span of the surface, and both the controls
described provide a very convenient method of achieving this. The balance
weight can be fixed in the nose so that it acts at a large radius along
the whole length, and part of the required weight is provided by the
balance itself.
Great attention is being given to eliminating friction from the
control operating gear by the use of ball bearings and in certain cases,
for example the XP.6O, cables have been replaced by pull end push rods.
The R.A.E. type spring loaded tabs have been considered for controls, but
generally speaking tb© Americans are not very enthusiastic about them
owing to the additional weight involved by the necessity of completely
statically balancing the control surfaces and the tabs. So far the only
application of spring tabs has been confined to rudders, and a very ingenious
spring tab mechanism is fitted to the Vultee Vengeance rudder, in which a
cantilever spring bar is used instead of a helical spring. See Fig. 4.
FIG. 4. VENGEANCE SPRING RUDDER TAB.
Many concerns have tried to overcome the usual difficulties with
controls on large aircraft, in particular the problem of making rudders
sufficiently light to provide sufficient yawing moment to counteract the
effect of one engine out, and yet not overbalanced at small angles. In
one case rudder overbalance at small angles has been overcome by arranging
for the balance tab to work opposite to the usual direction for the first
few degrees. Hydraulic servo controls have been tried on a number of
aircraft, for example the Douglas 8.19, the 8*32 and the Lockheed
Constellation, but owing to the difficulty of eliminating lag, they have
been discarded except by Lockheed.
On the Constellation none of the controls are aerodynamicslly balanced
and all are servo hydraulically operated. lockh.eeds have done this
installation very thoroughly both in the design and development. Full
ground tests have been carried out with the controls loaded to correspond
approximately with the air loads in actual flight. At the time of the
Mission*s visit, the aircraft had only done about five hours flying with
these controls, and naturally tnere are no particulars available as the
control system is still in the development stage. All the pipe lines in
this system have been duplicated, and if despite this something should give
trouble, it is still possible to provide some measure of control by use of
the control tab trimmers.
Everyone was fully aware of the necessity for ensuring correct
effect on tail control surfaces, and in the case of elevators to arrange
for almost as much stability stick free as with stick fixed.


There is considerable anxiety concerning the compressibility on the
wings affecting controls, the rudders and elevators being similarly
affected by the fin and tail plane; investigations have already begun,
and v/ill no doubt be carried through with the characteristic energy of
the Americans on research problems.
3A-7-02 Dive brakes. A number of dive bombers are produced in America and
the Navy favour this attack technique. The Mission reviewed this
problem with the engineering staffs of various firms, and were able to
see current practice. The use of dive brakes is not confined to dive
bombers; they have also been used on gliders, fighters and torpedo
dropping aircraft.
A particularly interesting type of dive brake is installed on the
American Vultee Vengeance aircraft. It consists of two hinged flaps
on each wing, one on the top surface hinged at the forward end, and
the other on the lower surface hinged at the rear end; the top hinge
is at about .5 of the wing chord and the lower hinge at thus when
opened to about 90° the top flap is in front of the lower flap and it
is understood this arrangement helps to minimise the change of trim.
See Fig.s«
FIG. 5.
In the open position each flap, -which is about 6 feet span by 10"
chord, is lifted away from the wing surface by virtue of the hinge anas,
thus leaving a clear gap of about 8" between its inner edge and the wing
surface. The flap surfaces are provided with vertical slots and the
venting effect of these, combined with the spanwise gap separating
the flap from the wing, has practically eliminated buffeting at any
speed. The flaps are operated by a link mechanism which rotates the
upper and lower flaps in opposite directions, so that the hinge moments
practically balance each other and the operating loads are small; when
the flaps are retracted they lie flush with the wing surface* It is
stated that with the dive brakes fully open max, is only reduced
by .1, and the parasite drag coefficient for the aircraft is about
four times greater than with flaps closed.
CHAPTER 8 - STRESSED SKIN CONSTRUCTION
This section is concerned with general features of American
stressed skin construction. For structural details of the particular
aircraft referred to, see Part B of this Section,


3A-8.01 Bomber Wing Design. For the most important American bombers, a typical
wing section is shown in Fig. 6, and this applies to types coming into
FIG. 6.
production such as the 8.29 and 8.32, as well as to current types like
the B. 2if. The bending moment is predominantly taken by the thick skin
and heavy spanwise stiffeners (or corrugations), and the shear is carried
by plate webs at about 1 3% and of the chord. On the top surface,
the flanges are small and their main purpose is to serve as an attachment
for the shear webs. On the lower surface, they are larger, but even here
they do not usually carry more than half the total load except across
large cut-outs. By comparison, Pig. 6 also shows the typical wing section
of a large number of British machines. The shear is carried as before by
webs, but the bending moment is now mainly taken by flanges, two on the
top surface and two on the bottom. The skin and reinforcing stiffeners
still take a portion of the direct load, particularly on the tension side,
but it is usually less than half the total and at the root may be nothing
at all. This feature, whether or not there are heavy flanges at the top
and bottom of the shear webs, contributes the basic difference between
typically British and typically American wing design.
From the preceding paragraph, it follows that for wings of comparable
size the skin and stiffeners are thicker and stiffer in American than in
British design and that the average ultimate stress developed in the skin
stiffener combination on the compression side is correspondingly higher.
The extent to which this is so can be seen by comparing the Lancaster
with 8.24. In the Lancaster, the average stress developed by the skin and
stiffeners at the full;/' factored load is 18,000 Ib/in , (excluding the
flanges) whereas in the 3,24 it is double this* In order to complete the
comparison it is, of course, necessary to consider the heavy flanges.
These can be made from extrusions of high-grade material and in the case
of the Lancaster they are stressed to 55>00Q ln this way, a
comprcHnise is struck between a part of the wing which is working
efficiently and a part of the wing which is not. Prom a purely weight
standpoint, there is not much difference between the two types of
construction, although theory and practice both suggest that for heavy
machines the American may be slightly lighter.
When using a flange having a yield of 55>Q00 in conjunction
with a skin stiffener combination with a much lower yield it is
difficult not to buckle the stiffeners long before failure, and in
British design this often happens. In American design, in which the


flanges are smaller and the material used is the same throughout, yield and
failure occur almost together. This point is brought out very clearly by
tests, one on the Lancaster and the other on the 8.24. In the former,
permanent set began at 75% of the design load and by 85% had become
pronounced although failure did not occur until over IGC%, whereas on the
latter there was no obvious permanent set until very near failure.
For wings of conventional design, as shown in Fig. 6, the torsional
stiffness is basically determined by the thickness of the shear webs and
of the skin between them, and the extent to which they remain unbuckled, To
this end, thick skin is an advantage, and the American form of construction
makes for considerably increased torsional stiffness. For present types
this is admittedly not important, but for future types, with higher speeds
and larger aspect ratios, increased torsional stiffness will certainly be
desirable.
The merits of a really smooth wing surface are discussed in Chapter 6
and the procurement of such a surface is an important factor in American
design. As the only feasible way of ensuring such a surface, when there
are spanwise stiffeners, is by means of a thick skin, the American type
of construction has an immediate advantage. A further point is that in
the British type of construction, compatibility of displacement of the
skin and flanges is partly brought about by rivet slip, and this is
undesirable from the point of view of wing surface smoothness®
The stress bearing door is an essential feature of the heavy skin
stiffener form of construction. For, owing to the heavy reinforcement
which would be necessary round a simple out out with a non- stressed, skin,
stress bearing doors are not so essential and development has been
correspondingly slower* As a result of these conditions, American design
enploys fully effective stress hearing doors which are good fits and give
smooth covers; whereas in British design, the doors are light but not so
effective as stressed components, and nor do they give such good surface
finish. Moreover in each case the weight of reinforcement is about the
same. The closely pitched screws necessary to make a satisfactory fully
stressed door are obviously a drawback operationally, but it is considered
that the overall smoothness merits this form of construction in high speed
•types. The general fit of panels and cowlings is very good in American
design. In stress bearing access doors this is partly due to necessity,
but the underlying reason for the good fits achieved seems to be the close
liaison between the design and production staffs and the use of thick
well reinforced panels.
A point where the American type of construction is at a disadvantage
is in the matter of wing joints, as these are essentially easier for the
heavy flange form of construction.
Throughout the preceding paragraphs, continuous reference is made to
wings which are of typically American or typically British design. In
current and important American types, this generalisation is justified,
apart from the A. 26 which is considered in detail later; and among
British types the only important exception is the Wellington.
3A-8.02 Fighter Wing Design. In fighters, as distinct from bombers, there is no
type of construction which can be regarded as typical of American design
and most of the firms visited expressed some doubt as to what, in their
opinion, is the best form of construction. All are very keen on
procuring a wing surface which is smooth and free from waviness, and an
endeavour to achieve this is a dominant factor behind the design. For
this reason no use is made of lap joints, and butt joints are used
exclusively.
North America have faced up to the problem in the P. 51 Mustang
by having a thick skin reinforced with heavy spanwise stiffeners to
take the bending and front and rear plate webs to take the shear.
Fig. 7 shows skin thicknesses for P*sl> P. 60 and P. 63. In this form
of construction, which is the same as that used in American bombers
and to which the remarks made in the preceding section accordingly apply,
cut outs are especially serious but the difficulty has been largely
overcome by the efficient use of stress bearing doors.


By contrast, Bell in the
P*63, and Curtiss in the P. 60,
have both adopted the heavy-
flange form of construction
in which the bending moment is
taken by the skin and spar
flanges, and the shear by plate
webs at about 3S$ and of
the chord, Spanvd.se
stiffeners have been dispensed
with completely and in their
stead the skin is reinforced
by chordwise stiffeners. The
pitch of these is such that
the skin will not buckle in the
high speed level flight
condition, and the absence of
spanwise stiffeners enables
the flanges to be highly
stressed without causing
permanent set in other parts
of the structure.
FIG. 7. SKIN THICKNESSES.
As regards structure weight, there is little to choose between the P»5l
on the one hand end the P,60 or P. 63 on the other, although theory and
practice both indicate that for light aircraft, such aa these, the heavy-
skin stiffener form of construction may be slightly heavier* The thicker
skin of the P.s‘l makes for greater torsional stiffness and wing surface
smoothness, although with respect to the latter, the gain due to the thicker
skin may be more than offset in the case of the P„6G and P. 63 by the benefit
of no spanwise stiffeners. Both types of construction are sound and
structurally there is little to choose between them.
In comparison with British design, the most interesting feature is the
role of spanwise stiffeners. These either take the bulk of the bending
moment or else they are completely dispensed with, and with a view to pro-
curing & wing surface which is free from waviness this merits attention,
3A-8.03 Fuselage Design, The basic fuselage structure of nearly all important
American types is a thin sheet cover reinforced by stiffeners, frames and in
some cases longerons; and the main difference from British construction is
in the magnitude of the frames. For in machines of comparable size, American
frames are usually lighter and sometimes much lighter than British. In the
P. 51 for example, the frames weigh only about a half of what they do in
the Spitfire, while in the case of heavy bombers an interesting comparison is
afforded by the figures in the table. This is not the result of detailed
theoretical knowledge but i 3 entirely due to experience derived from tests.
Similar remarks apply also to the amount of reinforcement round holes and
cut-outs,
Table showing size of Frames in British and American Aircraft
Aircraft
Approx,
all-up
weight
Type
Depth
ins.
Developed
length
ins.
Thickness
ins.
Pitch
ins.
Area
sq.ins.
Area
Pitch
B. 29
105,000
Z
2.0
3.5
0.051
20
0.18
0.009
B*32
95,000
Channel
5.0
4.75
0.051
20
0.24
0.012
Stirling
70,000
Channel
2.0
3.25
0.043
19
0.l6x
O.OO85
Lancaster
65,000
Channel
5.0
4.3
0.048
16
0.20
0.012
Halifax
60,000
Z
2.7
4,3
0.048
17
0.20
0.012
B.24
56,000
Channel
2.4
00
*
0.040
20
0.15
0,0075
B.17
L „ _
54,000
Z
2.0
3.5
0,040 .
20
0,14
0.007
h After making allowance for lightening holes.
In this table many of the figures are essentially average
value s.


The main exceptions to conventional fuselage design are the Glenn Martin
8.26 and an experiment by Curtiss on the P. 60. In these, the frames are set
closer together, and the stringers are replaced by four heavy longerons.
The form of construction is adopted on grounds of efficiency on a strength
weight basis, and in practice it seems satisfactory.
Owing to the American policy of having a large number of pressure cabin
types, there are many more American machines with fuselages of circular
section than there are British, e.g. 8.29, 8.32 and C. 69 (Constellation).
There is also an essential difference in the design of the fuselage
structure of British and U.S. bombers due to differences in bomb stowage.
It is customary in U.S. types to stow bombs in tiers. This leads to a
short deep bomb conpartment. The British practice of stowing bombs on the
same level leads to a long shallow compartment below the fuselage floor.
Structural and mechanical advantages of tier stowage are:-
(a) the cut out in the fuselage shell is minimised, and less reinforce-
ment is required.
(b) the operating doors are smaller and hence less powerful hydraulics
are required.
(c) the amount of floor space is reduced thus reducing floor weight,
while the amount of head room for personnel can be increased.
These lead to economy in weight.
Against these advantages may be set:-
(a) possible difficulties in stowage of large bombs.
(b) possibly slower loading of bombs.
(c) the deeper bomb cell makes access between the crew stations
either difficult or non-existent.
(d) the tier stowage restricts salvo dropping and choice of bombs
making up a salvo.
3A-B.CMf Unconventional Wing Design.
Wing Design of the Douglas A. 26 (See also part B). The wing structure
is built up of four heavy flanges which take the bending moment, and front
and rear spar webs which carry the shear (Fig. 8); and to this extent the
FIG. 8.
design is like the conventional British type. But there the similarity
ends. For the skin is reinforced throughout by closely pitched chordwise
stiffeners, and on both the upper and lower surfaces there are a number


of inter-spar chordwise cuts which are completely bridged by top hat
chordv/ise stiffeners. In this way the shear flow is unaffected, but the
average compression in the skin, and therefore its tendency to buckle, is
greatly reduced.
While recognising the ingenuity of this method for obtaining a smooth
wing surface, it does not necessarily commend itself for general use owing
to the large amount of material which is not efficient in bending, and the
high shear stresses which occur in the skin near the spars,
Monocoque Wing Design. For stowage reasons and to preserve a smooth
wing surface, Lockheed and the Navy Bureau are each trying to develop a
pure moncoque wing.
In the case of Lockheed, the actual project is secret but some
information is available on the wing structure. This consists of a shell
which takes the bending moment and three webs which carry the shear. 'The
shell itself is a sandwich, in which corrugated sheet is the filling,
and two sheets bent into the shape of the wing contour are the faces
(see Fig. 9). The strength and stiffness of this type of construction,
FIG. 9.
which is of aluminium alloy, is considerable and ribs are dispensed
with in consequence. For the complete wing, test results are not yet
available, but on panel tests this cardboard type of construction has
shovm up well.
In order to obtain a monocoque shell structure, the Navy Bureau
have been experimenting with magnesium (see also Chapter 11). Being
of lower density than aluminium alloy, it is possible to use a thicker
skin without increase of weight, and the Navy have made full use of
this fact in designing part of a 8,26 wing. The actual test specimen
was an outer wing panel extending from a point outboard of the engine
nacelle to the wing tip, and from the rear spar to the leading edge.
The structure was a monocoque D section, with a shear web at 60fo
chord, and chordwise stiffeners at 29 in, spacing. When tested in
bending and without any spanwise stiffeners, the surface of the skin
began to buckle at Gjfo of the design load, but after the introduction
of intercostal spanwise stiffeners, the specimen took 11Q$, Compared
with the aluminium wing of conventional design, the specimen tested
was IC fo weaker in torsion but lighter.
Moreover it has the added advantages of being easy to produce,
of providing an excellent surface, and of giving the maximum possible
stowage space. i _
3A-8.05 Rib Design. In almost all
American aircraft great use is
made of pressed ribs with beading
and lightening holes. The
examples shown in Rig.lo are
typical.
FIG. 10. TYPICAL
PRESSED RIBS.


3A-8.06 Recommendations.
(i) In the new design of both bombers and fighters, consideration
should be given to the heavy skin stiffener form of wing
construction; as compared to conventional British design it
gives a smoother surface, has greater torsional stiffness,
and for large aircraft may be slightly lighter.
(ii) For new fighters designed on the heavy flange form of wing
construction, attention should be paid to the possibility
of having chordwise instead of spamwise stiffeners on account
of better wing surface smoothness.
(iv) Research into new types of construction should be encouraged,
and some work of this kind should be undertaken by official
establishments.
(v) American fuselage frames are in general lighter than British;
and this difference should be investigated.
(vi) As a possible source of weight saving, tier stowage of bombs
should be considered in the design of new bombers.
CHAPTER 9 - PRESSURE CABINS
3A-9*ol Pressure Employed, The present U.S. Array policy for high altitude
bombers is to provide a differential pressure of the order of 6-7 lb,
per sq.in. This is exemplified in the Eoeing 8.29 and Consolidated
8*32 with differential pressures of 6j lb* per sq.in, Since the actual
service ceiling of these types is only $O,OOO ft, to 35,000 ft, this
differential pressure seems unnecessarily high, being equivalent to
operation at 10, 000 ft.
The U.3.Navy is only interested in pressure cabins in a small way
and has no definite policy since they can see no immediate operational
value in the pressure cabin aircraft for Naval use. They are not
convinced that the pressure cabin is essential for fighter types even
for operation above 40,000 ft. and have a slight leaning towards
feeding oxygen through a mask* However, they have little evidence with
which to support this view, other than that of Boeing who find that if
pilot and crew are denitrogenised for 45 minutes before take off they
will be able to operate satisfactorily at 35,000 ft. or more for
periods of 4to 7 hours.
The Mission do not agree with this view, but are recording it
as it represents such a very different outlook.
The pressure in the Lockheed Constellation which is essentially a
civil type is 2y lb. per sq.in. Since this aircraft has a service
ceiling of about 20,000 ft. this pressure differential gives an
equivalent height inside the cabin of 12,000 ft.
3A-9.02 Structural design. The 8,32, 8.29 and the Constellation all
employ cabins of circular cross section in order to minimise weight.
Of the aircraft seen the only exception to the circular cabin is the
Curtiss Commando which comprises two circular arcs intersecting at
floor level* Thus the cabin from front view appears rather like an
inverted figure 8 with a. wide neck. This type is not now pressurised
but the intention was to pressurise the cabin above floor level to
a different degree than the baggage compartment below floor level*
The 8.29 and 8.32 each have forward and aft cabins, the centre
portion of the fuselage being a non-pressurised bomb cell. The two
oabins are connected by a small tube, sufficiently large for the
crew to pass down, -which runs through the bomb compartment. The
stowage of bombs in tiers in a relatively short compartment has
greatly facilitated the layout of these aircraft. Had it not been


for this feature the circular cabins would have been vexy difficult to
provide.
The Constellation is pressurised over approximately three quarters
of its length.
In the 8.29 the bulkheads at the aft end of the forward cabin and the
forward end of the rear cabins are convex outwards. In the 8.32 the
forward bulkhead is fiat and it was noted that extra strengthening members
had been added.
No special troubles with the design of pressurised structures have been
experienced. Little additional weight is involved. On the 8.32 for
example the firm quote the extra structure weight due to pressurising as
750 lb. or about of gross weight.
Expansion of the cabin under pressure relative to the non-pressurised
structure has caused no trouble„
In an effort to keep the weight small the view from the windscreens
of the 8.29 and 8.32 has been sacrificed to a serious extent.
The American requirements call for a factor of safety of 2.0 on the
loads due to the cabin pressure operating alone. Also since the cabin
is frequently part of the main structure, a factor of 1.5 is required
when the loads due to differential pressure are added to those arising
from flight conditions. The firms themselves try to provide a larger
margin of safety. A factor of 3*o is aimed at on the pressure
loads acting alone. The firms feel it is undesirable to load the cabin
continuously to stresses which are 5C$ of the ultimate and hence their
anxiety to keep the factor above 2.0.
3A-9.03 Defrosting and Temperature Control. The only major outstanding
problem appears to be that of defrosting or demisting windscreens.
Boeings have done much work on this and have had success in non-
pressurised 8.17* s with a double layer windscreen. The air in the sand-
wich between the two layers of perspex is free to "breathe” through a
drier but is not circulated. This kind of screen is fitted to the 8.29
with small fans to blow warn air over the inner surfaces, but the firm
have yet to find out whether it will operate satisfactorily.
For astral domes Boeing are experimenting with a hot air spray over
the interior of the dome. The air is directed over the dome by means of
a circular pipe running partly round the lower edge of the dome
(see Fig.ll). This pipe is slotted and
is divided into two branches, one on
each side of the dome. When the Mission
visited Boeing experiments were proceeding
to determine whether the severe
temperature gradient through the thickness
of the perspex was a serious matter.
The Navy have bad success experiment-
ally with a triple layer screen, through
which warm air is passed.
Boeing use an intercooler to maintain
the cabin air at a reasonable temperature
at low altitude. The Navy have
attempted experimentally to control
temperature by ducting the hot air into
cabin, over the windscreen and under
the floor in varying proportions.
FIG. 11
3A-9.Q4 Sealing. Leaks are causing no trouble. So far as main structural
.joints are concerned, the joints are caulked with some material prior
to riveting. Paw tape, neoprene, and zinc chromate brush-on have been
used with success as caulking materials by Boeing. They are now
trying a zinc chromate impregnated tape as this gives a more even


thickness between the joint than the brush-on. A complete report of
Consolidated’s test on joints was obtained and judging from this their
experience was similar to Boeing.
Boeing use the fblloY/ing rules for rivet spacing in order to obtain
satisfactory air tight joints.
Ist Row 2nd Row
Butt seams, single row 6D
" " double row 7D 14D
Lap seams, single row 6D
" " double row 6B 12D
For sealing round cable or control rods etc. where the speed at which
the part moves is relatively low, simple rubber brushes of the kind
shown in Fig. 11 are fairty satisfactory. The only drawbacks are a
tendency towards stickiness when the movement of the cable is beginning,
and possible difficulties at low temperatures.
For sealing doors a neoprene ring is used with a cross section shown
in Fig.ll. A load of about sor 6 lb. per in. length is required to
maintain an air-tight seal.
3A-9.05 Boeing flight work,, Boeing have accumulated a vast amount of
experience of high altitude flying. The flight staff consists of 165
engineers and pilots and there are seven aircraft used for test purposes
(the majority of which is high altitude development). During 194-2 the
test branch had flown 960 man hours at altitudes greater than 35*C00 ft,
Since during a relatively brief visit it was onty possible to glirapse
the surface of their work, it is suggested that contact with Boeing
should be established if there is any intention to take pressure cabins
seriously in this country.
3A-9.06 Decompression chambers. Consolidated Aircraft Co. have recently built
a decompression chamber. This is a steel cylinder about 12 feet long and
7 feet in diameter, lined internally and externally with cork. Pressure
can be reduced to an equivalent height of 80,000 ft. and at the time of
the visit the firm were arranging to refrigerate the air to give
temperatures of - 70°F.
The Boeing decompression chamber is capable of giving pressures
down to an equivalent altitude of 40,000 ft, and temperatures of - 20°F.
3A-9.07 Recommendations. American firms have done more work on pressure
cabins than has been attempted in Britain, and they have greater
experience of flying large aircraft at high altitudes.
They have encountered the same problems of high flying, and certain
of the difficulties met in this country have not been solved in America,
Close collaboration should be maintained on all matters relating to
pressure cabins.
CHAPTER 10 - UNDERCARRIAGE DESIGN
3A-10.01 Nose Wheel Layout, The most striking feature of undercarriage design
in U.S. is the extent to which the nose wheel layout is used. Of some
30 types of aircraft seen, in 8 different firms, 50 % had nose wheels.
With one exception ail the firms who have adopted nose wheels stated a
distinct preference for this type of layout. The policy of the U.S.Army
is to encourage the use of tricycle gears on large multi engined aircraft.
This policy reflects the strong preference expressed by .American pilots
for nose wheel gears on heavily loaded aircraft. In view of this strong
preference, it is worth while reiterating the well known pros and cons for
the tricycle undercarriage.


The main advantages are:-
(a) freedom from bounce, making for simpler landing.
(b) less danger of nosing over, with consequent greater permissible
braking power and reduced ground run.
(c) greater stability on the ground with freedom from swing and ground
looping (locking the tailwheel of a normal type of gear* has not
always been found to be effective in preventing ground looping) •
(d) improved blind landing characteristics.
(e) improved steering control.
The main disadvantage is, of course, the extra weight involved. This
is hard to assess precisely. So far as the external parts are concerned,
for several typical undercarriages, the difference lies between 0,3% and
1 of gross weight. There are, however, internal changes such as
strengthening the nose of the fuselage to take a nose wheel or
strengthening the rear fuselage to take the tail-wheel. These changes
are, however, small in terms of weight and usually tend to cancel. As a
point of interest, Wright Field consider " tricyclising” costs to 2%;
Curtiss Wright quoted for a small fighter; Bell consider there is no
loss in weight while Boeing quoted to 3s> for a heavy bomber. Out of
this rather confused evidence it seems that a reasonable figure is 1/£ to
Iweight in favour of the tailwheel type. That the difference is
certainly no higher than this is shown by examination of the total
structure weights in Chapter 3. Here the differences in total structure
weight due to different undercarriage design is evidently very small.
A further disadvantage, more particularly for the fighter, is the
room required to house the nose wheel, but the cost in terns of extra
weight and drag is relatively small.
A possible disadvantage with a nose gear is that failure of the nose
wheel may cause a more dangerous accident than failure of a tailwheel.
Wright Field and Bell Aircraft are, however, insistent that their
experience does not bear this out. This position is also improved by
the fact that failure of a main wheel is less dangerous on the tricycle
gear* than on a tailwheel type.
We are therefore left with the generally accepted qualitative
advantages on the one hand and the quantitative disadvantages of -
1 weight on the other hand.
For peace time purposes it is considered that the extra safety of
the nose gear is certain to lead to its use on transport types. For
war purposes the choice really depends, not on whether a tricycle
undercarriage is 'nicer 1 , but on whether it reduces the accident rate.
This is a point which should be investigated thoroughly. In any case
it would seem most desirable that some British firm should gain
experience in the design of nose gears, preferably applied to heavy
bomber class, when the advantages to the pilot are greatest and the
disadvantages structurally are least.
3A-1G.02 Main Undercarriage Leg Design. Sven large aircraft in U.S. usually
employ a 3ingle cantilever leg, instead of the braced twin leg common in
Britain. There is little weight lost by using this design and Wright Field
consider there are no real difficulties. The main benefit is a considerable
reduction in air drag when the undercarriage is extended - a worth while
saving for modem bombers with long take off runs. No bulky castings of
the kind built for the Halifax undercarriage were seen. Forgings and flash
welded steel tubes are used to a considerable extent. As a whole the
undercarriage designs are very neat and compact.
3A-10.03 Tyre Pressures. U.S. .tyre pressures are usually of the order 60 -70
lb. sq.in. as compared with British practice of 50 lb./sq.in. The U.S.
wheel is therefore smaller and can be more readily housed when retracted.


No complaints have been received by Wright Field regarding "bogging" or
sinking in, on bad airfields* (this remark includes U.S. airfields abroad)*
A survey made some tic© ago in England led to the conclusion that above 50 lb*/
sq*in* tyre pressure bogging was likely on grass airfields. At that time
no heavily loaded U.S. bomber was included in the survey* and it would be
well worth while extending this enquiry further to include experience on
U.S. tyres in England*
Xt is worth noting that Bell use a double treaded square section tyre
on the P. 39 main wheels in order to give larger contact area. This in
turn gives a smaller diameter wheel for a given pressure and load supported.
The J&rstrand anti-shimmy t&ilwbeel tyre could perhaps be developed on these
lines for use on main wheels but the tyre would probably use more rubber
which would be a drawback.
3A-10.04 Layout for large Aircraft. On large aircraft now being built in the U.S*
(with weights of 100* ; there are two main undercarriage units* each
comprising a single leg with twin wheels. In England* in an attempt to
reduce the units to the smallest possible sire for stowage purposes and
also to spread the landing and take off loads spanwise along the wing* a
suggestion has been made to use four separate units* one under each
nacelle. The view in U.S. is that the British trend will lead to extra
weight, since landing with side-slip or with bank will cause high loads in
the outer wheel unit. Also the flexibility of the wing structure and the
irregularity of the ground will make it difficult to maintain a uniform
loading in four widely spaced units. In short, U.S, feel that the quick
and simple answer is the pair of wheels* and they do not consider they are
paying any penalty in weight or drag by adopting this easier course® It
is understood that one of the external conditions which has caused British
designers to employ four widely spaced units, is the need to spread the
load on to as many individual slabs of concrete in the manway as possible®
(Concentrating the load tends to crack the comers of the slabs}* It is
felt to be a great pity that the aircraft design should in ary way suffer
from difficulties in the runway.
On the largest sizes of U.S. aircraft (weights of the order of 200,000
lb.) it has been round that the problem of stowage of tbs wheels becomes
exceptionally severe* One solution has been to revert to two single
wheels which retract sideways and lie flat in the wing. This is unfortunately
a very heavy- method; the undercarriage of the 8.19 for example weighs about
S/b 01 the all up wsxghta There is also under development an undercarriage
employing a "tractor” arrangement, which may ultimately provide a
solution to the problem of undercarriages for very large types.
Unfortunately the Mission had no opportunity to see the one now being
tested at 'Wright Field, but it was of interest to learn that the scheme
was originally put forward over here.
3A-10.05 strength Factors. Undercarriage strength requirements are dealt with
in greater detail in Chapter 4. The broad conclusion is that the energy
absorption conditions have been considerably more stringent in U.S. than
in Britain but have recently been brought exactly into line for U.S. Army
types. The vertical load factors for bombers are also approximately the
same as for British types. For fighters, however, the factors are much
higher, on existing types in the ratio of about 7to 4. This means that a
short stroke harsh undercarriage is preferred to the long stroke "soft"
under carriage * It is believed that the U.S# practice has led to increased
weight. Wright Field view this more as a matter of history of design, than
any basic difference of conditions, and it is believed that, partly as a
result of the Missions® discussions, they are considering a revision of the
requirement a*
3A-10006 Brake Design. The American wheel brake is in general more powerful
than the British* This is partly associated with the layout of
the undercarriage, for the U.S. leaning towards tricycle layouts permits
fdH advantage to be taken of powerful Drakes. With our own aircraft,
danger of overturning has to some extent discouraged the development of
oetter brakes* However, with careful choice of the position of* the main
wheels relative to tbe G.G. this need not offer any overv/helining


difficulties, and it is evident that, as landing speeds increase* a powerful
brake will become necessary* -
The American wheel is fundamentally better than the British wheel so far
as its braking capabilities are concerned. The American tyre operates at a
higher pressure than the British* Thus for a given overall diameter of
tyre the cross sectional area of the inflated tube is smaller; the hub is
therefore proportionately of greater diameter, and the brakes can operate
at a greater radius from the centre, which is an obvious advantage* A
further point is that with the proportionately greater diameter of hub
there will generally be a greater percentage of metal in the wheel as a
whole* Since dissipation of heat is often the limiting feature in brake
design, this greater weight of metal is an advantage*
Hydraulic operation of brakes is almost universally used.
These various qualities probably lead to a certain increase in weight
which the increased braking power justifies. It is understood that Dunlops
are developing a new wheel taking advantage of higher tyre pressure as
outlined above. This development should be given every encouragement,
3A.~10.07 Future Trends. A reversible pitch propeller is being developed to
improve further braking qualities. It has been suggested that this may
tend to tip up the nose of tricycle undercarriages. However, in most
low wing and mid wing designs the centre of gravity of the aircraft is
above the centre line of the propellers and provided this is so the
pitching effect will be a nose down one.
The Civil Aeronautics Authority have considered operating with tyre
pressures as high as 100 Ib./sq.in, to relieve problems of stowage of
wheels.
Steerable nose wheels are used on the D.C.4- and the Constellation
a?id these will probably be used more generally in future. Trans Canada
Airways consider it a great advantage to make controlled turns at 4-0
m.p.h. or so, to avoid overrunning the end of the runway. A steerable
nose wheel makes this possible,
3A-10.08 BECQMMENDATIONS
Short Tern
1. The M.A.P, should investigate, through accident statistics for U,S«
types flown by the R.A.F. and also vdth the U.S. Army Air Force in
Britain, the truth of the contention that tin cycle undercarriages
reduce landing and take off accidents. If this investigation shows a
clear argument in favour of nose gears, on a longer term basis, nose
wheel design should be encouraged in British design,
2. For existing types, when overloading is limited by tyre pressures,
the use of a double treaded tyre should be considered. For types in the
design stage, the possibility of easing stowage problems by use of this
kind of tyre should be considered.
3. The survey of experience of bogging on grass aerodromes made some
time ago should be extended to include U.S. types with high tyre
pressures, since the U.S. view is that 60 and 70 Tb./sq.in. is
unlikely to cause difficulty. If this statement can be substantiated
it will facilitate wheel stowage problems in new designs considerably.
Long Term
1, More British designs using nose wheel layouts should be encouraged.
The application should be to a medium or large aircraft, where the
gains are likely to be greatest.
2. For new types British designers would perhaps find advantages in the
cantilever single leg construction, for larger types than those on which
it has been used as yet in Britain, in view of the aerodynamic cleanness
and general compactness of the construction,


CHAPTER 11 - MATERIALS
3A-11.01 Aluminium Alloy, In American ai a craft structures 8Q& of the sheet and
rolled sections used are alclad, and are of ?kS in either the T or RT
condition. This is substantially the same as D.T.D.390, although as a
result of recent improvements 24S has now slightly the better properties.
For extrusions the most commonly used materials are 14 ST or 24 ST., and
these have properties similar to those of L. 40. For these alloys, the
0,2% proof stress, the ultimate tensile, and the percentage elongation on
a 2 in. gauge length are as follows:-
PROPERTIES Q&‘
BRITISH AND AMERICAN
ALUMINIUM ALLOYS
BRITISH
Material
Condition
Yield (tensile)
Ultimate (tensile)
Elongation on a
Comae nts
(0,2% Proof Stress)
2 in. gauge length
DTD 390
Sheet
16
25
15/
Almost universal for
slieet or rolled
sections.
L 40
Extrusions
22
27
10/
Widely used for spar
flanges.
DTD 364
Extrusions
25
28
%
This is a relatively
under O.375 in.
new alloy which is
still Being deve-
loped.
Extruaiona
27
30
0/
over 0.375 in.
DTD 363
Extrusions
28
33
8/
Alloy with high zinc
"EH 77"
AMERICAN
content.
24 3T
(heat treated)
Bare sheet
18.7
28.5
\Zfo
24 SET
Bare sleet
23.2
30.8
11/
(rolled after
heat treating)
24 ST
Alclad sheet
0.012 in. to O.O63 in.
17.4
26.3
12/
O.O64 in. to 0.25 in.
17.8
27.6
1?/
Almost universal for
24 SRT
Alclad sheet
0.020 in. to 0.063 in.
21.4
27.6
%
sheet or rolled sections.
0.064 in. to 0.50 in.
22.3
29.4
10$
24 SCT
Alolad sheet
22.3
27.6
5/
Artificially
0.012 in. to 0.063 in.
aged.
0.064 in. tc 0.25 in.
22.8
28.5
5/
The prcoess of artifi-
uially aging is new, and
these figures sire conser-
vative.
75 3T
Alclad sheet
24.1
28.5
10/
This alloy is similar to
Under 0,064 in.
DTD 363, and is still
in process of development.
0.064 in. to 0.125 in.
24.5
29.4
10/
14 ST
Extrusions
0.125 in. to 0.499 in.
22.3
26.8
7/
0.500 in. to 0.749 in.
24.5
29.0
7/
Widely used for
extrusions.
Over 0.750 in.
25.9
30.3
7/
75 ST
Extrusions
29.0
33.5
8/
At 212^
26.8
29.9
8/
All stresses are
given in tons/in^.
The American Aluminium Co* are heavily engaged on research,and
developments are taking place along two main lines* The first consists of
improving 24 ST.- alclad by artificially ageing; the second is the develop-
ment of a high tensile alloy having a high zinc content which can be used
in the fom of either sheet or extrusions.
The process of artificially ageing 24 ST. alclad sheet consists of
stretching it about yZ, and then heating for 8 hours at a temperature of
375 degrees F. The figures given in the adjoining table are the minima
guaranteed by the Aluminium Co., but it is probable that in the future
they will be considerably imp roved. The whole process is recent, and
Consolidated, working in conjunction with the Aluminium Co., have
produced sheet which on test has a tensile yield of 63,000 and
an ultimate tensile of 67,000 Langley Field are very interested


in the structural possibilities involved, and in collaboration with
Consolidated are engaged in testing 1000 panels of artifically aged 2 L ST.
A point to notice is that all forming must be done before
the application of the secondary heat treatment.
The second development mentioned above has produced an alloy, 75 ST,
which is similar to the British ER. 77• Its properties are shown in the
table, although it should be noted that the values given are guaranteed
minima and typical values are some IC$ larger. This alloy is still in the
development stage,but the Aluminium Co. who have produced it consider that
in 75 ST, they have obtained an alloy with a high zinc content which is
strongly resistant to stress corrosion. When using this material in sheet
form, it is essential that all forming should be done in the W condition,
i.e. after quenching, but before complete ageing. Only limited amounts
of this alloy are available at present, but its development is being
officially encouraged.
A matter of importance in America and Britain is the high percentage
of aluminium alloy which has better properties than the guaranteed minima.
In America it had come to be felt that the best possible use was not
being ma.de of the material available, and a grading scheme was suggested.
In this it was to be possible at slightly increased cost to obtain
material with properties which exceeded the ordinary minima by definite
guaranteed amounts. This scheme, however, was found to be impracticable
on account of the variation in the properties of one individual sheet;
and instead, Wright Field have now agreed to the principle that firms
may work to allowables which are in excess of the guaranteed minima and
more in accord with average values. In each case, however, permission
has first to be obtained from Wright Field, and the fixing of the actual
allowables worked to is decided by the firm in conjunction with Wright
Field and is based on the result of tests,
A further point of interest is the condition in which firms receive
their sheet from the Aluminium Co,, and the Mission feel that even after
taking into account the American use of heavier gauges, American firms
in general receive their sheet in a flatter condition than do our own
firms over here.
In the course of the visit of two members of the Mission to Pittsburgh,
the American Aluminium Co, stated that they were having difficulty in
procuring Britain’s agreement to supply 24S instead of 235. Although the
former has the advantages of being a better material, of being just as
cheap, and of being easier for the Aluminium Co. to produce, Britain ms
still insisting on 235. It may be that 23S is easier to fabricate or that
it has some particular merit unknown to the Aluminium Co,, but the
position needs clarifying.
3A-11.02 Magnesium. As increasingly large supplies of magnesium are becoming
available, investigations into possible uses for the material are being
officially encouraged, and most firms have on hand an experimental
programme of some kind. Of these, that of Northrop is by far the most
extensive, as the structure of their all wing fighter is entirely of
magnesium, their night fighter which is ©ring into consio.eraD.ie
production has a twin boom magnesium fuselage, and in their large flying
wing magnesium is used extensively.
Bell have had made for them by the Dow Chemical Co. a complete
magnesium P. 63 tailpiane which has been tested statically and in fatigue
and has so far been entirely satisfactory, while the Navy have made and
tested a number of magnesium, wings, A wing of conventional design
proved to be ss> weaker but 20$ lighter than an aluminium alloy wing of
the ma me designed strength, and a magnesium wing section for the 8.26,
constructed as an almost pure monocoque, took 110$ of the design load,
and was htfo lighter in weight although 10$ weaker in torsion. Fig.T2 shows
an experimental test specimen of a magnesium wing.
At the same time the general attitude towards magnesium for other
than castings and lightly stressed parts is still one of suspicion, as
most of the firms visited feel that the difficulty of working and the


FIG 10. TEST SECTION of magnesium wing.
dangers contingent on corrosion and cracking, especially at low temperatures,
preclude its use on primary structures until the conclusion of some major
experiment. The Northrop machines are, however, just such an experiment and
if they prove a success there will undoubtedly be a large extension in the
use of magnesium. For in spite of its low yield in compression, there is
general agreement on its structural possibilities. Compared with
it is practicable to use a much thicker skin, and this not only reduces the
tendency to buckle but also facilitates the construction of a smooth wing
surface. Magnesium also has the advantage that it is easier to weld.
According to Wright Field the danger of fire is not so serious as is
generally made out; and preliminary tests by the American Aluminium Go*
indicate that, although not so good as aluminium alloy, magnesium will stand
up to reasonable gun-fire without shattering, While emphasising magnesium l s
present deficiencies, especially its low compressive yield stress in extru-
sions, the American Aluminium Co, feel certain that the properties of the
material will rapidly improve and consider that they have already made
appreciable progress in overcoming corrosion and fatigue troubles.
The Dow Chemical Co, produce most of the magnesium which is used by the
firms, and its properties, as supplied by the Dow Chemical Co,, are as ’
follows:
Properties of Magnesium used by firms*
Sheet
Yield
Comp Tension
Ultimate
Shear Tension
Elongation on
a 2 in* gauge
length
24*0 CO
2b,000
21,000
40,000
Extrusion
14,000
26,000
18,000
40,000
12^o
x 10 lb/; all stresses are given in lb/in^
The values given should be regarded as average rather than as guaran-
teed minima*
3A*»l i«O3 Steel, This is widely used in undercarriages and engine mountings, and
to a lesser extent in engine cowlings (where heat sometimes prohibits the
use of aluminium alloy) and certain special fittings.
As regards stressed skin construction, the 24, 000 lb, Budd transport
is of steel and is in series production, and experimentally a steel centre
section is being made up for one of the heavy bombers; but at the mm time
there is a general feeling that steel is an inefficient (from a weight
standpoint) substitute for aluminium alloy. Several steel fins and outer
wing sections have been made by (or for) Boeing and North American, and with
one minor exception they have all oeen some 10/4 or more heavier than the
aluminium parts they were meant to replace. With the growing importance
of preserving smooth wing surfaces, it is felt that to try and use steel
is unsound; and in view of the steadily improving properties of aluminium


alloy, it is considered that, to complete effectively on a strength weight
basis, the steel used would require an 'ultimate tensile of at least
125, 000 Ib/i rr and probably 150, 000 Ib/in • Wright Field are in full agree-
ment with this view, and do not share the enthusiasm of the advocates of
the Engineering Department of North American for low carbon steel which
has an ultimate of between 80,000 and 100,000 lb/in^.
3A~11*04 Wood* Much of the information in this section comes from Mr* Giles (of
the B«A.G* Washington) as a result of recent visits paid by him to American
wooden aircraft firms*
Wood is used extensively in American trainers, and moulded plywood
production is developing rapidly* The most important producers of moulded
plywood are Kaskelite, Fairchild Aircraft, Duramold Aircraft and Beech
Aircraft, and Has 'kb lit e Aircraft have just completed an entirely new plant
for the purpose* It has a floor space of 210,000 sq.ft* and contains two
12j? ft. x5O ft* and two Bft x3O ft* autoclaves* For improving the
technique of moulding plywood, the two most important firms are Vidal
Research and Duramold Aircraft, and the processes which they have developed
differ considerably* Duramold U3e steam heat and employ mostly female
moulds with internal pressure; while Vidal use hot water and air pressure
and employ mainly male moulds and external pressure*
Opinions about glues are conflicting* Kaskelite have found that
urea glues give better results than casein, owing to the reduced amount of
water* to be dried out; the Navy are very concerned with the breakdown of
urea glues by cr&cing when subjected to hot weather conditions and are
considering a return to casein; while Duramold Aircraft and Vidal Research
use phenolic glues almost entirely* Mention should lie re be made of a glue
acceleration system for assemblies glued by the nail strip method* The
system has been evolved by Beech Aircraft, and consists in placing aluminium
foil beneath the strips and next to the plywood, and then using the foil,
which is sub-divided into strips, as a heating element by passing through
it an electric current* This gives an appropriate temperature in the glue
line, and Beech Aircraft us© this method for gluing the skin of the A«T*lO
to the fuselage and wing framing* It is estimated that the fitting of the
strips takes 10 to 15 minutes longer than without the foil, but that the
gluing time is reduced from 6 hours (at ?O°F) to 20 minutes* Owing to nail
holes the foil is only used once but is fully re claimable* As a means of
accelerating glue setting in complex assemblies, this firm are also making
extensive use of infra-red radiation. It is thought that the glue line
is considerably more resistant to the passage of infra-red radiation than
the wood, and that a rapid heating of the glue line results*
OvTing to weathering troubles in certain parts of America, considerable
use is now being mad© of pfe-doped fabric for covering exposed plywood
parts, but according to Wright Field this procedure is not yet backed by
sufficient experience in actual use to make it generally acceptable*
Some interest is being taken in sandwich construction, and Kaskelite
have had considerable production at ply-balsa sandwiches for floor boards*
For ease of production it is admitted that a wooden machine may be
better than a similar machine of aluminium alloy; but in the matter of weight,
American opinion is almost universal in thinking that wood produces a heavier
aircraft* This is not only the opinion of firms who are not familiar with
wood - Bell, for example, who would build the P. 77 of metal if they were
permitted - but also of the Navy and of firms who are essentially interested
in wood, such as Duramold Aircraft and Universal Moulded Products. An
illuminating quantitative comparison is afforded by comparing the wooden
A.T.10 with the aluminium alloy A.T.11, both being made by Beech Aircraft*
The A*T.ll is a pre-war design and not especially adapted for production,
while the A.T.10 has been designed with ease of production as an essential
characteristic. For these two aircraft tha man hours per lb. of empty
weight per aircraft are in the ratio of 1 to 1.15 in favour of the A.T.lO*
The weight split up of the two machines is shewn in the adjoining table*


WEIGHT SPLIT UP OF THE AT-10 AMD THE AT-11
AT-tQ (Wood) AT-11 (Aluminium Alloy)
Structural Weights
Fuselage 372
326
Oentresection
Total wt, 548 360
Wt./Sq.Ft. 6.40 4.09
Outer Wing
Total wt. 279 357
Wt./Sq.Ft. 2.45 2.18
Fin
Total wt. 45 27
Wt./Sq.Ft, 2.96 1.66
Stabiliser
Total wt. 80 69
Wt./Sq.Ft, 1.96 1.81
Total 1603(26.35) 1496(19.05)
Finished Wei^its
Eirpty Weight 4920 (80.8$) 5796 (73*£$)
Load 1169 2054
Gross Weight 6089 lbs. 7850 lbs.
In America the general outlook concerning the weight of wooden
aircraft is well summarized by Mr. Page’s remarks about the Curtiss 0. 76
in which he said that it was 10$ or more heavier than an analogous all
metal machine.
In trainers, in which weight is not of paramount importance, wood is
used extensively and is regarded as an adequate substitute for aluminium
alloy; but for service machines the use of wood is regarded as an
unfortunate wartime necessity.
3A-11.05 Plastics. In America plastics are used in non-stressed parts, such as
fairings and instrument panels, and also in lightly stressed parts such a 3
tabs and control pulleys. There is, however, no prospect of their
application to highly stressed parts until a plastic can be produced
which has a sufficiently high shear modulus, and which will not shatter
at low temperature.
No such plastic exists at the moment, although Wright Field and a
number of firms are keenly interested in the development of a plastic
with glass cloth reinforcement, which has the merit that only very small
pressures are needed in its production. One of the firms making it is
"The Swedlow Aeroplastics Corporation of Los Angeles", and they claim
that as a result of research its properties, some of wrhich are shown in
the adjoining table, are being rapidly improved. If so, this is an
inportant discovery of far reaching application,but as similar claims
have been advanced for many plastics during the last few years they
should not be accepted lightly.
Some provisional figures for glass cloth plastic
Specific gravity 1.6 to 1.8
Percentage of resin 35 to 50
Tensile strength 40 to 50 x ib/in?
Compressive strength 50 to 75 x 10* lb/in 2
Shear strength 15 to 20 x 103 lb/in 2


A possible application for this plastic - quite irrespective of its
strength - is for lining petrol tanks; and this should be investigated.
There are still one or two enthusiasts who consider that an efficient
all plastic aircraft is a practical possibility but they constitute an
extremely small minority. In view of recent publicity the present position
is disappointing, for in the firms visited, plastics are no more widely
used than they are over here. In the parts described above the most widely
used plastic is one with a paper base, and Glenn Martin are developing its
use in sandwich construction with some light weight material as filling.
3A-11.06 Recommendations
(i) Britain* s insistence on being supplied with 235, when 24S is a
better material, no more expensive, and easier for America to
produce, should be investigated.
(ii) More attention should be paid to improving magnesium, and to
investigating its structural possibilities.
(iii) A close watch should be kept on American developments on plastics
with glass cloth reinforcement.
CHAPTER 12 - PROCESSES
3A-12.01 Cycle weld. Cycleweld is the name given to a special bonding technique
which has been developed by the Chiysler Coiporation during the course of
the last few years* prirnaril;/ for motor car bodywork* The bonding
materials are called cycleweld cements, and the one most recently developed
can be used for bonding together aluminium alloy, aluminium alloy to wood,
or wood to wood. It is a black low viscosity liquid and is marketed under
the code number C 3. As it is by far the most important from an aircraft
standpoint, no reference is made in what follows to any of the other
cements. Although still only in the development stage, the process is
everywhere regarded with interest and in certain quarters with enthusiasm.
For it is now generally agreed that the process is both sound and suitable
for certain types of assembly, and of the films visited, a number are
either making, or having made for them, tabs, flaps, fins or bomb doors
in which cycleweld has been used extensively, e.g.
(i) The Goodyear Aircraft Go. is designing and assembling by the
cycleweld process ten 824 flaps.
(ii) The Dow Chemical Co, is designing and assembling by cycleweld
ten magnesium alloy P. 40 vertical fins.
(iii) The Goodyear Tyre and Rubber Co. is redesigning for assembly
by cycleweld seven P. 47 single bay ammunition doors.
(iv) Curtiss are having 350 3ets of cycleweld flaps made for the
P. 60.
(v) Consolidated are considering using cycleweld for attaching
the skin along the leading edge of the 8.32.
The Navy and Army are both very keen on the process, and Wright Field are
confident that in time it will be used in the production assembly of
primary structures.
When cyclewelding two surfaces together it is necessary to carry
out the three following operations
(a) To clean the surfaces which are to be bonded
(b) To apply the cement
(c) To assemble, and cure the bond.


The first two operations are relatively simple, hut the third is trouble-
some, as it requires a temperature of 325°F for 15 minutes (or 350°P for
6 minutes), and sufficient pressure for the bonding area of the two
surfaces to be in intimate contact, If mood is one of the materials used,
the pressure applied is usually as large as is possible without damaging
the wood; but if the surfaces to be bonded are of aluminium alloy, the
pressure required ranges from 100 Ibs/i t& for thin sheets, to 200 lb s/in 2
for sheets 1/S in. thick. Lower pressures will be inadequate to bring
about the intimate contact of the bonding surfaces which is essential,
and failure to appreciate this point has been the cause of a number of
disappointments. To produce the required temperature at least three
different methods are available - baking, infra red radiation, or
electrical resistance - but in this field there is considerable scope for
development.
Wright Field have recently carried out an extensive series of tests
on the process as applied to aluminium alloy, and the following is a brief
summary of their conclusions.
Shear strength of lap joints. For short laps the failing load is
proportional to the depth of the lap, but for depths which exceed in.
in the case of thin sheets, or f in, in the case of thick sheets, the rate
of increase oi loan with depth falls off considerably. While the maximum
shear stress developed is not quite independent of the thickness of the
specimens, a good average value for loads whiph are applied for a short-
time and at room temperature, is 2,750 Ibs/in . While* the restriction
on the duration of the load is important, it is not so serious a
limitation as be imagined at first sight, since in an aircraft the
maximum loads only act for very short intervals. The drop in strength is,
however, considerable, for at room temperature for 600 hours and at
150°F for 400 hours, the shear stress carried was 1,450 lb/in 2 and
1,050 Ib/in respectively. As with moderate or thin sheets of aluminium
alloy it is possible to ensure that the sheet will fail before the bond,
it follows that a cycleweld joint can be 10Q?o efficient compared with a
riveted or spot welded joint, whose efficiency cannot exceed a ma-yjTrmrp of
9<?s.
pensile strength of butt joints. Provided that the tension is
applied at right angles to the joint and is uniformly distributed across
it, the average direct stress developed may be 1,340 Ib/in 2 , It is
important to realise however, that these conditions are ideal, and that
in practice failure will occur at a much lower load.
Weathering tests. Extensive tests were carried out at Wright Field
on the effect of weathering but in spite of the accelerated weathering
test which lasted approximately 200 hrs. and was equivalent to 4 to 6
months outdoor exposure, no effect on the strength of the joint was
noted as a result.
Iggier si on tests. It had been realised for some time that cycleweld
joints were impervious to water or oil, and the more recent series of
tests jivas to find out the effect of aromatic fuels. These have the effect
of softening the cycleweld adhesive on the outside of the joint but they
do not affect its strength - in fact in the tests carried out at Wright
Field, a slight increase in shear strength was obtained.
Impact tests. For all vibration and inpact tests carried out at
room temperatures, cycleweld joints are exceptionally good. At low
temperatures, however, more information is required, and for temperatures
below - 70°F such results as have been obtained are rather erratic. It
would appear that the base of the plastic adhesive starts to frees© at
temperature and it is probable that the joint becomes seriously
weakened.
Corrosion of aluminium alloys. Owing to the heating involved in the
cyclewelding process, bare sheet shows a strong susceptibility to inter-
granular corrosion; Wright Field accordingly suggest that cyclewelding
should be restricted to alcla.Q.» In the case of extrusions, which of
course cannot be coated with aluminium, it is recommended that a coat of


sine chromate primer be applied after bonding.
Panels, A number of panels have been constructed by attaching
stiffeners to alclad sheet by means of cycleweld, and compression tests on
these panels have given excellent results. Compared with similar panels in
which the stiffeners have been attached by riveting or spotwelding,
the ultimate load carried was seme to higher. No failure was
experienced in the bond until the load had started to fall off from the
maximum value, and panels had to be crushed to produce failure of the
adhesive.
While it is evident that further investigations must be carried out
on the effects of corrosion and low temperatures, the above summary shows
quite clearly the technical merits of the process. Although it is
essential for a machine to be designed for cvcleweld if the process is to
be used extensively, it is suggested that in the following structural parts
the process would be particularly suitable.
(i) In the pressure cabin assembly where cycleweld enables a joint to
be made and sealed at the same time.
di) In the neighbourhood of cannon or machine guns, where trouble is
caused by excessive vibration.
(iii) In the construction of a smooth wing where a continuous bond
would be helpful in procuring a smooth surface.
In conclusion, it is felt that cycleweld has justified itself from a
technical, standpoint, and that as soon as the production difficulties have
been surmounted, the process will be used extensively. Its possibilities
for joining wood to metal especially merit attention.
3A-12.02 Spot Welding. Ihe official attitude to spot welding is shown by present
Wright Field requirements, (as yet the Navy have no specific requirements)
coupled with the fact that a number of amendments abolishing some of the
restrictions are in course of preparation. Moreover present requirements
are by no means rigid, as if a firm wishes to use spot welding in a
place where it is normally forbidden and can put up a good case (based on
test) for doing so, permission is usually granted.
Wright Field requirements
I Spot welding may be used on all secondary structure; and all primary
structure, with the following exceptions
(&) Attachment of flanges to shear webs
(b) Attachment of spar flanges to wing covering
(c) Attachment of ribs to spars or shear webs
(d) Attachment of brackets, hinges, fittings.
II Spot welding may not be used to join two sheets together if their
thickness ratio is larger than 3 to 1.
111 Stop rivets must be used &t:-
(a) Stringer connections
(b) Stringer ends
(c) Where there are joggles.
Ike view that spot welding is structurally sound on certain primary
structures is substantiated by, and is largely due to, the experience of
Vought Sikorsky and a series of experiments carried out at Wright Field.
The former have been building Navy machines in which spot welding has been


used extensively and without mishap for over two years; while the Army
Air Force, as long ago as 1938-39, carried out 800 hours flying in an
experimental machine with largely spot welded wings* The results were
entirely satisfactory, and the reason given by Wright Field as to why
much more use had not since been made of spot welding was the expansion
programme. By 1939 this was well under way, and so much emphasis wa3
then being placed on production that there was little opportunity for
developing a prooe3So
The firms* attitude to spot welding varies enormously. Of those
visited Boeing and Lockheed are probably the two most in favour, and they
both intend to use the process to an increasing extent in the future*
Boeing, on the B* 17, are joining together by spot welding some of the sheets
forming the wing cover; and Lockheed on the Constellation have spot
welded of the fuselage* This is in addition to its extensive use on
secondary structure, such as engine cowlings. Both firms expressed the
view, agreed to by the Arnerican Aluminium Company, that compared to a
riveted joint which was not usually more than efficient, the
efficiency of a good spot welded joint can be as high as 9Q%» Among
most of the other firms visited the use of the process on other than
secondary structure is regarded with mistrust, the reasons given being
that it is difficult to repair, difficult to inspect and is bad in
fatigue* Moreover, there is no doubt that these criticisms are all in
some measure true. At the same time there has been an almost complete
absence of unfavourable experience, and in view of the experience to
the contrary already mentioned, such widespread mistrust is surprising*
In conclusion it would seem fair to say that the regulated use of spot
welding on primary structure has been shown to be sound, but that the
attitude of firms to its use ranges from enthusiasm to the reverse. All
are agreed, however, that the actual process must be carefully controlled
and that if the process is to be used on a large scale, maohines must
be designed for 3pot welding.
3A-12*03 Re commendations
(i) The tests now starting at firms and at the R.A.E. on the
strength and properties of (a) spot welding and (b) cycle we Id,
shouH be expedited and extended on really high priority.
(ii) M.A.P* should ensure that an adequate research programme is
being carried out by firms on developing the technique of
cycleweld.
(iii) Concurrently with (i), flight tests should be undertaken to
investigate the soundness under flight conditions of spot
welding and of cycleweld in (a) secondary and (b) primary
structure*
CHAPTER 13 - AIRCRAFT TESTING PROCEDURE
3A-13«01 The question of the rationalisation of British, American Arngr and
Navy flight testing procedure was one of the items which the previous
C*R*D. asked the Mission to investigate* Certain documents including
a memorandum from Bosoombe Down dated November 22nd, 1942 were 3ent
out to the Mission in order to help them with their discussions on this
subject, and two meetings were held before the Mission left for England#
Broadly speaking it was felt by C.R.D, that one of the most
important things the Mission could do was to emphasise the necessity for
the rationalisation and co-relation of flight tests results; in the
past failure to achieve this had led to criticisms which were apt to get
magnified, and had caused, in some cases, misunderstandings between the
two services* It was agreed that all these matters could be cleared up
by a proper understanding of how different types of aircraft were to be'
tested in regard to weights, fuel, armament, etc*, and under what


conditions various speeds, climbs, evolutions, etc., were to be measured.
On' the sea trip going over the Mission had the benefit of the company
of W/Cdr. Campbell Orde, who was also going to America, and various points
were discussed at some length.
On arrival at Washington, this particular item on the agenda was
reviewed with the 8.A.C., and it was arranged that W/Cdr. Summers and Mr.
Bolas, who had both been specialising on this subject on behalf of
the 8.A.C., should accompany the Mission for part of the trip and take part
in the conferences on this subject at Wright Field* It was during these
early negotiations at Washington that it was first made known to the
Mission that a Joint Committee of Army, Navy and B.A.C. authorities had
been sitting on this same question for sane 20 months; that this
Committee had come to some conclusions, and that a Test Manual dealing with
this whole problem had been cleared, was being printed and would be issued
shortly.
A discussion took place on this subject at Wrigjrt Field with General
Carroll, Colonel Bogert and Colonel Gillespie, the latter being the
chairman of the Joint Committee dealing with this whole subject. As a
result of this talk it was established that an agreement had been arrived
at on the aircraft conditions, weights, amament, etc., and that a suitable
manual would be forthcoming so that there would be no misunderstandings on
these subjects; but that the Committee had been unable to get any nearer
bringing the test results of the pilots of the different countries to a
common denominator, in fact there was not even an agreement between the
American Navy and Amy authorities.
The members of the Mission also gained the impression that although a
great deal of serious and well planned flight testing is carried out at
Wright Field, complete and individual reports of particular aircraft
are not as a rule prepared, as the information in regard to the each
aircraft is in the hands of the particular Project Engineer who carries
on their tabulated data from day to day, but does not in most instances
produce a finalised report. To check on this, Sir Roy Fedden asked for
and received a promise to have given to him a finalised report on the A. 26
and on the Minneapolis single lever exhaust turbo control, but these were
actually not forthcoming, and in the end it was agreed that they did not
exist in the same form as, for instance, the two reports that had been
produced by the British pilots on the 8.17 and A. 26 which were taken along
as examples of the form in which it was desired to have Wrigfct Field
Reports.
On the Mission* s return to Washington this matter was reviewed with
the 8.A.0., and it was decided that it would be in the interests of all
concerned for Sir Roy Fedden to take this up during his final talk with
General Echols and Admiral Davidson, the day before he left America. This
was done, and W/Cdr. Summers* report on the B. 1? and A. 26 were put forward
as being a typical example of what we hoped to achieve in standardised
form between the two countries • General Echols and Admiral Davidson were
unaware of the actual state of affairs; they said that the Rationalisation
Committee at Wright Field had settled this matter and that the Mission
were under a misapprehension as to the true state of affairs. This matter
was referred back again to the flight testing side of the 8.A.C., who
confirmed that all the information that had been given to General Echols
was correct. Correspondence has taken place since the return of the
Mission, with Mr.T.P.Wright and W/Cdr. Summers and the matter is being
followed up, but it is felt that the whole question is still in the
melting pot and it is important to get it cleared up.
The Mission would like to put on record that the American authorities
were perfectly frank in discussing this matter at Wright Field, explaining
to the members of the Mission exactly how they carried out their testing,
and how the system of Project Engineers operated, and Colonel Gillespie
and Colonel Craigie went to some considerable trouble to explain their
respective procedures, but the Mission felt that it is not appreciated
the higher authorities in America how far we are yet from obtaining a
proper understanding, and how vitally necessary it is to arrive at this.


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA
The as are grouped under the relevant Chapters of this Part
CHAPTER 2
1. Organisation charts of the engineering depariments of Boeing, Douglas
(El Segundo), Douglas (Santa Monica), North American,
CHAPTER 3
2. Papers issued by the Society of Aeronautical Weight Engineers?
N 0,2. Aeroplane Weight end Balance Control,
No.3* Aircraft Accessories, “A Weighty Problem*.
N 0.4, Weight Engineer and Flutter Problem.
N 0,6, The present status of Beryllium.
No.?. Predetermination of weight efficiency.
No.B. A practical method if wing weights,
N 0,9» Aircraft balancing and centre of gravity control.
No,lo. Calculations of landing gear hydraulic system weights.
No. 11. Messersehmitt 110. Details of Germany’s Mass Production
Fighter.
N 0,12. Weight Control. Aircraft design problem.
No,l?. Applications of psychology to weight control.
N 0.20. Wing weight estimating simplified.
N 0.22. Preliminary design equations .for aircraft weight estimation.
3. Society of Aeronautical NeigbfcEngineers Book. 1942*
Procedure and requirements for obtaining S.A.W.E. seal of weight approval.
4- U. 3. Army and Navy weight analysis forms, AN91020 and AN9IO3C.
5* Consolidated booklet on weight estimating data.
6. Weight comparison between Spitfire IX and PSIB.
7. Weight comparison between Spitfire, P4OF and P4OIS.
CHAPTER ,5
Wright Field.
8. Progress report on methods of analysis applicable to monocoque aircraft
structures, 1942.
9. Army Air Forces Technical Report NoUj-313 ♦ Revision 1.
10. Structures Bulletin N 0.25 Appendix 1, strength requirements of structure
adjacent to machine guns, Nov* 1942*
Navy Bureau of Aeronautics.
11. Preliminary draft of AH).4 Methods of Structural Analysis.
12. Structures Memorandum N 0.6 - Weight and Strength Comparisons for Wing
Panels of various Structural Materials.
13. Structures Memorandum No,B - A new type of wing construction utilising
magnesium alloy, October 1942.
Glenn Martin Co,
14. Structural Bulletin N 0.20 - Shear stress and deflection of aluminium alloy,
August 1939*
15. Test of Gun Blast Effect on Various Panels, September 1942.
Consolidated,
16. The efficiency of the webs of metal beams, by Roy A. Miller and Mortimer


17. Determination of the most efficient Shear Beam Stiffener Spacing, July
1940.
Miscellaneous
18. Problems in Aircraft Structural Research, by F.R. Shantey, November 1942.
19. Effects of Yielding and Perforations on Wing Tension Surface, by Richard
K.Koegler and Arthur Schnitt, Structures Department, Curtiss Wright
Corporation, Buffalo Plant, January 1943.
CHAPTER 6
20. Compressibility - Its Effect on Aircraft, by Colonel Ben. S. Kelsey,
Production Division, Wright Field, February 1943.
CHAPTER 9
21. Descriptive summary - Methods of testing cabin pressure seals, Consolidated
X 832.
CHAPTER 11
22. Handbooks of American Aluminium Co.
No.l Aluminium in Aircraft (basic information on its use).
N 0.2 Welding and Brazing Alcoa Aluminium.
N 0.3 Riveting Aluminium.
N 0.4 Aluminium Casting Alloys and Alloys for other purposes.
N 0.3 Machining Alcoa Aluminium.
N 0.6 Alcoa Aluminium and its Alloys.
No .7 Forming Aluminium.
No.B Finishes for Aluminium.
23. Technical papers of American Aluminium Co.
No.l Column Strength of Various Aluminium Alloys.
N 0.2 Model Tests of Latticed Structural Frames.
N 0.3 Tests of 28 ft. span Aluminium Alloy Trusses.
N 0.4 Bending Test on Panels of Stiffened Flat Sheet.
N 0.3 Static and Rapid Load Tests of Aluminium Alloy and
Steel Riveted Hull Plate Splices.
N 0.6 Typical Tensile and Compressive Strain-Stress Curves
for Aluminium Alloy 24 ST, Aided 24 ST, 24 SRT, and
Alelad 24 SRT Products.
N 0.7 Identification of Constituents of Aluminium Alloys.
No.B Revealing the Microstructure of 24 ST Alloy.
24. AN-A-8, Army-Navy Aeronautical Specification Aluminium Alloy (AL-14)
Extruded Shapes.
23. AN-A-12, Army-Navy Aeronautical Specification Aluminium Alloy (AL-24)
Plate Sheet and Strip.
26. AN-A-13. Army-Navy Aeronautical Specification Aluminium Alloy, Clad,
(AL-24C-2) Plate, Sheet and Strip.
27. Memorandum on Tube Standardisation.
28. Memorandum on Wire Round and Bar Standardisation.
29. Memorandum on Sheet Standardisation.
30. Reports on Wooden Aircraft by J.L. Giles of B.A.C.
31. Certain figures relating to glass cloth plastic, Swedlow Aeroplastics
Corporation.


CHAPTER 12
32. Proceedings of the Chrysler Cycleweld Conference held at Detroit,
October 1942, including in particular the following papers:-
No.l Bonding wood and plastic combinations for a cycleweld process.
N 0.2 Failure loads of demonstration cycleweld joints.
N 0.3 Tooling methods as applied to the cycleweld processes.
N 0.4 Assembly of a Curtiss P. 40 stabiliser.
N 0.3 P. 40 stabiliser test.
N 0 .6 History of cycleweld.
N 0.7 Heat as applied to the cycleweld processes.
No. B Basic structural performance of metallic structures bonded
via the cycleweld process.
N 0.9 Physical properties of cycleweld methods and process of
application.
No.lo Discussion of engineering data on cyclewelded metal to metal
No.ll Cycleweld possibilities.
33. Production Analysis of Riveting, Spot Welding and Cementing, Curtiss
Wright Corporation, December 1942.


AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART B REVIEW OF AMERICAN AIRCRAFT
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item I*ol Introduction
“ I*o2 New fighters
M I*o3 Heavy bombers
•’ I*o4 Douglas A. 26
H 1.05 Transport types
w 1.06 Plying boats
" I*o7 Action
CHAPTER 2 - DESCRIPTION OP NEW NORTH -AMERICAN P. 51
Item 2.01 General
” 2.02 Methods of lightening the P. 518
" 2.03 General data, lightened P. 518
CHAPTER 3 - DESCRIPTION OP CURTISS P. 60
Item 3*ol General
** 3*02 Details of structure
>*' 3*03 General data, P. 60
CHAPTER 4 “ DESCRIPTION OF BELL P. 63
Item 4* 01 General
” 4*02 Details of structure
” 4*03 General data, Po 63
\
CHAPTER 5 - DESCRIPTION OP DOUGLAS A> 26
Item s*ol General
” 5*02 Details of structure
** 5*03 General data, A. 26
CHAPTER 6 - THE BOEING 8.29 AND CONSOLIDATED 8.32
Item 6.01 General ~
H 6.02 Details of structure of 8.29
M 6.03 Details of structure of 8.32
" 6o 04 Performance and weight of B. 29
11 6005 Performance and weight of B* 32
CHAPTER 7 ~ CURRENT FIGHTERS IN PRODUCTION
Item 7*ol Introduction
v ” 7.02 Curtiss P.4OF
" 7.03 Bell P. 39
' ft 7*04 North American P.SIA .
CHAPTER 8 - CURRENT HEAVY BOMBERS IN PRODUCTION
Item 8. 01 Introduct ion
M 8.02 Bomb load and range of Bo 17 and Bo 24
,f B# o3 Component weights
CHAPTER 9 - TRANSPORT TIPBS
Item 9*ol Introduction
" 9.02 Existing types
H 9*03 Prototypes and projects
" 9*04 Curtiss 0.46 Commando
” 9*05 Lockheed Constellation
” 9.06 Conclusion
CHAPTER 10 - WOODEN AIRCRAFT
Item 10.01 Introduction
! ’ 10.02 Curtiss 0.76 Caravan
M 10.03 Bell P. 77
" 10.04 Conclusion
continued overleaf«••


CHAPTER 11 - FLYING BOATS
Item 11*01 Introduction
M 11*02 Consolidated Coronado
" 11003 Boeing Sea Ranger
” 11* 04- Conclusion
v v
CHAPTER 12 - TAILLESS AIRCRAFT
Item 12*01 General
12.02 Description of Northrop MX.140 and NS-2
" 12*03 Conclusions
CHAPTER 13 - TABULATED DATA
Item 13*01 American Fighter performance
13*02 British Fighter performance
13*03 Bomber performance
13*04- American Fighter weights
" 13*05 British Fighter weights
APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA


CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
33-1*01 Introduction. A close study was made of a number of new types of aircraft
now in the prototype stage and about to come into production, in order to
report to the Minister as fully as possible regarding the value of these
types to the R.A.F. and to recommend the appropriate action to be taken*
A more general review was made of other types already familiar in this
country to gain an overall impression of American methods and technique
and to report on any items of special interest®
33-1*02 New Fighters* The North American P*51C (lightened Mustang) the Curtiss
?.60 and BellP*63 represent the best examples of American fighter design*
In each case the performance and manoeuvrability are expected to be good,
the top speed and rate of climb of the first two being particularly high*
Whereas the Curtiss P»60 and Bell P* 63 are brand new designs and it is
therefore necessary to rely on estimated performances, the lightened
Mustang is the natural successor to the original P.51 without ary major
change. Such changes as have been made, as for example, the us© of the
Merlin engine, and proposed changes such as the use of lighter propeller,
radiator and undercarriage, are beneficial to the performance and do not
introduce any big unknown quantities* Therefore it is felt that reliance
can be placed on the Mission* s conclusion that# the lightened Mustang is an
excellent aircraft with an all round performance comparable to any
existing British production type*
Tlie Mustang form of wing construction represents an American design
thesis which has never appeared in British types* Since it is a method
which leads to a high degree of smoothness, coupled with high wing stiff-
ness and benee good rolling properties, at no cost in weight, it is
considered that the production of the Mustang in this country would be a
sound proposition for the war effort as well as providing useful experience
for British fighter firms* The P.60 and P*63* on the other hand, while
aiming at an even higher degree of smoothness than has hitherto been
achieved, employ a relatively untried method of construction* The Mustang
design also lends itself to ease of production.
If this is agreed, it is considered that a firm should be chosen and
a small team of engineers selected from the firm to go to the United
States to study trie design and methods of construct ion, and to acquire all
the technical data necessary*
3B-1*03 Heavy Bombers. At the Minister* ©request the Mission studied the B*29
and B*32 as possible replacements for existing British bombers* The pros,
and cons of the case are discussed xn detail in Chapter 6, but the general
conclusion is that the B. 25 is likely to be the better of the two® For
equal take off distance, either aircraft carries roughly the same bomb
load. If, however, take off from long runways can be permitted the 3*29
is capable of greater development than the B»32, and can fly safely at
overloads such that the bomb load for a 2000 mile range is 2§- times that
carried by the best British current bombers* Structurally the B* 29 is a
sound design; it is felt however that the aircraft could with advantage
(so far as R.A.F. use is concerned) be converted, as a first production
step, to a non-pressure type with directly controlled turrets.
As the present exhaust turbo installation has much development work
alia ad of it, the use of a single stage engine, such as the Centaur us or
some other suitable type, is advocated, as leading to a better all round
performance for night bombing below 25 ? 000 ft. and avoiding the use of
turbo superchargers until suitably developed.
Since the B.29 is in a relatively early prototype stage, it is
recommended that, as a means of obtaining quickly operational experience
of what will undoubtedly be an efficient type with a considerable life, M.A.P*
should acquire samples urgently, to ascertain whether the type is
considered suitable by the Mr Staff for R.A.F. use. . It is suggested
that an engineering staff should be sent to the U.S. to obtain drawings
and data, and to familiarise themselves with the production methods of
this type.


In coming to the conclusions, the advanced stage of the tooling, and
the three new and up to date plants specially laid out for the manufacture
of the 8*29, have also been taken into consideration.
38-1.04 Douglas A. 26. Of the attack types the new Douglas A. 26 stood out as the
most promising. The performance and manoeuvrability are good and the
design incorporates a number of interesting features, including anew form
of wing construction, and the provision of a75 ram, gun. It is
re commended that samples of this type should be obtained and tested here,
and it would be valuable to send two or three engineers to study the
design and production methods in detail.
38-1.05 Transport Types. The range of transport types available, the rate of
production and the total number of aircraft on order, is one of the most
notable features of the U.S, aircraft programme. There are five types,
ranging from feeder line aircraft to those suitable for trans-continental
routes, being produced at present at about 150 per month. The rate of
production is rising rapidly and total orders amount to over 12,000. In
addition there are several projected types, of which the Constellation
is the most advanced, which are certainly suitable for trans-continental
routes and possibly suitable for a transatlantic service.
38-1,06 Flying Boats. The importance attached to Flying Boats is also a
striklng feature of the American programme. There are three types in pro-
duction, and two large prototypes - the Sea Ranger and the Mars. While
large scale production of these last two has not yet been planned, the
combined figures for the first three are at present 100 a month and will
shortly rise to 180 a month. This considerable programme is a concrete
expression of the view that although the uses of flying boats are limited,
there will usually be tasks for which the flying boat is preferable.
While the American programme for flying boats is on a much smaller scale
than for landplanes, it is much in excess of corresponding British develop-
ments, With regard to the last two types, the Mission make no specific
recommendations apart from calling attention to the great experience being
built up on the design and development sides as a result of the number of
types being developed and in production.
38-1.07 Action.
(i) Production ol the Mustang in Britain Should be considered, and a
team of engineers should be sent to America to study the design
and methods of construction.
(ii) Samples of the 8,29 and A*26 should be acquired for study; as a
preliminary step engineers should be sent to America to obtain
all technical data.


CHAPTER 2 - DESCRIPTION Off NEW NORTH AMERICAN P. 51
(Lightened version of Mustang;
3B-2* 01 General. There are four main versions of the Mustang.
(a) The existing Mustang with Allison engine (P*51a)
(b) A direct modification to incorporate the Packard Merlin
engine (P.51B)
(c) Version (b) modified to lighten it*
(d) A completely redesigned version of very light weight.
At the time of the visit of the Mission to North American Aviation
the details of (c) and (d) were still under review and it had not then
been decided whether to attempt both* The discussion was therefore
centred round simple modifications of the kind envisaged for (c), as
this appeared to be the type of most immediate practical value*
Weights* The value of the Mustang with a Packard Marlin engine largely
depends on the amount by which the weight can be reduced. The firm are
aiming at reducing the weight of the present P.51-B by 1, 200 lb. giving
a lightened weight of ?,45$ lb* This was considered by the Mission to
be optimistic and after detailed discussions a figure of 7*850 lb* was
suggested* Wright Field considered this latter figure to be reasonable.
Performance Estimates* The Mustang has already established a reputation
for being one of the cleanest existing fighters. The wing and fuselage
are well finished. The cowling fits well and is robust. The firm quote
a top speed with Merlin engine of 456 nwp.h. at 28,000 ft. This
corresponds to a total drag co-efficient of a little under 0.016, compared
with about 0.018 on the original Allison engined Mustang. Considerable
work has been done on the provision of smoother wing surfaces. %
filling and using a smooth camouflage paint the wing drag is reduced from
O. to 0*0062, and polishing gives a drag of 0.0052* It is therefore fair
to credit the new version with a reduction of 0*001 which which gives a total
drag co-efficient of 0.01 7. This gives a top speed of about 450 m.p.h*
Rate of climb is largely dependent on weight. If we accept the
weight of 7*850 lb* and then compare with the Spitfire XX which is very
similar, the time to climb to 20,000 ft. would be expected to be 7-3/4
mins. The firm 5 a claim of about 5 mins, seems optimistic, and, even
allowing for combat ratings and crediting the Mustang with a more
efficient propeller, the time can hardly be reduced below, say, 6j
minutes*
Controls. The controls of the original Mustang are generally accepted
bv the R.A.F. to be good, while the aileron control is especially good.
During the visit of the Mission the firm was embarking on the production
of a modified aileron which would improve performance at low speeds.
Whether or not the rate of roll at high speeds was affected was not clear.
Extrapolation of results at lower speeds indicated no change of performance
at high speed. However, Gyoup Captain Campbell Orde and Wing Commander
Summers reported the control to be "rock solid” at high speed. The Mission
therefore pressed Wright Field to reconsider the matter. Before leaving
U.3. it was understood that a compromise modification had been found which
improved control at low speed and was not detrimental at high speed.
Armament. The present proposal is to fit four 0*5” guns with 270 rounds
per guru
Conclusion. A lightened Mustang with a Packard Merlin engine is a valuable
weapon, since it represents the combination of an excellent airframe and
first-class engine. By a redesign of those parts where the existing
P. 51B is heavy, the gross weight and hence rate of climb should equal
those of the Spitfire IX. The fine finish leads inevitably to a high top
speed when fitted with the Merlin engine. The controls are known to be
very good.


3B"2»02 Methods of lightening the ?» 518. The following lists the main group
weights of the P* 518 and for comparison the Spitfire IX®
P. 518 Spitfire IX
Structure Group 294$ 2141
l'-otter Unit 2997 260 /
Peel Supply 462 ( 255
Fixed Equipment 640 556
Removable Equipment S4B 1008
Fuel and Oil 777 6?3
Gross Weight 8664 7240 m
k The Spitfire is loaded beyond this weight but the
figures will serve the present purpose*
Considering first the power plant group* the use of a wooden propeller
as on the pitfire would save some 150 lb* A further 30 lb* might be
saved, since the quantity of oil in the system could presumably be reduced*
The other big item on the power plant group is the radiator on the 8.518
which together with its fluid is 180 lb* heavier than on the Spitfire* If
the same standard of cooling is accepted probably 120 lb* of the weight
could be saved* With incidental items it appears that the weight of the
power plant group could be reduced by a total of 325 lb*
The size of the fuel tank, could presumably be reduced for a short
endurance fighter* In order to maintain adequate self-sealing the weight
of two tanks with 50 gallons each would be not less than 150 lb*, a saving
of 85 lb*
The weight of the equipment depends so much on the precise operational,
requirements that it is not easy to discuss in detail. From general
experience it seems that a short endurance fighter with 4 x Q»5 !! guns and
armour sufficient to satisfy current demands would carry a military load
(less fuel and oil) of about 1,500 lbs., even with strict attention to
economy in design* .This compares with about 1430 lbs. on the P. 518, and
therefore no reduction is thought to be permissible in this portion of
the load*
Finally, there is the structure to consider; of the 800 lbs. differ-
ence between the P. 518 and the Spitfire IX, 250 lbs* can be attributed
directly to the fact that the whole aeroplane is heavier and a heavier
structure is therefore necessary* A further 400 lbs* is attributable
to the heavy undercarriage and engine mounting. The remaining 150 lbs*
is hard to trace to ary single cause. It is suggested that the biggest
' saving would be to redesign the undercarriage to British factors, to use
a fixed tail wheel, to use Dunlop wheels, and to redesign the engine mounts
to lower side loads. This redesign should save 3*5 per cent of the
..all-up weight, about 300 lbs.
'Whether any further structural saving could be attained is doubtful;
assuming for the moment that the remainder of the structure is unaltered,
we have for the lightened P. 518 (approximate figures):
Structure Group 2675
Power Plant Group 2715
Fuel Supply Group 380
Fixed and Removable Load 1450
Fuel and Oil 745
79^5
If a completely new structure of the same efficiency as the P*slß,
but with undercarriage, tail wheel and engine mounting designed to British
requirements, were produced, the structure group would be reduced to
2, 360 lbs. and the gross weight to 7,650 lbs* It is considered that this
further saving would in practice be very hard to achieve and as a
reasonable compromise, with every care to economise in weight in wings*
body end tail, it seems that 7 ) 850 lbs. is the lowest likely to be attained,
a reduction of some 800 lbs* below the existing weight*


38-2.03 General Data, Lightened P. 518.
Gross Weight - Firm* s estimates varied between 7,000 lb.
and 7,500 lb. according to amount of
redesign, but 7,500 lb. was quoted as reasonable.
The Mission's estimate was 7,850 lb. allowing
for considerable redesign but maintaining same
useful load.
Wing Area sq.ft. 233
Span ft. 37
Aspect ratio 5*9
Wing Loading Ib./sq.ft. 32.5 at 7,500 lb.
Span Loading lb./sq e ft. 5*5 at 7,500 lb.
Power Plant Packard Merlin 61
vi 650-3
Power at height Military 1300 at 24,000 ft.
Take off 1370 at S.L.
Strength.
Plight factor 12.0 at appropriate gross weight when finalised.
Landing factor Probably in accordance with British requirements.
Armament
4 x 0.5 cal. with 270 round/gun.
Main weight information
(Wright Field Figures)
Weight empty 5969
Useful load 1516
Gross Weight 7485 (Suggest 7850 lb.)
Performance. Note: These figures are estimated by the firm. See also
Chapter 13.
Top speed 456 m.p.h. at 28,000 ft. (suggest 450 m.p.h.)
Time to climb 6 mins, to 24,000 ft. at 7,400 lb. gross weight,
equivalent approximately to 5*2 mins, to 20,000 ft. at 7,850 lb.
CHAPTER 3 - DESCRIPTION OF CURTISS P. 60
38-3.01 General. This aircraft is not unlike the Hawker Tempest with Centaurus
engine in general weight, size and power. (Figs, 1, 2 and 3). The firm
FIG. 1 . CURTISS P. 60.


FIG. 2. CURTISS P. 60.
FIG. 3
P. 60 C.
GENERAL ARRANGEMENT


have made a special effort to reduce drag both in the wing design and the
cooling system. The wing is perhaps not quite up to the standard of the
Bell P. 63 but it is nevertheless better than any wing on existing British
types. Some flying has been done on the prototype. Whether or not to
place a large size order for the type has not yet been definitely decided,
as there is a possibility that production of the Kittyhawk and Y/arhawk
will be continued for some time. Detailed figures are tabulated at the
end of these notes.
Performance. The firm quote a top 3peed of 424 m.p.h., which in view of
the cleanness of the design seems rather low. With a normal drag co-
efficient (not giving any credit for special smoothness) a speed of
435 m.p.h. should be attained. Bearing in mind the high power/weight
ratio of the type, the figure of 5*2 mins, to 20,000 ft., seems perfectly
reasonable. This is attained with a four bladed propeller, although if
the machine goes into production, it is proposed to replace this by a
six blade contra propeller.
Controls. The aileron design has been studied by the firm with great
care, as it was rea3.ised that, with the large span, high rate of roll
would be more difficult to achieve. The ailerons are a shrouded type;
full particulars are available. The steady rate of roll for a3O lb.
stick force at 400 m.p.h. E.A.S., according to Langley Field tunnel test,
is 90° per second. This, compared with our present standard of 51 time to
bank" of 1 sec. to 45° t is very good.
General layout. A normal tailwheel type layout is used. The main
undercarriage is strikingly neat and compact in design. The four 0.5"
guns are housed outboard in the wings.
38-3-02 Details of Structure.
Materials. With certain exceptions, such as control pulleys, ammunition
boxes and gun ammunition rollers which are of plastics, and engine mount-
ings and part of the landing gear which are of steel, the aeroplane is of
aluminium alloy. Considerable use is made of extrusions, (although in
the future sane of these may be replaced by rolled sections), and both
these and the alclad sheet are of 24 ST. No use is made of magnesium.
Wing Design. The wing has a laminar flow section with a maximum thick-
ness chord ratio of at the root and iGfo at the tip (66,2-118 at the
root and 66,2-116 at the tip), and in general construction it is similar
to the P.63* The bending moment is taken by four heavy flanges at 31 2/0
and 75% of the chord, and the shear is carried by webs attached to the
flanges. As in the case of the P. 63, the front spar is the more important.
Along the front of the wheel well and very close to the leading edge there
is also an auxiliary spar necessitated by the cut out due- to the undercarriage.
The wing is constructed in three sections, and the two outer sections are
joined to the centre section by fittings bolted to the spar flanges.
The 3kin thickness is in Fig. 4 and for the most part is 0.04 in.
on both upper and lower surfaces.
The continuity of the wing surface is broken up by three major cut
outs. There is the gun door on the top surface, and the fuel tank cover
and cut out due to the undercarriage on the lower surface. The gun door
is attached to the wing by quick release screws and is not stress bearing,
but the fuel tank cover is designed to be fully effective in shear and
tension or compression. Outboard of the wing joint all torque is carried
by the D nose; in the neighbourhood of the joint there is a very heavy
rib which redistributes the torque; and inboard of the joint the torque
is taken by the box bounded by the front and rear spars.
The ribs are pressed and usually contain large lightening holes.
They are at fairly close pitch, and the skin cover between them is reinforced
by channel section chordwi.se stiffeners 6 to 7 inches apart, Fig. SA.
The reason for having chordwise instead of spanwise stiffeners is to
maintain a really smooth surface and to prevent the formation of spanwise
corrugations when the skin buckles. Although not quite up to the standard


FIG. 4. P. 60. SKIN THICKNESSES.
of the P. 63, the surface obtained i 3 very good, and if the skin over the
D nose could be put on in one piece and the joint along the leading edge
thus avoided, the surface would be excellent.
Fuselage Design. The fuselage is elliptical in section, and its design
is somewhat unconventional in
that stringers have been dis-
pensed with and the reinforc-
ing members consist of four
heavy longerons and channel
section frames at some 6 to 34-
in* pitch* (Fig*s(B)). Whether
the production version is to
have this type of construction
i 3 however, not quite certain,
as a more conventional fuselage >
such as that of the F,4-0 with
stringers and frames at normal
spacing, is under considera-
tion*
FIG. 5. P. 60 DETAILS.


38“3*03 General Data, P.6Q
gross weight lb, 10235
Wing Area sq.ft. 275
Span ft. 41,4
Aspect Ratio 6,2
Wing Loading lb./sq.ft, 37*5
Span Loading lb./sq.ft. 6.0
Power Plant P. & W. R.28Q0
B Rating C Rating
Power at height Military 1800 at 23,000 ft. 1800 at 23,000 ft.
Take off 2100 at S.L. 2000 at S.L.
War Emergency 2015 at 22,000 ft. 2015 at 20,000 ft.
T.O. power loading ib./BHP 4.9 5.1
Propeller 12 ft. 11 in. diam, 12 ft. 2 ins
4 blade 6 blade
contra-prop.
Strength
Appropriate weight 10,000 lb.
Plight factor - positive 12
negative 6
Landing factor 7
Limiting diving speed 500 m.p.h. E.A.S.
Performance Note: These figures are quoted by the firm. See also Chapter 13
With B rating of engine - gross weight 10,100 lbs. 4 Blade propeller.
Height Top Speed Rate of Climb
S.L. 362 4650
12500 393 3750
20000 - 3310
22000 424 ' -
Service ceiling - 34800 feet
With C rating of engine - gross weight 10,400 lbs, 6 Blade contra-prop.
Height Top Speed Rate of Climb
S.L. 360 4280
11200 - 3380
14000 404
17600 ~ 3520
20000 421
Service ceiling - 34480 feet
CHAPTER 4 - DESCRIPTION OP BELL P. 63
38-4.01 General. This is a design basically similar to the Airacobra, but
greatly improved in detail, and it should be a good job for production. (pigs.
6 & ?). The main constructional difference is a wing of larger area, with a
special low drag aerofoil section, and with the smoothest covering seen
during the whole tour. This change, together with rather greater engine
power, a redesigned nosewheel and a better hood, have increased the
performance considerably beyond that of the original Airacobra. The new
edition, with its good view, excellent finish and two stage engine, will
show whether the shaft drive is really worth while. The prototype had
flown to a limited extent and a large order had been placed for production
aircraft at the time of the Mission f s visit. Details are tabulated at
the end of this description.


FIG. 6. BELL, P. 63.
FIG. 7. BELL, P. 63
Performance. A special effort has been made to achieve a smooth wing. At
Langley Field drag co-efficient, of 0.0032 has been measured at a Reynolds
No. of 30 x A value as low as this may not be achieved in service
but if an improvement of 0.002 beyond present good practice is accepted,
a top speed of about 395 nw p. h. is reasonable. War emergency ratings for
the Allison V. 1710-93 have not yet been officially endorsed, but assuming
the proposed values are accepted, a speed of about 420 m.p.h. should be
attainable.
The power/weight ratio is a little worse than the Spitfire IX, so
that even allowing for the lower drag it is unlikely that the time to climb
to 20,000 ft. will be less than 7i minutes. With war emergency ratings
this should be reduced to minutes®
In this connection, it is worth, pointing out that the replacement of
the present Allison engine by a Merlin 68 (if this should prove practicable)
would materially improve the performance.
Controls. As a result of experience on the original Airacobra, the ailerons
are metal covered (magnesium sheet), and the rate of roll is understood to
be exceptionally good.


General Layout* This is similar to the Airacobra* The engine is mounted
aft of the pilot with a shaft drive to the tractor propeller# The 37 mra.
cannon gun fires through tbs propeller hub, with the two 0«5 M guns firing
through the propeller disc. Provision is made for two further 0.5” guns
to be slung externally from the wings outside the propeller disc.
An electrically retracted tricycle gear is fitted, generally similar
to the Airacobra gear, which is claimed to be completely satisfactory.
38-4*02 Details of Structure.
Materials. With certain exceptions, the aeroplane is built of 24 ST
aluminium alloy, and apart from longerons and spar flanges little use is
made of extrusions. The exceptions comprise the petrol tank cover and
control surfaces which are of magnesium, the bell cranks in the control
system and the doors covering the nose wheel which are also of magnesium,
part of the nose wheel and certain fittings in the fuselage which are of
steel, and a small door on the under side of the fuselage which is of wood.
Wing Design. The wing has a laminar flow section with a maximum thickness
chord ratio of 1670, (66, 2-116 at the root, and 66, 2-216 at the tip).
The bending moment is predominantly taken by four heavy flanges at 35%
and 10% of the chord, and the shear is carried by webs which are attached
to the flanges. Of the two spars, the front one takes appreciably the
greater load as the rear one is in the nature of an aileron spar. The
wing is built up in three sections, and the centre section, which extends
a short distance on either side of the fuselage, is joined to the two
outer sections by four special heat-treated steel bolts, one at each
flange. The bending moment, is, of course, taken by all four of these
bolts, but the shear is carried entirely by the two on the'upper surface.
That no part is carried by the two on the lower surface is ensured by
having a clearance round the joints.
The skin thicknesses are shown in Fig# 8* Forward of the main spar,
the thickness ranges from 0.064 ins. at the root to 0.04 at the tip;
aft of the front spar and inboard of the tip it is 0.04 ins. on the top
FIG. 8. P. 63 S KIN THICKNESSES.
surface and 0.032 ins. on
the bottom; and all over the
tip it is 0.032 ins. The
ailerons are of Q.Oii in.
magnesium and ace of metal
instead of fabric covering,
owing to the reverse curva-
ture required at the trail-
ing edge by the laminar flow
section. The fuel tank cover
is also of 0.04' in. magnesium,
and to withstand the aero-
dynamic loading is heavily
reinforced by chord.wise L
section stiffeners. It is
attached to the main structure
by screws at 3 in. pitch
chordwise and at 5 in. pitch
spanwise. At the root the
shear web thickness of the
main spar is 0.128 in* and
this steadily diminishes out-
board.
The main ribs are at stations 1,2, 3 and 4* They have a moderate
flange and possess solid webs heavily reinforced with L section verticals.
Between stations 1 and 2 there are a number of auxiliary ribs, but owing
to the undercarriage their webs contain large cut-outs. Between stations
2 and 3> the fuel tanks make these auxiliary ribs impossible and the wing
surface relies entirely on closely pitched chordwise stiffeners of L or
Z section. Outboard of Station 3$ there are auxiliary ribs which are
lightened by holes, reinforced by beading, and 8 in. apart. Forward of the
front spar there are a large number of nose ribs and the spacing of these


varies considerably. It is 4 in. between stations 1 and 2, 7 in® between
stations 2 and 3 and 8 in. outboard of station 3* They are pressed and
have lightening holes, beading and a small flange. Inboard, a particularly
large hole is caused by the ammunition shoot for the machine guns under
the wing*
A determined effort to procure a really smooth wing surface has been
a vital factor in the design, and is the cause of two rather unusual
features. The first is the use of chordwise Instead of spanvd.se stiffeners
for reinforcing the skin cover, thus preventing the formation of spanwi.se
corrugations when the skin buckles* The second is that the skin cover
forward of the main spar is entirely in one piece, so that the irregulati-
ties,so often caused by a joint near the leading edge, are avoided* The
resulting surface, improved by the use of a filler, is outstandingly smooth,
and even Mr. Eastman Jacobs has expressed himself satisfied. At the same
time it must be emphasised, that no evidence is yet available as to the
extent or rapidity with which these surfaces will deteriorate under
service conditions.
On the prototype, which was trie model seen, ordinary countersunk
flush riveting has been used throughout, but in the future it is hoped to
use a method of riveting analogous to that developed by N.A.C.A. at
Langley Field* In this, the rivet is left proud to the extent of 0.01 in.
and the top is trier, milled off by a special portable milling machine* In
this way a much smoother surface is obtained, as the dimples, caused by
cold working the skin in the neighbourhood of a rivet which is low, are
avoided. Whether a filler will be used on production models is not yet
decided, as there is still some doubt as to its importance as compared
with the tine spent in putting it on, and the difficulty of preventing
it from flaking off under service conditions.
The stresses developed in the are 60,000 Ibs./iin 2 in the
compression flange, and 50,000 lbs./in. (worked out on the basis of gross
area; in the tension flange. These stresses are higher than would be
permitted on the basis of ttie minimum values guaranteed by the American
Aluminium Company, but Wright Field have now agreed to accept the above
stresses as a result of tests carried out by the firm. Outboard of the
undercarriage bay the whole wing forward of the rear spar is effective
in torsion, but inboard the torsion is almost entirely taken by the
D nose.
Fuselage Design. The fuselage design is similar tc out somewhat simpler
than that of the Airaeobra, and is dominated by' the fact that the engine
is behind the pilot. The rear section
of the fuselage is conventional, but the
centre and front sections have some un-
usual features* forward of station 1,
(Fig* 9) the fuselage consists, from a
structural standpoint, of two torsion
boxes as the upper surface is broken
into by the guns, and the lower surface
by the nose wheel. At station 1 a frame
redistributes the torque in these two boxes and at
stations 2 ana 3 heavy frames transfer the fuse-
lage torque into the spars. Between these two
frames, the fuselage structure essentially con-
sists of two boxes reinforced by a number of heavy
members* (ifig. 10), .Aft of station 4 the structure
becomes conventional. The bending is taken by
four longerons and the torsion by the skin. This
is mostly 0.032 in. or 0.040 in. thick and is no-
where in excess of o*osl in* There are two light
stiffeners between the longerons and the ribs
which ax'© of light channel section are approx-
imate Iv 14 in. apart.
FIG. 9.
FIG. 10.
P. 63 FUSELAGE.


38-4.03 General Data, P. 63
Gross weight lb. 75 &5
Wing area sq.ft. 248
Span ft. 38.3
Aspect Ratio 5*9
Yfing Loading lb. /sq.ft. 30 • 5
Span Loading lb. /sq.ft. 3*2
Power Plant One V. 1710-93
Power at height Normal 1000 at 18,000
Military 1150 at 20,000
Take off 1325 at S.L.
T.O. Power Loading lb./BHP 5«7
Proposed War Emergency ratings give:
1150 at 21,500
* 1550 at S.L.
Strength
Appropriate weight 7500 lb.
Plight factor 12
Landing factor 7
Performance. The following are Wright Field figures:
Top speed 407 m.p.h. true at 20,000 ft. at 1150 B.H.P.(military power)
Time to climb 7 mins, to 20,000 ft. at 7730 lb. weight
Service ceiling 35*000 ft. at 7730 lb. weight.
The following figures are quoted by the firm, using war emergency power.
See also Chapter 13.
Height Top Speed Rate of climb
S.L. 370 4900
10,000 403 4500
20,000 432 3650
30,000 415 1880
Service ceiling 35,000 ft.
The time to climb to 20,000 ft. approximately 4.7 minutes.
Armament
1 x 37 mm. with 30 rounds
2 x 0.5" cal. with 200 rounds per gun
provision for:
2 x o*s" cal. with 300 rounds per gun.
Main Weight Information
lb.
£
Wing
1052
13. 3
Fuselage
595
7.9
Undercarriage
Main
435
5.8
Nose
154
2.0
Tail surfaces
136
1.8
Engine mounts and cowls
included with fuselage
-
Flying controls
104
1.4
Structure Group
2476
32.7
Power Unit
2552
33.7
Tanks & Systems
428
5.7
Power Group
z53o
39.4
Armament
650
O —
Armour
118
1.6
Remaining equipment
474
6.3'
Fuel
600
7.9
Oil
87
1.1
Pilot
180
2.4
Total equipment plus
fuel and pilot
2109
27.9
Gross weight
1565
100.0
Power group weight/ T.O power 2.25 lb./3.H.P


FIG. 11.
FIG. 12.
DOUGLAS
A. 26
FIG. 13.


CHAPTER 5 - DESCRIPTION OF DOUGLAS A. 26
38-5* 01 General. The Douglas A. 26 has been built as a replacement for the
Douglas A. 20 (the Boston) which has shown, itself to be a useful aircraft.
(Pigs. 11, 12 and 13.) The new type is a little larger in weight and size
than the Boston and the performance has been considerably improved, Details
of weights and performance are tabulated later in this section, as well as
a description of the structure. A general arrangement is shown in Fig. 14*
FIG. 14
DOUGLAS XA-26
ATTACK BOMBER
Duties. There are three main duties which the type can undertake, that
of fast day bomber, torpedo carrier, or attack machine. In the latter
version the aeroplane carries a 75 mm. gun. As a bomber four 1000 lb.
bombs can be or as a torpedo carrier, two 2000 lb. torpedoes. The
aircraft is very heavily armoured owing to its duties. Production of the
attack version should begin in January 1944*
Cleanness. A strilling feature of the design is its aerodynamic cleanness.
The body is slender and compact, the wing has been specially designed
to retain a smooth surface, and the engine cowlings have been developed
in the wind tunnel to give a specially low drag. The wing loading is
high and in order to keep landing and take off speeds reasonably low,
a double slotted flap is used.
Weight. Detailed weight information is given below. These were obtained
from the firm and were materially in agreement with Wright Field figures.
The structure weight percentages are good; the low values are partly
accounted for by the high wing loading of 59 ib»/sq.ft; the compactness of
the fuselage has also helped. (The fuselage surface area is of the
order of 800 sq.ft; this compares with 1300 sq.ft, in the Whitley and
1150 in the Wellington, which are aircraft of similar weight). The
stowage of bombs in tiers and the remotely controlled turrets have facili-
tated the design of the small neat fuselage.
Strength. The main factors are given below for the attack version at
29£D0 lb. gross weight and the bomber version at 32,000 Xb. gross weight.


Control and handling* An excellent report
by W/C&r. Maurice Simmers is available.
The general conclusions are that the ailer-
on control is very good at 300 m. p. h*
A.S.X. and is good at 400 m* p* h* The
rudder is a pleasant control and the ele-
vators satisfactory* Stalling qualities
are excellent*
38-5*02 Details of Structure#
Wing Design* The wing has a laminar flow
section of' the N*A*C*A. 66 family, and the
thickness chord ratio is 15% along the
entire span. The bending moment is taken
by four heavy flanges at 25% and 60% of the
chord, and these are designed to take a
stress of 53*000 to 60,000 lb* per sq*in*
The shear is carried by webs which are att-
ached to the flanges and are stiffened by
L section verticals at approximately 9
inch spacing*
Between the spars the skin thickness
varies from o*o9 in. at the root to o*o4
in* at the tip; and forward of the front spar
it is o*osl in* At corresponding points on
the upper and lower surfaces, the skin
thickness is approximately the same.
See Fig. 1 6Am
Outboard of the engine nacelle the
whole wing forward of the rear spar is
effective in taking torsion, but inboard,
the torsion is taken by the box formed by
the front and rear spars. At the nacelle
there is no discontinuity in the shear
carrying capacity of the skin, and hence no
weakness due to the torsion having to be
The factor of 5*9 as an attack type is a little lower than would probably
have been specified for a British type* There is no directly comparable
type but as examples we can takes
Beaufighter at 21000 lb# - factor 8
Beaufort at 22000 lb* - factor 7
Mosquito at 19000 lb* - factor 7i
Buckingham at 38000 lb* - factor 6
However, our experience with lower factors is limited and possibly the
A*26 strength will prove satisfactory in service* Meanwhile, it should
be remembered that the weights now proposed seem to be the safe upper
limit*
The undercarriage strength factors are adequate*
The diving speed at first sight appears to be rather low in relation
to the top level speed* However, these strength conditions were compiled
with at 20,000 ft. and at this altitude, which is high for an aeroplane
of this class to achieve its diving speed, the corresponding compressibi-
lity effects are severe* On balance, it seems that the diving speed
requirements will give a satisfactory degree of strength*
For bombing purposes at the higher weight of 32,000 lb. the factors
are adequate*
Performance* The performance figures below, and range diagram (Fig* 15)
obtained from Wright Field are estimated values, although flight trials
have shown a close approximation*
FIG. 15.
A. 26 BOMB LOAD AND
RANGE DIAGRAMS.


taken by differential bending. The rib spacing is about 40 ins. and the
skin between the spars is reinforced by top hat chordwise stiffeners at
approximately 6 in. pitch.
FIG. 16. DOUGLAS A. 26.
As the aim in the wing design is to maintain laminar flow, a really
smooth surface during high speed level flight conditions is most impor-
tant; but with a continuous covering and for a stiffener spacing of 6 in*,
the akin would certainly buckle in compression in this condition. To
prevent this, the skin contains a number of interspar chordwise cuts
5/16 in. wide. These are approximately 40 in* apart, and are so arranged
that the compression diffused into the 3 kin from the flanges is not
sufficient to buckle the surface in the level flight condition. While
keeping the skin free from compression in so far as is possible, it is
essential, in order to maintain requisite torsional stiffne33, that it
should be able to carry shear, and that the shear flow should not be
interrupted by the interspar chordwise cuts* In the case of the A* 26
this difficulty has been overcome by the ingenious device of bridging
the cuts in the skin by top hat chordwise stiffeners. See Part A,
Chapter 8.
Fuselage Design. The fuselage is of quite conventional design, but is
very neat and compact* A typical frame section is shown in Fig*l6B*
Miscellaneous Items. Although numerous sections have been tested there
has not yet been any full scale strength test of the whole machine.
Flush riveting has been used throughout and the surface finish is
good.
General Impression. While recognising the extreme ingenuity of the wing
design, its form of construction does not necessarily commend it for
general use owing to the amount of material which is not efficient in
bending, and the high shear stresses which occur in the skin near the
spars* As regards the latter, slight trouble has already arisen, for
when tested at Langley Field rivet slip occurred between the skin and
the flange and this adversely affected the wing surface smoothness*
38-5.03 General Data, A* 26
Attack Version
Torpedo
Bomber Version
Gross Weight (approx.) lb*
29,700
32,000
Wing area sq.ft.
540
Wing span ft.
70
Aspect ratio
9.0
Aerofoil Section
Laminar flow type with t/c = 15/
all along span.
Wing Loading lb./sq.ft.
55.0
59.0
Span Loading lb./sq.ft.
6.1
6.5
Power Plant
Two K-2800-2?
at altitude Normal
1450 at 13,000
Military
1600 at 13,500
Take off
2000 at S.L.
T.O. Power Loading
7.4
8.0


A* 2.6 - Main weight information - Bomber version with typical bomb load.
lb.
%
Wing
3 S 608
11.4
Fuselage
1,674
5*3
Undercarriage
Main
1,466
4* 6
Nose
359
1.1
Tail surfaces
587
1.8
Engine mounts and cowls
1,307
4.2
Flying controls
560
1.8
Structure group
9,561
30.2
Power unit
6,240
19.7
Tanks and systems
1,589
5.0,
Power group
7,829
24>7
Armament provision
1,180
3.7
Armour
1,628
5.1
Remaining equipment
1,966
6.2
Fixed equipment
4,774
15.0
Y/eight empty
22,164
69.9
ClW
600
1.9
4 x-50 cal. with 200 rounds each
508
1*6
Fuel (1*000 g&ls. & trapped)
6,030
19.0
Oil (28 gals*. & trapped)
407
1.3
Bomb load
2,000
! 6.3
Useful load
9,545
30.1
Gross weight
31,709
1
100.0
A» 26 - Weight Information ~ Attack Version.
lb,
<
Weight empty as for bomber version
~227TbT~'
74.7
Crew
600
2,0
4 x.50 cal, with 200 rounds each
508
1*7
1 x 75 nan, with 20 rounds
1,175
4*0
Fuel 800 gals, & trapped
4,830
16,2
Oil 28 gals. So trapped
407
1*4
Useful Load
7,520
25,3
Gross weight
29,684
100,0.


Typical Alternative Bomb Loads and Ranges.
Bomb Load lb.
Fuel Load
U.S. gals.
Range
Miles
2 x 1000
1000
1,835
8 x 300
800
1,510
2 x 1970 torpedoes. Stowed
partially protruding
800
1,195
4 x 1000
440
825
Notes: The above alternative loads are possible with gross weights between
30,(XX) lbs. and 32,000 lbs. The appropriate cruising speed is about
210 m.p.h. at 5000 ft.
A«26 - Strength
Gross weight lb.
29,500 32,000
Positive manoeuvre factor
5.9 5.5
Diving Speed
425 m.p.h. E.A.S.
Diving Speed/top speed at
rated height
1.4
Undercarriage vertical
load factor
4.6 4.3
A. 26 - Performance
Top speed
372 m.p.h. at 17,000 ft. at
military rating of 1600 h.p.
Service ceiling
25,600 ft.
Take off over 50 ft.
2,025 ft.
Landing over 50 ft.
2,157 ft.
The above figures are appropriate to a weight of 27,900 lb.
CHAPTER 6 - THE BOEING B.29 and CONSOLIDATED N.32.
38-6.01 General. These two heavy bombers (see Pigs. 17 and 18) were designed
to meet the same specification and thus have several points of similarity.
Details of weights, performance, and strength were collected at the firms
and subsequently checked for accuracy at V/right Field. These figures are
to be regarded as estimates, and may have to be reduced if material additions
are made to operational equipment, particularly armament.
Both the aircraft are large pressurised bombers carrying a maximum
load of 20,000 lb. of bombs and employing four Wright P. 3350 engines with
turbo superchargers, the cruising speeds being 250 m.p.h. at 25,000 ft.
The types are similar as regards general size and layout, the 8.32 having
a rather higher wing loading and therefore being the lighter of the two.
8.29 8.32
Wing Dimensions.
Span 141* 135*
Stiffener pitch 6" 6"
At root, chord 16* 16*
Front spar 18% ±O%
Maximum thickness 33% 30%
Pear spar 66% 66%
Thickress/Chord ratio 22% 22%
At tip, Chord 7* 9" 5* 6"
Front spar 11% 10 %


Wing Dimensioas(Pont♦) 8»29. 8>32»
Rear Spar 41 fo 66%
Thi ckness/Chord ratio
Aspect ratio 11*5 12,8
Taper ratio 2.1 3*^
Gross wing area 1740 sq*ft* 1422 sq.ft.
Fuselage Dimensions
iSHitF 93* 8« 83*
Maximum diameter 9* 8” 9*
Stiffener pitch 7i~9 rt 6-72*
Frame spacing 20-22” 20”
NOTE: Most of the above values have been measured off drawings and so are
only approximate; while some, such as stiffener pitch, are
essentially average values.
FIG. 17 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF BOEING XB 29


FIG. 18
Pre s sur isat ioiu The use of pressure cabins has led to windscreens which
afford the pilot a restricted view; the B* 29 however, is better than the
3*32 in this respect* Boeing are proceeding with a very large programme
of development work on pressure cabins in general and their experience
gives them a considerable advantage over Consolidated* A further reper-
cussion of pressurisation to the use cf remotely controlled turrets* These
various complications have led to the firms considering non-pressurised
versions with directly controlled turrets and improved pilots view* It
is believed that Consolidated have gone a fair way in this re-design*
It is considered that for use in the H*A.F. a non-pressure version would
be more desirable in the first instance*
Production Position* The development of the B* 29 and the plans for
production are on a larger scale and are more advanced than for the 8*32.
Use of Extrusions* There are 1,263 lb* of extrusions on the B* 32, and
1 lb* of extrusions on the B* 29* It is considered however that in
the case of the B* 29 a proportion of the extrusions could be replaced by
rolled sections without appreciable loss in structural efficiency*
Structure* Structurally there is little to choose between the two
aeroplanes; both are sound straightforward engineering jobs* The
impression was gained that Boeing had designed more carefully, but to
closer margins* In both types, however, the strength is adequate for
present weights and sufficient to allow for a reasonable growth. The
structure weight percentage figures (obtained obtained only for the
experimental versions) are good and roughly equal when compared on an
equivalent strength basis* The diving speed provided for in the 8*32 is
definitely on the low side by British standards* Owing to structural
difficulties with the twin fin arrangement on the 3*24, the firm are
considering a single fin arrangement for the B* 32.


Armament> Provisions for armaraent are good, the 8*29 carrying ten *5O"
guns and one 20 inrrw Cannon, and the Be 32 carrying ten • 50" guns*
As rodynamic s* The main difference here is the very high wing loading
of trie B* 32; 70 lb*/sq.ft* at IQO, GQQ lb* gross -weight compared with the
60 lb*/sq.ft* for the B. 29 at 105,000 lb* gross weight* Since both
types have similar' flaps (Fowler}, this difference in wing leading would be
expected to lead to a longer take off run on the 8«32, although Consolidated
claim that the take off run is equal to that of the B* 29* If Consolidated
are right, it naturally follows that the 3*32 becomes more efficient
as regards bomb load for a given range, the small wing giving a lower
drag* On the other hand if the two aeroplanes eventually operate at the
same wing loading for take off reasons, then there is little to choose
aerodynamic ally. This point is dealt with more fully in a later
paragraph#
Weights. For comparative purposes the most useful figures to study are those
appropriate to the production versions. The empty weight of the 8*29 is
increasing by some 3,800 lb. beyond that of the experimental type# The
corresponding figure for the 8.32 is not known* However if we assume that
1,300 lb* of the extra weight in the production 8.29 is due to increasing
the equipment to equal that carried by the 8*32, it seems that 2,500 lb*
is a reasonable amount for structural and power plant allowances for both
types* The weights empty are thus estimated to be: ~
8»29 71,400 lb.
Be 32 64,750 lb,
Considering next strength limitations, flight factors of 4*l are
achieved at gross weights of
3*29 120,000 lb*
8*32 lb*
Undercarriage strength is then a little less on the 8*29 but is satisfactory.
The gross weight is likely to be limited however by take off run
limitations. The B. 29 has a measured run of 1400 yards over a5O ft.
screen at a weight of 105,000 lb*
(wing loading x power loading = 720
at this weight). The B. 32 take off
has not been measured but rather
extravagant claims are being made
that a 1400 yard take off can be
achieved at 100,000 lb, weight.
Taking a more cautious view, the
take off run is likely to equal
that of the B. 29 at the same value of
wing loading x power loading. This
leads to a gross weight of 95,000 lb.
Using these gross weights we may
summarise the bomb carrying capacity
as follows (see also fig*l9):
FIG. 19.
HANGS
BOMB LOAD
Equal Strength
Bactor 4*1
Equal take off
1400 yards
Lancaster with factor
of 4*3 and take off run
of 1300 yards
-Bt.22. .
B»32
B. 29
Ba 32
1000
2000
3000
4000
20,000
20, 000
16, 000
8, 000
20,000
13,000
9,000
3,000
17.500
11.500
5,300
0
TB,ooo
11,500
5, COO
0
14,000
8,000
2,500
0
Appropriate
gross weight
120,000
100,000
105,000
95,000
63,000


It will be seen that if, as is likely, take off is a limiting factor there
is nothing to choose between the bomb-loads of the two types. For aircraft
of this kind, however, it seems worth considering operation from aero-
dromes with long runways. This would then permit the aircraft to be used
to their full advantage. Under these conditions the 8.29 has a greater
bomb load than the 8.32.
For a night operation entailing a range of 2,000 miles, a comparison
of the bomb loads carried by the Lancaster and the 8.29 is shown in the
table below.
2,000 miles Range
Best Altitude
All up weight
in lb.
Height
in ft.
Load
in lb.
Take off
in yds.
Lancaster
63,000
20,000
8,000
1,300
B.29
105,000
25,000
11,500
1,2*00
B*29
120,000
25,000
20,000
Over 2,000
(special runways)
Engine Change* The possibility of replacing the engines with Centaurus IV
power units has been considered. This would save some 2000 lbs. in the
power plant weight. Owing to the greater take off power, the gross weight
could be increased some 2000 lbs. for the same take off run. Both aero-
planes require about 1000 B.H.P. per engine for cruising at 25,000 ft.
at 250 M.P.H. The Centaurus would give this performance but the fuel
consumption for cruising would be some v j% or &% higher. Thus for the
largest ranges, the extra fuel required would be of the order of 2,000
lbs. For short ranges the extra fuel would only amount to about
1,000 lbs. Therefore, fitting the Centaurus engines shows a net profit
of some 2,000 - 3,000 lb. bomb load for a given take off run.
Conclusion. The Mission considered that the 8.29 was in general the
better aeroplane of the two, having roughly the sane performance as the
8.32, but being technically superior in a number of ways and capable of
greater development. The Mission suggest that as a preliminary step the
aircraft should be adapted for British use by fitting Centaurus or some
other engine of equal power employing a simple proved installation, and
using a non-pressure cabin and directly controlled turrets. This would
allow early operational experience to be obtained of the aircraft as a
night bomber.
38-6.02 Details of Structure of 3.29.
Materials. With certain exceptions the machine is made throughout of
22TST or 24 SBT aluroinium alloy. The main exceptions are the tinder-
carriage, engine mountings, part of engine cowling, and two wing surface
panels near the inboard engine nacelle, which are of steel; and the
pressurised tunnel and certain gun mountings which are of magnesium. The
spar flanges and most of the wing and fuselage stiffeners are extrusions.
Wing Design. A general description is afforded by Figs. 20 and 21, and the
dimensions already given. The following is additional comment.
On the top surface the skin stiffener combination is unbroken by any
major cut outs and continues right through the fuselage. The stiffener
joints on the outer portion of the wing are staggered so as to avoid
possible weakness across any one section. Over the entire spar the
spar flanges are light and take only a very snail proportion of the bending
moment.
On the lower surface the skin stiffener combination is seriously
broken into by cut outs due to fuel tanks and the undercarriage, and on
this account a much larger proportion of the bending moment is taken by


FIG. 20 SKIN THICKNESS ON BOTTOM SURFACE.
FIG. 21 B.29


flanges at the front and rear spar. This is especially the case at the
rear of the inboard nacelle, as the undercarriage folds up inside it,
and so necessitates a very substantial cut away. The remaining cut outs
are not so serious as they are covered by stress bearing doors which are
designed to take shear and compression. These involve a measure of rein-
forcement round the edges, but the weight incurred is not excessive and
the method of attachment by means of closely pitched screws seems most
efficient* At joints, the stiffeners are connected by small forged
brackets which are apparently very light and effective.
The inter-spar rib spacing varies, but on the average is about % in.
on the inner section of the wing, and 24 in. on the cuter. Those ribs
which have to sustain the hydrostatic pressure due to the fuel cells are
robust, which those in the outer section are pressed and usually have
lightening holes and beading.
Forward of the front spar
there are light pressed nose
ribs at 12. in. pitch (Fig. 22).
The shear webs vary from
0.072 iru at the root to o*o4o
in. at the tip for the front
web, and from u* 250 in. at the
root to 0.051 in. at the tip
for the rear. They are stif-
fened by L or Z section
verticals about 8 inches apart.
FIG. 22.
B.29 DETAILS.
The maximum stresses used in design are a compressive streS3 of*
40,000 lb* on the upper surface, and a tensile stress of 45*000
lb./in*“ on the lower, the latter being an average, calculated on the
basis of load carried divided by gross area. Flush riveting is used
throughout, and the smoothness of the wing surface is good.
Fuselage Design. (See Fig. 23)- The impression is given that in the
positioning of holes for bomb doors and turrets, most careful- attention
has been paid to structural considerations and to the need for having
as little reinforcement as possible.
FIG. 23. B.29 FUSELAGE
Since the fuselage is pressurised, the section is circular throughout,
dnd the two pressurised portions are connected by a thin magnesium tube
which runs close to the tap of the fuselage* For the most part the structure


is of conventional design,
although along the sides of
the bomb doors two small tor-
sion boxes have been intro-
duced to increase the tor-
sional stiffness. For the
sake of production, the frames
are attached to the stiffen-
ers (Fig. 24) and not to the
skin, and the whole structure
is light and neatly designed.
Flush riveting is used through-
out and the finish is good*
FIG. 24
B. 29. DETAILS
Miscellaneous Design It sins*
(a; The undercarriage is electrically operated, and is designed 30
that the wheels, which are double, lift up almost vertically into the
nacelles.
(b) The fuselage is attached to the wings by means of four 150-ton
steel bolts; an arrangement with the considerable merit that no secondary-
bending moment is transmitted to the fuselage.
(c) The wing is an R.A.F. 34 section, modified near the leading edge
to avoid compressibility effects. (Boeing 117 section).
(d) The wing has withstood 100$> design load for positive high angle
of attack, but failed in tension at 91$ design load for positive low angle
of attack. Since then the structure has of course been strengthened in
the region of failure*
General Impressions. The detailed and overall design is excellent, and
outstanding points of merit are:-
(a) The wing surface smoothness.
(b) The stiffener Joints on the wing.
(c) Stress bearing doors designed to take tension and shear*
(a) The method of attachments of the spars to the fuselage.
(e) The general arrangement of holes and cut outs in the fuselage.
(f) The general, lightness of the fuselage, with special reference
to the reinforcement round the bomb doors and turrets.
There are no Devious places of weakness, although trouble might
develop either immediately behind the inboard engine nacelle on the lower
wing surface, owing to the very high load concentration which exists there,
or in the neighbourhood of the bomb doors on the fuselage owing to inade-
quate torsional stiffness and the possibility of tail flutter.
The first of these points was brought out in the high angle of attack
test before the addition of increased reinforcement; and the second was
confirmed by one of the test pilots at Wright Field* During flight
test he had noticed a certain lack of fuselage stiffness, but although
undesirable he did not consider it serious.
38-6*0 3 Details of Structure of £.32.
Materials. With the exception of the engine mountings, undercarriage,
and the plates which attach the wing to the fuselage, which are of steel,
and certain undercarriage castings which are of magnesium, the structure
consists of aluminium alloy. The bulkhead stiffeners and centre section
front and rear spar stiffeners are 24 SRT, while the remainder is 24 ST.
To facilitate production, extrusions have been avoided, and stiffeners,
spar flanges, and bulkhead flanges,, are all rolled sections.


Wins Design* A general description is afforded by Pigs. 25 and 26, and
the dimensions already given. The following is additional comment.
The complete wing is built up in three sections; a centre section
which extends to a distance of 35g ft. on either side of the centre
line; and two outer sections which extend from the end of the centre
section to the tip. Provision is mad® in the wing for leakproof fuel
and oil compartments, and although costing is little in weight, this
appears to have been done most efficiently.
On the top surface the skin stiffener combination passes right
through the fuselage and is unbroken by any major cut outs* The spar
flanges act as attachments for the shear webs; but being light, take
only a very small proportion of the bending moment.
On the lower surface the skin stiffener combination is very
seriously broken into by cut outs due to gun doors, fuel tanks, and the
undercarriage, so that over the centre section a much larger proportion
of the bending moment is taken by flanges at the front and rear spars.
FIG. 25 SKIN THICKNESS ON LOWER SURFACE


FIG. 26. B.32.
These flanges are built up of o*ls in. rolled sections joined together by
large and numerous countersunk rivets. Of the two flanges, the rear one is
the larger, and immediately behind the inboard engine nacelle this has an
overall section of approximately Ig- in. by 9 7 !' in. Compared to an ex-
trusion of the same length, these built up flanges are easier to produce and
easier to taper; at the same time they are heavier, and considerable work
is involved in riveting the sections together.
The doors under the fuel tanks (stations 0 to 3 and 6 to 9) and between
the gun bay(wing guns are now probably not being fit ted) and outer engine
nacelle (stations 11 to 14) are stress bearing; but aci'oss the two nacelles
(stations 3 to 6 and 9 to 11) and the gun bay itself (stations 14 to 15)
there is no stress taken at all. Of these three cut outs, that due to the
inner nacelle is by far the largest and most serious as the undercarriage
folds up inside the nacelle and necessitates the introduction of an auxiliary
rear spar.
At joints on the outer
wing, the stiffeners are con-
neoted by snail cover plates;
and at a gas proof bulkhead
a most efficient splice is
effected by means of a dagger
forging. (Pig. 27).
Inboard of station 9»
the interspar rib spacing is
16 in. and a typical rib has
a stiffened pressed web with
bent-up flanges and flange
reinforcing angles; while out-
board of station 9, the spac-
ing is 21 in. and a typical
rib has a pressed web with
bent-up flanges, beads, and
lightening holes.
Forward of the front
spar, there are light pressed
FIG. 27. B.32 DETAILS.


nose ribs at approximately 12 in* spacing* (Fig*27)*
The shear' webs vary from o*lo2 in. at the root to o*osl in* at the
tip for the front web, and from o*lB7 in. at the root to 0*032 in* at the
tip for the rear* They are stiffened by L section verticals at from 4
to 6 in* pitch*
The maximum stresses used in design are a compressive stress of
35,000 lb*/in. 2on the upper surface, and & tensile stress of 42,000 lb./in. 2
on the lower. The latter is an average calculated on the basis of load
carried divided by gross area* The wing is designed on the assumption that
the leading and trailing edges make no contribution to its strength or
stiffness, and that these are provided by the box bounded by the front and
rear spars*
Forward of the rear spar the wing is flush riveted throughout* Between
the spars the surface smoothness is excellent; but over the leading edge,
due to the skin being only 0.025 in* thick, the surface finish is poor.
Fuselage .Design* The fuselage looks strong, and the reinforcement round
the turrets may well be excessive. There is considerable bracing in the
neighbourhood of the bomb doors, and there should certainly be no danger
of any weakness here.
The fuselage, forward and aft of the bomb bay, is pressurised, and the
two portions are connected by an aluminium tube which runs along the middle
of the fuselage. (Fig* 28). This tube is just large enough for a man to
crawl throughj and is fairly strong as it assists to carry the bomb load*
The fuselage structure is of quite conventional design, with both stringers
and frames (Fig* 27) attached to the skin*
FIG. 28.
Miscellaneous Design Items*.
(a) The undercarriage is hydraulically operated, and is designed so
that the wheels lift up vertically into the nacelles# It is probable
that the present hydraulic system will be ultimately replaced by one
which is electric.
(b) The wing is a Davis section with maximum thickness about }Q%
back* The object bias been to get low drag at cruising speeds rather than
to try and obtain laminar flow at high speeds.


(c) No major wing test has yet "been carried out*
General Impressions* The structure as a whole gives the impression of
strength, and it would not be surprising if the wings and the fuselage
both prove to be appreciably over strength.
Outstanding points of merit are; -*
(a) The surface smoothness for the inter-spar portion of the wing,
and in particular the excellent surface finish of the built up rear spar
despite all the riveting.
(b) The wing stiffener joints and the detailed design of fixe leak-
proof fuel and oil cells*
There are no obvious structural weaknesses, but the following
changes would better the design.
(a; The smoothness of the wing surface forward of the leading edge
is poor, and would be greatly improved by increasing the present skin
thickness from 0.025 in. which is all that it is at present, to (say)
0.051 in*
(b; The wing structure would be more efficient if the rear spar was
further forward. Far this would enable a proportion of the material in
the skin and stiffeners to be further from the neutral axis. If this were
done the firm suggest that the present wing weight could be reduced some-
what although unfortunately such a change would necessitate a complete
re-design, of the wing.
(c) A saving in weight could be effected if the built up spars on the
lower surface were replaced by extrusions; although from a production
standpoint such a change would be bad*
33-6.04 Performance and Weight of 3. 2"}*
Weight* Detailed weights are given for the experimental version of the
XB 29. No detailed figures were obtained for the production version. The
structure weight percentages indicate an efficient structural design and
a generally well balanced structure. The undercarriage weight is rattier
high but this is associated with unusually high shock absorption and
strength.
According to Wright Field the production 8.29 will be some 3830 lb.
heavier than the XB 29* This gives a weight empty (in the U.S, notation
weight empty includes radio, oxygen and sundry small items of equipment)
of 71400 lb.
Strength. Strength factors are summarised in Table 111. The strength
under manoeuvring conditions is considered to be adequate up to 120,000 lb.
The strength and shock absorption of the main landing gear are more than
adequate by British standards. No direct comparison of nose wheel strength
has been made but the conditions are reasonably in accordance with British
recommended practice* The pressure cabin strength is adequate for
operation at the required pressure of lb./in. but Boeing are trying to
raise the strength a further 25% to 50%
Performance» In Table IV main performance figures are listed* The take
off run over a 50 ft. screen at a weight of 105,000 lb. is expected to
comply with the guaranteed value of 4,100 ft. In point of fact take off
over the screen at 105,000 lb. has been done with a run of 4,200 ft. or
less in very adverse conditions. In these tests the unstick speed was
105 m.p. h.
On the basis that take off runs should be a little under 1,500 yards,
an all up weight of 105,000 lb. seems to be a reasonable figure for
comparative purposes. (If taking off from special runways permitting
2,000 yard take off a weight of about 115,000 lb. becomes permissible;
alternatively a power unit developing greater take off thrust would


permit some improvement)•
Bomb load/range. Fig® 19 shows the bomb load range diagram, at gross
weights of 105,000 lb® (present take off limitation) and at 120,000 lb®
(present strength limitation)® The maximum bomb load of 20,000 lbs. is
determined by internal stowage space available.
Boeing 8»29 General Data
Table I
Wing area sq.ft.
Span ft.
Aspect ratio
Power plant
B.H.P. normal
military
take-off
1,74*)
141
11.5
Pour R-3350-13
2,000 at 25,000 ft.
2,200 at 25,000 ft.
2,200 at sea level
Gross weight lb.
105,000
120,000
Wing loading lb./sq.ft.
60.5
69.0
Span loading lb./sq.ft.
5.3
6.0
Power loading Ib./BHP
11.9
13.6
Wing loading x power
loading
720
930
Boeiag 8®29 Weights
Table II
Component
Experimental
XB 29
Production
3.29
lb*
as % of
lb.
120,000 lb.
Wing group
13,575
1175™ 1
Tail M
1,400
1.1
Body **
7,297
6* 1
Undercarriage Group
7,515
6,2
Nacelle "
4, 278
3* 6
Surface Controls”
704
0,6
A Structure
34,829
29.1
tower tJnit
' Y8/934
T5TS 1
Fuel System
.3,716
3.0
B Power group
22,653I
18. 3
Instruments
24o
0.2
Electrics
1,671
1.4
Radio
730
0.6
Armament
4,835
4,0
Furnishings
1,448
1.2
Miscellaneous Equipment
1*165 J
1.0
C Fixed Equipment
10,095
|
- - -• - - -
Weight Empty
67*574
-353 1
“f,4C0^
A + B + G
m
Defensive armament
2,311
1.9
Crew
1,200)
Assumed to be
Miscellaneous
135)
1.1
approx, as for
XB 29
Bombs + Fuel and oil
48,782
40.7
45,000
Useful load
52,426
43*7
~Tcj7ooo “
Gross wight
I
A 4- B + C + .D
120,000
100
120,000
Note: fa) Radio includes fixed and removable parts*
fb) Armament includes turrets, armour, and bomb beams etc*
(c) Furnishings include oxygen, cabin heating, seats,
instrument panel and sundry mountings.
(d; Miscellaneous equipment includes aux. power plant,
cabin superchargers, etc.


Booing B» 29 Strength Factors
Table 111
Gross -weight lb,
105*000
120,000
Positive manoeuvre factor
4*7
Ih 0
Negative manoeuvre factor
2.7
2*5
Diving ©p©e&m*p*h# E.A.S.
390
34-5
Diving speed/Top speed at
rated height
1.58
1.40
Energy absorption (drop height)
-
24*
Undercarriage vertical load
factor
-
4*0
Ultimate strength of pressure
cabin Ib./iiu 2
13
13
Boeing 3*29 Estimated Bsrfonoance Data
Table IV
’ ■ —
Top Speed
r—~ :
363 ffi«p>h» at 25*000 ft* at military rating
Grulsing speed
250 m*p* h* at 25,000 ft* at U-9/j pomr
Service ceiling
33,600 ft* at 105,000 lb*
T&k® off over
1*370 yards (measured) at 105,000 lb*
50 ft* screen
gross weight *
2,000 yards (estimated) at 120,000 lb*
gross weight*
3BHs*os Performance and Weight of Consolidated 8»32.
Weight* Detailed weight information was only obtainable for the experi-
mental version, the XB 32© The weights listed show that the structure
is an efficient one* The 13.32 production version, detailed weights of
which are not available, is being considered as a non-pressure cabin
aircraft with directly controlled turrets. This is said to be about
3,000 lb* lighter than the pressurised experimental version. However it
is considered that some growth is likely, and 2,500 lb. is & reasonable
figure, i.e* a net reduction of 500 lb. For purposes of comparison with
the B* 29 it is fair to consider the weights of 8.32 with pressure cabin
and therefore the weight empty of the XB. 32 has been increased by 2,500 lb*
Strength. In Table 111 main strength factors are listed. The strength
under manoeuvring conditions at 100,000 lbs. is considered to be adequate*
The diving speed, is however, rather la?. Bearing in mind that operational
types occasionally dive to I*6 - 1.7 times their top speed level at rated
height, the value of I*3B, coupled with a factor of 1.5 (as compared
with 2.0 in British requirements) seems definitely small* The undercarriage
conditions though less severe than on the B* 29 seem perfectly satisfactory.
Pressure cabin strength is also adequate.
Performance. Main performance figures are given in Table r/« These are
largely estimated values, but Wright Field considers them to be substan-
tially correct. At a gross weight of 100,000 lbs., the firm is aiming
to achieve & take-off run over a5O ft. screen of 4,100 ft. No take-off
runs have yet been measured but at 99,000 lbs. the tale-off is described
as "satisfactory”.
Some doubt is felt by the Mission about this take -off run since at
100,000 lbs. the wing loading is appreciably higher than that of the
Boeing B. 29 at 105,000 lbs. ( the powsr loading not differing greatly).
Thus it may be safer to assume until further evidence is available that a
taloe-off weight of 95,000 lbs. (reasonably comparable with Boeing) is
likely to be the limit.


By pensitting longer runs or use of engines with greater take-off
thrust these conditions could of course be improved*
Bomb load/range. In figure 19 bomb load is plotted against range at
e;ross weight of 95>000 lbs* (possible take-off limitations) at 100,000 lbs*
present take-off limitation according to firm's calculations and also
strength limitations)*
Consolidated 8>32 General Data
Table I
V/ing area sq.ft*
Span ft*
Aspect ratio
Paver plant
B.K.P. normal
military
take-off
1422
13b
12*8
Pour R.3350-13
2,000 at 25,000 ft.
2,200 at 25,000 ft*
2,200 at sea level
Gross weight lb*
Wing loading lb*/sq.ft*
Span loading lb./sq.ft*
Paver loading lb./BHP
Wing loading x power loading
95,000
67.0
5.2
10.8
720
100,000
70.5
5.5
11.4
810
Armament;
Turrets Guns per turret Rounds per gun
2 Upper Martin turrets 2 x*so 5OO
1 Lower Sperry Ball " ” 500
i Bendix chin tuiTet ” " 400
1 G.E. tail turret " " 1000
TOTAL 5800 rounds
Consolidated B. 32 Weights
Table II
EXPERIMENTAL XB.32
REDUCTION
B.32
lb.
as % of
100,000
lb.
Wing Group
13,795
13.8
Tail Group
1,344
1.35
Body Group
6,84-2
6.85
Undercarriage Group
6,039
6.05
Nacelle Group
2,340
2.35
Surface Controls
1,035
1.0
A Structure
31,395
31.4
Power Unit
177B5S
17.65'
Fuel System
2,864
2.85
3 Power C-roun
?0,73?
20.7
Instruments
240
0.25
Electrics
1,518
1.5
Radio
752
0.75
Armament and Furnishing
and Miscellaneous Items
7,618
7.6
C Fixed Equipment
10,128
10.1
64,750 *


Weight Empty A + B + C
62,255
62*2
65/5 I
Gv.bg and Ansnunition
Ore*
Miscellaneous
Bombs and Fuel and Oil
3,559
1*200 }
44 )
32*362
5*55
1.25
33.0
Assume as
for XB» 32
30,467
D Useful Load
37,745
-
* ■ ,,li m -‘- -
37. a
35,250
Gross Weight
A + B + 0 + D
100,000
100
il niwi > i WiM.i „ — —
100* 000
Wi M
x Hough guess (Non-pressure version some 3,000 lb. lighter than this)
Consolidated 8.32 Strength Pact ora
Table 111
Gross Vfeight XU
‘95*000
100,000
Positive Manoeuvre Factor
4*5
4*12
Negative Manoeuvre Factor
2*5
Diving Speed m»p. h* E.A.S.
Diving Speed/Top Speed at rated
350
—
height
1*38
-
Energy absorption (drop height)
24*
-
Undercarriage vertical load factor
Ultimate strength of pressure cabin
4*0
3.S5
lb* /in*
16
16
Consolidated 8 *32 Estimated Performance D&ta
Table P/
Top Speed
360 m*p. h» guaranteed
379 estimated
at 25,000 ft. at military rating
Cruising Speed
250 s.p*h* at 23,000 ft. at
k5% power
Service Ceiling
30,000 ft. at 100,000 lb. gross
weight.
Take off ever 50 ft. screen
1210 yards at 95,000 lb. gross
weight.
2d VI0 yards at 100,000 lb. gross
weight.
x Figure considered to be optimistic (see text).
CHAPTER 7 - CURRENT FIGHTERS IN PRODUCTION.
38-7-01 Introduction. The current fighter types are the Curtiss P.4OF (Warhawk)
the" BeTjrp39 M TAiracobra), the Republic P.47C (Thunderbolt), the Lockheed
P. 38 (Lightning), and the North American P. 51 A (Allison Mustang). Of these
the Thunderbolt and Lightning were not studied in detail. The general
trend on these fighters has been an up-grading of engine power at altitude,
and to some extent an increase of weight. In an endeavour to improve rates


of climb there is at present an intensive effort to reduce the weights of
existing production fighters,
38~7*02 Curtiss P.4QF. The original Curtiss P. 40 Tomahawk had a gross weight of
about 7, 2sCTllb* 3 carried two 0.3 55 guns and two o<>5 R guns, and was powered
by an Allison engine, Since then the type has matured to the present War™
hawk, weighing 8,800 lb.carrying six o*3* guns and employing the Merlin
engine. The firm are also considering a light weight version. This will
weigh about 7*400 lb,using the Allison engine with war emergency ratings,
and carrying four 0.5” guns. The fuel is also reduced but will be suffi-
cient for short endurance interceptor work.
Structurally the P. 40 is not modern in conception, although it is one of
the first machines in which consideration was given to breakdown in design.
The wing is a multiweb design with numerous stringers; the fuselage is
orthodox. Nevertheless the structure weight is good.
An Interesting feature is the method of retracting the P. 40 leg. This
folds backwards, the leg remaining outside the wing contour. The wheel ro-
tates so that it lies flat in the trailing edge of the wing. The leg is
faired into a blister.
Although there are considerable structural advantages these are offset
by the extra drag, and new versions axe having a fully retracted under-
carriage, They are ad so being fitted with a new and shallower radiator.
The firm consider that as so many pilots and ground crews have had ex-
perience with this type, and so many airfields are equipped to service it,
there is good reason to maintain production of the aircraft, either as the
P*4oi? Warhawk. or as the P.4QN lightened Kittihawk, for some time yet. As
an instructive example of air cooled power plant for fighter types, the
Mission were given full details of an experimental edition of the P. 40 with
a new series of Pratt and Whitney R. 1820 Engine, and a cowling reminiscent
of the F.W.190, which had an excellent performance, and & top speed of
386 m.p.h.
38-7»Q3 Bell P. 39. The Bell P. 39 has not changed to any marked degree during its
production. Recent war emergency ratings have increased the performance somewhat.
The structure gives the impression of extreme ingenuity in detail design
necessitated by the unorthodox general arrangement.
The centre section, housing the engine, pilot and equipment, is an
especially awkward structure, and it is only as a result of the clever de-
tailed design that the structure weights are good. The wing surface smooth-
ness is only moderate owing to the numerous access panels along the nose of
the wing.
Without turbos and with a high boosted low altitude engine the P. 39
should make a good long range intruder fighter.
38-7»04 North American P,SIA- This type is well known in Britain, where for low
altitude attack duties it has proved most satisfactory. The change over
to the Merlin engine and the endeavour to reduce the weight are described
in Chapter 2.
Of the fighter types in production this is strue tur ally one of the best.
It combines aerodynamic smoothness with a high degree of wing torsional
stiffness; the structure weights of the main portions of the airframe are
good. The undercarriage is the one exception, being heavy even by com-
parison with U.S. standards.
CHAPTER 8 - CURRENT HEAVY BOMBERS IN PRODUCTION
$
38-8.01 Introduction, The two current types of heavy bombers, the Portress and
the Liberator, are too well known in this country for it to be necessary
to describe them in detail. The most interesting feature is the manner in
which these types have been improved during their production life.


The original B. 1?B for example carried two o.3*’ guns and three 0,5“
guns. The latest version } the B* 1?F for which very large orders are
placed,carries eleven o*s" guns. Provision is also made for increasing
the fuel capacity from 2500 U.S, gals to 3600 U.S. gals. By carrying
bombs externally* the latest type can carry an extra 8000 lb. of bombs,
Boeing have also improved the structure, and still employ 500 of
their engineering staff or, this hind of work. As an example of this, the
whole of the rear fuselage has been redesigned for the latest type. Also
spot welding is being introduced where riveting was previously used in
several parts of the structure.
The Consolidated 8.24 has matured in a similar way and is still
employing some 400 engineering staff. The guns on the first version, which
is now used for ferrying only, comprised two 0.3" calibre and six 0.5“
calibre. The latest type has ten 0.5” gun 3. The engine rating has also
been increased giving higher speeds.
Owing to the importance of the increased bomb loads now proposed for
both the 8.17 and the B. 24, these are considered in some detail.
38-8.02 Bomb Load and Range of 8.17 and B. 24. Two separate aspects of the
bomb load/range capabilities of the B, 17 and B. 24 have been considered:
(a) With reasonable strength limitations how these aircraft compare
with the Lancaster,
(b) Future possibilities of over loading and engine changes.
In choosing a gross weight for comparative purposes, strength and take
off distances need be considered. At a weight of 54,000 lbs. the 8.17
has a flight factor of 4*o and an undercarriage factor of 3*75* At a
weight of 56,000 lbs. the B. 24 also has a flight factor of 4*o and an
undercarriage factor of 3.75* At the highest weight at which the
Lancaster has flown operationally, 63,000 lbs., the flight factor is
about 4*3* The strength of the undercarriage of the Lancaster was not
available when, preparing these notes. However, the current minimum
strength factor is 3*5 at take off weight and the Lancaster probably
complies with this requirement. On a strength basis therefore, these
weights are roughly comparable.
From rough calculations it also seems likely that at these weights
the 8.17 and B. 24 will have take off runs over a 50 ft. screen of about
1,000 yards and 1,400 yards respectively. The Lancaster with Merlin
engines has a take off run of 1,300 yards, so again the conditions,
though not strictly comparable, are not widely dissimilar.
Accepting the above values for gross weight, the figures in 8.03
below give the approximate detailed weights for the two U.S. types. In
Pig, 29 the corresponding bomb/range
diagrams are plotted. These are
approximate curves compiled from various
data obtained from Wright field. The
Lancaster bomb range is that quoted by
R.D.T. performance section; the values
quoted for the U.S. types have been
checked against R,D,T. figures and are '
roughly in agreement.
For a night bombing operation of
750 miles radius of action, the total
range is 1,500 miles. In practice,
however, owing to allowances, fuel would
be carried for a theoretical range of
say 2,000 miles* The corresponding
bomb loads are:-
Lancaster 8,000 lb*
B.2tiD 6,000 lb,
8.17 F 5,000 lb.
F1G. 29.


and the altitudes flown at would probably be about 20,000 ft. for the
Lancaster and 25,000 ft. for the two American machines.
At such ranges as this the 3.17 and B. 24 show to their best advantage.
For longer ranges the Lancaster is proportionately better. For short
ranges of 1,000 miles or less the 8.17 and 8.24 cannot be used to full
advantage since the maximum stowage space available is 6,000 lb. and 8,000
lb. respectively® (This remark is qualified below).
The table below shows the bomb load taken by the 3.17, 8.24 and
Lancaster, under various operating conditions.
Bomb load lb® for
Operation
Lancaster
at 63*000 lb.
Liberator
at 56,000 lb.
Portress
at 54,000 lb.
Night
1,500 miles,
East height
for each
aircraft*
8,000
6,000
5,000
Night
1,100 miles
20,000 feet.
11,000
8,000
6,000
Night
750 miles
20,000 feet
14*000
8,000
6,000
Day
1,500 miles
25*000 feet
Not adapted
for these
conditions
4,500
3,500
This raises an interesting point, for the B®l7 is often criticised
for the smallness of its bonis load compared with the Lancaster* The
difference is partly explained above. There is, however, the further
point, that when the 8.17 is used for daylight operations, for a given
practical range a greater allowance of fuel needs to be made to permit
the aircraft to fly in tight formation- If for day operations 50%
allowance is made instead of 33%, then for the 1500 mile practical range '
the bomb load drops to 3,500 lbs.
A further reason for the small bomb load is that the small compart"’
raent may not permit the same range of choice of bonib. For instance a
6,000 lb® compartment may only carry one 4,000 lb., while a 12,000 lb.
compartment would house three 4,000 lb. bombs® Thus in tins example, the
small compartment can only be used to two thirds of its capacity while the
large compartment can be completely filled.
We may next consider what increases of bomb load are possible for
the 8.17 and 8.24* By a suitable choice of bombs, 8,500 lbs. can be
stowed internally in the 8.17 F (2,500 lbs* above usual limit) and provision
for external stowage of 8,400 lbs* of bombs is made* The total bomb
load can therefore rise to 1 6, 900 lbs. Similarly 9,000 lbs. can be stowed
internally on the £.24D and 8,400 lbs. externally, giving 17,500 lbs.
total bomb load. The appropriate line is shown dotted in Fig. 29*
With these external bombs the 8.17 F is expected to fly at a maximum
weight of 64,500 lbs. and the 3.240 at a maximum weight of 64,000 lbs.
Under these conditions the factors for the B* 17F and for the B. ?4D are about
5.2* This is much lower than would be considered safe for European
conditions when the take off weight does not diminish appreciably before
combat is expected. The take off run for the B. 240 at this weight is
probably 2,000 yards or more and for the 8.17 F about 1,500 yards.


The low factors and long runs therefore reduce the value of the
aircraft for operation in Europe* The speed of the machine drops seriously
with external bombs and the Mission stated that in their opinion this was
a condition which could not be considered for operation from Britain. If,
however, the lov 7, factor could be Y accepted for special missions, the take
off position could oe improved by using an engine giving better take off
power* One suggestion is to use existing engines with 1,350 B.K.P. in
the B. 17 and 1,400 B.H.P. in the B, 24*
This would render possible take off in 1,500 yards at a weight of
about 65,000 lbs. in the 8.24 D. The take off problem could therefore be
solved fairly readily.
A further alteration suggested for improving performance is to
replace the existing engine with a larger Pratt and Whitney engine with a
displacement of 2,000 cu» inches and with mechanically driven blowers*
The power unit would probably be a little lighter than the present version,
however, the maximum height for cruising would be 17,000 ft.
to 18,000 ft. which is a severe operational limitation* Also for the same
load of fuel, the range would be reduced appreciably and this would
balance out the weight saved in the lighter power unit*
38-B*o3 Component Weights.
B»24X> 8.17 F
lbs* % lbs. %
Wing group 6513 3935
Tail group 759 839
Body 3238 3601
Undercarriage 2947 2507
Nacelle 1571 2301
Surface controls 651 568
15699 28*0 15801 29*3
Power unit less tanks 10441
Fuel tanks 2478
Power plant 12919 23.0 12010 22*3
Instruments 1 66 23*0 12010 22*3
Hydraulics 449
Electrics 1141 1016
Radio 343 670
Armament 1733 2891
Furai shings 1358 1279
Anti-icing 3*lB 180
Fixed equipment 5712 10*2 6275 11.6
Weight empty 34330 61.2 34086 63.3
Fuel, oil and bombs 18552 33*2 16062 29*8
G-uns and ammunition 1918 2052
Crew 1200 1800
Removable 21674 38.8 19914 36. 7
Sross weight 56000 100 54000
CHAPTER 9 - TRANSPORT TYPES.
J?B~9.01 Introduction* The general question of Air Transport is dealt with else-
where in this Report, and this chapter therefore refers only to particular
Transport mac nines* Fig* 30 shows payload - range diagrams*


38~9* 02 Existing Before dis-
cussing types in detail it is of
interest to consider broadly the
classes of aircraft in production®
The Lodestar, Skytrain (DC3)*
Commando and Skymaster (BOIi),
give a wide range of types between
the small feeder aircraft and the
trans-continental airliner* Per
example the following are
possibilities;-
lype Theoretical Payload
Fringe
Lodestar 1,000 mi3.es 3?500 lbs*
Skytrain 1,500 M 5,500 "
Commando 2,500 M 7,000 «
Skymaster 3,500 M 8,000 M
Tbs Skymaster in particular
offers a wide choice of duties
having a long range of L,SOG miles
.with 3,600 lbs of payload (i.e* 12
passengers plus freight and mail)
or a short range of 2,500 miles
with 12,000 lb* of payload®
FIG. 30.
The cruising speeds of these types lie between 160 and. 200 m*p.h. and
are satisfactory for overland operation. Furthermore the Commando and
Skymaster could be pressurised if it were necessary to increase the
cruising height for the sake of better performance.
Lookheed
Douglas
CprtisB
Douglas
Ourtxss
C» 60 j
0.47
0.46
0.54
0.76
Lodestar |
Skytrain
Commando
Skymaster
Caravan
Gross Weight lb*
Wing Loading lb./ft. 2
21500
29000
45000
-50000
62000
34000
39*0
29.3
33*1
-36.8
42.3
21.8
Structure -weight %
-
.31
.31
.28
.33
Power Plant
2 Wright
2 P.& W.
2 P.d W.
4 P.& W.
2 P.& w.
Power at height (Noroal)
R1820-87
R1830-82
R2800-51 or-43
R2000-3
R1830-92
900 at
1050 at
1450 at
1000 at
1050 at
15200’
7500’
13000’
14000'
7500
Take off power
1200
1200
2000
1350
1200
Top speed nwp.h.
266 at
229 at
267 at
285 at
198 at
•
17150 s
8800’
13000’
15600*
7500’
Cruising speed m. p. h*
200
170 at
160 at
185 at
150 at
10000 s
5000 ?
10000*
7500'
Production orders
1000
6400
1200
770
2600
Variant
Douglas
Remarks
of DC3
| DC4
Figures not checked for accuracy
The low structure weights are worthy of note particularly when it is
remembered that the wing loading is not high in these transport types*
Great attention lias been paid in the design to breakdown for production,
but equal attention has been paid to ease of maintenance* The latter has
not been sacrificed to the former as in some of the best military types.


The remaining production type, the Caravan, is perhaps useful for
economical transport of freight at low speed. This type is described in
detail in the Wooden Aircraft Section.
Production orders for these five types amount to a total of 12,000.
38-9*03 Prototypes and Projects. The new aircraft listed are very different
fran existing types. They are all multi-engined, all have tricycle landing
gear, four are pressurised and four have cruising speeds of 200 m. p. h. or
more.
The wing loadings of these aircraft are high and it is therefore
likely that the structure weights will be low. (This is known to be the
case in the three which haw Eiilitary counterparts).
Lockheed
069
Constellation
Consolidated
32
Consolidated
33
Boeing
XC97
Douglas
074
Consolidated
XC99
Gross wight lb.
Wing Loading lb./ft. 2
86,000-96,000
52 - 53
64,000
61
100,000
70.5
120,000
69
125,000
50
265,000
55.5
Power Plant
Power at Height (Normal)
TakB Off Povrer
4 Wright
R3350-35
1,800 at
15,500*
2,200
4 P « W
1830 SI&3G
1,050 at
7,500*
1,200
4 Wright
R3350-13
2,000 at.
25,000*
2, 200
n Wright
R3350-23
2,000 at
25, COO*
2,200
4 Wright
113350-31
2,100 at
25,000*
2,300
6 P & \7
R4360-5
2,500 at
40,000*
3,000
Top Speed M.P.H.
Cruising Speed M.P.H.
314 at
16,000*
260 at
18,000*
250 at
4,900*
200 at
10,000*
360 at
25,000*
250 at
25,000*
335 at
25,000*
250 at
25,000*
275 at
15,200*
175 at
335 at
30,000*
210 at
Remarks
Prototype
has flown
Conversion of
B24 Prototype
being built
Projected
civil version
of B32
Projected
civil version
of B23
Project
prototype in
1944
Mock up
Data regarding range and payload is scanty. The figure for the
Constellation is the most reliable as it is the only new type which has
undergone flight trials* Possibly the Consolidated 32 or 33 are a
little optimistic; the Boeing XC 97 and Douglas C 74 most certainly are.
It is however clear that with aircraft of this size (60,000 - 120,000 lb.
all upweight) still air ranges of 3,000 miles will be possible with
payloads of the order 10,000 lbs. - 18,000 lbs. Whether or not the ranges
of these types will be adequate for Trans-Atlantic crossings carrying a use-
ful payload is more difficult to judge, but it is evident that for Trans-
Atlantic ranges the percentage load available for passengers will
inevitably be very small. It follows that to carry across a reasonable
load in a single trip automatically involves a large type and the U.S.
aim is clearly in this direction.
38-9.0 A Curtiss C. 46 Commando. The Mission had the opportunity to study this
aircraft which is a conventional twin engined all metal monoplane. It
was designed as a pressure cabin aircraft to carry passengers or troops
or alternatively heavy military equipment. This has had a considerable
influence on the fuselage design* In cross section the fuselage appears
as two circular arcs intersecting at floor level (rather like an inverted
figure 8 with a wide neck). The upper compartment is the larger and houses
the main loads or passengers; the small lower compartment carries baggage.
The intention was to pressurise these compartments to different degrees which
accounts for the unusual cross-sectioh&l shape. In the actual production
aircraft the cabin is not pressurised at present.
The floor of the cabin is exceedingly stiff and robust and picketing
points for heavy masses are provided. The door to the main cabin, which
is in the side of the fuselage, is large and square, to facilitate loading of
large pieces of equipment. This door presents a major structural problem
and the hole in the fuselage is heavily reinforced. The wing comprises


a cover of moderate thickness reinforced by semicircular top hat stringers,
see Fig. 31. The spar flanges are very light and serve mainly to attach
the shear webs to the skin* The ribs are built-up frame structures and
the bracing members give the impression of being very light* The fuel
tanks are housed in the wing and these are apparently rather uneconomical
in shape as they are shallower than they need be*
The undercarriage folds in such a manner that the wheels move
almost vertically into the nacelle. A retractable tailwheel is fitted
and the ground angle is such that loading must be rather difficult.
The factor of 4*o at 50,C0G lb* all up weight is satisfactory*
FIG. 3l. CURTISS COMMANDO.
38-9.05 Lockheed Constellation* The Constellation is a four engined all metal
low wing monoplane design* The cabin is intended to carry 40 to oQ
passengers according to the degree of comfort required* Owing to the
intention to operate at high altitudes the cabin, which is of circular
cross section,is pressurised to 2?r lbs*/sq*in* and this portion extends
far about three quarters of the fuselage length* Spot welding is
extensively used in the fuselage structure (stringers to skinj.
The wing has two spars in the central section where the nacelles are
installed. Outboard of the engines there is a sudden change as the front
spar discontinues while the rear spar continues to form the main spar of
a D nose* The spars run gradually toward the leading edge going outwards
along the span, and the spar position in the D nose region is thus not
unduly far back.
The wing cover is 0.1” thick at the root tapering to 0.04” in the D
nose at the tip and 0.016" at the trailing edge near the tip* Flush
riveting is used throughout the wing structure, the thick skin being
countersunk and the thin skin dimpled to accommodate the rivets* The
cover is reinforced by corrugated sheet, see Fig* 32* The wing is eero-
dynamically very clean.
FIG. 32. LOCKHEED CONSTELLATION
The undercarriage is a tricycle layout, each unit comprising a
single leg with twin wheels. The nose wheal unit is particularly long
and appears flimsy. (The strength criterion for the nose wheel is a
static thrust case with wheels chocked and engines at full power).


A triple fin and rudder arrangement is used.
The aeroplane was originally designed to have a factor of 4.3 at a
weight of 72,000 lb. with a diving speed 30% in excess of all out level
speed. At a weight of 96,000 lb. which is no?/ suggested the factor is
reduced to the exceedingly low value of 3.0, At this weight the aeroplane
would only comply with British gust requirements by restricting the flight
speed to about 90/« of the all cut level speed* Although the latter is not
a serious penalty in a civil type it is felt that the strength as a whole
is low but is probably satisfactory at 80,000 lb. for which the payload
and range figures are plotted in the figure.
The general performance of the Constellation is the highest known
on any existing civil type. The high speed at high altitudes, coupled
with its long range pits it practically into the trans-Atlantic class
and it is certainly a valuable type for tran3-continental travel of a
super-luxury kind.
33-9.06 Conclusion. A s regards Air Transport it is evident that the state of
development, the scale of production and the plans for the future are
on altogether a different plane in America as compared with this
country* They have five types ranging from feeder line aircraft to
those suitable for trans-continental routes which are being produced at a
steadily increasing rate - now amounting to 130 a month. In addition there
are several projected types, of which the Constellation is the most advanced,
which are certainly suitable for trans-continental routes and perhaps
for a trans-Atlantic service.
CHAPTER 10 - WOODEN AIRCRAFT.
38-IQ.OI Introduction. The use of wood in the construction of aircraft is covered
in Part Aof this Section* The following notes refer to specific types
seen. There were two of these; the Bell P. 77, a light weight fighter,
(performance and weights given below) and the Curtiss C. 76 Caravan, a low
powered transport (performance given in Chapter 9).
In both cases the firms had used wood from necessity rather than
choice, and they felt that a considerable penalty had been paid in terms
of weight. Mr. Page, Chief Designer of Curtiss, St. Louis, considered that
certainly and probably about 10 % increase of gross weight had been
necessitated by the use of wood compared with aluminium. The latter figure
is borne out by Wright Field*s estimate of a cost of 4,000 lb. (out cf
a gross weight of 28,000 lb.). On the Bell P. 77 wing the firm said that
wood had cost about 15% overweight. It is fair to point out that neither
firm had had recent previous experience in the use of wood and therefore
it is likely that some weight was wasted by inexperience. However the
opinion regarding the use of wood of all the firms visited was sought, and
in every case the opinion was that wood was unsuitable (on grounds of
weight and deterioration) for use in first line aircraft. When strategically
necessary to employ wood the firms considered that it should be used in
trainer aircraft, when weight was of secondary importance.
38-10.02 Curtiss 0.76 Caravan.
General. The Curtiss Caravan is a low powered aircraft, built entirely of
wood, intended to cany troops, or freight. Its specification called for
a load of 4,300 lb. to be carried 600 miles. It has an exceptionally low
wing loading of the order of 20 lb*/sq.ft, which will permit landing and
take off from small fields. The structure can be broken down into
comparatively small sub-sections for transport purposes, but this had been
found to be particularly costly in weight of joints. The cabin space is
approximately 33 ft. x 6 ft. x 7.8 ft. The entire nose of the fuselage
folds up to allow ready access of large pieces of freight. As a point
of interest, 10 months only elapsed between the inception of the design
and the first fxight of the prototype, with four other aircraft partly
complete. An engineering staff of 240 men was employed. The main uses


of the aircraft seems to be for inaxpensive transport of war materials
over internal route 3* and for invasion purposes®
.:r t,rupt 4. The wing is a conventional box spar arrangement, both
front and rear spars having spruce flanges and double webs (see Pig. 33}
FIG. 33. CURTISS CARAVAN.
ibe spar flanges cany 75!# of the bending. The remainder of the bending
is carried by the 1 airly thiols plywood skin, which is reinforced by
simple longitudinal rectangular spruce stringers* The plywood used in
the cover and elsewhere is without exception laid at 45°. Mahogany,
poplar and birch plywoods are used according to the magnitude of load
«o be carried. The D nose and trailing edge have light sub spars, the
flanges oi which lie adjacent to the flanges of the front main spar
and rear main spar respectively. Attachment of the D nose to the wing
is by means of bolts running fere and aft through the flanges of the
main and sub spar. The- trailing edge is attached in a similar fashion.
Transfer of shear from the D nose to the main box is by means of small
metal plates sandwiched between the flanges of the main spar and sub-
spar* tbs so plates are perforated all over with a rough punch which
gives Jagged edges. Alternate holes are punched from opposite sides of
the plate. Thus when tightened up the .jagged edges pierce the spar
flanges.
( "'he centre section fuselage comprise 3 a plywood cover laid at
45 with neavy ouixt up longerons and frames* In between the longerons
are stringers the shape of a ’Welsh hat’ formed of moulded plywood about
f" deep and at 12” pitch. The floor in this region is very robust, being
ouilt 01 g 4 ’ plywood* The rear fuselage is a simple structure of plywood
cover with light spruce stringers and frames*
4 nose wheel undercarriage is used, hydraulic retraction
being lit ted to all wheels. Tbs nose wheel unit is fitted with twin
wheels and a hydraulic damper* The surface controls aic of the shrouded
type; flaps are slotted type with external hinges below the wing at
about 0.3 Flap chord*
38-10. 03 Bell P» 77.
Oemr&l. The leading particulars of this aircraft are listed below. This
fighter is viewed as an interesting and bold experiment both as regards


its small size and as regards the way in which wood is employed* It will be
seen that the structure weight is a little high, chiefly due to the use of
a tricycle gear, which has proved uneconomical in this size of aircraft*
The power group weight is reasonable for the power quoted* Owing to the
fairly high wing loading and the exceptional smoothness of the cover, the
engine power (and hence weight) for the speed of 410 m*p*h* claimed is
not very great* Thus the engine weight as a percentage of gross weight is
fairly small* The total equipment is very light, and this is the real
reason why it has been possible to build so light an aircraft* The total
fuel and oil allowed is not known exactly but this could hardly be less than
350 lbs* for reasonable endurance; thus allowing 180 lbs* for the pilot, the
remaining fixed and removable load is between 700 and 800 lbs*, compared
with nearly double this weight on current fighters* It is felt therefore,
that there is no unusual reason for the lightness of the aircraft, which can
be accounted for mainly by the lightness of the equipment carried.
The pilot is well protected from above and from the rear by armour
plate. Immediately in front of the cockpit there is a self-sealing petrol
tank. The engine is air cooled, and the machine is fitted with a two
blade propeller*
Construction* Wood is ingeniously employed in the construction* Two cross
sections of the wing cover are shown in Pig* 34* The main cover is plywood,
with grains running spanwise and chordwise, 9/28” thick at the root and
3/28” thick at the tip* This thick cover gives a very fine finish. The
spruce flanges ere wide and thin to achieve maximum efficiency, their thick-
ness is 33/28” at the root and tapers down towards the tip* The webs are of
simple moulded plywood with grain at 45°, and there are ribs every 7 2" •
Difficulty is being experienced in obtaining the required bending strength
although the thick aerofoil section is helpful*
FIG. 34.
The fuselage is built up of a laminated moulded cover with plie3 at
45°; near the front the cover is about thick with 8 laminations, while
towards the rear the thickness reduces to about half this amount* The
fraraes are at 18” pitch, and are moulded from numerous laminations about
1/16” thick built up to 1” depth* No stringers are used, but there ere
four longerons forward round the cockpit region*
The undercarriage is a tricycle, with the main wheels at about 30% of
the semi-span* Both flaps and the undercarriage are manually operated and
the time of retraction of the latter is about 25 secs*


38-10.04. Conclusion. There are several useful detail design points in the Bell
P. 7? and Curtiss C. 76* Apart from these, their general design exemplifies
the American view of wooden construction generally, that for a given strength
it produces a heavier aircraft than aluminium alloy.
General Data, Bell XP.77
Gross weight lb. 34-50 with low rated altitude engine
3650 with high rated altitude engine
Wing area sq.ft. 100
Span ft. 27.5
Aspect ratio 7*5
Wing loading lb./sq.ft. 34 at 3450 lb. gross weight
Span loading lb./sq.ft. 4* 6
Aerofoil section NACA 65 at root 1 6% thick
NAGA 66 at top 15% thick
Power plant Ranger
Power High alt. rating 510 BHP at 27000 ft. *
Take off 575 BHP at S.L.
T.O. Power loading lb./BHP 6.0
Strength
Plight factor 12
Limiting diving speed 575 m.p. h. E.A.S.
Performance
Top speed (estimate) 410 m.p.h. true at 27,000 ft.
Armament
1 x 20 mm. cannon with 100 rounds
2 x 0.5 cal. guns with 200 rounds
x This rating is optimistic - 510 BHP at 23,000 ft. is more reas-
onable. Allowing for ram, and for the excellent surface finish
of the wing the top speed estimate is reasonable, however.
CHAPTER 11 - FLYING- BOATS.
38-11.01 Introduction* There are two modem flying boats in production, the
Coronado and the Mariner, and one rather older type, the Catalina. In
addition there are two large prototypes, the Sea Ranger and the Mars. Very
brief details of these are given below; these figures are values quoted by
the Bureau of Aeronautics with the exception of those for the Mars which
were obtained from the firm.
Consolidated
PBY.5
Catalina
Consolidated
PB2Y
Coronado
Martin
FEM4
Mariner
Boeing
FBB-1
Sea Ranger
Martin
XFB2M
Mars
Gross Weight
Wing Area
Wing Span
31,400 *
1,400
104
66, 000
1,780
115
58,000
1,408
118
62,000 p
1,826
140
140,000
3,683
200
Power Plant
Two
R1830-92
Four
R1830-88
Two
R3350-8
Two
R3350-8
Four
R3350-18
Power at
height
1200 at
S.L.
1200 at
S.L.
2300 at
S.L.
2300 at
S.L.
2300 at
S.L.
Maximum bonib
load
4 x 1000
12 x 1000
8 x 1000
6 x 1000
30000 lb.
cargo
0 orre sponding
range at
speed
930
at 112
1,070
at 131
990
at 128
1,250
at 131
2,700
Maximum speed
165
194
196
211
223
X Flown operationally
at 34,500*
See later regard-
ing higher weights.


There is also an experimental flying boat built by Consolidated, the
XPB3X-1 ’weighing 120,000 lb*; this was not seen by the Mission*
The production of these flying boats is on a considerable scale;
present production is about 100 a month and this will shortly rise to
180 a month, large scale production of the Mars and the Sea Ranger is
not yex planned, but some first production Mars boats have been ordered.
The British situation does not compare too favourably, the one boat,the
Sunderland, being a fairly old type and the production being some 15 20
per month.
The Coronado and the S@a Ranger were studied more closely, these
being representative of good modern practice.
33-11.02 Consolidated Coronado* The construction of the Coronado is striking in
that certain parts are visibly very light. Examples of this are the wing
ribs, the Dracing of which, consists of extraordinarily light channel
sections. The hull frames and the longitudinals along the hull bottom are
light. There are rather large cut-outs in the wing and in the hull but
again the use of heavy reinforcement has largely been avoided.
Ihe results of these efforts to economise appear mainly in the verv
light hull weight; this is only 7*l oo lbs* or IQ«7?$ of* gross weight,
compared with about 8,500 lbs. for the Sunderland or 15*2?$ of the gross
weighty of 56,000 lbs. Possibly this latter percentage includes some
furnishings but this can hardly account for the 4. 2% difference.
38-11.03 3oej.ng Sea, Ranger. The most interesting feature of this design,
(see Fig. 357 if the proposed use of assisted take-off. Unassisted aircraft
will take off in about 100 secs, at a weight of 75*000 lbs. The firm
quote a maximum range, at this weight, of 5,080 miles, and a range of
3,4-80 miles with 10,000 lbs* of bombs* These figures appear to be
a little optimistic by comparison with those quoted by the Navy at other
weights and it seems that a maximum range of about. 4,000 miles is more likely.
At this weight the factor is comparatively high being 4*35* For assisted
take off the firm consider the aircraft is satisfactory up to 102,000 lb.
at which weight the factor is 3*15 (Note the Catalina has regularly flown
at a factor oi 3* 2j* At this weight the Navy quote the exceptional
figures of a range of 4,000 miles with a bomb load of 20,000 lb.
38-11.Q4 Conclusion# Although U.S. flying boat design and production is on
a much reduced scale compared with the l&ndplane programme, the amount of
work in hand is considerable. The general viewpoint appears to be that,
though the uses of flying boats are limited, there will usually be certain
tasks, for which the flying boat is preferable.


CHAPTER 12 - TAILLESS AIRCRAFT.
FIG. 35 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF BOEING XPBBSI
38-12.01 Genera,!. On the Mission*© visit to the Northrop Aircraft Corporation
at Long Beach, California., Mr. Northrop explained his tailless aercplanss
and his reasons for undertaking the development of this type, which
includes both a heavy bomber and a high speed fighter. 'For many years he
has studied the possibilities of the flying wing, being convinced that
it represents the ideal aeroplane to be aimed at, and he was encouraged by
the work already done by others, for example the Dunn tailless biplane
and the Hill Pterodactyl.
Examination of the drawings (Pigs* 36 and 37), particularly the large
bomber, shears that he has succeeded in producing a very clean design of
flying wing, even to the extent of eliminating vertical fins and rudders
at the wing tips. Directional controls have been developed which are
concealed in normal flight and do not impair the efficiency of the wing.
One device is in the form of split flaps near the wing tip which fold


FIG. 36. NORTHROP FIGHTER


FIG. 37. NORTHROP BOMBER


flat into the wing when not in use, and another method is by deflecting
& portion of the wing tip] these are described in greater detail below*
In this design the body, tail unit and engine nacelles haw been
eliminated; a low drag aerofoil section of the K.A.C.A. 66 family has
been used, and this project closely represents the original conception
of an ideal flying wing aeroplane with the minimian parasite drag*
Furthermore the total structure weight is much lower than usual owing to
the absence of body and tail unit, and because most of the load is
distributed along the spar, thus reducing the maximum bending moment*
It is necessary to restrict the fora and aft limits of the C.G.
more closely than usual on account of the comparatively short arm of the
controls and the wing tip stabilising surface, and although this has not
presented any serious difficulty, care has to be exorcised in the
installation of fuel and bombs* The problem of providing a suitable high
lift device which does not appreciably affect the trim is still under
consideration: split flaps have been flight tested on a one third scale
model of the bomber and aGy maximum of I*6 has been recorded* Although
this is not a very high value, the wing loading for the full scale
machine is only 35 lbs* per sq.foot, and a me&n Cq, maximum of I*6 is
comparable for take-off and landing with a Cl maximum of 2*2 for a
conventional machine having a wing loading of if? lb* per sq* foot* The
large bomber is in the course of construction and it is understood
that the fighter was flight tested shortly after the Mission left America.
Tricycle undercarriages are fitted to both aircraft; they are of course
essential to this design*
38-12* 02 Description of Northrop MX* 140 and NB»f2* The MX* 140 is a four engined
heavy bomber of 140,000 lb* all up weight and the 111-2 a single engined
fighter of 11,000 2b* Both are tailless pusher swept back monoplanes;
the leading edges are swept back at an angle of 26°,
On both bomber and fighter a low drag aerofoil section of the N.A.C.A.
66 family has been used* The a geometric twist of 4°* which gives
an aerodynamic twist of probably 6°. reducing the incidence towards the
tip. This is equivalent to the t&ilplane setting or longitudinal dihedral
of a convent ional aeroplane * To ensure stability it is necessary to confine
the centre of gravity within narrow limits; the normal position is between
2 and 3$ of the wing chord forward of the mean aerodynamic centre of the
wing. Great cars has therefore been taken in the design to dispose the
bomb and fuel loads as close as possible to the centre of gravity.
Longitudinal control is obtained by means of "Elevens” which also
function as ailerons through the medium of differential gearing in the
control system. These control surfaces are on the trailing edge situated
roughly midway along th© semi-span; the chord is 20$ of the wing chord
and trie span of each is about 1 /3rd of the span. Pitch control
flaps for providing longitudinal trim are fitted to the trailing edge,
they extend inwards from the wing tip for about 1/4 of the semi span
and have a 30$ chord. The method of supplying directional control is
interesting, it comprises 25$ chord split flaps at the wing tip Just in front
of the-pitch controllers* These flaps are hinged at the forward edge and
when out of action lie flush with the upper and lower wing surfaces: care
has had to be taken in the development to prevent any appreciable adverse
effect on the rate of pitch aid roll* This control seems promising, and
it is apparent that, due to the large arm available from the C.G* to the
wing tip, ample directional control can be provided. Northrops are
exploring the possibilities of obtaining directional control by deflecting
a portion of the wing tip either upwards or downwards; although the
investigations are not yet complete, wind tonne! and flight tests with a
downward deflected tip indicate that sufficient directional stability can
be obtained with practically no loss in the efficiency of the wing® The
device for increasing lift and drag take the fore, of a split flap with
a 20$ chord and it occupies about 1/3 of the span*
Bombs The wing has a thickness chord ratio of 15$ at the root and 15$
at the tip; the aspect ratio is 7*4 and the mean dihedral angle is I°.
The mag chord at the centre and tip are respectively 37 : k feet and 9 feet.
The wing structure, which has a strength factor of 4 at a weight of


140,000 lbs., is very light indeed, the total structure weight of the aircraft
is stated to be less than 25$ of the gross weight. The span is 172 feet,
the wing area 4,000 sq.feet, the all—up weight is 140,000 lbs., and it is
possible that this may be extended to 190,000 lbs. Power is supplied by
4 Pratt and Whitney "X - Wasp" engines giving 3,000 H.P. at take-off.
They are buried in the wing and drive contra rotating pusher propellers
through the medium of the long shafts fitted with remote two speed reduc-
tion gears. Cooling air is supplied through leading edge ducts assisted
by fans, which run at engine speed, and the oil coolers, intercoolers and
intakes receive air from the same source. Mr. Northrop estimates that the
drag resulting from this intake cuts down the range of the aircraft by 18$.
The weight empty is estimated to be 68,000 lbs. giving a useful load of
72,000 lbs. at an all-up weight of 140,0 a") lbs. Performance calculations
at this weight, which includes a bomb load of 10,000 lbs., show that the
range at 35,000 feet is 7,500 miles; the cruising speed at reduced power
is 275 m.p.h. and the top speed is 410 m.p.h. The Service Ceiling is
40,000 feet, or with two engines stopped less bombs and half fuel it is
lo,oou feet. The take-off distance to clear 50 feet on a prepared runway
is 1,700 yards. The aircraft carries a formidable defensive armament
consisting of four 37 sun* cannons, and twelve .5” machine guns; stowage
has been provided for a total bomb load of 32,000 lbs. The crew of eight
are housed in a pressurised cabin and particulars of their stations and arma-
ment are given below. Sight stowages for 4,000 lbs. bombs, or other com-
binations, and four 1,.250 gallon fuel tanks are provided in the wing; extra
fuel is carried in detachable tanks stowed in the wing and in certain of the
bomb cells which become available for the longer ranges.
The crews 1 cabin occupies the full depth of the nose of the wing section
for a width of about 9 feet; it has a height of 6-g- feet at the maximum
depth, and at this point it changes to a circular section which gradually
tapers down to about 4 feet diameter at the trailing edge and terminates in
a cone which houses two remotely controlled 37 mm. cannons. Equipment is
installed for maintaining an internal air pressure equivalent to that at
10,00*3 feet up to an altitude of 40,000 feet, together with window defrosting,
air conditioning, and emergency oxygen for one hours endurance.
The defensive armament comprises one twin 37tmcan non turret mounted in the
tail of the cabin; one 37 mm.cannon turret carried approximately in the middle
of the cabin, with the guns firing above the wing: mounted underneath this
is a .5“ four gun turret in which the guns are arranged to fire beneath the
wing, At about halfway along the wing on each side are two .5” two gun
turrets mounted one above the other, one pair of guns firing above the wing
and the other pair below. Each 37 mm.gun is supplied with 300 rounds of
ammunition and each *5” machine gun has 1,000 rounds. All the turrets are
remotely conti*olled and the three gunners operate their sights through
transparent blisters, one above and the other below the wing, at the aft end
of the cabin, whilst the forwnrd gunner uses the blister above the pilot's
compartment.
The pilot sits in the front of the wing with only his head projecting
into the transparent blister above the upper surface, and in this position
his eye is about 6 feet behind the nose. His downward view, particularly
sideways, is restricted, although this may be improved slightly by the use
of the adjacent transparent nose panel in front of the co-pilot*s position,
who normally sits about fifteen inches lower than the pilot, but as occasion
demands elevates his position level with that of the pilot.
The bomb aimer also operates as a navigator, and has two stations; for
bomb aiming he sits adjacent to the co-pilot and sights through a window on
the underside of the leading edge. For navigational work he sits at a chart
table on the starboard side with astrograph, sextant, instruments, etc.,
mounted on a panel fixed to the cabin wall above the table. The wireless
operator sits alongside the navigator facing a comprehensive set of wireless
equipment including intercommunication and a blind landing receiver. In a
similar position on the opposite side of the cabin is the flight engineer's
station complete with all the essential engine controls and instruments and
nearby is a reclining chair. Between the aid 37 mm. gun turrets and the rear
gunner's station is a rest compartment about 6 feet diameter by 14 feet long*
this is equipped with three reclining chairs,


two sleeping bunks, a toilet and a pantry.
The aircraft is in course of construction and the Mission had the
opportunity of examining the mock-up. In addition to the original scale
model with two 80 h.p* "Franklin engines, a l/3rd scale model has been
built with two Menasco engines each giving 290 b.h.p.for take-off. Several
flights have been carried out, including tests with wool tufts in front of
the ailerons, and the aircraft stability appears to be satisfactory about
all three major axes.
Fighter. Aer©dynamically the fighter follows similar lines, except that
in order to give directional stability the wing tips are directed down-
wards at 12° to the horizontal from a point about 5i feet inboard of the
wing tips, and the rear fuse lags carries a central fin. The wing chord at
the centre and tip are respectively 11 feet and 3y feet.
The span is 42y feet, the wing area 310 square feet, the useful load
is 2,600 lbs. and the gross weight is 11,000 lbs. Power is supplied by a
Pratt and Whitney R-2800 type engine giving 2000 ‘h.h.p. for take-off,
1,800 b. h* p. at 19,500 feet, with a normal rating of 1,550 b.h.p. at
21,500 feet. The engine is entirely enclosed in the centre nacelle, mounted
between the wing spars, and drives the contra rotating propeller through
a short extension shaft fitted with remote two speed reduction gear.
Cooling air is supplied through leading edge ducts; it is assisted by a
cooling fan mounted on the engine propeller shaft, and ejected through an
annular opening just ahead of the propeller spinner. The oil coolers and
intercoolers also receive thsir supply of cold air from this source. The
estimated top speed is 470 sup. h* at 19,500 feet and 405 nup.h. at
5,000 ft., in both cases using 1,800 b.h.p* The estimated time to climb
to 20,000 feet is 6.9 minutes using 1,800 b. h.p* for the first five
minutes, and the take-off distance over a 50 foot obstacle is 500 yarda*
Powerful armament is carried; it consists of two 20 mm. cannons and four
•5" machine guns neatly installed in the nose; with 100 rounds of ammunition
for each 20 mm. cannon and 400 rounds for each .5" gun. The weight is
made up as follows:-
lbs.
Wing including controls and fin 1,370
Body less engine section 620
Tricycle undercarriage 845
Engine structure 190
Controls and hydraulics 195
STRUCTURE WEIGHT 3,220
Power plant including propellers, tanks
and protection, etc., 4,600
Fixed equipment 570
WEIGHT EMPTY 8,390
Crew 200
Fuel 1 9 290
Oil 150
Armament 950
Oxygen 20
Useful load 2, 610
Gross weight 11,000
It will be noticed that the structure weight is less than of the
gross weight; this is very light for a fighter and is of course particularly
valuable in improving the rate of climb. The fuselage is an extremely clean
streamlined form, about 5 feet in diameter at the maximum cross sect ion and
23 feet long from the nose to the tip of the propeller spinner. The pilot*s
view is exceptionally good and. uninterrupted, owing to the sharply
tapered short nose and the absence of the power plant; as there are no
propellers in front, the guns have been compactly grouped together in


the nose, and are very conveniently situated for servicing.
Both aircraft make extensive use of magnesium, and the resulting
weight saving and improved wing smoothness are thought to be considerable.
But the aerodynamic experiment of a tailless aircraft is quite independent
of this feature.
To compare the large Northrop Tailless MX* with other interesting
new American conventional types, the following table is given:
B.32
B# 29
”577?
“MX# 146 orT
XB.36
Type
Consolidated
Boeing
Douglas
XB#35_
Northrop
Consolidated
Engines
4-3350
4-3350
4-3350
4-X Wasp
6-X Wasp
H.P. Take-off
9,200
9,200
9,200
12,000
18,000
Wing Area-Sq# ft*
1,422
1,739
2,500
4,000
4,800
Gross Wt# - lbs*
99,800
05,000
25,000
140,000
270,000
Power Loading-
10.8
11.5
13.6
11#5
15
lbs* per h#p*
Wing Loading -
lbs. per sq.ft#
70
60.5
50
35
56
Span
135*
141*
173 s
172*
230*
Wt# empty
61,600
71,400
73,000
68,000
130,000
Mar. speed at
380
350
25,000 ft#
370
368
300
Max. speed at
Kj4
-J
CO
30,000 ft.
397
Cruising speed
at 25,000 ft.
250
250
Cruising speed
288
230
at 30,000 ft#
Estimated
time to
Completion
14 yrs.
2 yrs.
2j yrs.
38-12.03 Conclusions* At many of the larger aircraft firms a great deal of
interest is being taken in and studies made of tailless aircraft, hut no
one 3eemed to he quite as enthusiastic as Mr. Northrop, or so ready to
embark on an experimental aircraft.
Mr. Northrop claims that his structure weight will he only 20$ to
25$ of the gross weight, and the overall drag of the aircraft only about
one third of that of the conventional aircraft. Even if the revolutionary
claims have to he written down severely, has big f our-engine d bomber will
still be a remarkable aircraft. This machine is a 100$ wartime effort, which
can only be used as a bomber and could not in any way oe modified for
transport requirements. Its offensive fire power is most impressive. The
Mission were greatly impressed with this effort and the American Array Air
Corps and Mr. Northrop are to be congratulated, but a great many new things
are being tried on one design, including a very bold use of welded
magnesium, and the estimated length of time to develop them seem optimistic.
For this reason, it is thought that the tailless type must be considered
a research effort, which could never be embarked upon as a production
order from the drawing board. The Mission believe that in three or four


years* time, most valuable information would be obtained from this undoubt-
edly far-seeing effort of the Northrop Company.
CHAPTER 13 - TABULATED DATA.
38-13-01 American Fighter Performance. In reviewing the performance of American
fighters, consideration must be given to their methods of rating engines.
As the American engines to date have not been fitted with boost controls,
there can be no assurance that pilots observe the letter of the law as
regards keeping within the "military rating" of the engine as cleared by
the "model test" which can be regarded as the equivalent of our "type test".
In order to regularise the established operational procedure of' using
high manifold pressures at low altitudes in emergency, and in order to lay
down the highest power that can be taken from the engine in such emergency,
the "war emergency" rating has been introduced. This rating is cleared by
a test of 7i hours ’ duration and the power is equivalent to that obtained
with the boost over-ride used on some British types.
In machines using engines for which a "war emergency" rating has been
cleared, this power has been quoted in the tables, and the top speed and
climb estimates are based on this rating.
Type
Curtiss
Curtiss
Curtiss
Bell
Bell
Bell
North
North
P-4QF .
P-401,'
P-60
P-39/N1
P-63
XP-77
American
American
F-47C
Warhawk
“
Airacobra
~
P-51
Mustsng
F-51C
Thunderbolt
(lros3 Weight lb.
3336
7332
10235
7663
7565
3650
8664
7485*
13850
Structure Wt. %
31
35
32
31
33
3k
34
Wing ire« sq.ft.
236
236
275
213
243
100
233
233
300
Span ft.
37.3
37.3
41.4
34.0
38.3
27.5
37.0
37
40.8
Aspect ratio
5.9
5.9
6.2
5.4
5.9
7.5
5.9
5.9
5. 5
Wing Loading lb/aqft.
37.5
31.0
37.5
36.0
30.5
36.5
37.0
32.0
46.0
Span Loading Ib/aq.ft.
6.4
5.3
6.0
6.6
5.2
4.6
6.3
5.5
'3.3
Power Plant
Packard
Allison
? & w
Allison
Allison
Ranger
Packard
p * w
Merlin 23
71710-81
R2300
V1710-85
71710-93
Merlin 6l
Merlin 61
R2300-21
V1650-1
V1650-3
V1650-3
Power at height
Normal
1010 at
1000 at
-
1000 at
1000 at
_
16?3 at
16000'
13200'
14000'
18000*
20000'
Military
1120 at
1125 at
1300 at
1125 at
1150 at
at
1300 at
2000 at
13000'
14200'
23000'
16100'
20000’
27000*
24000'
24000'
20000'
Take off
1300 at
1200 at
2100 at
1200 at
1325 at
575 at
1370 at
137C at
2000 at
S.L.
S.L.
S.L.
S.L.
S.L.
S.L.
S.L.
S.L.
S.L.
War emergency
-
1425 at
2015 at *
1420 at
1150 at
...
9700'
22000'
9700'
21500'
1550 at
S.L.
Tata Off Power
Loading
Power Plant Weight/
6.3
6.2
4.9
6.4
5.7
6.0
6.3
5.5
6.9
Take Off power
2.2
2.05
1.95
2.2
2.25
1.95
2.5
2.1( afflux.)
-
Top 3peed ra.p.h.
365 at
371 at
424 at
396 at
415 at *
410 at
445 at
456 at
3*59 at *
lU.S. value)
19270'
9000*
22000'
9700'
25000'
27000'
23000*
23000’
25000*
w.e.
w. e.
w. e.
w. e.
Cto/raents
Reasonable
Reasonable
Pessimistic
- expect
Optimistic
- expect
Reasonable
Reasonable
Reasonable
Suggest
450
Curiously
low
435
335
Approx.time to
climb to 20000'
10 mins.
6.7 mins.
w. e.
5*2 mins.
w.e.
5*2 mins.
4.6 mins.
-
6.5 mins.
4.8 mins.
3.4 mins.
(U.S.value)
Comments
Reasonable
Reasonable
Reasonable
Optimlstio
Suggest
Optimistic
Optimistic
Reasonable
- expect
5a mins.
- expect
- expect
6.7 min3.
8 mins.
Armament
6 x 0.5"
4 x 0.5"
4 x 0.5"
1 x 37 mm.
1 x 37 tom.
1 x 20 mm.
4 X 0.5"
4 x 0.5"
6 x 0.5"
2 x 0.5"
2 x 0.5"
2 x 0.5"
4 x 0.3"
provision
f a2 x 0.5"
8 x 0.5"
General remark*
Stripped
Estimated
Engine
Engine
Wooden
Rolls
* 425
Kitti-
values
buried in
buried in
Construo-
Royce
Mustang
hawk
fuselage
fuselage
tion
Mustang
for
earlier
* includes
/ Power
opt Ira-
* Weight
optimis-
version
j w. e* b war emergency J
ram
istlc
tic
7350 lb.
reasonable


38-13»02 British Fighter Performance.
Type
Hawker
Typhoon
I
Hawker'
Tempest
I
Hawker
Tempest II
development
Vickers
Spitfire
VII
Vickers
Spitfire
IX
Vickers
Spitfire
21
Focke
Wulf
FW-190
Grose weight
Structure weight
Wing area
Span
Aspect ratio
Wing leading
Span loading
lb.
ss
sq.ft*
ft.
lb/ sq* ft*
lb/sq.ft*
11163
34.1
279
41.6
6.2
40.0
6.35
11221
38.3
302
41.0
6* 1
36,9
6.3
11300
30.5
275
38.0
5.3
41.0
7.8
8300
2.9
248
40.2
6.5
32.5
5.0
7500
30
242
36.8
5.6
31.0
5.5
9233
29.5
248
40.2
6.5
37.0
5.7
8580
31
203
34.5
5.9
42.0
7.2
Power Plant
Napier
Sabre II
Napier
Sabre 17
•
Bristol
Centaurus
17
Rolls
Royce
Merlin
61
Rolls
Rqyoe
USerlia
61
Rolls
Royoe
Griffon
61
aw
8oid
Pull
rating
Power at height
Normal
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Military
1800 at
16250*
2000 at
19500'
1910 at
15200'
1300 at
24200*
1300 at
24000*
1470 at
26250*
1750 at
18000*
Take-off
2000 at
S.L.
2000 at
i 2300 at
S.L.
1370 at
S.L.
1370 at
S.L.
1550 at
S.L.
1600 at
S.L.
War emergency
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Take Off Power Loading Ib/BKF.
Fewer Plant Weight/Take Off Power
5.5
2.15
5.5
2.15
4.9
1.75
5.8
2.2
5.5
2.1
6.0
2.2
5.3
2.1
Top speed m.p.h*
404 at
20000'
455 at
25000*
445 at
! 19000*
405 at
26500'
406 at
27500*
428 at
30500*
405 at
21000*
Approx* time to climb
to 20000'
8*5 mins.
6.0 mins.
6*5 mins.
7.8 mins.
7»4 mins.
6.5 mins.
6.3 mins.
Armament
4 x 20 mm
4 x 20 mxn
4 x 20 mm
2 x 20 mra
4 x .303"
2 x 20 mm
4 x .303"
4x20 mm
4 x 20 mm
2 x 7.9™
General remarks
Estimated
values


38-13» 03 Bomber Berformanoec
Uyp«
Douglas A26
Attack
version
Douglas A25
B outer
version
Boeing B17P
Portress
Consolidated
B24D
Liberator
Boeing
B29
Consolidated
B32
Avro
Lancaster I
Gross weight lb.
Structure weight %
Wing ere* sq.ft
Spen ft.
Aspect ratio
Wing loading lb./sq.ft
Span loading lb./sq.ft
29700
32
540
70
9.0
55.0
6.5
32000
30
540
70
9.0
59.0
6.1
54000
29
1420
104
7.6
38.0
5.0
56000
23
1030
no
11.7
54.0
105000
33 x
1740
141
11.5
60.5
5.3
95000
345 x
1420
135
12.8
70.5
5.5
63000
29.0
1297
102
8.0
48.5
6.1
Povrar plant
Two P & W
H2800-27
Pour Wright
81830-97
Pour PAW
R1830-43
Pour Wright
E3350-13
Pour Wright
E3350-13
Pour Rolls
Royce
Merlin XX
Power at height
Normal
1450
at 13000*
1000 at
25000*
noo at
25000*
2000 at
25000*
2000 at
25000*
-
Military
1600
at 13500*
1200 at
25000’
1200 at
25000 ’
2200 at
2500C*
2200 at
25COO’
1175 at
2050C *
Take-off
2000
at S.L
1200 at
S.L
1200 at
S.L
2200 at
S.L
2200 at
S.L
1280 at
S.L
Take-off power loading
lb./BHP
7.4
8.0
11.2
11.7
11.9
11.4
12.4
Power plant weight/Take-off
Power
1.95
1.95
2.7
2.5
2.6*
2.4*
2.3
Top speed at height
372 m.p.h
at 17000’
372 m.p.h
at 17000'
309 m.p.h
at 25000'
316 m.p.h
at 25000*
368 m.p.h
at 25000*
379 m.p.h
at 25000*
282 gup.h
at 20000'
Cruising speed
210 m.p.h
210 m.p.h
230 m.p.h
210 m.p.h
250 m.p.h
250 m.p.h
192 m.p.h
Take-off to 50 ft.screen
775 yards
approx.
900 yards
approx •
1000 yards
1400 yards
1400 yards
1400 yards
(Pins's
estimate
considered
optimistin)
1300 yards
Maximus bombs (Internal)
lb.
Not
applicable
4000
6000
8000
20000
20000
14000
Corresponding range miles
—do—
825
1800
1600
700+
800+
3000
Maxi muni range miles
-do-
1800
2900
3200
3900+
3800+
3450
Corresponding bombs lb.
-do-
2000
0
0
0+
0+
0
Armament
4 x 0.5"
2000 rands
total
1 x 75 ®
20 rounds
4 x 0.5"
2000 raxce
total
n x o.5"
4600 rands
total
10 x 0.5"
2850 rounds
total
10 x 0.5"
2850 rands
total
10 X 0.5"
6000 rands
total
1 X 20 JBB
60 rounds
10 x 0.30?*
19000rands
total
x Applicable to experimental version y- See text for performance at higher weights


38-13* 04 American Fighter Weights*
Bell
P59/te1
Curtiss
P4Q-?
Curtiss
BjO-H
Curtiss
P.60
Bell
P.63
North AacrB
P51-B
North AoerS
P51-C
Bell
IP. 77
Wing
951
1121
1117
1340
1052
1256
401
fuselage
675
630
411
554
595
431
185
&®in Unde roar ri age
595
494
) 50?
538
435
623
213
Auxiliary Undercarriage
1*2
54
51
154
83
110
Tail Surfacea
116
149
131
22S
136
178
147
Engine Mounts and Ocwris
0
185
342
450
0
275
109
Flying Control#
116
98
96
113
104
94
41
Structure Group
2395
2731
2604
3274
2476
2940
2400*
1206
Power Unit
2317
2345
2100
3644
2552
2997
961
Tanka and lystesa
358
538
350
434
*26
*62
125
Power Group
2655
2883
2450
1*068
2980
3459
2900*
1106
Armament
954 )
1125
691
703
650
605
S@saaini.ng Equipment
568
669
501
552
474
51?
iurasour
196 )
150
138
162
118
166
81
Fuel
624 )
942
720
1168
600
635
Oil
71 )
156
98
128
87
142
1155
Pilot
200 )
180
180
180
180
200
Total Sqjuipoent & Fuel & Pilot
2613
3224
2328
2893
2109
2265
2155
1236
Gross Weight
7663
8838
7382
10235
7565
8664
7485
3548
Notes Gross weights quoted are not necessarily latest
* Rough
Estimated
operational weights. The detailed, weights of structure
appro xi-
values
ana power plants are probably fairly accurate but
mations;
equipment weight say not represent latest values.
total eon-
aide red to
be optima-
tie.
38-13*05 British ffigbfcer Weights.
Spitfire
Spitfire
Spitfire
Typhoon
Tesroest I
Tensest 11
Focke Wulf
VII
IX
21
1
1
development
190 _____
Ving
1000
3.000
1237
1646
1857
1480
1113
Fuselage
562
430
650
964
1155
717
485
Auxiliary undercarriage
36
30
37
44
51
43
35
Main undercarriage
334
300
399
637
679
686
480
Tail surface*
90
90
93
214
233
207
150
Engine mounts and cowls
199
206
233
229
245
257
250
Flying controls
95
85
87
73
79
70
100
Structure group
2316
2141
2736
3807
4299
3480
2613
Power unit
2668
2607
3159
3608
3045
Tanks and system®
317
255
315
407
300
Power group
2985
2862
3474
4204
4289
4015
3345
Armament
Remaining equipment
722
477
479
Jl337
Jl536
{1265
974
425
9lS
400
Armour
196
193
251
163
109
181
150
Fuel
864
605
702
1109
915
935
860
Oil
68
66
100
144
144
108
96
Pilot
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
Total Equipment & Fuel & Pilot
2527
2236
2580
3152
2633
2823
2622
Gross Weight
7828
7239
6780
11163
11221
10298
8580
Notes Gross weights are not necessarily latest operational weight. The
Estimated
Mainly
detailed weights of structure and power plants
are probably fairly
values.
weighed
accurate, but equipment weights may
not represent latest values.
values.


APPENDIX - LIST OF DOCUMENTS BROUGHT FROM AMERICA.
These are grouped under the relevant Chapters of this Part.
Chapter 2.
Weight
1. Actual weight and balance report of P. 51
2. Weight comparison betaken Spitfire IX and P. 518
Controls
3* Plight tests on internally balanced ailerons on P. 51
Structure
4* Drawings showing details of wing constructions and general
arrangement of fuselage.
Chapter 3.
Weight
5* Detailed weights c£ P. 60
Controls
6. Complete drawings of internally balanced ailerons on P. 60
Performance
7* Performance curves of P. 60
Structure
8. General arrangement drawings of P. 60 wing
Chapter 5*
Controls
9* Preliminary handling report and general information on A. 26
Chapter 6.
General
10. Descriptive Drawings of Consolidated 8.32
11. Drawings of bomb installation of 8.32.
12. Effect of compressibility on performance and stability of the 8.29.
Chapter 7.
Structure
13* General arrangement drawings of P. 40 wing
Chapter 8.
Structure
14* General arrangement drawings of 8.17 and 8.29
Chapter 13.
' Performance
15* Monthly chart of aircraft characteristics and performance
(United States Army production types).
16. Performance charts of United States Navy service and experimental
aircraft.
P 1997, 1592?,3067,350, 6p.959,M&5, 7/43.


AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART C PHOTO LOFTING
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
Item 1.01 Master layout
” 1.02 Contact reproduction
" 1.03 Camera reproduction
" 1.04 Lofting manuals
" 1.05 Grid scribing
n 1.0 6 Action
CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL SUMMARY
Item 2.01 Methods already used in Britain
" 2.02 American visits-
n 2.03 General advantages of master layout
” _2.04 Accuracy
** 2.05 Camera versus contact methods of reproduction
" 2.66 Layout department
M 2.07 Dimensioning of drawings
” 2* 08 Conclusions
CHAPTER 3 - LAYOUT PROCEDURE
Item 3© 01 Lines and detail layout
" 3*02 Metal drafting
" 3*03 Economies attributable to metal layout
” 3*04 Technique of drawing image on metal plates
” 3*03 Elimination of dimensions
" 3.06 Storage and handling of metal masters and reproductions
” 3*07 Grid lines. Boeing grid scribing machine
” 3*oB Eloor area and personnel of layout department
n 3*09 Second degree curves
” 3*lo Lofting and layout tables
M 3.11 Layout and template material
M 3© 12 Template cutting
CHAPTER 4 - ALTERNATIVE REPRODUCTION PROCESSES
Item 4. 01 Camera methods
w 4* 02 Direct X-Ray process
” 4*03 Afterglow X-ray process
M 4*04 Prest electrolytic process
" 4*05 Photoprint process
n 4*06 Globrite process
" 4*07 Hutchinson process
" 4. 08 Offset-litho process
CHAPTER 5 - CAMERA PROCEDURE
Item s*ol Description of Lanston Monotype camera equipment
M 5*02 Specification for Lanston Monotype camera
" 5* 03 Layout of camera and processing rooms
M 5*04 Light sensitive emulsions on metal plates
” 5© 05 Lenses
” 5©06 Camera accuracy
w 5©07 Camera reproduction flood lights
** s*oB Storage of glass negatives
M 3*09 Eastman Recordak micro film
” 5* 1 0 An example of cost saved by camera
” s*ll Transfer of Liberator lines at Willow Run plant
CHAPTER 6 - MESCELLAHEOUS
Item 6.01 Bell production technique
n 6.02 Modification procedure
M 6.03 Walt Disney educational films
M 6.04 Documents
APPENDIX - List of documents etc, brought from America




PART C PHOTO LOFTING
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD POLICY CONCLUSIONS
30-1 •01 Master Layout# All the aircraft firms visited "by the Mission
for this investigation use lofting methods# It is the general
opinion of the Mission that master layout, combined with one of
the methods of reproducing the image on metal, is well worth
while, showing an economy in total labour and a reduction in the
time required to produce prototypes# The extra labour involved
in the layout process is more than offset by the saving on
layout work in the shops, and the necessary personnel can be
drawn from this source#
30-I*o2 Contact reproduction* It is recommended that as a first
step one contact process should be introduced throughout the
whole of the British industry, and it is considered that the
Robinson ‘ACT* process is as good as any method seen in the
U.S.A#
30-I*o3 Camera Reproduction* This method has the advantage of
allowing change of scale; e#g. for reducing and enlarging lines,
or making half size blue prints for record purposes# The
glass negatives also form a convenient master record from which
the lines can be reproduced again full size at any time#
Alterations to the original layout are also easily made# The
Mission have arranged the purchase of two Lanston Monotype
cameras in order that this process may be tried out by two
selected firms m Britain#
30-I*o4 Lofting manuals* These are used in America to instruct staff
in the methods to be used* Their preparation for use in Britain
is considered essential in order to introduce a standardised
system of lofting with the least possible delay#
30-I*o3 Grid Scribing# Master layout is easier and more accurate if
a grid is scribed on the metal plates# This is not easily
done with sufficient accuracy by hand# One American firm use
a grid scribing machine, and it i 3 recommended that one should
be designed and built in Britain to serve the whole industry#
30-I*o6 Action* Decisions are required
(i) To develop lofting methods in Britain, and set going
the preparation of lofting manuals.
(ii) To introduce and develop the Robinson and the camera
processes#
(iii) To hasten the installation of the two cameras at the
selected firms.
(iv) To initiate the design of a grid scribing machine.




CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL SUMMARY
3C-2.01 Methods already used in Britain. In August, 1942 Mr, Tilt man hed.
ocoasion to submit a personal memorandum to M.A.P., drawing attention to
the valuable contribution made in America not only to prototype develop-
ment, but also to production, by the methods of master lay-out drafting
on metal and the means of reproducing these drawings also on to metal.
A tour of the British Industry was suggested in order to test the
amount of interest, and also to make a general examination of British >-
methods, A report on these visits was submitted; this indicated a
genuine keenness for steps to be taken to introduce such methods. In-
cluded in the report was a recommendation for a detailed examination of
systems used in America.
As a result of this report, the 5.8.A.C., with the full support of
M.A.P., invited Mr. Tiltman to visit America and to make such an examina-
tion. It was arranged that he should- Join Sir Roy Pedden’s Mission.
Before the Mission left, a meeting of technical representatives of all
design firms was called, and a detailed questionnaire was presented embodying
information required. In addition, a small sub-committee was formed to
press forward general development work, particularly certain elements of
standardisation, pending the return of the Mission.
In Britain, of the 20 companies visited, comparatively few were,
actively engaged in up-to-date lay-out and photo and litho-reproduction
methods. Of these the more advanced were the Handley-Page, Bristol,
Rolls-Royce, Vickers and Westland Companies.
The B S. & A.Robinson ‘ACT* Lithographic process appeared to show great
promise and is being taken up by a number of companies. Handley-Page is
following a camera method similar in essentials to American practice.
3C-2.02 American Visits. The following firms were visited. On every occasion
the greatest possible generosity was shown in the giving of all information
asked for.
Curtiss-Wright St. Louis
North American Los Angeles
* Lockheed Burbank
Vega Burbank
Douglas Santa Monica
Consolidated San Diego
Boeing Seattle
Hammer Dry Plate Co. Los Angeles
Photoprint Co. Los Angeles
Walt Disney Studios Burbank
Wright Field Dayton
De Havilland Toronto
Fleet Buffalo
Curtiss-Wright Buffalo
Bell Aircraft Buffalo & Niagara
Bast man Kodak Rochester
Zeiss Hew York City
Eastman Kodak New York City
Goers Am.uptical Co. New York City
Lanston Mrootype Mo,Go. Philadelphia
Rutherford Machinery Co. New York City
Glenn L.Martin Co. Baltimore
*
3C-2.03 General Advantages of Master Layout. The advantages in laying-out lines
and details of plate' work full-size and true—to—scale, and reproducing these
on to metal templates, tool stock, Jig boards and even the material
actually to be fabricated, have now been established. No economy ,in
design personnel is claimed; on the contr*ary a small increase is to be
expected in the early stages. This increase cannot easily be expressed
quantitatively, since conditions in America and Britain are so different.
Economies in the factory are, however, of quite considerable magnitude.
The combined effort of design plus manufacture is materially reduced by
these methods-


One important reason for an overall increase in efficiency, is the
improved accuracy of lay-out, combined with the automatic check for errors
which the method naturally provides.
Further economies are represented by the fundamental facts that only
one'master lay-out is made of any line or detail, and that lay-out work is
entirely eliminated from the shops where it has always been an inefficient
operation.
Possibly the greatest advantage of all, particularly in war time, is the
shortening of\the time of design and construction of prototypes. This
appears to be quite a positive effect, and some individuals have quoted it
as high as a 4X>/<a saving on time from start pf design to completion of
prototype.
30-2.04 Accuracy. Great pains have been taken to confirm the accuracy of
practical operation of the Camera method of reproduction. Unless elaborate
checking tests are made with the older types of Camera, accuracy is
questionable. It is thought, however, that in the case of the Lanston
Monotype Camera equipment, the degree accuracy is adequate; when ex-
perience has been gained, a tolerance on reproduction of 0.01" in 120” can
be achieved in practice with percentage rejections due to this cause of the
order of from 2 to 5%.
3C-2.05 Camera Versus Contact Methods of Reproduction. In order of merit the
Camera System comes first and is making a valuable contribution. Certain
of the.simpler contact methods should, however, be considered not as
competitors, but as complementary to the oamera.
There is comparatively little disagreement in the U.S. A. regarding the
merits of the Camera System. There is, however, very considerable differ-
ence of opinion as to which is the best oontact system - the X-Ray,
Riotoprint, Offset-Litho, Electrolytic and other processes. This very
diversity of opinion, combined with the steadily growing use of the Monotype
camera throughout the industry, provides good evidence that the camera
system leads all other methods in general usefulness and economy of
operation.
The advantage of the Camera System can be quoted as follows:-
> . . ' ' -
(a.) Great flexibility in operation.
(b) It is at least as cheap as most other methods, since the master
negative material is l/25‘ the area of a contact negative.
!c) Economy in negative storage.
d) Very considerable economy in blueprints material sinoe most prints
can with advantage be made half full-size (1/4 area).
(e) Shrinkage allowances can be introduced.
(f) Drawings for wind-tunnel and other models can be sOaled down from
master lay-out.
(g) Duplicate master lay-outs or negatives can be made without inter-
ference with the original.
(h) Mock-up lines can be scaled up from reduced scale first approxi-
mation lines.
Since in England there is the Robinson *ACT’ process, it is probable
that, at the moment, it will not be necessary to introduce the X-Ray,
Riotoprint or Electrolytic methods. They are all of considerable interest
but it will be expedient to have some degree of standardisation.
«**■• | j.' 3 ’ \
The purchase for the British Aircraft Industry of 2 of the latest
type of Lanston Monotype Cameras, together with Floodlighting Equipment has
been arranged.
J-2.06 Layout Department. It is generally agreed that the introduction of a
buffer Department (i.e. the master lay-out section) between creative design
staff and factory is psychologically beneficial, since a gap which has
always been a source of trouble has thereby been bridged. In all cases
lay-out is under the direct control of engineering, but the control of


reproduction varies in different companies. In 3ome cases this is under
engineering, in others under factory administration; in one instance it
was found that photo-reproduction was responsible direct to the secretary
of the company.
Another advantage in having a lay-out department is that the personnel
become expert in this one particular type of work. If full advantage is
taken of all the developments which have recently occurred, it is quite a
large undertaking, and it is certainly advantageous for this group not to
have to concern itself with such issues as strength requirements, aero-
dynamics, etc. This department takes full responsibility for the fit of
all parts, the correctness of all details, and the elimination of all fouls.
•e
The personnel of the lay-out departments is principally recruited from
the technical colleges. New men must have had lor 2 years training,
especially in mathematics. Most companies are just beginning to use a
small percentage of female workers. Where a toolroom lay-out staff exists,
they can very quickly adapt themselves to lofting work.
3C-2.07 Dimensioning of Drawings. The entire elimination of dimensions from lay-
out details represents an important issue, and one which so far does not
appear to have been faced up to. While at Wright Field an opportunity was
taken of discussing this subject with the senior staff of the Engineering
department, who insisted that full dimensional drawings were necessary for
maintenance in the field. We are therefore faced with two alternatives
(i) To issue, for field maintenance, a set of fully dimensioned
drawings. If this is really necessary, it takes away many of the virtues
so laboriously developed for the system. It increases the volume of
engineering work by possibly AjO-sC£o. In addition, and even more dis-
quieting, it introduces two sources of information which sooner or later
are sure to disagree.
S y
« (ii) To develop some system which will enable reproductions from one
set of metal lay-out plates to be made (a) with dimensions for field
maintenance eto. (b) without dimensions for shops. There are various
means of accomplishing this, perhaps the most promising, when using
Camera method, being a system of colour filtration. (in England this
system is in the development stage).
+ .. n - .
In actual practice it was found that quite a number of companies were
taking short outs and were not supplying fully dimensioned drawings. Two
Glenn L.Martin contracts specifically permit the elimination of most
dimensions.
30-2.08 Conclusions.
(i) Master lay-out .combined with one of the many methods of reproducing
the image on metal, is definitely worth while, and shows economy both in
total labour and time.
(ii) A combination of the Camera method and the English Robinson ACT
lithographic process will probably satisfy British requirements of the
immediate future.
(iii) Reduction in time of prototype design and construction will be
achieved when the system has been in operation for a reasonable time.
Patience must be exercised during the transition period.
(iv) An economy in design man hours is not anticipated; in actual fact,
particularly to start with, there may be an increase. There will, how-
ever, be a substantial saving in workshop labour for prototypes.
(v) The Mission have arranged the purchase of 2 Lanston-Huebner Aero Tem-
plate Cameras with 2-Goer z ARTAR 30 H F.L.lenses for each camera complete
with floodlighting units, etc., and certain spares.
(vi) The volume of information accumulated during this tour, together with
what is already known in Britain, should be sufficient to set-up a lay-
out section combined with photo-reproduction department similar to the


best examples in America.
(vii) It would appear that any large company can profitably run both a
camera projection system and a contact method in conjunction with one
another, combining the two methods to the best advantage.
CHAPTER 3 - LAYOUT PROCEDURE
30-3*ol Lines and Detail Layout. Every aeroplane company which was visited em-
ploys some form of master lay-out technique. Although there is no uni-
formity in thes methods used, a number are similar and all follow closely
the same general principles.
The initial idea of Lofting came from the ship building industry
although its methods were, and still are, quite primitive.
The general idea behind lofting methods is the elimination of paper
with its shrinkage disability, and the employment of metal in large areas
in order that all work can be laid-out full-size and true-10-scale. It was
felt that for any curve or detail shape, if it were laid-out once, it need
never be laid-out again, since some means could be developed of transferring
an image from one metal plate to another. Pig*l is a general view, showing
lofting work in progress, and Pig. 2 shows similar work at another firm.
Figs 1 and 2. Metal drafting.
It is not possible, nor is it necessary, since there is so much simi-
larity, to describe all methods in detail. Although wood is still used in
a few instances on which to develop lines and details, in most companies the
work is carried out either on galvanised steel or on aluminium alloy sheet.
These sheets are coated with various kinds of lacquer upon which it is con-
venient to scribe or draw with pencil or ink the required lines. The very
nature of these surfaces encourages acouraoy of lay-out. In certain
processes (for example the X-Ray) other coatings are added which have special
properties.


The object of this accurate lay-out operation is to generate a complete
set of templates of all the plate fittings on the aircraft structure, and
also to develop a series of sections for panels having double curvature.
In parallel with the work of developing this new technique, there has
been a definite demand on the part of the shops for a much higher degree of
accuracy than is possible using small scale paper drawings. The fit and
tailoring of stressed skin parts has demanded and will continue to demand
more accurate engineering information.
3G-3.02 Metal Drafting. In the most advanced examples of this metal drafting
technique, the complete lines of an airframe are first developed with the
greatest possible precision. A few companies are not even satisfied with
graphical fairing methods and are using mathematical conics a 3 an aid to the
elimination of the human error. This process is described in 3.09 below.
Secondly the complete airframe is detailed on metal sheets, eliminating di-
mensions. From these two sources of data a template can be derived from any
curve or for any plate profile.
If one had to express an opinion as to the best method of metal draft-
ing which has been seen, it would be roughly as follows
The metal plates would be duralumin, or if not available specially
stretched ~g alvaneal, ,. Upon this material could be sprayed 2 or 3 coats of
*preparacote’ nitro-cellulose lacquer. When lightly rubbed down, this
provides an ideal surface upon which to draw, either with a silver solder or
an 8H pencil. Grid lines would be machine scribed upon all plates. In
the past the hand drawn grid has been a laborious and not too accurate a
reference system, but now that a precision machine has been developed to
scribe the lines automatically within a tolerance of + 0.005 H , this should
become universal.
Advantages of metal drafting as described above are as follows
!&) Perfect surface unchangeable in dimensions.
b; Natural and automatic chepk on engineering information. Errors
are reduced to a minimum, fouls are avoided and parts should fit
precisely.
(c) All lay-out work is taken away from shops; it is carried out by
trained specialists under ideal conditions.
(d) The creative engineers are relieved of the anxiety of being
responsible for absolute accuracy.
The storage and handling of large quantities of plates, each one of
which can weigh over 100 lb., has now been developed to a stage where it
presents no unreasonable difficulties.
%
Means have been devised whereby accurate duplicate of master lay-outs
oan be distributed to other plants and sub-contractors.
3C-3.03 Economies attributable to Metal Lay-out. The Douglas view on the general
nature or economies in labour, which are brought about by the introduction
of metal drafting and photographic techniques, is as follows:-
There is, first, a small saving in the creative part of design work;
the lay-out department does, in practice, take a small load from this
section, since it assumes responsibility for fit, fouls, and can be relied
upon to discover most mistake's.
The new lay-out plus photographic departments are greater than the
original detail section. A fair estimate of the additional engineering
labour is an increase of 20$ on the original detailing effort.
The main saving is difficult to determine, since there are so many
variables, and the character of aircraft has changed completely since the
old method was in use. All are agreed, however, that the saving in labour
required to start production is substantial, particularly on a time basis.


3C-3.04 Technique of Drawing Image on Metal Plates.
methods are employed in America for drawing
Fig. 3. Scribing lines on metal.
Quite a number of different
the image on the master lay-out
plate. In the case of the
X-ray process, the line is
scribed through a film of
lacquer on to the metal with a
special engraving tool. (Fig. 3).
At the Douglas Company,
although all details are drawn
v/ith a pencil between 6 & 3H,
in their lines lay-out depart-
ment all lines are scribed.
There appears to be no logical
reason for the different tech-
nique used in the two depart-
ments of the same company, and
it would seem that in this case
the pencil is adequate and
superior.
In the Boeing Company, a silver solder pencil, having a silver content
of - is used. The line given by the silver solder pencil is slight-
ly more metallic than the graphite pencil, but iJhotographs equally well; it
is necessary, however, to see that the flood lights in this case project at
a very flat angle to the easel in order to avoid photographing the metallic
reflections of the line.
In passing, it may be said that Glenn L.Martin are experimenting with
a gold pencil, and so far, results are quite promising.
In the Boeing plant, all information of a general character such as bills
of material, general instructions etc., instead of being written on the lay-
out plate where they occupy space without requiring precision, are issued
on a separate sheet which is Sheet 2of the metal lay-out plate. Generally
speaking, only the data which have to be shown precisely to scale, are given
on the detailed plate itself. In order to reduoe the number of metal plates
used in the lay-out department, all details up to about B'* x 10” are drawn in
pencil on ‘Kodatrace’. Contact reproduction? of these sheets can be made
on to metal.
When a number of reproductions are made from one original master, each
one of these must have its own marking. This is accomplished very simply;
the information constituting the marking is printed on a disc of transparent
material in black ink and introduced into the front of an eleotric torch.
Either before or after exposure, this torch is brought up to the metal sheet
and the bulb illuminated. The information is automatically printed on to
that sheet.
Most titles are put on the original master plate in the form of a trans-
fer. This is superior to a rubber stamp. The colour of this title blank
should be brown, since it photographs better than any other colour.
Master lay-out plates, due to the large amount of work which has to be
carried out on them, must be protected against damage and dirt as much as
possible. Most companies keep these plates, when not being drawn upon,
in cellophane envelopes. Incidentally, checking of modifications and other
small data can be indicated on these cellophane envelopes in wax pencil of
various colours.
Glenn L.Martin are experimenting with a sprayed cellophane coating,
which is less likely to be torn, but can be stripped off quite easily.
The Bell and Gurtiss-Wright companies scribe their lines on battleship
grade linoleum, very carefully mounted on a wooden floor. These companies,
however, are now appreciating the advantages of lay-out lines on metal.
Both these companies use the Offset-Litho process of reproduction. Fig. 4
shows the Wagner Press.


It is of considerable importance that the lines of a lay-out, when they
are to be photographed, should have a fair degree of uniformity. Quality of
reproduction benefits thereby.
An interesting variation in the lay-out technique is for the lines of
a new type to be made as a first approximation in the first stages of the
Fig. 4. Offset Litho press.
project to say 1/4 full size; at this stage, a very high degree of precision
is not necessary and a saving of time is achieved. Using the camera, these
1/4 full scale lines can now be stepped up to full size, and will be accurate
enough for the building of the mock-up.
Another application of the changing of scale is when employing a family
of wing-seotions which are geometrically similar, as can be sometimes arranged
at a wing tip. The scaled down profiles of these varying sections can be
derived by photographic reduction.
One of the most important objects of laying out a new design precisely
on metal is the necessity for a high degree of accuracy in the skin details.
The procedure at North American, where this technique has reached a fine art,
is that the skin panels are developed theoretically for the first machine.
One set is made and tested out in the prototype. Any modifications which are
required are sent back from the shops to the lofting department, and the
plates are altered accordingly. Generally speaking, skin panels require, in
practice, to be about 1/16" larger than the theoretical size. Much depends
in the determining of this correction on the skill of the men laying the skin.
This allowance i 3 not made in the lay-out department unless called for by the
shops.
Splines present a good deal of difficulty. All materials have been
tried at some time. Generally speaking, they are made of duralumin, spruoe
or perspex. They have a longitu-
dinal groove which registers with the
pointers of the lead weights or ducks.
(See Pig.s).
It is common practice in most
American companies for a carefully
chosen representative to be lent from
the tool room, planning department
etc. to the Engineering Section.
These representatives are stationed
amongst the designers and lay-out men,
with the express purpose of intro-
ducing a production back-ground.
Such men are constantly changed, since
it is well known that after a period
Fig. 5. Weights and splines.


of say 6-9 months, they begin to take on the character of the department
to which they have been transferred. This scheme represents one of the
main reasons why, in prototype design, production is given more considera-
tion in America them in England.
3C-3.05 Elimination of Dimensions. One of the objects of the new technique is
that all lines and details shall be laid out full size and true to scale.
This arrangement makes dimensions unnecessary. If anything, information
as to profile if duplicated by dimensions would introduce possible in-
accuracies and ambiguities.
It is worthy of note, however, that the Glenn L.Martin Co. has recent-
ly reoeived two contracts for prototype aircraft, wherein it is specified
that dimensioned drawings will not be required, thus inferring that the paper
prints from the metal lay-out sire adequate for inspection and field mainte-
nance.
In this connection, it was surprising to note that no work is being
carried out in America on the filtering out of coloured lines. This
development is being pursued in this country, and if successful, it may have
a number of applications.
3C-3.06 Storage and Handling of Metal Masters and Reproductions. Most companies
who have been carrying out metal drafting have gained a healthy respect for
the dangers of accidental injury, which can be incurred if proper means are
not provided for handling the bigger plates efficiently.
In some plants where the lofting and photographic departments are on
different floors, special elevators have been installed for carrying the
plates from one department to another.
Again, in the case of the Boeing plant, a special trolley has been de-
signed, (a blue print of which is available), to reduce this hazard. All
plates should have the corners radiused and the burr taken off the sheared
edges.
Unsensitised plates, if necessary cut to various sizes, may be stored
in quite a crude way: (see Pig. 6).
FIG. 6
The storage of master lay-outs and photo-
graphic productions must be more .carefully
carried out, since the surfaces must not be
allowed to chafe and damage the image. The
Boeing Co. have developed an interesting
method of storing such plates, which is shown
in Pig. ?• This rack is represented by a
built up wood component about deer>, and
say 10* x 8* resting flat on the floor.
This is constructed with circular grooves
into which the plates slide. The curva-
ture maintains a stable upright position
of each plate without any other support.
Plates of any size can be filed in this
indiscriminately. The plates are, of
course, indexed, and each groove has
- its own number.
To the right hand piece of timber
out 7 fl convex are bolted a number of
grooved sections, the long bolts pull-
ing each to the curvature of the right
hand former.
3C-3.07 Grid Lines. Boeing Grid Scribing Machine.
Generally speaking, the American indus-
try appears to U3e the grid line system
of reference in about of the
companies visited. The remaining companies
Fig. 7. Storage of
lay-out plates.


have developed a method whereby four target points located at the four
corners of the sheet are established on every lay-out plate; these are very
precisely located and checked, and are a means of establishing accuracy on
the photographic reproductions.
The main reason why the grid system is not used completely in America
is that the manual drawing of the grid system is very laborious, and is not
always very accurate, because of the general monotony of draughtsmanship.
Required accuracy is + 0.005“.
The Boeing Go. have now designed and built a grid line scribing machine
which is a precise piece of equipment. This maohine scribes lines at the
right spacing, about 0.002” thick, located with a tolerance of + 0.005“.
The lines are scribed through the nitro-oellulose lacquer on to""the metal
plate. They are, therefore, permanent, and will not be erased during
modification. (See Fig.B).
It is proposed to design and build one of these machines in England to
serve the whole aircraft industry. The necessity for designing this machine
Fig. 8. Boeing grid scribing machine.
is explained by the fact that only a photograph is available; the details
will require working out.
As in so many other directions in America, no standardisation has been
introduced into the grid line systems, and during the Mission’s tour, many
sizes were seen; 5" x5 W was the most popular size. It is hoped in this
country to standardise on a 12” x 12” square. This size has the advan-
tage of the lines being not too close together, thus congesting the
drawing; at the same time, it provides an adequate reference system in feet
for location of any detail throughout the aeroplane.
30-3*oB Floor Area and Personnel of Lay-out Department, In the Boeing factory,
the lay-out department is represented by a total of 12,500 sq.feet, of which
the photographio department occupies 3,100 sq.ft, and storage 1,200 sq.feet.
The Bell lofting and template departments occupy a staff of 130, which
includes female labour.
At Consolidated, lofting and reproduction occupy 184 staff in two
factories, which includes a section of 6 checkers and 3$ female labour.
In two of their plants, the floor area for lay-out and reproduction is
distributed as follows:-


Main Plant
Lofting and Lay-out;
300 x 30 sq.ft. = 9,000 sq.ft.
130 x 40 sq.ft. = 6,000 sq.ft.
photographic Reproduction;
30 x 60 sq.ft. = 1,800 sq.ft. 16,800 sq.ft.
Second Plant
Lofting and Lay-out
40 X 150 sq.ft. = 6,000 sq.ft.
TOTAL 22,800 sq.ft.
At the Martin Co., the engineering staff represents 2,300, of which
there are 700 designers and draughtsmen. There are between 250 and 300 in
the metal drafting department.
At Lockheeds, the engineering staff comprises 2,300, of which the
lofting and lay-out represents between 60 and 70.
At North American, the lofting and lay-out department represents 70,
which includes 9 checkers.
The lines and lay-out of the ’Mustang' fighter occupied 35 men.
For what it is worth, one average lay-out at North American occupies one
man for 10 days.
In this company, lofting and lay-out occupies 8,080 sq.feet, of which
X ray and photographic work takes up between 3,000 and 4,000 sq.feet.
3C-3.09 Second Degree Curves. Y/hen a tolerance of jj- 0.005” is being aimed at,
the fairing of long flat curves is not an easy operation within this de-
gree of accuracy.
This difficulty has led one or two companies to give up the attempt
altogether and introduce in its place a system of mathematical calculation
by second degree curves.
The mathematical mechanism is too complicated to discuss here, but gen-
erally speaking, if the angles of the two tangents at the extreme ends of
the curve and the position of one point substantially midway along the curve
are known, all ordinates along the curve can be plotted.
Although the development work on this technique has occupied a fair
amount of mathematical skill, now that the procedure has been made into a
routine operation, the work involved is not very great. All the calcula-
tions are carried out by clerical members of the engineering department with
calculating machines (not slide rules).
The Mission was informed that the North American 'Mustang' had its
ourves completely developed in this way. The idea is by no means new, and
is being used by at least one company in this country.
3C-3.10 Lofting and Lay-out Tables. In America, no degree of uniformity on this
subject is apparent within the industry. Tables of every size and height
are seen at the various plants.
No standardisation of plate sizes is apparent, and a number of methods
are used for registering over-lapping plates.
\
The heights of tables would seem to vary between 12 ins. and 3 ft. 3 ins.
From this, it is apparent that for single small tables, the latter height is
liked, whereas for large sized tables containing the lines of complete «.


aircraft, the lo>ver height is preferred.
For any good job, it is important that the tables should be as small
as possible, in order that the lay-out men can work in comfort around the
perimeter.
Considerable interest was shown by all the firms visited in the
suggested British idea of having standard 8 ft. x 4 ft. precision tables,
which build up to any size, whereon standard 8 ft. x 4 ft. plates are
accurately positioned by means of four dowels. These plates will be
supplied from a central source, coated, jig drilled with the scribed grid
system accurately located to the dowel holes.
All lofting tables in America are made of wood, but the suggestion of
constructing these of steel angle framing was looked upon with consider-
able favour.
3C-3*ll Lay-out and Template Material. Many companies use mild steel both for
metal drafting sheets and photo templates. Much of this material is
supplied by The Republic Steel Corporation of Cleveland, Ohio. A brief
specification is as followsj-
(a) The plates are known as Republic Zincbond Bonderised Sheets.
(b) They are stretch-levelled.
(c) They are electro-plated with practically chemically pure zinc
followed by the bonderising process, which provides a good
paint bonding surface.
(d) Sheets may be stamped, drawn or formed by any process. They can
be spot and seam welded; they can also be soldered.
(e) If the surface becomes contaminated with handling, vapour degreas-
ing may be employed or plates may be wiped with a solvent such
as naptha. Maximum moisture resistance may be developed by
using a final treatment of a solution of Tertiary Butyl Alcohol,
diluted with two volumes of water. To one gallon of this
solution, add two grams of chromic acid just before use.
(f) The bonderising process gives a final phosphate film which converts
the surface of the electro galvanised sheet into an inert,
finely crystalline, non-metallic coating. This surface provides
a * tooth' which mechanically holds the sprayed lacquer coating.
Anodised duralumin or Alclad plates are used for lay-out work in some
plants, partly because they are lighter and easier to handle, and also
because, being more carefully crated, they seem, in practice, to be flatter,
and suffer less from damage.
Glenn L. Martin are experimenting with magnesium alloy sheets. These
are to Specification 57W, and are 0.050" thick.
30-3* 12 Template Gutting. Most companies have their template cutting department,
adjacent to the metal drafting room, and since the process of cutting
Fig. 9. Do-All bandsaw.
templates is associated with a
great deal of noise, this unit
should be sound-proof.
In the Consolidated factory,
the master template is made from
the original, using it as a type
of routing jig. The duplicate
templates are sawn, leaving 1/32"
to be cleaned off on a vertical
spindle miller. A cylindrical
portion of the tool registers
with the original template. By
this means, subsequent templates
are accurate to the master tem-
plate to a high degree.


The ’Do-All’ bandsaw (Sec Fig. 9) and filing machine is used exten-
sively for template cutting. In order to avoid breaking the band each
time it is necessary to cut an internal, hole, an internal nibbling machine
is often used. For the finish of flat curves, a disc grinder with a
coarse carborundum linen disc is used.
It has been found worth while to mark the perimeter of ail templates
with a stamped arrow head ju3t touching the lino. This indicates any
alteration to the original profile.
CHAPTER 4 - ALTERKATIVE REPRODUCTION PROCESSES
SC-4#ol Camera Methods. These methods ore considered here'for comparison with
the other processes. Camera procedure is dealt with in more detail in
Chapter 5.
»
By a tedious process of trial and' error, during which many types of
camera equipment have been used under actual working conditions, a system
is now becoming universally accepted in America involving a largo ’Hori-
zontal Camera .unit in which the lens and vacuum easel travel on overhead
runways giving automatic adjustments for definition and scale.
Sight plants now use the Lanston Monotype Camera which lias been
specially designed to deal with this work. In the next year or two it is
quite certain that more of these units will be installed. This equipment
has been developed with two particular objects in mind; very high pre-
cision and speed of operation. For the first time accuracy of definition
and scale can automatically be established by the setting of certain dials
against figures given on a chart. It is no longer necessary to focus or
te check individual projections for scale accuracy. Accuracy can be main-
tained at 0.001" per foot. Output has thus been speeded up 200/6.
Storage of negatives has been developed and breakages are practically
non-existent.
It was thought that damage to a lens might present a problem; this has
been dealt with by having duplicate matched lenses carrying a ’Bureau of
Standards* certificate. Time will show whether this point is a real em-
barrassment.
Advantages
Great flexibility of operation. •
(b) In the end this system is probably cheaper, since all prints
can be issued at a scale of one half full size. Blueprint
area is therefore reduced to 25>6.
v (c) Half-full size prints easier to handle and store. Economy of
transport.
(d) If other plants have a camera, duplicate negatives can be
supplied to them.
(e) Shrinkage allowances can be introduced to scale.
(f) Wind-tunnel models can be made direct from stepped down working
'lines*.
(g) Mock-ups can be built from stepped up reduced scale lines.
Disadvantages
(a) More complicated technique. This is not 'real* unless method is
less reliable or more costly.
(b) Further research is required in having a sensitive emulsion for
metal plates which will not flake.
(c) Damage to lens may present a problem. Glenn L. Mart in ’ s comment
quoted in 5*05 below must be checked.
Cost. Capital cost is high. Full equipment, including processing, may
represent £6,250. Cost of metal reproduction appears to be about per
sq.ft. This would be very considerably reduced if account is taken, when
comparing it with contact methods, of economy of blue-print material and of
labour.


Note. Many types of Camera equipment have been tried during the past few
years. At one time vertical Cameras taking negatives direct from the loft
floor were considered a possibility; however the system had many disad-
vantages and except for speoial work their use has been discontinued.
I
A number of companies have attempted to design their own camera gear;
here again with one exception these efforts have not compared with the work
of specialists, and after considerable coats had been incurred, the work
was dropped.
3C-4.02 Direct X-Ray Process. (North American and Vultee). This is a contact
photographic process in which a fluorescent lacquer coating is used on the
lay-out plate, the source of light for activating the sensitised film of
the reproduction being X-Rays.
The steel lay-out plate receives 1 coat of white primer together with
4 coats of Eastman*s fluorescent paint, having a barium fluoride base.
A scribed image is made upon this surface.
Contact prints upon metal, which has been sensitised by one of the
several processes, are made in a vacuum printing frame with travelling
X-Ray equipment for exposure. The first reproduction, which is an oppo-
site-hand negative, is made upon a steel sheet ooated with Eastman *e
fluorescent paint also covered with a sensitised emulsion. The emulsion
retains the image from the master, while the fluorescent coating provides
the sourde of light for the positive. The negative is developed in the
ordinary manner.
Positive prints are taken and processed in a similar way.
/
Advantages. Contact accuracy,
Diaadvantages. (&) Complexity of camera methods without its flexibility,
fbj Equipment somewhat cumbersome.
(c) Two reproductions required.
(a) Image inclined to be, slightly fogged.
Cost of equipment, including processing apparatus,about £2,500 to £3,750.
Cost of reproduction about 4/3d to 4/6d per sq.foot.
3C-4.03 Afterglow X-Ray Process (North American) - This is a more up-to-date
development of the direct process, and is designed to avoid the slightly
fogged image referred to above.
\
In this case the steel master plates are prepared in a similar way to
those in the direct method, except that one extra coat of gray-green opaque
lacquer is added.. Lines are scribed through this opaque surface on to the
fluorescent paint by means of a specially ground scribing tool.
This plate is activated in an X-Ray chamber from which it is taken to
a standard type vacuum printing frame* The image retains its glow for
about 20 minutes. In this method the intermediate printing stage has been
eliminated and the reproduction is therefore an ‘opposite hand* negative.
If the information on the reproduction is not to read backwards, the letter-
ing of the original must be made ‘opposite hand*.
Advantages. This process is an improvement on the direct method.
Disadvantages. (a) The master lay-out must be made ‘opposite hand*.
(b) The process is still somewhat complicated and wanting
in scale flexibility.
3C-4.04 Prest -Electrolytic Process (Lockheed and Vega) - This process is an electric
contact one, and for that reason the lay-out plate is coated with a clear
lacquer having insulating properties. The image having been scribed through
this lacquer, the master plate and the one which is to receive the reproduced
image are moistened with ferrous sulphate solution, placed in a press and a
low voltage current is passed between them. The image is etched on the
surface of the second plate.


The copy blank, preferably of terneplate, must be thoroughly scrubbed
■with a cleaning solution, washed and air dried. Both plattens of the press
have thick rubber pads to make the pressure uniform at 25 lbs. per sq.inch.
Copper strips over the surface of the rubber connected to the source of
current make contact with the plates.
The Electric current, which is derived from a 6-volt storage battery
having considerable capacity, is applied for 3 seconds during which time a
current of from 9,000 to 10,000 amperes passes. A generator maintains the
battery in a charged condition.
Advantages. (a) Low cost.
(b) Simplicity.
(c; Durability of line image.
Disadvantages (a) Either master or reproduction must be ‘opposite hand'.
!b) No transparent copies can be made,
c; The master plate can, under some conditions, suffer
strain and damage.
Cost Complete installation to take 4' x 12* plate costs £2,500 to £3,750.
Cost of reproduction 1/- to l/6d per sq.foot.
Note. A variation of this process is being developed by Northrop. It
has as its objective the final etching of the profile line of a template
right through the metal plate. It is claimed that the automatic electro-
lytic cutting operation is accurate to a few thousands of an inch, but one
cannot help being somewhat sceptical of this feature at the present stage
of development.
30-4*05 Photoprint Process (Consolidated). This process starts with nitro-cellu-
lose lacquered lay-out plate having penoil lines identical with that used
for the Camera method. A glass negative is made of this master in a
vacuum reflex printing box. From this negative a print is made on sensi-
tised metal.
Since the glass negatives have to be of considerable size, 5* x 4*,
sheets of plate glass are given a coating of sensitised emulsion in the
photographic department of the Aircraft Company by the silk screen method.
These plates are cured in a dark room at 95°F* When the exposure ha 3 been
made on to the metal reproduction, the film is stripped from the glass
which can then be used for the next master.
Advantages. (a) Contact accuraoy.
(b) Reasonably rapid.
\
Disadvantages.(a) The process is a secret one, and supplies of sensitised
metal plate material can only be obtained from the
Photo-print Company in Los Angeles.
(b) High temperature necessary in the glass sensitising room
is a great embarrassment.
(c) Contrast between lines and background is not too good.
Cost Complete installation will probably cost from £1,750 to £2,500 and the
cost of reproductions work out at about 3/- per sq.foot.
30-4*06 Giobrite Prooc33. The master lay-out is made on a metal plate prepared
with ordinary template lacquer and a luminous paint known as Giobrite.
Pencil or ink lines are used for the image which is contact printed in a
vacuum frame, the source of light being the natural luminous effect of the
Giobrite lacquer.
Advantages are not very apparent.
Disadvantages.(a) Quality of image not good.
Giobrite lacquer expensive.
(c; Either master or reproduction ‘opposite hand‘.
Cost Equipment could probably represent £1,250. Cost of reproduction
4/9d per sq.foot. (4 ooats of Giobrite represent 3/- per sq.foot).


30-4*07 Hutchinson Process (Aircraft Industries Corp.). This is similar to the
Photoprint process. The image is drawn with pencil or ink upon drawing
paper which has previously been oemented to the lay-out plate. The nega-
tive is represented by a piece of plate glass to which has been cemented
sensitised paper. Contact exposure is made in a reflex vacuum box.
Positives are made from negatives on sheet metal material to which also has
been cemented the same type of sensitised paper.
Advantages. Doubtful.
Disadvantages. The paper surface both of the original and the reproduction
is vulnerable to damage and dirt.
Cost of equipment about £2,250. Cost of reproduction about 3/- per sq.foot.
3C-4.08 Qffset-Litho Process (Curtiss-Wright and Northrop). The lay-out sheets
are lacquered in the usual way and the image is scribed through on to the
metal. This plate is then inked over with the conventional printers'
roller. The lay-out plate and the plate which is to have the reproduction
are then placed in register on the table of a standard Wagner Offset-Litho
press. The rubber covered drum of the press is passed over the plates and
a negative image is transferred; this is then lacquered for protection.
More comprehensive equipment is available which automatically inks in the
original.
There are variations of this process, one of which uses sun acid
resisting ink whereby the lines can be etched in, for durability, on the
template.
The examples of this process which were examined at the Curtiss-Wright
plant had all information stamped on to the lay-out. These stamped letters
do not reproduce well and the copy usually has also to be stamped. This
is a tedious operation if several copies are required, and is one which
encourages errors.
Advantages, (a) Simplicity.
(b) Low cost.
Disadvantages (a) Image and data are sometimes of poor quality.
(b) It has been suggested that, due to the flexibility of the
rubber covered drum, the accuracy of reproduced image
cannot always be relied upon.
(c) The scribing of the lines is an extra operation.
Cost. The Equipment cost can vary appreciably according to the type of
machine chosen. This might be anywhere between £1,250 and £3,750. The
average cost of reproduction is 2/- per sq.foot.
CHAPTER 5 - CAMERA PROCEDURE
30-s*ol Description of Lanston Monotype Camera Equipment. This installation,
which represents a considerable advance over other apparatus for template
reproduction, was originally ordered by the Douglas Company.
This camera has a family resemblance to a smaller model which was
designed for general lithographic work. The main elements, i.e, negative,
lens and easel, are mounted on a 14 n dia. heavy gauge steel tube, which
takes bending and torsional loads. The whole structure is mounted from
above through a series of springs. Some companies use this equipment under
conditions ©f vibration, when this method of damping out such vibrations
is satisfactory. (Se© Figs,lo and 11).
In this design of camera, the negative is stationary, and is located
at the partition between the two dark rooms comprising the camera unit.
The lens and vacuum easel are mounted on electrically driven carriages.
These are operated by push button control on a stand which is portable and
can be located at any part of the dark room,. Although it is not practicable


LANSTON
MONOTYPE CAMERA
FIG. 10


Fig. 11. Lanston Monotype Camera.
to locate the lens and easel to such a high degree of accuracy, the dials
on the motor register to 0.001”.
In place of the Cooper Hewitt mercury vapour projection lamps, the
cameras ordered for this country will be fitted with a battery of Mazda
fluorescent lamps. This choice was diotated by a number of advantages which
the fluorescent tubes have, the most important of which is that they give
off considerably less heat and the negative does not experience minute
change of dimension.
Fie. 12. Front of vacuum easel.


Fig. 13. Back of vacuum easel.
Considerable flexibility is introduced into the vacuum easel board
which can accommodate without improvisation 24 sizes as quoted in the spec-
ification. With improvisation, it is considered that many more sizes
can be used, together with a maximum size plate of 12* x 6*. (See
Pigs.l2 & 13).
Most Monotype cameras are now working three 8-hour shifts per day.
About 25% of the work is to a scale other than 1 : 1.
3C-5.02 Specification for Lanston Monotype Camera. A detailed quotation and
specification for this equipment has been put to the British Ministry of
Supply Mission by the Lanston Monotype Macliine Company. A copy of this is
among the documents listed in the Appendix; an extract is quoted as it
gives a picture of the equipment involved:
One (1) PRECISION HiOTO TISMPLATu! CAiORA, with controls both
inside and outside darkroom, complete with all necessary provisions
for making negatives up to a maximum of 5* x 10 »; also equipped
with proper projection lighting attachment for projecting an image
on the sensitised template material; aluminium vacuum copyboard;
(6) Goerz Filter Frames; complete set of tools for'tramraeling and
calibrating cameras; Book of Instructions for Installation, Opera-
tion and Lubrication; packed for export shipment; Height of
camera 10* 4 W - Width at darkroom end 14* - Overall length 30*.
HtICE ,#17,146.00
EXTRA Um AMD SPARE PAR? EQUIPMENT : -
(l) jso ri Goerz Apo-Chroraat Len 5".".."."." $420.00
(l) B7SC2 Lens Plate 20.00
(17) 44SC1 Lamps, GE Mazda Type F (photo-
graphic Blue) Jsfi each 16.85
(17) 445G40 Lamps, G-E Mazda Type F (Ultra
Violet) @ 1.03 18. 85
(1) X3SC7O Speed Device 150.00
(2) ‘X3SC97 Counters Q 511.50 each - 23.00
(2) 445C4 1/8” x 40” x 45" Flash Opal
Glass ® $12.30 25.00
(3) 3SCI9 Clamping Springs 3 75j£ each 2.25
C/F:


b/F:
(200) feet 405C31 1/4" x 1/4" Sponge Rubber
7i/ P er ft .with Pint Gan Speoial
Cement 15*60
(4) 6273 Springs for Cable Supports 10/ each ,40
(12) 445C7 Starters for Light Tubes (3 30/ each 3*60
(2) N 0.5 Speoial Packard Shutters //13*25 26.50
{l) Transformer 100,00 824.30
This is essential for use in transforming the British Grid System of
230 v, AC, 50 Cycle Current to 110 V, 50 Cycle Current required on the
Timer, Camera Drive Motors, Control Valves for application of vacuum
to the platen and Projection Light Source, particularly since fluore-
scent lighting is to be used. The vacuum pump motor would be fur-
nished for use on 230 V, 50 Cycle Current, but we must have the phase
information, whether 2,3, or 4 wire, and this you can fbmish within
six weeks after date of order without holding up construction of
equipment.
MACBETH ARC LAMP EQUIPMENT:-
(l) Complete double deck set of four double arc,
45 ampere Airflow Photographic Camera Lamps, type 12b6,
equipped with HE controls (transformers) and
standard 19 ft. pendants to travel with copyboard,
packed for export shipment j5 1395*00
(1) Exhaust Unit for type 1286-OSPI6 double deck
sets complete with asbestos-packed flexible
metallic tubing with air connections and ball-
bearing pipe carrying arms 260.00
(1000) 5/8” x 12” White Flame Carbons 152.00
SPARE PARTS (Arc Lamps)
18) No. 309 5/8" upper carbon holders @3* 50 ,023.00
4) No. 310 5/8" lower carbon holders @ 3*50 14*00
8) N 0.347 upper c.h.cables, 45 amp. @ .95 7»60
4; N 0.348 lower c.h.cables, 45 amp. @ .95 3*Bo
4) N 0.382 c.h. wrenches ® .25 1.00
1) No. 378 45 amp. solenoid & 9.00 9*oo 63.40 1,870.40
TOTAL F.O.B.FHILADELFHIA, H2NNA. NET $.9,840.70
DESCRIPTION OF MACBETH ARC LAMP EQUIPMENT;- The overhead trackage is
attached to ceiling "by brackets or rods. It is sturdy and rigid. Large
ball-bearing rollers over and under tracks maintain pendants in position.
No binding. Free rolling. Pendants are 2-1/2" square steel tubing to
guide the lamp carriers on the outside and enclose the weights inside for
safety.
Lamps are 12-inch trim. Carbons coaxially arranged (not at angles)
so that arc is at focal point of reflector and at some distance from back
and sides of reflector at all times to promote evenness of light. Lamps
tilt upward and downward as desired, mounted in fork on double hinges v
that permit lamps to be swung in toward or away from the centre of copy.
Airflow features: Lamp sides and ends are tightly enclosed with
outlet at the top through which hot air, dust, and gases are removed.
Controls are transformers so constructed that arcs are always equal.
Controls provide 45 amperes at the arcs and draw only 30 amperes from the
service line for each pair of lamps.
Attached set of blueprints shows the erection of the lamp with over-
head trackage and exhaust unit.
The necessary N 0.6 2-conductor rubber covered cable will have to be
purchased in England after length required is known.


TEMELATJS SIZSS:
12" x 18" 18" x 24" 24" x 36" 36" x 48" 60" x 96"
12" x 30" 18" x 36" 24" x 48" 36" x 120" 60" x 120"
12" x 48" 18" x 48" 24" x 96"
18" x 72" 48" x 60" 24" x 72"
18" x 96" 48" x 96" 36" x 72"
48" x 120" 48" x 72"
60" x 72"
30-5*03 Lay-out of Camera and Processing Rooms. During the Mission's tour, a
number of representative plans of photographic departments were seen, and
their arrangement was carefully observed.
When considering the efficiency of these camera departments, much will
depend on the lay-out, and the following points should be noted:-
(a) A minimum width of 26 ft, should be given to the camera room; this
width, however, is not neoessafy behind the negative. If a silver
solder pencil line is used on the layout plates, this width is
important so that reflection on the lines can be avoided.
(b) The combined length of the two oaraera rooms should be 40 -45 ft.
This leaves a few feet behind the easel board for benches the full
width of the room, for general purpose work, (See Pigs. 14,15 & 16).
The whole camera department should have a floor area between 3,500 and
4,000 sq.feet. The Boeing plant at Seattle, which handles a very great
volume of photographic work, has an area of 4,200 sq.feet for their. Mono-
type equipment, processing and storage rooms. At another Boeing factory,
6,800 sq.feet has been reserved for the department.
Light traps should be given careful consideration. At North
American, light traps with two doors are installed between all rooms of the
department; the two doors are electrically interconnected, so that only
one can be opened at a time.
Indirect red or yellow light is preferable to a conoentrated beam.
It is necessary, therefore, to distemper or enamel the walls and ceilings
of the photographic department a light colour. Inside light traps should,
of oourse, be painted a matt black.
In the template processing room, there seemed to be a divided opinion
in regard to the relative merits of horizontal or vertical tanks; there is,
however, a bias in favour of vertical. In making a decision, much will
depend on the quality and quantity of work to be handled.
Economy of processing liquids appears to be in favour of vertical
tanks. A figure given by Boeings was that horizontal tanks require re-
plenishing roughly every four days, while the solutions in vertical tanks
will last five weeks. It must be remembered, however, that the latter con-
tain very much more liquid, so that the economy is in nothing like that
proportion.
Generally speaking, the advantages of the vertical tanks are as
follows
(a) Less oxidisation. Tanks generally constructed of wood, there-
fore no electrolytic action.
(b) Settlement of impurities.
(o) Considerably less floor area required.
(d) Two or more plates can be in hypo bath at the same time.
Since the processing time in hypo is about five minutes, point (d) is
quite important. If camera is used to full oapacity and horfeontal tanks
were used, there would have to be two or more hypo tanks which would take
up a considerable floor area.


Fig. 14. Layout of camera and processing rooms.
Fig. 15. Making negative.
Fig. 16. Reproducing from negative.


Generally speaking,, iieavy plates are more easily handled vertically.
The liquid drains off rauoh quicker; in consequence, there is less contam-
ination of the various solutions.
■
Boeings use Eastman D. 72 developer which they make themselves.
It is important that there should he a fall on the processing room
floors. Corrugated asphalt can conveniently carry any liquid away to a
gutter either at the side of the room or to a gulley in the oentre under-
neath the tanks. This point is ©f some importance, since many departments
have been seen in America where this point has been forgotten, and the
dark room staff are forced to work under uncomfortable conditions.
If horizontal units are chosen, stainless steel ioonel tanks should be
used. It must be carefully noted that ioonel strip must be used for
welding the corners of these tarries, since if this is not done, corrosion
sets in. Even when these precautions are taken, electrolytic action
between the plate and the bath is noticeable, unless the two are insulated
from each other during immersion. The Douglas Company use a large number
of glass marbles at the bottom of the hypo tank to provide such insulation.
There should, of course, be a fall on the bottom of horizontal tanks to a
drain fitted with the usual plug.
A necessary accessory in the photographic department is a negative
examination and re-touching frame. This can be arranged to hold the
negative in a horizontal position, floodlighting shining through an opal
screen from the bottom. Lighting can be from a battery of Mazda
fluorescent tubes.
Instead of the more conventional Macbeth oarbon arc or mercury vapour
flood lights, Glenn L.Martin are using a travelling vertical bar of light
about 2 n wide. They claim that the light intensity is more uniform, and
there is considerable saving in current consumption. The speed of passage
of the bar regulates the exposure.
In the last few years, Lockheed have accumulated 5,000 negatives.
Consumption of Eastman Kodak Matt Transfer Film, (X-ray process), on
‘Mustang* and 'Mitchell* aircraft was 100,000 sq.feet per year.
30-5*04 Light Sensitive Emulsions on Metal Plates. In America, the sensitised
film for the coating of metal is probably the weakest link in the photo
reproduction chain. Four different materials are available, as followsj-
(1) Eastman Kodak matt transfer film.
(2) Hammer sprayed emulsion.
(3) Agfa sprayed emulsion.
/
(4) Glenn L. Mart in 'swobbed* emulsion.
Generally speaking, the matt transfer film is likely to be the best
although further development is needed. It has the advantage over the
other processes that the characteristics of the emulsion film are
reasonably constant, and exposure and development are, therefore, more of
a routine operation. (See Fig.l7).
The sprayed emulsions, although being used to some considerable ex-
tent, have to be maintained at a low temperature from the time when they
leave the factory until use. In England, this would be a great disad-
vantage. Also,due to the varying thickness of the film when sprayed,
the exposure and development characteristics vary. There has also been
a suggestion that the spraying operation is slightly toxic.
The Glenn L. Martin 'swobbed* emulsion has been developed and is made
up by that factory. It is cheap and reasonably satisfactory. This
emulsion does not have to be maintained at a low temperature.


One criticism of the Eastman Kodak matt transfer film is that the use
of methyl alcohol in the laminating process is disliked by the operators,
since it is slightly toxio. Kodaks in America are experimenting with
other solvents.
Fig. 17. Laminating matt transfer film.
305*05 Leases. The question of lenses is obviously an important one with the
camera process.
When in New York, the firms of Carl Zeiss Incorporated and Goerz
American Optical Go. were visited, and a number of interesting points in
connection with large focal lengths process lenses came to light.
The two lenses which would probably be used for the Monotype camera
arej-
(a) Zeiss "Apo Tessar", 7.5 cm. barrel, 29.5’* F.L. Price, New York,
without tax, $7OO.
(b) Goerz Apochromat, "Artar", Anastigraat f12.5>30" F.L. Price, New
York, without tax s+2o.
Since the Goerz lenses are actually manufactured in New York, whereas
the Zeiss lenses are imported from Germany in peace-time, the decision to
use Goerz lenses in England was a foregone conclusion. The Zeiss lens has
one further disadvantage in that the arrangement is not a symmetrical
combination; this would encourage distorsion of the field.
It was, therefore, arranged that the contract for the two Monotype
cameras should specify two 30” F.L. Goerz lenses as above for each camera,
all four lenses to be matched at the Bureau of Standards in Yfashington.


Throughout the tour, a certain amount of anxiety was felt as to what
would happen to an accumulation of important negatives if the lens with
which these negatives were taken suffered damage. None of the aircraft
firms, nor the lens nor camera companies would express an opinion as to
whether a duplicate lens to the same specification would give a repro-
duction accurate throughout the field within the required tolerance.
However, during a visit to Glenn L. Martin at the end of the tour,
this question was very adequately answered by the Martin executive who
demonstrated the routine of interchanging a range of lenses of
different focal lengths and manufacture, without any hesitation. Martin
go so far as to say that the use of a range of lenses of different focal
lengths introduces an important advantage to the process, and although most
of their negatives are taken with a 30" lens, quite a large percentage of
their reproduction is carried out with a 16" or a 24 M focal length lens.
30-5*06 Camera Accuracy. The tolerance to which most of the aircraft companies
work is, generally speaking, + 0.001" .per foot. This degree of accuracy
does not appear to impose any great strain on the photographic department,
if a Lanston Monotype camera is used, sinoe rejections,due to this cause,
vary between 2 - ss,which is not considered unreasonable. Concessions
slightly above this tolerance are sometimes permitted on parts or compo-
nents where extreme accuracy is not essential.
Generally speaking, temperature corrections are not introduced. It
is considered that when all the items of equipment etc. are made of steel,
it can safely be assumed that such corrections are unnecessary.
For those, however, who wish to use an aluminium or duralumin master
lay-out plate, which subsequently has to be reproduced on steel, it is
advisable to introduce a temperature correction. In this case, a record
is kept of the temperature at which the grid system or target points are
scribed; it is then quite easy to introduce a correction to the scale of
reproduction. The rev. counters on the motor focussing gear for the lens
and easel are given a few extra turns according to a chart.
It must be noted, in passing, that although such corrections represent
one extra operation, they are not difficult to introduce; the Monotype
camera does have a considerable advantage in this respect, in being
capable of dealing easily with such corrections.
With contact processes, unless the temperature is the same when the
grid lines are scribed as when the reproduction is made, it is not possible
to introduce such corrections.
It is the standard practice in America to take all negatives 1/5 full
size. This is slightly on the small side if contact prints from the nega-
tive are being used for record purposes.
In England, it may be that a standard of 1/4 full size will be estab-
lished in order that contact prints may be used.
3C-s*o? Camera Reproduction Flood Limits. It will be notioed in the specifica-
tion of the Lanston Monotype Camera that the installation includes the
Macbeth ventilated carbon arc flood lights. This is the standard equipment
in America. Time will show whether this is superior to the mercury y&pour
arc lamps now being used in this country.
Considerable advantage has been achieved by using reflected light
from these lamps. At the Douglas Co., the flood lamps point away from the
easel on to white distempered screens which, being hinged, can be adjusted
to give optimum light distribution.
3C-s*oB Storage of Class Negatives. This presents considerably less difficulty
than was expected. The usual arrangement is to have racks which Jjave
grooved compartments, each carrying 4-6 negatives. The height of these
racks registers with the small dimension of the standard negatives.


It is important that some means should be introduced of eliminating
dust from the negative storage room. If no better method is available,
an extractor fan with felt filter would probably serve. The cabinets can
conveniently have dust excluding doors, but this is not really necessary
if other precautions have been taken.
Certain companies store their negatives in paper envelopes. This
again does not appear to be necessary, and although it reduces the chance
of scratching and possible fracture, it makes the general handling a
slightly longer procedure.
In the oase of the Douglas storage scheme, the vertical edges of the
negatives are, to within 3/8" of the top and bottom, bound with trans-
parent tape. This reduces the chance of scratching and gives the
operator a grip. Each negative has its own label similar to that in &
card index.
The negative filing room in the Douglas factory has 200 sq.feet floor
area.
The breakage of negatives does not appear to present any problem;
firstly, breakages very rarely occur,
and if they do, new ones can easily
be made from the master lay-out which
is not destroyed.
9
3C-5*09 Eastman Reoordak Micro Film. An
opportunity was taken when in New York
of visiting the Eastman Reoordak
Corp., to investigate the equipment
which this Company supplies.
Any drawing up to a maximum
size of 52" x 37" can have a 35 m/m
film taken and rapidly processed.
These negatives give a sharp re-
production up to the same size as
the original.
The process is particularly
interesting for duplicating & set
of drawings against the hazard
or bombing. A pamphlet con-
taining fullest particulars is
available. (See Fig.lB)
Fig. 18. Eastman Recordak equipment.
3C-5.10 An example of oost Saved by Camera. As has been stated, the Douglas
Company were the first to co-operate with the Lanston Monotype Machine Go.,
in the development of the special aircraft camera to which we have
referred.
immediately the camera was installed at Santa Monica, it became
necessary to scale down from a set
of full size lines of the 8.19,
(one of the biggest machines exist
ing), a set of geometrically
similar lines to the scales of a
series of wind tunnel models.
This was the first work which the
oamera performed, and Mr. Douglas
wrote to the Monotype Co., stating
that the Drawing Office labour
sawed by introducing the photo-
graphic method of reduction
instead of the usual re-drawing,
had justified itself by saving a
oost equal to that of the camera
equipment. (See Fig.l9).
Fig.l9. Wind tunnel models
at Douglas.


30-3*ll Transfer of liberator* Lines at Willow Run Plant. An interesting
example of how, in an emergency, the camera can be made to assist, is
shown by an experience of the Ford Co., who are building 'Liberator'
aircraft on a mass-production scale.
The lines of this machine had been laid out on a lofting floor with
exceptional care. - These lines had been insured for the sum of $160,000.
At a later date, it became expedient to obtain a precise copy of these
lines for another plant which was to build this machine.
* ' "v
The lofting room had only a head-room of about 8 feet, and it was
considered unwise to lift the plates from the floor and risk disturbing
their register.
Eastman Kodak were approached and asked if they could photograph
the. lines with a high degree of accuracy. This was finally carried out
by making a mosaic of a large number of photographs taken by a vertical
camera within the height of the building. Since the floor was uneven,
each individual plate, upon which had been plotted four target points,
required correction for scale and obliquity. The whole work was carried
out quickly and at nominal cost compared with the original.
CHAPTER 6 - MISCELLANEOUS
3C-6.01 Bell Production Technique. The Mission thinks very highly of the tech-
nique developed by the Bell organisation at their Buffalo x^lants.
The history of this Company is interesting, since an exceptional
expansion has occurred in the last two years. Up to that time, the
entire aircraft output of the Company had only been 17 machines. Now
their production methods compare very favourably with the best in America.
Since this achievement has been made largely as a result of a correct
appreciation of accuracy in lay-out methods, it would seem profitable to
deal briefly with the manner in which they have used this new process to
stimulate production.
In actual fact, their lofting or lay-out methods are relatively
primitive, and it is not so much with the manner in which they use this
process that we are concerned. These somewhat primitive methods are ex-
tremely precise, and it is this high degree of precision that has made it
possible for them to carry out the ambitious programme of fabricating 80$
of the metal plate work throughout the airframe as press tool punched
units complete with rivet holes punched. Thi3 means that two adj&oent
plates have to have the two lines of rivet holes registering very accurately
indeed.
Figure 20 shows diagrammatically the arrangement of the die for punching
Fig. 20. Die for punching rivet holes.


out plates up to 12 ft, x 4 ft., complete with rivet holes, 135 men in
tool room make these dies and this number could make all the dies for a
fighter aircraft in eight months. This work would involve 7*ooo - 8,000
complete dies. 50 plates of the largest size can be punched out in one
hour.
It will be obvious that such precise work can only have been
achieved by a method of lay-out which was very exact.
Regarding their lay-out method, this is in most cases the simple
process of scribing the lines of a template direct on to the metal from
which the template is to be cut. The general lines of the machine are
scribed on a lofting floor which is covered with battleship linoleum.
It is likely that thege methods will be reviewed in the near future, and
already this company is putting in some more elaborate equipment for tem-
plate reproduction.
30-6.02 Modification Procedure. Although the introduction of metal drafting
and photo-reproduction has partially revolutionised design technique, the
changes to modification procedure have not been so great. The basic
principles have remained, and it is more in the smaller detail where the
routine has required change.
\
It must be appreciated that a large number of trivial and
irritating amendments to drawings have now been eliminated,since Drawing
Office errors hive been reduced, due to more care in lay-out and the
natural check which the method provides. •
Small modifications may be handled direct by the metal drafting
department, with a covering signature from Design. More extensive changes
must be the subject of a well considered drawing, checked, stressed etc.
This routine is the same as the issue of prototype design information.
There are many ramifications, and in America, no two companies have the
same routine.
' \
Sometimes the master lay-out is modified; there is always the nega-
tive to record the plate in its original form. On other occasions, a
photo reproduction is modified, keeping the master unchanged. There is no
difficulty in superimposing a pencil correction on an Eastman M.T.F. copy;
the emulsion can either be removed by erasing or by the use of a solvent.
The bare undercoating of lacquer-will then take a clean pencil line.
The Lofting Manuals referred to in the Appendix deal in detail with
Modification procedure.
30-6.03 Walt Disney Educational Films. When in California, the Mission was given
tiie opportunity "of viewing a series of educational films produced for the
Navy by the Walt Disney studios. The films so far produced occupied a
projection period of about three hours. They covered a wide range of *
production topics and were extremely instructive.
It so happens that the many of the processes of lofting photographic
and lithographic reproduction, etc., occupy a considerable proportion of
this three hours, and much benefit can, therefore, be derived by persons
interested in these subjects.
The Mission has brought back a set of these films from America,
together with copies of 12 descriptive manuals which amplify these films.
30-6.04 Documents. Yftiile in America, a number of documents dealing with the
subject under review was collected. This information is contained in
Engineering and Lofting manuals, reports, pamphlets, catalogues etc.
Only a very small proportion of the data given in these documents can be
included in this report, and it is, therefore, hoped that all persons and
departments interested will make a point of inspecting these, which are
listed in the Appendix. .
Various opportunities will be arranged by the Mission to give the
industry an opportunity of using this information to the fullest possible
advantage.


APPEND IX - LIET OF DOCUMENTSETC. FROM AMERICA.
Item Mo. Description
1 "Drafting .loom Manual" : Boeing Aircraft Company
S
2 "Engineering Manual" : Curtiss-Aright Corporation
3 "Engineering Manual” : Curt iss-7right Corporation
4 "Loft Manual" : North American Aviation Inc,
5 "Engineering Manual" : Curtiss-'.'/right Corporation
6 "Engineering Manual" : Curtiss-v/right Corporation
7 "Brief Outline of Engineering Procedure" : North American
Aviation Inc,
8 "Engineering Loft Manual" Consolidated Aircraft
Corporation
9 "Ilathematical Development of the Second-Degree Curve" :
North American -lireraft Inc.
10 "Drafting Doom JAnual" : Lockheed Aircraft Inc.
11 "Loft Handbook" : Lockheed Aircraft Inc.
12 Miscellaneous Photographs
13 Miscellaneous samples of images reproduced on metal
14 "reproduction of Drawings and Templates with Eastman
Matt Transfer Paper" : Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester,
New York
15 "Electro Zlncbona Sheets" : Republic Steel Corp.,
Cleveland, Ohio.
16 "Patent Plan" : Consolidated Aircraft Corp.
17 "Draftin .; Hoorn Manual" : Bell Aircraft Corp.
18 "Photo Process Manual" : Douglas Aircraft Co. Inc.
19 "Engineering M:eleases of Bales Orders etc." :
Curtiss-V/right Corporation
20 ’Visual Production Training" : Bell Aircraft Corp.
21 "Analysis of D.A.T. Reproduction Processes" : C.a.Keys,
Vega Aircraft Corp.
22 Various short lie ports on Metal Drafting and X-Ray
Reproduction : North American Aviation, Inc.
23 "Lofting Problems of Streamline Bodies" : Carter
M. Hartley, North American Inc.
24 "The Pies* Electrolytic Transfer System" : Vega
Aircraft Corp.
25 "Electrolytic Etching in Aircraft Tooling" :
Northrop Aircraft Inc.
26 "Precision Photoprint Process" ; Photoprint Company.


Item No, Description
27 "Micro-Filming" : He cor dak Corp*
28 "Outline of Classes for Loft Training School"
29 I.Miscellaneous Pamphlets of Rutherford Machinery Co*
30 "Masonite Die Stock" : Masonite Corporation
31 "Dimensional Integrity: Reduction of non-standard
Assembly Operations" : Lockheed Aircraft Corp*
32 Drawing of "Truck ’A 1 Type for Sheet Stock" : Boeing
Aircraft Co*
33 Invention Agreement : Consolidated Aircraft Corp.
34 "Mould Loft" : Bell Aircraft Corp*
35 "Job Specification - Template Filer" : Bell Aircraft Co.
♦
36 "List of Equipment and Supplies required for a
Photoprinting Department" : Consolidated Aircraft Corp.
37 "Methods of Template Reproduction" ; Clarence 0* Prest,
Consolidated Aircraft Corp*
*
38 "Quotation and Specification for Lanston Monotype
Camera" : copy of letter from Lanston Monotype Machine
Company to British Ministry of Supply Mission*




AIRCRAFT DESIGN
PART D SELF SEALING FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS & FUEL HOSE
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD CONCLUSIONS
Item 1.01 General
” 1.02 Exchange of information
CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL SUMMARY
Item 2.01 Previous reports
w 2.02 Fuel tanks
" 2.03 Oil tanks
*' 2.04 Hose
CHAPTER 3 - FUEL TANKS - AMERICAN PRACTICE
Item 3.01 Current protections
n 3*02 Recent developments
w 3*03 Slushing
” 3«04 Materials
” 3*05 Seams and formers
3.06 Tests during manufacture
” 3.07 Weights and thicknesses
*' 3*oB Performance
" 3.09 Inspection and identification
n 3.10 Installation in aircraft
" 3.11 General
n 3.12 Examples of design
CHAPTER - H33E - AMERICAN PRACTICE
Item 4.01 Materials
w 4.02 Comparison with British and German practice
" 4*03 Performance and test procedure
M 4.04 Yfeights and thicknesses
M 4.05 Inspection and identification
" 4.06 End fittings and pipe supply
'* 4.07 General




PART D SELF SEALING FUEL TANKS, OIL TANKS & FUEL HOSE
CHAPTER 1 - BROAD CONCLUSIONS
3D-1.01 General. American practice in tank design has developed along
different lines to British; the Brarason cellular fuel tank prin-
ciple not having “been favoured and self-sealing of oil tanks
being in the early stages only. American hose has certain
advantages, particularly in the use of fabric reinforcement and
in simplicity of end fixings. The American lines of development
have certain merits, but no change of British policy can be
recommended at the moment.
3D-1.02 Exchange of Information. The Mission find that there has not
been a full exchange of information on this subject; this
should be arranged so that each country may benefit by the other*s
experience and ideas* It was stated at the conference between
the Mission, the industry and the M.A.P. on April 30th that the
British Air Commission reports referred to in 2.01 below are not
available to the industry. That such a statement can be made
emphasizes the need for a Teohnical Records Department of M.A.P.,
which would ensure that reports such as these were immediately
forwarded to those interested, and that requests for information
from either side were met.




CHAPTER 2 - TECHNICAL SUMMARY
3D-2.01 Previous Report s* Before the Mission left Britain, it was known that
Mr* Ernest Jones of the British Air Commission, an expert on rubber
processes, was concentrating on this subject. On reaching America it was
found that Mr* Jones was in close touch with all interested parties *>pd
also that two comprehensive reports B.A.C. Report N0*.5119/11-3/EJ
dated 10th November, 1941 and a second report ref; 11-3 dated January 1943*
The latest Amy and Navy specifications, N 0.28419-0, Anendment No* 2, dated
7th January 1943 on self-sealing fuel tanks, and No* AN-Z2-H-456a, Amendment
No*l, dated 3rd July 1942, on hose, were also available. Certain informa-
tion in this report is based on these sources.
311—2*02 Fuel Tanks. Chapter 3 deals with self-sealing fuel tanks for
operational aircraft. The performance and construction of British and
German tanks are referred to from time to time, in order to provide a
comparison in cases where the same working principle has been put into
execution in accordance with the particular technique of the countries
concerned*
The stages of development of the self-sealing fuel tank in America
have resembled those in other countries, in that they have taken place in
three major steps: -
(1) Existing metal tanks, of whatever design, covered, where possible,
with layers of self—sealing materials cemented together and to
the outside of the tank.
(2) Flexible bags, made of petrol-resisting treated fabric with self-
sealing protection, housed in existing tank bays which have
been reinforced to take the differently disposed load.
(3) Flexible bags, rendered semi-rigid by the external application
of multiply fabric treated with resin* These semi-rigid tanks
require less structural modification to the tank bay, and the
presence of the non-roetallic sheet next to the self-sealing
layers minimises the risk of damage from fragments of the
supporting structure being added to the damage from the bullet
itself*
Both Great Britain and Germany have encountered stages (1) and (2);
it being generally agreed that a flexible bag of correct design will show
superiority over a metal tank with equivalent weight and thickness of
self-sealing protection. For protection against bullets of *5 in. diameter
and over, the flexible tank can be regarded as entirely superseding the
metal tank.
It is interesting to speculate that the German self-sealing tank, in
quantity production in 1939* with its fibre skin and uncured rubber sealant,
must have been a development from the metal tank with the same self-sealing
covering. The substitution of fibre for metal, while presumably designed
to overcome damage to the sealing layers from jagged edges of the metal
tank skin, in some part anticipated the latest American design of semi-rigid
tank with non-metallic outer reinforcement. The internal stiffening
structure of the German tank, however, precluded its functioning as a truly
flexible or semi-rigid tank, and this deficiency is reflected in later German
tanks which conform to conventional design for flexible bags housed in
modified tank bays.
Y/ith few exceptions, chiefly on fighters, American operational aircraft
in current use have been designed or modified to employ flexible bag tanks
with self—sealing protections* In cases, such as the Hudson, where machines
were originally designed as civil types, the existing tanks have had to be
protected by the external application of a protective covering*
It is noteworthy that whereas American aircraft have for some time been
equipped with flexible tanks for protection against *3 in. and possibly
.5 in. ammunition, the equivalent British aircraft have employed metal tanks
protected against gunfire of similar calibre. In Europe the flexible tank
has only been introduced as a protection against 20 mm* ammunition.


In fairness to designers, it may be added that British self-sealing
coverings for metal tanks have provided extremely good protection against
• 303 in. and *5 in. ammunition, and that production interests in this
country were not prepared to face up to the considerable design modifica-
tions necessary to effect the change-over from metal to flexible
installat ions.
3D-2.03 Oil Tankso Very few American airoraft possess self-sealing oil tanks,
owing to the small size of these rendering them very vulnerable to
hydraulic shock^wave.
A list of current operational types, with details of protected oil
tanks l is given below;-
BOSTON Internal bag in integral wing tanks. Neoprene inner lining,
crude sealant, leather outer covering. Mads by the
U.S. Rubber Co.
BUFFALO Metal tank with external Linatex and leather protection.
HUDSON Nacelle tanks, covered with Linatex and fabric.
KITTYHAWK Tank behind fire-wall, covered with Linatex and leather,
except for lease-lend aircraft.
TOMAHAWK Tank behind pilot*s seat, covered with Linatex and leather.
VENGEANCE Internal bags in tanks in front of fire-wall. Hycar inner
lining, semi-crude sealant, and vulcanised rubber outer
covering.
The Goodyear Company are developing a special internal bag, using a
combination of crude and vulcanised rubber layers, with a Chemigura lining.
The same difficulties are being experienced in America as in England,
although the Americans are the first to use flexible oil tanks in place of
metal tanks with self-sealing covering.
3D-2. 04 Hose. Chapter 4is concerned with the characteristics of American
flexible self-sealing hose for conveying fuel, coolant, or oil. For purposes
of comparison, brief reference is made to British and German procedure.
Up till November 1942, self-sealing fuel pipes were not generally
installed on American aircraft. Experimental types had been produced, but
their limited installation had to be scrapped at the advent of aromatic
fuels.
CHAPTER 3 - FUEL TANKS - AMERICAN PRACTICE.
38-3.01 Current Protections. The chief American manufacturers of self-sealing
tanks are Goodrich, Goodyear, Firestone, and U.S. Rubber Co. Particulars
of the types of construction supplied by each firm, together with details
of American aircraft fitted with the respective makes are contained in the
two reports by Mr. Ernest Jones, of the 8.A.C., Washington, dated
November 1941, and Januaiy 1943*
Operational American aircraft at present in use employ various types
of self-sealing fuel tanks, as follows:-
(1) Metal tanks with external self-sealing protection cemented on.
Examples: Martlet and Tomahawk, with Goodrich covering.
(2) Metal tanks, themselves fuel-tight, with self-sealing bags
inserted. Example: Chesapeake.


(3) Integral tanks, themselves fuel-tight, with self-sealing
covering, such as Linatex and U.S. Rubber Go*, cemented and
clamped to outer surface. Examples: Buffalo and Hudson with
Linatex, Maryland with U.S. Rubber Co*
(4) Self-sealing bags fitted into existing fuel-tight integral tanks
with additional supporting structure. Example: Catalina.
(5) Integral tanks, themselves petrol-tight, with self-sealing bags
inserted* The aircraft capable of being flown on integral
tanks with bags removed. Example: Liberator.
(6) Self-sealing bags, supported wholly or partly by a -g" thiak
plywood lining to the tank bay. Example: Airacobra.
(?) Self-sealing bags, supported wholly or partly by a thin
(approximately 18 G) sheet-metal lining to the tank bay.
Example: Catalina.
(8) Self-sealing bags, supported in a thick sheet-metal (approx-
imately 12 G) casing. Example: Fortress.
(9) Self-sealing bags, with light internal stiffening of fibre,
supported by 1/16 in* synthetic sheets fastened to top-hat
sections on bottom surface of the wing bay. Air space round
tank filled with light sponge rubber to minimise fire risk.
Example: Mustang.
(10) Self-sealing bags, rendered semi-rigid by a sheet of synthetic
material 3/32 in. think cemented on the outside. The resultant
tank is secured in the wing bay by means of flanges.
Example: Ventura.
The examples referred to above are current operational types, whose
tanks have an estimated or proved Self-sealing performance against 0.3 to
0.5 in. ammunition.
3D-3*02 Recent Developments. The introduction of aromatic fuels, and the necess-
ity for providing protection against 20 mm. ammunition, have both been
responsible for the two main improvements which have been effected in the
construction of flexible fuel tanks. The improvements are as follows;
(1) Slushing of the interior of the tank with Fuller’s TL-284
compound or other approved equivalent.
(2) The use of a semi-rigid outer covering for flexible bags. This
outer covering is cemented to the outer layer of the self-sealing
protection and serves a dual purpose:-
(a) As an insulation for the protective covering against
interference from fragments and Ragged edges of the metal
aircraft structure.
(b) As a means of facilitating the installation of the tank in
its bay.
3D-3. 03 Slushing. There are three main circumstances under which slushing may
have to be carried out:-
(1) With tanks in position in tte aircraft with no access to the
interior of the tank except through filler orifice and drain
connection.
(2) As above, but with access panels available in the tank.
(3) With the tank removed from the aircraft.


In case (1). the slushing compound is poured into the tank via the
filler orifice, the aircraft being rocked to ensure that no air pockets
remain at the top of the tank* To avoid pin-holes due to bubbles, the
compound should be poured slowly through, or down the side of a tube.
After a suitable period (see note below) the compound is drained by
removal of the sump.
- - I 1 x
In case (2), the inspection covers are removed, and the interior of
the tank coated by brushing. Care is taken to coat the inner face of
inspection covers before replacing.
In case (3)» the tank is sealed at all points with the exception of
the filler cap. A quantity of the slushing compound, equal to approximate-
v ly 3/S> of the capacity of the tank is poured in via the filler, and the cap
is then closed. The tank is then turned about all axes for about 5
minutes, so as to allow the compound t-o flow over all internal faces,
including metal fittings*
The following notes apply generally:
(1) The tank must be completely dried before slushing if fuel has
already been used.
(2) The interior should be wiped, if possible, with acetone, or.
similar solvent, to remove grease or residue.
(3) The viscosity of the slushing compound is important, as over-
thinning weakens the protective film, and too great a thickness
produces blisters and heavy streaks. The original density as
received from the manufacturers should be adhered to and checked
by a Vydrometer.
(4) The slushing compound, when applied otherwise than by brushing,
should remain in the tank for five or ten minutes before
draining off.
(3) Quantities of compound which have become trapped in pockets may be
removed with a suitable syringe.
(6) The interior of all metal parts should receive an adequate
coating.
(7) By the filling or swilling methods, two coats of compound should
be applied. The first coat must be quite diy before the second
is applied.
(8) Drying after slushing may be effected by a stream of air. This
stream should be slowed down so as to produce a change of air
every two or three minutes, ij’our hours is the normal drying
period, but this may vary with climatic conditions and with the
possibility of using a warm air stream.
(9) The area of tank wall with which the fuel contents gauge float may
come in contact should be protected with a heavy coat of
acryloid resin or equal, mixed with syo nitrocellulose clear
lacquer.
(10) As the compound remains tacky for a considerable period after drying,
cane must be taken to prevent interior surfaces making contact
if the talk has to be collapsed during insertion in the bay.
If this danger presents itself, the interior of the tank should
toe swabbed with clear engine oil just prior to installation.
3D-3.04 Materials. The material used for tank construction may be grouped as
follows:-


(1) Petrol-proof inner lining.
!2) Textiles for mechanical strength.
3) Impregnated textiles for rigidity.
4) Sealants.
5) Protective outer coatings against spilt petrol.
6) Cements.
7) Extra petrol-proofing.
The following are particulars of materials used for the purposes men-
tioned above:-
The petrol-proof inner lining is a synthetic rubber in sheet form,
approximately 0.045 in. thick, and is a polymer of butadiene/acrylic nitrile,
known under the trade names of Ameripol, Chemigum, Perhunan, and Hycar.
A further type is a copolymer of styrene and butadiene, known as Buna N,
which is sometimes compounded with acrylonitrile as a protection against
aromatic fuels.
The textiles used are chiefly rayon or tyre cord fabric, 0.030 in.
thick., or 21 oz. frictioned duck, 0.045 in. thick. Similar materials are
used in Great Britain for the same purpose.
Impregnated textiles used for rigidity consists of 3 or 4-ply resin
treated duck; each ply having a thickness of approximately one-sixteenth
of an inch. The layers are cured together by a heating process, sometimes
during application and sometimes before application.
With few exceptions, the sealant layers are of crude rubber, usually
-§ n thick and varying between 1/16 in. and 3/16 in. Two layers are normally
used, divided by an inter-layer of fabric. Fabric is also used both above
and below the sealant layers. Examples of exceptions to this rule are the
use of Linatex for the metal tanks of the Buffalo, and the use of sponge rubber
on the Fortress.
Protective outer coatings are proprietory synthetic resin finishes,
applied by brush or spray, and are known by names such as Korolac and
Vinylite. Buna is also used for this purpose.
Cements are either self-curing or heat-curing, and are generally
applied by brush. The heat-curing period varies, but separate layers are
cured for approximately 30 minutes at 120 degrees F. whilst the whole tank
is cured after completion for up to 3 hours at 260 degrees F. in a steam
oven. Where two or more coats of the same cement are applied, each coat
contains a distinctive dye to ensure completion of all operations. Where
dyes are thought to be harmful, a careful timecard check is used instead.
For extra petrol-proofing a Nylon solution, consisting of Nylon
in Iso-Propyl Alcohol, is frequently brushed on to the outside of the
petrol-resisting inner lining. This forms a petrol-re si sting skin between
the tank lining and the self-sealing layers.
3E-3.05 Seams and Formers. With the exception of crude rubber layers, which have
butt seams, closed with a stitch wheel, layers have overlapped seams.
Seams in successive layers are staggered, as in normal European practice®
In place of the collapsible wooden formers used in this country, metal
formers are normally used in America, with cardboard substituted when
material shortage demands. Plaster formers, which can be broken up for
removal j are also extensively used, notably by Goodyear.
3D-3.06 Tests During Manufacture. Tanks are inspected both during and after
manufacture. Pin-holes in the tank lining are avoided by calendering the
lining material into a 3-ply layer. An electrical device exists, details
of which are not obtainable, which can detect flaws in the tank lining
when thi3 first layer has been made up on its former.
Pressure tests are used, as in Great Britain; a wire cage being placed
round the tank to enable pressures as high as 4 lb. per sq.in. to be used.


Time card checks are used to ensure correct drying and curing times
for layers®
3D“3*07 heights and Thicknesses® Weights of tanks appear to be heavier than our
own, although thicknesses are generally lower in America than in England*
Both these discrepancies are accounted for by the fact that a thin layer
of crude rubber is used in America where we should normally use a thicker
layer of sponge rubber as a sealant*
For flexible tanks designed to seal against *5 in* ammunition, weights
vary betvfeen I*Bs and 2*07 lb* per sq.ft* For non-metallic semi rigid
tanks, designed to seal 20 mm. ammunition, weights vary between 2*75 18. per
sq*ft. and 3*65 lb* per sq.ft. The equivalent British tanks would weight
I*s lb* and 2*o lb* per sq.ft, respectively.
Thicknesses of American tanks are approximately as follows:-
Flexible bag for protection against .5 in* ammunition: 5/16 in.
Semi-rigid tank for protection against 20 mm. ammunition: 11/16 in.
Equivalent British thicknesses would be 7/16 in. and 5/8 in.
respectively.
3D-3.08 Performance. As previously mentioned, flexible tanks installed in American
aircraft are designed to seal against .3 in. and .5 in. ammunition. Tests in
this country on representative specimens of American tanks show that initial
sealing of the mechanical, crude rubber layers of sealant is good, but that
broadside (or tumbled) inlet or exit wounds which have a high initial rate
of leakage do not reduce this rate as would be the case if a sponge rubber
sealant were used.
In the case of non-metallic semi-rigid tanks, protection against
"untumbled" 20 mm. ammunition is claimed. British experience has shown
that a series of exit wounds with 20 mm. solid inert ammunition will produce a
high percentage of partial or full broadsides, and that these wounds, with
their accompanying increased hydraulic shock-wave, inflict very severe damage
to the self-sealing covering.
The interpretation, therefore, of the term "untunibled" is important if a
comparison between British and American tanks is to be made. Assuming that
"untumbled" means a straight entry and exit, there is no very high degree of
performance attained in sealing the resultant wounds. If, however, the term
refers to non-deflected entries, then a percentage of broadside or tumbled
exits may be assumed, and claims to provide self-sealing against the
resultant wounds may be regarded as an indication of extremely efficient
performance.
There is no exact 3ritish equivalent of the American semi-rigid tank,
but comparative British performance may be briefly stated as providing
satisfactory sealing against 20 mm. half-broadside exits, with a fair measure
of sealing against fully-broadside exits. No success has so far been
obtained against broadside entries of 20 ram. solid ammunition.
The most characteristic feature of American tank performance: the
fairly good initial seal with no subsequent improvement, has probably been
obtained through the influence of the American policy of guarding against
the fire hazard rather than against loss of fuel. Since most fires
originate from a burst of machine-gun fire, it is apparent that the fire is
started by an incendiaiy bullet which .ignites the stream of petrol issuing
from the hole made by the preceding ball and armour-piercing bullets. From
the point of view of fire hazard, therefore, an immediate seal is important,
as even if the first burst of fire does not set light to the tank, a second
burst, some minutes later, may ignite the petrol vapour which has accumulated
in the tank bay while a sponge rubber layer has been closing a rapid initial
leak.


The difference in weight and thickness between British and American,
tanks must be taken into account when comparing performance, but there
again, in the absence of strictly comparative tests, these factors should
not be regarded as indicating a directly proportional superiority in
performance on either part#
3D-3*09 Inspection and Identification# Complete details of inspection of fuel
tanks, before and after installation, are contained in Amendment No# 2 to
U.S. Amy Spec. N0.28419-C*
P v
As regards the service life of American non-metallic tanks, this is
reckoned as being 4 to 6 months with aromatic fuels, with a maximum life of
Bto 12 months# After this period, tanks may be retained in service only
after a very thorough inspection and re slushing of the interior. There is
at present no specified limit to the service life of British flexible tanks,
but the duration of approval flight trials is 3 months, and certain tanks
have completed,longer periods without showing the slightest sign of
deterioration of the petrol-proof lining.
✓
Lead shot tests, to reproduce 5*5 g., on a semi-rigid tank for a
Portress showed no appreciable sagging# The shape of the Portress tank,
however, being long and narrow, would not impose such a test of rigidity
as would the inboard tank of the Lancaster, which has a minimum span of 6 ft
and a capacity of approximately 600 gallons.
In order to distinguish between tanks which are suitable or unsuitable
for aromatic fuels, a system of identification marks has been standardised,
as follows:-
(1) Por slushed tanks, broken red line is painted on the exterior
aircraft structure adjacent to the filler cap, with the words %
"Slushed for aromatic fuels", with the date.
\
(2) Aromatic resistant tanks are indicated by a solid red line
painted on the adjacent exterior aircraft structure, with
the words "suitable for aromatic fuels", with the date.
This information is also marked on the tank proper.
(3) Tanks not suitable for aromatic fuels, are indicated by the words,
"not suitable for aromatic fuels"# No date is added#
3D-3* 10 Installation in Aircraft. In the section of this report headed "Current
Protections", reference is made to the different methods of installing fuel
tanks in aircraft#
To summarise the types already referred to, it may be stated that
rigid metal tanks, with external protection, are installed as they would
have been had no covering been applied, whereas the flexible tank requires
some structural modification to the aircraft in order to provide for the
fact that no securing straps can be used round the tank and the weight of
fuel in the tank must now be distributed over a wide area#
An inner lining to the tank bay is the most successful method of
strengthening and insulating the aircraft structure against the effects of
hydraulic shock-wave# As against the European method of providing a thin
sheet-metal inner skin, the latest American practice is to use a ■§■ in#
thick sheet of synthetic material such as Plioform. This sheet is lightly
attached to the tank bay stiffeners for registration, and is practically
floating. As previously mentioned, the use of this non-metallic sheet next
to the tank gives the covering every advantage in performing its self-
sealing function#
Stressing of the structure supporting the tank is not carried to 9 g.
as in England, but is to the more usual sg. or thereabouts. The addition
of the semi-floating, non-metallic inner lining to the tank bay may,
however, add some additional capacity to withstand shock-wave#
The clearance between the empty tank and the inner tank bay wall is
usually -g- in# _


Tank bays are not deliberately ventilated, as the very low rate of
permeability allowed is regarded as precluding the possibility of accumu-
lation of fuel in the covering or tank bay, provided the bay has any
capacity to breathe at all.
Even with so-called flexible tanks, as in England, only the slightest
amount of folding or collapsing is permitted during insertion in the tank
bay. This distortion is avoided whenever possible, partly to avoid mechani-
cal damage to the tank and partly to prevent inner surfaces sticking
together while the tank is still tacky after slushing.
3D-3.11 General. Jettisoning valves have been discarded by the Array, as these
fittings introduced more hazards than they overcame.
Anti-surge baffles are seldom used, but partitions to conserve fuel
during side-slip are incorporated, and these are fitted with simple flap
valves, made, in the case of Firestone, of phenolic resin impregnated
fabric.
Multi-cellular tanks, such as tie Bramson, have been tested at V/iright
Field under the auspices of Col. George Field and Capfc. Phillips. The
feeling is, however, that these tanks afford insufficient protection against
fire; and as the fire hazard is regarded as a more serious risk than loss of
fuel, the cellular tank lias been discarded. In England, there is a great
deal- of opinion in favour of the cellular tank, backed, no doubt, by the
reservation that a very special system of fire prevention is available for
use in conjunction with it.
3D-3.12. Examples of Design. To summarise the actual construction of American
fuel tank protections, representative types are illustrated diagrammatioally,
as follows:-
Fig. 1. Goodrich Superflexit protection on Tomahawk metal tank
Sponge rubber is used entirely for the sealant, and each layer of
sponge has a sheet of rubber cemented to both sides.
The layers are not stuck together, and the protection appears to
follow the principle of early French self-sealing coverings for this type
of tank.
Fig. 2. Goodrich 281 protection for Tomahawk metal tank
A sandwich of crude rubber between 2 layers of sponge rubber is used
as the sealant, with leather as the outer covering.


The layers are cemented together, but the inner layer is not cemented
to the metal tank skin.
For the tup surface of the tank, the thickness of the sealant layers
is slightly reduced.
This covering represents a combination of European and American
practice.
Fig. 3. Linatex protection on Hudson metal tank
This is a method, of applying an external protection to an existing
integral wing tank.
The single Linatex layer is cemented to the metal wing surface, and
the leather outer covering is cemented to the Linatex.
Clamping strips are used for the edges of the protection.
This protection is a combination of British and German practice in
1940.
Fig. 4. U.S. Rubber Company protection on Boston III flexible tank
The tank skin consists of 21 oz. duck, proofed on the inside with
Neoprene, ‘and covered on the outside with a stiffening compound.
The sandwich type sealant consists of soft rubber between 2 sheets
of ordinary rubber.
All layers are cemented together.
No slushing is used for the inner petrol-proof lining.
Fig. 5. Flexible tank for Airacobra
Thiokol-Neoprene treated aero fabric is used for the flexible tank
skin, slushed with Puller's compound.


Crude rubber is used for the sealant, and is supported on either side
by layers of cord fabric.
Neoprene is used as an outer protection against spilt petrol.
This protection represents a typical American flexible bag, developed
according to American practice*
Fig. 6. Goodrich flexible tank on Catalina
This is another typical example of American practice for flexible
tanks* The Ameripol sheet is not slushed, and is designed to be fully
resistant to all types of 100 octane fuel*
Fig. 7. Goodrich flexible tank on Fortress
This is another example of a typical American fuel tank with unslushed
Ameripol lining, but using a combination of sponge and crude sealant layers.
The tanks on this aircraft are among the largest used in any American
machine, and the additional sealing layers are probably supplied to cope
v/ith the additional head of petrol in these large tanks*
Fig. 8. Typical American non-metallic semi-rigid tank
This protection consists of a typical flexible bag, stiffened on the
outside by the application of several plies of resin-treated duck*


The resulting tank can be installed without undue modification to the
aircraft tank bay.
Fig. 9. D.T.D. 1047 British protection for metal fuel tanks
This protection was originally applied without the layers cemented
together, following early French practice. The same protection was
subsequently standardised with all layers cemented together and the inner
layer cemented to the metal tank skin.
A combination of sponge rubber and vulcanised rubber layers is used,
reinforced with outer layers of netting and fabric.
Fig. 10. D.T.D. 1047 British protection for metal fuel tanks.
This protection was designed in Great Britain, and uses sponge rubber
for the sealant, with an inner and outer reinforcement of fabric.
All layers are cemented together, and the first layer is cemented to
the metal tank skin.
Fig. 11. D.T.D. 1057 British protection for metal fuel tanka
This protection was designed in Great Britain, and employs a combination
of sponge rubber, cemented between 2 layers of mechanically sealing tear-
resisting rubber. An outer reinforcement of fabric is used.
All layers are cemented together, and the first layer is cemented to
the metal tank skin.


Fig. 12. D.T.D. 1070 British protection for metal fuel tanks
This protection was designed as a means of economising in the use of
raw rubber# A special wool-cloth is used in place of the 2 layers of
tear-resisting rubber in D.T.D.1057 protection. This type of construction
is now the standard fuel tank covering in this country, pressed felt
being sometimes substituted for the inner layer of wool-cloth#
All layers are cemented together, and the inner layer is cemented to
the metal tank skin#
Fig. 13. D.T.D. 1048 British protection for flexible fuel tanks
The fabric tank skin is proofed with Cimatrol synthetic resin, and
no additional slushing is used#
3 layers of sponge rubber are used as the sealant, with an outer
covering of rubberised duck.
ill layers are cemented together.
Fig. 14. Typical British development flexible tank
Cimatrol-proofed fabric is used for the tank skin, and rubberised duck
for the outer covering#
The wool-cloth and sponge rubber sandwich is used for the sealant, as
in D.T.D. 1070 protection illustrated in Diagram 12 above#


General Notes
The above illustrations show the steps in the development of American
and British self-sealing tanks. In both cases metal tanks with loose
layers of sponge protection were used, to be superseded by cemented layers,
and later by flexible bags with cemented layers. At this point, American
tanks adopted crude rubber as the sealant, whereas British tanks retained
sponge rubber.
The latest developments in each countiy are: the use of the non-
metallic semi-rigid tank in America (Pig.B), and wool-cloth sponge
sandwich protection in England.
The outer protections of British tanks have always been aero fabric
or cotton duck, protected against spilt petrol by the application of
aircraft cellulose dope. In America, synthetic resin or rubber finishes
are generally employed.
As regards protection against large calibre ammunition, the only
American type which claims to seal against 20 mm* is the non-metaliic
semi-rigid tank (Fig. 8), whereas in England both types of flexible bag
(Figs. 13 and. 14) are designed to fulfil this purpose.
CHAPTER 4 - HOSE - AMERICAN PRACTICE
3D-4* 01 Materials. Three rubber manufacturers handle the production of a
standard construction of self-sealing fuel hose, resistant to aromatic
fuels* To distinguish this type of pipe from earlier designs, the prefix
AR is applied. The manufacturers and types are: -
Goodrich AR 184
Goodyear AR 145
U.S.Rubber Co. AR 230
The materials used have been simplified to consist of a synthetic
rubber wall, reinforced with fabric braiding. In all cases the synthetic
rubber is a polymer of butadiene/acrylic nitrile, known under the trade
names of Ameripol, Chemigum, Perbunan, and Bycar. The fabric braiding
consists of either rayon or cotton*
Manufacturing Technique. Production has been considerably simplified in
the latest standard pipes with the use of extruded cores and braided
reinforcement, both of which readily lend themselves to continuous mechani-
cal production* Earlier types of pipe consisted of multiple layers,
usually containing a sealant rubber, and in this respect more closely
approached British procedure.
3D-4.02 Comparison with British Practice. The most noticeable feature
of difference between the American and British type of flexible pipe is
that the design of the former has been entirely conceived by rubber
manufacturers, and its flexibility relies on the physical property of
rubber, whilst the latter has been designed by the pipe specialist, making
use of the principle of helical support to give a mechanically sound
structure. In the case of the former mode of construction, meohanic&l
strength and lightness are sacrificed to ease of production* In the case
of the latter, fabrication involves laborious handling or highly complicated
machinery, but avoids redundant material in that the mean wall thickness
is at a minimum*
t
German practice, on the other hand, has combined the two types of
structure, in that it includes a light metallic helix in a synthetic rubber
tube reinforced with fabric braiding.


3IH-0 03 Performance and Test Procedure*
(a) Self-Sealing. Pipes of internal diameter between § in* and in-
are required to seal with aromatic fuel at 15 lb./sq. in* pressure
within 2 minutes against untumbled *5 in. ammunition. The
requirements of the test must apply between the temperature
range: 20° - 104° P.
(b) Bending Radius* All hoses are required to withstand collapse
at a negative pressure of 20 in. Mercury when bent to a radius
corresponding to 6 times the internal diameter. Installation
re commendations y however, state that the hose should not be bent
at less than 12 times the internal diameter.
-4
British requirements call for a minimum bending radius
for installation purposes of 5 times 1.D., but a negative
pressure test is not included here as the crushing strength of
the system is substantially high and remains so throughout the
bending range# A negative pressure clause is included in the
self-sealing test.
(c) Bursting Test* All pipes are required to withstand 90-100 lb./sq. in.
without leaking or distortion.
British pipes are tested at 90 lb./sq.in., but this includes
the test on the coupling.
(d) Resistance to Aromatic Euela. This test is confined to observing
the amount of swelling which takes place internally, and is
conducted, after a period of 24 hours contact with the fuel, by
passing a steel ball of given diametrical difference through the
inclined tube against a current of air.
3D-4#04 Weights and Thickness.
Size I.D. Average Y/eight Wall Thickness
per 100 ft. Limits
(i ns * ) (lbs. ) (ins. )
f 47 19/64 - 23/64
I 53 19/64 - 23/64
1 68 19/64 - 23/64
If 90 21/64 - 25/64
n 104 21/64 - 25/64
2 . 133 21/64 - 25/64
2i 155 21/64 - 25/64
3y way of comparison, the RAB-Linatex pipe of § in. I.D.
weighs 33 lbs. per 100 ft., and of 1 in. I.D. weighs 50 lbs.
per 100 ft#
3-0-4*05 Inspection and Identification. Ereshly fitted pipes are required to be
inspected daily, to ensure that the clamp is not slackened by the tendency
of the hose to set. Thereafter, clamps and hose are inspected at 50-hour
periods, the former being examined for tightness, the latter for any
tendency to crack# The hose is not removed until cracks are sufficiently
deep to show the internal fabric braiding.
AR type hose is marked with one solid red line along the hose, with
the maker’s name, type number, and date of manufacture stencilled or
stamped every 12 inches. Non self-sealing AR type hose, that is, hose of
i in* I.D. and smaller, is marked with one broken red line and one solid
white line running the length of the hose, together with maker’s name, etc.
3D-4-06 End Sittings and Pipe Supply. All sizes are usually supplied in 50 ft.
lengths for cutting and assembly of fittings in situ. End fittings consist
of ordinary smooth metal pipe, on which the hose is held with a single
screw clamp. *


This generally follows present RAE-Linatex procedure, with the
exception that a safe, hut simple, fitting, ferrule and damp are used.
3D-2f 07 General*
(1) .American self-sealing pipe development has, like the tank
project, been in the hands of the rubber manufacturer, and a
system consistent with his methods has resulted. The use of
braided fabric reinforcement is highly desirable, but
difficulty in production, through scarcity of machinery, has
prohibited its use in this country.
(2) Self-sealing is purely mechanical, and this point has been
generally recognised as the only practical system to employ.
The o 5 in. bullet against our *303 in. is obviously very
severe, but correspondingly one is inclined to be sceptical
of the alleged sealing properties of, say, a f in. bore pipe
against such a projectile.
(3) The supply of continuous lengths and the scrapping of "designed"
couplings was an early and highly desirable feature, though
excessive simplification of jointing procedure places a heavy
burden of responsibility on maintenance.
(4) By reason of its very simplicity, development of the American
system may be considered to have reached its peak, and improved
sealing under present or more severe forms of attack is orfly
likely to be gained by a general increase in wall dimensions.


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




