

The Moral Challenge
of the War
A Series of Papers read May 22nd,
1917, at the General Conference
of the Methodist Church of
Australasia (with the
Discussion that
followed)
Published by Direction of the
GENERAL CONFERENCE OF THE METHODIST
CHURCH OF AUSTRALASIA.




The
Moral Challenge
of the War
A Series of Papers read May 22nd,
1917, at the General Conference
of the Methodist Church of
Australasia (with the
Discussion that
followed)


CONTENTS.
The Methodist Church and the War 5
The War and Its Teachings . 7
What are the Moral Causes of the War ? 8
How does the War Affect Christian Faith? 20
What New Problems Does the War Create for the Christian
Church 30
National Dangers and How to Combat Them 35
How to Ensure a Nobler Citizenship and a Better International
Relationship ’ 44
The Discussion on the Moral Aspect of the War 49


preface.
During- the sessions of the General Conference of the Methodist
Church of Australasia, held in Melbourne in May, ig'i7, a whole day
was devoted to the consideration of the situation created by the Great
War, and the problems presented thereby, so far as they relate to the
Christian Church. A special subject was assigned to each of the five
Annual or State Conferences comprised within the jurisdiction of the
General Conference. In response to an official suggestion, a paper was
prepared by each Conference on the subject allotted to it. The papers
so prepared were read and considered at the General Conference, and
a discussion ensued thereon. Eventually certain “findings,” or resolu-
tions, were arrived at, and agreed to, as embodying the judgment of
the General Conference on the matters presented to it, and on the war
situation generally. By direction of the Conference, the papers read
and the findings thereupon are herewith printed in pamphlet form, for
the information of Methodist people and the public generally.
It was a matter of regret within the Conference that the pressure
of denominational business of great urgency and importance prevented
a full and extensive discussion of the war situation and the war pro-
blems. But the thought of the Empire and its needs was present with
the Conference throughout its sessions from first to last. Every day
a special interval was set apart for direct and special intercession. The
loyal note was sounded at all our public services and gatherings. The
largest and most enthusiastic of all the public demonstrations was a
patriotic gathering. An impressive memorial service emphasised the
homage we pay to the memory of those who have made the last great
sacrifice in the cause of righteousness and freedom. By express reso-
lution, the Conference declared “its unabated loyalty to the Throne
and Empire of Great Britain, and its unswerving adherence to the
ideals of life and liberty for which the Empire is so sacrificially con-
tending in the great world war.” It also, with similar definiteness,
declared the struggle to be one “for honour, freedom, and righteous-
ness,” and recognised “the responsibility resting upon our Australian
Commonwealth as an integral part of the Empire to bear our full
share” of the task of carrying the struggle to a successful issue. And
not in words only have we declared our attitude in this dread crisis of
human history. Our sons and brothers—the young men of our
Churches and homes —have gone forth by tens of thousands from the
various States of the Commonwealth, also a contingent of natives from
the Mission District of Fiji. They have gone with our blessing and
our prayers. Honour boards record their names in ’almost every church
of our denomination within the Commonwealth. We abhor war as
such. We shudder at the sufferings it entails and the sacrifices it
demands. But it is even at such a cost that the highest ideals that
any civilised or Christian nation can stand for are at times maintain-
able. In the inscrutable Providence of God, such a challenge has
now been addressed to the Empire to which we belong. In the language
of President Woodrow Wilson, “The great fact which now
stands above the rest is this: This is a people’s war for freedom, jus-
tice, and self-government among the world’s nations —a war to make
the world safe for the people who live in it.” Much as we desire
peace, we may pay too great a price for peace. We believe with Dr.
J. H. Jowett, that “there is something more noble than peace, if peace


means a benumbed indifference to moral issues and a dead aloofness
to the cry and sigh of those who are wronged. ” By all the principles,
therefore, which underlie the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
which vitally affect the foundations of society, we are committed to a
struggle which can only be settled by the overthrow of a false philoso-
phy and an arrogant militarism, and the triumph of the principles which
make for righteousness in all the relations of life and a brotherhood
of nations based upon liberty without licence, and justice assuied to
the weak as well as to the strpng. In this conflict, in the last and best
resort, “God is our refuge and strength.”
Therefore we call upon our people to place the issue,
with more and more definiteness, in His hands. “\e people
pour out your hearts before Him; God is a refuge for us. •
The call of the hour to the Empire is for men, money, and
prayer, “instant and earnest prayer.” When the nation in its entirety
responds to that call, the day of peace will soon dawn. Victory will
come with speedy steps as it is waited for in the way of Cod s com-
mandments. The ancient rallying cry seems to become again
specially opportune in this hour of crisis and darkness, Up, sanctify
yourselves, for to-morrow ye shall see wonders !”
J. E. CARRUTHERS.
President of the General Conference.
Mosman, New South Wales.
June. 1917.


The Methodist Church and the War.
The following resolutions were carried unanimously by the
Conference:—
(1) That this Conference records its unabated loyalty to the Throne
and Empire of Great Britain, and its unswerving adherence to the ideals
of life and national liberty, for which the Empire is so sacrificially con-
tending in the great World War.
(2) We are grateful for the constancy and courage which have
characterised His Majesty the King and his representative advisers in
the task of carrying the fateful struggle for honour, freedom, and
righteousness to a successful issue, and recognise the responsibility
resting upon our Australian Commonwealth as an .integral part of the
Empire to bear our full share of that task.
(3) We regard with gratitude the dauntless bravery and heroic
sacrifice of our Army and Navy in the awful experiences through which
they have passed and are passing, and earnestly pray their noble efforts
may result in a speedy and lasting peace, based upon righteousness and
..national honour.
(4) We record with thankfulness the heroism and patriotism of the
tens of thousands of our fellow-citizens who have enlisted in the
Empire’s holy cause. We tender our deepest sympathy to those who
have been wounded, and to the relatives of those who have paid the last
great sacrifice, praying that to them may be a plenitude of sustaining
.and comforting grace of God.


The War and Its Teachings.
I. The President of the General Conference, in order to ensure
that the subject of “The War and Its Teachings” should be brought
before the Conference in some reasoned and adequate form, assigned
a specific branch of the subject to each of the five Annual Conferences,
and requested the President of each Conference to appoint a committee
to prepare a paper dealing with that part of the subject assigned to it.
The question:
“What Are the Moral Causes of the War?”
was assigned to the Victoria and Tasmania Conference, and a paper
dealing with the subject was presented by Dr. Fitchett, the convener
of the committee. As he was suffering from a sore throat, he deputed
the task of reading the paper to the Rev. A. McCallum, the Secretary
of the Conference; by way of introduction and explanation, however,
Dr. Fitchett said:
We are on one of the high places of history. A hundred years hence
the men of that age will be looking back to our day and trying to find
out what sort of people we were, and how we bore ourselves under the
shock of such tremendous events. Every business man is trying to
discover how the war will affect his trade. Politicians have to study the
war from their aspect; newspaper men watch it from theirs. And this
war specially affects us as Churches. It is a spiritual conflict, and if we
stood dumb, waiting for whatever shape events might take; if we make
no serious and intelligent attempt to learn what God is teaching His
Church and His world at this moment, I think we should fail in a
pfreat duty.
The other Churches are trying- to find out the secret of it.
In Scotland the two great Churches have appointed a joint com-
mission of the best of their men, and have set them the task—allowing
them to spend weeks over it if necessary—of finding out if possible
what lessons the war has for the Church, and what the Church must do
to prepare for the new condition of things that will undoubtedly be
■ created by the war.
I venture to hope that the papers—they have been carefully
.prepared—and the discussion that will follow, will yield some useful
results for our guidance. I, for one, am hopeful that we shall be guided
as to the way in which we ought, as a Church, to meet the problems
arising out of the war. The paper which the Victorian Committee has
adopted deals with the causes of the war. It contains nothing that is
new; and will provide little matter for discussion. It is intended to
show that the conflict we are witnessing is one of spiritual forces, and
jas such we are vitally concerned in it as a Church.
The Rev. A. McCallum then read the following paper:—


What are the Moral Causes
of the War?
HIS Conference is not concerned to discuss the political,
II r H 1 JJ racial, dynastic, or economic causes of the war. In the last
AA I JL analysis, war always springs from some breach of the
VV\ If) moral law. It is a thing essentially evil—an evil flower
blossoming from a bitter root. Human peace is not
wrecked unless, first of all, somewhere, and by some per-
son or nation, the law of God is broken. What is the exact form or
manifestation of evil from which this, the most dreadful war in the his-
tory of the human race, has sprung?
We can afford to put aside those general forms of evil out of which
wars spring—the ambitions of nations; the clash of economic forces ;
the hunger for territory; the materialistic temper of the age, etc.
These, like the poor, are “always with us,” and they have bred many
wars. But this particular war is unlike any other in history. It has
drawn fourteen nations into a black tempest of battle, a red whirlpool
of blood. It is being fought on every continent and every sea. It
threatens to wreck the civilisation of the world. It is so unique, not
only in scale, but in the methods by which it is being fought, and in
the tremendous issues it raises and must decide, that to explain it we
must seek for some form of evil having an energy, an intensity and
depth never before known. What, it may be repeated, is the exact
manifestation of evil from which this, the most dreadful war in the
history of mankind, has sprung ?
In a spiritual diagnosis of this sort we must begin by
locating the seat of the mischief. Moral evil must have its
root in some human will, or wills, so we begin our search by
asking: “Who began the war? On which nation does its guilt rest?”
“We must never forget,” says Sir Edward Grey, “how the war came
about. . . What was its real cause? Some people say, ‘You need"
not go back on the old ground now; everybody knows it. But you can-
not go back on it too often.”
Now this is a question which can be answered with certainty. The
facts are clear; they are familiar; yet, in the rush of quick-following,
tremendous events, they are in danger of being forgotten; and it is well
to set them in clear order, and beyond the possibility of doubt.
How the War Began.
The first guns were fired on Belgian soil; but it was certainly not
Belgium that planned the war, or began it; she was its first victim. It was-
not England who began it; she hated war, and had no thought of war.
It was not France; she was in no condition or temper to plunge into an
adventure so vast. It was not Russia, for she had not recovered from
her defeat by Japan; not Servia. No charge of intending the war, or
of beginning it, is possible against any one of these nations.
In the order of events as recorded by the almanac, Austria, by the
ultimatum she addressed to Servia, struck the match that fired the-
dreadful magazine of this war. The ultimatum itself was the most ex-
travagant and unreasonable in character of any known in diplomatic


"history; it was, in fact, an invitation to commit suicide addressed by
a. nation of 50,000,000 to a tiny State of 4)OOo,ooo; and Servia was given
only forty-eight hours to reply. She did reply within that period, refus-
ing none of the demands made upon her, consenting to eight out of
ten, and asking that the remaining two should be submitted to the
Hague Tribunal. Within an hour of receiving that answer the Aus-
trian Ambassador left Belgrade, the Austrian columns were on the
march to the Servian frontiei. There is no other example in civilised
history of demands so severe, under conditions so unreasonable; of war
begun in a time so brief, and for reasons so insufficient.
That the war would raise the most perilous question in European
diplomacy—would set Teuton and Slav on terms of battle—was certain.
The leap by Austria on a tiny Slav State like Servia, was a direct chal-
lenge to Russia, who was, in a sense, the representative and guardian
of the smaller Slav nationalities. Germany protested that she knew
nothing of the terms of the Austrian ultimatum; but in that she is
known to have lied. If no proofs were available, it would still be in-
credible that Germany would risk war in support of an ultimatum by
- ustria, the terms of which she did not even know. But the proofs that
Germany did know the terms of that ultimatum are definite and final.
I he German White Paper itself records that Germany “was consulted
by Austria previous to the ultimatum, and not only approved of
Austria’s cause, but gave that country a carte blanche to proceed.” The
German Ambassador to the United States, in an article he published in
an American paper six weeks after the war broke out, said in express
terms, “Germany approved in advance the Austrian ultimatum to
Servia.
Germany, from the first, “warned off” all the other European
Powers, and denied their right to interfere betwixt Austria and Servia
and she persisted in this, though Russia at once notified that she could
not stand aloof and see Servia crushed. All the Great Powers of Europe
-—Great Bntain, France, and Russia—kept the wires hot during those
fateful seven days with messages to Austria and entreaties to Berlin,
asking only that time should be given for consideration of the chance
tor making some arrangement which would satisfy Austria and save
Europe from the tremendous calamity of war. But Austria steadily re-
tused; she pressed on without a moment’s delay. Never was a
vast war begun in a hurry so breathless. All the Great
Powers have issued books—White Books, Red Books, Green
Books—showing what was done and said during that critical week—
to secure a moment’s breathing space for discussing how to
avert war. Perhaps no diplomatist ever worked with such
an energy for peace as did Sir Edward Grey during those hurrying
days; the story of that week is his title to enduring honour. Germany
says she advised Austria to give time for consultation; but in the
“White Paper” she has published, vindicating the part she took in the
diplomatic exchanges of that week, not a single communication appears
addressed by Berlin to Vienna, urging that time should be given for
negotiations for peace. At the last moment Austria did notify Russia
that she would discuss the situation with her; and on the very day that
glimmer of hope for peace emerged, Germany declared war on Russia!
Austria had mobilised for action against Servia; later, and reluctantly
Russia, in reply, mobilised on that part of her frontiers which
“marched” with those of Austria. And that partial mobilisation was
"the pretext on which Germany instantly declared war.


The nations that suffer most by the war had no voice in this matter*,
no chance of expressing - a wish. Only one poor week of time was al-
lowed for reason to plead; and during those seven days the fate of
Europe was in the hands of about a score of men. “The war,” Presi-
dent Wilson told Congress, “was provoked in the interests of a group
of ambitious men, who used their fellow-men as pawns and tools.’ It
is a story which shocks sane reason. A war so vast, begun with a haste
so breathless, for a cause so small, and with a space for reason so brief,
is, on the face of it, one of the blackest crimes in the history of the
race. We are entitled to ask who, in view of the facts here recited, is
the criminal ?
The Guilt of Germany.
The Kaiser has declared, “before God and history,” that he “never
intended this war.” This is probably true; it is even certain that he
never “intended” a war creating the aspect the present conflict has
taken—a war which sees the German flag swept from every sea, every
German colony lost, the military strength of Germany strained
to the breaking point, and the Hohenzollem dynasty in peril.
We may go further, and believe that he never intended any
war. He hoped, that is, to reach his ends—and they were
ends of aggression—without war. In iqoB, it must be remem-
bered, Austria violated the Treaty of Berlin and annexed the two grotit
provinces, Bosnia and Herzegovina, which she held in trust under the
terms of that Treaty. It was one of the great thefts of history! The
other signatories of the broken Treaty protested;. but Russia was in no
condition for war; England hates war, and her interest in the Balkan
question seems remote. The Kaiser, as he himself put it, .appeared in
his “shining armour” to support Austria, and so a great crime was left
unpunished, and Germany and Austria won a bloodless victory. But
it was a victory that left bitter memories behind it.
Now the Kaiser, it cannot be doubted, hoped to repeat the triumph
of 1908 in 1914 —to win, that is, a diplomatic victory- a .great political
victory—not by drawing the sword, but only by rattling it. Russia, at
the moment, had not recovered from the shock of the Japanese defeat;
France was in trouble with her Socialists; England seemed at the point
of civil war. At such a moment it seemed probable that the rattle of
the German sabre would be sufficient. But Russia could not betray her
ward; she must fight. That drew in France. Germany invaded Bel-
gium’; Great Britain could not dismiss as a mere “scrap of paper” a
Treaty which bore her signature; so war came. And on any reading
of these facts, Germany is reponsible for its coming. As Sir Edward
Grey told Berlin if she “would only press the button” Austria would
yield and give time for negotiations; but the “button” was.never
pressed. Austria was not so much Germany’s partner, as her tool, in
the crime.
To sum up the plain facts, Germany planned an encroach-
ment on the rights and interests of her sister nations, and did this on
the calculation that they would submit to the wrong rather than fight.
So she hoped to get the results of war without its cost. But that calcu-
lation betrayed her, and set Europe in flames.
The Witnesses.
It is worth remembering that, in addition to what has been said,
three witnesses, each of whom is of special authority on this subject,


• may be quoted against Germany. The first is Italy, itself a member
of the Triple Alliance. Each member of the Triple Alliance was bound
to assist the others, if they were attacked. Italy, with full knowledge
of the whole business, decided that in this case Germany and Austria
were the aggressors; they were not fighting to defend themselves; they
were joined in a conspiracy to attack other nations; so the terms of the
treaty which linked the three Powers together did not apply. And
neither Germany nor Austria challenged a decision by their own ally
which pronounced them to be the aggressors.
The second witness is a German editor, Max Harden, perhaps the
ablest and most influential journalist in the Fatherland. He dismisses
with contempt all pleas that Germany did not begin the war. “Let us
drop,” he says, “our miserable attempts to excuse Germany‘s action.
Not against our will, and as a nation taken by surprise, did we hurl
ourselves into this gigantic venture. We willed it. . . We do not
stand before the judgment seat of Europe. We acknowledge no such
jurisdiction. Our might shall create a new law in Europe. It is Ger-
many that strikes. When she has conquered new domains for her
genius, then the priesthoods of all the gods will praise the God of
War.”
The third witness is Mr. Beck, a distinguished American lawyer,
who was Assistant Attorney-General of the United States. He has ex-
amined with the trained skill of a great lawyer all the facts in the case,
treating it as an issue to be tried, in his own words, “in the Supreme
Court of Civilisation.” All the actors in the tragedy, in turn, are put
into the witness-box—the Kaiser himself, the Czar, the diplomatists of
the various nations; and Mr. Beck’s work, entitled “The Evidence in
the Case,” is the most powerful indictment of Germany which has ap-
peared in literature. He gives his conclusions in the form of a judicial
finding. “It is proved,” he says, “that Germany and Austria, in a
time of profound peace, secretly concerted to impose their will upon
Europe in a matter affecting the balance of power. . . They made
war inevitable by what they did.” “Germany,” he adds, “had, at all
times, the power to arrest the action of Austria. It failed to exert its
influence for peace. It certainly abetted, and possibly instigated,
Austria in its actions which led directly to the war.”
We may now ask what strange combination of facts and influences
has made it possible for Germany—the Germany of the poets and the
musicians, of Kant and Goethe, of Luther and the Reformation—to lay
upon itself the guilt of such a crime as the present war: a crime against
the human race, a crime that has deluged half the world in blood, and
which, if it succeeds in its aims, will destroy freedom, wreck civilisa-
tion, and turn all the currents of history backward to' paganism ? That
question goes to the very heart of this dark problem; when it is an-
swered, the moral secret of this war is revealed. What is the answer?
The Moral Causes of the War.
The answer, putting- aside minor and contributory causes —with
which this Conference is not concerned—is that the central and deepest
root of the war lies in that fundamentally wicked theory- -the theory of
a non-moral State —which Germany has adopted, and on which she
acts; a theory which g-ives the lie to everything- that Christ taught or
that Christianity means. The proof of this is found in German litera-
ture and in German history; for German history is but German litera-
ture translated into concrete terms. It is easy to quote passages, ex-


pounding the dark doctrine of a non-moral State, from typical German
writers, such as Treitschke, Professor of History in the Berlin Uni-
versity, or General Bernhardi, in his semi-prophetic book written three
years before the present war broke out, entitled “Germany and the
Next War.” “The State,” says Treitschke, borrowing the evil idea
from Machiavelli, “is power.” It/ is above morality. In national
affairs, and in the relation betwixt nations, “Might is. at once the
supreme right.” “The highest moral duty of the State is to care for
power,” “In politics, weakness is the true sin against, the Holy
Ghost.” Treaties are only binding on a State for such a time as the
State may find them to be convenient. “The State,” says. Bernhardi,
“is the sole judge of the morality of its own actions. For it, whatever
is necessary is moral.” “The State,” he says, again, “is a law unto
itself;” weaker nations “have not the same right to live as powerful
and vigorous nations.” “A strong nation” is justified in
provoking war; and “the happiest results,” we are assured, “have fol-
lowed such deliberately provoked wars, for the prospects of success are
the greatest when the moment for declaring war can be selected to suit
the political and military situation.” “No Power exists,” he says,
“which can judge between States.” Even God is dismissed from that
realm ! Bernhardi has put this dreadful teaching in the most naked
and offensive form. “Christ came,” he says “to teach a morality based
on the law of love; but this law can claim no significance in the rela-
tions of one country v?ith another.”
Here, then, ii a realm of human action across whose borders thte
feet of Christ may not pass; it is the realm of public affairs. Where
the State stands, the law of God has no authority. Wickedness surely
never spoke in more daring - accents than in these words ! 1 here is a
worse atheism than that of the fool who says in his heart, “There is no
God.” It is the atheism which says, “There is a God; but from one
kingdom of human affairs —the business of the State —He is, by His
own creatures, dismissed. Germany, of course, has a God, but it is
not the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Judge of all the
earth who must do right, whose law is “perfect, converting the soul;”
whose statutes are “right, rejoicing the heart;” whose commandments
are “pure, enlightening the eyes;” whose judgments “are true and
righteous altogether,” “more to be desired than much gold, sweeter
than honey or the honeycomb.” It is “the good old German God” of the
Kaiser —a deity quite unknown to Christian faith —whose symbols are
the torpedo and the submarine, the Zeppelin and the poison-gas. In
honour of this monstrous deity, a German divine has introduced a new
figure into the stately fresco of the “Te Deum.” “To Thee,” the new
hymn of worship runs, “cherubim and seraphim and Zeppelins continu-
ally do cry.”
To this doctrine of a State which is above morality is linked a
theory of war equally dreadful, and equally in fundamental quarrel with
everything for which Christianity stands. Both Treitschke and Moltke
declare war to be “an ordinance fixed by God;” and, says Treitschke,
“the living God will always see to it that His ordinance of war is ob-
served.” Bernhardi looks at war from the scientific point of view, and
declares it to be'“a biological necessity.” He then turns to the ethical
side of war; in its grim creed, he says, the dispute as to what is right
is decided by the iron test of war, and war “always gives a biologically
just decision.” There remains what may be called the aesthetic side
of war It is a mistake, we are assured, to regard war as a curse; it is
“the greatest factor in the furtherance of kultur and power.” Then we


have the political uses of war. “Since every part of the globe is in-
habited, new territory,” Bernhardi argues, “must be obtained at the
cost of its possessors; that is to say, by conquest, which thus becomes
a law of necessity. . . It is not the possessor, but the victor, who
then has the right. Might gives the right to occupy or to conquer.”
“Might,” he repeats, “is at once the supreme right.” “War,” he says
again, “is not only a biological law; it is a moral obligation.” “Did
not Christ Himself say,” he asks, “ ‘I am not come to send peace on
earth but a sword’?” Bernhardi understands the art of quotation, and
conveniently forgets that other Divine saying, “They that take the
sword shall perish by the sword.” He dares to say that Christ’s teach-
ing “can never be adduced as an argument against the universal law of
struggle. . . According to Christianity we must admit that war is
justified, morally and historically. . .” “Efforts directed towards
its abolition,” he says, “are absolutely immoral, and must be stigma-
tised as unworthy of the human race.”
This, of course, is but the morality of the jungle. A wild beast
knows no other ethics than its appetites, and any beast smaller than
itself is its natural prey. It is teaching which gives the rein to every
base appetite in men or nations; it justifies every crime. And German
ambitions have taken such a scale that, to quote Bernhardi, “for us
there are two alternatives and no third—world-power or ruin.”
German Ambition.
“The Germans,” says Professor Usher, in his “Pan-Germanism,”
“aim at nothing less than the domination of Europe and of the world
by the Germanic race.” To prove that this is not an exaggeration we
may quote the German Chancellor himself in his address to the Reich-
stag on November ioth, 1912. “For months past,” he said, “we have
been living now, in an atmosphere of passion such as we have perhaps
never before experienced in Germany. At the root of this feeling is
the determination of Germany to make its strength and capabilities pre-
vail in the world.” This, on the witness of the German Chancellor
himself, was the mood of Germany two years before the present war
broke out! And the secret of this “atmosphere of passion” was not
any dread of France, or of Russia, or of England; it was the “determin-
ation of Germany to make its strength and capabilities prevail in the
world.”
In “Pros and Cons of the Great War” the list of “German Inten-
tions” stretches through seven pages, and practically covers about
three-fourths of the civilised world. In the exposition of these “inten-
tions” by that Germanised Englishman, Chambrelain, we are told,
“The pax Germanica is to prevail everywhere. From the territories
of Germany all non-Germans are to be exterminated. The Roman
Empire of the German race will police the seas and govern all the
English colonies.” And it is interesting to learn that “in Australia a
proportion of one-tenth Germans will, by their superior capacity, be
the masters.”
Out of this theory of a non-moral State, in brief, have
sprung ruthless ambitions that are a menace to the world, and a theory
of war, to serve those ambitions, more ruthless than any Paganism
ever knew.
It may be asked, of course, is it fair to judge a whole nation by the
writings and teachings of a semi-insane genius like Nietzsche, a little
stone-deaf Professor of History such as Treitschke, a stray writer on
war such as Bernhardi? But Trietschke was the most influential inter-


preter of German ideals this generation has seen. Bernhardi was, and
is, an officer of rank in the German army, who understands German
ideals, shares in them, justifies them, and undertook to explain them to
the world. He did this with a frankness which knew no reserves, and
might well have been challenged as indiscreet, but which was never
disavowed by the German Government. But the fact which gives
authority to the teaching of these men is that in the present war Ger-
many has acted, and is acting, on the exact theories which they repre-
sent. The war is the theories of Trietschke and Bernhardi translated
into terms of blood and fire. What the little stone-deaf Professor of
History taught in his classrooms, and what General Bernhardi ex-
pounded in his infamous book, Germany is proclaiming from the iron
lips of i6in. howitzers; is writing with the sword and bayonet on the
bodies of men; is illustrating with its torpedoes and submarines. Nay,
Belgium itself, the most heroic and the unhappiest of all nations, with
its exiled king, its wrecked cities, its ravaged soil, its cruel yoke of
slavery, is but the teaching of the witnesses we have quoted, translated
into concrete terms.
Under these conditions there has been created in Germany what it
is quite inadequate to call a non-moral conscience, or even a paganised
conscience; it is an Inverted conscience, a moral sense which is not
merely blind to the quality of its own acts; it inverts all moral judg-
ments. It is this yhich has made possible in the conduct of this war
by sea and land those monstrous deeds which have horrified the world,
and made Germany a moral outlaw. For to the new Prussianised con-
science right and wrong, when the interests of the State are touched,
change their nature; wickedness becomes a pious duty; vice is trans-
figured into virtue.
A Catalogue of Crimes.
The barbarities committed by the German army in Belgium and
elsewhere, for example, have made Germany itself a moral outcast; the
conscience of the human race condemns them. But Germany offers no
apologies for them. In its dreadful “War Book,” which is declared to
be “the most wicked book ever published,” exactly such barbarities
are enjoined; throughout the German press they are extolled. An
article written by a distinguished German officer, Major-General von
Disfurth (quoted by Mr. Beck) says: “No object whatever is served
by taking any notice of the accusations of barbarity levelled against
Germany by our foreign critics. Frankly, we are, and must be, bar-
barians, if by these we understand those who wage war relentlessly and
to the uttermost degree. We owe no explanations to anyone. There is
nothing for us to justify and nothing to explain away. Evepr act of
whatever nature committed by our troops for the purpose of discourag-
ing, defeating, and destroying our enemies is a brave act and a good
deed, and is fully justified. Germany stands as the supreme arbiter
of her own methods, which in the time of war must be dictated to the
world. They call us barbarians. What of it ? We scorn them and their
abuse. For my part I hope that in this war we have merited the title
of barbarians. Our troops must achieve victory. What else matters?”
The Kaiser himself talked in exactly these accents long- before the
present war broke out. In his parting- address to the German contin-
g-ent sent to Peking, he told them, “No quarter shall be given, no
prisoners shall be taken. Let all who fall intp your hands be at your
mercy. Just as the Huns a thousand years a#o under the leadership of


Etzel (Attila) gained a reputation in virtue of which they shall live in
historical tradition, so may the name of Germany become known in
such a manner in China that no Chinaman will ever again dare to look
askance at a German.” Hate in Christian ethics is a vice; in the Ger-
man code it is a virtue, and every German mind is to be carefully
“educated” in hate. In a well-known book, Dr. ruchs urges “the
organisation of hatred; education to the desire for hatred.” “Let us
abolish,” he says, “unripe and false shame before brutality and fana-
ticism. We must not hesitate to announce: To us is given faith, hope,
and hatred, these three; but hatred is the greatest amongst them.”
A Danish professor, again, has published a book with the curious
title, “Hurrah and Hallelujah,” made up of collections from the verse
of German poets, the arguments of German professors, the sermons
of German preachers; and no more dreadful self-indictment of a nation
can be imagined than these pages supply. Everybody remembers the
oft-quoted parody of the Beatitudes by Nietzsche; but a German divine
has attempted a feat more dreadful; he turns the Lord’s Prayer into a
vehicle of hate: “Though the warrior’s bread be scanty,” it runs, “do
Thou work daily death and tenfold, woe unto the enemy. Forgive in
merciful long-suffering each bullet and each blow which misses its
mark. Lead us not into the temptaiton of letting our wrath be too
tame in carrying out Thy Divine judgment! Deliver us and our ally
from the infernal Enemy and his servants ofSearth. Thine is the King-
dom, the German land ; may we, by aid of Thy steel-clad hand, achieve
the power and the glory.”
Some months ago an appeal was issued in America, signed by the
religious leaders of practically every Church, intended as a protest
against that indifference to the spiritual values of the issues raised, by
the war from which the United States then suffered, but from which,
thank God, it has since so splendidly awakened. “We are Christians,”
say those who sign this great document, “and we direct the attention
of our fellow-Christians to a few of the great issues which in this war
await their final decision.” Then follows a recital of these issues.
“The ravage of Belgium and the enslavement of her people: was
it right or wrong?
“The massacre of a million Armenians: was it a sane and justi-
fiable precaution or an unpardonable crime?
“The desolation of Servia and Poland: was this a regrettable
necessity or a frightful injustice?
“The destruction of life through the sinking of the ‘Lusitania’
and of other merchant ships: was this an ordinary incident of war-
fare, or was it deliberate and premeditated murder?
“The starvation of Jews and Syrians in the Holy Land: is this
an accident of economics or a violation of the Taws of God and man ?
“The attempt to array Moslems against Christ in a Holy War’:
was it a laudable act of imperial statesmanship, or was it the treachery
of a Christian monarch ?
“The intimidation of small nations and the violation of inter-
national agreements; are these things excusable under provocation
or damnable under all circumstances?”
Now there is no doubt as to the answer of the instructed Christian
conscience to the challenge of these questions. These acts were crimes
of the blackest sort. “The memory of all the saints and martyrs, say


those who sign this document, “cries out against such a betrayal of
Christian ethics as is represented by any hesitation to brand these acts
as crimes.” But the notable thing is that the new German conscience
regards all these acts as praiseworthy! The Kaiser himself rewarded
with the Iron Cross the commander of the submarine that sank the
“Lusitania.” In the Bryce report on the outrages in Belgium, a report
drawn up by a committee of the highest authority, it says, “In the
minds of Prussian officers the war seems to have become a sort of
sacred mission . . . ordinary morality and the ordinary sentiment
of pity are superseded by a new standard which justifies to the soldier
every means that can conduce to success, however shocking to a
natural sense of justice and humanity. Cruelty becomes legitimate
when it promises victory,” “All this,” the report adds, “is the out-
come of a theory held by a ruling caste, who have preached and thought
and written and talked and dreamed about war until they have fallen
under its obsession and been hypnotised by its spirit.”
One of the sanest and ablest of British journalists, Mr. Spender,
has described his experiences when trying at different stages of the
war “to discover what is in the mind of the German, what peculiar pro-
cess of thought or code of conduct led him to do this or say that.”
“Sometimes,” says Mr. Spender, “we seem to be looking into the
nethermost pit of hell, as when we attempt to fathom the thought of
the man who launched the torpedo against the ‘Lusitania,’ and of the
Government which gave him the order, decorated him for executing it,
and struck a medal to commemorate the cold-blooded slaughter. At
other times we seem to be dealing merely with eccentricity or comedy,
as when the Kaiser complains bitterly that the peaceful inhabitants of
a German town have been subject to the outrage of bombing by air-
craft, or as when a newspaper laments the obtuseness of the world in
failing to see that Germany is the “gentlest of nations.’” And
in the German mind there is a fantastic and fanatical self-admiration
which has a lunatic strain. It is not a mere case of megalomania;
it is something darker and more ominous.
The Root of the War.
It is, perhaps, the supreme example in history of that spiritual
blindness, that enormity of self-deception, which is the special peril,
and penalty, of a sin that, as measured by the terms of the pocket
and the senses, prospers. It inevitably deflects the scale of moral
values. The whole spiritual arithirfetic is disordered, and the con-
science becomes, not the censor of vice, but its accomplice and flat-
terer. The Kaiser himself is an example of this exact process. He has
a belief almost as fanatical as that of Mohammed himself that he is a
special favourite qf the Almighty. In one of his addresses to his army
he said: Remember the German people are the chosen of God. On
me as German Emperor the Spirit of God has descended. I am His
weapon, His sword, His vicegerent.
But the belief that they are the special favourites of God seems to
be universal in Germany. God Himself is believed to be a German;
and one German poet begins a set of verses with the invocation, “O
German God.” The author of “Hurrah and Hallelujah” gives many
examples—the worst of them from the sermons of German diyines—of
this blurred moral sense. “It is upon Germanism,” says one preacher,
“that the salvation of the world depends. Germany is called upon to be
God’s missionary amongst all the peoples of the earth, who can only


be saved by adopting- Christianity in its perfected German form.’*
“God must be on our side,” says another German divine; “we fight
for right and truth and true Christianity.” “The Lord God has
spoken, and His words were, ‘My German people shall live.’” “Ger-
many,” it is announced from another pulpit, “is the future of humanity,
a nation which is God’s seed-corn for the future, the centre of God’s
plans for the world.” “The German soul,” he adds, “is the world’s
soul; and God and Germany belong to one another.” Then, rising to
a still more blasphemous height, he says, “The German soul is God s
soul; it shall and will rule over the world.”
The Germany of to-day, it remains to be added, has been corrupted
by its history. It has suffered that most deadly form of wickedness, the
wickedness that prospers in the world, that grows fat, that fills the
pockets and flatters the senses of those committing it. If, in that far
country to which he went, the Prodigal Son in the parable had grown
rich and influential, he would probably never have returned to his
father’s house. And Germany has grown rich by its iniquities. Lord
Rosebery says that, in a secular sense, Frederick the Great is ‘ the
patron saint of Germany.” The stamp of his evil genius lies deep on
the German mind to-day. Germany policy is ruled by his maxims, and
strives to repeat his triumphs. And yet Frederick the Great, in spite
of Carlyle’s many volumes, was one of the great scoundrels of history.
He has himself given us a definition of the principles on which he
acted. “I take what I want,” he says, “and leave the pedants to prove
that I had a right to take it.” His history is a tale of plunder. His
first act on succeeding to the throne was to invade Silesia, whose
integrity Prussia had guaranteed, and he did this for no better reason
than that he desired its possession. “His motive,” says Mr. Whibley,
“was the motive of the burglar.” He wrote to the girl-queen of Austria
a letter of sympathy, in w’ ich he renewed the pledge to guard her
throne ; then he proceeded to invade her territory. His troops were
across the frontier before the ink on his letter was well dry. By that
act Frederick lit the flames of the Seven Years’ War, and, as Macaulay
puts it, “in order that he might rob a neighbour whom he had pro-
mised to defend, black men fought on the coast of Coromandel, and
red men scalped each other by the Great Lakes of North America.”
Frederick repeated in the matter of Poland his crime in Silesia.
He guaranteed the rights and liberties of Poland, and then assisted at
its partition. And “it is to Frederick the Germans of to-day look up,”
says Lord Rosebery; “to him they always appeal when they contem-
plate some peculiarly flagrant act. . . . He bequeathed territory, power,
and comparative prosperity, but he also bequeathed the terrible heritage
of systematic perfidy. . . . Systematic perfidy, rapacity, and hypocrisy,
these would seem to be the sinister inheritance. that Frederick be-
queathed to his people.” Lord Rosebery suggests that contemporaries
of Frederick the Great—Howard, Jenner, and Wesley—may hereafter be
ranked higher than “the wanton conqueror who, possessing consum-
mate qualities of brain and fortitude, was a curse to his age and to
his kind.”
A Corrupted History.
The Germany of to-day undoubtedly is corrupted by the success
of Frederick; but it does more than repeat his crimes; it exaggerates
them. He refused to count rape and pillage amongst the legitimate
practices of war. “The first man who pillages or destroys a house,”
runs one of his orders, “will be hung or shot on the spot.” A monu-


ment to Carlyle stands in Berlin; but that monument is only a proof
of the completeness with which Carlyle lost all sense of moral values
in his account of the great Hohenzollern of the eighteenth century.
Bismarck, next to Frederick the Great, is the evil genius of Ger-
many; and he prospered by exactly the arts of Frederick the Great. He
fought three wars, each, as Bismarck himself admits, deliberately
planned for purposes of gain. That against Denmark, in 1864, gave
Germany Schleswig-Holstein. The war against Austria in 1866 gave
Prussia the leadership of the North German Federation. The war of
1870 overthrew France, welded the scattered kingdoms, duchies, and
free states of Germany into a rejoicing unit, filled German pockets with
a vast indemnity, flattered German pride with the annexation of Alsace
and Lorraine, and changed the kingly crown of Prussia into an Imperial
diadem. Never was a war so prosperous.
Bismarck, however, was like a retired burglar who had grown rich
and wanted to be respectable. He warned Germany, the Germany he
had created, of the peril of new adventures; specially warned it agajnst
any quarrel with Russia or with England. But the present Kaiser, as
soon as he came to the throne, “dropped the pilot,” and kindled in
the brains of Germany, which had thriven on war, ambitions for a
greater war and a vaster prize. The war of 1870, in a degree, and for
a moment, corrupted Germany itself yet more fatally. The whole long
chain of successes won by the sword threw the German mind off its
balance, and generated a belief, at once fantastic and fanatical, in the
superiority of Germany in every field. The unanimity into which were
welded the scattered parts of Germany was, as a clever writer in “The
Times” puts it, .“a unanimity of appetite,” and in these appetites the
dark secret of this war lies at exactly this point.
Summary.
To sum up: Germany dismisses God, and the laws of God, from
its national affairs. Christian morality, it teaches, is personal, and
its nature cannot be political. Over the acts of the State moral re-
straints have no authority. The State, in Treitschke’s words, “is to be
judged not by the standards which apply to individuals, but by those
which are set forth by its own nature and aims.” “Might is right;
and the dispute as to what is right is decided by war, which gives a
biologically just decision.” On this logic, if Mohammedanism threw
up a supreme military genius, and overthrew the Christian nations, this
would prove that the Koran has a right to take the place of the Bible.
Or, when Attila swept triumphantly over one-half of the world, it proved
his fierce Paganism was a true creed, the gospel for the race. A sound
theology is preached from the iron lips of a i6in. howitzer, when it
has in its front guns of, say, a 6.2 calibre. Germany has pushed this
dreadful doctrine to its logical and dreadful conclusion, has preached
it from the iron lips of i6in. howitzers, and expounded it until it
seemed to succeed. But what we see to-day is its breakdown. The sure
Nemesis of wrong-doing is falling on Germany; and we are watching,
perhaps with only half-comprehending eyes, the last stage in the moral
wreck of a great nation, the penalties that smite it, and—let us pray
God—may heal it.
Finding,
The following resolutions on the subject covered by the foregoing
paper were passed by the Conference :
What Moral Causes Lie at the Root of this War?
It is clearly part of the duty of the Christian Church to discover
and assess, as far as lies in its power, the moral, as distinguished from


the political or economic, causes of this great war—a war which is
powerfully affecting the whole life of the world, which is testing, and
may revolutionise, all existing*institutions, and reshape human history
itself. For the guidance of the Methodist Church of Australasia, this
General Conference, after a careful review of all the facts, desires to
put on record its judgment:—
(1) As to the question of who began the war, no doubt is possible.
There is overwhelming proof that the guilt rests on Germany and
Austria, who wantonly and in a time of profound peace, took the steps
which made it inevitable.
(2) The central root of the war lies in that fundamentally wicked
doctrine of the State which Germany has adopted and proclaims, and
on which it acts. It is the doctrine that the State is above moral law,
and is the sole judge of its own acts. In national affairs, and in the
relations between nations, might is right, and the dispute as to what
is right is to be decided by war, which, it is claimed, “always gives a
biologically just decision.” Germany itself has been corrupted by this
doctrine; its diplomacy has been paganised ; its moral sense has been
perverted and destroyed, so that in the conduct of this war it casts off
all regard for honour and good faith, and violates without shame every
canon of humanity.
(3) The present war, in its progress, is found to classify the nations
engaged in it on moral lines and by moral tests. In the wars which lie
behind us it is not easy to discover any clear dividing line of right and
wrong between the opposing nations, but in the struggle now proceed-
ing the moral issue emerges clearly. One side is fighting for the safety
of the weaker nations, for the good faith of the plighted word 1 , for the
authority of moral laws in national affairs. As far as they are con-
cerned, it has become a fight for honour against dishonour, for hu-
manity against cruelty, for truth against falsehood, for love against hate
—a war for the ethics of Christianity against the ethics of paganism.
(4) This war is visibly supplying one of the most tremendous illus-
trations in secular history of the penalty which falls on a nation which
commits itself to a policy in quarrel with what may be called the
spiritual order of the universe. “The soul that sinneth, it shall die”—
that is the language of Scripture. It is one of the eternal certainties of
God’s universe. And it must hold true of that aggregation of soul,
the nation, when, as in the case of Germany, it is not only guilty of acts
of sin, but erects sin into a policy.
(5) As a result of this war, the Conference rejoices to believe the
political ideals and methods of all nations will be lifted up to a higher
level. The laws of God will have a new authority in national affairs.
As the significance of the war in this respect grows* clearer, it must re-
buke and arrest the impulse visible in secular politics everywhere—and
not the least in Australia —to think that politics and religion can be
kept in separate compartments; that God’s law does not hold good for
kings, and for Cabinets, and for Parliaments as surely as for indi-
viduals.


How does the War Effect
Christian Faith ?
This question was assigned to the Western Australian Conference,
and the paper dealing with it, prepared.by a Committee of that Confer-
ence, was read by its convener, the Rev. C. A. Jenkins.
HILE in every department of life we shall be faced with
grave prbblems arising from the new situations created by
this war, nowhere will the pressure of these new conditions
be more felt than in the sphere of religion. The whole war
rightly viewed pivots on religion. No creed or system can
be claimed to be religious if it is indifferent to the tre-
mendous issues of this conflict, and certainly the Christian faith must
take the responsibility for the creation of those ideas of personal and
national liberty, and of the inalienable rights of the weak, that have
inspired the entrance of our own beloved Empire into the arena. Chris-
tians rightly see in this great struggle but another phase of the age-
long contest between the material and spiritual conceptions of life.
It is but a new presentment to Eternal Justice of the plea of right" for
justice and liberty against the demands of might to enforce its will by
brutality and outrage.
The Christian Church is more than interested in this war. Its own
future is interwoven with the fabric of our national cause, and one can-
not be rent without the other. We are called upon to consider the prob-
lems concerning the Christian faith, not merely because the success of
the Church depends upon an adequate solution of those problems, but
because we realise that the future of the State and Empire depends
upon the success of the Church. If we are to be saved from a renewal
of the present struggle, it can only be by the triumph of
those Christian ideals of which the Church is the guardian and dis-
seminator. The spurning of those ideals by a nation has been the
primary cause of this present war. The Satanic ambitions and dreams
of Germany, supported by an infernal sophistry and machinery, have
driven the world to the very brink of ruin. It is the world’s extremity,
and God’s opportunity. Now, if ever, man will be convinced that God’s
way to progress and happiness is the only road. All other paths are
but blind alleys, or lead to precipices. The Church of Jesus Christ
must settle her own disputes, and solve her own problems if she is to
take the place for which her Master created her.
The problems are not those of doctrine. The cardinal doctrines
of the Christian faith are not really assailed. The moral system of
the Christian faith was never more emphatically vindicated. But two
things we must admit: First, that the Church has not been successful
in its presentation of the sublime teaching of Jesus Christ, else
there would not exist the grave and almost universal misunderstanding
as to the essential nature of our Master’s rule and thought.
Second, that the Church has not been sufficiently adaptable to the
changing conditions of life, and has lost many glorious opportunities


through her conservatism. This is a general though not universal ad-
mission. It is not in matters of essential doctrine that we must change
our ground. Doctrines that could be modified to meet popular opinion
would not be “doctrines” at all, but worthless sentiments. Yet we must
be prepared to meet popular conditions in the presentment of those
doctrines, and to adopt new methods of aggression against the evils of
our time, and, if desirable, new systems of church • government
and work, so that the great mission of the Church may not be hindered
for an hour by prejudice or conservatism.
The Doctrine of a Divine Providence.
The doctrine of the Providence of God is challenged, because
war and its horrors are permitted, and God apparently does not inter-
vene. The Christian religion is challenged because its claims are mis-
understood. It is assumed that when we speak of the Almightiness of
God, we claim unlimited power for Him in every province. Clearly
there is one sphere where His power cannot intrude, that is the Tealm
of the human will. God could have made us lower beings wholly sub-
ject to His will, but we would not be men. What God might do in an-
other world, or with another race, say in heaven with the angels, we do
not know. Presumably there the will of God is perfectly followed, not
through arbitrary exercise of power, but because angelic beings are
morally perfect through attainment, and there is no clash be-
tween the angelic will and the Divine will. With us it is otherwise.
We are morally and spiritually imperfect. We are children here. The
clear purpose of God is the production of' the perfect man, after the
pattern of Christ. The whole universe apparently exists for this one
purpose. Creation itself is perfect, but awaits its crown, perfect man-
hood. “The whole creation . . . waiteth for the revealing of the
sons of God.” Clearly, too, character cannot be arbitrarily made. It
must develop. No laws human or divine can do more than give char-
acter a chance for development. Since these two terms, manhood and
free will, cannot exist one without the other, there can be no good in
this world without the possibility of evil. God might have
made us incapable of doing wrong, but that necessarily would
mean that we would be incapable of doing right. The caged
tiger is not docile because it is caged. The planets follow God’s will
implicitly, but we cannot call them “obedient” except by a figure of
speech. There can be no morality without freedom since man is man,
and not a machine. He must be free to choose good or evil as he will,
v It is equally clear that while God has' left us free to
choose, He is intent on developing in us the will to good. That will
to good can only be trained by permitting evil. We must know what
sin is and what sin can do, before we learn to hate it. Unfortunately
we are reluctant to learn by precept. Had we been willing, the precepts
of Jesus would have changed the world long ago. We demand experi-
ence; and we get it. The bitterness’of sin must be tasted by all, that
we may know how exceeding bitter it is. Innocence is not righteous-
ness. Innocence is the untempted state. Righteousness is the success-
ful struggle against temptation, or of recovery after yielding to tempta-
tion, and tasting the bitterness of sin. God wants more than an inno-
cent world. He is intent upon the production of a righteous world.
It follows inevitably that if the purpose of God is the development
•of the perfect man, and character can only be won by conflict with evil,
two things must be permitted—the possibility of evil, and the freedom
of the will to choose or reject it.


Admitting this, God cannot be charged with any responsibility for
the moral evil of the world. Evil is wholly a fact of human, and not of
Divine, character. War is not essentially evil. It may originate in the
noblest impulses. The war in America had a noble and righteous
motive the liberation of the slave. The suffering and cost of that war,
though enormous, was nothing compared to the principle at stake—
whether or not a man owned his own soul. Some suffered bitterly, but
only for a time. The good bought by that suffering continues, is in-
finite and eternal.
Why Did Cod Permit This War?
But the enquiry really is, “Why did God permit this
war?” and the question is prompted by the magnitude of the conflict
and the horrors that have attended it. But in essence it is in specific
form the general question, “Why does God permit evil at all?” This
war differs only in degree from, the other incidents in the perpetual
struggle between the forces of good and evil. On a mimic scale that
conflict rages in every heart with greater or less intensity. “While I
would do good evil is present with me —I find then a war,” says Saint
Paul. ‘ .
In the present European war we see human sin marshalled, organ-
ised and equipped on a scale of magnitude never before even imagined.
But despite its spectacular and terribly impressive character, it is the
same old sin, hiding itself behind the dazzling glory of war. But when
seen near at hand known for the same sin that devastates the world at
all times, that makes a mockery of civilisation, of education, of charity,
the sin that elsewhere ignobly fills gaols and madhouses. Ambition,
lust, cruelty, treachery, brutality, murder, outrage, and the whole foul
brood children all of base human passion—are now g'iven free play
because a nation casts off the laws and restraints of God, and scorns the
Golden Rule of Jesus Christ.
God did not cause the war. He did not even permit it,
since permission means allowing something that might be
refused. He ha.s worked against war since the day of Cain. He has
fought the spirit of war in every way consistent with Divine love and
human moral freedom. By teaching the race higher things, by noble
example, by bitter experience of sin’s effects, by proof of what love and
meekness can do, by the sending of His meek and loving Son, in every
w 7 ay within the power and wisdom of Almighty love, God has fought
the spirit that incites war. For He has fought sin, and sin is the basal
cause of all war. And God does not leave us alone to struggle. Every
page of history shows God as the Great Ally of all just causes. He
intervenes, not with angelic hosts, as our Lord reminded us, but by His
Spirit. In His own mysterious way, He confounds the plans of the un-
worthy foe, causes him to over-reach himself in his pride, ambition, and
treachery, brings his fond schemes to nothing. God raises friends! and
yet more friends, for the just caused inspires our warriors with that holy
courage that only a clear conscience can give, and in a thousand ways
that elude us, because they are His ways, and not ours, He ensures
that the ultimate issue of every conflict is the re-affirmation that
“Blessed is that nation whose God is the Lord.”
The doctrine of the Providence of God is further challenged be-
cause apparently innocent people suffer more than the aggressors. The
problem may be magnified by the war, but it is not a new one. It is as .
old as mankind, and may be classified with the general problem of pain.
History is a great teacher. It reveals that advancement in every sphere


of human experience has been along the path of suffering. The world
gives birth to progress through pain and travail. The principle of the
survival of the fittest is possible only by the long story of the martyr-
dom of the creature, just as the history of human progress is the story
'of the martyrdom of man. Moreover, suffering on the part of indi-
viduals and nations is frequently of a vicarious nature.
In this God has set the great example. For the good of man He
sent His Son along the pathway of suffering—the sinless, innocent One
bearing shame and death for the guilty. In the incarnation of Christ
we have the perfect expression of vicarious suffering. Nevertheless the
principle of salvation through suffering is almost universal. A Saviour
in most instances.must needs be a sufferer. The principle is magnified
by the war. The history of nations tells the story of salvation and pro-
gress along these lines. Early Britain endured the devastations of the
Roman invasion, the sorrows of which eventuated in semi-barbarism
giving place to civilisation and Christianity. The Normans laid
waste the lands and homes of the English, but the years
of bitter experience brought with them culture and refinement.
The social progress of our Empire finds the same great principle in
operation. How great is our obligation to the vicarious sufferings of
our forefathers.
The Problem of Suffering.
The present war is a repetition of history on a gigantic scale. It
is evident that the progress of peoples through pain and suffering is the
only way. It would Qeem as if there was no other method. It is pos-
sible to imagine a world such as ours having its being without pain,
without suffering, without a disturbing element; but its progress under
such conditions would probably be uncertain, and it is more than likely
it would have perished by its own inertia and stagnation.
So in these days, with their sorrows and 'sufferings, the like of
which the world has never known before, if the ultimate blessings to
mankind be proportionate to the magnitude of suffering, and if those
blessings or results would never be achieved without those sufferings,
well, then, the world must heroically endure them.
Suffering is a great teacher. It takes the form of an ennobling
sorrow, a soul’s discipline. The lonely Christ, whose suffering
was none of His making, sanctified pain and sorrow. They
became sacred. Even if our Empire be wholly innocent, the sufferings
•of the age will make us a nobler people. We shall come through the
great shadow with a loftier conception of our duty to God and the
nations of the world.
The question submitted speaks of “the apparently innocent.” That
is a necessary qualification. We may be innocent of the great trans-
gression, the making of the war; but we have our national sins, and
have done things not creditable to us as a people. In days gone by
jealousy of Russia’s advancement threw Britain on the side of Turkey.
As a result the Dardanelles were preserved to that country. Gallipoli
has been our glory. It has been also our Golgotha. Belgium has suf-
fered much and has much yet to bear. While in no sense responsible
for the war and certainly not an aggressor; nevertheless Belgium must
make atonement for the devastation of the Congo and the sorrows of
its unhappy people. No one ventures to suggest that God brought the
war into being for the express purpose of punishing Britain and
Belgium. But the nation’s discipline through suffering will compel


them to investigate their own annals—suffering Belgium makes a.
persecuting Belgium impossible ifi the future. Britain, too, will never
again make the fatal mistake of supporting an unworthy people be-
cause it fears the progress of some other power. We may not all live to
realise the fact, but history will record that the world became a better
world because it had suffered much.
Does Prayer Count?
Again the providence of God is challenged because prayer is ap-
parently so. ineffective in bringing victory. The history of mankind
affords abundant evidence that the exercise of prayer is almost uni-
versal. The best and wisest of mankind have known the value of prayer
—even the heathen practises, as best he knows how, the same great
privilege. The testimony of the race shows that prayer is not a delu-
sion or a fallacy. The true spirit of prayer recognises the sovereignty
of God’s will. There cannot even be the suggestion that the objective
of prayer is to alter the Divine will. Our Lord prayed three times that
the cup of agony of the atoning sacrifice might pass from Him. Finally,
with the word of resignation upon His lips, “Nevertheless not My will
but Thine be done,” He faced the cross. The consummation of the
eternal purpose of God in the incarnation of His Son necessitated the
full surrender to His will. The cup did pass, not by avoiding the cross,
but in the consciousness of a completed task. Conformity to the will
of God implies on the part of the individual an earnest effort to forsake
sin and a striving after righteousness. It would be unreasonable to
expect God to answer prayer if he whc£ offered the prayer
still remained in open rebellion to the will of God. He must
show sincere evidence of an earnest endeavour to be in accord
with the Divine. So, too, in dealing with prayer from a
national point of view, the same principle must be observed.
It were a travesty of the righteousness of God, and a mis-
apprehension of His character and the nature of His Kingdom, to
expect that prayers for victory could be answered whilst the peoples of
the Empire were lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. But what
right has anyone to assume that prayer in its relation to the war is in-
effective p Who can say positively that God is not answering the
prayers of His people? In what way is God expected to answer those
prayers ?
The fact is God is answering prayer; it is in the way that He sees is-
best for mankind. The entry of America into the great struggle, as
well as innumerable events in the war that are not easily explained,
may be steps in this direction. If the prolongation of the war means
the deliverance of the vast bulk of the peoples of Russia from serfdom,
the enfranchisement of the Jews, the independence of the Poles, the
purging of Belgium from the stain of the Congo atrocities, and the
awakening of France to the need of population, the destruction of the
spirit of complacency and selfish indulgence within our Empire, the
destruction of German militarism, and the deliverance of Palestine
from Mohammedan rule, who will dare to challenge the wisdom and
goodness of God in not immediately answering our prayers for victory
at this stage of the war?
With unwavering confidence in God we believe that our Empire,,
with garments cleansed in the blood of sacrifice, shall champion the
cause of the submerged peoples of the world, and the glory of the latter
days shall outshine the glory of the former. Then shall it be made-


manifest that the apparent ineffectiveness of prayer in securing an earlv
vctOjy was but the evidence of our lack of spiritual visiS *
<;rl , ri lbe doctnne j s °/. sl . n and salvation are further challenged by ob-
scuring: the spiritual iniquity of sin in the individual in the shadow of
great national wrongs done and borne. One of the outstanding features
? e .P r^ sent ar i s the mhuman methods adopted by our^enemies
iTrn e b CSS VJ he f 5° Wer ° f ° Ur youth without hesitation have fhf sen
k® ° u ffh path of duty. Their readiness and self-denial have not g-one
unrewarded in the hearts and minds of a 2-ratefnl npnnlo mv.
suddenly find themselves living under enri^ fy new The
Personal Responsibility.
quickly all** the “ T?*** J**
and obscure moral vision, so that sm loses m?mh of y h “ heart
horror. There is no possible escape from th; ... 1 s m oaningt and
tolerated, the worst °in P us S wifi fin^^pp^rnnkiLTo^seek s domin' a
young- soldier suddenly finds that do u• . seek domin ion. A
swept away. The restraint of home the close^a^f^V^ l^? 8 are
ones, the influence of church fellowship the regard
fellow man are removed. He finds himself in d J* llfe of his
beset his path. Is it any wonder that mant und field Where snares
find their standard of conduct perceptibly “T c ? ndltlons
general tendency, we are thankful that m™, * lhou B'h this is the
with their Christian character unsullied 6thers f how™ 60 Win th ™ u^h
take advantage of these abnormal times to Sn ZT ’ Quick t 0
sinful desires, and are only too readiiv »r,ic^ Ve * e s co ? rse to their
are called upon to offer .heir lives, an/iiceuselor°“hem fs'per^
doctrines, Ld afford*.* **,“ faith and
against sin, whether practised by the individ f Wa ? e ceaseless war
Christianity that did not resLt boft evi “hZ s 'V I,a ' i ° n - The
anything but a blessing to mankind Wh P nT ■ evd men w °uld be
the world will discern the true cause of b * 2? 1 ? 6 ° f " ar dies a ”ay,
stand as never before the dreadful menace of sin “nerb" and “ ndf;r -
Christ dare not lower His standard, nor be siient iJIh Church of J esus
evils that threaten His Kingdom Th P Jr' * m tbe P re sence of the
fully demonstrated than Tn the 'D Jseml W* has never beer » so
must reaffirm the nature and power of sTh inf"*? 1 *; The . Churc h
itself! and His teaching save th e C world C from
doctrine of salvation°by 1 grac e h ”hrough ah h a ffe C^ ed by - the war is the
tion to the future life 5 faith ’ and specially, in its rela-
a changed accent. Speculation is Hf^as' ten f dency toward
human sacrifice and the safety nf &S 1 r , edem P tlv e power of
attitude of mind £ less TdirL Wh ° d,ed in battle - This
a pathetic entreaty. C a engre tban a rev erent enquiry and
“There is no God,” the foolish saith,
J3ut none, there is no sorrow ”
And Nature, oft the cry of faith ’
In bitter need will borrow:


Eyes which the preacher could not school,
By wayside graves are raised:
And lips say, “God be pitiful,”
Who ne’er said, “God be praised.
This new interest in the facts and conditions of salvation we must.
welcome, and seek to direct into legitimae channe • Th
’SSh" £ STS "
SSsEra f£!
seen rising to ihe skies, and its cnfranch.sement realising afresh that
“ Sweet and blessed country,
The home of God’s elect.”
-e w
to light'by the Gospel.
Light on Death.
The men who died inbatrit, have moved^ew
wb? C ihns fell we h h rar the <af ,onons
assurance that Absent from , better” “Blessed are
with the Lord”-“with Christ which is far better thanks to
the dead which die in the , L ord But while we t.h *’ d the
God for all His servants departed The pain-
task of discrimination is necess 1 P h P haye died wit hout pem-
fiUcd questions perms of character and limitation
tence and faith? Will yourn s . • , f divine judgment?”
of opportunity find recognition in the ?rnciples^M^
To these, and similar cognate encjuir , Qn human know-
address ourselves, hl f n V i ly , reC ?p en S revealed We have no warrant to
ledge beyond that g which with a know ledge of the atoning
encourage the hope that n y > Christ persists in a wilful re-
workmg of our Lord and S t(> enter upon and enjoy
jection of His grace in m s , rnTriP n ut it is not for man to
nor the awe of man’s moral responsibili^


powers d unfor^lven carries its own penalties and executive
“For ever round the mercy-seat,
The guiding- lights of love shall burn •
But what if, habit-bound, mah’s feet
Shall lack the power to turn?”
by that act, redeemed, whatever his wof 5 ?f' ld ’ “
further consideration, such implications 1 -T B " t upon
sublime, may be seen to be as irrnmr T f hun ? an sacrifice, however
as misleading Such sacrifice is . n , <IS irre eva -nt, as mischievous
of sentimental eteavaeance V be “P te »»y the in-
solation to remember the brave bearing of our men Then-Te™ 1 * 16
C„ C con°s f ci' h us, r y “ f ,h oufrS:
vided an offering. 7 YvJ gWede?ou £S%E2v a % Un r°2 S ?° Usly they pro '
and chivalry, thfir vicarious suffeSng^ and
gleams of heavenly light pierce the lnri,q * r , M ,any radlan t
touches of human phy that recall the H to -. morrow of the battlefields;
s* a
world unto God. that He mi^ht reconcile the
Bivine” sacrifice ?o o \hTde K re h e%r^ o nr-, 0f f lh - human sacrifi “ t 0 ‘l*
death as in His life the Son of £ ?° f V,Canous content. In His
Christ died unto sinh man dies b£ ft C S S /,f' S 0 ° f men-
render to sin’s conditions; man’sVeith is snrrend.T” 5 -r ral sur -
Grace carries dea‘h as a c surrender to sin’s nature.
flcVs St^l^
other bases— the foundations of grace grace free * , ope ,^ eposes on
vellous; grace that never •* g ’ race tre ®’ boundless, mar-
efficacy. " faltCrS m ,ts q uest and never fails in its
“ The dying thief rejoiced to see
That fountain in his day ;
And th f re may I, though vile as he,
Wash all my sins away.”
That classic illustration is no exceptional 'instance It hnld<= the r i
efface of God for sinners in its nahed sLpllc^td’S
“ ™r°ugh all . the depths, of pain and loss,
binks the plummet of His Cross •
Never yet abyss was found
Deeper than that Cross could sound ”


The sacrificial death in battle, even for those who are not as Christ
mav mean much for their approach to Him-for the quickening- of the
Ss powers of spiritual vision and faith. Assuredly, no““Sfof a
can lose its reward, and the reward for such an. act ,nay be a t <.f a
saving l conviction and repentance for the life it closed Further, the act
of life’s self-surrender to a Divine ideal may be itself the expression o
a salng faith FaTth is the attitude of the soul. Here motive and will
are determining- factors.
Who may appraise the spiritual faith inspiring *at profuse pour-
ing forth of the red sweet wine of youth, bringing back to
and holiness again? Or who may etsimate the spiritual conditions
created and the religious emotions evoked by presence of war s hazara
Ind death ? '■The wfnd bloweth where it listed.: thou heares. , the sound
thereof but canst not tell whence it cometh nor whither £ joeth _
is every one that is born of the Spirit.” Let us not limit His influence
even S the moment and act of dying. “There is life for a look at the-
Crucified One.” Of how many may it be said:
“Between the saddle and the ground
He pardon sought and mercy found.”
With sin upon the soul, and life set in opposition to the Divine will,
i, mus, ever be “a fearful thing ,o fall into the hands of. the living,
God ” But in such a case would it not be a more fearful thing to fall
out of His hands, were such a thing possible? Our dead are m the
hands of a just and righteous Father, whose holy bve enfolds all souls
in all worlds through all- ages. It is the Father who deals with th ,
searching and trying, giving every award or Penaltyas
for them They are in God’s care wherever they be. He is making the
most of them.' Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Our
wisest words here are the humblest we can speak, but this we
and is it not enough: “In the Father’s House are many abodes ?
“ I know not what the future hath
Of marvel or surprise,
Assured alone that life and death
His mercy underlies.”
Finding.
On the subject dealt with in the foregoing paper, the following
resolutions were adopted by the Conference:
(1) The doctrine of the loving and ever-working Providence of
God as taught in the Bible, is not rendered less certain by the wide-
spread suffering caused by the war. Human suffering is only part of
the larger question of the existence of evil, and the key to that problem
is found in the endowment, at once splendid and perilous, of free will,
which man possesses, and without which moral character would be an
impossibility.
(2) The doctrine of the goodness of God is not shaken by the fact
that so much of the suffering of this war falls upon those who had no
share in its guilt. We are so knitted together as a race, as a society,
as families, that we all profit by the labour and sacrifice of others. It
is part of the same law that the innocent must bear part of the suffering
which wickedness brings upon the wrongdoer. This is the teaching
of the Bible, and finds perpetual verification m history.


(3) Christian teaching- as to the office of prayer is not disproved
by this war. No true prayer g-oes unheard or remains unanswered
But God’s plans have the scale of His eternity. His methods run
beyond the sweep of our thoughts. We must wait God’s time, and con-
sent to His choice, remembering always that an essential—and some-
times the greatest—office of prayer is to bring our human wills into
agreement with the will of God.
(4) The war is the greatest verification in secular history and in
secular terms of the Bible teaching as to the reality and nature of sin.
[5l The doctrine that human salvation depends on the atoning
sacrifice of Jesus Christ is of the very essence of Christianity, and
holds good for all men and through all time. What is the value in
spiritual terms, of the self-sacrifice of so many of our merf at the
e °rui’ - an ° k° W ar at spirit in them reflects, and accepts the sacrifice
ot Christ are questions on which' only God can decide, and we have
no right to anticipate His judgment. He will judge rightly and His
sentence will be the judgment both of infinite righteousness and of
innnite love.


What New P roblems does the War
Create for the Christian Church?
This subject was assigned to South Australia, and the paper deal
ing with it, prepared by a committee of that Conference, was read by
its convener, Rev. W. G. Clarke.
HAT new problems for the Church does the war create,
and what new adjustments in our methods and polity are
desirable or necessary in order to meet them?”
While it is too soon to arrive at definite conclusions as
to what new problems the war has created for the Churc ,
and the necessary adjustments in methods and polity re-
anu me uatooaij' . . - . ■,
quired in order to meet them, it is not too soon to be thinking- seriously
about the subject. When the war is over, and we are able to see its right
perspective, and to assess its results, we shall be better able to dea
with the chang-es it has made and the problems it has created. Bu
without waiting- for that time, which, God grant may come speed ly
and in the right way, there are certain facts, and ce rtam c _ ol J d^ lons
growing out of those facts, which demand immediate consideration
There is the fact of the war itself, unparalleled in its wide extent,
its scientific barbarism, its expenditure of wealth and life. There is the
fact of millions of lives cut off in their early prune, and the homes
from which they went bereft of their very best. There are the millions
of wounded and Y maimed who are incapacitated for the work they womd
otherwise have done. There are the tens of millions who have taken up
arms who would never have done so but for the call that would not be
silenced. Future Life.
The ever-increasing death roll has brought into prominence the
problem of the future life and demanded consideration. The Church
must have an answer for those who are asking old questions with a new
and eager desire Not only are they repeating the enquiry, If a man
dfe shill he hve again?” but they ask what do we really know
about the conditions under which the departed live? In deal
ing with the problem there will be the temptation to allow
emotions to weigh more than reason, and perhaps to say
Zre than we have any right to say. But nothing must
prevent a clear answer being given. Possibly it may be a confession
of ignorance. Better that than a dogmatic assurance about a subject on
£" knowledge a. bes, is partial. The t.me has come when
utterance on eschatology must be clear and <definite- There is; a■ w
difference between what we are supposed to believe and ■ what I we ■ dobe
\\7ve Silence is being misunderstood. The silence ought to be broken
subterfuges" XTgUm
" s c ca,fx l xrx SXXS
S" aTI. XarXr thTT' diX XT' XUS


than many have thought it to be. The grace of God is
as far-reaching as man’s sin, and infinitely stronger. While refusing
to accept the fallacy that any merit, even that of the hero who gives his
life for others, is sufficient, in itself, to ensure admission into the King-
dom of heaven, we must make allowance for the imperfect faith and
imperfect life of many who never had a fair chance. If they had known
what they were really required to believe they would have been num-
bered among believers; if they had seen Jesus as He is, they would
have loved Him; and to many that vision has come in the trenches and
amid the battle's roar. These men will be found on Christ’s right hand,
not because of their self -sacrifice, not because of any good in them-
selves, but because they were for Christ when thev saw Him, and knew
Him.
The Returned Soldier.
Then there is the problem of the returned soldier. While every-
thing is being done that can be done by the Parliaments and the people
to find them employment, it must be recognised that repatriation is
more than a matter of land ; it is a matter of mind and heart. These
men must be made to feel that their native land is worth fighting for,
that their fellow subjects are worthy of the sacrifices made for them.’
In order to do this class rivalries and jealousies and conflicts must
cease. The waggon of social reform must be hitched to the star of re-
ligious faith. Co-operation must take the place of competition, and the
extremes of poverty and wealth must be forever done away.
The returned soldier is not coming back the same as he went away.
The boys will come back men. Mentally and morallv they will be
changed beings. Unfortunately in many cases it is to be feared they
will be moral wrecks; the temptations of Egypt, France, and England
will have got them down. Without palliating their faults, ought it not
to be remembered that the nation is very ‘largely responsible for the
severity of the temptations? Who is to blame for the wet canteens and for
the swarming prostitution ? Those who have failed to prevent the mis-
chief must not fail to do what they can to cure it. The menace to our
homes must be dealt with drastically, and at the same‘time we must
seek to bring the returning sinner to the Heavenly Father, as well as
to the earthly home.
Thank God there will be among the returning many who have been
kept from great transgression. They will come back with faith
strengthened, and characters purified by fire. They will surprise us by
the progress they have made. Between these two classes there will be
thousands who have had serious hours when they have faced the reali-
ties of the trenches, and have had impressions made upon them that will
never be erased.
Home Problems.
There is also the problem of the men who have stayed at home.
Some have done so because they felt it was their duty. It has cost them
as much courage and resolution to stay as it has cost others to go. They
must not be penalised for not going. There are the physically unfit.
They are not to be thus classified and then passed by. Why are they
unfit? If through their own pernicious habits, or those of others, the
cause ought to be discovered and dealt with. There ought to be a wide-
spread effort to increase the average efficiency so that each one may
make the best contribution possible to the commonweal. We are not
going to keep pace with other nations and hold our own in the com-
mercial world by legislation of a protective kind, unless we do what we


can-and ought-to prove ourselves equal, if not superior, to any nation
° D Thm leads us to notice another class demanding serious attention-
, 11 Thp armv of cowards, wasters, gamblers, loafers,
for war Purposes there can only be
s m warm r 3 paraskesTo grow and Sourish and impoverish tire industrious
and S "Sd prohfemfar'e not created by
It may be objecrea uia new nQr are they speC ially for the
Chmch’ While giandng that we claim that the Church is called upon
m as g never^before and to take the lead in bringing about
the second part of our subject, “What new adjust-
ment are necessary in our methods and polity?” we suggest the follow-
mg:"~ A united Church.
t Tt will be necessary to re-state our beliefs and to emphasise the
things ce'ain anT essential. Many have been unbelievers because , c*
their misconceptions of what they were required to believe. A minimal
Seed an ampi science, a mardmal faith" is the requirement of the
hour Better believe less and believe it more than to hold loosely a long
CreC< Out of this there ought to grow a larger unity of the Churches in
things essential. Denominations must lose sight of their minor differ;
Sees or die Men who have fought side by side in the trenches lived
together in dug-outs, sung and prayed and celebrated tile Lord s Supper
together in bams and buildings, sacred and otherwise; will refuse-to be
separated by trifling things.
“We do but need for a better love
That we knew each other more;
Mistaking brothers for enemies,
We have lost the right before.”
These men will know each other better,_ and the Church will lose them
if it does not become more liberal and include them. . ,
W’th the larger faith there will need to be greater freedom in the
methods of public worship. If politicians have become ru y,
so have the preachers and church officials We must get
out of the old ruts and take care not to get into new
ones The tendency to formalism must be guarded agams.
The spirit must not be stifled by the flesh; the power must not
be strangled by the form. Preaching will have to be more virile and
forceful and practical. Men will not go to church to listen to moral
essays or even to eternal truths in language that has become obsolete,
or to dry disquisitions on abstruse subjects. But they will go to listen
to men who have a message for the hour and who speak it as if they
believed it and meant others to believe it.
Church Problems.
Our young men must have a large place in 'the affairs of the
Church A great effort must be made to tram them for office and ser-
♦


vice. The Men’s Movement must be extended and utilised. The
Kindergarten method of dividing into small groups and multiplying
the number of assistants might be used with great advantage m
departments of Church work. “To every man his work” is an ideal
only to be reached by constant and careful effort. The greatest contri-
bution some could make to their Church would be to resign some of the
offices they hold and allow others to occupy them. In all our Churches
. we ought to have a number of sub-pastors always on the look-out for
those who need shepherding.
The conditions of membership need to be clearly defined and ex-
pressed in the language of the times. Notwithstanding the clear teach-
ing of Jesus Christ that the Spirit is like the wind that “bloweth where
it listeth,” and that of St. Paul, that “There are diversities of opera-
tions, but the same Spirit,” there is always an inclination to regard as
essential the form, the manner, the method that was used in Our own
case. Because certain means of grace were helpful to us, we insist
that they are necessary to all. The form of to-day becomes the fetish
of to-morrow. The brazen serpent must be crushed to powder when it
has become an idol. The qualification. for membership in the Church
and for service for the Master is not correctness of belief or perfection
of character, but a heart full of love for Christ shed abroad by the Holy
Ghost.
Social Problems.
It is open to debate whether or not there will be a danger of
militarism growing up amongst us. But it is very certain that the very
qualities which have gone to make the British Empire the power she
is in the present war, must be utilised for spiritual ends. The magni-
ficent enterprise, enthusiasm, courage, devotion, that have been put
into combating' Prussianism ought to be put into social and moral
movements. If this were done, what changes could be made in the
dwellings of the poor; how speedily would prohibition be an accom-
plished fact; what mighty advances would be made in Foreign Missions
and Home Missions ; dreams the most Utopian would materialise and
the apocalyptic vision of a new earth would be realised, and the world
would see. that the blood of the brave had not been shed in vain.
What we shall need after the war is what we needed before and dur-
ing the war; not so much new methods, or machinery, or adjustments,
as a new passion and potency. When there is the discovery
of a new force it is soon seen that new means are needed for its utilisa-
tion. You can’t use vour old oil lamps or your gas pipes when you put
on the electric current. You don’t attempt to harness electricity to a
bullock dray. The old machinery is scrapped in order to make way for
that which is suitable for the new power you are employing. It we get,
as we ought to do, an intenser abomination of sm and a stronger de-
termination to destroy it at any cost; a clearer sense of spiritual values
wh ; ch will lead us to trust less in material and physical forces ; a w
love and a stronger faith; if our baptism is not that of john, cold and
separating, but that of Jesus, meeting, burning, permeating, energising,
uniting, then we shall find the real problem and its solution and our
polity and our methods will adjust themselves or make way for others
that are suitable and sufficient.
Nothing is more certain than that the. present h° ur is rich with
opportunity, which must not be allowed to pass unused. The days are
evil, but they are full of possibilities of good. Let us, by prayer and
.zeal, buy up the opportunity, and the Kingdom of Christ will be


advanced with a rapidity never known before, and the King- will come-
to reign over His people.
We recommend:—
(1) A re-statement of our essential beliefs and of the conditions of
Church membership.
(2) The formation of Men’s Brotherhoods, with a view to getting
into closer touch with young- men, and finding them work in the church.
(3) The arrangement for public services in which there shall be
greater freedom and simplicity.
(4) Greater aggressiveness in social, moral and spiritual enter-
prises, especially in temperance and missionary work.
(5) Effort to promote the organic union of the Churches wherever-
possible, and to co-operate where union is practicable.


National Dangers and How to
Combat Them.
This subject was assigned to the New South Wales Conference,
and the paper dealing with it was read by the convene
mittee, Rev. E. Dyer.
VZr'-CZX N any thoughtful approach to this subject, its largeness
(fiJI an( i difficulty are soon discovered. It is like a wide-spread-
\\ T I) tug varied landscape that a fixed lens cannot cover, nor a
1 A) narrow canvas contain. It would be easy to make a survey
of national dangers in which details should ke undu y
elaborated, perspective be disregarded,
m ade ,o include everything to tlm far.best honeon, t.ll the
ne°ed to wf need, W we can. to find the roots from which our
mtional dangers spring. Then we may hope to find means for dealing
wX«he d dan?e r r S s as They retire to be deal. with. Wh« tt,n, «
thoughts to foots instead of branches, to seeds instead of fruit, t
because we believe that among such things we are most likely to
what we need most to discover.
To-dav the light of war falls on all our life, and we must needs see
most things in it! grim light. Whether war has created new dangers
m our nafional life?o”no?, it has certainly thrown a strong light on
some of the familiar dangers lying there, and we see them just now
as we have never seen them in other days. We must also needsi 1
on our dangers in the light of their relation to the
Church. These two things may, in some degree, guide us m deal g
with our subject. . , ,
Our survey must necessarily be limited, since time is short > and th ®
subject very wide. If, therefore, some things are not touched in this
paper, they are not necessarily forgotten; it is simply a case m wh c
onlv a little can be attempted; and the line taken is selected af er
careful consideration. It deals with matters that are certainly import-
ant, if only few out of many.
Perhaps we may best achieve our end if we begin with things per-
sonal and individual, and observe how such things spread from the tn-
dividual outward. A small stone dropped into still water will start
series of circling ripples that will spread to the w f*er m £
directions So natural life takes up the individual impulses, a nd
comes a sort of aggregate of that which makes iip the l[ ™ m
Because of this, national life may be endangered by things that seem
to lie mostly in the life of the individual.
The Abuse of Freedom.
One root of such national danger is found in false and misleading
ideas of personal liberty. This is surely the talk
crop of our national dangers spring. We need only listen to the tal
we P often hear about liberty, to be convinced of the danger that may


arise in this direction. We often listen to talk concerning personal
liberty which can mean nothing, except, that every individual is per-
fectly free to do as he pleases in all things, always, and everywhere.
Such a conception of liberty needs only to be expressed even roughly to
show what its real character is. It is self-centred ; it has no place for
restraint or discipline; it neither counts nor regards obligation. Such
conscience as it possesses has neither law nor judge; its conception of
good is material; its idea of joy is easy pleasure through appetite or
inclination; its horizons are always narrow; it is weak to resist tempta-
tion ; it cares little for great endeavour or achievement; and it sees no
meaning in sacrifice. In short, it has no law, no kingdom, no king to
whom it kneels —it is freedom, wide, homeless, purposeless. It may be
in many cases the fruit of ignorance. It may be the result of passion.
It may be partly the result of environment, or it may be caught like the
infection of some widespread disease. It may be taught by embittered
men, or by vain, conceited teachers, proud of their own ignorant
vapourings. But no matter how it is spread, or how it increases, it is
always the same in essence.
Liberty of that kind is bound to bring danger; and the spread of
such a conception of liberty is certain to bring grave danger to the
national life. The individual, believing in such unconditional liberty,
may become gambler, drunkard, sensualist, sweater, striker, loafer,
money grabber, parasite, merely as a result of such belief acting
through appetite or opportunity; and in the spread of such belief we are
faced with one great danger of our national life. A man will say that
if he has inclination to drink spirituous liquors and money to buy them,
whether in his own pocket or in his neighbour’s pocket, he is perfectly
free to buy and to drink. And another man will argue that since it will
increase his bank balance to sell such liquors, you should not interfere
with his individual liberty in so selling; and hence the drink traffic,
Another will argue that when the fires of lust burn in his body, he
should be free to use any woman who will consent to such commerce,
and that any means may be used to seduce any pure girl. Again, it will
be said that when some fellow-man is in necessity and must sell either
his property or his labour, any man is free to buy at any price. Or it
will be argued that when any combination of men acting together can
by the force of such combination compel some advantage to themselves,
they are perfectly right so to compel their neighbour or neighbours;
and hence many social evils.
Such ideas of individual liberty—and they are all too common
among us to-day—when they have no care for the rights of others, no
mercy for the sins of others, are selfish to the core, always anti-social,
poisonous to all wholesome life, and fruitful in an awful crop of evils.
They are lawless and loveless and Godless in the worst sense. And
whether the fruit of such ideas be matured in the world commercial,
political, social, or in the smaller world of the family, it is a terrible
harvest of misery and desolation.
As many things may combine in producing this false and mis-
chievous thinking, so it may manifest itself in things that may seem
to have no relation to each other; but we need to remember that it is
one and the same thing seen in many manifestations. In one direction
it puts away the Bible and turns its back on the Churches; in another
direction it breaks down home restraint and despises parental control;
in yet other directions it has other manifestations. It has little respect
for elders or for office; it disregards history, and is not much concerned
to provide for the future. It is fatal to the long following of lofty


ideals, and it loves neither discipline, self-discipline, nor long labour for
distant results. It knows no perspective of life, and it has no desire
to serve in any great cause or to help any high purpose. In its growth
it becomes a mere blind following of appetite, propensity, or self-
interest..
That men are free to will the right, and free to will the wrong, no
Methodist is likely to deny. But every instructed man is bound to deny
that any conception of personal, individual liberty is right which pro-
duces such results, and shows itself in such things as those detailed.
Nor will he deny by a mere protest against gambling or drink, against
lust or greed. He will deny on much broader and stronger grounds.
The real danger of all such thinking is that it is lawless and loveless,
that it takes no account of the teaching, example and sacrifice of Christ.
It may argue against the reality or authority of these; it may hate them
in a spirit of bitter revolt; or it may treat them with the utmost in-
difference ; but it is in each case, and always, the same spirit. It is in-
deed, to borrow apostolic language, a "root of bitterness,” and when
it springs up the Church is troubled and many are defiled.
The Penalties of Lust.
There is one manifestation and fruit of this thinking and spirit
that challenges attention to-day, as, perhaps, it never did before.
That is, the awful practice of lawless sexual intercourse, and the terrible
things that result therefrom. It seems that a teriible increase of
venereal disease has come through war; at least, the life we live during
a state of war has made it all visible in a terrible fashion • When we
remember how that vile disease spreads, how it strikes the innocent,
pure young bride through the guilty, unworthy bridegroom; how it
lays hold of the faithful wife, whose delight is her children, through
the adulterous, unfaithful husband; how it fastens like doom on the
unborn generations—then we realise in some degree how terrible this
thing is. We see it following, like a very shadow of death, the woman
of the streets; and smiting like heli the young men who refuse re-
straint. We hear the count of the men who attend the special night
clinics provided at some of our public hospitals for the treatment of
this disease. We learn of the numbers of men enlisted to fight the
battles of the nation who never face the foe, because before they reach
the battlefield they are smitten by this disease; and we shudder as we
think of its awful grip upon our life. It is the fruit of that liberty which
is both iLwlels and loveless, a fearful Dead Sea fruit. We cannot close
our eyes to the fact that many agencies, more or ess directly are con-
stantly helping to minister to this lawlessness. What is called art does
it by stage and picture screen; what is called literature does it by
countless pages of unholy suggestion; what is called fashion does it in
the unseemly dress of womanhood that we so often meet on our streets,
and the dirty ; est ahd story of contaminated manhood does.it for youth
and boyhood. J Perhaps in no portion of our life is the false idea of per-
sonal liberty working more deadly havoc to-day Here> it shps; from he
leash of restraint, and from the cover of modesty all thesexual passion
in the days of its vigour; and the result is a hell upon eart .
Tn another direction and perhaps a more painful one still, the same


: point; it is not among- the untaught, but among- the educated that this
thing- 1S most noticeable. What it means to l nation in which it is
udespread, France has known in these last years. If we dig down to
free ,o do te, | ible PraCtiCe - , We Sha “ find there the Wea that we
are tree to do as we please even to this extent; that the practice of such
things does not reflect on our citizens’ life or our religion. This sad
side of our life provides food for much serious thought It is to-dav a
■danger to our national life; and it may be a bigger one to morrow
The Dismissal of Cod from National Affairs.
Now if we turn to another side of our national life, we find another
danger that is well nigh the opposite pole to that we have glanced at
viz., an undue emphasis on the national life, an emphasif whfch &
fraught with many dangerous possibilities. We are in the midst of the
great war, and in it the very existence of the smaller nations is at stake
fouX T? es i ,s,ence ' vUl de >«” d ™ ‘he issue of battles now bring
fought, and yet, m a sense, the whole terrible, tragedy is the result of
a false emphasis on national life. “From all that I have seen lam
m ,° r f bK han e^j r convinced tllat the Kaiser and Prince Bismarck’meant
what they said when they averred that the German Empire was destined
lnnl^W 16 a ., domiMnt fac . tor in Europe.” So wrote Li Hung Chang
long before the great war began. “A dominant factor*’; that is the un’
due emphasis. That is the spirit which has made the great war- and
seeks and SPint embodled m Bismarck and the Kaiser. Such a spirit
seeks and uses many means for impressing its will on the neonle
SvTfre' W 1 not m Slta l e t 0 buy ’ bribe and contr °l what is nomin-
elL i f Press; it will with equal lack of hesitancy shape to its Z
fntn schools and pulpits; it will carry it? propaganda
t e . llfe °f friendly nations, or into any other place that mav seem
promise the success it desires; and most of all, it will strive to centre
all power rn some small group, the smaller the better for afl such SS
poses. It is a spirit of pride, ambition, lust of power- and it alwavs
seeks to be a dominant factor. It is evil because it uses such means
fflts p S ffo h tt ndS ’ aad does not hesitate to trample down other peoples
m its effort to reach the position of a dominant factor. P
• ?i b * S i. sp * rb: * s dangerous, because it so easilv and sn
quickly becomes a spirit which fears not God nor regards
Sbe selfish ” 7 o e ut eVe f that u “ The ? atrio ¥ sm of nations
m oe setnsh. Out of such patriotic selfishness we <r P t nan
with its dream of a great confederation, stretching
manfe,a l io r „ e '„i t tt COmeS US ■'? no,e wel1 ' a " d ‘° >»ve a care of any
of the same spirit in our own national life And it is
f ore-et* th at ° St WhlCh - mUSt needs be on our Stiard. We must not
rgret that the same spirit may express itself variously It miv find
SSKaf * pol,t » party politkd organisSfon ”n
sures Wp h crffamsatlon ’ as well as m military movements and mea-
sures. We have recently been loudly warned against the danger That


may come in military guise - well, let us not that .
however, remember that the danger is nearer to us m some other torms,
against which we are not so often warned.
That nolit’-cal phrase, “A White Australia,” commands wide accept-
ance .Say "all raiks and classes. Bu, let us.no, fat «o see how
easilv it ernes down to that patriotism of nations that is seltish.
easily it shuts out God’s redemptive purpose for mankind; equally
easily it kills the very spirit of the Lord’s Prayer; and it also may very
easily destroy the Christian idea of human brotherhood
that spirit which seeks to be the dominant factor; and it may at any
time use false and unworthy means to execute its purpose.
The Abuse of Power.
Nor can we fail to see the danger that lies _in a certain type of
political organisation, in which a small group ° f in d™du a]
tn rule the politics of a State or of the Commonweath. i Farll / v .™
must be the mols of such men, and governments must do their biddig
or fall; while the men who so rule are few and not m sense repre-
sentative or responsible to the community. This is surelv tne ve
Sence of ,ha, spirit which seeks to be “the domrnant factorßVH ever
“the Kaiser and Prince Bismarck meant what they said when t
averred that the German Empire was destined to become a dominant
factor in Europe, ’ ’ the men who foster this idea of government by a
few heads of a political party mean to be the dominant factor. A
tbrv like the great Germans, will surely come, sooner or later, to nave
they, like tne grear , th met hods they employ.
They wd be qute atisfied“o be The mksters of the land by being the
masters of governments and legislators. They may without stammer-
- nr blush declare that such method is democracy, government by
the ueople and Tor the people, pure and simple- and the people may
ev m come to believe such teaching. That is one danger the great war
should make us see. . f
Another manife h s . t ““ n st ° 1 | 'Joshed in"the Roman Catholic Chu’rch.
|T£{as'
rhonglTuTrobabTyls Any dream of controlling power in temporal
though it is. > Church, will always be a danger
things cherished, in that o.any other c instead of
*° rnThClstead of Rome Its methods may be peaceful penetra-
tioT instead 1 oTb’urning persecution, and
inquisition; but the s pmt an^fVe^priesthood,’and discipline that
authonty and power n the hands of o the d Pnes We
priesthood with an iron han unquestioning obedience;
-SS3SSSSigs-
HeEXthSewCdrm oW in .TmporTaS


long dreamed by Popes and priests, endeavour to bring the whole
Roman Catholic Church into line to support them in attempting to in-
crease and strengthen their power.
What Are The Remedies?
If then serious danger to our national life lies in these things and
m these directions, how shall we meet them? If this false idea of
liberty and this pernicious conception of power are real roots of the
great dangers of our national life, how may we best guard that life
against the dangers that beset it? Perhaps the light which the great
war sheds on our life generally may help us a little in this matter.
Many things allowed with easy toleration in the piping days of peace
are dealt with in quite other fashion in times of war. When the nation
is at vital grips with a great foe, it does not trust individual freedom
too far, lest in that freedom the nation be destroyed. In the times of
its great stress the nation limits and cuts off the drink traffic, limits
profit-making and private enterprise, controls ships and foods, and lays
many burdens on women and men for the good of all the nation. In
the times of war when the nation fights for its very existence, men
learn that personal individual freedom has no place or sphere, except in
the life of a free nation. If we would maintain the free life of our
nation, if we would maintain a national life like the pattern of Christ,
and in the Kingdom of God, then we, too, must have a care; we must
see that we teach, cultivate, and live, only that spirit of liberty in which
Christ makes us free.
A great fire through a forest will burn and blacken to the tree-tops,
but the forest will survive the fire. To make a forest primeval into a
land of fruitful fields and gardens needs other process than that of fire.
Your chopping axe, as well as your fire, will be useful; but you must
go farther. You must get down to the roots, and you must root out
and destroy there. When that is done, you can get in your ploughs,
and sow your seed, and begin those processes of cultivation that give
you the gardens of delight, and the waving crops of grain.
That is what we need to ever keep before us. A radical danger
requires a radical remedy. It is here that the sphere and life of the
Church come to the fore. The State cannot use the radical remedy.
It may cut and lop; it may prune and repress; and these in many
cases are necessary processes. They are not, however, the radical
remedy. The State may restrict the drink traffic, and it ought to do
so ; but mere restriction of the drink traffic does not alter that false
idea of personal liberty from which the drink customs spring. Nor
will legal restrictions and enactments against venereal disease cure
the untamed passion from which such things rise. A radical remedy
is necessary after all. While we are bound to aid the State in such
repressive measures as tend to cleanse the public life, and while we
are bound also to urge upon the State its duty in all such matters, as
well as furnish such guidance as we can to the State as it employs
such means and measures; unless we would fail in our work, we must
go much further than that.
All measures that merely restrict and repress are negative. They
have their place and their power; but the Church which merely depends
on them is using the tools of the corrupt Church of other days. The
very life of the Church should supply the radical remedy our dangers
make necessary.


The Work of the Church.
Her teaching - must be the teaching of the very life of Christ; her
witness must be her own high standing fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made her free. That is, she must stand in a freedom of
love, and grace, of faith and hope. A kindergarten class in which the
little people are taught to remember and rejoice in each other’s birth-
day is teaching, in one of the best ways, the lesson that correpts false
ideas of liberty; all such teaching tends to correct the false idea of
individual freedom by leading the child into thoughtful, kindly, un-
selfish relations with the other children.
If we are to put better things in the place of these false ideas—
and, after all, that is the radical cure for them—the Church must
return to the Holy Family. I do not mean return to the pictures and
legends of the Holy Family, though they are beautiful, and healthful,
too; but return to ideals and endeavours after family life that shall
sanctify the family and train for the days to come generations tf
women and men who will live for the best things, and for the Lord
Christ Himself. Hence one of the best means lyirig to the hand of
the Church for her work against the dangers that threaten our national
life is the work of teaching and training her children. If Sunday
Schools are no longer needed to pioneer education, they are needed to
pioneer the new and better social order, the higher womanhood and
manhood. Let the whole Church give herself to this work with en-
thusiasm and resource, and the days to come will show the fruit of all
we do now. And we are foolish if we are content to believe that we
have done, or are doing, all that is needed, or all that can be done,
in this direction. At this point, and it is the very fountain of the
national life that is to be, t we need as much hard thinking and
research as munition factories require, as much inventiveness as the
Royal Navy has needed and encouraged; as well as a leadership second
to none. We need to get back to the Holy Family of the Cotter’s
Saturday night, to the Holy Family of that old Epworth Parsonage;
for in so doing, we shall be applying radical remedies to our national
dangers. Even farther afield than this the- Church must help all
education. She must show that there is something better, unspeakably
better than mere utilitarian education, and she must lead the way in
it also. Church schools, that simply follow the State schools, will not
count as they should; they must lead in the direction of the new and
better life. Surely here the Church has a work and a responsibility
the State can never fill.
Then, if we would save the nation from the crop of dangers that
spring from the root of undue emphasis on National life, and its iron
desire to become the dominating factor, what shall we do? How can
the Church best bring salvation to the State in these, things ? There
are many directions in which she may help. She may, indeed, she
must, stand for democratic government that is “broad-based upon the
people’s will”; but to do that she must get at the will itself. Such
government is not by wire-pulling, but by will directing. And here
the preaching of the evangel of a new life of grace in Christ must be
made to count. It must be an evangelistic preaching, which seeks
results at the penitent form and in the inquiry room, but even both
results at the ballot box and in the Senate hall. Nor must it be by
the preaching of politics—that the Church has tried sometimes to her
shame and her sorrow. Nothing but broadest, deepest, and
strongest evangelical preaching will ever give the pulpit of to-day the
place it was meant to have. Let us see to that great work.


The Church must also exalt, purify, magnify, her witness for
Christ in the life of her fellowship. She must believe in the communion
of saints, but she must live in the communion of the Holy Ghost, in
order to beat down the evil desire to become the dominating factor,
no matter how that desire may be seeking its expression. That unholy
desire, disguised as Bismarck and the Kaiser disguised their purpose
by talking of a nation “destined” to become a dominating factor, may
seek its realisation through armed hosts, through scientific tariffs, or
through some hierarchy exclusive and proud; it must be broken and
ended —if we can break and end it—by a full-orbed,life that is the real
•communion of saints.
The Heroic Note.
To this end must we not revive, and develop anew our Foreign
Mission work? Have we not misread largely the meaning of our
Foreign Mission Work? Has it not been to us a great task, a great
responsibility, a great work always calling for men and money, and
much sacrifice? Sometimes a great missionary has made us feel other
things; and we have wondered if we really knew the heart of this great
work. It is not mine to tell its splendours or its triumphs, or plead its
claims and its needs, in the ordinary way. We have done much, and
we should rejoice in our great Missionary Society, and in its great men
and women. Still have we not, after all that, misread the heart of it
all? Is not our Foreign Mission work much more than our great task?
Is it not the very means our Master has appointed for the realisation
of His prayer, “that they may all be one?” There has been a belief
that modern Socialism, working internationally, could realise the
brotherhood of men. But it has failed thus far; and it is doomed to
failure right on, unless it can be redeemed. If we read the past we
may discover what Foreign Mission work has done, and what it can
do. To whom came the first great vision of human oneness and unity,
the first rapture of knowing that walls of partition were broken down ?
Surely it was to the Apostle Paul! To him came the truth that in
Christ Jesus “there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free.”
Surely that truth became real to him only as he was the Apostle of the
Gentiles. His life and his work among the Gentiles broke down his
own national pride, gave him a leadership much wider than any nation-
alist ever can know, gave his mind a breadth, and his heart a fire, that
still keep him among the very first of human leaders.
If we seek a modern illustration of the same thing-, we find it in
that little procession of Africans travelling down to the coast, reverently
bearing the body of the White Father they had learned to love so well.
David Livingstone lived the life that had no colour line, but who so
white as he ? He had no purpose to become the dominating factor in
Africa, but he was that factor; he acquired no territory, founded no
new state, but he bound men together in Christ, and in a real sense
opened the Kingdom of Heaven to the heathen. Here surely is the one
great means for improving all international relationships, and it is the
sole' privilege of the Christian Church. Across the crash of the great
war, the Balkans call the missionary, the lands that lie under the
tyranny of the Turk call the missionary, and loudest of all, Turkey
itself calls the missionary. When that call is royally answered by our
nation and by the other nations, many of our national dangers will
surely be put away, and we shall be finding what I believe is the way
-of salvation from some of our national dangers.


To sum up, we need to do all that can be done in the way of con-
trol and suppression of vice by the civil Government; we need to teach
with great earnestness and everywhere the true idea of personal liberty ,
we need to safeguard the emphasis on nationality; and, as a Church,
it is ours to do these things by the most insistent and intense preach-
ing of the Gospel of salvation through faith in Christ that is possible
to us as a Church. Further, we must practice, as we are not doing
to-day, the Christian nurture of the young in family life, church, and
school. And in a new spirit, as well as with a new vision, we must
enter into and press our Foreign Mission work. These activities of
the Christian life are the only radical remedy for our national dangers.
Finding.
The following resolutions on this subject were adopted by the
Conference:—
Believing that many grave dangers beset our national life, and
that these dangers call for strong action, we express our deepening
conviction that the drink traffic, gambling, lawless sexual commerce,
and the practice of limiting the birthrate in wedlock, should be dis-
couraged and restricted as far as possible by the Civil Government.
We further urge that the State should, as far as possible, protect
children and women, as they may be liable to suffer because of the
above-mentioned evils. We also urge our people to help as they have
opportunity all such action on the part of the Civil Government as
tends to lessen these grave dangers.
' Believing also that the State has no means of reaching the roots
of these evils, this General Conference declares that the time has come
when all our people must: —
(1) Guard most carefully the family life by providing for the
religious education of the children and young people of our homes and
Church.
(2) Provide for a cleaner, fuller, and more constant proclamation
of the evangelical doctrine of salvation only by faith in our Lord Jesus.
Christ.
(3) Maintain an#l develop, as the very best means to the attainment
of the fulness of our own Christian life, as w r ell as to the attainment
of our rightful place among the nations of the earth, a wider and more
vigorous Foreign Mission policy.


How to Ensure a Nobler Citizenship
and a better international
Relationship.
This subject was assigned to the Queensland Conference, and the
paper dealing with it was read by its convener, the Rev. J. Gee:- —
HERE are three words in this suggested subject which
clearly indicate the nature of the thoughts to be presented.
Ensure is to make certain or secure. For any man or
body of men to suggest that such a determination of this
subject is possible at the present time, or even remotely
possible would indicate gross ignorance of the magnitude
of the task. We consider then that the meaning in the mind of those
who chose this thorny and difficult problem for consideration is that
some suggestion shall be presented which will lead to serious thought
on the one hand, and some practical scheme on the other, whereby the
Church may not only show her interest in these all-important subjects,
but also that the. Church may convince the people of her sincerity and
her ability to take the lead in the education of the nation.
At this point we touch the crux of the whole matter. Governments,
leagues, associations, treaties, cabinets, conferences or any other as-
sociations brought into being for these purposes—that is, the enforce-
ment of laws or the acceptance of suggestions for the betterment of
things—can only succeed to the extent of measures which have
been used to educate the mind of the nation, or nations, involved.
Legislation in advance of public opinion is never the- success which is
wished, because- as a rule it becomes repressive. But laws, rules of
arbitration, ethical and moral control of the public consci«nce are al-
ways successfully applied when nations or communities have been
trained to receive them; understanding their importance and meaning,
realising their protective and purifying power, and loyally accepting
their lofty ideals. If these statements be true the question at once
arises—What medium of educating the public mind (or as we should
prefer to say, conscience) is the best qualified for the work? We say
unhesitatingly—the Christian Church. The home of the most precious
literature dealing with these subjects is within the Church. The ideals
which have been so far in the history of the world the most uplifting
were originally taught by the Founder of the Christian Church.
“We all agree that through the fires and tempest of the present
holocaust we have passed a crisis which renders it impossible to return
to former conditions. Life can never again be the same to us. We
British have to rebuild and reconstruct our ideas of the world at large.
Our splendid isolation has lost all it ever pretended to have. New a.nd
terrible inventions remind us we can no longer safely occupy the rich
plains, and fenced in pastures of our great Empire regardless of the
rights and conditions of others. In a sentence it is just here that the


enormous responsibilities of Christianity rest upon the leaders of the
united Churches of the Allies.”
This being so, our subject begins to unfold itself in its true re-
lationships. There is an education of the individual, and there is an
education of the nation. The one is dependent upon the other. Given
a nation with low conceptions of citizenship, you have a riation with
corrupt conceptions of its relationships to other nations. Thus any
nobler ideal of internationalism is ultimately bound up with a noble
ideal of citizenship. This brings us to our second word in the sug-
gested subject.
A Nobler Citizenship.
A citizen in the broad meaning of the word is a member of a State
or city, or better still a “freedman.” The word may have its local
applications, but here we accept its meaning as having a world-wide
significance. Another meaning must be clearly considered. The
loftiest ideal of citizenship remains with the New Testament. There
is an aloofness, a separateness, a purity of motive, and a
detachment of purpose in the New Testament ideal which
seems to remove it from the material ideals df these days.
But is it not true that this war became possible when a great power
taught a false idea of citizenship and love of fatherland P With unblush-
ing arrogance that power eliminated the New Testament ideal. It is
the duty of the Church to lead the nations back to that supreme
authority in all such teaching and kindred themes. This war has im-
pressed the world with the falsity and menacing dangers of an ideal
divorced from New Testament teaching. Here, then, we have the op-
portunity for the Church. £&e must reorganise and lead this better
mood of the world. She must impress by faithfulness and outspoken-
ness Christian ideals on the minds of the people.
What are the chief characteristics of the noblest type of citizenship ?
The Acknowledgment of the Privilege of Life Itself.
The materialistic idea of life is that it belongs to the one who lives.
The nobler ideal is that life is a gift, a trust, a great heritage of com-
bined responsibilities and privilege. “Man’s presence on the earth is
not an accident, but the wise arrangement of an infinitely wise Father.”
This thought suggests filial relationships. Jesus taught “There was
room enough for all as there was for lilies, and food enough for all as
there was for sparrows.” If these had a right to live so had man, and
if man cannot live it is the fault of society and not of God. This was
the first supreme human right which Christ asserted. If the Church
asserted that right, as it is within her power to assert it, the changes
in public opinion upon the meaning of life would be amazing and per-
manent. An ignoble ideal of citizenship cannot teach this doctrine,
and a noble ideal cannot be taught without it.
The Recognition of the Right of Liberty Through Obedience to the
Highest Law.
Law divorced from liberty is tyranny; liberty divorced from law is
license. Unless we are entirely mistaken the dreadful experiences
through which we are passing are the direct result of the ignoring of
these principles. There is a consuming desire for liberty, which is
license; there is a mad orgy of law for one power without obedience to
any other power. Thus we have the insensate rush for self-enjoyment
in these States, and the mad assertion of the “All Highest” to the


Central Powers. The two stand in an evil kinship to each other, and
both are in conflict with the truly balanced conception of liberty with
law, and law with liberty of the New Testament teaching. If you “could
emancipate the soul of man from its corrupt maxims, the overthrow
of tyranny and wrong would follow.”
The Acceptance of the Claims of Brotherhood.
A gift of life from an Infinite Father involves the privilege of this,
filial relationship. How quickly even the materialistic spirit of our time
seizes upon this, oftentimes for nefarious purposes, never dreaming that:
it is touching one of the precious jewels in the crown of noble citizen-
ship. How did Christ see the crown of a noble citizenship? “He saw
men in their essential moral nakedness and stripped of the mere acci-
dents of place. It was obvious enough that mankind was one. Rich
and poor, high and low were united by more precious things than gold,
and more enduring than learning, by the mystery of birth and the
agony of dying, by the impartiality of pain and the catholicity of sor-
row, and the meanest shared the thoughts of the highest, and the
highest the passions of the meanest. And so prejudice has its claim
on culture, suffering on happiness, poverty on wealth, for men are not
isolated personalities who can do as they like, but members of one
body and members one of another.” The enthusiastic socialist will
acclaim this—and deny it by everyday action ; while the man at the oppo-
site extreme of opinion denies it. The only true lasting ideal of citizen-
ship is within the New Testament, and our business is to see that it
becomes an accomplished fact in the life of city and nation.
The Noblest Citizenship Involves Sacrifice —Sacrifice of all that is Best
in Life, and Sacrifice if Need Be of Life Itself.
The creed of many to-day is the right of happiness. The right of
Christ was the right of sacrifice. And this cruel war has taught us how
in all states of society that call has been heard. On the other hand, we
stand aghast at the selfishness and greed of life around us. We feel it
is ignoble, debasing, and degenerate. The saviours of society or
nations or empires are those who tread the path of sacrifice. This war
has revealed the best and the worst of human character. But the prob-
lem as we stand at the parting of the ways is how to ensure that
humanity as a whole shall walk in the way of sacrifice. “Love is sacri-
fice, patriotism is sacrifice, holiness is sacrifice. And so all the things
the Church holds dearest—purity, prayer, faith, are forms of sacrifice.
She has voice and speech when all else is silent. She must ensure that
her message is heard, but she must make certain that her own sacrifice
is complete. She must see to it that this noblest ideal of citizenship
is hers before she can issue the call to the world. For “the Satanic and
the sacrificial were the two opposite poles of the ethics of Jesus, and
He taught that men were Satanic as they shunned sacrifice, and divine
as they endured it. Sacrifice is not a bitter necessity of life but a splen-
did right and privilege, for no other creature but man could conceive
the thought of dying for his fellow. This touches all phases of our
citizenship, nationalisation schemes, rights of property, rights of the
masses. All theories of democracy or aristocracy are dependent for
their future existence in the measure that they recognise this ideal.
How to ensure its domination over society and the nations is the prob-
lem of the hour. The Church must give herself to her own reconstruc-
tion under this law afresh before she can impose its obligations on.
others.


We now turn to the other pait of this suggested subject—
’the “creation of a better internationalism.” It will be seen
at once that, given the foregoing principles of a noble citizenship
in the lives of the people of the various nations, a better international-
ism would naturally follow. But until these ideals have permeated
world-wide society, what, can be done ? What remedial measure can be
suggested? To use the initial word of our subject title—how can we
■“ensure it?”
Why have we the spectacle of the Church standing- behind
the Allied powers in the war? It is because she recognises that they
are fighting for life, law, the gains of centuries of sacrifice, and against
the dominance of treachery and unscrupulosky. When the fight is over
how are the gains to be retained for posterity? As an immediate and
interim suggestion, we know of no propositions so pregnant as Mr.
Balfour’s in his covering message to the British Ambassador at Wash-
ington.
“The Existing Causes of International Unrest Should Be As Far As
Possible Weakened or Removed.”
Every disease must be diagnosed before a cure can be effected. All
grievances must be removed, or partially removed, in cases of dispute
before reconciliation is possible. And in the case of nations the same
.principle holds good. “In matters of dispute no settlement can be
reached until the causes producing the unrest are removed.” The value
of this suggestion lies in the use of the word “causes.” You get behind
the grievance, remove the creating factors, and hence the atmosphere
of thought and feeling is changed. The Church has advantages for
arousing public opinion in these matters. It is her mission, and she
will only be bringing into the relationship of nation with nation what
she has been striving through the centuries to bring as leaven to the
people.
Second. —That the Aggressive Aims and Unscrupulous Methods of any
of the Nations Should Fall into Disrepute among their own Peoples.
Evidently Mr. Balfour, with an experience of these matters which is
probably as great as that of most men, realises that it is useless to work
in advance of the people’s opinion. To ensure a process of education
among the nations whereby any government, military or civil,
would fall into disrepute with its own people if it persisted in unscrupu-
lous methods, there must be some advocacy by interchange of thought
between the nations. Representatives of one nation must visit the
others and by patient education —and it may be investigation—gain
knowledge of each other’s special needs, and the path of least resist-
ance in each for the acceptance of these lofty ideals. The Church can
•find a great mission in this suggestion, for she is in touch with all
peoples, and has some acquaintance already with their differences of
thought and desires. To so infuse the people of the nations with an
ideal of relationship with any other nation which will exclude treachery,
ambitions and aggrandisement, and the use of the “mailed fist,” is a
true mission of the Church and a fine application of the golden rule.
Thirdly.—That Behind International Law Some Form of International
Sanction should be Devised which would give Pause to the Hardiest
Aggressor.
This is essentially a penal suggestion, but we note it rests upon
the assumption. that international opinion has been so formed as to


admit of the introduction of some kind of penalty for the infringement
of international laws. Probably this will always be required as an ulti-
•mate safeguard for the freedom and rights of weaker peoples and lesser
nations. The Church must take her place in the advocacy of such a
suggestion as the above. Both her history and her teaching are full of
attesting the value of it. And she knows the value of law and order
controlled by the supremacy of love and good will. To ensure fulfil-
ment of the other two suggestions, this third one is absolutely essential.
In conclusion, shall not the Church, represented by this great
Assembly take her place in the universal Church in the advocacy of
these ideals ? The best citizenship is the best security of universal
peace. The best internationalism is dependent upon the growth and
strength of movements in the inner life of all peoples toward these
nobler ideals. To ensure their expression and practical power may be,,
and is, a most perplexing problem. But the Church must stand fast
in her advocacy. She must not only remember that she is a “pilgrim
and a sojourner,” but also that she is a “kingdom.” Those of us who
believe in the evolution and regeneration of mankind believe that a new
era is at hand if we only have the confidence and courage to walk
through the open door, and inherit that which will be possible after the
winding of the war.
Finding.
On the subject of this paper the Conference passed the following
resolutions:—
This Conference, impressed with the low ideals of life which largely
obtain, brought into prominence by the war, expresses its judgment
that the time has arrived for a more vigorous setting forth of those
New Testament principles which are the only basis upon which we can
build a pure and noble citizenship.
Especially does the Conference emphasise the claims of human
brotherhood, and the need for a wider recognition of the ennobling
power of sacrifice, in contrast with ignoble ideals of selfishness and
material pleasure. ,
The Conference urges that, in order to produce a better condition
of international feeling, and to promote intercourse between the nations,
a more frequent interchange of thought bet-ween them should be culti-
vated by literary, political, and religious leaders and representatives
with the ultimate purpose of applying New Testament principles to
the government and life of the peoples in their international relations.


The Discuśion on the Moral
Aspect of the Wa r.
The Conference gave a complete session to the discussion on the
papers which had been read, and limited the speakers to five minutes
each. A verbatim report of the speeches is given here, as reflecting
the general jnind of the Conference on the whole subject of the war. '
SENIOR-CHAPLAIN C. J. PRESCOTT, M.A.
The first speaker was Senior-Chaplain C. J. Prescott, M.A., head-
master of Newington College, who said: “Mr. President, as you so
admirably suggest, it would be possible to spend five minutes or longer
on each of the many points touched upon in the excellent papers we
have heard; but I want rather to put, in a few brief words, one or two
aspects that have been overlooked, and that seem to me to rise superior
to some of the others.
First, I want to say that Germany has sinned against humour.
You may possibly think that this is a matter of small importance; but
if you look at it you will come to see that there is more in it than
appears on the surface. Germans have no humour. The Kaiser is
destitute of it, and so is his precious son Prince Wilhelm. And because
of their failure to see the comic, the ludicrous aspect of things, they
have landed themselves in a number of difficulties. We, on the other
hand, happily possess a keen sense of humour, and the laughter-loving
power of our soldiers has been very conspicuous in the trenches, and
has been a distinctly valuable quality. One of the writers tells the
story of a how a certain battalion of English troops, occupying a front
line of trenches, heard the Germans in their trench just across the way
singing songs ; and by and by discovered that they were singing the
famous Hymn of Hate. ’ The discovery created a perfect furore of
enthusiasm. All other sounds were hushed that they might hear the
song plainly, and when it was through they greeted it with shrieks of
laughter. They considered themselves the luckiest battalion in the
trenches to have heard this celebrated Hymn. When a lot of men can
receive such an outpouring of hate with peals of laughter, it is. a
guarantee that they possess some spirit which their opponents lack,
and a guarantee, too, that something will be moved in the right direc-
tion. Secondly, I want to say that Germany has sinned against clean
sport. You may again think that I am taking a lower level; but lam
not. What is the essence of clean sport? It is that you play the game
fearlessly, fairly, and justly. Now you have throughout thfe English-
speaking communities—in’their schools, colleges, and in the race itself
—an instinct for clean sport. Of course, there are those who sin against
it, but these are the rare exceptions. The nation, as a whole, loves
clean sport, and wherever this spirit goes, it goes as a breath of
purifying air. This is a thing that the German cannot understand,
and that is why they have played the great game so badly. While there


are plenty of people in our land who do not pay much attention to what
they hear from the pulpit, but who are very anxious in their sports-
including racing and prize-fighting—to see that the rules of the game
are not broken. And because the Germans do not understand that
spirit they have carried on the war so. abominably. Thirdly, and I o
not want to labour this point, for it is obvious to you, Germany has
sinned against ethics. They have outraged every ethical standard we
have known. Of course, the trouble about it is, how many more nations
have done the same thing, and how far we ourselves have failed to live
up to the ethical standard ?
CHAPLAIN-CAPTAIN F. COLWELL
The question for them was, “What are we going to do when
the boys come home?” He had expected that this General Conference
would send out some suggestions to all the State Conferences as to
lines of dealing with the problem of the returned soldiers. Men m
the street have been saying to me—in quite a friendly way of course
“what are you going to do about the returned men; have you any
suggestions; have you thought anything out?’ And that is what we
ought to be asking ourselves and discussing. We must not forget that
whilst of the 300,000 men who went away, many were outside the
Church; many were also in our churches; so that we have the double
work of dealing with our men, and winning those who are outside. I
have found from my experiences at Liverpool that it is possible for the
Church to do a great deal to win the outsiders. They are by no means
unreachable and untouchable. To give but one illustration:—A man
came into the camp who had not been inside a church for ten years.
He had a prejudice against the Church, but he came over to our hall to
have a look at it. A few kindly words were spoken to him; he made
use of our writing room and our reading room, and on the following
Sunday he attended the church parade, which he had previously been
trying to avoid; and the other morning I had the very great pleasure of
administering the Sacrament to him, and of knowing that he had be-
come a Christian man.
“That is the kernel of the whole question : how are We going to
win the men when they get back? We know that there are some men
who are raised in thought and aspiration by the war, but there are
many who will be sadly deteriorated by the experiences through which
they have to pass—and we must recognise that our task is no light one,
but one we must prepare ourselves to face and tackle. How many men
there are who when they see a clergyman cut away from him! Is it
not one of the things that have grieved us in the past that so many meii
stay out of the Church? I understood that we were going to lay out
some careful plans, to instruct our Annual Conferences, and that as
individuals we might carry away from here some definite practical
plans for dealing with our returning men.”
Voices Well, tell us some of your ideas.”
Capt. Colwell: “I will; but I am laying down the principle first.
One thing I might mention is this: We shall have numbers of men in
settlements. Our Government is going to do a great deal in the way
of making efforts to get men in groups or communities on the land,.


and whenever men are gathered together in groups of ioo or 150, we
ought to be prepared to put a man specially to tell them we want to
keep up the friendly relationships between them and the Church that
have been established. Then in the cities we must do the same. One
or two ministers have said to me: ‘Do you think I ought to give up
part of my Sunday school to establish a sort of club room to provide
billiard tables, and other forms of amusement?’ and I have replied,
‘Certainly, I think we must do all we can to attract them.’ ”
MR. FRED. CHAPPLE, 8.A., B.Sc., C.M.C. (South Australia).
Without any question the Church should make it its first duty to
welcome back with open arms its own members. We should get hold
of the men who used to belong to us and say emphatically to them,
“We have not forgotten you; there is your old place waiting for you;
there is the chair you used to fill; we want you to occupy it again.”
“I would like to support what Mr. Colwell said about catering for
the men on the settlements,” added Mr. Chappie. “We should be on
the look-out for the right man—or the right woman—or both—for this
work. In these settlements there are not only men, there are the wives
and the children. If you cannot have a man—and men are hard to
secure in these times—we must have a woman ; but it is imperative that
we should have someone to let the men and women know that we care
for them and wish to be of service to them.
“As a last word I should like to suggest that we should in every
possible way work in with the members of the Y.M.C.A. who have
found out how to do a lot of tilings in this war along the lines of caring
for not only the bodies, but the souls of our soldiers.”
REV. HENRY WORRALL (Melbourne).
Germany’s central sin, said the Rev Henry Worrall, was her sin
against the home life of her people. “As far back as half a centurv
ago,” said Mr. Worrall, “Germany began to destroy her home life by
building barracks for her young men. Millions of youth were taken
from their homes and herded together for military training. At the
most plastic period in their life Germany substituted the barracks for
the home, and with what direful consequences those who have been
reading the German papers know. That sin was reflected in the mental
attitude of the Germans towards their women—women to them became
mere chattels, and one of the darkest pictures of Germany was pre-
sented in the statement that over 40 per cent, of the male population
between the ages of 18 and 45 were tainted with an unnameable disease.
Mr. Colwell wants to know what we are going to do for the boys when
they come back—the answer is, See that their home life js regenerated;
teach our people to keep their children at home, to rebuild their family
altars, to make the home life so fine, so compelling, that the boys will
be glad to come home.
And while we condemn Germany, let us not forget that we have
the same evil influences all around us, and unless we are careful about
our home life the same dreadful consequences may fall upon us. A few
days ago I went, at the invitation of some scientific men, to Langwarrin.
I felt that I was in hell. . . five thousand of our boys have been
treated at that institution. What a lesson from the war is that! What
a call to us to see to our home life! What a warning to exercise
•chastity, to spend our time on bended knee before the family altar!


"If Germany had remained true to the principles enunciated by her
great reformers, she would have been saved from her evils, and we
should have been spared the horrors of this great war. But when she
bartered home life for the barracks, she committed the central sin. The
hearth stones are the surest foundation stones for a nation to build
upon, and I believe it is in these common domestic duties that we are
going- to lay the foundation of the new nation. Are we doing it ? Or
are we in our home life guilty of careless acts, of forgetfulness of God,
of neglecting the familv altar? Oh! brethren, let us plead and work
for an ennobled motherhood, for fathers who will stay at home and
teach their own children the way of life. If we do this we shall build
up an institution that shall save the nation, and we shall have learned
one of the great lessons of the war for us.
Here the Conference Precentor started the air, and the members sang r
"Keep the Home Fires Burning."
MR. W. E. V. ROBSON, M.L.A. (Sydney).
I have not spoken a great deal in these meetings, . because I
have felt diffident about speaking upon many of the subjects about
which other members with wider experiences know so much more than
I do. But I do feel that, in connection with the matters dealt with
in the papers that have been read to us to-day, we should have failed
in the object for which this Conference was called together unless we
can lay down some practical lines upon which to act as a Church in
relation to these men who are returning from the front. I was very
glad to hear the turn that Mr. Colwell gave to the discussion when he
asked the question, "What are we going to do about our boys when
they come back?"
I feel that there is something lacking at the present time in con-
nection with our Church life, and that is the encouragement of the
social side of the Church. There should exist a more direct intercourse
and relationship between the pulpit and the-pew. That intercourse, I
am conscious, does not exist. Many of us only see our minister as
we view him in the pulpit from the pew week by week. We do not
know him in our daily lives; we do not see him in our homes. It is
not his fault. His time is fully occupied with church meetings and
organisations. It is well to encourage the idea promulgated by Mr.
Worrall. I believe, with him, that the Christian home life should be
encouraged to the utmost, and I am afraid that the Church is respon-
sible to a very great extent for the fact that there is not the same home
life existent to-day as there used to be. But, at the same time—and
recognising all the calls there are upon men in the present day—l think
that we want to discover some way of making use of the social instinct
in the Church itself.
Mr. Colwell has referred to the means he would adopt of dealing
with the question as it concerns the men in the country. lam anxious
that tKe most effective methods should be adopted of attracting: and
holding the men in the big cities. I say let us have a social hall in
connection with every church; let it be known that the minister will
be there at least one night in the week, when men may come in, meet
him, and have a chat with him upon any subjects that interest them ;
where the members of the church can meet in social intercourse, and
talk things over. If you make that a centre of social attraction, you
will bring the young fellows under church influences. I would give


them every attraction you can possibly give them, and in that way I
believe you will gather together and gradually obtain a hold upon
many of the young fellows who have been connected in the past with
the Church, and many who have never been associated with any
Church.
CHAPLAIN-GENERAL COLONEL HOLDEN (Melbourne).
During his recent visit to England he had been greatly im-
pressed by the work accomplished by the Naval and Military Board
of the Wesleyan Church in England. Their organisation, under the
secretaryship of Mr. T. H. Bateson, was so complete and so thorough
that every returned Wesleyan soldier who had been discharged as unfit
for active service, had been found suitable employment. “Now, could
we not,” asked Colonel Holden, “as the Methodist Church of Aus-
tralia, pledge ourselves to the Government of this Commonwealth to
look after our own returning men as our share in the repatriation
scheme ? Why should we leave this duty to the merely civil authorities ?
Why should we not bring the affection and the spiritual motives that
lie behind our Church to bear upon this matter, and so give a very
practical welcome back to our own boys who are. coming back from the
war? I trust that this will be
MR. A. J. DERRICK (Melbourne Central Methodist Mission).
“I recognise the value of some of the suggestions made by brethren
regarding the question of dealing with returning soldiers, but the dis-
cussion had taken a trend which he at least did not expect. “I under-
stood that the purpose of the Conference, in considering
this matter, was that, as a Conference, we might make some definite
presentment of value to our people throughout the length and breadth
of the land upon the various phases of the war and the problems arising
out of it. That is why, I understood, the subject was divided into
separate headings. For instance, the contribution that came from the
Victorian Committee set out the essential facts of the war, gathered
and presented, the essential points in the literature of the war—from
books that otherwise could not possibly come into the hands of all our
people—and so gave a reason for our belief that we are fighting in a
righteous cause. The West Australian paper, again, answered objec-
tions and criticisms, captious and otherwise, in a splendid way. So I
say that the purpose of these papers was to collate and present the
difficulties met with and the lessons to be learned, and when these
papers and resolutions and the report of the discussion are submitted
to the committee, I understand that they will excise that and elaborate
that, and in the end produce some definite findings.' And what I
think we ought to do, above everything else, is to formulate in these
resolutions what our views are as a Conference for the help and guid-
ance of all the inhabitants of our land. So in this discussion, the
question we ought to deal with is how far do these papers meet what
we are trying to tell our people?”
REV. ALEXANDER McCALLUM (Melbourne).
“I hope that in the findings arrived at there will be some indication
or notification to guide and perhaps quieten the distress of some of our
most pious people who have been confronted with some form of specious
argument that war is unchristian and immoral. Any finding that goes


to them ought to cause them to see our attitude as a Conference on this
matter.
“Then there ought to be some strong, warm stimulus in the find-
ings indicating to our boys, who while they have been away have had
something of the Bohemian character in their services, that we wish
to make the atmosphere congenial to them when they come home, and
that without doing anything irregular we are prepared to put some vim
into our Church life.’' •
MR. J. J. CUNNINGHAM (Victoria).
He wduld like to follow Colonel Holden’s suggestion with an-
other, to the effect that the leaders’ meetings be standing committees
to give advice and use their influence so as to render practical help to
our locally returning soldiers who are members and adherents. These
committees could raise local funds to meet the immediate needs of those
men who required assistance.
MR. A. T. SUTTON (South Australia.)
As one who has been closely associated with Sunday School work
for a good many years, I feel that this question of the Church dealing
with returning soldiers is urgent. We should not only consider what we
are going to do when the boys come back: we should take it up now.
Our boys are coming back now by twos and threes and dozens. We can
see them in the streets. What is being done for them by the Churches ?
My opinion is that, if something is not done for them at once, it will
have a great effect upon the other boys when they come back, and vice
versa. These boys, who have returned, ought to be handled now, and
they can best be handled—not by the elders of the Church —but by the
Sunday school officials, who used to know the boys when they were in
the Sunday school and who have thus been in most recent touch with
them. Ido not wish to speak in any egotistical sense; but I may say
I have been myself trying to work upon these lines. I have made it a
practice td meet the incoming trains and, after finding out our own
Methodist boys, of assuring them of our loyalty, and inviting them to
come back to us. We have kept the local school open every night in the
week, and have provided games and entertainments for them. But this
is a small, insignificant matter, a concern of the moment only. What
we want to do is to lay hold of their lives, and make them feel that the
Church is a real, effective force that is not only willing, but is able to
help them. If we can. do this now, we shall succeed later on; for it is
the influence of these lads upon the other boys who are coming back
that is going to count one way or the other. Therefore, I say, now is
the time for us to be moving. And I appeal to the Sunday school
first. Most of the Methodist boys who have come back have at one
time or another been connected with our Sunday school. And it is the
Sunday school officers who are most likely to get into touch with them.
Of course I do not suggest that we limit our activities to this branch.
Another tKing'l have done in our local council is to place before mem-
bers lists of the boys who are on their way back, and, as a council, we
have made :t a practice of letting them see that the district is interested
in their welfare, and is anxious to help them. We cannot do too much
for the boys.”


THE PRESIDENT, DR. CARRUTHERS,
I think that the Conference is being- led on to a line of discussion
that is not quite intended. A new subject has been introduced which
wants to be considered apart; the subject now is, ‘The Teachings of the
War as Indicated by the Papers.’ This great subject 6f repatriation
should be considered separately with a view to something being- done.
THE REV. W. CORLY BUTLER, OF W.A.
It was the Church’s obvious duty to take advantage of the
present plastic mood (i) to enforce the necessity for Christian ideals;
(2) to enforce the lessons from vice and intemperance so as to secure
permanent legislation to restrict and ultimately remove these evils; (3)
co-operate with every effort made to purge our land from the vices and
temptations that menace the young life of Australia; (4) assist every
effort made to secure to our returned soldiers an opportunity to resume
a settled life, and a sufficient means of founding and maintaining a
home; (5) to warm the social life of our Churches, and adopt our
methods and message to meet the new mental and spiritual needs of the
returning men.”
THE REV. P. J. STEPHEN (Sydney Central Mission).
I am very glad that this arrangement has been made, even if
only to give us the opportunity of listening to Dr. Fitchett’s paper. It
seems to me to be a very fine analysis of the whole situation. He has
put his finger upon the real spot, and to my mind the secret of the
tragedy of German decadence lies in the fact that she has, been disloyal
to Jesus Christ. No one who reads the story of Germany’s following
after what they call the Liberal Christ, can fail to see that by cutting
the nerve of her religious life, she has destroyed her morals and left
herself without any sanction of the higher Christian morality. We can
only escape like.disaster by safeguarding ourselves from a similar loss.
We must get into our Churches a note of deep spirituality, and we can
only do this by reserving a whole-hearted loyalty to the characteristics
of Methodism in its highest moods.
“Speaking of what may really be done when the men come back, I
would say this is too wide a question to be treated adequately in this
Conference. It is a matter to be dealt with by all the Conferences, and
in a systematic way. But it seems to me that one thing is certain—
that we shall have to throw all our influences round our men to protect
them—many of them coming back with shattered nerves, and weakened
powers of resistance, from vices and temptations that will be thrown
in their way. We must protect them from the open bar, from the shout-
ing evil, and from the women of the streets. We must face this ques-
tion hinted at by Mr. Worrall in a wise and effective way. The hour has
come in the history of the Commonwealth when feelings of hesitation
on this point must be thrown aside We must in hand with
the scientific medical men and face this question from our point of view.
This is a practical way in which Methodism, as a great Church, can
defend her home-coming soldiers, from the greatest of evils that
threatens them. It goes almost without saying that every individual
church with a sense of responsibility will throw open its heart to receive
the returning’ men. In my circuit never a lad comes home but receives
a public welcome and such treatment as ensures him of the warmth of
our affection.”


CHAPLAIN CAPTAIN T. S. B. WOODFULL.
Colonel Holden’s suggestion was one that should be considered.
It would be possible to have a committee appointed by this Conference
for each annual Conference for the purpose of dealing with the returned
soldiers in the particular State. That, however, was a broader ques-
tion.
“I think,” added Mr. Woodfull, “that one of the most important
lessons which the war teaches us is the necessity of learning the true
meaning of patriotism. What we want as a Church is to learn the
secret of teaching young Christians the meaning of patriotism.
Patriotism is a word which has been very freely used in recent times.
We have had a good many expressions of it from politicians, social
workers and others, but a great deal that is given the name of patriot-
ism is not true patriotism. We must teach our young people that the
highest ideals of patriotism are not jingoistic, but the liberation of men
from the bondag-e of fear and selfishness. If we had cultivated true
patriotism, we would have had a finer moral atmosphere in our elec-
tions and in our streets. We need to cleanse our community of false
conceptions of what patriotism is. Another lesson we must learn from
the war is that we must look after and make use of the manhood of our
Churches. We have immense resources, but we are not applying them.
They are largely latent. I believe, however, that the manhood of our
Churches will answer the call of freedom far more readily if we can
get some of the disciplinary methods of organising manhood shown us
by the army. I do not think that the manhood now at war will come
back and be satisfied with the old selfish individualism. I believe in a
true disciplining of manhood to help manhood. We have had examples
of this in the organisation of the munition workers, the transport divi-
sions, and so on. Everywhere we find one section helping another
section, and so we arrive at a great example of scattered forces organ-
ised into unity, and the lesson of this will not be lost on our manhood.
They will say, ‘We cannot come back to the old methods. We must
organise to cope with the dangers of our social and civic life.’ And we
must immediately commence to organise ourselves in this way a great
revival of consecrated manhood to enrich the community.”
MR. W. B. MCUTCHEON (Victoria).
I am unable to agree with those who think the Church’s finding
on this great question should be “Germany is to blame”—only that
and nothing more. This is much too easy and simple a solution to be
true or convincing. And to-day our Church is exercising a judicial,
rather than a patriotic function, in pronouncing a judgment on the
great war, and as a branch of the Great Church of the God of right-
eousness, we must render a righteous judgment. Many causes have
contributed to the international atmosphere which cond.uced to the war,
such as mistaken ideas of patriotism, typified by the saying, “My
country, right or wrong!” the supremacy of nationalism over religion,
contributed to by the foolish jealousies and dissensions between
religious denominations; the dangerous idea, bred of Carlyle’s philoso-
phy, that, because right is might, therefore might is right; the lack
of moral principle in the sphere of Government; the belief that certain
duties and obligations cease when a frontier is reached ; the rivalries
of nations in the pursuit of territories and markets; the general atmo-


sphere of unfriendliness and selfishness, induced by a civilisation based'
on materialism, and cankered by selfishness —the active selfishness’ that
ever grasps advantage, and the passive selfishness, that does not care.
All these things, and many other national evils, for which no one nation
must be asked to bear the whole responsibility, contributed to the
causes of the war; though, when all is admitted, it remains that Ger-
many was the great wrong-doer, the most refractory and arrogant of
the nations whose rivalries have brought about the great Armageddon.
And at her door lies the greatest responsibility. Out of this maelstrom
of human strife and struggle I hope for light in the following direction:
1. A closer union between the Churches, so that the Church of
God can exercise a profounder and united influence on politics and
statesmanship, raise life to a new elevation, and insist on the same
moralities being honoured in international relationships as are com-
monly recognised within the border of each nationality, and to correct
those ignoble forms of nationalism that have led to unholy rivalries
and jealousies. *
2. A check on the gross materialism, the love of luxury, and pur-
suit of pleasure that have soiled our latter-day civilisation.
3. A recognition that this is a spiritual war in a sense that nobody
thought of claiming for other recent military struggles, such as the
Boer war, and an affirmation of the sublimity of the sacrifice that
thousands have made, and are making to attain a righteous and lasting
result.
4. An enlarged charity of thought respecting those who have, in
a true spirit of self-surrender, made the supreme sacrifice.
May we not be compelled to review some of our pre-war rigidities
of belief, and allow the possibility of a “fourth dimension”? Is it
necessary or wise for us to dogmatise, and sternly pronounce “non
possumus” to those anxious and bereft souls who believe that life
generously sacrificed for a high ideal'and the preservation of the best
in civilisation, may be allowed to fulfil itself hereafter, who look to
their church for comfort and enlightenment in their great grief? If we
be rooted and grounded in love, we may be able to comprehend with
all saints, what is the length, and breadth, and depth, and height, and
to know the love of Christ that passeth knowledge.
There’s a wideness in God’s mercy
Like the wideness of the sea;
There’s a kindness in His justice
That is more than liberty.
For the love of God is broader
Than the measures of man’s mind,
And the heart of the Eternal
Is most wonderfully kind.
REV. DR. FITCHETT.
“I am not greatly concerned about how this war is going to affect
our theology. It is, of course, causing some simple people to doubt. . .
They are asking, ‘Why does not God stop the war?’ Dr. Horton
preached a sermon which I jiave been reading—l wish you could all
read it—on the question, ‘Could God stop the war? ‘Yes,’ said Dr.
Horton, ‘God could stop the war. And God could put an end to all sin
—by killing the sinners! But that is not God’s way. Moreover,’ said


Dr. Horton, ‘if God adopted that method He would come amongst us,
and where would He stop?’ No, that is not God’s method.
But I think that this war is going to stop war. It will create such a
hate of war in the human race that not your children’s children, nor
their grandchildren will see another war. This is the war that will kill
war.
“And I want you to notice that if this war has had the effect of
shaking- the faith of some simple Christians, it is on the other hand
winning infidels from their infidelity, it is teaching them to doubt their
doubts. If Christianity has been questioned, everything else has failed.
Education has failed. Science fias broken down. Civilisation has broken
down. Neither education, science, nor civilisation can save the race. I
want you to notice the fact that Mr. H. G. Wells, who does not pretend
to be a Christian, declares that the one safety of the race lies in estab-
lishing the Kingdom of God on earth. And the last report of the Society
of Free Thinkers in England declares that all their theories have gone to
wreck. . v . So that, on the logic of this war, Christianity is the only
hope of the world.
“I feel that out of this war will come a stronger, not a weaker
faith; a reinforced faith, not a shaken faith; for the most tremendous
example of the penalty of excluding Christianity from human affairs
and from politics is supplied by the spectacle of Germany starving and
ruined. This is a bad world to sin in, and the great proof of that is
supplied by Germany to-day.
REV. HAROLD WHEEN (New South Wales).
“I thank Mr. Dyer for telling us that the teaching of this great
war was in the direction of showing that our children have the secret
of the recovery of the nation. It is they who will build up the nation
when the war has wrought its utmost havoc. Dr. Fitchett has told us
that Germany was the most educated people on the face of the earth;
but of what character was her education ? I would like to remind this
Conference that We have more Sunday schools and more Sunday school
scholars in Australia than there are in the German Empire. I hope
that this Methodist Church of ours, which has in its Sunday schools
.75,000 boys, will turn its attention as never before, to making the most
of this great asset. Have you any conception of what 75,000 boys can
do? I saw twenty thousand of these boys march past Sir lan Hamilton
when he was in Australia. He said to me that as he watched them
marching by, the thought went through' his mind, what fine soldiers
they would make—and some of them have made splendid soldiers;
some of them, alas! lie on Gallipdli, some in France. I thought as I
saw them marching past, what fine soldiers of Jesus Christ they would
make! Let us lay hold of our boys, for they are the nation-builders of
the future when the war has done its utmost. I plead with this Confer-
ence to go back to their work especially to give direction to the work
among the young people. I am sure that if the boys are to be made
the most of. it will be only when the men of the Church lay their hands
.upon their shoulders and claim them for Jesus Christ.”


REV. W. T. SHAPLEY (South Australia).
“I think that the war has been teaching - us that our Methodist
standards are right . . . that sin is a disintegrating force. Ger-
many began the war; but we can go further back and see that it was
the sin which crept into German life which was the real cause of the
war. If sin be a disintegrating force, what is the power that is going
to bring us together? What is the unifying force? Dr. Fitchett told
us that education had failed—morfe things than education had failed—
diplomacy has failed, and world-statesmanship has failed. Not only
so, but all those theories such as socialism, in which men put their
trust have proved non-effective, and we are brought back to this, that
the only power of unification is the Gospel of the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ which we preach.
“The war has taught us further; it has revealed to us how great
was the love of God in the gift of His Son, and what was meant by the
sacrifice of our Saviour. Many of us in this Conference have given our
boys to the nation and its cause. When my own brave boy fell in
France, one of the brethren said to me: ‘Shapley, maybe you under-
stand to-day as never before the meaning of John 3: 16.’ Sir, that is
true. I never knew as I know to-day what was meant by God’s great
love in giving His Son to die for us.”
REV. A. McCALLUM asked if we had no message for those
mothers and fathers who are wondering about the eternal condition of
their sons who have fallen. I fear we put the emphasis in the wrong
place. We have emphasised belief in the Lord Jesus Christ to be the
pivot of salvation; may it not be salvation by sacrifice.”
THE REV. E. T. COX
had been much impressed by a Maeterlinck phrase on the sub-conscious
criminality of Germany. “It is very necessary for us,” he said, “to
know the causes of the war, because we can then know how to cure
them. And we must ask ourselves, ‘Where are these reasons to be
found?’ I happened to strike upon a phrase which was created by
Maeterlinck that Germany was sub-consciously criminal. There Maeter-
linck hit the nail upon the head. I pondered a great deal over this ex-
pression, and it seems to me to go to the root of the matter. Both the
good we do and the evil come out of the sub-conscious region within
us—that is the idea. Because the light shines into our inner conscious-
ness, good issues therefrom; but the devil may also dwell in the sub-
conscious region, and then evil is the result. But we are not always
conscious—we do not realise that we are doing evil. Y er y well, then—
we are teachers of religion ; we are men who are set apart to bring.the
power of God into the human heart, and what is wanted from us is a
great presentment upon the causes of the war so far as they are spiritual
and moral, and some solution of the problem of curing them.
“Well, now, the first cause. I take it the cause is that Jesus Christ
has been banished from German thought. No one who has been read-
ing the literature that dominates the thought of all the German schools-
and colleges doubts that fact. Everything about Germany is official.
The very ministry is official; the pastors are paid by the State, and the
same spirit rules them all. . .
“Now you may have a traditional virtue belonging to catechisms,
and the nations may subscribe to it; but if it doesn’t penetrate into the


inner life, into the sub-conscious mind of the people, then you can ex-
pect no good results from it. And what we want to know is, how can
we penetrate the inner consciousness of the people, and revive within
it the power of God ?
“We have been asked, ‘Why does God not stop the war?’ and one
way in which He might stop it has been suggested. But there is another
way in which God works. He stops war and other evils by putting im-
pulses in that direction into the minds of good men. What prevents the
stoppage of the evil, however, is that other men’s minds are charged
with feelings in the opposite direction. You throw out a suggestion
into the mind of the body politic. What is it stops it ? It is the convic-
tion in the minds of other men against it. And I repeat, we must aim
at so opening the minds of our people that the light of Jesus Christ will
penetrate, and they will naturally respond to the impulses of good, and
not those of evil. Had Germany done this, she would not have been
guilty of that sub-conscious criminality of which Maeterlinck writes.”
THE REV. DR. YOUNCMAN (Queensland)
said another phrase had emerged, and become more or less familiar
during the course of the war. It was a phrase expressing a choice:
“Christ or Corsica”?
“It seems to me,” said Dr. Youngman, “that the whole question
really amounts to this: How far is Jesus Christ to be allowed to be ac-
knowledged as the teacher and the leader of our life in general? It is
said by some that He is alright as the leader of our religious and our
personal life, but He does not lead our social and political life. I think
that the great lesson of the war for us is, that we must put Him first
everywhere. Ido not see how, if a man takes Him into his inner life,
he can help Him taking part in all his activities. We had a prominent
politician in Queensland some years ago who used to proclaim himself
as a Socialist. I pressed him once for a definition of his socialism,
and he replied: ‘I always stand for the Golden Rule applied every-
where.’ ‘Very well,’ I said, ‘why don’t you apply it in the case of the
State schools and the Bible?’ ‘Oh,’ he said, ‘I draw the line there.’
(Laughter.) The trouble is that we all are given to drawing the line
somewhere. We want other people to do unto us what we are not pre-
pared to do for them. All this will have to be altered in our municipal
and our political chambers. We shall have to right it all along the line,
and we must always be doing to other people what we would have them
do to us. If the war has not come from the opposite course of action,
I would like to know where it has come from. But if our teaching is
based upon the right, it will bring about a time when war shall be no
more.”
MR. A. T. DANKS (Melbourne).
[Mr. Danks, as a method of securing “Industrial Peace after the
war,” moved the following resolution, which was carried: —
Industrial Peace After the War.
That, in view of the noble sacrifices of our soldiers, and the
inevitable and serious after-war problems, this Conference urges on the
members of our Church throughout Australia, and would recommend
■to members of other Churches, the advisability of providing at least


.a three years’ industrial peace after the war, and it calls upon both
employers and employed to use all possible means to agree upon legis-
lation which will ensure this result.]
“In proposing this resolution,” he explained, “I have to
acknowledge the inspiration of the idea as _ from a Memo-
randum published by the authority of the British Government
in ‘lndustry After the War.’ And this fact is strongly em-
phasised, that, if we are to face our post-war problems in a
right spirit, and with any assurance of a satisfactory settlement, it is
absolutely necessary that for a time industrial peace shall be assured.
It points out that this is possible if employers and employed will meet
one another in a proper spirit, and arrange for means of settling dis-
putes without recourse to strikes or lock-outs.
“It sets out the great sacrifices which have been made in Great
Britain on both sides, by the employees in allowing most of their
•cherished Union rules to be abrogated, and by the employers handing
over their works entirely to the Government on the simple assurance
that they will receive what is considered to be right. These are great
concessions, and it is hard to say what they involve in the future.
“There is certainly a promise to the Trades Unions that things will
be as they were after this war; but new conditions have arisen, and
the position will no doubt be a difficult one, and it has all the possi-
bilities of a great upheaval.
“In view of all this, the Garton Trust called upon several of the
wisest men on both sides to consider the position together and advise,
with the result that a Memorandum was issued and subjected to general
criticisms. The criticisms have all been condensed, and the present
Memorandum has been issued.
“Apparently it has been agreed that the only possible way to carry
out the agreements that have been made is, in the first place, to get
both employers and employed to consider the matter and arrange for
such tribunals as they deem necessary to decide all questions as to rates
of pay and conditions generally that will arise during the proposed
periods of industrial peace.
“It is pointed out that the men who have fought and bled for us
have a right to consideration, and that if they find on their return,
stricken and wounded, that the turmoil and strife of industrial warfare
has been substituted for that of the battlefield, their condition will be
hard indeed.
“In Australia it cannot be claimed, except for personal sacrifices,
that either side has been called upon to make any great concession, and
the arranging for a period of industrial peace should be as compared
with Great Britain an easily possible matter.
“I am anxious that the. Conference will understand what is con-
templated in this resolution.
“It is not intended for a moment that either side shall be asked
to accept the position as it is at present without change for the term
of peace, and that there shall be no betterment of bad conditions. All
that is asked is that eventually a limited number of representatives of
both sides, with power to act, shall meet and agree to any alteration
considered necessary in the present methods of settling industrial dis-
putes, and then further agree that for a period, say, of three yeais after


the termination of the war, to loyally accept the decisions and to refrain
under substantial penalty from anything: in the nature of strikes or lock-
outs. The boon that such an arrangement will be to the community is
incalculable.
“We will, like sensible people, be producing wealth at a time never
more needed. The very big problems that must inevitably be faced
may be considered with cool judgment, and the effects of this awful
war minimised to an incredible extent.
“Is it not worth while to make some sacrifice to attain this end?
And in the name of the Prince of Peace, the Church has a right to ask
its members and the community generally to do everything possible to-
make it an actual fact.”
l.jt
The following resolutions dealing with the war—in addition to that
of Mr. Danks—were adopted by the Conference :
Repatriation of Soldiers.
(1) That the Conference pledges itself to make the utmost en-
deavour to provide for the repatriation of all returning Methodist
soldiers and sailors, and that the several Annual Conferences be
directed to give effect to this resolution so far as their respective States
are concerned.
(2) That until the next Meeting of the Annual Conferences, the
various Naval and Military Affairs Committees of the different States
be the several Committees for the above purpose.
Christianising Social Relations.
That, with a view to giving effect to the findings of the General
Conference on the Christianising of social relations, the Presidents of
the State Conferences be asked to nominate in their Conferences a
Commission, to be charged with the duties hereunder:—
(a) To collect and digest all information relative to the question.
(b) To give publicity to the results of their investigations by the
issue of reports from time to time.
(c) To co-operate with similar Commissions in other Churches.
(d) To appeal for funds to carry out their Commission in such
ways as may be approved by the President of the General
Conference.
The Secretary of the General Conference was appointed to>
co-ordinate the work of the Commission.
