

By
WM. H. DICK,
Editor,
Daily Northern Ary as, Rockhampton.
FBII<SE sispbrcb.
First Edition, 15,000
lexhlmmptmv:
PUBIiISHED BY Wm. MUNBO, EAST StKEET.
1
(I 11|


TIMBER. TIMBER. TIMBER.
To the Public of Rockhampton and surrounding Districts
Susiuel Johnston,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
TIMBER MERCHANT,
EAST STREET, ROCKHAMPTON,
In returning thanks for the liberal support afforded him in the past,
begs to notify that he has engaged Mr. E. 13. Moyle to Manage
his business at Rockhampton, and from Mr. Moyle’s long experience
(having been Manager for Messrs. Wilson, Hart & Co. during the
last ton years) he is well acquainted with every branch of the
Trade, and all orders entrusted to him will receive due care and
attention.
S. Johnston is about making extensive alterations in his Timber
Yards, and intends keeping a large and well assorted Stock of
Rough and Dressed Pino and Hardwood, also Cedar, Beech,
Felloes, Spokes, Doors, Sashes, Galvanised Iron, Nails and Builders*
Ironmongery, and customers can depend on getting their orders
promptly supplied at lowest rates. The steamer “Burnett” is
kept constantly running from the Saw Mills at Bundaberg to this
Port, so that Special Orders can bo supplied on the shortest notice.
Price Lists on application.
Note- the Address
s. TOHijsrsToisr,
Timber Merchant, East Street, Rockhampton,
B. m* MQflil,
Manager,


ACHESON & ALLEN,
and -IJoMec
IMPOETEES OF
OILMEN’S STORES, GROCERIES, GLASS, CHINA,
EARTHENWARE, LAMPWARE, HOLLOWARE.
And all Pamily Requisites.
*T@(sh
Agents or Adelaide Flour, Seoteii Coulee*
tiooerjf, Hade's Corn Flour, &c., He.
A. & A. have this season imported a very Large Shipment of the
€M§I€BST TBsiS
Procurable in the China Markets, comprising—
Kaisow, Congou, Podding, Pongong, Tseen Moo,
Mooning, Mountain-grown Pekoe, Oolong, Scented
Orange Pekoe, Hang Mae, and Gunpowder. Also a
large stock of INDIAN TEAS —Assam, Dargeeling—
always in stock, which they can offer at very low rates.
gur ||ea6 are ||otcd all over the Central JJiatfict.
We are in receipt of regular shipments of
Maize, Bran, Pollard, Hay, Chaff, Pota-
toes, Onions, Bacon, Cheese, &c.
COFFEE ROUSTED & GROUHD
By Machinery on the premises—freshness guaranteed.
Oiiilfy Mm CktiMlj fitkti mi
Note the Address :
ACHESON & ALLEN,
WILLIAM STREET, ROCKHAMPTON.


H. W. RISIEN,
3twfv $ Station 2Un>t dmral JforfoarHtig,
HOUSE, LAND, AND
Commission Ag exit A. Mining Brolsor.
Rents and Interest Collected.
AGENT FOR—
The Colonial Mutual Life Assurance Society, Limited.
The Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Company, Limited.
Victoria Insurance Company, Limited.
SECRETARY POR-
Fitzroy Pastoral, Agricultural, and Horticultural Society.
Union Gold Mining Company, Limited.
Greek’s Reef Gold Mining Company, Limited.
Hit or Miss United Gold Mining Company, Limited.
U-!
ADDEESS—
East Street,
Rockhampton.


J. McPSESSOH & CD n
AUCTIONEERS,
Sroes,
HOUSE, LAND,
AND
General Cemmissien Agents,
EAST STREET,
ROCKHAMPTON.


A I, CtfLm.V A C 0„
STOCK, STATION,
AND
General Commission Agents,
AUCTIONEERS,
Plim&f Clwmhers,
AND
AJliano© ©aleyards,
EAST STREET,
ROCKHAMPTON.


WILLIAM MUNRO,
Bookseller,,
Wholesale & Retail Stationer,
ROCKHAMPTON
Music and Piano Warehouse.
Brlmmmi Flas# Bofvtu


ROCKHAMPTON FOUNDRY.
BURNS S TWIGS,
ENGINEERS, BOILERMAKERS,
IRON & BRASSFOUNDERS.
Makers and Importers of all kinds of
Mining, Squatting, anil Agricultural Machinery
and Implements*
T. W. WHITEHOUSE,
STEAM
JjJfaM ’ffaterjl, (jwiiaty, |«0 ||ai|ilieliif®p.
T. W. WHITEHOUSE has started a BRANCH at that favourite watering
place, YEPPOON, where they can rely on getting his Celebrated Abated
Waters. Largely patronised by the Medical Profession and leading citizens.
ICE CAN BE HAO AT ALL HOURS.
The RIPPLED SODAWATER manufactured by him is in
Queensland, being equal to Schwepps’, over a Thousand (1000) Dozen being
sold last season for private consumption only.
Sole Proprietor;—
T. W. WHITEHOUSE,
ROCKHAMPTON & YEPPOON.
Address ;—Head Office and Factory, Denison Street, Rockhampton,


AnsHsaMilsi tii. Hvnial Alii®!*
ROCKHAMPTON.
Auctioneer, Valuator,
Heal Property Salesman,
AjS id
§mmal onraMM Agaat*
G. S. CURTIS undertakes the Sale and
Management of Landed Estates, re-
ceives Produce and Merchandise for
sale on consignment. Splendid Auction
Sales Rooms and Receiving Stores and
other special facilities.
Business Established many years.


ESTABLISHED 1866.
J. McKKNZIE,
Successor to GL Hounsell,
VranasaML Hasta* iiilfte to*
WILLIAM STREET, ROCKHAMPTON.
All kinds of Marble and Stone Work executed on the shortest
' ’ notice. Designs and Estimates furnished on application.
W. H. STESNLAKB,
Jipeail ifaMiaelawr, t (jraiaetiraer,
Any orders entrusted to my care will receive prompt attention.
WILLIAM STREET, ROCKHAMPTON.
S. A.. STONE,
William Street, Rockhampton,
PICTURE ERAME MAKER.
*1- Designs and Estimates forwarded free. 4*
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
FURNITURE DEALER AND UPHOLSTERER,
CUTLEEY AND HARDWARE MERCHANT,
WILLIAM STREET, ROCKHAMPTON.
Damps and Eampware. N.T3.““Crockery and Glassware lent on hire.


THE FAMOUS
MOUNT MORGAN COLD MINE,
ROCKHAMPTON, QUEENSLAND,
ITS HISTORY, GEOLOGICAL FORMATION,
AND PROSPECTS,
Together with an
Explanatory Account op the Chlorination Process for' Extracting
G-old prom Quartz Orb, and a Description op the Present
Machinery and the more Extensive Machinery
about to be erected.
WM. IT. DICK,
Editor,
Daily Northern Argus.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Published by Wm. Munro, East Street, Rockhampton.


PREFACE.
Till subject matter of this publication originally appeared in the
columns of the Daily Northern Argus in a series of four papers. It
was then, perceiving the interest felt in the Mount Morgan Mine,
and having had it suggested to me that many people throughout
the Australasian Colonies and Q-reat Britain would desire an oppor-
tunity of procuring a complete and reliable account of this marvellous
mine, that I determined to republish my articles in th. 3 present form.
I have thought it desirable to append a leading editorial, which
appeared in the Daily Northern Argus of 15th December last, in order
that intending investors in Queensland mines may be warned of the
grossly dishonourable use that is being made of the Mount Morgan
name, to float companies which are utterly without prospects so far
as this famous mine is concerned, and I only hope that the widespread
circulation of this pamphlet will prevent - any more “ bogus ” concerns
being placed on the English market in however deceptive a manner
the name of Mount Morgan may be linked with North, South, East,
or West.
I have only to add that the reading matter which is now reprinted
is precisely the same as that which appeared in the columns of the
Argus.
WM. H. DICK,
Editob,
Daily Northern Argus.
Rockhampton, January, 1887-


THE FAMOUS
MOUNT MORGAN GOLD MINE
««g «e-o-^-o«oi
No. I.
*T is to the writer o£ fiction in the future that what may be termed
the mythology of Mount Morgan must be left. What wondrous
tales have been woven about this most wonderful discovery of
modern days, and how inaccurate are all of them, only those who
have been permitted behind the arras, into the inner sanctuary of
knowledge, really know. When the classic author of “ The Last of
the Barons ” so prettily recounts the glories, the treacheries, and the
final fall of the great King-maker, he paints in romantic colours
certain scenes in the life of the gay Yorkist king, which are deftly
presented to suggest the real, though hidden reason why Warwick
afterwards espoused the Lancastrian cause. The discovery of Mount
Morgan will live in Australian story for centuries to come, but some
day, it may be, from the depths of some legend store, preserved by a
second “ Old Mortality,” will issue the incidents of a story never told
before —the episodes of a history of which all the truth was never
previously known. We are however, mere prosaic chroniclers of
passing events and existing things at present, and though, when we
think ourselves warranted, we may give full play to the imagination,
yet the tale of the finding of this marvellous mountain of rich ore,
with all its manifold shades and varieties of fact and fiction, pure
romance and semi-truths is not within our present scope. Our pur-
pose now is to describe the Mount Morgan Mine as we found it, and,
connectedly, to express our own views regarding it, to relate what has
been done and is doing, to explain the mysteries of the chlorination
process for extracting the precious metal, and generally to give our
readers such a portraiture of the mine, its surroundings, and its pro-
bable future, as will prove an instructive and pleasing substitute for
a personal inspection.
Mount Morgan is situated on the bank of the Dee River, about
26 miles from Rockhampton. Rising precipitously from the bed of
the river, it attains an altitude of some five hundred feet, with
a height above the sea of 1225 feet, and consists principally
of ferruginous quartz, containing very finely dissimulated
gold, intermingled and often coated with oxide of iron. There
have been many theories propounded as to the origin of the Mount
Morgan formation and the deposition of gold in the quartz silica, of
which it is so largely composed, but not one of these has so far been


accurately determined. After a careful study of the whole forma-
tion, Mr. R. L. Jack, the Government Geologist, came to the
conclusion that nothing but a thermal spring in the open air could
have deposited the material which there abounds. But we are well
aware of how little credence is to be given to the conclusions of
science, so called. In the early editions of the Encyclopaedia
Britanniea, a quartz lode or reef was described as a superficial deposit
of stone wedge-shaped, which always ran out at a depth not exceeding
100 feet, and even so astute an authority as Sir Roderick Murchison,
in the early editions of his works, contended that the whole of mining
experience showed that lodes only went down to a very short distance,
and were invariably unremunerative for extensive sinking operations.
These are fallacies, which we now know to be such, and Mr. Jack is
as utterly in error regarding Mount Morgan. Doubtless he had very
incomplete data to go upon; yet he jumped to a very hasty and a
very erroneous conclusion, for the evidences of a thermal spring not
only dissappear a few feet from the summit, but the notion is actually
disproved by the revelations which recent works in the mine have
made. There is a new theory held still by one or two skilled officials
connected with the mine, that the decomposition of a large pyrites
lode has put the quartz silica into a molten state, and that water
from below has caused a chemical outburst, during which the gold
has been precipitated with the stone, and formed the stalactite forma-
tions in the “ vugs ” which are still to be seen in portions of the
mine. We have no intention of putting our own ideas in opposition
to any one’s, yet we have formed an opinion, and we think it right to
express it. To our mind, the last-referred-to explanation of the
phenomena at Mount Morgan does not account for what is there to
be seen. Mount Morgan, we believe, is but part of a system which
has its source in the vast crucible of nature at unexplored depths,
and which will yet be traced north and south of the present mine,
either traversing the centres of the hill, or dipping below their base,
to reappear again at points where centres of volcanic activity have
existed, or where wholly or partially opposing currents have met in
the bowels of the earth, and, by pressing on the superincumbent
strata have formed and filled those fissures which are nothing but the
gaugues of quartz lodes. The agencies that were at work to upheave
Mount Morgan have, to our mind, no connection with any superficial
or adjacent causes, but have had a centre and a source in those sub-
terranean currents whose changing trends are yet very imperfectly
understood. Geology is a much more empirical sc ?nce than it is a
positive one, yet it is by the patient analyzation of overy theory pro-
pounded that the truth may be got at in the end. And here are one
or two facts that we desire to place before our readers. There seems
to be a hastily conceived opinion held by some people, that the
geologic “ country ” of Mount Morgan is of a very limited area. It
is no such thing. The same “ make ” will pass through the ground
above and below Mount Morgan, though not necessarily with the
accompaniment of payable gold, until the surface effects disappear
through the receding volcanic wave, or until some stronger opposing


force breaks its continuity, or deflects it, "We have the authority of
an experienced oflicer at the Mount Morgan Mine for stating that at
the Taranganba mines theie is not a single element present at Mount
Morgan that is awanting there, except the chlorination returns.
.Now, at Taranganba, there are some three or four such upheavals as
we think Mount Morgan is, and the auriferous belts can be traced
from one upheaval to another right across the intervening plainland.
But it is fruitless to indulge in further speculation of this kind,
and we have said so much as we have, rather to disabuse peoples
minds of the idea that Mount Morgan, as a geological formation, is
necessarily unique, however singular it may be in relation to the
presence of gold, if it is ever proved to be thus singular, which we
very gravely doubt. Our readers, however, are chiefly concerned with
the practical and economic features of this wonderful mine, which
has not inaptly been described as a mountain of gold. After a care-
ful and exhaustive inspection of all the workings, one is forced, by
candour, into two admissions, viz.: that there is a great deal which
puzzles the mind, and that it is beyond the power of any man of
woman born to compute the capacities of the mine. Let us reflect
one moment. Our readers can guess as accurately as we can. They
have some idea of the enormous yields of gold won during the last
five years. Let them consider that there are at the crushing works
at least 30,000 tons of stone yet untreated, besides 25,000 tons of
tailings, and that for all these years work, and all the result we have
mentioned, there seems to have been little more done than removing
a part of the summit, and prosecuting necessary works for opening
up the mine. And here, we may remark in passing, that these
developing operations shew the impress of a master-hand. There are
still existing about Mount Morgan evidences of the crude methods
of mining that were formerly in vogue, but these relics of a bygone
time are fast giving place to a well-devised scheme, the working out
of which will be apparent to our readers as we proceed. But
returning to the question of the value of the mine. The whole of
the 55,000 tons of quartz and tailings will give an average of not
less than 5 oz. to the ton, or proportionately 275,000 oz. of gold, ef
the value of something over £1,000,000, and the cost of crushing
and chemical treatment, but not of breaking and sending to the
battery or crushing mill, requires to be deducted. Again, here is
another method of getting an idea of worth. The calculation is that
when the new machinery, which will be erected within twelve months
from the present time, has been got ready and is in full operation,
1000 tons a week will be able to be put through with it. This, at a
moderate estimate, will give a return of 270,000 oz for the year, or a
value in money of something approaching £1,090,000. Strike off
the £9O 000 for the year’s expenses, and there remains a profit of a
million of money, and so makes the present market value of the
shares equal only to a two years’ purchase. These calculations are
mainly contingent on the successful continuance of the chlorination
process, of which, it will be seen later on, there is no apparent
reasonable doubt. We say it mainly depends or, is contingent upon


this, because the supply of stone, at least as rich as that upon which
we have grounded our calculations, for some years to come, is, t® all
intents and purposes, a determined fact, as our readers will shortly
perceive. Let no reader run off with the impression that the quartz
at Mount Morgan merely covers the summit and slope with a thick
encrustation. That might have been so had it turned out to be an
old geyser, or even the production of decomposed pyrites and water,
but on the contrary, the quartz, as shown even by the already accom-
plished explorations, makes into the heart of the hill. In one tunnel,
which we will shortly describe, payable stone is carried practically all
the way through from one side of the hill to the other, and a crosscut
has proved this “ make ” to be at least 136 feet wide, and all through
it will average something like 5 ozs. to the ton, while there is a
longitudinal distance of not less than 800 feet, and probably 1000
feet. Those of our readers who are expert mathematicians may
draw any quod erat demonstrandum they choose, from the figures and
facts already given, and from others that have to follow. We con-
tent ourselves for the present with this remark, that judging by our
experience in other mines, and guided only by what we ourselves
witnessed, the Mount Morgan Company have “ stone in sight,” using
the expression in a purely mining sense, for the next fifteen or twenty
years, irrespective of all discoveries yet to be made.
No. 11.
The real difficulty in attempting a faithful picture of the immense
golden resources of Mount Morgan begins only when we come to
speak of the contrast between the little that has actually been done
in excavating the rich stone, and the extensive field for future opera-
tions that is being opened up. We know that hundreds of thousands
of tons have already been broken down and treated, and still even
the topography of the hill has been little more than slightly changed
at the summit, and concerning the tunnels that are now intersecting
the hill they have only, as yet, begun to cut up strips for future
stoping. So apparently exhaustless, and so easily accessible is the
stone, that when the mine is opened up, and the necessary labour-
saving works completed, over 2000 tons of quartz per week can be
run down to the new works to be erected, with greater facility, and
at a less cost than at almost any other mine we have ever seen.
Ascending the mount from the south-east by the circuitous road
down which the stone is at present carted from the main hopper and
shoot to the batteries, we come to the freehold tunnel which is being
put in at about 350 feet down from the summit of the hill. It is
through this tunnel, when the splendid scheme of Mr. Lisle, the
mining manager, is worked out in practice, that all the quartz from
every part of the hill above this level will pass on to an endless cable
tram, and the elevations are so admirably fixed, that the incline from
the mouth of this tunnel to the side of the new works, is just suffi-
cient to allow of the full down trucks hauling up the empty ones.


We may here show what the elaboration of this general design is to
be. From the opposite side of the hill, what is known as No. 1
tunnel, now being constructed, will be connected with this freehold
tunnel, and in time too, the latter will be connected with the No. 2
tunnel, which has been put in something like 200 feet nearer the
summit, and from a crosscut off which a rise is now being carried
through to the surface. Thus the present open faces nearer the
surface, which we have yet to allude to, can go on uninterruptedly
while these main openiug-up works are in progress, and at the same
time the ventilation of every part of the mine is being secured in
about the only perfect way in which any mine can be ventilated, viz.:
by a system of passages for the full play of air currents. It requires
no great effort of intellect, then, to perceive all the completeness and
efficacy of Mr. Lisle’s plan. From the summit of the hill, and on
every side down to this main tunnel, not an ounce of stone will need
to be hauled, but all must pass either down shoots or along inclined
trams, till the endless cable already mentioned is reached. To no
practical miner need we fill in here all the minutiae of self-emptying
tips and automatic contrivances for the economical working of the
stone; these, in point of fact, are but common-sense ideas, which
Mr. Lisle especially, with his varied experience in Southern mines,
must be better aware of than we are. This freehold tunnel at the
time of our visit was in only 148 feet, and it will need to be extended
an additional 200 feet or so before the rich stone which makes into
the hill on the higher levels is cut: and, calculating from its mouth,
it will have to be constructed a distance of 900 feet before it can be
connected, first with the tunnel above alluded to as No. 2, and then
with a shaft through to the summit of the hill. Passing further
round the slope of the hill the main hopper is reached, and into this
the produce of five different faces, all connected with it by lines of
rail, is emptied through a long shoot. It is not so very long since
this shoot was formed only of rough slabs without sides to guide the
stone in its descent to the hopper, and even in front of the termina-
tion of the shoot there used to be only an open paddock without
even a barrier to prevent the larger stones that came down the shoot
rolling over the precipice into the creek below. It is needless to say
that with Mr. Lisle’s advent at Mount Morgan, all this was promptly
altered. The hopper itself, with a high boarding to check the scatter-
ing of the stone beyond the hopper, was his contrivance, and, to
make assurance doubly sure, he had a barricade erected in front of
the hooper to prevent any quartz tumbling over the steep hillside,
and likewise floored the shoot with iron, and lined it on either side
with substantial walls. Even now, however, we cannot see why cart-
ing from this main hopper to the batteries should be continued.
There is no obstacle at all in the way of having all the stone trucked
on inclined rails to the batteries, or better still, as the cable between
the mouth of the tunnel and the foot of the hill may as well be con-
structed first as last, why not connect this hopper with the line of
rail that will come to the opening of the tunnel, and so save what
certainly seems unnecessary expense. Granted that with so much


rich stone so easily got out, temporary labour-saving appliances are
not of material moment, yet there is no reason why they should be
neglected. But proceeding up the hill, we come to the several open
faces or cuttings. The first face, 33 feet from the summit, is carrying
the top of the hill right away. There is a second face 18 feet lower
down, another 33 feet below that, and another again 33 feet still
lower down. These four faces, in point of fact, are all cutting away
the entire top of the mount, and at one portion or another of them,
all the different kinds of stone except the distinctively sinter charac-
ter, found in the No. 2 tunnel, are to be seen Thus, there is the
black stone almost pitchy in appearance, which goes about 6 oz. to
the ton; again there is the red stone which, treated separately, would
yield about 30 oz. to the ton, and there is further a mottled stone
which is of varied richness, but never less than 5 oz. to the ton. It
is in the black oxidised stone that the stalactite formations are found,
and it is noticeable, as we before remarked, that these formations as
well as the character of the stone changes as the distance from the
summit is increased. It may not be inappropriate to quote here what
Mr. Jack says regarding this part of the mine, but it must be remem-
bered that at the time of Mr. Jack’s inspection, the works were not
so far advanced as they are now. Mr. Jack says:—
“The work (apart from prospecting of exploring operations), is
carried on in two quarries or faces. No. 1 cuts into the hill from a
level of about 25 feet below the summit, and is designed simply to
remove the top of the mountain for the purpose of passing it through
the stampers. No. 2, or Magazine quarry, presents the aspect of a
“siding” road cut out of a steep hill, and attacks the auriferous
deposit at a level of about 100 feet below No. 1. The central portion
of the upper cutting is a largo mass of brown haematite ironstone,
generally in great blocks (up to some tons in weight) with a stalactite
structure, as if the iron oxide had gradually filled up the cavities left
in the original deposit. The ironstone contains gold of extraordinary
fineness, which, however, after a little practice, can be detected in
almost every fresh fracture. The ironstone is more or less mixed
with fine siliceous granules, Gradually to right and left of the
central mass the silica more and more replaces the ironstone. It is a
frothy, spongy, or cellular sinter, sometimes so light from the enlarge-
ment of air in its pores that it floats in the water like pumice. Fine
gold is disseminated throughout this siliceous deposit as well as in
the ironstone. Next the west end of the cutting is a vertical dyke
of kaolin mixed with fine siliceous granules, passing into pure kaolin,
with some silicates of magnesia, including a fine variety of French
chalk. I selected a number of specimens as characteristic of the
various deposits of the upper cutting. These, when assayed by Mr.
Karl Staiger, City Analyst, Brisbane, gave the following result: —
No. 5. Stalactite brown luematite from middle of cutting, 6 oz.
11 dwt. gold per ton.
Alo. 6. Siliceous sinter veined with quartz, 4oz. 4dwt gold per ton.
No. 7. A mixed mass of ironstone and silica from the level of the
road, east of the dyke, 5 oz. 4dwt. gold per ton.


No. 8. Ironstone siliceous sinter from west side of dyke, 10 oz.
14 dwt. gold per ton.
The lower, or Magazine face, presents a sort of fan-like arrange-
ment of its various materials. In the centre is a baud (almost ver-
tical) of brown haematite in large “ bombs,” with a mammilated
botroydal, or sometimes reniform appearance. To the right (east) is
a nearly vertical deposit of aluminous iron ochre, followed by a mass
(still nearly vertical) of red haematite in large cellular bombs. To
the east is a broad mass of loose ironstamed siliceous and aluminous
material, which begins to lean eastward like the outward feathers of
a fan. A great mass of loose earthy red haematite, another of brown
haematite, weathering to iron ochre, another of red earthy haematite,
and another of brown haematite in large (ton) blocks, appear in suc-
cession as the cutting is followed to the east. The Magazine (near
the east end of the cutting) is excavated in a fine white siliceous
earth, and the cutting ends with a mass of soft earthy aluminite.
Beginning from the west side of the nearly vertical mass of brown
haematite first described, we pass in succession in going westward a
band of yellow ochre, a broad belt of light siliceous sinter ironstained,
and containing some angular fragments of the quartzite of the
“ country rock,” a belt of similar siliceous sinter mixed with earthy
red haematite, and finally a broad mass of siliceous veins, and con-
taining some angular fragments of the “ country rock,” the members
of the series leaning more and more fan-fashion to the west as they
recede from the central vertical bands. At the end of the cutting
is a mass of magnesian and aluminous silicates, which is probably
the prolongation of the dyke in the upper quarry. Mr. Lisle, the
manager, informed me that he had got “ prospects ” in every part of
the cutting with the exception of the siliceous earth at the Magazine.
This was corroborated by my own observations. I ground and
washed a great number of specimens (of my own selection) from
both the upper and the lower cutting, and from every variety of
material, and was surprised and delighted with the prospects I
obtained, in most cases from stuff which miners would regard as
most unpromising.
Mr. Staiger’s assays of characteristic samples, selected from the
lower cutting, yielded as follows :
No. 1. Brown haematite (from b), 3 oz. 6 dwt. per ton.
No. 2. Bed haematite (from y), 6oz. 16 dwt. per ton.
No. 3. Aluminous rock from west of dyke. No gold,
No. 4. Siliceous sinter from among the aluminous rock, 3 oz.
15 dwts. per ton.
The kaolin dyke to which Mr. Jack refers, and which is nothing
more nor less than fire-clay, is most distinctly shown m the 33 ft.
bench at the summit of the hill, where it seems to run up along the
southern side of the richest gold-bearing stata until it comes close to
the top of the mount when it branches off, at an angle, to the north,
dividing the hill into two, and on both sides of this dyke rich quartz
has been found. Let it be understood that neither the colour nor the
character of the stone is a sure indication of richness. Thus? some


of the richest stone found in the mine was got amongst the ironstone
quartz, close to the summit, whilst in the crosscut from the No. 2
tunnel some of the stone, which is much whiter than that aboye,
would go over 32 oz. to the ton, and this stone is sinter in character.
We are not aware that any special significance is to be attached to
the fact, yet it is worth mentioning that the ironstone chiefly lay to
the east of the best gold, which, so far, has been found on the
western side. The most auriferous stone of all has been found to be
that of a yellowish colour, stained with iron. No one can yet say
with perfect accuracy whether the five different formations of stone,
changing, no doubt, in appearance, but preserving their identity,
make down through the heart of the hill separately, or form them-
selves at a distance from the summit into a huge lode. Our impres-
sion is, and it is one entertained by Mr. Hall and Mr. Lisle, that no
junction of the “makes” of stone will take place until at least a
depth lower than the bed of the river is reached, and the develop-
ments in the mine too, so far, bear out this theory. But it will be
time enough many years hence, when there is a prospect of the stone
supply giving out, to discuss this problem. We advert now to the
No. 2 tunnel, which has been driven through the hill from south to
north, a distance of about 460 ft., and carries good average stone all
the way. About midway in this tunnel a crosscut has been put in,
in an easterly direction, through 130 feet of sinter quartz, which
varies in quality from 1 oz. 2 dwts. to the ton to over 32 ozs. to the
ton. Some 50 tons taken promiscuously in driving this crosscut gave
an average of over 5 oz. to the ton, and it is from here that a rise is
being put through to the surface, and that a connection will be made
also with the freehold tunnel, which will be carried immediately under
the rise above referred to. The No. 1 tunnel, which is going in from
the southern side of the hill, is being driven along the edge of
the white stone found in the No. 2 tunnel above, and all
that can be known until crosscuts are put in is, that the
stone is payable. Keverting for a moment to the No. 2 tunnel
works, it has been pointed out that the quartz on one side of the
tunnel only has been proved, and that it is anticipated two, if not
three, other makes of stone will be cut, when driving is commenced
the other way across the “ lay ” of the country.
No. 111.
Oue preceding articles will, we think, have given our readers a pretty
fair conception of what the Mount Morgan Mine is, and we entertain
little doubt they will arrive at the conclusion we have, that the
resources of the Mount are practically eshaustless. So far as the
future development of the mine is concerned, we place far more
reliance on the combined skill and experience of Mr. J. 'Westley Hall,
the general manager, and Mr. Lisle, the mining manager, than we do
all the ink that can be shed in a hundred years on geological
definitions and theories, aided by the most voluminous of scientific


dictionaries. Tims, we pay little heed to rhyolite dykes or dioritic
bars, excepting so far as, in actual practice, they are found to affect
the gold-bearing stone. It is well-known in the Southern Colonies
that dykes, with their twin formations known as slides, throws, heaves,
and cross-courses are almost uniformly associated with an increased
richness in the stone contiguous to them. To adopt the language of
a standard encyclopaedia “ if our means of tracing dykes -were at all
perfect, we should probably find that they could be, in almost every
case, traced into the parent mass of igneous rock from which they
had originally flowed.” And here it may be observed that the
presence of such dykes at Mount Morgan seems to strengthen the
theory suggested by us, of an igneous origin of the quartz. It is
only fair to mention, however, that the strong dioritic masses that
passthrough the country diagonally to the “ strike ” of the quartz,
are urged by the officials at the mine, who favour the chemical out-
burst idea, as something on their side of the question, in that, as
they put it, the cc .ntry around has there been shattered, and full
play given for the bubbling up of the steam and water.
It is almost needless to say that the lands around Mount Morgan
have been pretty well prospected, but so far no corresponding forma-
tion has been found. It is deeply to be regretted, notwithstanding
this unquestionable fact, that more than one concern has been
placed on the English market on grossly fallacious represen-
tations. We have already said so much about the Mount Morgan
(West) and the infinite immorality manifested by those who were
responsible for the misstatements in the prospectus, that we do not
think it needful to add more than this that the veriest tyro in gold
mining would never dream, after walking over the ground, that the
Mount Morgan (West) had the most remote prospect of catching a
single speck of the Mount Morgan run. Now, however, we hear
that another and an equally disingenuous scheme has been placed on
the English market, believed to include or consist of the selection
of Mr. 1). 0. Gordon. To support probabilities of success
for this venture, statements have been made that the Mount Morgan
quartz is bearing forty degrees east by north. Such assertions aro
utterly untrue, and this selection unless other ground is included in
the claim, stands in, if possible, a worse position for the Mount
Morgan run than the Mount Morgan (West) does. And now for tho
chlorination works.
The history of the chlorination process at Mount Morgan is a
record of steady progress, not without its elements of difficulty and
discouragement but there cannot be much doubt of this, that, since
Mr J. Westley Hall took over the entire charge of the mine and
works, the advance towards the present comparative perfection has
been at once more rapid and better sustained than formerly. It is
not assumed by any one that chlorination, as it is conducted at Mount
Morgan, has reached its limit of improvement. The success of the
essential principles has long since been assured, but there are
economic adaptations to he worked out in precisely the same way as
improvement after improvement was made in every form of steacr


machinery contrived. Possibly this is a duty, a recreation, or a
hobby, or more correctly all three combined, with Mr. Hall, and in
this respect the company are extremely fortunate. Mr. Hall has had
a long and varied experience in mining, he knows something of
mineralogy, metallurgy, and chemistry, and to add to all he is a
careful observer, and a devoted experimentalist, and thus he is about
the best man the company could have secured to mature for them a
method of economically extracting gold from ore, which has nothing
of a kindred character away from Central Queensland.
Those who know anything of the history of the Mount Morgan
Mine are well aware of how, for a time, the greater part of the gold was
washed down the creek in the tailings, and how different tests awoke
the shareholders to the discovery that there was more gold by a long
way in the battery refuse than was caught by the ordinary crushing
and amalgamating process. Some stone was sent to Gympie, where
Mr. Limborner treated it by chlorination with good results. That
gentleman then, in conjunction with Dr. Benson, entered into an
arrangement to put up chlorination works at the Mount, and four
vats were got ready and tried, the means adopted to generate the
chlorine gas being by mingling black oxide of manganese with sul-
phuric acid and salt. The system was so far a failure that only half
the gold in the tailings was secured. Amalgamation was then tried
in Wheeler’s pans, and though the cost of this was not one third that
of Dr. Benson’s system the tailings still gave assays of 40 per cent
of the entire gold. Dr. Benson’s process was by chlorinizing the ore
in vats by allowing the gas to ascend through the stuff from the
bottom. In August, 1885, Mr. Henry Trenear, the company’s
assayer, discovered that by roasting the ore and treating it with
chloride of lime and sulphuric acid the whole of the gold could be
extracted. Then it was that the first revolving barrels were con-
structed and the furnaces built. These barrels were originally
constructed of pine, for which Mr. Hall subsequently substituted
ironbark, strongly bound with iron bands put on hot, and allowed by
the contraction in cooling to draw the staves firmly together, with
solid bars screwed transversely across the end, and a cast iron frame
round the outside edges. These barrels have, in point of fact, been
of the most service of all, and have indeed proved the main stand-by
of the company in the chlorination process. It was some short time
after these barrels had been at work, that an arrangement was entered
into with Messrs. Newbery and Yautin, for the erection of ten iron
barrels which were constructed in Melbourne, and set to work under
the supervision of Mr. Yautin, and these are the ones that Mr. W.
Pattison alluded to in his speech at the late ordinary meeting as so
faulty that only two out of ten could be kept going. They were
originally of wrought iron lined with wood. Mr. Hall soon found it
desirable to replace the wooden lining with lead, and since then the
barrels have practically been repaired anew. Thus the material used in
the first instance was boiler-plate iron, fths of an inch thick, with
half inch ends. Now these ends are being taken out and replaced
with cast iron ones, and two inches of hard wood placed inside the


leaden lining to protect it from the influences of the chemicals. It
•was found that the cast iron ends broke through the action of the
friction gear, and this, likewise, had to be remedied by altering this
gear from the bevel to the smooth surface, which obviates the strain
on the ends of the barrels, in that all side friction is entirely done
away with, and so the iron ends are prevented from breaking in the
centre. Up to the present four of the Newbery and Yautin barrels
have been altered in the manner we have described, and two more are
ready to be fixed in position, which leaves only four remaining to be
dealt with in a similar manner. In the design of Messrs. Newbery
and Yautin there is a novel principle claimed, viz., that of pumping
the atmosphere into the barrels, to drive the chlorine gas through the
pores of the ore, which, of course, would save considerably in the
use of those chemicals necessary tD generate the gas. We are not
aware whether the application of this principle has been successfully
made at any other similar works, but it has not yet been tried at
Mount Morgan. Whether it may be tried when the new works are
constructed is a question which has not, so far, been decided.
The process of chlorination at Mount Morgan is a very interesting
one, and would well repay a visit of inspection by any who are
interested in the profitable and economic treatment of auriferous ores.
The tailings, as they come from the battery, or from the dry crusher,
as the case may be, are first of all roasted, in eight large furnaces, each
with a capacity of putting through 8 tons in 24 hours. The roasting
of the ore in the first place, is to free it from the waters of crystaliza-
tion, and to burn all organic matter out of it. When it leaves the
furnaces, it is turned out to cool in a large space, which lies under
the principal sheds, between the furnaces and the chlorinising barrels.
When it has sufficiently cooled, it is taken on an inclined tramway to
the hoppers connected with the chlorination barrels, in which the gas
is generated by mingling chloride of lime with sulphuric acid. Water
only is added, and the barrels, which are, of course, perfectly air*
tight, are kept revolving until the gold is thoroughly chlorinated, or
to speak plainly, put into a fluid state. Each barrel contains a charge
of about a ton of ore, and it is possible to get through 12 charges in
the 24 hours. The period for which the barrels are made to revolve
averages one and a-half hours. When this operation is over, the
contents of the barrels are discharged into what is known as the
draining vats, from whence the water and the gold, put into a state
of solution, are drained into the charcoal filters below. The charcoal
possesses such an affinity for the chlorine that the gold is rapidly
deposited, and the charcoal is so laid in these Y shaped filters that
the golden fluid passes through layers gradually becoming finer
towards the bottom, and so practically all the gold that is dissolved
by the chlorine gas in the barrels is caught in the charcoal, and so
effectual is the process that the refuse from the draining tubs will not
assay more than a pennyweight or a pennyweight and a half to the
ton, while in order that nothing may be lost that it is possible to save,
the water which drains off from the charcoal filters is pumped back
and goes through the process a second time, The contents of the


charcoal filters are conveyed straight to the smelting works, which
are of a very complete kind, and are under the immediate superin-
tendence of Mr. Trenear. There the charcoal on which the gold has
been precipitated, is first roasted in furnaces specially constructed,
and the residuum smelted in the usual smelting pots. After this, it
is run, as occasion requires, into ingots of the purest gold that is
ever turned out in Queensland.
No. IV.
We think readers of the Argus will already have gathered from our
previous articles, that nothing hut a plant and works on a scale of
unexampled efficiency and magnitude would fully meet the require-
ments of the vast field of golden stone that is being opened up in
this famous mine. The present appliances, indeed, would be thought
adequate for any ordinary mine, but the Directors of the Mount
Morgan Gold Mining Company have wisely determined to leave
nothing undone to secure such machiuery as will amply meet every
necessity of the mine. Thus, a few hundred yards closer to the
mount than the present works, a site has been selected for the new
machinery, which has been ordered principally from England and
America. At present the battery consists of 25 stampers, the first 10
heads put up having soon been found insufficient. There are,
altogether, three engines on the ground, each of about 16 horse
power, and a large engine of 40 horse power, which is to he used to
drive the new chlorination barrels, is now on the way from England.
Though practically these are to be entirely new works, as we have
stated, at the foot of the mount, it is by no means intended that the
present machinery is to he done away with, hut rather that all shall
be kept going and that the whole shall work harmoniously together,
and in the department of machines and workshops for doing a great
portion of the contrivances, fittings, &c., in connection with the mine
and works, there is a much more complete provision than anyone who
has not visited Mount Morgan would credit. Thus, for driving the
machines in the workshops there is an efficient horizontal engine with
a large Cornish flue boiler. In these workshops there is a punching
and shearing machine, a Eoot’s patent blower, a 19-inch lathe, with
26-inch bed, a 6-inch lathe, a large drilling machine, a 4-ton stroke
steam hammer and three powerful forges. There are also a planing
machine, a screw cutting machine, a band saw, a morticing machine,
a wood lathe, besides smaller contrivances for doing the iron and
wood work necessary in connection with the mine and plant. Under
another shed is one of Marsclen’s dry crushers with two sets of
rollers and a circular saw and a breaking clown saw are being erected
there at the present time.
Dry crushing at the .battery was tried, but without that measure
of success that was thought sufficient, the ore being turned out too
fine to harmonise with the necessary after process and so it has been
determined that the principle at the new works shall be dry crushers
with steel rollers, The quartz will first go through stone-breaking


machines, and then pass into the rollers to be ground to the necessary
fineness, and the system that is to be adopted is that the stuff which
does not pass, after the crushing operation, through the sieve, is put
back to be crushed by the rollers. One set of these rollers has just
arrived in Brisbane from America, and others have been ordered, and
are on the way, and it may here be mentioned that experience has
already shown that this plan of dry crushing is the most effective and
economical yet suggested. At the new works there will be con-
structed 24 additional furnaces and 24 additional barrels, with their
co-relative draining and filter vats. These are to be carried out
under the personal direction of Mr. J. Wcstley Hall, and will be
completed with every provision for those improvements in material
and in detail, which experience and repeated tests have shown to be
expedient, and to which we have already alluded. Thus, in twelve
months’ time from now, or possibly less, there is little doubt that the
entire new plant, decided on by the Mount Morgan directors will be
in full swing with a capability, including that of the present works,
of effectually, completely, and economically treating something over
1700 tons of stone per week. We based a previous calculation of
probable profits in the future, on the average of 1000 tons, which the
new Avorks alone would be able to accomplish. Our readers can now
readily enough estimate wdiat the returns to shareholders are likely
to be at the rate of 1700 tons a week treated, which the combined
works will be able to do. The average may be set down with safety
at soz. to the ton, which gives 8500 oz. per week or 450,000 oz. per
year, equal in value to nearly £1,800,000. Allowing a very large
margin for expenses, unlooked for hindrances &c., there does not
seem much reason to doubt that the shareholders of the Mount
Morgan G-.M. Co. will in a few months from now, be in the enjoy-
ment of profits to the extent of a million and a-half per annum.
Our figures are large, but they are supported in every respect by
facts. There are areas of stone, the value of which has been
ascertained Avith conclusive accuracy, and it is beyond a doubt almost
that for some years to come, at all events, the average yield taking
the richest of the stone with the poorest will not fall under soz. to
the ton. If there is a doubt to be suggested at at all, it is that some
merely mechanical defect may be discovered, but this it will bo
evident to any intelligent reader, can only cause a trifling delay, for
such obstacle's in the present age are. never long insurmountable.
The first co-partnership that existed in connection Avith the Mount
Morgan Mine comprised :—Frederick Morgan, his two brothers—F.
G. Morgan, and T. 8. Morgan —and one of the brother’s sons, they
possessing one half of the mine, and Messrs. T. S. Hall, W. Hall
(Sydney), W. K. D’Arcy, and W. Pattison possessing the remaining
half. The Morgans subsequently subdivided their half into five
shares, and Mr. T. S. Hall became possessor of one-fifth of their half.
Mr. Edivard Morgan sold his share to his brother, Mr. Frederick
Morgan, for the sum of £IO.OOO. Thus Mr. Fred. Morgan Avith his
own original share, that of his son, and that purchased from his
brother Ned, possessed 3-10ths of the whole mine. This interest he


eventually sold to the original shareholders of the second half, for
the sum of £62,000. On the same day as this sale, the purchasers
sold l-10th interest in the mine for £26,000 to Mr. John Ferguson
the senior M.L.A. for the district, and he has since split up portion
of that interest among a number of Eockhampton people who have
invested various sums from £SOO to £IOOO and upwards. Finally,
the original shareholders of the second half bought out Thomas
Morgan’s one-tenth for £31,000. A limited company has now been
formed with a capital of £1,000,000 in 1,000,000 shares of £1 each.
The total area of ground held by the company, including the free-
hold, the leasehold, and the consolidated claim, which embraces
thirty men’s ground, is about 730 acres.
We have now come to the close of our descriptive papers on the
Mount Morgan G-old Mine, and we have little more to add. Wo
have no idea that the present generation will see this wonderfully
rich mine exhausted. Its possibilities, indeed, seem to us to travel
far beyond the range, which limits the present outlook. The hill has
yet to be explored from its base, and with the multiplied cir-
cumference there, as compared with that nearer the sumit, there
must also be a multiplied increase of the golden stone. But even
that is not all; nor is it all either when the present formation has
been worked into tbe bowels of the earth to as great a depth as it is
proved payable, for even when all the wealth in these regards has
been won from the mine, there is at least one other lode, known as
the mundic lode which passes through the western portion of the
claim, still to be explored.
In finally closing we desire to thank Mr. J. Westley Hall and Mr.
Lisle for the gentlemanly courtesy they extended to us. With the
thermometer standing at 104 deg. in the shade these gentlemen
accompanied us over every part of the mine, and afforded us such ex-
planations as we asked with so much hearty good-will that we were
almost ashamed of the multiplicity of enquiries it seemed necessary
to us to put, and if we have any counterbalancing solace at all, it is in
the reflection that, so fas as our humble ability goes, readers of the
Argus have reaped the advantage of our pertinacity in seeking in-
formation, in the accuracy and completeness of these articles.


TEE
MOUNT MORGAN (WEST) GOLD MINE,
(From the Daily Northern Argus , December 15, 1886. y
<{ (Falsehood,” remarks Colton. “ is never so successful as when she
baits her hooks with truth,” and if ever there was an occasion when
this truism received complete exemplification, it is now. The
prospectus of the Mount Morgan (West) Gold Mine was published
in an issue of the Fall Mall Gazette recently to hand, and such
portions of it as we thought essential for public information were
given in the Argus of Monday, and we hear that copies of the same
production have been in private circulation in Eockhampton for
several days past. There can be no doubt that the production, there-
fore, is a serious one —that it is a statement formulated with the
authority of those who have charge of the venture in London. We
allude to both the serious and the authentic aspects of the prospectus,
because the first impression one gets upon reading it, is that it is the
concoction of some ponderous joker desirous of sarcastically pictur-
how cunningly romance may be blended with truth when it is
desired to inflame the wealth-acquiring fancies of English capitalists.
But the extreme gravity of the situation is amply realised by a very
brief reflection, and every unbiassed person, at all acquainted with
the facts, instantly experiences a revulsion from an inclination to be
amused, to a feeling of unqualified condemnation, and an impulse to
use language which would not be considered ultra-orthodox in a
Church Congress. Certainly, no document was ever penned in
■which fact and fiction have been more deftly blended, and in the
process of interweaving the two, to produce a perfect illusion, there
are evidences of the hand of a master in the art of deceit That all
this is the handiwork of those Q-uoensland directors, whose names
figure on the document—men whom we have known as upright
colonists, straightforward in all their dealings in the past —we cannot
and we will not believe; but that is a view which must not be per-
mitted to prevent us from exposing the mountain of gross mis-
representation and highly deceitful colouring, presented in the most
transparent guise, in this precious emanation. One beholds, indeed,
a beautiful network of truth and falsehold with all the manifold
entwinings of “ a lie that is half a lie” and “a truth that is three-
quarters false,” and thus a mine which, by no sensible man, who is
aware of the real position of things, would be regarded as anything
but purely prospective, is suddenly metamorphosed by the install*


taneous process of deceptive wordpainting into a concern from which
it would be a thousand wonders if enormous dividends are not drawn
with almost electric swiftness.
We are not concerned with any of the arrangements made between
the past owners and those “ sundry persons in relation to the pro-
motion of the company” so described in the prospectus. If the
prospects of the mine had been stated with even an approach to
honesty, we might possibly have left all whom it may concern to
guard their pockets in their own sweet way, and to judge for them-
selves if the probabilities of success, were worth the risk of the
capital demanded. The matter, however, stands in a much more
immoral light, and our ordinary responsibilities as public journalists
are increased by the magnitude and extent of the evils, which may
result to the whole of Australia, from this stupendous attempt at
fraud. Ordinarily we might have been contented with the statement
to our readers that the “ now famous Mount Morgan,” (an expression
which with kaleidoscopic changes is temptingly imported, with
marked frequency, into the heap of exaggerated verbiage composing
the prospectus), is as likely from present revelations to affect the
richness of this Mount Morgan (West) as Mackay’s Bonanza mines
are. But that would neither satisfy us, nor any of our readers, and
hence we venture upon more explanations.
We presume it will not be denied that this Mount Morgan (West) is
identical with the Great Mount Morgan Extended. The inconsequential
alteration of name may, of course, have no connection with a
particular crushing effected by a party under the latter title, yet it
seems strange that no mention is made at all of this crushing. Under
the name of the Great Mount Morgan Extended, this Mount Morgan
(West) ground, has been worked for a very considerable time, and
some 10 to 15 tons were tried at Mount Morgan battery, and, with-
out allowing for gold that must have been remaining on the plates
before this parcel was commenced to be put through, the result was
not 4ozs. and the treatment of the tailings gave practically nothing.
But this incidentally. The very first statement that is made in the
prospectus regarding the ground comprised in this scheme is a gross
misrepresentation. “ This company,” so the prospectus runs, “is
formed to purchase and work fourteen acres of gold-bearing rock
deposit, being a portion of the now famous Mount Morgan.” It is
not, in any sense, a part of Mount Morgan, though it may embrace a
portion of a spur from that mount, and that there are fourteen acres
of gold-bearing rock deposit, is simply shamefully wide of the truth.
But that statement is further amplified by the averment that ‘ ‘ the
value of this company’s property, which is of identically the same
character as that of the Mount Morgan partnership may, therefore,
be judged by the extraordinary results already realised by that under-
taking.” No more disingenuous description of any mining property
was ever given, and no greater attempt to throw dust in people’s
eyes, was ever made. Mount Morgan (West) is not only anything
but “ of identically the same character” but so far from there being
any prospect of the rich stone worked by the Mount Morgan Com-


pany trending any way near the Mount Morgan (West), all the facts
prove precisely the reverse. On the very "best authority possible, we
are able to state that the Mount Morgan (Wosty is more than 600 ft.
away from any gold deposit that has been worked in the Mount
Morgan, and more than that, the auriferous belt of country, which is
being worked by open faces, and by tunnels, in the Mount Morgan,
running as it does a point or two east of north is thus at both ends,
going further and further away from the ground of the Mount
Morgan (West/ Still further, the only prospecting done by the
Mount Morgan at all close to the boundary of the Mount Morgan
(West) only served to show that the latter at that point was worth-
less, That was at about 850 feet from the boundary in question. In
a shaft there, on the Mount Morgan ground, prospects were got at a
depth of 16 feet, and. the stone was driven on towards the confines of
the Mount Morgan (West), but the quartz ran out in the first place,
and in the second it was valueless. In describing the position of
the Mount Morgan (West) the prospectus says that “ the famous
local gold mining partnership called Mount Morgan bounds it on two
sides.” We have no intention of quarrelling about mere terms.
There is a sense in which it is bounded on two sides. To the north
west of the Mount Morgan leases, the boundary lines of the Mount
Morgan (West) wedge into the Mount Morgan property with a very
obtuse angle, and it is the two sides of this obtuse angle that are
described as “bounding on two sides,” yet so obtuse is the angle,
that the extra boundary length, that is given by the two sides of the
angle exceeds the base only, by so insignificant an amount, that it
would have been more correct to have described the Mount Morgan
(West), as bounded on one side only, by the Mount Morgan. More
important, however, as showing the utter worthlessness of relative
positions about which so much has been made in the prospectus, we
may mention that both boundary lines of the Mount Morgan (West)
run transversely to the magnetic line, in such a manner that the
possible value of Mount Morgan (West) is lessened.
The statement about the boundaries is alleged to be made on the
authority of a plan prepared by Mr. F. J. Byerley, the Queensland
Government Mining Surveyor for the .Rockhampton district. To
begin with, there is only a limited sense in which that gentleman is
“ Government Mining Surveyor,” but we pass that by in order to
reach the far more delusive portion of the prospectus viz., that which
gives a false interpretation in language, of Mr. Byerley’s plan. Wo
are writing now with Mr. Byerley’s plan before us, and we defy any-
one by the most subtle perversion of facts to show anything in that
plan which detracts from the absolute untruthfulness of the follow-
ing : —“ This plan also shows the shaft on the property of the Mount
Morgan Partnership, on the southern boundary of the property of
this Company, which has proved the richness of the gold-bearing
deposit rock, it having assayed 7oz. per ton, and a shaft on the
Morgan and Go’s claim on the northern boundary of this Company’s
property, proved the deposit to give lOozs. of gold per ton. This
Company’s property lies directly between the two trial shafts, as


shown in Mr. Byerley’s plan.” It is to be observed that there is
here a singular mixing up of titles. We do not know what is meant
by “ Morgan and Co.’s claims on the northern boundary of this
property,” and the plan before us has no such shaft marked upon it.
The other shaft, tolerably accurately described, is the one already
referred to in the present article, from which a drive was constructed
westwards till the stone was crossed. No such assays as those speci-
fically mentioned were ever heard of, and the Mount Morgan (West)
■just as accurately may be described as lying between Jerusalem and
Madagascar, as between the two shafts referred to in the prospectus.
We, of course, acquit Mr. Byerley of all blame in regard to the false
conception which has been engendered, professedly on the strength
of his plan.
We think we have now said enough to show precisely what this
Mount Morgan (West) is, and how much it would have injured
Australian mining investment if it had been allowed to pass unnoticed
with all its specious pretensions. The borrowed lustre which this
venture seeks to draw from the real Mount Morgan very nearly
resembles the golden splendour which may be cast from a jeweller’s
shop over a ragged urchin on the footpath outside, and that little
outcast is as likely to share in the treasures within, as the Mount
Morgan (West) is to secure a slice of the auriferous belt that passes
through Mount Morgan. All the truth, in point of fact, about the
genuinely rich Mount Morgan is profusely used to bait the many
hooks with which the Mount Morgan (West) has sought to secure
English investors.


Tini
DAILY NORTHERN ARGUS
Published Daily,
Price—ONE PENNY,
Acknowledged to be the most influential and enterprising
Journal in Central and Northern Queensland.
THE DAILY NORTHERN ARGUS is the only
Penny Paper published in Central Queensland, and not
only commands the circulation of Rockhampton and
neighbourhood, hut also the inland townships, including
Springsure, Blackall, Aramac, Tamho, and the immense
Pastoral Districts of Western Queensland; also Mount
Morgan, Crocodile, Cawarral, and the extensive Gold-
fields of Central Queensland. It is therefore unrivalled
as an Advertising Medium in the districts named.
Subscription—6s. 6d. per Quarter,
Strictly payable in advance.


The Queensland National Bank,
SlSilf'Sß,
Incorporated under “ The Companies Act, 1863/
BANKERS TO THE GOVERNMENT OE QUEENSLAND.
Authorised Capital, £2,000,000 ; Subscribed, £1,304,600 ;
Paid-up, £652,300; ±toserve Fund, £315,000.
Dixsjctors g
Hon. F. H. HAST, M.L.C., Chairman; BOA"D D. MOREHEAD, Esq., M.L.A.;
Hon. Sir A. H. PALMER. K.C.M.G., M.L.C.
Auditors. 6
THEODORE UNMACK, Esq.; A. B. WEBSTER, Esq.
B©lielto*rs t
Messrs. HAET and FLOWER.
General Manager—EDWAßD ROBERT DRURY, C.M.G.
GENERAL MANAGER’S OFFICE.
Secretary (Acting) ... ... ... ARTHUR FORBES.
Sub-Inspector of Branches (Acting) JAMES STEWART.
~ „ „ R. T. SHIELDS.
Branch Accountant G. H. PRITCHARD.
Manager ... 11. W. GLERNY. Accountant ... J. K. CANNAN.
BRANCHES.
LONDON OFFICE: 29, Lombard Street, E.C.
Local Directors —E. S. Dawes, Esq.; Yicary Gibbs, Esq.; R. M, Stewart, Esq.
Manager—Robert Dunlop Buchanan. Accountant—Samuel T. Smith.
Bankers—The Bank of England, The Consolidated Bank Limited.
SYDNEY: 89, Pitt Street.
L. A. Johnstons ... ... Acting Manager.
AGENTS.
Victoria ... ... ... The National Bank of Australasia
V IGUUIicL ••• hi idly XN BLlOllßi iXBIIK Ol jaIIS LrQlQSlcl
South Australia... The National Bank of Australasia
Western Australia ... The National Bank of Australasia
New Zealand ... ... Bank of N.Z., The Colonial Bank of N.Z.
Tasmania... ... ... The Bank of Van Diemen’s Land Limited
Scotland Royal Bank of Scotland; British Linen Co. Lank
Ireland ... ... ~, Ulster Bank Limited
New York ... ... Messrs. Laidlaw and Co.
San Francisco ... ... Bank of California
China and the East ~, Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.


E. S. LUCAS & CO.,
IMPOSTERS OE
DRAPERY, + CLOTHING.
HATS,
Chinese Bamboo Chairs and Blinds,
Mailings Gita «*% <So., 4§k f
EAST STREET,
ROCKHAMPTON,
at LOGIIiISS and HOISG KONG.
Indents for all classes of Goods executed at low rates .


Watgies akb Jeweueby.
W. G. J. EDGAR
HAS BEEN
AWAMBEO FIRST FM^E
Over all competitors for the Best Collection of LOCAL MADE
JEWELLERY; also Eirst Prize for the Best Collection
of MEDALS.
THE GREATLY INCREASING DEMAND FOR
SFMCIM Wai¥€M
Has compelled him to complete a contract for the regular supply
Monthly of this Splendid Piece of Mechanism.
The Largest and Most Vakied Stock of
Jewellery, Watches, & Clocks
Ever imported to this city is now open for inspection and selection
at EDGAR'S SHOP.
All are hereby invited to come and see the Latest Designs in
Novelties, and the very latest fashion, at GREATLY REDUCED
PEICES.
Edq-ae employs only Competent Workmen for the Watch and
Clock repairing Trade.
ALL KINDS of JEWELLERY MADE TO ORDER 05 SHORTEST NOTICE.
Practical Watchmaker and Jeweller,
East Street, Rockhampton.


ROBERT LYONS,
Solicitor, §lanmj<mar, mid proctor.
COMMISSIONER foe AFFIDAVITS
Queensland, New South Wales, and
Victoria
‘ARGUS’ BUILDINGS,


JOS. PATTISON,
Solicitor, &c.,
SaasMi Skualnn, Qua}' Stntt,
ROCKHAMPTON.


iiochlf.nnplon Alenin
go-
B-QX»S QVm STBEETv
USUAL SIZES OF DOORS, &c. :
Sashes : Glass, 10 xB, 2 ft. 4 in. x 3 ft. 9f in. ; 10 x 12, 2 ft. 10 in. x 4 ft. 5f in.;
10 x 14, 2 ft. 10 in. x 5 ft. If ft. Doors ; 6 ft. 6 in. x 2 ft. 6 ft. ; 6 ft. 8 in. x 2 ft.
8 in.; 6 ft. 10 in. x 2 ft. 10 in. French Lights : 7 ft. x 3 ft. ; 7 ft. x 3 ft. 4 in.
Doors, Windows, Timber, Ike., of the best quality.
All goods for Country customers carefully inspected before leaving factory.
WES¥ & ’Mmmmfgmwm*
D\ PINBERG,
mwkii a
Tobacconist and Fiisicy Croods.
A fresh supply of all kinds of Fruit from
the Southern Markets by every boat.
S. HEISER,
lillet and, Clot Mei, impel mi isnml iiliMii*
AND FANCY GOODS STORE.
S. HEISEB,
The Emporium, William Street,
I*. HIGHATT-.
Fruiterer and Greengrocer,
WILLIAV STREET, ROCKHAMPTON.
All descriptions of Emits, Vegetables, and Iced Drinks
always on hand.


W. KASCH,
CABINETMAKER AND UPHOLSTERER,
East street (opposite Grant’s Timber Yards).
Manufacturer of all kinds of
maims, Hosnuos. uatsbassis, & mm
At Reasonable Reduced Prices.
Always in Atock, drawing-room Auites of
Walnut, at Aydney Prices,
Second-hand Eurniture Bought and Sold. Cheapest
House in Town.
t. :m. black,
UNDERTAKER,
Holsover street (opposite Wilkinson’s Horse Bazaar),
Importer of
Coffin F'y.mttupe- S Gardisj
ROCKHAMPTON.
J. 0. JOHNSTONE,
|lip Qlpiilw, |all, |w*t, ®i|i ||a|ef,
WILLIAM STREET, ROCKHAMPTON.
barge assortment of Tents and Tarpaulins on hand, of all sizes and
qualities, and made to order at the shortest notice. Large stock
of Best Manilla Hope, all sizes, and a large and general
assortment of Ship Chandlery.


J. W. FACE & CO.,
QUEENSLAND
East and William Streets.
Tills is 111® Cheapest House in the Trade-
Visit or send your orders to this Establishment.
For Quality, Style, Low Prices, J. W. FACE & CO. can compete
with any other business house in the trade.
We have a large and good stock to choose from of General Drapery,
Millinery, Underclothing, Men’s and Boys’ Clothing.
Importers of Ladies’, Gents’, Boys’ and Girls’
moors am shoes.
Prom all the Leading Makers in the World- Great Variety.
TAILORING
IN ALL ITS YAEIOUS BRANCHES.
MEN’S and BOYS’ SUITS Hads to Order on the
Shortest Notice.
'Trousers Made to Order for 2is*
.o^o-
ROCKhIj\IPTOnI 118


London CLOTSIHG Company,
S, GEIMISH, Manager,
■MHEAST + STREET,**
IMPORTERS OF
•Iflothing, hirb,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL,
TAILORING A SPECIALITY
The Best Cutters in Queensland.
Send for Price List and Patterns.
•* 6EPRHL 4- enTFFPFEI^,*-
The Trade supplied.
mmm mmamm i r
EAST STREET,
S. GRIMISH, Manager


J. HANSEN LUNDAGER,
Photographs of Mount Morgan sent to
any part of the Colonies or the United
Kingdom, either mounted or unmounted.
These Photos were highly spoken of by
the English Press when they were ex-
hibited in the Colonial Exhibition.
OVER 60 DIFFERENT VIEWS.
•* J.v PNgEN v MI\D7IfiER,»
East Street, Rockhampton.
DAWBARN & GAVIN,
Public Accountants and Auditors,
Trustees in Insolvency,
g© ©3taEafe#re f Mast Street f
OFFICES:
The Mount Gordon Gold Mining Go., Ltd.
The Dee River Prospecting Co., Ltd.
The Crow’s Nest Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
The Block and Pillar Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
The Mary Florence Gold Mining Go., Ltd.
The Mount Holly Gold Mining Co., Ltd.
The Yeppoon Sugar Co., Ltd.
Chamber of Commerce.
City Mutual Life Assurance Society.
The Northern Assurance Co. Fire. 3
The North Rockhampton Brick and Tile Co., Ltd.
Correspondence and General Agency undertaken.


OBITEBIOIT.
M& STEWUMT .«• €O,,
IMPORTERS OP
GENERAL DRAPERY,
iSMillli* l&fTlil, £ TUUtI.
"We receive by every vessel from London the latest Novelties in all
classes of Goods; and our buyers being thoroughly acquainted with
the Home Markets, we are enabled to offer Goods of a much better
quality considerably cheaper than generally sold.
SBSiSIMIIS la ill Hi imatta mMii fey
Pjifssstaal HiUm.
COUNTRY ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
Patterns Forwarded Post Free.
In our Tailoring Department every article is guaranteed well shrunk.
Instructions for self-measurement forwarded on application.
NEW GOODS BY MAIL STEAMERS.
EAST AMD DENHAM STREETS,
AOOSHAMPTOir.


W- G. Thompson & Co.,
Bonded Warehousemen,
Insurance, Customs, Forwarding, Real
Estate & General Commission Agents,
ACCOUNTANTS AND BROKERS.
Offices and General Stores:—QUAY STREET,
Bonded Warehouse', —EAST ST,
FIRE INSURANCE at Lowest Rates. Large lines taken on good
risks in the ROYAL INSURANCE CO.—the wealthiest Eire
Company in existence.
MARINE INSURANCES on Gold, Goods, Freights, &c., at lowest
tariff rates. Wool covered (when required) from Wool-shed
to Port of Destination in the UNION INSURANCE SOCIETY
of Canton and the STRAITS INSURANCE CO.
CUSTOMS Work promptly and Carefully attended to. Proprietors,
“ THOMPSON’S ” BOND, East Street.
GOODS RECEIVED AND FORWARDED with despatch on account
of Country Constituents. Wool and other Produce shipped for
sale, and returns on account of Owners
SALES OF REAL PROPERTY (privately) undertaken. Rents
collected, and absentee’s interests carefully protected.
CONSIGNMENTS OF GOODS FOR SALE treated promptly, and
account sales, with proceeds, speedily rendered.
SECRETARYSHIPS—Rockhampton Jockey Club, &c.; AUDITS—
The Mount Morgan Gold Mining Co., Ld., Municipal Council
of North Rockhampton, and others ; and INSOLVENCY
TRUSTEESHIPS undertaken.
ACCOUNTS adjusted or systematised.
BROKERAGE in all its branches executed at lowest rates.
TARIFF OF BOND CHARGES ON APPLICATION.
Agents for the Loyal Insurance {Fire), the Union
Insurance Society of Canton , Ld, {Marine).


HALTER IEID & <lO..
MIE/RTMAKTiS,
i^ociciai^iivdijPTOisr.
Importers of Machinery, Drapery, Wines, Spirits, Ales, Oil-
men’s Stores, etc., and of every description of Station,
Storekeepers’, Miners’, and Hotelkeepers’ Requirements.
Shipping, Insurance and Forwarding Agents.
Liberal Advances made against Wool, Tallow, Hides, Skins, Horns, and
every description of Colonial Produce for sale in London or elsewhere,
SOLE AGENTS FOR
Queensland Royal Mail Line
British-India Steam Navigation Co.
Peninsular & Oriental Steam Navigation Co.
Union Steamship Company of New Zealand
Messageries Maritimes Steam Navigation Co.
Scottish Line of Clippers and Steamers
Queensland Steam Shipping Company
“Gibb” Line of China Steamers
Oriental Tea Company
Gospel Oak Galvanised Wire Company
Ryland’s & Whitecross Iron and Steel Fen-
cing Wire
Knight, Bevan, and Sturge’s Cement
J. Dunn & Co’s Adelaide Superfine and Steel
Roller Flour
Robert Cran & Co.’s Yengarie and Millaquin
Sugars
River Estate Plantation Sugars, Mackay
Nindaroo Estate Sugars, Mackay.
Vergniaud’s Claret
Tennent’s Ale and Stout
Patterson & Hibbert’s Ale and Stout
McEwan’s Ale and Stout
E. & J. Burke’s Ale and Stout
Read Bros.’ famous Bull Dog Head Ale & Stout
Clausen’s Lager Beer
Teacher’s Rob Roy, and other first-class
brands of Whisky
Central Society of Vineyard Proprietors’
Brandy, and other good brands
A.V.C. and Menkow’s Brandy
Hunt’s Port Wine
Gilbey’s Port and Sherry Wines
Imperial Fire Insurance Company of London
Marine Insurance Company of London
Australian General Assurance Co., Sydney
North Queensland Insurance Co., Lim. (Mar.)
United Australian Coastal Steamer Service.
Special QuotatioßS made for insurance of Wool from Sheep's Back.
LORDOR IXOUSR
Mcllwraith, McEachharn and Co.,
Fenchurch House, 5 & 7, Fenchurch Street;
And 33, Rue St. Paul, ANTWERP.
Who are prepared to execute Indents and realise upon Consignments to
the best advantage and upon'the most reasonable terms.
l|§r Mcllwraith, McEachaen & Co. make a speciality of receiving and
treating all classes of Ores, as well as executing Indents for all kinds of
Machinery; and also negotiate Sales and Purchases of Mining and other
properties-.
Printed at the Central Queensland Printing Works, Bolsovcr Street, Rockhampton,
