

THE JEWS and the WAR


HIS SPIRIT
LIVES ON
IN THE
AUSTRALIAN
ARMY
OF TODAY


The First World War
WHATEVER their type of activity, the lews have
always been loyal to their country and never failed
their homeland when it needed them. The first
world war was a great test for that readiness to serve.
In the war of 1914-1918 sixteen nations were involved, with
65,000,000 men under arms. 1,500,000 of these were Jews, or 21c
of the total mobilized, which is just twice the normal proportion,
since the Jews were only 1 % oi the total population in all countries
at war.
170.825 Jews were killed in action.
Of Jewish participation in the Great War, Winston Churchill said:
"Although Jews form but a small proportion of the population of
the British Empire, some 80,000 fought in the war In Europe,
Africa and Asia. Of these 2.324 gave their lives for our cause,
and a further 6.530 became casualties. Five Jewish soldiers won
the highest honour it is possible to obtain, namely, the Victoria
Cross, while a further 1,533 obtained other honours, I can. truth-
fully say that this record is a great one and British Jews can look
back with pride on the honourable part they played in winning
the Great War."
Lloyd George, then Minister of Munitions, singled out one man
"who helped to win the war": Dr. Chaim Weizmann, who in 1916
showed England how to make acetone, an essential in the manu-
facture of high explosives, Lloyd George, in his Memoirs, wrote:
"Dr. Weizmann with his discovery not only helped to win the
war, but made a permanent mark upon the map of the world."
Australian Jewry has its full share in this praise, for no fewer
than 11% of the then 17,287 Australian lews enlisted voluntarily
in the Ist A.I.F. against 9% oi the whole nation. Jewish contri-
bution to the death roll was slightly higher than the average:
15% of Australian Jewish soldiers were killed compared with
14% of non-Jewish Australians. 192 Jews obtained commissions,
headed by General Sir John Monash, Corps Commander of the
Australian Imperial Force. Many officers and men won distinc-
tions, one was decorated with the Victoria Cross, 95 received
honours and were mentioned in despatches.
Apart from the enlistments in the A.I.F. there was a consider-
able number of Australian Jews serving in other Dominion forces
or with the Imperial troops, whilst some joined the Australian
Navy. Jewish men and women were employed in war work,
some became nurses or did their share in the voluntary services.


Several Jewish dentists and doctors held commissioned rank on
the Home Front.
In the Red Gross, Y.M.C.A., Comforts Fund and similar auxiliary
organisations Australian Jews played a conspicuous part, and in
each State civil honours were awarded to Jewish citizens for
services rendered to the war effort.
Palestine then had a very small Jewish population; but Jews
fought gallantly side by side with the British forces. In 1915 they
succeeded in forming a special unit, the so-called "Zion Mule
Corps," whose valuable sendees in the Gallipoli campaign are
untorgotten by the Anzacs. After the evacuation of Gallipoli the
Corps was disbanded, but several hundreds of its members
reached England, where two Jewish Battalions were formed, one
under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Eliezer Margolin, D. 5.0., of
Perth, formerly a Captain in the Australian Army and one of the
first to volunteer, in this country. The Jewish Battalions were
strengthened by 6,500 volunteers from America and helped con-
siderably in the final conquest of Palestine. Several officers won
the D. 5.0., and M.C., and the Battalions were mentioned in
despatches.
In Russia 650,000 Jews were mobilized, of whom 100,000 were
killed. It is common knowledge that in Tsarist Russia no Jew
could obtain a commission in the Army. Yet fay 1916-1917 there
were several hundred Jewish officers, thus indicating that they
had achieved their rank fay sheer merit on the battlefield.
In France there were 55,000 Jews under arms, or 22% of the
Jewish, population, as compared with 14% for the total population.
Fifteen Jews held the rank of General, and the Jewish General,
Andre Weiller, was wounded eight times and decorated six times.
In America Jews numbered 3% of the total population: the
records of the last war reveal, however, that over 4% of the United
States Army consisted of Jews; out ol every hundred eighteen
volunteered. One half of these Jewish volunteers joined the Marine
Corps where the hottest action was to be expected- American
Jews won six of the 78 awarded Congressional medals of honour.
On the other side of the war front 100,000 German Jews fought
for what was their fatherland, and 12,000 were killed on the
battlefield. Hitler has banned their names from war memorials
throughout Germany, so that future generations may not be per-
plexed by tacts which do not fit his anti-Jewish theory.
In the huge Austro-Hungarian Empire there were 400,000 Jews
in the fighting forces. Their participation amounted to 20% and
was 2% higher than the participation' of non-Jews in the war.
20,000 Jews of Austria and Hungary died through war causes.


The Present War
aN the first world war Jews fought according to their
nationality. In the present war—for the first time in the
history of modem wars —they are spared this choice;
all Jewish sympathies are for one side; they are fighting
with the Democracies, not a single Jew taking sides with the
Axis powers.
In Great Britain and all other parts of the British Empire, as
well as in America and Soviet Russia, the Jews are contributing
their full share to the Allied war effort, both in the military field
and in every other sphere. They are also to be found in all the
other Allied forces—-among the Poles, the Fighting French, the
Belgians, Dutch and Czechoslovaks, the Yugoslav and Greek
guerrillas. This is only natural as the Jews are a freedom-, and
justice-loving, people—and, on the other hand, the Fascists are the
most powerful and most ruthless enemies the Jews have ever had
throughout the thousands of years of their recorded history.
Therefore they wholeheartedly contribute to the gigantic struggle
to overthrow the Axis powers.
Immediately the present war broke out, about 500,000 Jews
enlisted in the Allied Armies. After the subjugation of Poland
and France this figure was temporarily reduced to 400,000, but
since the Soviet Union and the United States entered the war it
has passed the one million mart, that is about 13% of the Jews
living in Allied countries.
■ In his message to a Mass Meeting held in New York on July
21st, 1942, Mr. Churchill expressed his great appreciation of the
Jewish war effort. He said: "All over the world Jewish com-
munities have made their contribution to the United Nations'
cause. Over 10,000 are now serving with the British forces in the
Middle East, more than 20,000 are enrolled in various police for-
mations in Palestine, and, as in this country, great numbers are
employed in that front line constituted by pursuits and industries
essential lor the prosecution of the war and in various services
for civil defence."
At present it is impossible to provide complete figures concern-
ing the participation of Jewry in the war; they will be available
only when the war is over. The rather conservative estimates
and the provisional figures on which this booklet is based reveal,
however, that everywhere Jewish participation is in advance of
their proportion to the general population.


AUSTRALIAN JEWRY FIGHTS
Australian Jews, including refugees, number roughly
30,000—less than half per cent, of the population.
Like any other section of the Australian population, Australian
Jewish men and women of military age are serving with the
forces. In Western Australia, out of a toted Jewish population of
2,200. including about 200 refugees, about 300 have enlisted. This
represents 16% of the Jewish male population of Western Aus-
tralia. No figures are available for other Stales at present, but
no doubt similar proportions will be found In file whole, of the
Commonwealth.
To quote just one indication: the Youth Group of the Liberal
Synagogue in Melbourne (Temple Beth Israel) consists of 72 male
members. Out of these 59 have volunteered for service with the
A.M.F. This does not include a great number of former members
who are now serving overseas with the A.1.F., R.A.N., and par-
ticularly the R.A.A.F. Many Australian Jewish officers and men
fought in North Africa, and are fighting in all zones throughout
the South-West Pacific area.
When A.I.F. wireless operators at Darwin picked up an un-
familiar signal and discovered the "forgotten commandos of
Timor," another epic of Australia's gallant fighting men was
revealed. Among the guerrillas of Timor were three Jewish men;
Sig. Harry levy and Cpl. Ralph Coyne, both- cf Melbourne, and
Lieut Eric lipman. of Adelaide.
Gunner Nathan Zemmil was recently awarded the Military
Medal lor gallantry and distinguished service In the Middle East.
His two brothers, Gunner Abraham Zemmil and Private Solomon
Zemmil, enlisted in Sydney, N.S.W., and also served in ihe Middle
East Some time ago the brothers Nathan and Abraham met in
Libya. Their father served in the last war in the 38th Royal
Fusiliers. He was wounded during Allenby's campaign in
Palestine. He is at present serving in ihe 3rd Battalion, Glasgow
Home Guard.
Many excellent pilots of the R.A.A.F, are Jewish. Several have
been decorated and some have become "popular heroes."
Take for instance Flight-Lieutenant P. S. Isaacson, D.F.C., A.F.C.,
D.F.M., a Melbourne boy, who brought his Lancaster with an


all-Australian, crew hack to Australia. He received the D.F.M. for
his hazardous flights over Axis targets. He has raided Germany
Flight Lieut. Peter Isaacson,
D.F.C., A.F.C., D.F.M.
of Melbourne.
thirty-nine, and Italy, five times. The D.F.C.
was awarded him for flying his damaged air-
craft safely to its bass. He was given a third
decoration, the Air Force Cross, for skill and
good service as an Air Force officer.
In a message io the President of the Victorian
Jewish Advisory Board, Melbourne, which, held
c reception in honour of Flight Lieut. Isaacson,
the Minister for Air, Mr. A. S. Drakeford, said;
"Much regret Canberra Cabinet Meeting ren-
ders it impossible me speak reception Lancaster
bomber captain. Flight Lieutenant Peter Isaac-
son, D.F.C., D.F.M. His magnificent deeds in
■the air and record flight in world's largest
bomber are typical of the ability and courage of
the great Jewish race which has so heroically
resisted the unjust persecution of the Nazi enemies of civilization."
Wing Commander Julius Alan Cohen is another Jewish airman
with a distinguished record. At 26 he is in charge of a flying
boat station at which numbers of Catalina
crews who are guarding our shores are
trained. He has seen service in Europe and
the South-West Pacific and wears the purple-
striped ribbon of the Distinguished Flying
Cross for his gallant exploit of flying Lord Gort
and Mr. Duff Cooper back from French
Morocco to safely In England, after France fell.
Wing Commander Cohen, who is regarded
as one of Australia’s most dashing and daring
flying boat pilots, comes from Cooges, Now
South Wales, and is an old Sydney High
School boy. A fine all-round athlete, swim-
ming and tennis were Ms main sports.
Pilot-Officer Kenneth Lyons, of Sydney, was
Wing Commander
Julius Alan Cohen,
D.F.C.,
of Coogee, N.S.W.
awarded the Distinguished Flying Medal in recognition of gallantry
and devotion to duty in air operations.
The Honourable Harold Edward Cohen, who holds the rank of
Brigadier and served with distinction in the last war, was awarded
the C.M.G., C.8.E., D.S.O. and V.D., and was twice mentioned in
despatches. H© is at present Deputy Adjutant-General at Allied
Headquarters.


DECORATIONS FOB JEWISH MEM IN NEW GUINEA
Australian jews are in the latest list of men decorated lor
service in New Guinea. Captain George J. Cullen, of Woolhara,
N.S.W., has received the M.B.E. (Military Division), while a brother.
Major (temp. Lisut.-Col.) Paul Cullen, of Sydney, has received the
D-S.O. Ihey are sons of Sir Samuel and Lady Cohen, of Sydney.
_ W .0.1 Frank Rubenstein and Lt. (temp. Capt.) Allan Lionel
Benjamin, coin oi Melbourne, have been mentioned in despatches.
IN THE EMPLOYMENT COMPANIES
About 1,000 Jews in Victoria, 700-800 in New South Wales, and
smaller numbers in other States are serving in the Employment
Companies. These are mainly refugees, most of whom are de-
barred from joining, the other forces. When, former internees .of
i/tctoria—between 500 arid 600 of them—were given the chance
to volunteer tor the combatant forces, most of the younger people,
did so.
The Australian Array magazine, “Sail," has devoted an article
to these "Men of the Labour Corps" (the majority of whom are
Jews), from which the following extracts are quoted;—
You will find them on the docks, in the warehouses, depots,
dumps—the men whom Hitler hates. First victims of the Nazi
madness, the men of this Australian Employment Company wear
the Australian uniform pridefully, voluntarily. This is their war
as well as ours. Although not allowed to fight as front line sol-
diers, they lend their strength to our war effort,"
"Many of the Company are professional men with fine brains
and specialised training. They have learned to use their muscles.
They are bent on helping to win this war, because Fascism to
them has a real meaning.*’
The Jewish men in the A.1.F., R.A.N. and R.A.A.F. are-
lookea after by, several Jewish Welfare Officers and chaplains,
led by Senior Hebrew Chaplain of the Commonwealth, Rabbi
Colonel J. Danelaw, V.D., M.A., another indication that the figure
at serving Jewish men is by no means negligible.
Jewish women are in the different Women’s Auxiliaries to
which several Jewish female refugees have also been admitted,
ihousands are engaged, like their Australian sisters, in essential
war work, in munition factories, aircraft production and so on.
New Zealand's Jewish population, which numbers only 1,500,
is also playing its part in the struggle against our common foe,
and has sent many of Its able-bodied sons to the fighting fronts.


BRITISH JEWS IN UNIFORM
*Tjjk ATEST information to reach this country reveals that
J |yv about 50,000 Jews of Great Britain are serving with
'U the Forces, including 7,000 in the Air Force.
Several Jewish families are repre-
sented in the ranks by two or three
sons, some by four, and two families
even by six and seven sons. British
Jews have fought and died in every
campaign in Europe, the Middle, and
Far East. They have fought and died
on the battlefields of Libya and Abys-
sinia, of Greece and Syria, in France
and Belgium, in Tripoli and Tunis.
They are in the garrisons of Gibraltar
and Sierra Leone, of Iceland and
Malta; they were in Hong Kong and
Singapore. They hold Important
positions in all three services.
Among the British naval heroes of
this war is a Jewish Captain, Daniel
de Pass, the Commander of the
famous destroyer, H.M.S. "Cossack,"
which took so important a part in the
rescue of British merchant seamen
from the German raider and prison-
ship, "Altraark."
Recently Air Commodore R. L. C.
Marx, C. 8., D. 5.0., was appointed
Air Vice-Marshal ol the R.A.F, He
is the first and only Jew to hold this
rank. Bom in 1889. he served in the
Dardanelles and elsewhere in the last
war, and was twice mentioned in
despatches. He received the Order
of the Crown of Belgium after he was
Six Sons of a Jewish Family
serving in the Armed Forces
Hyman Benjamin
Isodor Benjamin
Reuben Benjamin
Louis Benjamin
Harry Benjamin
Abraham Benjamin
wounded. In 1941 he took part in the bombing of Duesseldorf,
when a Zeppelin was destroyed in its shed. He has also been
mentioned in despatches in this war and recently was awarded
the C.B.


Two of the top-ranking Army officers .are lews: Maj.-General R.
H. Lorie, CJS.E., and Brigadier W. H. Beddlngton, C.B.E. The third.
Brigadier Frederick Kisch, C.8.E., D. 5.0., was killed on the eve of
flie great victory of the Allies in North Africa. Chief Engineer of
the Eighth Army, he was called by the Germans, in snarling
broadcasts, "The Jew who is Montgomery's right-hand man."
War correspondents flashed the news of Kisch's death to their
newspapers, which published long articles in honour of him.
The Queensland "Sunday Mail" correspondent with the Eighth
Army, W. J. Munday, gives a vivid picture of Brigadier Kisch's
personality, his work and death.
"He was killed by a mine—one of many thousands he and his
sappers had cleared since Alameln. That great battle and the
long chase through the mine-strewn terrain wMch followed would
not have been such a success if it had not been for short be-
spectacled Esch. like a plump, benevolent old gentlemen, his
officers described Mm."
"He was one of the most popular officers in the Eighth Army,
and, as senior staff officer, took the historic parade when
Churchill came to Tripoli. It was Kisch who
formulated the standard Army method for
clearing minefields. It was he who thought
out the best ways of dealing with each new
type of enemy mine. Twenty thousand sap-
pers, officers and men, knew him, loved him
for his kindliness, respected him for the
daring with which he got into the job with
them."
"Kisch was way out in front when killed. He
and Ms sappers had helped guide the Eighth
Army through the Wadi Akarit and the mine-
strewn defences of Gabes Gap. There im-
patient British tanks and infantry were eager
to be off after Rommel again, but the Germans
had blown the bridge across a culvert, planted
Brigadier F. H. Kisch,
C.B., hief Engineer of
the Eighth Army, killed
in action in Tunisia.
mines thickly around it Kisch led the sappers there. They worked
with the swift efficiency of long experience. Then one stepped
on a mine. Kisch was near and one of those mown down. His
sappers carried him back past the troops and trucks already in
pursuit through the safe lanes they had cleared."
"It was the irony of fate that a Jew was to play one of the biggest
parts In the defeat of the Nazis in North Africa," the correspondent
adds.
Fate played another trick on the Fascist powers when the
Italian island of Lampedusa surrendered without a fight to a 22-
ysar-old Jewish airman., Sgt. Pilot Sydney Cohen, R.A.F., made


a forced landing on Lampedusa, and was received with the
white flag. "Can’t you do something about this,” shouted the
Italians, who could not stand the fierce Allied bombardment any
longer. To Cohen's amazement they offered the surrender of the
island which he accepted. He then asked them to refuel his
plane, and flew off to his North African bass to report the his-
toric event.
The heroism shown by Jewish officers and men in the epic
withdrawal from Dunkirk won lor more than thirty of them either
decorations or mention in despatches. At the end of 1941 Jews
in the Services had won eight D-F.C.'s, nine D.F.M.'s, four Military
Crosses, 10 Military Medals, and 13 British Empire Medals. These
figures were disclosed early in 1942, and they are likely to have
increased since then.
English and Scottish Jews are not only doing their bit on the
battle fronts, but in the Civil Defence Services and the A.R.P. as
well. Many have been decorated for gallantry and by the end of
1941 three Jews had been awarded the coveted George Cress,
the foremost decoration for bravery in civil defence. As Jews
form less than one per cent of the British population, this pro-
portion is very high, when compared with the total of thirteen
awarded.
This picture taken from the film. "Lift Your Head, Comrade," shows refugees from the
hell of Nazi Germany on Army construction work in England.


ihousands or Jewish refugees' who escaped from Nazi terror
are serving in the Pioneer Corps. .. The British Ministry of Infor-
mation has made a film, with the poignant title of "Lift Your Head,
Comrade," telling of the past sufferings and valuable war work
now being done by these anti-Nazis. Originally used for demo-
lition work in the bombed areas of East London, this Corps had a
perilous time during the fiercest of the blitz. Nov/ it is engaged
largely in defence construction, and doctors, lawyers and archi-
tects are digging trenches and doing other forms of unaccustomed
heavy manual work. Originally led only by British officers, the
C-oips is now being largely officered from its own ranks. The
iilm has been shown all over Australia.
, i j ! ® Jewish women and girls of Britain,. female refugees in-
cluded, are flocking just as eagerly into the various Women's
Auxiliaries: the A.T.S., W.R.N.S., W.AA.F.S., etc. One of them
was _ the first woman to win the new British Empire Medcd for
heroism. honour has been conferred upon Miss Rosalie
passman In recognition of her exceptional conduct while engaged
in her duties as a telephonist at a Hornsey A.F.S. station during a
severe air raid." Although the garage which housed the station
was destroyed by a direct hit, she kept on giving and taking
messages over the phone, in between tending the injured. She
s.ayea on all night until the officers had finished the fire fighting.
THE EMPIRE
aN those ports of the British Empire where
recruiting is only voluntary, the Jewish re-
sponse has been excellent and Jews have joined
up in numbers in advance of their proportion to
the general population.
In South Africa the Jews form less than five per cent of the white
population, but the total figure of 3,000 Jewish men and women
serving with the Forces represents nine per cent, of the entire
Jewish community and compares very favourably with the figure
for the general population. Over 3,000 of these fought for victory in
North Africa. Casualties in the early days of the campaign were
851. Nearly fifty have been decorated with the 0.8. E., the M.8.E.,
the Military Cross, the D.F.C., etc., or have been mentioned in
despatches.


General Smuts has expressed nis appreciation ol the Jewish
war effort several times. In a message to the Zionist Conference
at Bloemfontein, he wrote: "In the years that follow this war, it will
surely be remembered that, whoever else faltered or failed, the
Jews played their part by the side of the Allies, and that remem-
brance may help to solve the problems which have so far proved
too much for us."
In another recent message he expressed his certainty that the
United Nations realized the noble part played by the Jewish
people in hastening the end of one of the most bitter periods in
the whole of human history. He then went on: "Your loyalty to
this cause is splendid and has never been doubted. Your reward
will be great when the enemy has been overthrown and the world
has been freed from persecution and domination and the Jews
will have regained Zion."
The volunteer army ol Canadian Jewry has also played a con-
spicuous part, enlisting in numbers in excess of their proportion
to the total population. In an address at the unveiling of a roll
of honour in a local synagogue in Ottawa, Mayor Stanley Lewis
said that, "from 10-12 per cent, ol the total Jewish population of
Ottawa has joined up either in the Navy, Army or Air Force. This
is a notable record of enlistment. The Jewish boys on active ser-
vice overseas have a fine record." he continued. "They have the
initiative, discipline and industry to make good fighting men under
modem conditions of war."
"It is no picnic for any member of a bomber crew in operations
over Germany. Jewish boys in the Canadian bombers have little
to expect in the event of being shot dawn. They go out with
good hearts, however, dedicating their lives to the cause for
which this war Is being fought. Ottawa is well represented
among the Jewish boys of the Canadian fighting forces."
A large number of young Canadian Jews left for England with
the first division that was sent from Canada, and many went to
Dieppe. The Sing presented the Military Medal to Sergeant David
Lloyd Hart of Montreal, a Jewish Dieppe hero. His brothers. Cap-
tain Paul Hart, Quebec Regiment, and Sergeant Edward Hart, of
the Royal Canadian Signals Corps, were present at the investiture
at Buckingham Palace.
Canada played a special part in enabling American citizens to
enlist for the British Fighting Forces in the first years of the war
when America was still neutral, and there were many Jews from
the United States among these volunteers.


JEWS IN THE ARMY OF OUR ALLIES
!■ || HE Jews of Poland displayed the utmost self-sacrifice
J I during the coimtry's short struggle against the in-
vader. Only five weeks after the beginning of
hostilities, on October 9th, 1939, the Polish General Staff
announced that 32,216 Jews had fallen in defence of their
homeland.
The Polish Army, which, after the downfall of Poland, was
organised in France, contained a proportion of Jews that ulti-
mately amounted to 12%. When the dark hour came for France
many of these Polish Jews managed to join the armies of Demo-
cracy, either by enlisting in-the British or'in the Free French
Forces. The present Polish Army in Great Britain includes many
Jews who have come from Canada, the Argentine and Brazil , to
fight. The Polish Army in Russia, according to General Anders,
Polish Commander in Russia, contains at least 15% Jews,
France's spell of fighting was so brief and the confusion after
her collapse so enormous that there is an inevitable scarcity of
information. Nevertheless, it has been stated that the Jews, imme-
diately alter the outbreak of war, rushed to the colours to fight
against the enemies of Democracy, and that no fewer than 80,000
were in the Defence Forces (about half of them refugees). Many
held commissions; there were several Jewish generals. Some hun-
dreds were awarded decorations lor gallantry, and many were
killed, wounded or taken prisoner.
The same foreign Jews who are now outlawed in Vichy France
and handed over to Hitler's concentration camps, were as keen
as the French Jews to help in the light against German dictator-
ship. The recruiting bureau for foreign Jews opened in Paris by
the "Federation of Associations of Jewish War Veterans and
Volunteers," and the special recruiting offices established in Paris
and many provincial centres, were daily besieged. The number
of foreign Jewish volunteers in the French Army at the beginning
of the war was over 40,000. Of these about 15,000 were refugees
from Germany and Austria, who were mostly sent to the Foreign
legion In North Africa,
When France collapsed, many Jews escaped to England, where
they joined the British Forces. Thousands fought side by side
with the Britishers In Syria, or followed General de Gaulle's call
to defend France's honour.


In the Underground movements and
the Querrills
aN all countries which had come under Hitler's iron heel
the lews immediately joined the underground move-
ments, guerrillas and partisans. They are active in
Czechoslovakia and Norway, in Jugoslavia and Greece, in
Belgium, Holland, France, Poland and Russia.
A considerable number of Czechoslovakian Jews joined up with
the Czechoslovakian Legion, whilst in Greece they took such a
conspicuously valiant part in the struggle for freedom that their
gallantry was specially acknowledged by the Greek authorities.
The number of Jews In the Greek Army was estimated at some
20,000. More than 7.000 Jewish soldiers came from Salonika
alone. The first Greek officer of field rank to be killed was a Jew,
Colonel Mordecai Frizi, who fell "Heroically leading Ms troops to
victory."
Jews are particularly active in Jugoslavia, where 16,000
Including 2,400 women, have joined the guerrilla legions. A
message from Nazi-controlled Belgrade Radio revealed that several
Jewish women were captured, recently and only then was it found
that they were women. They wore' uniforms like men, ana
belonged to a guerrilla unit which carried out regular raids
against Nazi concentration camps.
THE BATTLE OF WARSAW
The Warsaw ghetto was the centre of Hitler's diabolic extermi-
nation system. Daily executions, starvation and epidemics, had
reduced its population from 600,000 to 35,000. The young and
strong people were put to slave labour. These Polish Jews in the
Warsaw ghetto.were determined to sell their lives dearly. Sup-
plied by a small amount of ammunition from the Polish under-
ground movement and the Polish Government in London, ■on the
morning of April 19th, 1943, they started the attack. They built
fortifications from which they flew the flags of the United Nations.
"The Warsaw ghetto has been transformed into a miniature
Stalingrad," the Polish underground radio reported. The Nazis
used tanks, artillery, armoured cars and aeroplanes, whilst the
Jews, after having exhausted their ammunition, fought with obso-
lete weapons, stones, and their bare fists. The struggle lasted for
more than a month. On May 25ih, the official Polish Telegraphic
Agency reported: "The heroic resistance is now almost at an end,
except for some isolated points." 20,000 to 25,000 Jews had laid
down their lives in order to avenge their wrongs and to proclaim
their rights.


500,000 JEWS in the American Army
According to the latest estimates published by the Director
of the American Bureau of War Records (Jewish Welfare
Board), there are at present 500,000 Jews in the American
armed forces. They include 50,000 officers, while one-third
of all Jewish refugees of military age are also in the forces.
Many are at present "down under" fighting side by side
with our boys on the Islands. Many have distinguished
themselves in the battles raging from Alaska to New Guinea,
and many have been decorated several times over for
bravery. The number of Jews among the U.S. Marines at
Guadalcanal was'particularly 'high, and so was the death
roil among them, a fact which was emphasized in several
messages received on American' Jewish 'Heroes Day,.
May 23rd, 1943.
General MacArttur wrote: '1 am proud to join you in saluting
the memory of fallen American heroes of the Jewish faith," and
Admiral Halsey: "Jews have always fought against oppression,
seeking freedom for themselves and all people. We are proud to
have Jews in our ranks. Their deeds furnish unshakable proof
of their courage and loyalty to the common cause."
A sergeant of the United States Marines, Max Koplow, emerged
as one of the heroes who helped to smash the Japanese in the
Solomons. Ensign Ira Weill Jeffery was one of the first casualties
during the Japanese attack an Pearl Harbour. Due to his "extra-
ordinary courage and disregard of Ms own safety," he was
honoured posthumously in an. unusual way. For the first time in
American history 'a naval vessel will be named after a Jew.
First Lieut Boy Bright U.S. Army Corps, has gained double
honours, the Silver Star and the D.F.C. "for completion of a
dangerous mission over enemy territory." His flying miles during
one year were equal to more than five times round the world.
Sergts. Lewis Kaminsky and S. B. Morriss, both gunners on a
Flying Fortress, have up to now flown on 60 bombing missions.
Kaminsky has the Purple Heart decoration wMch was awarded
for bravery while wounded, and both have been recommended
for the D.F.C. and Air Medal.
Some of these young heroes are refugees from Nazi oppression
who have been accepted by the American Armed Forces, like
Sergeant Julius Schellenberg who showed such courage in his
fight against Japanese Fascism that he won the Purple Heart


A story written for the newspapers of the "Chicago Daily News
Syndicate" by a War Correspondent with the American troops
near Sanananda in the Pacific, reveals another side of Jewish
heroism. "He was a swell little Jew, that guy Hymie Epstein,"
the Correspondent says, and he goes on, quoting the Major under
whom Epstein served. "In war I guess the best go first, and that
kid was the best." Epstein was a medical aide and he was every-
where where it was thickest He crawled through the lines, bullets
falling all around him, and, lying on his back, bandaged the
wounded. “I could not understand how he ever got back," the
Major told the Correspondent, "the Japs simply poured lire around
him." Epstein went on with his job during a whole night, but in
the morning a bullet hit him. After they had buried him, the
Major said; "When they are handing honours around, you can
give mine to that little Hymie Epstein, and that goes for all of us."
Bombardier Meyer Levin,
who was killed in action.
Another touching and inspiring story Is that of
the late Bombardier Myer Levin, famous Ameri-
can Jewish air ace recently Idled defending
Australia. He took part in sinking the Japanese
battleship "Harana." He saw service in the
Philippines from the outbreak or the Pacific
War, and later continued in action from Aus-
tralia. "I am the fiftieth on the leave-list, but
I have no idea when I will get my leave. We
have a lot to do here. I take off again and
again to do my best lor America. Only a
few days after his parents had received tins
message from their son, Myer Levin volun-
teered for a bombardier comrade who was fll
and took his plans into the air. His kit for
his leave was already packed, but Myer Levin did not return.
He was killed in action at the age of 26. His decorations included
the Distinguished Service Cross, the Silvei Star and the Oak Leal
Cluster.
In a message to Myer Levin's mother. General Marshal, Chief
of Staff of the United States War Office, said: "The Nation owes
Sergeant Levin an everlasting debt of gratitude."
In his home town of Brooklyn, plans are already afoot lor the
purchase of a bomber to be named after him, and a hundred
medical field units to be sent to the Red Army by the United
Jewish War Effort are also to bear his name.
General Eisenhower, Allied Commander-m-Chief in North
Africa, has a Jewish aide-de-camp: 31-year-old Major Ernest R.
Lee. When Eisenhower was entrusted with the big task of the
invasion of North Africa, Major Lee became his right-hand man,
as the late Brigadier Ktsch 'was General Montgomery's.


Perhaps on account of this close relationship General Eisen-
hower Mmsell has been "suspected" of 'being a Jew. ' A quite
amusing anecdote scotches these rumours. General 'Eisenhower
has two brothers who hold important positions in American civil
life. One day an American lady addressed one of the brothers
in the following terms: "Yon are such a marvellous family," she
said, "What a pity you are Jews." "What a pity we are not,"
was the answer the embarrassed lady received.
JEWS of Russia defend their Homeland
aN the 'Red'Army: the Jews are playing an outstanding
part. Mr. Mikhejev, Australian representative of the
"Tass" (Soviet) Agency, in a statement to Australian
pressmen, declared, that on account of the freedom and
equality of rights the Jews were given by the Soviets, they
are now to be found in every sphere of Russian life, as well
as among the fighting forces. They are serving in the
trenches, in the air fleet, in the Navy, in the guerrilla bands,
in which (in Mr. Mikhejev's own words); “Jewish youth has
helped to write many heroic pages."
The leading Soviet publicist, Ilya. Ehrenburg, has paid high
tribute to the lews serving in the Soviet forces. Ehrenburg's tribute
was made as a comment on the Allied Declaration of protest
against Hitler's campaign of extermination of Jewry in Europe.
"The Jews of the Soviet Union, along with citizens of other nation-
alities, fight heroically ...... They have produced quite a few-
gallant fighters. Jewish Red Army men are lighting bravely on
all fronts of the Soviet Union."
600,000 Jews are in uniform, in all ranks of the Red Army,
headed by many generals, and General Jacob Shmuskevich, who
for some time was Commander of the Soviet Air Force, is a
Jew. An order of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the
U.S.S.R. lists 13 Jewish officers, ranking from Lieutenant-Colonels
to Major-Generals, among commanders decorated for successfully
completing difficult military operations of great strategic
importance.
From the outbreak of the Russian war fill November of last year,
5,000 Jews had been decorated for gallantry in action at the front.
According to figures published by the Soviet Government, the


Jews cams fourth among all nationalities in the number of deco-
rations for bravery awarded, Russians first, Ukrainians second,
White Russians third, Jews fourth, with even the famous Cossacks.
Tartars and Georgians far behind.
The first Jew in Russia to receive the Alexander Nevsky Order,
only recently created by Premier Stalin, is Fighter Pilot Isensohn,
who won the award for an heroic exploit at Stalingrad.
Commander M. Lechfman, a Jewish officer, is cited in the press
as on© of the three commanders who led the victorious Soviet
drive on Rostov,
The well-known "brigade that knows no fear" is headed by
Lieut. Rabinowilz. No less than nine times was his detachment
surrounded by the Nazis, but he managed to repulse the enemy
with a hail of hand grenades.
Tribute to Jewish bravery at the Soviet front is paid in an edi-
iorial in "Pravda," which emphasizes that it was the Jewish
General Lev Dovator, killed in action. The Russians honoured his memory by issuing
a new postage stamp, which is shown several times enlarged on this picture.
General Lev Dovator who started the retreat of the Nazi Army
from Rostov, the key to the Soviet oilfields in the Caucasus.
Gen. Dovator, who fell on the battlefield, is an example of Jewish
heroism. Russian cavalry detachments today operating In the
German rear, proudly cal themselves "Dovaforists."


Another stor/ released by the Anti-Fascist Committee at
Embyshev is that of a young Jewish pilot, SMolme Feinman, who
deliberately crashed his plane on an enemy aerodrome' in order
to prevent German fighters taking off in pursuit of a Soviet squad-
ron. Feinman s heroic feat was reported by a member of his
unit. He said that Feinman was determined to avenge his parents
who had been murdered by the Nazis, and his wife who had
been violated by German soldiers breaking into his home.
The Commander of the submarine "Maluta," Israel Fisanovich,
who has struck terror into the hearts of the German naval com-
manders plying the Baltic Sea, and has succeeded in penetrating
Nazi defence lines and sinking Nazi ships off German seaports,
has been awarded the title of "Hero of the Soviet Union," together
with the Order of Lenin and the Gold Star Medal, whilst 37-year-
old General Jacob Kreiser, head of the Moscow Proletarian
Division, is known as the "Soviet Samson."
RUSSIAN GUERRILLAS
The role played by Jews in the .guerrilla units fighting behind
the German lines has been described by the Ukrainian writer
Alexander Korneltscliuk. "One meets Jews In almost every guer-
rilla detachment, he reports, "in one place I met a Jewish father,
mother and two sons, all fighting in the forests during the cold
winter months. A Jewish girl named Basic has become a legen-
dary figure among the guerrillas. Hie was responsible for
blowing up bridges and warehouses in the rear of the enemy
and, with the help of another Jewish fighter, succeeded in captur-
ing a German Colonel and bringing him alive to the Russian lines.
She crossed the front line eight times, and each time brought
Important Information. Her husband was killed in action and she
herself was twice wounded."
Guerrilla bands operating in the Minsk district of western
Russia, and consisting largely of Jews, have distinguished them-
selves by their successful attacks on German units stationed in
small places and on trains carrying Nazi troops and supplies to
the threatened hastern front. Many German officers and soldiers
have been killed by the guerrillas, and much war material has
been destroyed.
The Jewish leader of a guerrilla band in the Ukraine, Sender
Dreimas, has won the Lenin Order for his skilful operations
against the Nazis, and many other Jewish guerrillas have received
decorations in fhe fighting in the Ukraine, White Russia and the
Crimea.


ALL PALESTINE
ON WAR FOOTING
*1 is the only country where the
45 Jewish participation in the war effort must
not be judged solely by the number of volunteers
for the forces and their achievements—-being a
mandated territory there is no conscription—but
rather by the increased war-production in the
country as a whole.
Jewish P.A.T.S. on guard in Palestine.
irour days before the struggle began Dr. Ch. Weizmann, Presi-
dent of the Jewish Agency (Palestine's Jewish Administration},
offered Britain a Jewish army of 40,000 in case of war. Before
this offer was declined by the then British Prime Minister,
Mr. Chamberlain, the Jewish National Council organised, early
in September, 1939, a registration of volunteers. It was limited to
men and women between the ages of 18 and 50. Within five days
no less Shan 136,043 had enrolled. They consisted of 85,781 men
—71% of those eligible in this age group, and 50.282 women, or
42% of the eligibles.


The present Jewish population in Palestine does not amount to
more them 584,000. Although a Jewish army has not come into
existence yet, the lews of Palestine; are nevertheless doing their
duty. The Jewish Agency has recruited.no less than 42,000 men
and women for the British Armed Forces. Apart from these,
25,000 Jewish temporary policemen stand on guard for the safety
of Palestine. Their services were appreciated by Mr. Churchill
in a special message. Warm recognition of the part which Pales-
tine plays in the fight of the United Nations against the Axis has
also been made by President Roosevelt, who has praised the
substantial contribution of Palestine to the United Nations' war
effort.
Palestinian military units consisting of Jews and Arabs, and
some of them completely Jewish, have fought in battles in Greece
and Crete, and in all theatres of war in North Africa.
Arthur Henderson, Joint Under-Secretary ol Slate for War, told
the House of Commons that over threequarters ol the Palestinian
volunteers In the Armed Forces axe Jews.
The part the Jews played in the First Libyan Campaign has
been highly praised by General Wavell, who said that they per-
lorraed "pre-eminently at Sidi Barrani, Solium, Fort Capuzzo,
Bardia and Tobruk." Others formed three-fifths of the Palestinian
"Suicide Squads" and were chosen for their toughness, daring
and mobility for special actions in Abyssinia; numbering about
300, they had joined the British Army at the outbreak as volun-
teers, many of them having found a haven in Palestine only a
few months before as refugees from Nazi terror. Like the "Suicide
Squads," other small groups and individuals have distinguished
themselves on many occasions, and have gained honours, includ-
ing the C.8.E., and the M.M. Several were mentioned in
despatches.
Almost two-thirds of .the camouflage company of, the British
Eghth Army, which was cited fay Prime Minister Churchill, are
Palestinian Jewish soldiers.
Little has been revealed of the enormous help given by the
Jews of Palestine in the campaign by the British and Allied forces
in Syria, but some time ago the veil was lifted through a broad-
cast in the U.S.A. by Arthur Hale over the Mutual Radio Network:
"When plans for the invasion were made, one of the main diffi-
culties was a lack of intimate knowledge of the terrain across the
Palestinian border. Before the British advance a selected group
of fifty young Palestinian Jewish volunteers was sent across the
border to reconnoitre and report Disguised and unarmed they
crossed into Syria in small groups and brought home such valu-
able information that three days later these fifty Jewish scouts


Jewish Unit of the 8th Army marching into Tripoli.
were asked to march alongside with the spearhead ol the first
Australian units to enter Syria. Because the Jewish scouts had
mapped the advance, the Allied forces were able to develop
great speed, and therefore no serious opposition by the Nazis and
Vichy French was encountered."
The contribution of Palestinian Jews is also very valuable to the
vital battle of She seas. Many Jewish seamen, manning Palestinian
Jewish ships, have already given their lives for the common
cause. Many other Jewish seamen are serving with the Royal
Navy, marine stations and the Merchant Navy. Special tribute
was paid by Admiral Cunningham to three Jewish seamen lor
saving a freighter which had caught fire as a result of enemy
attack. He praised their "considerable presence of mind and
courage,” and added: “their good services have been noted by
me with much satisfaction."
At present 2,200 Palestinian Jewish women are being trained
for active service in camps for the Auxiliary Territorial Service
and about 75 members of the P.A.T.S. are already engaged in
driving military ambulances and trucks. Some are, doing scientific
jobs in laboratories whilst the majority of women and girls are
nurses in military hospitals.


Palestine has become the workshop of the Allied Armies in the
Middle East. The number of factory workers- engaged on the
production of essential supplies has Increased by 50%- since, the
outbreak of war, and a total of 36,000 men and women ore work-
ing in 1,299 factories. The output of some of these war industries
has increased eight-fold since 1940. Many plants have 24-hour
shifts. Transport and public works are other spheres in which
the Jews of Palestine have rendered considerable service. Many
camps, hospitals, fortifications and roads were constructed at very
short notice and completed in half the allotted time. A number
of Jewish factories are working exclusively to fill army orders for
ammunition. One factory has been fully equipped for the repair
of tanks and other military machines.
Science is almost completely devoted to war work, and the
Hebrew University offered the services of its scientific and medical
staff to the Allies immediately after the outbreak of war.
15,000 Australian soldiers who- have been entertained In, the
Jewish settlements are lull of praise for what they have seen -there.
JEWS ON THE HOME FRONT
57\LTHOUGH no other country gives such a complete
/iL \ picture of the Jewish contribution to the war as
’“'•“Palestine, there is enough evidence that the Jews
everywhere cere doing their best to support the war effort,
and to bring about an early victory of the Allied Nations.
Many contributions cannot be recorded at all. It is impossible
to give any figures as to how many Jews in the democratic coun-
tries are engaged in essential work of some kind, in war industry
and munition factories. It is impossible even to estimate the
amounts they have subscribed to war loans, how they have
reacted to public appeals, how much they have spent to provide
the troops vrith comforts, to ease the needs of the blitz victims in
Britain, to save children in the bombed areas. Only if this kind
of charitable contribution is made through Jewish organisations
can we get a glimpse of the support given.
AUSTRALIA
One figure recently published reveals that the National Council
of Jewish Women in Sydney has subscribed £20,000 to the third
"Liberty Loan."


Here in Australia there are many such organisations which
devote their activities entirely to the war effort, and it goes with-
out saying that the money or comforts collected are distributed
among Jews and non-Jews alike. One of the most efficient Mel-
bourne welfare organisations is "A Jewish War Effort Circle"
which has raised an amount of roughly £25,000 since it came Into
existence three years ago.
During the last financial year (April, 1942-April, 1943) £1,369
was donated to the Red Cross Society, £4OO to the Prisoners
of War Fund, £666 to the "Sheepskins for Russia" Appeal; about
£7OO was spent on Christmas hampers and other food parcels for
the fighting men; Army Headquarters were provided with scien-
Mobile Unit presented by a Jewish War Effort Circle.
tific books, several camps with pianos, wireless sets, etc. Th®
year before, the Red Cross and the Comforts Fund were provided
with mobile units and searcher cars; several Employment Com-
panies received sewing machines, and so on. The slogan under
which the drive to procure all these amenities is carried out is
'You Must Give Until It Hurts,” the aim of the War Effort Circle:
"Help to Win the War."
Similar are the activities of the "Judean Red Cross and War
Auxiliary," the "Patriotic Auxiliary," the "Jewish War Services
Association," and others. They support limbless soldiers, raise
funds for mobile canteens, ambulances, etc. Recently the
"Melbourne Jewish Youth Council" presented the Department of


the Army •with an ambulance, dedicated to the memory of Lieut.
Merton Ciddor, a member of the Council who was killed in action
in New Guinea.
Officially opening a new recreation hall and kitchen at the
Anzac Buffet Hyde Park, Sydney, the Lord Mayor, Alderman
Bartley, said that the "Jewish Citizens* War Activities Committee"
had contributed £2,700 to pay for the additions,
Alderman Bartley pointed out that the Committee had already
raised £6,000 to cover the cost of the Sir John Monash Hut and
the Anzac Buffet to which the additions had been made.
"Unselfish and splendid work is being done at the Sir John Monash
Hut and Anzac Buffet for our fighting men," he said. The Buffet
recently served its two-millionth meal and it sometimes caters for
5,000 fighting men a day.
All organisations and 'the various Synagogues have' special
Ladies' Auxiliaries that.are very active,-not'only in collecting,
money and devoting it to -the most useful purposes, but also in
setting up War Savings Groups and providing the troops vdth
knitted goods and camouflage nets.
The "Sheepskin Appeal" for Russia, to which the whole Aus-
tralian population responded so well, found a wide echo in Jewish
Circles and, comparatively soon after its opening, the Jewish
Branch of the Russian Red Cross, Melbourne, was able to send a
cheque for £2,000 to the Sheepskins Fund. There is not a single
appeal, whether it comes from Australia—such as the Red Cross
Drive for prisoners of war, the Hospital Sunday or Lady Dugan
Appeal-—or from overseas, from Britain or Russia, which does not
get the widest support from the members of the Jewish Community.
Only recently The sum of £4OO was collected at a special showing
of "Moscow Strikes Back," and donated to the Russian Branch of
the Red Cross.
AMERICA
It is obvious that a small community, such as the Jews form in
Australia, cannot impress by gigantic figures. Quite different is
the position in England and especially in America where the four
and a half million Jews are able to play a conspicuous part in
social welfare. Just recently it was announced that the "United
Jewish War Effort" has sent 1,000 fully equipped medical field
units to Russia as a gift.
B'nai B'rith. America's largest Jewish organisation, was pre-
sented some time ago with a certificate signed by the Secretary
of the Treasury, "for distinguished services rendered." These
services were called by the War Savings Staff a "great concrete
contribution to the winning of the war."


LLb. Jewry has also been pre-eminent in making dirsc' coerri
buttons to all forms of relief work for Britain and giving help for
tne British war effort at a time when America was still neutral.
It gave support to the work of the "British War Belief
Society/' and the "Inter-Faith Committee for Aid to the Demo-
cracies" has a special Jewish section. A large number of the
ambulances in service with the Allied Forces in England. Canada.
Egypt and the Near East were subscribed for entirely by Jewish
organisations or individuals. This was revealed by Mr. William
Buxton. President of the British-American Ambulance Corps.
Jewisn contributions from America helped to endow homes for
cliila bomb victims in England, organised on a non-sectarian
basis. Under the auspices of the American Jewish Congress a
gift oi 2,000 mobile kitchens was made available for the British
Army.
Although the Jews of Canada have Individually contributed to
cil patriotic appeals, the Canadian Jewish Congress has made a
communal gift of more than 725 recreation huts, fully equipped,
which it has provided for most of the units of the Canadian Army.
PALESTINE
On behalf of the "Jewish Federation of Labour of Palestine" a
representative handed in a cheque for £lO,OOO to the Russian
Ambassador in London, Mr. Maisky, whilst from another Jewish
settlement, from Biro-Bidjan (the Autonomous Province in Soviet
Russia), comes news that the population of this small orovince
has contributed an amount of 8,000,000 roubles to State Defence
bunds, and a million-and-a-half roubles for the Fighter Plane Fund.
ENGLAND
This picture of the Jewish war effort would lack an important
feature if spiritual and scientific contributions were not mentioned.
As a matter of fact, wherever Jews live and work in freedom they
have already important technical inventions and scientific dis-
coveries to their credit. Official accounts of air attacks on Britain
included the statement that some "new devices" helped to beat
on tne attackers. These devices, whose nature was, of course,
not revealed, are the invention of two refugee scientists. A Jewish
Professor-Designate of Anatomy at Birmingham University, Dr, S.
Zuckermann, has evolved a protective device of great importance
io relieve the immense pressure of blast on the lungs in bomb
and other explosions. Members of the Forces, Fire Fighting Per-
sonnel and A.R.P. members have been issued with special spdnge-
rubcer coats in accordance with Dr. Zuckermann's discovery.


HITGCSTZE
In Russia the Vice-Commissar for Defence,
H. M. Machles, is a Jew, and so is Abraham
Bikhovsky, known as the "Artillery Eng."
He is in command of the largest cannon-
producing plant in Russia, and, through his
efforts, the plant is today producing ten times
more cannons than at the outbreak. Many
other Russian Jews now hold key positions in
war production work. They are in general
to a high degree responsible for the develop-
ment of the Red Air Force. This was acknow-
ledged by the Chairman of the "Central Trade
Union Committee for Aviation." Many of them
have distinguished themselves as directors,
Vice-Commissar
H. M. Machles.
engineers, workers and, most of all, as constructors. One' o:
these Jews, Israel Levin, has been awarded the Order of Lenin.
Two Jewish engineers, Isaac Moscevitch Saltzman and Joseph
Yakovlevich Kotin, rendered such valuable service in organising
tank production for the Red Army that the Presidium of the
Supreme Council of the U.S.S.R. has conferred upon each the title
of "Hero of Socialist Labour."
Recently, out of five hundred scientists more than eighty Jews
were awarded Stalin prizes for outstanding achievements in their
respective fields. Many prizes went to Jews who have perfected
new weapons of warfare, including trench mortars and small
arms. Others were honoured for developing new technological
processes. An important discovery expected to restore to life
people apparently killed by shock, earned Lena Stem, Jewish
, woman scientist, the Gold Medal,
War Effort and the Retugees
WHEN Hitler and his partners in crime forced hundreds
of thousands of Jews and political opponents to look
for refuge in the world of democracy, only a very
small part of them were admitted to these countries. The
main part was left to the mercy of the Nazi murderers,
who have already slaughtered two million of them and now
threaten the whole of European Jewry with death and
extermination.
In many countries in Europe most of these refugees were
admitted under conditions which prevented them from working.


As time went on the authorities recognized that these mostly
highly skilled men and women, scientists and physicians, artisans
and technicians, were a potential asset and lifted the ban Imposed
. upon them earlier. The results were very favorable. In England,
for instance, 300 factories were set up by immigrants, which, gave
employment—mainly in the distressed areas —to 30,000 British
workers. These figures were given by "Industrial Publicity,"
London, in June, 1942: they may have risen considerably since
then. Over 100 industries, entirely new to Britain, have been
established in England, and valuable processes, recorded only in
the minds of the inventors who had to flee from Germany, Austria
and Czechoslovakia empty-handed, became at the same tune a
loss to the Nazis and a gain to the Allies.
The same applies to America, Canada and Australia, where
new industries have been set up by refugees from Central Europe
and the knowledge and experience of many specialists put at the
disposal of either the Government or private enterprise. To quote
only a few essential branches of industry: optical instruments,
electrical appliances, devices and parts of aeroplanes, pottery
with coloured glaze, tin-reclaimers, flints, etc. Unfortunately there
are no figures available for Australia similar to those for England,
but it has been officially admitted that "these immigrants are
among the best educated types of migrants ever to reach Aus-
tralia, an outstanding proportion being graduates of Universities
and Technical High Schools."
When the first war clouds gathered over the anti-Fasdst world,
during the Munich crisis of 1938, 200 German and Austrian
refugees out of a then very small number who had found a haven
of refuge in this country, offered their services to the Australian
Government. A far greater number did the same immediately
after the outbreak of war. In February, 1942, the great majority
of the refugees—about 90% of whom are Jewish or of Jewish
origin—volunteered for the Forces. That was confirmed in a letter
by the Minister lor the Army, Mr. F. M. Forde, to Dr. Evatt, in
November, 1942, in which he stated that, "under the National
Security (Aliens' Service) Regulations, up to October 31st, 1942,
3,489 refugee aliens have registered for service as required, and,
of these, 1,201 have volunteered and been allotted to the Aus-
tralian Military Forces."
These 3,489 refugees (out of a total of about 8,000 newcomers,
including women, children and old people) to whom the Minister
for the Army refers, were male refugees between 18 and 60.
Mr. Forde did not disclose how many had really volunteered but
had been rejected as medically unfit, or because they were in
war Jobs as scientists, technicians or skilled workers—obviously
many more than "the 1,201 allotted to the Australian Military
Forces." But he did state in this letter that, of the 3,489 refugee


men, old and young, fit and unfit. In protected lobs or not 1,201
bad Joined the Army as volunteers. That Is more than 34 per cent
In. the minds of the refugees from Nazi-terrorized countries such
a response is only natural, for the war of destruction was declared
on them as early as 1933, when Hitler and his ruthless system,
came to power. They therefore knew that an Allied victory is a
question of life and death for them, and they are prepared to
make every sacrifice to bring about this victory.
Bui it is necessary to siress this point as many prejudiced
people wrongly accuse the refugees of a selfish or even hostile
attitude toward the country which gave them refuge. These preju-
dices are unjust and dangerous, because they hamper the war
effort as do the racial and religious prejudices against Jewry in
general. , Anti-Semitism has proved in all Nazified countries of
Europe to bs a forerunner of Fascism and Fifth Column work.
Jews are Hitler's scapegoats, and to instigate hatred against them
very well served to destroy the unity of the people and to weaken
their resistance to Nazi onslaughts. It is a Fascist slogan, too, that
Jews don’t fight The present war shows that Jews gladly share
the duties and perils of the country where they live as respected
citizens, and that they spare no effort if the light is one for the
highest ideals of mankind, for freedom, justice and democracy.
Reterences:
Figures and quotations are based on official documents, dispatches and
articles published in the Press oi Australia. England. America. Canada and
South Africa, information from several Organizations, the Press Relations
Brunch, R.A.A.F.. Melbourne, etc.
AMONG OTHER REFERENCES
British Jewry Book of Honour, Gaston Publishing Company, London.
Israel Cohen: "The Jews and the War," Frederick Muller Ltd., London.
{The author gives as sources for his information various friends,
national and public bodies, and the "Jewish Chronicle," London).
Israel Cohen: "Britain's Nameless Ally." W. H. Allen & Co., London.
L. P. Fox: "Australia and the lews." Sydney.
Harold Boas: "Australian Jewry" (Book of Honour —The Great War 1914-
1918). Perth, 1928.
Louis Golding: "The Jewish Problem." (Penguin Special).
Jews and the World Wan Publication by the Jewish War Veterans, New
York.
STDAHT, TJtTLOB . PIKE PKIKIEBS MIC.BOVBKE
Issued by the Jewish Council to Combat Fascism
and Anti-Semitism. Melbourne.
SECOND EDITION
