

VfcTH i
i n r r ~f)
*? V J • • % f ' 4^
Pc*We*-'0 LJ ' :> - fi OK ' '
/•’ r
■ »V3l




THE SWAN RIVER SETTLEMENT.
The south-west angle of the continent of Australia, from the
shortness and ease of communication with the most important of our
Eastern possessions, had been long pointed out as admirably adapted
for a colony. From the scarcity of harbours, and the cliffs and low
hills along the shore being generally covered with drifted sand, the
whole of the west coast had, however, been supposed unfit for cultiva-
tion. Until within these few years, no attempt had been made to explore
this coast more narrowly ; the French, who sailed along it during the
winter season, examined it in a very slovenly way, and the storms
which they encountered seem to have impressed them with a most unfa-
vourable opinion of the country.
While Captain Stirling was on the coast of New South Wales, in
command of his Majesty’s ship Success, he determined to avail himself
of the opportunity of making a more accurate survey, and for that
purpose he sailed from Sidney, accompanied by an able botanist, Mr.
Fraser. He reached Cape Leeuwin, in latitude 34 deg. 30 min. south,
on the 2d of March, 1827, and from thence proceeded along the shore till
he reached Gage’s Roads, at the mouth of Swan River, which was the
chief aim of his expedition. These roads he found to afford excellent
anchorage close to the shore. As they are protected pretty well from
all winds, except those from N.N. West to W. N. West, they will, during
great part of the year, prove very convenient for ships loading with
produce brought down the river, or from the country to the northward.
The trouble and expense of carriage to Cockhurn Sound will thus be
aVoided. Cockhurn Sound is the only harbour on the coast, and must,
therefore, form the nucleus of the colony. It lies in latitude 32 deg.
la min. south, 115 deg. 34 min. east longitude, and nearly eight miles
south of th'e mouth of Swan River; it is eight miles long by four
Woad, and has a depth of water varying from four to fourteen fathoms.
Buache Island, or, as Captain Stirling named it. Garden Island, be-
tween eight and nine miles in length by one in breadth, forms its
western boundary, and effectually protects it from the ocean, so that
it may be considered perfectly safe for any number of ships during the
whole year. It has a commodious entrance, with six and seven fathoms
water, between the north end of Garden Island and a small islet
called Pulo Carnac. Twelve miles from the mouth of the river, and
the same distance from the entrance to the Sound, lies Rothenest Is-
land, nine miles long by four broad :—of both these islands Captain Stir-
ling speaks very favourably, the soil being generally a brown sandy
loam, clothed with luxuriant herbage, and capable of rearing all sorts
of vegetables.
Before proceeding to describe more minutely the tract watered by
Swan River, which was the chief object of Captain Stirling’s examina-
tion, we will give a brief account of the situation and probable extent
of the country likely to become available for settlers. It consists of a
narrow strip of land, bounded on the west by the sea, and on the
east by an almost continuous chain of mountains, from twelve hundred
to fifteen hundred feet in height. To the southward it extends as far
'as Cape Leeuwin, and probably from thence runs eastward as far as
King George’s Sound, where a settlement was established about four
June 1829. —VOL. XXV. NO. CTI. 2 L


years ago. Cape Leeuwin is nearly one hundred and eighty miles
from Swan River, and along the whole of this extent the mountains
run nearly parallel with the coast, at a distance varying from twenty to
thirty miles. From these mountains run a great number of small
streams; but the only rivers of any consequence, besides Swan River,
are the Leschenault and Vasse, which fall into Geographer’s Bay,
the one eighty-five, the other one hundred miles south of Swan River.
The courses of these two streams are yet unexplored, but they'have bar
harbours at their mouths, which, though at present unfit for large ships,
will afford shelter and accommodation for small coasting-vessels, when
the colony shall have become so settled as to require an intercourse be-
tween its different districts. Mr. Fraser describes this country, which
contains more than three millions of acres, as being generally, as far as
he had an opportunity of ascertaining, very well adapted for agricul-
tural purposes. It consists of a succession of low undulating hills, of
which the soil is a fine brown loam, alternating with broad valleys of
the finest alluvial soil; the hills appeared finely timbered ; the valleys
produce an immense variety of herbaceous plants in the greatest luxu-
riance, and through each of them generally flows a small stream, af-
fording abundance of excellent water. The only impediment, indeed,
to the rapid colonization of this fine country, is the want of harbours.
The country to the northward of Swan River has been explored to
the distance of a few miles only, but there is good reason for believing it
to be for several degrees farther north, equally as favourable as that to
the south. It labours however under the same disadvantage as to har-
bours, none having hitherto been found nearer than Shark’s Bay, which
lies in the 26th deg. of south latitude, four hundred miles north of
Swan River. A few miles from the mouth of the river, the coast bends
considerably to the westward, and the mountains also receding more
inland, the distance between them increases gradually to upwards of
fifty miles ; and, though from this point the course of the mountains i$
unknown, they are supposed to run nearly parallel with the coast for
several hundred miles, from the fact that no river of any magnitude has
been discovered to the northward.
From Geographer’s Bay to the north of the river, the rocks along
the shore consist chiefly of lime and sandstone. These strata extend
from three to five miles inland, and the soil covering them consists ge-
nerally of a light sandy loans, in some places of rather a sterile nature,
but generally capable of producing tolerable crops : across the mouth
of the river a continuation of the limestone ridge unfortunately extends
and forms a bar, on which there is only a depth of six feet at low water.
About a mile from its mouth the channel deepens and opens into a
beautiful and extensive salt-water lake, which has been named Melville
Water. This lake is about eight m : les long, by three or four broad ;
and from the depth of water, the perfect security, and the natural wharfs
which form part of its shores, it would prove one of the finest harbours in
the world, provided it possessed a navigable communication with the sea.
To effect this object, Captain Stirling suggests two plans ; one, to
deepen the channel of the river, w'hich, from the soft friable nature of
the limestone under water, he thinks may be done without much ex-
pense ; the other, to take advantage of a bend in the river, after it
issues from the lake, where it approaches within four hundred and


eighty yards of the sea. The channel from this bend to the lake has a
depth of five to seven fathoms, and the depth close to the shore outside
is four to five fathoms. The intervening rock is limestone; and as
it will be very well adapted for building, Captain Stirling thinks the
demand for it for that purpose, in the event of a town being built, will
contribute considerably towards defraying the expense of cutting a
canal through it.
Into this lake fall two rivers, one, properly the Swan, from the north-
east, the other, named the Canning, from the south-east. The former
was ascended by Captain Stirling to its source, which is rather more
than fifty miles from its mouth in a straight line, and about seventy fol-
lowing the windings of the river ; the latter, to where the water ceased
to be brackish, about twenty miles in a straight line from its junction
with the lake, and more than thirty from the sea.
Mr. Fraser gives a very favourable account of the country. In the
neighbourhood of the lake and the lower part of the river, there are
extensive salt marshes, which he thinks will answer well for the growth
of cotton. “At Point Fraser,” says he, “ the lake may be said to ter-
minate, and the channel assumes the appearance of a beautiful inland
river ; at this place the flats, which extend to a great distance, are
composed of deep alluvial soil, drift timber being found imbedded five
feet below the surface: they appear occasionally to be overflowed.”
He seems to have been both surprised and delighted with the flou-
rishing appearance of the various trees and shrubs, and the general
luxuriance of the herbage with which the country is covered. This
he found to arise from the numerous springs which everywhere
abound. In fact, the whole soil, a few feet beneath the surface, is
saturated with water, and even in the most unpromising places there
is no want of this necessary article. Alluding to such a place,
he says, “ I -was astonished in observing the facility with which water
is obtained in this apparently sterile tract; for on digging only three
feet, water of the best quality was found in abundance.”
In ascending higher up the river, he paints the country in equally
flattering colours.
“ The view from Point Pelican,” says he, “ was exceedingly grand :
the contrast between the dark blue of the distant mountains and the
vivid green of the surrounding woods is peculiarly pleasing; and to
the eye of a person accustomed to the ever-brown of the forests of
Port Jackson, it must be particularly interesting, being so different
from any thing in New South Wales. From Point Heathcote, inland,
the country seems to improve, as far as I can judge from the immense
quantity of herbage which it produces.”
In proceeding still farther up the river, the party found the flats to
become more extensive, stretching back from its banks as far as the
eye could reach, and divided at intervals by low swelling hills; the
country also becomes more open, the trees not .averaging above two to
the acre, and consisting chiefly of the different species of gum-trees
common in New South Wales. Numerous rivulets also intersect these
plains, running into the river along the greater part of its course, but
particularly from the eastward.
As far as the Canning River was explored, the country appeared to
be of precisely the same description as that on the Swan, and no doubt
2 l 2


was entertained of its continuing equally good to the mountains. A
strong proof of the superior fertility of the soil may be derived from
Mr. Fraser’s remark, that, when exploring the country, he at first took
it for granted that those tracts, covered with the different varieties of
banksia, zanthorea, and zamia, were similar to those on the east coast,
where the presence of these plants is considered a certain proof of
sterility, till, on examination, he found the soil to be a fine sandy loam,
capable of bearing any kind of crop.
As the expedition w'as on the coast at the end of an apparently very
dry summer, the luxuriant vegetation shows that it must be exempted
from the evils to which the settlements on the east coast have been so
often exposed in consequence of the long droughts. It is well known
that the west coasts of all continents and islands enjoy a larger share
of moisture than the east; and the clouds driven from the ocean being
attracted by the lofty range forming the boundary of the settlement,
must afford an ample supply for the numerous springs, lagoons, and
rivulets, which are everywhere to be met with. There can be no bet-
ter proof of this than the fact, that the Swan, though having so short a
course, and it being the end of summer, was navigable by boats for
nearly fifty miles from its mouth.
The same causes which produce the fertility of the soil, have also a
sensible influence on the temperature of the climate. During the time
the party was on shore, the weather was delightful; the average of the
thermometer being 72 deg. and the extremes 84 deg. and 59 deg. This
moderate temperature Captain Stirling attributes ii&part to the in-
fluence of the winds from the mountains, on which he found the ther-
mometer to be 15 deg. lower than on the plains.
From the greater degree of moisture, it is feared by some that the
climate may not prove so healthy as that of the old settlements on the
eastern coast; but it is probable, that the greater uniformity of tempe-
rature, produced by the alternate breezes from the sea and the moun-
tains, must entirely counterbalance its humid effects; and the report
given by Captain Stirling on the subject perfectly coincides with this
conjecture:—“ In my opinion,” says he, “ the climate, considered with
reference to health, is highly salubrious. This opinion is corroborated
by the Surgeon of the Success, who states, in his report to me, that,
notwithstanding the great exposure of the people to fatigue, to night-
air in the neighbourhood of marshy grounds, and to other causes
usually productive of sickness, he had not one case upon his sick-list,
except slight complaints unconnected with climate.”
As far as the observations of the exploring parties extended, the
animals appeared to be the same, or nearly the same, as those on the
east coast. The natives with whom they met seemed in no respect
different from those at Port Jackson : they carried the same rude
weapons, and appeared as little advanced in civilization: nothing like
a hut of any kind was seen, and they were equally destitute of any kind
of boat or canoe. They remained on friendly terms with the party
during their stay on shore, although they seemed not altogether to ap-
prove of the intrusion into their territory.* Mr. Fraser says that,
* And by what right do we take from them their country?—by none, we fear,
but that of power.


while he was attending a party that, at some distance, was hauling the
cutter through the mud, he was accosted by three natives, armed, who
made signs to him to depart, but offered no violence; on hearing the
voices of the party, they retired into the woods. One or two varieties
of kangaroos were seen on the main land, and a small variety was very
numerous on Rothenest Island. In the woods, the howling of the na-
tive dogs was heard, though none were seen. Iguanas and land tor-
toises were also met with. In proceeding up the river, the party was
much surprised to find in several places a number of deep pits on its
banks, which they afterwards found were dug by the natives to entrap
the tortoises, in those places where they abounded. Mr. Fraser says
that,'immediately before he was accosted by the three natives, he dis-
tinctly heard the bellowing of some animal similar to that of an ox,
from an extensive marsh farther up the river. Although it is rather
singular that an animal of smb a size, if really existing, should
escape the observation of the party, it is likely enough that the country
may contain such. We believe that, about four years ago, several cat-
tle were landed on Rothenest and Buache Islands, and some of these
may very probably have found their way to the main land.
The catalogue of birds is somewhat more extensive: the emu was
frequently seen on the open downs; the lower parts of the river, and
particularly Melville Water, abound with that beautiful bird the black
swan, as well as numerous varieties of geese, ducks, and other water-
fowl ; the woods swarm with all the varieties of cockatoos, parrots,
and parroquets, common on the east coast. One sort of cockatoo,
which seemed peculiar, was seen in large flocks; the back and upper
part of the wings were white, the under part of the tail yellow, and the
breast of the male grey and vermilion, that of the female black. Pi-
geons, quails, and numerous species of smaller birds, were everywhere
plentiful irr the woods.
On the shores of the different islands, seals were observed in great
numbers; and Captain Stirling was of opinion that, in the proper sea-
son, whales frequented the coast, which may become a field for the
establishment of a valuable fishery. The banks, which extend to a
great distance from land, furnish many species of excellent fish, and
in such numbers, that a boatful was easily caught in a few hours.
Little opportunity was, of course, afforded for mineralogical re-
searches. No coal was found ; but Captain Stirling remarks that the
strata usually accompanying coal were predominant, and appear in
many places above the surface, so that he thinks a careful examination
may bring this useful mineral to light. Some specimens of copper and
lead ore were found, and considerable veins of iron ore were seen to
traverse the rocks in different places.
Among the limestone cliffs there are numerous extensive caverns,
some of them covered with beautiful stalactites, and in several places
incrusted with rock-salt in considerable quantities.
In concluding his description of this fine country, Mr. Fraser thus
sums up its advantages :
“ In giving my opinion of the land seen on the banks of Swan River,
I hesitate not in pronouncing it superior to any I have seen in New
South Wales east of the Blue Mountains, not only in its local charac-
ter, but in the many existing advantages to the settlers.


“ These are as follow :
“ First.—Evident superiority of soil.
“ Second. —Facility with which land can be cultivated, in consequence
of the open state of the country, on which the trees do not average
above two to the acre.
“ Third. —Great abundance of springs producing excellent water,
and the consequent permanent humidity of the soil; two advantages
not enjoyed on the eastern coast.
“ Fourth. —Water-carriage to the door, and the facility of land-car-
riage.”
The situation of the colony in respect to communication with other
places is also admirable; it is easily accessible at all times of the year,
an advantage not possessed by the old settlements on the east coast. It
lies almost on the direct track of ships frotn Europe to the latter
colony, and within a moderate distance of that of our ships to India
and China, so that it can always enjoy sufficient intercourse with all
these places.
The distance from the Cape is only four weeks’ sail; from Java two
or three weeks, and from Mauritius, Bombay, and other places in our
Eastern possessions, from five to six weeks; so that supplies of all kinds
of tropical produce may be obtained readily, at very moderate prices.
Although settlers in this colony can have no difficulty in raising the
necessaries of life in abundance, yet they can never expect to attain to
any great degree of wealth or importance, unless they can raise such
exchangeable commodities in return for the productions of other coun-
tries, aS may enable them to avail themselves of their favourable situa-
tion : some persons doubt whether this, with the exception of a few
trifling articles, can ever be in their power, though we cannot see any
grounds for such an opinion. With the exception of a few exclusively
tropical productions, they must be able to raise nearly all those articles
which command a ready market in Europe and elsewhere, and their
central situation must give them a great advantage over several of their
rivals. Being in the same latitude as Port Jackson, we may conclude
that the colony is equally fitted for the growth of fine wool; and as the
terms on whicii settlers have their lands must enable them to defy com-
petition, we may reasonably expect that before many years are passed,
the wool of the continent will be almost entirely superseded by the
produce of these colonies. Tobacco, too, being supplied almost ex-
clusively by a nation which at present seems to use every means of
cramping our power, will be particularly deserving of attention ; and
there is no doubt it may be raised in any quantity, and equal in quality
to that of the United States. The amount last year imported into the
United Kingdom was 33,000,000 lbs. of which 82,000,0001b5. were from
America, and almost exclusively in American shipping: what a field
then do we see open here for the industry of our colonists, and the em-
ployment of our shipping ! Hemp, flax, silk, hides, gums, &c. may,
with proper attention, soon become valuable articles of export. Horses,
too, we have reason to believe, may form an useful branch of export to
India. A considerable number of these animals are annually imported
into that country from the Red Sea, and bring very high prices 5 and we
understand that some have recently been imported from Sidney on
speculation, which have afforded a profitable rfeturn: it can hardly be


doubted, therefore, that the new colony, possessing such advantages in
point of situation, may render this a valuable trade.
After having spoken thus favourably of the projected settlement, and
shown what promising prospects it offers to an enterprising settler, we
are sorry to have to mention any thing which may tend to damp the
ardour of the thousands who have been preparing to proceed to it.
By the terms of the prospectus issued from the Colonial Office, the
public will be led to infer that only actual settlers will be entitled to the
privileges and advantages offered therein; and with this opinion a num-
ber of individuals have already sailed for the settlement. After some
vague rumours which appeared in the public papers, it has, however, at
last transpired, that the Home Secretary, who loses no opportunity
of quartering his relations on the public, has received a grant for
one of them, or, more properly speaking, has conferred upon himself
by far the most valuable portion of the colony. Great anxiety has been
shown by the parties concerned in this transaction to keep the public in
the dark as to the fact; and even after the thing could no longer be
concealed, they have attempted to deceive them still more grossly, by
pretending that the grant, instead of being an obstruction, will prove
a benefit to other settlers, by forming a sort of depot, from which the
latter may be supplied with cattle, grain, and other things, which they
may not at first be able to provide for themselves; and that, as it lies a
considerable distance up the river, it leaves ample room for other emi-
grants, in equally favourable situations. Now, we can tell the public,
on undoubted authority, that the first of these assertions is a fallacy,
the second untrue. From the open state of the country and mildness
of the climate, settlers cannot arrive at any season of the year without
finding themselves enabled at once to plant some sort of grain—wheat,
barley, and oats at one time, Indian corn at another, and potatoes and
all kinds T)f vegetables throughout the whole year; so that, if they
proceed with moderate prudence and industry, they can have little or
no occasion to depend on others for these articles.
To enable our readers more clearly to understand our proof of the
falsehood of their report, as to the situation of the grant, we will refer
them to the description previously given of the courses of the two ri-
vers. The one coming from the north-east, and the other from the
south-east, they form a fork or angle of about 45 deg.; and Mr. Peel’s
boundary line, commencing at the extreme point to which the Canning
was explored (32 miles from the sea), and carried parallel with the
mountains towards Swan River, reaches the latter thirty miles from its
mouth in a straight line, and above fifty following the windings of the
river. The distance between the two rivers at these points is thirty-
three miles, and the space remaining between the boundary and the
mountains is generally from one to three, and never more than four
miles in breadth. Of this narrow, unoccupied strip, the greater part is
unfit for cultivation, the surface to the.distance of a mile from the
mountains being covered with fragments of chalcedony and other rocks ;
the remaining patches being hemmed in and excluded from the river by
Mr. Peel’s domain, can never be desirable situations for free-settlers, so
that they must be considered as portions of the grant. Having thus
secured the fertile uplands, Mr. Peel’s next object is to get possession
of the whole water communication of the colony, which he does by run-


ning from his extreme limits on the two rivers, lines hearty direct to the
coast, which they reach, the one fifteen miles to the north, the other the
same distance to the south of the river’s mouth ; thus completely en-
grossing the whole navigable courses of the two rivers and Cockburn
Sound, the only harbour. The tract of country thus shut against free-
settlers contains pbout 650 square miles, including the water-surface,
which may occupy nearly fifty square miles more. Of this amount,
however, Government has reserved, for the site of a town and other
public purposes, a small portion, extending along the coast from Cock-
burn Sound to four miles north of the river, a distance altogether of
eleven or twelve miles, and extending about nine miles inland. From
the obscure explanation which was officially given respecting the ob-
noxious grant, the public may probably infer that this small tract will
be open to settlers on the same terms as the more remote parts of the
country; we inform our readers, that such an inference is erroneous;
this reserve will be no more available for agricultural settlers than Mr.
Peel’s grant; and even though it were, so small a spot could not de-
serve a moment’s attention.
It is amusing to observe the paltry subterfuges which have been had
recourse to in order to mollify the public. It is, of course, nearly as
much the interest of the monopolists that the surrounding lands should
be settled as that they should find occupants for their own ; they, there-
fore, at first quietly allowed two or three cargoes of emigrants to sail
for the colony, prudently thinking that it would be time enough to dis-
sipate their golden dreams after their arrival, when they should find
themselves compelled to march twenty or thirty miles into the interior,
or to accede to any terms that should be dictated. When the job first
got wind, and began to excite the doubts and fears of other emigrants
in intention, they endeavoured to dissipate them by representing the
grant as quite in a remote and out-of-the-way situation, selected at
random, and that they were quite ignorant of the nature of the soil and
other capabilities. Now when this affair has been exposed by the press,
they think disguise no longer necessary, and boldly vaunt it to be
possessed of the best situation and most fertile soil in the colony, and
as enjoying other advantages, which render it infinitely preferable for
settlement to any other place.
After having acted thus, we may give them credit for any kind of
trickery for the advancement of their interests, and accordingly the
terms on which they propose getting tenants for their lands, hold out
ample opportunity for its exercise. Professing the utmost liberality,
and a paternal regard for the welfare of those who may be innocent
enough to accept these offers, they inform the public that the plan on
which they chiefly mean to colonize their land, is by leasing it to men
of moderate capital; and that for the benefit of those who may not have
the means of fully stocking and cultivating their lots, they will make
advances of cattle, implements, and goods of every description, for the
conveyance of a large quantity of which to the colony they have al-
ready made arrangements. This is certainty, in appearance, very
liberal, but m appearance only. We have had good opportunity of
observing the effects of such a plan in Canada, where it has'frequently
been acted upon, and the uniform consequence has been the ruin of the
tenant; the object of the superior being merely to procure a tertipb- !


rary cultivator of his land, till, by the industry of the latter, and the in-
creasing cultivation of the surrounding country, it may have attained
such a value as to enable him to sell at a good profit, while he takes care
to involve the tenant so deeply in his debt that he can have little or no
chance of extricating himself for a very long period. Thus situated, he
generally, also, takes care to exact a sufficiently exorbitant per centage
on these advances, keeps the vassal in a state of slavish dependence so
long as he finds it convenient, and when a good opportunity of selling
presents itself, turns him adrift without ceremony, under pretence of his
inability to fulfil his engagements. We do not say that the proprietors
of this grant mean to act thus, but we think that no man of common
prudence, with such precedents before bis eyes, will venture to engage
in such a speculation, where there is so much temptation to oppression,
and so little chance of gaining redress.
It is worthy of remark, too, and we have the best authority for mak-
ing it, that a great part of the discontent and dissensions in Canada has
arisen from this cause : the numerous sufferers, knowing that these
large monopolizing grants emanated from the Government, looked upon
the latter as the original cause of their distresses ; and as reparation to
these people was seldom if ever thought of, the temporary irritation
has been nursed into a deep-rooted hatred against the Government,
which they endeavour by every means in their power to thwart and
annoy. We understand that Mr. Peel intends, at a future period, to
increase his grant to 1,000,000 of acres; in which case the discontent
which at present exists must be increased in a tenfold degree.
The grant to Mr, Peel is in no respect more obnoxious than in that
indulgence which allows him a period of twenty years for bringing the
land into cultivation, while others are limited to ten. In taking pos-
session of so extensive a tract, he seems to have been perfectly alive to
the necessity of granting himself this privilege. He can hardly expect,
while good land, within a reasonable distance of water-carriage, though
lying less conveniently, is to be got for nothing, that a settler will con-
sent to become his tenant, and render himself liable to the evils to which
we have before alluded. He knows, that while others are limited to ten
years, they must labour strenuously to fulfil the terms on which they re-
ceive their grants ; and that his land, forming the very nucleus of the
settlement, must, without a single effort on his part, or the expense of a
shilling, rapidly increase in value, by the progressive improvements
around it, and thus easily ensure purchasers among succeeding emigrants.
It must indeed be a powerful cause of irritation among the colonists to
find that a man who has so seriously injured them by excluding them
from the best part of the Colony, should be permitted quietly to rest
on his oars and profit by their industry. Another and more immediate
evil is, that such a large extent of country will intervene between the
different settlers, interrupting their communication with each other as
well as with the sea. In Gourlay’s work on Canada, he gives a statis-
tical account of a number of districts, in the shape of reports, drawn up
by the most intelligent of the inhabitants of each ; and these, with only
one exception, attribute the comparatively slow progress of prosperity
to the injudicious system of keeping large reserves for the mainte-
nance of future schools and churches, and of giving large grants
to persons who are non-resident. From such grantees generally no


terms were required ; and even when bound to cultivate the land so
granted within a limited time, few took the trouble to fulfil the condi-
tions : these non-residents, too, being frequently tools of the Govern-
ment, the sufferers by the abuse seldom dared to complain. The ne-
cessary consequence was, that the actual settlers were scattered at dis-
tant intervals among the woods, their mutual intercourse seriously ob-
structed, and the reserves being destitute of roads, the carriage of
produce to a market was next to impossible.
We are glad to see that the public are so unanimous in opinion re-
specting this grant. We think it, indeed, one of the most shameful
jobs with which the annals of our jobbing country have been for some
time distinguished. Mr. Peel seems to flatter himself that Machiavelli’s
maxim respecting great men is particularly applicable to himself, and he
certainly shows a most magnanimous contempt for the world’s opinion.
In consequence of the notoriety which the affair has gained, there is
considerable probability, however, that it may fall to the ground ; or,
if not, that the progress of the settlement will be most effectually re-
tarded, if not altogether stopped. We ourselves know several indivi-
duals who have already sailed to another colony; and hundreds have
either changed their destination in the same manner, or given up all in-
tention of leaving this country, although they had already made consi-
derable preparations to proceed to Swan river. Sufficient evidence of
this is afforded by the fact, that of the many ships advertised to sail from
the Thames to the Settlement, the major part have been withdrawn.
We hope, however, that the subject will be again brought before
Parliament, and justice done to the public ; and if the grant be not al-
together rescinded, that it will at all events be so modified as to allow a
reasonable portion of good land on the river to be open to other set-
tlers.
THE GALLO-IRISH.
At the last Assizes of Wexford, (I am an observer of incident, and com-
municate whatever strikes me as deserving of note,) a case was tried before
Mr. Justice Jebb, in the course of which a singular scene took place. An
action for a libel was brought by Mr. John Corcoran, a respectable attorney
of the town of Enniscorthy, against a gentleman of considerable property
and of a very peculiar character and aspect, Mr. John Wheeler Pounden.
He had been at one period an exceedingly zealous Protestant, and exempli-
fied his legal orthodoxy by very signal manifestations of zeal during the
Rebellion. But suddenly he abandoned his original opinions, both in poli-
tics and religion, and became an enthusiastic Roman Catholic. It was
with no little astonishment, and with no less indignation, that the loyal
inhabitants of Enniscorthy (which is situate at the foot of Vinegar Hill)
beheld John Wheeler Pounden, accompanied by “ a Moabite woman,” pro-
ceeding to hear the Bishop’s mass on a beautiful Sunday morning; and it
was with a corresponding exultation that he was seen by the Roman Ca-
tholics of this factious village, kneeling in an attitude of sincere and humble
abjuration of the errors of Luther and of Calvin, clasping in contrite piety
the hands with which the yeoman’s sabre had been brandished and the car-
bine had been levelled, and bowing down the high and haughty front, on
which the helmet of loyalty had so often waved its plumes, when he charged
at the head of a constitutional squadron, and put the phalanxes of pikemen
to flight. John Wheeler Pounden became a Catholic; and whilst he ac-
quired the support of one party, he incurred the detestation of the Protest-
