

"The Royalty that
wins Loyalty."
In memoriam
The Rt.hon.the marquis of limlithgow,G.C.M.G.,
first Governor.General of the Commonweath.
R Sermon by
A. F. Maldon Robb, B.A.,
minister ol Chalmers Church, Launceston,
Tasmanla.
Preached march 15, 1908.
price..Sixpence.
Camania:
Printed at "The Daily Telegraph" Offices, Launceston.
1908,




"The Royalty that
wins Loyalty."
ln IRemoriam
Che Rt. fion. Che marquis of Cinlithaow, G.C.m.6.,
First Gooernor-General of the Commonwealth.
H Sermon bp
n. f. maldon Robb,
minister or Chalmers Church, Caunceston,
Casmanla.
Preached march 15, 1908.
Price ■ - Sixpence,
Casntania:
Printed at “ The Daily Telegraph ” Offices, Launceston.
1908.




The Royalty that wins Loyalty.
“If thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt
serve them and answer them to speak good words to them, then
they will be thy servants for ever.” —i. Kings, xii., 7.
These words spoken to a young king nearly 3000 years
ago are so modem and so instinct with the democratic spirit
of our own nation, that one might well believe them spoken
yesterday : and most admirably do they express the ideal of
Royalty —or Vice-Royalty—which Australians, at any rate,
alone have any use for, and which alone will win and focus
and hold Australian loyalty. The old conception of the
King as Autocrat, Tyrant, Absolute Monarch, for British men
at least, died on the marshes at Runnymede and on the
scaffold at Whitehall. Never again, for us of British stock,
that Royalty that sits above the Law, that ‘‘sells, denies, or
delays” justice, that “right divine of kings to govern wrong !”
But we have still use and loyalty and love for rulers that
serve their people, and “with nothing of the lawless or the
Despot,” make their throne “broad-based upon their people s
will,” And surely it is good for our Australian Commonwealth
that its beginning is imperishably linked with the name of
Lord Hopetoun, and that here he'won that higher title, which
will never sound so familiar in Australian ears, by his plain
devotion to the people’s good, and to that ideal of Kingship
which our Lord declared supreme, when He said : “He that
would be greatest among you, let him be the servant of all.
And as one of our own poets has said :
“Not his to court the blatant praise
That smaller men approve —
His ways were straight Australian ways
That gained Australia’s love.
He dreamed his dreams—but o’er them all
The work he did prevailed;
He faltered not at duty’s call,
Nor of his duty failed;
And, though for evermore he sleep
In kindly Scottish earth,
Australia in her heart shall keep
The memory of his worth.”
Let me try to make vivid to you this ideal of the Royalty
that wins loyalty by laying side by side two pictures, separated
historically by a space of near 3000 years, in the first of which
the advice of Solomon’s wise men, in the words of my text,
was rejected, and, in the second of which, it was made the
guiding star of a monarch’s reign.


Our first picture takes us back to the year of King Solomon’s
death, when his only son, Rehoboam, at the age of 21 years,
ascended his father’s throne without any opposition, 937 years
before Christ. The young King’s name alone is interesting,
for Rehoboam means, “The Enlarger of the People,” and
helps us to understand his father’s ambitions for this, his only
son. But surely never was the terrible irony of history more
forcibly illustrated: it was under this king’s rule that the
unity of the Kingdom of Israel was forever and irretrievably
broken. “The power tO' which Solomon had elevated Israel,”
says the Jewish historian Gratz, “resembled that of a magic
world built up by spirits. The spell was broken at his
death.' The Northern tribes were in a rebellious mood. They
had been won by the vivid personality of David; they had
been dazzled by the royal magnificence of Solomon. But they
were not prepared blindly to accept Solomon’s son. This boy-
had just emerged on his father’s death for the first time from
the shadow of the palace-harem, and was the son of an
Ammonite woman, who worshipped an alien, barbaric god.
Instead, therefore, of going to Rehoboam at Jerusalem, they
summoned an Assembly at their ancient city of Shechem,
between the mountains Ebal and Gerizim. In this fortress and
sanctuary, they determined as “men of Israel,” to bring their
grievances under the notice of the new sovran, before they
ratified his succession and took the oath of loyalty. “1 think”
(says Ewald), “there can be no doubt that they had the fullest
intentions of confirming his power as king,” if their legitimate
demands were granted. They summoned Jeroboam, who l had
spontaneously returned from Egypt on Solomon’s death, to be
their spokesman. When the Assembly met, they told the king
that they would accept him as their monarch if he would
lighten the grievous service and the heavy taxation which his
father had put upon them. Taken utterly by surprise, Reho-
boam said that they should receive his answer in three days.
In the interval he consulted the aged counsellors of his father.
Their answer is astute in its insight into human nature : Ver.
7. They plead for reasonable concessions. They say in short,
If you will accede to their terms, instead of dictating your
own, then you will win them.” They saw he would fain play
the autocrat; that he resented it exceedingly, that his subjects
just as he had begun to taste the sweets of power, should
presume to parley with him. And they say in effect, “You
think that they are reversing the proper relation, that they
are speaking as the sovran, and treating you as the servant.
Let it be so. Give the people a civil answer, tell them that
you are their servant. Content with this, they will scatter
to their homes, and you will bind them to your royal house
for ever,”


“Who knoweth whether his son will be a wise man or a
fool ?” says So lorn o p in the Book of Proverbs. Apparently
he had done very little to save his only son from being the
latter. The proposal of the elders was evidently not very
agreeable to the rash and imperious King, who was probably
a boy of 21, and in whose veins the blood of his Ammonite
mother was flowing. “Despots in polygamous households,
whether in Palestine, or Turkey, or Persia, live in perpetual
dread of their own sons, and keep them for the most part in
absolute subordination." If Rehoboam had received the least
political training, if he had even been possessed of the smallest
modicum of commonsense, he would have been able to read
the times sufficiently well to know that everything might be
lost by bluster and arrogance, and everything gained by tact
and concession. Had Rehoboam been a man like David,
—or even like Saul in his best days—he might have grappled
to himself the affections of his people with hooks of steel,
his throne might have been “broad-based upon the people’s
will,” by seizing this opportunity of abating their burdens, and
offering them a sincere assurance that he would study their
peace and welfare above all. Had he been a man of ordinary
intelligence, or of lofty character, he would have seen that
the present was not the moment to aggravate a discontent,
which was already charged with elements of danger to his
Throne and Kingdom. But the wise counsel of the elders was
utterly distasteful to a man who, after long insignificance within
the walls of the palace-harem, had become intoxicated with
the power of the autocrat. He felt strongly that his rights
were impugned; he forgot or never knew that the kingliest
thing to do with one’s right may be to sacrifice them for the
sake of others.
He turned to the young men who had grown up with
him, and the very fact that he turned to' them argues
weakness of character. These were his companions in the
harem, the gilded, head-strong, featherbrained youth of a
luxurious court, the aristocratic idlers in whom the insolent
self-indulgence of an enervated society had expelled the old
simple patriotic faithfulness. Their answer was the sort of
answer, which Buckingham might have suggested to Charles
H. in face of the demands of the Puritans; or Stafford
whispered in the ears of the First Charles, when Parliament
made its just and temperate demands : and it was founded
on notions of the royal prerogative and the Divine right of
Kings, such as the Bishops instilled into our own James the I.
at Hampton Court, or Archbishop Laud suggested in the days
of “Thorough.”
“Threaten this insolent canaille ,” they said, “with your royal
severity. Tell them that you do not intend to give up your
sacred right to their labor or their dues. Tell them that your


little finger shall be thicker than your father’s loins, and that
instead of his whips you will chastise them with leaded thongs.
That is the way to show yourself every inch a king.’ The
senseless advice of these foolish youths proved itself attractive
to the empty-headed, infatuated prince. He accepted then
counsel, in the madness which is a prophecy of doom, for as
the historian tells us in the 15th verse, the disruption that
followed was God’s doing : “The matter was from the Lord.’’
The announcement of this incredibly foolish reply woke in
:he men of Israel an answering shout of rebellion. In the
rythmic war cry, which had now become proverbial, they cried :
“What portion have we in David?
Neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse ;
To your tents, O Israel!
See to thine own house, David !’
Unable to appease the wild tumult, Rehoboam again showed
his want of sense by sending an officer to the people whose
position and personality he knew would be offensive to them.
He sent the income-tax collector, “Adoram, who was over the
tribute,” the representative of those very taxes they wanted
lightened, the man of all others most odious to their sight.
Josephus says he hoped to “mollify them. But it was too
late. They stoned the king’s envoy. And the king found
that David was no longer a name to conjure with, and that
the Throne had lost its awful glamour over men’s hearts. He
barely • succeeded in reaching his chariot, in which he fled
with headlong speed to Jerusalem. The men of Israel chose
Jeroboam for their King. From that day, for ever, the umt\
of Israel was broken, and the twelve tribes became the ten
tribes and the two, and indeed the very name became legendarv
in the face of the bitter antagonism beween the two powers.
And now my second picture. It is the year of grace,
1839, and a girl of nineteen sits on the throne of England and
is face to face with a popular demand voiced constitutionally
through the House of Commons. Lord Melbourne's Ministry
has been defeated, and Sir Robert Peel has been sent for by
the young Queen, and in his interview with her, he intimated
that it would be necessary to make certain changes in the
ladies of her household. It was felt that the difficulties of
administration would be seriously aggravated if the Monarch
had always around her the wives, daughters, and sisters
of the avowed political opponents of Ministers; and the in-
conveniences of such an arrangement were clearly explained.
But all was in vain. The Queen was inexorable, and even
fractious. She would not part with a single lady in attendance
upon her, and declared that such a proposal was contrary to
usage and repugnant to her feelings. She wrote in a tone of
indignant defiance to Lord Melbourne, maintaining—woman-
like—at the same time that she had been perfectly calm and


composed, when she had discussed the matter with Peel and his
colleagues, and closing her spirited note with the statement:
“They wished to treat me like a girl, but I will show them that
lam Queen of England.” The immediate consequence was
that Sir Robert Peel declined to undertake the formation of
a Ministry; Lord Melbourne resumed office, and continued to
be Prime Minister for two years longer; and a crisis was,
for a time, tided over with less friction than one would have
anticipated.
But Earl GrevilLe makes this comment on the situation: “It
is a high trial to our institutions when the wishes of a Princess
of nineteen can overturn a great Ministerial combination.”
Lord Melbourne and his party clearly recognised the awkward-
ness of the position, and did not pretend that the Queen was
right, but, influenced by a feeling of chivalry they determined
to stand by her and consult her fancies in a matter that so
largely concerned her personal happiness and domestic con-
venience. The rule of Sir Robert Peel was therefore post-
poned till the year 1841, and in the meantime Lord Melbourne
had done not a little to promote the negotiations for the
Queen’s marriage with Prince Albert.
The question was revived in 1841, and the Prince Consort
displayed much tact and judgment in avoiding the recurrence
of those difficulties which had frustrated the entrance of Sir
Robert Peel to office two years before. The Queen, he felt,
must not again be open to> any imputation of being governed
by political partisanship or royal caprice. With this view the
Prince consulted Lord Melbourne, and reported the result to
Baron Stockmar as follows: “My communication with Mel-
bourne went off extremely well. 1 explained to- him that T
was naturally under some uneasiness at the present state of
things; that my chief object was the Queen —my sole anxiety
that nothing unconstitutional should be done, and that the
Queen should come out of the crisis this time with more eclat
than she had done on a previous occasion, that it was my
duty and his also, not only to prepare the Queen for the
possible eventuality, but also to come with her to an agree-
ment as to what she and f and he would have to do.”
Now does not every one see that all the elements of a great
tragedy were here, as in the former case? That in the grow-
ing tide of democracy, the throne of England itself would not
have been safe if the Queen had continued* to set up her
wishes against her Ministers and her people, as Rehoboam did
against the advice of the elders and people of Israel? But
whereas in the former case the wiser counsel was given and
disregarded, in the latter the counsel and tact of the Prince
Consort prevailed, and the Queen learnt that if she would be
“a servant unto her people, and would serve them and answer
them, and speak good words to them, then they would be her


servants for ever.” That lesson, harder for her than you and
I can guess, she nobly learned—not easily, as her private cor-
respondence published this last year clearly shows-and was
carried to her grave amid the mourning of a nation
who felt that she had given them of her best, and m
fierce light that beats upon a throne, had proven herselt the
Mother and Servant of her people.
How splendidly our present Sovereign Lord, King Ldwarcl
VII has redeemed the promise he made at his mother s grave,
on his accession to the throne, “to reign as a constitutional
monarch,” and to tread in her footsteps, this is not the time or
place to tell; but to win the title of the “Peacemaker in a
short seven years reign, to be “the most trusted monarch ot
Europe," and the unofficial, but potent, ambassador for good
he is to-day, proves how he too has learned the lesson of m>
text, and is the Servant, and therefore the King of his loyal
P6 ft'was in that school and from such monarchs that our first
Australian Viceroy learned the lesson which made him what
he was. He gained Australia’s love by his intimate knowledge
of Australian life won in personal contact with her sons and
daughters. Wherever the lonely sheep-farmer or miner or
farmer of Australia went, our Governor came, sharing eu
burdens, shaping their aspirations, pointing ever to t
glorious dream of nationhood.
“And she whose feet he taught to tread
The path of empire knows,
When as she sees her sponsor dead,
How deep a debt she owes.”
The reputation he won as Governor of Victoria pointed him
out infallibly as the first Governor-General of the Common-
wealth, and we know with what self-sacrifice, with what battle
against hereditary and constitutional ill-health with what
devotion to duty, with what loyalty to his King, and the conn r>
he loved, he faced the difficult responsibilities of his high office.
And, as he said in Melbourne the other day who knew him
best, “He was a man dominated by a strong sense of duty,
and of duty springing from the deepest and most sacred o
instincts—religion. Born to high rank and ample fortune, he
might well have followed in the footsteps of the gilded youth
who lived a life of selfish ease and pleasure ; but he was not
made that way. A strenuous ancestry and fine tamilv
traditions, as well as clear personal faith and conviction, set
him face forward on a nobler path—the path of duty. And
that path he consistently pursued in striving to serve his
Sovereign, his country, his fellow-men, and his God. Even-
fine gift, every winsome quality he possessed, was comman-
deered” by his conscience to that grand end, so that the
noble work he did was truly the outcome and the evidence of
the noble character he was.” His devotion to duty was like


Wellington’s. He shouldered tasks which he could have
avoided, responsibilities not really his, and the shouldering of
which could bring him no gain.
We need in our young country lives like this, which proclaim
that service alone is kingly and divine. We can all be kings
■thus, and win love and loyalty if, as Christ did, the King of
Kings, we are but content to serve and to perform all
humblest tasks with a gentle unselfishness that shall gild the
lowliest of them with the “light that never was on sea or land.”
It is good for us to know that that life and example are
ours —Australia’s—to copy and to follow, in so far as he
followed Christ. God be thanked our great empire is served
everywhere to-day by men whose service is done at cost to
themselves, who seek but Duty’s iron crown, and because right
is right who follow right, in scorn of consequence. This is the
Royalty that wins loyalty, and better still, that wins the “Well-
done” of Him whose victory came to him through sweat and
pain and battle and the Cross, Who, lifted up, draws all men
unto Him.
Here in Australia is growing up a nation that will be potent
over all the East for good or ill. We have its making in our
hands. We can never make it great or abiding or splendid
among the nations, unless we plant God’s purity and purpose
at its heart. That means at the heart of its young men and
maidens now, in their plastic time and in the nation’s plastic
time. As Henry Lawrence said of his little band at the relief
of Lucknow, “Every man tells.” Ah, yes, my brother, every
man tells, and it is a great God’s-gift to our young nation
that its first Governor-General keyed its note of character and
service so high. His statue will stand on the St. Kilda-road,
but he is already enshrined in the people’s hearts, a
Scotsman and yet Australian, more symbolically Australian
than any man our Federation has yet produced, and by
irresistible popular instinct reckoned one of ourselves. Yes,
“On God and God-like men we build our trust”—for Australia !
“Hush, the Dead March wails in the people’s ears.
The dark crowd moves and there are sobs and tears:
The black earth yawns: the mortal disappears:
Ashes to ashes: dust to dust;
He is gone who seemed so great—
Gone; but nothing can bereave him
Of the force he made his own
Being here, and we believe him
Something far advanced in State;
And that he wears a truer crown
'Phan any wreath that man can weave him.
Speak no more of his renown,
Lay your earthly fancies down,
And in his regal silence leave him.
God accept him, Christ receive him.”
Amen.










