

League of Loyalty to the Empire
And for the Protection of Civil and
Religious Rights.
The Roman Catholic Church
in Australian Politics.
The Menace of Roman Catholicism.
Meeting of the Catholic
Federation.
Archbishop Cerretti.
Message from the Pope.
FROM THE "SUN,” TUESDAY, APRIL, 10th,
1917.
The condition of the Catholic Church in
Australia was flourishing, and its prospects
most promising. To attain them there must
be organisation. The Holy Father, the Pope.,
had commanded him (Archbishop Cerretti) to
give the organisation of the Catholic Federa-
tion his best assistance. They must organise,
organise, organise, etc.
Archbishop Kelly.
The Catholic Church progressed, despite all
opposition, because of organisation. The
Catholic Federation had great potentialities,
etc.
The “Hobart Mercury,” Tasmania, of Fri-
day, February 3, 1917, in a strong article
points out that the Catholic Federation is a
political federation and anti-British.
This Federation boasts that it has a mem-
bership of 50,000 men, besides the women
members.
Dr. Mannix on the
War.
PROTEST FROM THE LAITY.
DEPUTATION REBUFFED.
Melbourne “Argus,” April 6 1917:
The reiterated statements made by Dr.
Mannix to the effect that this is merely a
“trade war” has given deep offence to many
Roman Catholics and more especially to those
whose sons have gone to fight for what they
deem a most righteous cause. As a result of
this feeling a deputation of leading Roman
Catholics recently waited on Archbishop Carr
to protest against utterances that they held
to be disloyal and also inimical to the inter-
ests of the church. Archbishop Carr received
this deputation but declined to take any
action. Dr. Mannix, he said, had a right
to express his opinions on public questions,
and he referred them, therefore, to Dr. Man-
nix himself. On behalf of the deputation, Mr.
Vincent Nolan then wrote to Dr. Mannix,
asking him to receive them, as they wished
to express their disapproval of some of his
public untterances on political questions.
These Mr. Nolan wrote, were in their opinion,
opposed to the interests of the church, and
they were alien to Australian sentiment.
In the course of his reply, Dr. Mannix said
that he had in the first instance seen Mr.
Nolan’s letter in the press. Had the request
been made in common courtesy, and had
there been any useful purpose to serve, he


would have received the deputation, but in
the circumstances he would decline to re-
ceive them.
The laymen’s position is that, if a priest,
no matter how exalted his rank, chooses to
take part in purely secular affairs, his
priestly office can in no wise protect him
from criticism, for he speaks not with any
priestly authority, but as an ordinary man.
He invites criticism, and the church from
which he derives his authority confers on him
no right to forbid criticism. Holding this
view*, leading Catholics have decided, that
the matter shall not be allowed to drop
merely because they have been rebuffed by
the Coadjutor-Archbishop.
Extract from the “Australian Statesman
and Mining Standard,” February 1, 1917:
If we look the situation fairly in the face,
we must see that, if the contention of the
Protestants of Queensland be justified, there
is nothing for them to do but to start a cam-
paign to prevent the Catholic Church from
obtaining in the Government of the State a
power out of all proportion to the degree of
influence it is entitled to, either on a nume-
rical or on an educational basis. There is, in
fact, something worse than' sectarianism in
politics, and that is, sectarianism in the gov-
ernment of a country. That is the sort of
thing which, where the favoured sect is not
in an overwhelming majority, makes sectar-
ianism in politics inevitable; and that is why
the growing influence of the Roman Catholic
Church in Queensland has to be met in that
State by very strong and aggressive action.
For Protestants to sit down and allow Catho-
lics to obtain dominance in the State would
be equivalent to signing their own death-
warrant .
Roman Catholics in this country are very
ready to talk of themselves as a persecuted
Church, and are fond of complaining of the
narrow sectarianism of their opponents. Ex-
fanaticism on the part of Roman Catholics
is not sectarianism in their eyes. Does it
never occur to them to ask themselves why
it is that there should be a bitterly anti-
Catholic element in every country where
Roman Catholicism is powerful, while one
never hears of anti-Presbyterianism, or anti-
Methodism, or anti-Anglicanism (except
where the English Church is established by
law, the objection even in that case not being
to the Church, but to the establishment) ? Is
there any particular reason why the Roman
Church should be the object of an opposition
from which other western Christian churches
are free? There is a reason, and a very
cogent one. It is that the Roman Catholic
Church is not only a Church, but also a poli-
tical organisation. It is not content, as are
the Protestant bodies, witff endeavoring to
minister to the souls of men; it aims at get-
ting control over all men, not only those who
belong to it, but also those beyond the pale;
and, where it has the power, we know it is
invariably exercised against religious liberty,
against freedom of thought, against scientific
progress, and against decmociat c ideas. The
Church is reactionary in the extreme; but it
is more than reactionary; it is tyrannical; it
is grasping; it is intolerant. That is why a
very large proportion of the populations of
countries that have been the most extremely
Catholic in the world —Italy, Spain, Portugal
—have become bitterly anti-clerical, and, out
of their hatred for the Church, have drifted
away from Christianity altogether. In any
country where the Catholic Church holds
sway, it will not allow freedom to Protestant
worship, except where it realises that an
exercise of its power in the direction of such
a curtailment of liberty would react against
itself.
There may be people who delude themselves
into the belief that in a free country such as
Australia the Roman Catholic Church would
never dare to abuse any power it might ob-
tain. That is true to a very great extent. It
would never dare, for example, to act as it has
acted in several Catholic countries that might
be named; but it, nevertheless, could achieve
much that it never ought to be allowed to
achieve. Where it is given the greatest free-
dom, it uses it for the overthrow of the power
that protects and cherishes it. This was
what it did in France, where its treacherous
efforts to subvert the republic led to the
rooting out of the Church's monastic and
teaching institutions. The power it sought to
obtain in freedom-loving France, it will not
scruple to snatch at in freedom-loving Austra-
lia. Indeed, it has been doing so. It has
been setting itself deliberately for some time
past to obtaining a thorough grip of the
Federal and State Public Services. It is not
only Queensland where the menace is realised.
Having regard to these facts, we can
only repeat what we have already said, that
there is a vwse thing than sectarianism in
politics, and that is, sectarianism in
the government of the country; and with that,
unfortunately, the country is permeated. We
hold then that, greatly as the necessity for
introducing sectarianism into politics is to be
regretted, the Roman Catholic Church has
made it inevitable.
THE LOYALTY OF THE
CHURCH.
“Australian Statesman and Mining Standard”
February 1, 1917.
We have dealt above with the grip which
the R. C. Church is obtaining on the gov-
ernment of the country, but the fact would,
perhaps, to a large extent, have passed un-
noticed had it not been for the degree of dis-
loyalty it has displayed since the outbreak of
the war. The disloyalty is not universal.
There are some priests who have acted as
patriotically as could be wished, but they
are, unfortunately, a hopelessly small minor-
ity. . . . We are precluded from thinking
that the Roman Catholic Church’s attitude
was due to any mistake in conception of what
was consistent with loyalty by the fact that
it is notorious that ever since the beginning
of the war there have been priests, and a very
large number of priests, guilty of deliberate


discouragement of their flock from enlisting.
There have even been much more open proofs
of disloyalty than this. For instance, there
were thirty priests arrived here a few days
ago from Great Britain. On the voyage out
these individuals not only argued openly
against enlistment, but conducted special
prayers for the repose of the soul of the exe-
cuted traitor, Casement, and walked out in a
body from the saloon when the National
Anthem was sung. These men, it is needless
to say, were Irishmen; and practically the
whole body of Catholic disloyalists in Austra-
lia are Irishmen also. One cannot help
wondering why the Church has imported to
this country at such a time men of this stamp.
Are they brought here to help to sow the seed
of disloyalty, and what is the Government doing
to allow creatures of this sort to land in this,
one of the King’s dominions? This is only
one of scores of instances of the gross dis-
loyalty of the Irish Catholic priest; and it is
not the least of the evils of the situation that
the Roman Catholic Church in Australia
could be even more Irish than Catholic. That
is probably a circumstance from which the
Catholic Church itself will suffer severely, for
the attitude of the Irish in regard to the war
is arousing here, as in Great Britain and
Canada, and even the United States of
America, a bitterly hostile feeling towards the
Irish race. If they are regarded as shirkers
and as traitors they have only themselves to
blame; but what is certain is that the Roman
Catholic Church will share that blame, and
will suffer for it when those who have sent
their sons to death and those who have taken
part in the defence of Empire, and have
survived the ordeal, come to reckon up
the work done by the Catholic Church
during the war. We could not at any
time afford to allow the Catholic Church to
obtain the control of the affairs of the Com-
monwealth or any of the States of the Com-
monwealth; but least of all can we afford it
at a time when the nation is at war and the
Church has shown itself as a body disloyal to
the Empire and unsympathetic towards its
Allies.
Interview with Mr. Meagher.
“Sydney Morning Herald,” of March 26th, 1917:—
“I have no excuse to make,” said Mr.
Meagher, yesterday. “I have a committee
whose loyalty and devotion to me, in spite of
subtle influence —in spite of insult, boycott,
terrorism, and even physical violence —I shall
ever remember. ‘’Tis not in the power of
mortals to command success’ : they certainly
deserved it.
“I have been beaten by a two to one ma-
jority in a constituency wilich gave the most
marked negative vote against conscription of
any constituency in the State.
“Whilst the aggregate vote in West Sydney
Federal constituency was, Yes 7059, No 17,873,
the portion which comprised the Phillip con-
stituency voted Yes 1596, No 7632.
“To have reduced this vote down to two to
one amidst a saturnalia of sectarianism and a
veritable hurricane of hate, I feel is no mean
performance.
“I was fully aware of the stupendous task,
but I could not leave it in the mouth of any
slanderer to say I was scared out of any
constituency for fearlessly doing my duty in
answer to my country’s, call.
“Even as these adverse figures stood, I was
confident of surmounting the difficulty and
placing the flag of victory on the position,
but for the intrusion of the foetid issue of
sectarianism.
“The first blast of this in the campaign in
a constituency largely Roman Catholics was
the assiduous dissemination of a report that
I had insulted the administrator of St. Bene-
dict’s Church by refusing to see him when he
called at the Town Hall in relation to rates
on St. Benedict’s property.
“Then I had the strange spectacle of al-
leged Labour men who, 12 months before,
were singing my praises for bringing a plank
of the Labour platform into operation (tax-
ation on unimproved land values) helping to
condemn me in mock indignation at increased
rates on St. Benedict’s Church. Still the
hurricane increased in velocity by a wicked
concoction that I caused a reverend gentle-
man, who was an active opponent of conscrip-
tion, to be removed from St. Benedict’s.
“The ‘Catholic Press/ a few weeks back
contained an account of a public farewell to
the rev. gentleman, and, although the mem-
ber for the district, I had not even the court-
esy of an invitation, but a gratuitous insult
instead. The newspaper reports: ‘Dr. Twomey
said that the memorable event of the year
1916 (.conscription) had left a lasting Impres-
sion on the people of St. Benedict’s. He was
not sorry to see there were no political hum-
bugs there that night.’
“I have no hesitation in saying that if I was
Grand Master of the L.O.L. I could not have
had more venom and malevolence projected
against me, than I have experienced these
last few weeks —and, in many cases, frenzied
epithets applied by individuals out of whose
homes I have taken the bailiffs, and in other


So great had this menace become in Queensland that it became
necessary for the other churches to organise for their own protection.
In Brisbane, on January 23, at an Enormous Meeting
in the Exhibition Building, the
League of Loyalty to the Empire and for the
Protection of Civil and Religious Rights
■ ■ ~— nun —hi ii *hi I.IHMII—i .1 i i ——■ "
Was Organised.
Mr. T. M. HALL, M.L.C., then submitted the following resolution
This meeting expresses its hearty approval of the objects of the league, to wit : I. —To
maintain loyalty to the throne, the unity of the Empire, and to promote the national develop-
ment of Australia. 2. — To uphold civil and religious freedom and equality for all citizens.
3. —To resist any encroachment on the rights and privileges of the people of the Roman
Cath die or any church or organisation. • 4 To maintain the national system of education,,
without endowment, concession or privilege in any form to any denominational or p ivate
schools. s—To5 —To secure just and equitable distribution of patronage, employment, and
promotion in the public Service of the Sta e. 6. —To return to Parliament and other public
positions men whose character and principles are in accord with the objects of the league.
And this meeting commends the *bovenamed objects to the favorable support of the citizens
who desire civil, political, and religious justice for all persons irrespective of ecclesiastical,
creed, or political party.
Branches are now being Formed throughout Australia.
JOIN THE SYDNEY LEAGUE.
COLLECT AND CONTRIBUTE TO ITS FUNDS.
Office of League : “ DAILY TELEGRAPH ” BUILDING, King St. (sth Floor.)
Open TUESDAY and FRIDAY, 9.30 to 11.30 a,m.
cases the bread they eat obtained from posi-
tions they pestered me to get.
“In this extraordinary campaign I have been
engaged throwing germicide on seething com
coctions by day, and combating hostile hordes
by night—and all because I exercised my
freedom of judgment in a matter the deter-
mination of which largely affects the fate of
Christianity and civilisation.
“If my defeat has brought joy and satis-
faction to sectarian zealots, I can assure them
that the consciousness of putting up a chival-
rous fight against malevolent odds leaves me
a serenity of conscience which will be perma-
nent when their delirium of triumph has
vanished.
“After strenuous years, I can enjoy a rest.
and then come back to the track and make
fresh records for democracy.
“As late as August last, the members of
the Labour Council and P.L.L. Executive
placed on record congratulations to me as a
Labour man and democrat. Before October
I was a little demi-god, after October I was a
demon. If time was put back, and the Octo-
ber issue reviewed, I would act again pre-
cisely in the same way—for the Empire,
Liberty and Humanity —if I lost 50 seats.
*
“When I look at the empty chairs in the
homes of the people of this State, left by
brave lads who gave their lives that we may
live. I look on the sacrifice of my political life
at Phillip as small and paltry, and I rejoice
to know that after this hurricane of hate from
the worst elements of society my spirit of
loyalty is unconquered and unconquerable.”
fits.
H. Cock & Co., Print, 200 Castlereagh-st., Sydney.
