

SECOND EDITION
Containing a Criticism received by the Author ,
and his Reply thereto.
The Policy of the Future
AFTER THE WAR
How Germany should be Treated
and Controlled, and how Permanent
Peace, Commercial and Industrial
Progress, and the Federation of all
Nations may be attained
BY
WILLIAM HARDING
4 BRIDGE STREET. SYDNEY
N.S WALES




SECOND EDITION
Containing a Criticism received by the Author ,
and his Reply thereto.
The Policy of the Future
AFTER THE WAR
How Germany should be Treated
and Controlled, and how Permanent
Peace, Commercial and Industrial
Progress, and the Federation of all
Nations may be attained
BY
WILLIAM HARDING
4 BRIDGE STREET. SYDNEY
N. S WALES '




The Policy of the Future
After the War.
press extracts from a speech of Lord
Bryce, British Ambassador to Washington, with
|| % the opinions of two British critics thereon, pub-
lished in the “Sunday Times,” afford excellent
material and opportunity to raise and intelligently consider
the greatest question of the near future, and to clearly per-
ceive the only right and practical way that the Divine
purpose for which the drastic War in Europe is being
fought may be achieved.
The extracts quoted from the speech of Lord Bryce
deserve repeating and are as follows: —
“Let us repress the spirit of hatred.”
“Is it wise to talk of banning a whole people for all
time to come?”
“The talk we now hear about starting, after peace has
been concluded, a new war of trade to follow the
peace of arms, has immense capacities of mischief.”
“Such a trade war would prolong, would embitter
afresh, those hatreds that ought to be allowed to die.”
These opinions are adversely and severely criticised by
Major Norton Griffiths, M.P.; while they are favourably
reviewed and supported by Sir Mark Sykes, M.P.
The criticism of Major Norton Griffiths, who opens his
attack by jumping at conclusions that are in no sense indi-
cated or justified by the words of Lord Bryce, is throughout
particularly faulty and unsound.
From the views advanced by Major Griffiths on the
whole subject it would appear that he possesses a very
indifferent knowledge of ethics and economies, with little
idea of first principles and of the undeviating course of
the laws of the Universe.


Major Griffiths fails to realise that he is a unit of the
Universe, and that the peoples of all Nations are equally so.
Major Griffiths entirely forgets that poor misguided
and obsessed Germany and her satellites are likewise a
part of the whole, and that it is physically impossible to
cast them off the face of the globe, even if such barbarous
thought could be ethically justified.
All this muddled conception regarding actual facts
has afflicted Major Griffiths with distressing night-
mares that prevent him from realising that the policy
he indicates is in essence the same old stupid disregard of
the real truth that lias been indulged in for many genera-
tions past, the natural result of which has culminated in the
present disastrous War having to be fought as being the
only effective means of clearing the way for making a fresh
start on a sound foundation in full harmony with the laws
of Nature which are God’s laws, and by which we each and
every one of us (even the World’s enemy, Germany) live
and move and have our being.
Major Griffiths has conjured up a fiction of Germany
awaiting opportunity to dump some £300,000,000 worth of
accumulated goods on Britain and has allowed himself to
become obsessed with the view that the only preventative
means is to institute a trade war.
He would obviously set up a tariff wall against imports
from Germany, blindly ignoring the fact that such course
would neither punish nor hinder Germany, and that the cost
of such mistaken policy would be borne and paid for by the
British Empire consumers.
The extent of the burden thus mistakenly inflicted, not
upon Germany, but upon the Empire, would be limited
only by the amount of the unnatural impost, while if an
absolute prohibition against German imports were set
it would still be futile.
The goods would filter in freely through neutral coun-
tries. Germany would still dispose of her products, while


the Empire consumers would carry the burden and pay the
.cost.
Major Griffiths suggests that it is neither hatred nor
friendship we want. But does he suppose for a moment
that his policy would not foster most bitter feelings and
create disruption that would grow apace, until within a
short season the whole world would become again involved
in hideous war?
“That which a man soweth, that shall he also reap”
was ever true and always will be.
It is a proven fact in Nature that result of action by
thought or deed is certain, and that the product will be the
exact counterpart of such action. There is no possibility
of escaping from the unerring course of that powerful and
just law. Therefore it is imperatively important that no
mistake must be made at the conclusion of the War in
regard to the future, and that the right course, and only
the right course must be followed if we expect to secure
permanent peace, progress, the general uplifting of
humanity, and the full possibilities that are now being so
nobly fought for under such heavy sacrifice.
There is, or will be with the conclusion of the War, a
way out of the unhappy chaos into which the whole world
has fallen as a result of past errors by wholesale disregard
of the controlling forces of Nature, but let us make no
mistake about it, there is only one way.
The first matter to be considered is—What should the
Allies do with Germany when the time arrives for arrang-
ing terms and conditions of cessation from hostilities?
The German Nation has undoubtedly fallen to a very
low standard under the domination of Prussian militarism
and unbridled greed, while her people have become
obsessed by the Spirit of Darkness and hypnotized into
believing their cause to be just, and the contest to have
been deliberately forced upon them.
Blinded by this baneful obsession Germany has, as we


know, been guilty of a continued series of barbarism such
as would almost make a savage of the South Sea Islands
blush, but she is unable to realise the fact of her own
insanity, and believes the Allies (and especially England)
to be the aggressors who are wholly responsible for the
War instead of herself.
A calm and charitable review of the position therefore
compels the conclusion that Germany is suffering under a
wave of insanity and that her people are utterly irrespon-
sible for their actions.
Under her present unfortunate mental affliction it is
unthinkable that the Allies could place any reliance in
her, but she should and must be placed under restraint
and control, with the dual purpose of protecting her against
her own madness, and also to make certain that she shall
not again commit barbarous onslaughts upon the rest of
the World.
Germany has a huge debt to pay, but she should and
no doubt will be compelled by the Allies to face the ordeal
to the fullest extent that is humanly possible.
A vast amount of the suffering, cowardly acts of bar-
barism and heartless conduct wrought by our enemy can
never be rectified, but everything that it is humanly pos-
sible to restore and pay for should be rigorously enforced
to the full, even if by annual instalments the required
indemnity may take 300 years or more to complete.
It may also be accepted as a certainty that the dicta-
tion of terms will become the prerogative of the Allies,
because they are engaged upon a just and righteous cause.
The task of defending themselves and the rest of the
World from the attempted domination of Prussian militar-
ism, which would be worse than slavery, has been earnestly
and vigorously undertaken by the Allies with a single-
minded fixed determination to carry it to a victorious
ending.
The terms of settlement with our enemies should in


elude the confiscation of their fleets and the Colonies that
have been captured. They should, in addition, be com-
pelled to restore the destruction they have wrought in
Belgium, France, Poland, Servia, and lioumauia, and in
addition a heavy indemnity should be demanded to cover
the costs of the Allies in prosecuting the War, while armies
of occupation should also be placed in possession to ensure
compliance with the terms arranged.
The debt incurred by the enemy is indeed a heavy one,
but it was entirely self-imposed, while their conduct
throughout does not reveal one redeeming feature that
might warrant the slightest consideration by way of modi-
fication.
His 40 years of deceitful intriguing preparation for
the launching of his nefarious scheme to capture the world
while asleep and off its guard, is in itself sufficient to
justify the Allies in firmly adhering to a demand for the
fullest reparation by Germany. And it is right that the
task imposed should be substantial in order that the lesson
may be thoroughly learned and appreciated.
We have now reached a stage in the discussion at
which all persons who are acquainted with, and possess a
fair understanding of the doctrine of reincarnation, may
realise how completely the above suggested scheme is in
accord with Nature. And, remembering the undeviating
certainty of that powerful and just law that returns to the
sower that which he has sown, the vast possibilities that
will be presented for right development of the future of all
Nations should become apparent if only the true and
natural course is adopted.
As Lord Bryce, as well as other thinkers have force-
fully asserted, we have no moral right to hate the enemy,
and we can profit nothing by adopting such mistaken
policy.
On the contrary, we should fill our hearts with pity for
his unhappy misfortune in having fallen under the spell


of the aecursed influence by which he has become obsessed;
and, with his vision and mind falsely coloured, he is unable
to see and appreciate the true facts, but instead believes
his unholy avarice and acts of barbarism to be a righteous
dispensation that he has been specially directed by the
Divine Ruler of the Universe to spread over the face of
the globe.
Is it possible to conceive any greater misfortune than
this lamentable affliction having fallen upon a section of
humanity ?
Does such condition of mind denote any other than
thorough lunacy?
And yet withal it becomes our duty not to lose control
of our own sanity by falling into the same error that
entrapped our poor misguided enemy.
By all means we are entitled to and should place him
under thorough restraint and control, but we should also
afford him the opportunity and even assist him to work off
and to recover from the affliction.
There are many no doubt who may regard such sugges-
tion antagonistically and as being utterly utopian and im-
possible. But for a professing Christian to condemn the
scheme in such manner w r ould amount to hypocrisy, and
must equally denote that his conception of Christianity,
Ethics and Economics, is of exceptionally low standard,
and is encompassed within distressingly narrow limits.
Does the assertion require illustrating to point to its
accuracy? If it does, then wherein lies the consistency of
the Christian whose creed embraces brotherly love and the
brotherhood of mankind, who can find joy and justification
in completely boycotting and banishing a large number of
his fellows in heartless effort to achieve the impossible?
How could any sound Christian reconcile such conduct
with the teaching, “That which a man soweth, that shall
he also reap,” >
Surely then it is wise to pause and carefully consider


whether there is not a better way, lest we fail into error and
become afflicted with the same malady as that of our mis-
guided brothers whom we sanctimoniously claim a right
to hate and to destroy by economic warfare, being goaded
into such fatal mistakes by a rash and brutal desire for
vengeance.
The Way Out.
The all-important subject relating to the course that
should be followed at the conclusion of the war, and par-
ticularly what should be done with or unto Germany has
been vigorously, variously, and seriously discussed.
On the platform, in the Parliaments of the Empire and
of the Allies, and at the Paris Conference the policy of the
future has been accorded exceptional attention, but alas!
the views that so far have found expression by prominent
political leaders sadly “miss the ’bus.”
All Nations, however, appear to be in unanimous agree-
ment that there must be some material economic reconstruc-
tion of policy made by the Empire and her Allies, as well
as probably by Neutrals also.
Exactly! Of such necessity there is nothing that is
more positively certain if we hope and intend to profit by
and take proper advantage of past experiences, and the
opportunity that is being nobly fought for under such
heavy sacrifices by the Armies and the Navies of the
Empire and her Allies.
The very purpose for which the terrible War in
Europe is being fought arose out of its positive necessity,
because there was no other way to clear the road for the
future.
The great task imposed and enforced upon the Allies
by the War was the only effective means by which the
wmrld could be rescued from the chaos in which it had
become involved as the natural result of its own error
and persistent disregard of right principles and sound
legislation throughout a vast number of generations;


while the earnest and cheerful manner in which that
task has been prosecuted in the face of cruel privations
and difficulties stands as a great monument to the sacri-
fice by the men of all the Armies who are offering their
lives in order that permanent peace and prosperity
throughout the world, and the uplifting of humanity, may
become a reality.
Remembering all these facts, which are indisputable,
we shall criminally fail in our duty if we neglect to grasp
the opportunity which is about to be presented to us
simultaneously with the ending of the War to make good
by the adoption of right and scientific methods that will
ensure a long reign of peaceful happiness, progress, and
prosperity throughout the world.
That glorious ideal may be realised with positive
certainty, but there is one way, and one way only, by
which such universally much-desired conditions can pos-
sibly be attained.
Yes, as all expressed opinions have invariably ad-
mitted, there must be a thorough reconstruction of
economic systems.
But we must be practical and know how to do it.
We must recognise the economic Principles that will
enable the results we desire to be attained, because again
remembering the unerring force in Nature which gives
forth results that are the exact counterpart of the basic
cause or action, it will be impossible to attain right
results unless full reliance is placed in the Divine Prin-
ciples which govern the Universe, and our systems of
National intercourse are in full harmony therewith.
There must be no faltering. There must be no further
tampering and tinkering with the Principles.
The fusty, immoral, unscientific, and indefensible
methods of the old order must be abandoned and a new
departure must be made on a solid foundation that is
both ethically, and economically, sound.


The New Way, or Policy of the Future.
A pronounced feature of this discussion has submitted
that the cause of the world’s present-day troubles, stag-
nation and suffering is mainly due to the persistent dis-
regard of the unerring Forces and Principles of Nature
which govern the Universe, and the consequent conflict
-and disorder that is created by man’s inconsistent legis-
lation being so largely foreign to and out of harmony
with those natural laws and conditions by which we live,
and move, and have being.
We must get right back to Nature therefore, right
back to First Principles.
The present-day stupid, unnatural, and unrighteous
systems of restriction must be discarded and superseded
by systems of perfect and complete freedom.
The huge mass of complicated, confused and contra-
dictory Statutes that impose unjust taxation, as well as
inflict a vast number of other improper burdens upon
Commerce and Industry, must be east upon the scrap-
heap as speedily as possible.
Indeed, there should be no need for taxation, nor
would there be any such necessity if proper systems and
methods were universally adopted.
Such assertion is, of course, likely to inspire the
question:—lf there is no taxation where is the revenue
to come from?
That question is, however, very easily answered, and
perhaps the best method of doing so may be by sub-
mitting another question, viz.:—Where does the revenue
really come from now under our stupid systems of heaped
taxation and confiscation, that inflict so much injustice?
There is only one source from which all wealth is
produced, namely, the land. Consequently, revenue ob-
tained by our present erroneous systems really comes from
The land, and it will and must always continue to do so,


because there is no other source from which in actual
reality it can come.
Land and labour are the two important factors of
production, and land brought into productive use by its
active co-partner, labour, produces all the wealth that is
obtained throughout the world.
Man is a land animal, and he cannot exist without
land, and because of man’s necessities for sustenance,
which are derivable solely from the land, the economic
value of land is a community-created, or State-earned
value, and that value unquestionably belongs to the
community, and should be appropriated for communal
purposes as the means of providing the revenue that is
required for the national upkeep.
Land is only valuable because it will supply all the
requirements of man. consequently it is the presence and
needs of the community that give the economic or State-
earned value to the land.
As it cannot be denied that the land is the source
from which all wealth is produced, and also as it cannot
be denied that the economic or State-earned value of land
is created by the community and not by any individual
holder or user, and further, as it cannot be denied that
the economic or State-earned value of land will provide
all the revenue that is required for the national ex-
chequer, it follows that appropriation of such State-earned
value by the Crown is all that becomes necessary for
purposes of revenue.
Therefore in support of a preceding assertion that
taxation is not an actual necessity as a means of obtain-
ing revenue, the following illustration should make the
fact clear: —
A tax is a Statutory impost that takes from a person
by way of tribute something that he has earned or pro-
duced by his individual effort or results of his industry.


But, inasmuch as it is an undeniable fact that the
economic or State-earned value of land is a community-
created value, and is not something that has been pro-
duced by the personal exertion of an individual holder
or user of an area of land, it should be clear that appro-
priation of that value by the Crown is in reality not a tax.
Such appropriation by the Crown only takes what
in fact belongs to and has been produced by the Com-
munity to be used for national requirements.
No defensible argument can possibly be raised in
opposition to the equity, simplicity and perfection of
such a system and means of obtaining the necessary
public revenue.
liesting upon such a solid foundation, the construc-
tion of the superstructure will not be confined within
limits, but its development and the degree of perfection
to which it may attain, will be to the fullest extent just
what the combined wisdom and efforts of the peoples
of all nations prove themselves capable of. Freedom is
man’s natural heritage with which he is endowed by his
Creator, and Restriction has no place amongst the Divine
Laws by which the Universe is governed.
Throughout past generations man in blind disregard
of the reality of his own existence as an atom of the
Universe and an Expression of the Divine Ruler, while
professing and preaching brotherhood and brotherly love,
has strangely and inconsistently fettered himself, his
commerce and industry, and his fellows throughout the
globe by legislative shackles.
Gradually, but surely, with the forging of each restric-
tive link of the many chains with which he has bound
himself, bis troubles have increased. Out of one disorder
a vast number of others have grown as a natural sequence
with increasing rapidity and magnitude. World wide
strife, bitterness and general unrest have grown apace,


until the climax has been reached, and the huge bubble has
burst out in a distressing war and with the whole world
involved in chaos.
There is nothing particularly new in regard to the
basic principles of the scheme herein proposed.
Such reform ideals have been vigorously and ably
advocated by many earnest devotees very many times
before, but the opportunity to bring such new methods into
practical reality has not been available.
To attempt to set up a perfect system of freedom
and free trade in an isolated portion of the World (such
as one State, Country or Nation) surrounded on all sides
by Nations practising policies of restriction and the in-
justice that unholy system breeds, would be comparable
with a small oasis in the centre of a vast desert in respect
of possibilities of progressive development.
Nor has the time arrived to-day when this mighty
reform may be successfully launched, but it will arrive
simultaneously with the conclusion of the war and the
arranging of the conditions of peace.
Let us consider for a moment what a vast change has
taken place since the declaration of war, and has continued
to make strongly during the course of the war in the
direction of great possibilities for the future.
What a cementing of hearts and minds took place like a
flash upon the declaration of war?
What a remarkable and laudable sinking of differences
occurred almost instantly between both men and Nations?
A great wave of happy welding swept over the face
of the globe, gathering force as it moved onward, solidly
determined to combine in furthering every good purpose.
And also what strong feelings of gratitude must there
be extended by Neutrals towards the Empire and her
Allies for the masterly and noble manner in which they
have thwarted the hideous machinations of the world’s
enemy.


It is openly admitted by Political Leaders throughout
the Empire and the Allied Nations that with the conclusion
of the War there must be material revision and reconstruc-
tion of economic policy.
Then what insurmountable difficulty is there standing
in the way of Lord Tennyson’s vision of the Federation of
the World, and thereby to make material advance towards
the goal of God’s plan and purpose for humanity?
Nothing! There is absolutely and positively nothing
that need or should be permitted to block the way to speedy
realisation of the Federation of the World built upon a
solid foundation of perfect freedom.
Freedom to produce, and freedom to exchange by and
with all Nations is a right ideal that is in perfect accord
with Nature.
With a fiscal policy purged of restrictive taxation,
and the many other forms of restriction that are imposed
upon Commerce and Industry which are equally un-
natural, but which, as a natural sequence, are the pro-
duct of a system of unsound fiscalism; and with
the artificial International barriers broken down and
replaced by pure freetrade between all nations, what
vast possibilities of healthy growth and sound develop-
ment would immediately arise!
Further, there could be no fear of underhand or
unfair competition by the enemy, because his own internal
taxation necessary to provide funds wherewith to pay
off the war costs will render it impossible for him to
become a menace to the world, either in trading, or by
other means.
Of course the enemy cannot be admitted into the
Federation at present on equal terms with other Nations.
He has a huge debt to discharge first, and he must
also be perfectly cured of his obsession and regain his
sanity before any reliance can be placed upon his promises
and undertakings.


But there is positively no necessity to erect a tariff
wall against him in order to keep him in cheek and under
control. And there need be no reason to fear that he will
dump upon England, as Major Norton Griffiths asserts,
£300,000,000 worth of accumulated goods to her disad-
vantage.
If the right course is followed, and as a condition of
peace the enemy is compelled to pay a full indemnity, then
he and his subjects will be kept busy for many generations,
and the heavy internal annual tribute all his subjects
will be compelled to provide in order to meet the war
obligations, will leave them little more than a bare margin
of subsistence.
Moreover, enemy subjects will not be able to spread
themselves over the globe as they did formerly, scheming
and intriguing. They will be kept too busy at home
providing the inland revenue to pay off the war costs,
and the erstwhile fatherly Government of the Fatherland
will be unable to subsidise its subjects and set them up
in business abroad, as was done in the past, because the
war obligations will leave no funds available for such
purpose.
In after years when he has fulfilled his indemnity
obligation, and has recovered from his obsession and
become sane, the open hand of fellowship may be ex-
tended to him on equal terms with the rest of the World
and the Federation wholly completed.
A great and grave responsibility is cast upon the
Political Leaders of the Empire and her Allies to see to
it that they do not fail to embrace the opportunity to
lift humanity out of the chaos into which it has fallen.
The course is clear and certain, and there is no
valid reason why it should not be taken. But if it is
neglected and refused, those who hold possession of the
reins, will assuredly have to pay the penalty for missed
opportunity.


And, if the opportunity to institute the necessary
reform is not seized, the day of tribulation will certainly
follow, and may fall upon us sooner than might ordinarily
be anticipated.
Almost immediately another war of even greater
magnitude, and more completely disastrous, may be
looked for.
Indeed, it has been simmering for years past with
constantly repeated outbreaks, while each outbreak proves
more difficult to subdue than its predecessor, and the dis-
order which is spreading and gaining force throughout
the world is already getting out of hand and beyond
control.
Ihe war between Capital and Labour, the fascinating,
deceptive, mischievous, and impossible policy and demands
of machine-made Socialism are factors that must be faced,
and which have been created and grown to present un-
happy degree, purely by reason of our foolish adherence
to systems of restriction instead of adopting the natural
law of freedom.
This truth may not be altogether palatable, but it is
a fact that cannot be successfully controverted.
The only way in which the hideous and rapidly-
spreading cancer can be dealt with is to remove the cause.
Therefore, if the surgeon’s knife is not applied, in
the only way to successfully treat the malady, as soon
as the right opportunity to do so becomes available, rest
assured the whole world will very speedily be involved
in a factional civil war which will eventually prove more
destructive and disastrous than the present war in
Europe, even great as has been the sacrifice and suffering
it has caused.
Two admirable contributions upon the subject of
after-War policy have been published, which are well
worth careful perusal, “An Occult View of the War,”


by Mr. C. W. Leadbeater; and “The War and After,
bv Sir Oliver Lodge.
These works deal with the subject and the basic
Principles involved in a masterly manner, and from a
standpoint of knowledge and authority that should im-
part inspiration and confidence.
Amongst many other valuable statements, Sir Oliver
Lodge says:— “Freedom is the Watchword of humanity.
This it is which was conferred upon us by Divine Charter,
which may not be revoked.”
Will any sensible person venture to dispute that fact?
Then why continue to divorce freedom, and truckle
with restriction that has already proved so utterly false
and destructive ?
In view of all the unhappy experiences of the past,
and the evidence of what hitherto erroneous systems have
led to, shall we continue to be so foolish as to continue
on similar lines of blundering?
But, at the conclusion of the War, when the time
arrives to make a new departure, should we not instead
start confidently out upon the open road with a reform
policy that is straight as an arrow in its purpose, clean-
cut as a diamond in its form, and which is in perfect
accord with Divine Law and the Scheme of human
progress?
We have no moral right to ignore the Call, and will
certainly suffer most severely if we do so.


A Criticism received, and the
Author’s Reply.
The author desires to acknowledge the receipt of a
strong criticism of his views, and at the same time wishes
to thank his critic for the attention he has devoted to the
matter, and for his exhaustive and courteous discussion of
the subject.
For private reasons our critic does not wish his name
to appear, and, consequently, his wishes in that regard must
he respected.
In order that the criticism and reply may be clearly
followed, and also to be perfectly fair, the objections raised
are reproduced herein in the form and as they have been
submitted.
By means of a reply to the criticism an effort will be
made to remove some apparent misconceptions, and to
■effectively answer other objections which are held to be
■erroneous.
It will be noted that these objections (which it is pro-
posed to answer seriatim), are set out by our critic under
six separate headings and are as follows:
The Criticism.
The Problems—
The title of the booklet indicates the main problem
purported to be dealt with, viz.:
(1) “The Policy of the Future after the War.”
The subsidiary but related questions are stated by
the explanation following the title, viz.:


(2) “ How Germany should be treated and controlled.
(3) “How Permanent Peace ”i(may be attained).
(4) {How) “ Commercial and Industrial Progress ”
{may be attained).
(5) {How) “The Federation of all Nations may be
attained.”
The numerals are not the author’s, but are inserted
to emphasise the separate problems.
A Criticism of the Author’s Treatment of the
Problems,
(1) The first problem (by itself) is not stated
clearly or forcibly, and it is too indefinite. This
applies also to its treatment in the booklet. The
policy is seemingly “freedom” in production and
exchange, also no restrictive taxation, whilst
the adoption of this policy by all nations is
evidently intended. No emphasis, however, is laid
on the latter. Altogether, an obviously more
appropriate designation of the problem would
seem to be: “International Freedom — the Policy
of the Future.” “After the War” is tautology.
(2) The reader is rather amazed to find that those
weighty subjects (involving the destinies of
nations) are dealt with —seemingly to the satis-
faction of the author —within the scope of 16
pages. The justification for brevity in the
treatment of such big problems would be over-
whelming arguments —but these are not at all
apparent.
(3) Whilst all the questions (except the first) are
clearly set out, no attempt is made to deal with
any one of them specifically, and consequently
the arguments are not assembled in logical
sequence, and considerable ingenuity is required
to apply them directly to any of the particular
questions at issue.


(4) “Freedom” appears to be the keynote of the
arguments right through the booklet, and con-
sidering “freedom” is largely a relative term,
it does not always show up to advantage. For
example: Whilst the resolutions of the Paris
Conference are denounced as restrictive and
likely to create bitter feelings, future disruptions
and future wars, the imposition of an indemnity
that would take Germany 300 years or more to
pay off, also the placing of armies of occupation
to ensure compliance with peace terms are (on
the other hand) strongly advocated. Does Mr.
Harding call the latter “freedom”? Also, whilst
freedom in production and exchange is considered
necessary, so also is the “ appropriation” of the
State-earned value of land, which would evidently
mean (at any rate in the cases of individuals
holding freehold titles) confiscation of property
“for communal needs,” also a restriction on the
ownership and exchange of land, and in some
cases a restriction in the production from land.
Further, this latter (appropriation of State-earned
value for communal needs) seems to be entirely
contradictory to the opinion expressed later on
regarding the “impossible policy and demands of
machine-made Socialism After all, there is
probably no such thing as the “perfect freedom”
idealised by Mr. Harding. Individuals, society
and the universe are necessarily governed by laws.
Laws imply restriction, restriction implies limi-
tation of freedom, and limitation of freedom is
not “perfect freedom” in any sense. It might
also be argued with reason that restriction is as
much a natural law as freedom; the earth, the
moon, the sun, have all freedom of action within
limits , the freedom being restricted to their func-
tions. They also, as well as man and nations,


are atoms or '‘units” of the universe, governed
by the “divine purpose.” “The divine pur-
pose” is quoted by Mr. Harding as an argument
for ‘ 4 freedom, ’ ’ but there is an obvious confusion
of thought here; for who can say that “the
divine purpose ” will not be accomplished what-
ever differences of opinion exist as to the policy
after the war?
(5) There are a number of seeming contradictions in
the booklet. In one place it is argued that “the
same old stupid disregard of the real truth (evi-
dently by the Allies, since he is combating Major
Griffiths’ argument in favour of allied policy) is
the cause of the present war”; whilst later it is
said to be Germany’s “40 years of deceitful in-
triguing preparation for the launching of a
nefarious scheme to capture the world whilst
asleep!” Whilst later again it is stated that:
“The very purpose for which the terrible war in
Europe is being fought arose out of its positive
necessity—because there was no other way to
clear the road for the future.”
Referring back to paragraph (4) above: Is this
latter explanation of the war “divine purpose,”
or freedom of action by Germany and the Allies?
Again, the criticism of Major Griffiths is mainly
negation. No disproof of the suggested evil effects
or the suggested dumping by Germany of huge
stocks of manufactured goods is offered; but it
is evidently argued by Mr. Harding that a tariff
wall would not stop goods being dumped, and in
that case it is said in effect that they would be paid
for by the country in which they were dumped,
and since they have to be paid for, let their cost
be as low as possible by allowing them in free!
Mr. Harding would have ns believe that this is
sound economics; but he himself admits (and this


seems inconsistent on his part) that “there must
be material revision and reconstruction ot“
economic policy ‘after’ the war,” so why quote out
of date economics? Economic truths (so called)
of yesterday have been found on larger knowledge
in some aspects to have evolved to something quite
different, and there are many experts in economics
who contend that the whole science of economics
will have to be re-written. I will not dwell on
this subject, but Mr. Harding will no doubt re-
member that in the opinion of some economists
before the war, war for any length of time was an
economic impossibility! Further, the decisions of
the Paris Conference —according to newspaper
reports —seem to put Mr. Harding’s contentions
“out of court.” Whilst another report regard-
ing the evil effects of “ dumping ” on Great
Britain is also against his arguments.
(6) The Paris Conference resolutions are only men-
tioned incidentally (though adversely) by Mr.
Harding, but to his critic they would seem to be
more practical and practicable than what is advo-
cated by Mr. Harding; in fact, many of the reso-
lutions are already being given effect to. More-
over. they represent the considered views of
expert economists and experienced men of affairs
who had their nations’ best interests at heart. In
the latter connection it is perhaps not inappro-
priate to remind Mr. Harding (who is fond of
natural laws) of the natural laws of “the survival
of the fittest” and “self preservation.”
(7) Now, regarding Mr. Harding’s obviously pet
theories regarding free trade and single tax. I
would remind him of Sir George Reid’s (an erst-
while free trade apostle) recent admission that the
war had altered all preconceived notions about
free trade with Germany in future; also of the


fact that as far as the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia is concerned it is generally agreed by
political parties that the present fiscal policy will
not be altered in substance until her necessary
manufacturing industries are on a sound founda-
tion. As to a tax on the State-earned value of
land providing all the revenue required—con-
sidering the inducements that have been necessary
in the past and are still being offered to people
to go on the land, this matter also seems without
the range of practical politics. Apart from
that, however, the system would appear to be
inequitable, inasmuch as it would apparently
involve confiscation or repudiation of existing
freehold rights. Also, it is not clear how the value
would be turned into cash. In many cases the
value would be largely theoretical, being based on
the assumption that land can be sold at a certain
price or would bring a certain rental; whereas the
suggested change and comparative insecurity of
tenure might make a sale out of the question.
The change would also affect the security value of
the land for the purpose of borrowing from a
financial institution—which, under the changed
conditions, would probably not be prepared to
lend in future. As to whether the scheme is
theoretically desirable, the fact remains that since
a certain repudiation of existing rights is involved,
the matter is not at present within the range of
practical politics, and cannot therefore solve the
problems now requiring prompt solution. As to
the argument that land is the only source from
which all wealth is produced—this may be so
in an exaggerated sense, but seeing that the sale
of produce is governed by the world’s markets, it
is not clear how taxing the land to provide all the
revenue required could be added to the price of


the produce by the man who has to find the tax;
and if he cannot do this, how is he to turn the
►State-earned value of his land into cash and
remain solvent? Possibly free trade and single
tax are only desirable and possible in a federa-
tion of the world; but whilst Mr. Harding pur-
ports to show how this may be attained, he admits
that it is not likely to take place—with the in-
clusion of Germany—for some 300 years or more.
Under all the circumstances Mr. Harding’s book-
let is not convincing as a solution of the problems
he has attempted to dispose of in 16 pages, but I
must thank him for the mental exercise it has
afforded his critic to read his booklet and tender
this hurried and imperfect criticism, which, it is
hoped, will not be resented, but rather received in
the spirit in which it has been written—of genuine
interest in the important questions discussed.
The Reply.
I shall first endeavour to dispose of what appears to be
the main contention raised by my critic in the second objec-
tion, and at the same time to point out a misconception that
seemingly has induced some of the views he has expressed
therein.
The object aimed at in compiling and publishing the
booklet was not with the idea or expectation of educating
the world’s peoples by means of the slow process of detailed
argument.
Intimate and active association with the politics of this
country, extending considerably over a quarter of a cen-
tury, has long since made it evident that many thousands
of persons who possess votes are variously dense, incon-
sistent, and apathetic in regard to first principles of Poli-
tical Science.
Over and over again it has been conclusively proved
to be the ease, but if such unfortunate condition had not


hitherto existed, we in Australia would uot have found our-
selves in the unhappy, almost chaotic position in which we
are to-day situated.
The present, however, is not the time to enter into the
details of practical initiation of the scheme, and when, with
the conclusion of the war, that time does arrive there will
of necessity be many preliminaries to consider and arrange
before a practical beginning can be made.
Consequently, in my treatise I considered it desirable
to confine present efforts purely to setting out these essential
basic principles which we cannot afford to ignore, and to
endeavour to induce the people to unite in active organisa-
tion with a view to forcing the policy into being.
The all-important first step was to deal with the foun-
dation upon which the superstructure may be erected. This
has been done, and it has been clearly as well as emphati-
cally stated why such reform must uot be ignored.
What is required is a leader who is capable of rising
above self—one who is prepared to devote himself to the
cause of humanity, and to lead the people fearlessly without
baulking at barriers created by ignorance and personal greed
which may be met with.
Therefore no pretence was made to enter into exhaus-
tive detail, nor was such purpose intended at the present
juncture. But the Author is fully prepared to render the
statesmen of the Empire and the Allied Nations any assis-
tance of which he may be capable if, as it is seriously
desired, an able leader is willing to honestly undertake the
task.
Having replied to criticism No. 2 first, with a view to
removing at the outset an obviously mistaken impression
regarding the objective sought by the booklet in the
direction of promoting activity in support of the
scheme, let us now pass on to consider and deal with the
remaining objections raised in regular order, but commenc-
ing with No. 1.


OBJECTION No. 1.
The policy advocated in the booklet is freedom in pro-
duction and exchange. That is most definitely and clearly
stated, and there is no ambiguity in the repeated references
thereto which would justify the suggestion that such policy
is but “seemingly” intended. Also with equal clearness
and emphasis it is assert'd that no restrictive taxation can
be countenanced, and moreover not only restrictive tax-
ation, but any restrictive impost upon, or interference with,
commerce and industry are likewise denounced.
Assertion of freedom and denunciation of restriction
in no half-hearted manner is emphatically expressed not
once only, but several times over, in advocacy of the policy
that should be adopted.
Therefore our critic appears to have formed a some-
what hasty conclusion in remarking that “seeming” free-
dom in production and exchange, also no restrictive taxation
is evidently intended.
How could freedom in production and exchange (or
free trade) obtain if restricted taxation or any other form
of restriction of commerce and industry were permitted?
FREE spells free! Therefore how can trade be free
if it is subjected to taxation, or if it is hampered by any
kind of restrictive impost?
What is the use of talking about freedom and free
trade, and professing, as many persons quite seriously do,
to be advocates of and believers in that Divine policy, while
in practice their method is to hamper trade by taxing it,
and to handicap the development of commerce and industry
by such taxation, as well as by other forms of improper
interference ?
It will also be found clearly stated that the scheme in-
volves universal adoption by all nations, and, on page 12,
definite opinion is expressed that to attempt to set out a
perfect system in any other way would prove impracticable,
and in fact comparable with an oasis in the midst of a vast
desert. While, on page 13. the federation of the world


built upon a solid foundation of perfect freedom is advo-
cated with decided emphasis.
“International Freedom —The Policy of the Future,”
is suggested as a more appropriate title.
Well, the Author would have no particular objection
to that title, but he prefers his own, which in his opinion
is better calculated to aid the purpose he has in view.
And as to the objection that “After the War” is
tautology, to some extent the Author is willing to concede
the point, but, nevertheless, he had very decided reasons for
employing these words.
The issuing of this booklet is only the initiation of
the scheme the Author has in view, and hopes in a practical
way, with co-operation of others, to follow up vigorously.
Therefore it was considered a wise course to make it clear
by the title that the reform could not be set in operation
until after the war, otherwise many persons would probably
suppose immediate reconstruction was intended.
OBJECTIONS Nos. 2 and 3
Are fully disposed of, the former in the opening re-
marks upon the criticism, and the latter by the answer to
No. 1.
OBJECTION No. 4.
Our critic is quite correct in his conclusion that ‘ ‘ free-
dom” is the keynote of the argument throughout, but he
may be reminded that “freedom” does not mean “un-
limited license.” The view which my critic has advanced
with the object of supporting his ease in stating that ‘ ‘ free-
dom” does not always show up to advantage cannot be
accepted.
Freedom, as an economic policy correctly laid on a true
foundation, will always show up to advantage. Denial of
the accuracy of that statement, and of the certainty of
beneficent results that will accrue from such policy, involves
denial of the wisdom of Divine law, and is equivalent to
asserting that the Creator and Ruler of the Universe has


made some mistakes in His system and plan, which errors
the parliaments of man are compelled to correct.
Our critic at this juncture appears to have lost sight of
the fact (which previously he recognised) that the Author’s
argument is based upon, advocates, and anticipates the
adoption by all nations of a true policy of freedom in pro-
duction and exchange.
The Author is well aware, and candidly admits, that
some isolated policy of freedom surrounded by a vast and
intricate mass of restriction will not always show up to
advantage, because the unnatural disturbances and condi-
tions created by the destroying restrictive systems will
annihilate the measure of freedom.
It is impossible to work advantageously two opposite
principles in double harness in any fiscal or economic policy.
That is the essence of the Author’s protest throughout
the booklet, and further, it is confidently asserted that the
only possible means by which right results can be attained
is by following Nature’s laws which control the universe.
While it seems reasonable to assume that it will be admitted
some fairly solid reasons are advanced in support of such
contention.
Surely no stronger evidence of the disastrous conse-
quences of doing things in the wrong way need be required
than the everyday experiences that are inflicted upon a
long-suffering people by the many inconsistent and indefen-
sible taxation measures alone that are in force in Australia
to-day, without even necessity to give a passing thought to
those of other countries.
Our high and inequitable Customs tariff, our several
State Income Taxes, our variously absurd and unscientific
State Land Taxes inflict heavy burdens upon the com-
munity which fall with the greatest severity upon those who
are financially the weakest, while the limit of absurdity and
injustice is reached by means of the Federal Land Tax Act
and the Federal Income Tax Acts.
We need but look around us to find abundant evidence


of the disastrous consequences of our unsound legislation.
Is there any one who can truthfully say that he is
satisfied with the conditions existing throughout the world
to-day ?
Will any person in Australia admit that conditions are
as they should be either within or without the Com mon-
wealth ?
And is there any person engaged in commerce or in-
dustry in Australia who can honestly claim to know pre-
cisely what he may legally do or what he may not do with-
out committing some breach (rendering him liable to severe
penalty) of some statute that subverts human intelligence
to the domination of a machine that has been conceived and
born in ignorance or of fanciful expediency?
All commerce experiences daily struggles in negotiation
of the fences that are placed by unsound statutes across its
path of healthy development.
Everyone engaged in commercial pursuits knows the
delays and losses that are continually met with at the in-
stance of such unnatural confiscating statutory machinery.
While also much too frequently these machines are directed
and controlled by public servants who have had no com-
mercial training, and whose academic administration accen-
tuates the evils and increases the impediments that are
created by such unwise statutes.
There are many employers in Australia who are com-
pelled to keep a clerk, or even a small staff, constantly
engaged upon the records that have to be compiled to comply
with requirements of the industrial laws and regulations,
and the demands of unions empowered thereby.
The cost of all the various compulsory details and
records which have to be compiled amounts to thousands
sterling annually, and becomes in that alone quite a heavy
tax upon the community. But yet we appoint boards, and
pay them, to sit solemnly endeavouring to discover why the
cost of living increases.
These are the conditions created by the world’s past and


present systems, which systems the principles of policy sug-
gested at the Paris Conference, and by political leaders
within the Empire, would continue even in stronger form
than hitherto.
Surely our critic does not seriously consider there is
even a shadow of “freedom” attached to these distressing
conditions (which a large section of the public has experi-
enced in fact), or to the measures of patchwork legislation
that have produced them?
The mere fact of designating a system or policy by the
term “freedom” does not, and never will, make it “free-
dom ' ’ if its basic principles are not sound and truly free.
And just here it seems desirable to touch upon our
critic's effort to support his arguments, and to allege in-
consistency in that of the Author, by the former’s reference
to the suggestions made respecting the imposition of an in-
demnity upon Germany, in which he asks the Author if he
will call that proposition “freedom.”
There is no analogy between the subjects referred to in
that portion of the criticism.
The policy advocated from cover to cover of the book-
let is commercial and industrial freedom, which it is sub-
mitted cannot be attained unless built upon a solid founda-
tion that is ethically and economically sound and truly
free, and in full accord with the laws of the universe.
Therefore it may be repeated that freedom does not
mean license, and our critic’s view that “freedom” is
bounded by convenient limits cannot be endorsed.
It is not so. True freedom, the principle the Author is
dealing with and advocating, has no “convenient” limits,
for the plain reason that the moment any course of action
under the guise of freedom exceeds the principles of true
freedom, it at once ceases to be freedom and becomes license,
trespass, confiscation, even perhaps barbarism.
To what degree such error will extend depends exactly
upon the license or undue trespass that is mistakenly intro-
duced into the action.


The suggested indemnity to be imposed upon Germany,
together with an army of occupation to ensure proper com-
pletion, is quite another subject to that forming the essence
of economic policy which it is submitted is the proper course
for free men and free nations to adopt.
Germany, and her dupes, have become victims of Prus-
sian domination and greed.
A nation, deluded under influence of the vicious arro-
gance of Prussianism, has been responsible for the most
hideous barbarism and destruction known in history, and it
is right that the conditions of peace should demand full pay-
ment, so far as is humanly possible, of the huge debt that
has consequently been contracted.
No dictation of fiscal policy for Germany appears in the
booklet. That will remain for her statesmen to arrange in
such manner as will provide the means of meeting the obli-
gations in respect of the suggested indemnity.
Advocacy of such imposition as a means of paying the
huge debt due to the Empire, the Allies, and neutral nations
resulting from her wild escapades and methods of barbaric
frightfulness, is in no sense related to the matter of free-
dom in production and exchange, which is the subject under
discussion in the booklet. Neither does it conflict with nor
subvert principles of freedom in any way whatsoever.
We will return again to this subject of indemnity after
treating with our friend’s next objection, wherein he classi-
fies the proposed appropriation of State-earned values of
land “as being confiscation of property, also a restriction
of the ownership and exchange of land, and in some cases a
restriction in the production from land. ’ ’
These views coincide in a remarkable manner with the
arguments that were advanced some 23 years ago by the long
since defunct National Association.
The association, which was formed to oppose the idea of
land value taxation, when that system was first introduced
into practical politics in the State of New South Wales,
made strenuous efforts to ignore facts, and to endeavour to


attempt the impossible, but the task was found to be too
heavy. And after a brief struggle it was compelled to suc-
cumb under the weight of its self-imposed burden.
With the demise of the old association it was generally
supposed that these old-fashioned ideas had also died a
natural death, but as our critic has revived old-time argu-
ments, it becomes necessary to dispose of the obvious mis-
conceptions that are involved.
In cases of individuals holding freehold titles, our friend
says, “appropriation of the State-earned value of land for
communal needs would mean confiscation of property. - ’
Why ? Just a little reflection should make it clear that
this statement contradicts its own assertion.
What is the State-earned value of land ? Every student
of political economy knows, or at any rate he should know,
that the State-earned value of land is (as is pointedly demon-
strated in the booklet, page 10) the value that attaches to
land by reason of the presence and needs of the community,
and such value is therefore a community-created value, and
is not created or produced by the individual holder or user
of the land.
How, then, can appropriation by the State of that which
it has itself produced become confiscation of property
belonging to the individual holder of the land, who did not
create or produce the said value?
To permit the individual landholder to appropriate the
said State-earned or community-created value (as our friend
appears to desire) certainly would, and does, amount to
confiscation of the people’s property by the individual.
And it is just here where the shoe pinches.
It is just because this foolish system of confiscation by
individuals has been permitted throughout past generations
that the world has become involved in the inequitable and
troublous situation of to-day.
It is the non-recognition, or repudiation, of that great
truth and important fact in Nature that is the root of the


serious unrest, distress, and general troubles that exist
throughout the world.
And it is just that positive truth, and fact, that must
be realised, and adopted as the foundation upon which to
build, before any sound reform, or lasting peace and healthy
development can become possible.
Let us pause now to closely examine our critic’s pro-
position “that appropriation by the State of the State-
earned value of land would mean confiscation of property
of persons holding land under freehold titles.”
This necessarily assumes that, by the purchase, the in-
dividual has acquired the land absolutely as his own, with-
out possibility of any future obligations becoming due by
him to the State in respect of the land, that is to the com-
munity which constitutes the State.
But, by virtue of the purchase, the landholder has not
legally or morally acquired any such right.
The amount he paid for the land when he acquired it
was simply the annual rental capitalised, as estimated at
time of purchase, but the right thereby secured, to hold
and use the land, was subject to any charge or tax the
State might subsequently impose, or to resumption by the
State if required for public purposes.
Therefore, it should be clear that absolute ownership,
free of all further obligation, was neither conceded nor im-
plied by the purchase.
Consequently, a right to monopolise and appropriate
the State-earned increment, subsequently created and accru-
ing in respect of such land, was neither legally nor morally
acquired by the individual.
How could such a proposition be defended from a
moral standpoint, if even in a legal sense it were possible
to assert a right to such privilege ?
It has already been clearly stated that man, being a
land animal, cannot exist without land, from whence he
draws his means of subsistence. (Vide pages 10 and 11.)
Consequently, if it were admitted that a right of abso


lute ownership to monopolise land is acquired by its purchase
as a freehold, it follows that unborn generations must come
into the world having no place on which to lay their heads,
excepting upon such terms and conditions, with payment of
tribute, which may be demanded by the land monopolist,
who, by such false system of assumed absolute ownership,
had acquired unlimited control over that natural oppor-
tunity which is the birth-right the All-wise Creator and
Kuler of the Universe has provided and assigned unto all
mankind.
It should require very slight reflection to convince any
person that land is a necessitous adjunct of his physical
existence. It must also become equally obvious that land
and labour are the two all-important and main factors of
production, and that the union of these two factors forms the
source from whence all material necessities of life and all
wealth are derived, while, in turn, the distribution of the
products of these united factors provides commerce and
industry with the means of their existence in carrying on the
important work of distribution.
A somewhat common misconception is frequently
responsible for an impression that commerce, and commer-
cial industry, are some kind of parasite whose chief function
is to exploit the prime producer.
This is quite a mistaken view, and, under natural con-
ditions of freedom in production and exchange, it could not
become a true indictment.
Under a proper fiscal system every person who is
engaged in commercial activity is, in reality, as much
engaged in aiding the production and development of
wealth as is the man who tills the soil.
Commerce comprises the avenues of distribution and
the means of exchanging the products of the soil, and, con-
sequently, every commercial activity becomes, in reality,
an agent of the prime producer, rendering him substantial
service by providing a market for his produce, while at the


same time leaving him free to devote himself uninterruptedly
to the work of further production.
Ethically there is no material difference between the
acquirement of a freehold, or that of a perpetual leasehold
under right conditions.
In the case of the former, the purchaser pays down
the amount of the annual economic rental capitalised, but
subject to such further obligations as may be, and properly
should be, imposed by and on behalf of the State; while in
respect of the latter (a perpetual leasehold), the economic
rental is paid annually, being periodically reappraised at
reasonable intervals, as its value increases by reason of the
direct consequence of State influences.
Security of tenure is equal in either instance, A free-
holder must fulfil all proper obligations that may be im-
posed by the State on his freehold, just as the holder of a
perpetual lease must pay his annual rent.
A perpetual leaseholder enjoys tenant rights to all
improvements. He may sell and transfer his holding at
will: the only obligation necessary to preserve his control
over the land is to pay the annual rental while he continues
to hold the property. That is precisely identical in prin-
ciple with the position which a freeholder would occupy
under the scheme of appropriation of the State-earned incre-
ment, and which upon all grounds of morality and justice
certainly should be imposed.
It should therefore be clear that by State appropriation
of the State-earned value no injury or injustice would be
inflicted upon persons holding land under freehold titles,
nor would such course mean confiscation of property belong-
ing to such persons in any sense whatsoever.
And it should be equally clear that by neglecting to
claim and take the State-earned value of land, the State per-
mits persons who have acquired land under freehold title
to confiscate property that rightly belongs to the community,
while we foolishly tax ourselves, our commerce, and our
industry, in every conceivable and absurd manner, to make


good the shortage in the revenue that is the result, under our
present imperfect systems, of permitting individuals to
appropriate the said unearned increment to their own use
and personal advantage.
Moreover, to admit that by acquiring laud under free-
hold title accords to the purchaser the right of absolute
ownership for all time free of any obligation to the State
in respect of State-created increment of value, involves con-
ceding to individuals a monopoly whereby they may demand
tribute from others, and from future generations for the
right to live.
Such violation of the Divine purpose by monopolisa-
tion of the natural opportunity, whereunto the Creator in-
tended all mankind should enjoy the privilege of having
equal access, is one that cannot be morally defended.
The conditions under which any person should be
entitled to hold land are:—
(a) That he pay to the State its full economic
rental value;
(b) That he uses it for purposes for which it is best
suited and likely to prove most productive.
The devotion of just a little unbiassed thought to the
subject, and careful analysis of all that is involved in such
monstrous proposition as conceding absolute monopoly over
land by virtue of the purchase money paid for it, cannot
fail to make clear that the system creates conditions even
worse than slavery, for it confers upon those who have
acquired possession of the land the power to own all land-
less persons also, and to impose upon them drastic terms for
their right to life.
Given freedom, no living creature, except man, suffers
from hunger and want of the means of subsistence. Yet,
the superior creation of the cosmos, humanity, by the mil-
lions, endures semi-starvation in the midst of plenty as the
direct consequence of our false economic systems, and inept
conception of the true spirit of brotherhood. Truly it may
be justly said that man’s inhumanity to man passeth all
understanding.


It should therefore become obvious that by every test
which it appears possible to apply, the old-fashioned super-
stitions regarding supposed sacred rights of private owner-
ship of land fall to the ground.
If, then, the system is unsound and unrighteous, why
strive to justify and apologise for it?
Why cast about for excuses in support of its continuance
when there is such abundant evidence everywhere about us
of the injustice and misery that springs from such purely
selfish system?
The time has surely arrived when we should no longer
endeavour to deceive ourselves, but, recognising that the
Supreme Law and Purpose cannot be upset by man, we
must act with common sense, and remodel the economic
systems of the world in sound and purely scientific manner,
if we hope to escape from world-wide disaster even greater
than that experienced by the present war.
Our critic does not appear to have done himself justice
in the discursive consideration of the subject to which his
paragraphs 5 and 6 are devoted.
Indeed, this portion of the criticism seems to indicate
that the real points involved in the discussion have been
missed, while the ‘ ‘ apparent contradictions ’ ’ alleged against
the Author are obviously creations of our critic’s miscon-
ception.
For instance, no suggestion has been made that the
Allies were the cause of the present war, nor is the reference
to Germany’s 40 years of deceitful intriguing preparation
advanced as being the real cause of the outbreak. The
words “the same old stupid disregard of the real truth”
•quoted by our critic, and extracted from a paragraph on
page 2, it will be seen refer to the policy Major Griffiths
advocates, which it is claimed is, in essence, the same dis-
regard of the real truth that has been indulged in for many
generations past as having produced the conditions which
have culminated in the war.


Upon reference to page 1, it will be noted that it is the
mistaken policies of the whole world, which throughout past
generations have been based without apparent healthy know-
ledge of ethics and economics, or of first principles and the
undeviating course of the laws of the universe, to which the
cause of the war is mainly attributed; while, that “in
•essence,” Major Griffiths’ arguments, in criticism of Lord
Bryce, are stated to have amounted to precisely the same
•error and confusion in regard to essential principles.
Later (page 7), an opinion is clearly stated that a
purpose of the war is to clear the road for the future. That
-opinion is here again re-affirmed.
The intense disorder that has been created by the unwise
policies referred to being ethically and economically un-
sound, the embarrassment of commerce and industry fettered
and bound by shackles that prevent natural development,
destroying individual rights and intelligence, and piling in-
justice upon injustice, renders the position one that has
attained to virtually the full limits of absurdity in regard
to human endurance.
Undoubtedly a powerful occult purpose lies behind the
war, which has arisen in large degree at any rate by reason
of the confusion and general disorder that has grown out
of the persistent disregard of right principles and Divine
law.
Therefore, it may be quite accurately asserted (in reply
to the objection raised) that the war does accord with
Divine purpose, because it is the outcome of wrong systems
that have persistently been followed, and which were dia-
metrically opposed to the governing principles of nature.
And, just as the Supreme Edict proclaims, “that which
man sows that shall he also reap,” so it follows that the reap-
ing (by the war) is in accord with Divine purpose, being the
Karma, or consequences of wrong actions by violation of the
immutable principles of nature, by men and nations as a
result of their sowing, which has accumulated throughout
past centuries, until limits of stagnation, oppression, and


confusion have been reached, and have culminated in
disastrous and sanguinary struggle, that finally became the
only available means by which the whole world might be
rescued from attempted tyrannical domination, and the
freedom of its people saved from complete annihilation.
We have neglected to take heed of the many warning's
given us that we were on the wrong track. Warnings which
have been in abundant evidence throughout the past.
We have closed our eyes to the real truth, and have
blindly resorted to methods of patchwork in efforts to
check the disorder created by some system of unsound
character.
Each patchwork effort being only a variation of method,
with the governing principles just as unsound as those of
the error it was designed to cure, simply aggravated the
disorder, and caused fresh outbreaks in various other direc-
tions.
All this error upon error has been practised in the past,
with the result that we have been aroused by the cannon’s
roar into activity at immense cost in order to save our
liberties, and our lives, from destruction.
Major Griffiths, Members of the Paris Conference, and
many others who have debated the subject, seem to be bent
upon adhering to the same unnatural systems as those
which have led up to the present chaos, the only variation
suggested being that the form or policy of restrictive inter-
ference should be increased.
Shall we still continue to blindly ignore positive facts
that cannot be mistaken if we honestly look for them ?
If we do so, nothing can prevent a greater and more
disastrous war (a world-wide civil war springing from the
unnatural disruption between capital and labour) follow-
ing almost immediately upon this present war.
A tariff war is not the means of cure, and such irrational
method never has and never will serve any good and laud-
able purpose.


Our critic appears to have fallen into the very common
error that is experienced by many persons when considering
and discussing the subject of universal free trade.
He seems to forget, for he does not take it into account
in any way, that when the fiscal barriers that now impede
trade and healthy development are swept away, and the
entire system of production and exchange is placed on a
true and natural foundation, the abnormal, harassing,- and
destructive conditions that to-day are met with in every
branch and department of prime production, as well as of
commerce and industry, will disappear.
The false economies practised by all nations for cen-
turies past have, to a large extent, warped both vision and
mind in relation to fiscal reform.
The people of the different countries have variously,
to a greater or lesser degree, encrusted themselves within the
narrow limits of an almost impregnable shell, and, by long
custom to such surroundings, many persons experience great
difficulty in viewing any position beyond their own im-
mediate and cramped confine.
The result is that it is by no means uncommon to find
a scheme of true reform measured and rejected because its
equity and possibilities are judged without making the
slightest allowance, or calculation, in regard to the materi-
ally altered conditions that will be created by the initiation
of such system.
No, the advantages and perfect equity of a truly sound
system cannot be judged by measuring the possibilities of
healthy expansion from a standpoint that would retain in-
tact the immoral and false systems that presently constitute
the basis of national and inter-national fiscalism and com-
merce.
And, before we can expect to be able to form an intelli-
gent opinion upon sound economic reconstruction, we must
first sweep out of our minds the phantoms we have unwisely
relied upon, and which have created so much injustice.


We must banish all thought from our minds that such
inequitable, and even cruel, conditions as those which exist
to-day would be able to find foothold and live. While, at
the same time, we must realise that we propose to wipe the
slate clean of past errors, and make a fresh start in full
harmony with the Laws of the Universe and Divine inten-
tion.
To be unwilling to accept this view and act upon it.
would be equivalent to asserting that the Supreme Ruler
has made some mistake in the Great Plan of Evolution, and
that He has created the world without order and purpose,
or means by which all mankind may acquire the proper
advantage to which each individual should be entitled as the
just reward of his industry.
Present conditions are precisely what we have made
them as the natural sequence of our strangely unscientific
fiscal systems, and surely no person in his sane senses will
pretend to believe they are what they ought to be.
Future conditions will also be precisely what we make
them, and will be harmonious and peaceful, or the contrary,
according to the wisdom or unwisdom of the methods we
adopt as a means of putting our house in order.
DUMPING.
Dumping goods (to which our critic makes reference in
expression of his sympathy with Major Griffiths views) is
a favourite argument of devotees of high tariffs to conjure
with, because it appeals to sentiment rather than to the
senses.
It may be said that there is to many persons quite an
altruistic sound about the phrase that catches their sym-
pathy, and misleads them into belief that it represents a high
ideal.
It seems, however, never to occur to persons who dili-
gently assert and condemn alleged evils arising therefrom,
that it is high tariffs, and tariff-walls, that prove chiefly
responsible for this system spoken of as dumping.


Why'/ Because high tariffs prevent natural compe-
tition, and fictitiously increase the price which may be de-
manded by the manufacturers located within a country pro-
tected by such tariff-wall.
Under the influence of a tariff the manufacturers
acquire a monopoly over the situation, and, as in all coun-
tries a vast majority of the people are landless, because, by
our false systems of dealing with land, their birth-right has
been bartered away to earlier generations, and they, the
said landless people, become more or less dependent upon
a minimum wage, which those who have acquired possession
of the laud, and a monopoly of other opportunities created
by tariffs, may choose to pay.
Further, the fictitious prices and large profits which
manufacturers are able to command under the influence of
the tariff, enables them to dispose of their goods for home
consumption to such special advantage that they can afford
to let their surplus stocks go at the best price that can be
obtained for them in other countries, irrespective of the cost
of transit, and the tariff imposts of such other countries.
Where tariffs exist in any country similar mono-
poly of opportunity to demand high prices by manufac-
turers within such country obtains. Therefore, goods ex-
ported thereto from any other tariff-ridden country will find
a market at prices below the fictitious prices ruling within
the country of import, without serious loss to the foreign
manufacturer, notwithstanding a tariff.
The evils of tariff restriction are legion, and extremely
far-reaching, but amongst them it may be mentioned that,
while the monopoly created by the tariff assists manufac-
turers to acquire labour at a minimum wage, a large portion
of that wage finds its way back to the manufacturer in the
form of high profits, leaving the labourer a very small
margin for other purposes, and therefore constantly depen-
dent.
Consequently, while the exporting into other countries
of surplus goods, commonly called dumping, may not be


relished by the manufacturers of the country of import, the
landless and dependent peoples of such countries may experi-
ence some relief by an opportunity to supply some of their
needs at reduced cost.
It is not contended that the adoption of pure free trade
by one country or nation, while all others maintain a system
of tariffs and restriction, would be attended by all-round
desirable results.
On the contrary, it is pointedly claimed that a Federa-
tion of all Nations should be aimed at, to be founded on a
basis of pure free trade, with State appropriation of the
State-earned value of land, as the natural source of national
revenue.
Recent opinions expressed by Sir George Reid against
universal free trade are quoted by our critic in support of
his arguments. But no person well acquainted with Sir
George Reid’s political career would ever suggest that gentle-
man as a standard authority upon free trade or economic
principles. Nor does his famous “yes-no” advocacy offer
an example that should be followed in regard to Federation.
Our critic somewhat reluctantly (but with apparent
doubt) admits that land is the source of all wealth produced,
which he says may be true “in an exaggerated sense.”
From what other source under the canopy of heaven
than the land is the production of wealth drawn ?
That there is no other source from which prime pro-
duction can be drawn must be an obvious fact. Then why
discount a reluctant admission by gratuitous assumption
that “it may be true in an exaggerated sense”?
Then again, our critic mixes up a “tax on land ” with
‘ ‘ appropriation of the State-earned value of land, in the
following words: “It is not clear how taxing the land to
produce all the revenue required can be added to the price
of the produce by the man who has to find the tax.
In discussing economic science it is necessary to be
particular in regard to the meaning of words.


A tax on land has not been suggested, but, on the con-
trary (vide pages 9 to 11), it is made quite clear that the
policy of appropriating the State-earned value of land is
not imposing a tax at all, and that it takes nothing from the
holder or user of land that he has created, earned, or pro-
duced.
The policy aims at the economic rental value of land
being paid to the State authorities for communal purposes,
because that value has been created by the community whose
presence and needs make the use of land profitable.
The amount of the yearly rent, thus charged and paid
for use of the land, cannot be passed on to the consumer, as
all taxes usually are, and that is precisely wherein the virtue
of the system lies, and distinguishes it from the nature of a
tax.
The space of 300 years indicated as the period when
Germany may have qualified to be given a responsible place
in the World's Federation, was necessarily suggested in
quite general .terms.
Before that time arrives Germany must have paid the
huge debt she has contracted, the amount of which cannot
yet be measured, because, great as it already is by the facts
that are known, it must become vastly greater by reason of
the heartless and needless destruction she is daily piling up
by means of the acts of barbarism and frightfulness she is
waging on sea and land, in the course of the enforced
retreat before the Allies’ armies that are now sweeping her
out of France.
Xo possible estimate can yet be made of the indemnity
that should be imposed upon her in respect of the horrors of
wanton destruction Prussian ism is, oi* will yet be accountable
for, but it is clear that the amount that should be demanded
must run into large figures.
And further, German}' must first be cured of her in-
sanity before she can be trusted, and accepted within the
ranks of civilised nations.


All this becomes possible of realisation by means of the
well-established and proven fact in Nature, Reincarnation
or rebirth.
Students of Nature will readily recognise the consis-
tency and natural relations of this portion of the scheme
with those of the entire plan of universal Federation herein
suggested, and the uplifting of humanity generally.
Germany as a nation has committed serious crimes
against God and man. All those of her subjects who have
aided and abetted therein will have to pay the penalty for
their mistakes under the immutable law which gives back
to the sower exactly that which he has sown in good or
evil.
The Lords of Karma and superhuman guides of man’s
destiny may be relied upon to fittingly direct the reincar-
nation of Egos according to the measure of reward or
punishment which each individual has earned in former life
by good deeds, or by excess of error and crime.
It is possible that a vast number of the German Army
who have passed over may be guided to reincarnate much
sooner than is ordinarily the case, if .suitable opportunity
exists whereby they may work olf bad Karma they have
earned by the errors, excesses, and needless acts of in-
humanity that have variously been indulged in.
It is also probable that many generations, and several
rebirths, may be needed to teach the lesson, which must be
acquired by experience of the difference between right and
wrong.
When that knowledge has been acquired, gathered from
the experiences of hard and bitter struggles of perhaps a
lifetime, or of several future lives on earth, the character
and aspirations of the people composing the German Nation
will be totally changed from the aggressive domination and
barbarism constituting their ruling features which presently
horrify the world.
Then will the people of Germany be cured of their bane-
ful delusion, and having learned their lesson by bitter


experiences of lifelong struggle, enforced by the continual
drain upon the fruits of the nation’s industry, in conse-
quence of the heavy internal taxation she will be compelled
to impose in order to provide the revenue wherewith to pay
off the indemnity that should form a condition of Peace
agreement, they will have reached the standard of rational
understanding that will entitle them to be received into
civilised society.
The course suggested, being in full harmony with
nature and science, is the one that should be followed. But
if trade wars and tariff-walls are resorted to, as has been
so diligently advocated, such fatal mistake will defeat the
intended purpose.
Abundant evidence, founded on facts, exists to prove
the certainty of failure, with all its attendant disaster, if
the mistaken policy of high tariffs and trade wars is per-
sisted in.
Shall we, then, awaken to intelligent recognition of the
real facts, and take heed of the writing on the wall while
there is yet time, or shall we foolishly continue on the course
that has led the world into the present chaos, with the cer-
tainty of greater disaster overtaking us. and rapidly increas-
ing as each day dawns?
Addendum.
Just after this edition had been placed in the hands
of the printer, a cabled press report appeared of the
powerful speech General Smuts made on the occasion of
the Freedom of the City of London being conferred upon
him.
The views expressed by General Smuts upon the war,
its purpose, and the possibilities of the future, clearly
harmonise with those advocated in this treatise, as may
be gathered from the following passages clipped from the
published report, and which are well worthy of repetition :


“Let us be neither too elated by victory, nor too
depressed by ill-fortune. Greater forces are fighting for
us than our armies. The spirit of freedom is on the wing,
and the great creative spirit is once more moving among
the nations in their unspeakable agonies. Let us gather
inspiration from our cause, and when the end comes —it
cannot be far off —let us, in the hour of victory, remember
that greatest ally, and endeavour to build up a better
world on the enduring foundation of liberty, (Cheers.)
Let all our institutions be monuments to the real victory
in this greatest, and, let us hope. last, war of the world.
“I emphasise the cause we are fighting for because I
am assured in the grave dangers ahead that a clear con-
sciousness of that cause alone will strengthen us to hold
on unflinchingly. The circumstances of my life have made
me realise more than most what that means. In my day
and in my country I have seen freedom go under in what
appeared to be a death agony of a people. I have seen
her rise again indestructible, deathless, immortal. I have
seen the same beaten people rise again to fight for the same
freedom, no longer for themselves alone but for the whole
world. (Cheers.)
“To-day I see another vision—from the Freedom of
the City of London to the freedom of humanity. May the
vision come true. (Loud cheers.)”
The vision will come true —there can be no obstacle
great enough, nor force powerful enough, to prevent it
doing so—if a leader possessing clear perception, fidelity
to right principles, and courage, such as that evidenced by
General Smuts, will come forward and lead.
The world is waiting for the Man, and its peoples are
readv to follow.
JOHN SANDS LIMITED. SYDNEY.


WILLIAM HARDING,
Taxation Expert.
4 BRIDGE STREET,
SPECIALIST ON THE SYDNEY.
Income Tax Acts of N.S. Wales
and Queensland. The Federal
Income and the Federal Land
tax acts. 3rd Septemoer, 1919,
TELEPHONES: ADDRESS ALL LETTERS BOX 1150 6.P.0.
CITY 96
Chatswood J I O I O
John. A. Ferguson, Esq.,
University Chambers,
167 Phillip Street, SYDIIEY.
Pear Sir,
I have this morning yours dated 29th ultimo, and
I have much pleasure in forwarding you herewith a couple of copies
of my Booklet "The Policy of the Future After the War".
This Booklet has been distributed in' various
Countries of the Empire and I have received a number of encouraging
acknowledgments from several Statesmen, and Members of the House
of Commons, as well as from India and other Countires.
I am still working diligently to endeavour to
impress upon the minds of our leaders and the people that it is im-
perative to lay a solid foundation in regard to finance legislation
before it will’ become possible to build a sound and permanent super-
structure making for the equitable advantage of all humanity, and
I think it will be fairly admitted that the chaotic conditions of
to-day (which are acutely increasing as each day dawns) amply bear
out the forecast I made when I published this Booklet in January
1917.
With kind regards.
I am.
Yours faithfully.
William Harding
