





J&. ft. fTL/yiZr*
THE GROWTH'
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES
AND THEIR
PRESENT RELATION
TO THE
MOTHER COUNTRY.
Frank M. Bladen.
Being the successful Essay in the Competition for the Earl of
Rosebery’s Prize for Undergraduates of the Sydney
University, May, 1888.
PUBLISHED IB Y" EEatTEST
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.
SYDNEY:
J. L. HOLMES & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS, 815 PITT STREET,
1886,




THE GROWTH
OF THE
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES
AND THEIR
PRESENT RELATION TO THE MOTHER COUNTRY.
The history of Australasian Colonization is emphatically a history of
British enterprise. The state of the Mother Country at the time when
the occupation of Australia was determined upon was one of extraordi-
nary national prostration. When George 111. ascended the throne, he
found the British Empire united at home and supreme abroad ; the
wealth of India poured into its treasury, and the loyalty of America
was as great as her prosperity. Thirty years afterwards the nation was
involved in one of the most disastrous crises that have ever threatened
her safety. At home—thanks to a weak and vacillating ministry—the
whole country was disorganised by dissensions; Ireland, so long
neglected and so deeply wronged, was crying for reform ; the energy
and skill of Warren Hastings, of which his friends were so justly proud,
and which even his traducers could not deny, 'barely retained the
British possessions in India. France, Spain and Holland, eager for revenge,
had jointly declared war against Great Britain. Her arms were worsted
on land ; her naval supremacy for the time was gone ; the nations of the
Baltic had adopted the transparent expedient of an armed neutrality;
America had secured and proclaimed her Independence, and the rising
genius of Napoleon Bonaparte boded ill, not alone to Britain, but to
Europe. Such were the auspices which attended the birth of the Australa-
sian Colonies. Amid such dangers did Great Britain undertake to colon-
ize a continent, and, as if to compensate for the loss of her American
dependencies, raise for her children the splendid heritage of Australasia.
Long before the arrival of Captain Arthur Philip, Australia had a
reputation, if not a history. For centuries, rumours of its magnificent
proportions and fabulous wealth had been current amongst the maritime
nations of the earth. Portuguese, Dutch and Asiatic navigators knew it
as the great golden Chersonesus of tradition. They spoke and wrote of it
as rivalling India in the profusion of its natural resources and the magnifi-
cence of its vegetation ; a land abounding in every tropic plant and fruit,


where waving palms and majestic rivers combined the grandeur of
America with the fertility of Ceylon; a country rich beyond the
dreams of avarice in precious metals and priceless gems, But ere
Captain Philip arrived, the pleasurable fiction had faded completely
away. Even the first English discoverers—Dampier, Tasman and
Cook—while recognizing the enormous tract of territory totally unex-
plored, discredited its probable future usefulness. They described the
country as being equally uninviting and inaccessible; the aborigines as
the most degraded and miserable of savages; the soil as but a barren
waste of rock and sand. Such was the reputation Australia enjoyed
when the Government of Pitt determined to utilise the East Coast—
pending voluntary immigration—as a penal settlement.
Edmund Burke once remarked that “ he knew of no more absorbing
and instructive occupation for the mind of a thoughtful man, than to
trace in all their peculiar grandeur the bold and swiftly-formed out-
lines in the history of a young and patriotic people.” Such an
undertaking, in the case of Australasia, is particularly easy. A single
century more than embraces our history. No mystic legends, no romantic
traditions confuse the vision. With ease and certainty we can trace
the bold outlines in the history of our country. We behold her—a vast
island continent, whose extent was uncertain, and whose surface was
almost entirely unexplored —pass rapidly from a convict settlement to a
free dependency of the freest people on earth. We can trace at once
the path of the Austral Clio through all the difficulties of early days.
An adventurous Ambition leads her children into the pathless interior;
even disintegration of the one great mother colony gives a mighty
onward impulse, and soon, with incredible rapidity, Australia takes her
place among the nations, occupying a position unpretentious, and even,
perhaps, insignificant at first, but one which nevertheless gives earnest
of a grand and noble future. The vast expanse of her territories; the
beauty, the fertility, and the wealth of her lands ; the salubrity of the
climate; every circumstance and peculiarity in her history have aug
mented the rapidity and confirmed the stability of her progress ; until
now, after the lapse of 97 years, the country deemed but a valueless and
almost inaccessible desert, has developed into a magnificent domain, the
future possibilities of which bid fair to vie with the fabled opulence of
Oriental lands.
Two great leading events in Australian history mark this singular
transformation: —Ist. The discovery of a practical route over the
Dividing Range ; and 2nd. The initiation of a form of Responsible Self-
government. To the one we can trace all our material prosperity; and
to the other all the varied political, social and religious privileges we
enjoy.
The announcement, towards the end of the year 1813, that Blax-
land and his companions had discovered a pass over the Blue Mountains,
completely changed the whole purpose and complexion of Australian
affairs. Confined no longer to a narrow strip of undeveloped coast-land,


the settlement seemed to extend at once over the spreading plains of the
Bathurst and Macquarie districts. A practically inexhaustible expanse
of rich pastoral and agricultural land, ribboned by fertile valleys and
numerous streams, seemed to offer an universal welcome to the crowded
nations of the world. Seldom perhaps in the history of human progress
has the immediate future of any people presented such sudden and
imposing indications of coming greatness.
Prior to 1813, the efforts of the colonists were mostly limited to
the production of the more immediate necessities of local consumption.
But the opening of the interior, following so closely on the discovery of
the suitableness of the climate for the growth of the finest qualities of
wool, imparted a peculiar impetus to the enterprise which was destined
to become so intimately associated with the prosperity of the colonies;
and, inasmuch as it secured to Australia the possession of a permanent
and distinctive industry, it deserves to be regarded as amongst the most
important and memorable epochs of our history.
The rapidity with which the occupation the mother colony
proceeded naturally necessitated the creation of isolated centres of
population, which took up the work of settlement with equal vigour and
success, and ultimately became the centres of distinct and independent
colonies. This gradual division of the continent into separate communi-
ties has accelerated, rather than retarded, the general prosperity.
With so extensive a territory and such primitive methods of government,
many of the distant portions of Australia must for many years
either have remained in the back-ground or have been entirely neglected.
But when the establishment of the colonies of Victoria and Queensland
was determined upon, a more thorough and vigorous system of occupa-
tion necessarily began. With something of local pride each colony
undertook the work of settlement, and the result has been an increase
in population and in wealth, which has more than compensated for those
slight provincial jealousies that even the most friendly and healthy
rivalry is liable to induce.
Within the limits of an effort such as this, an exhaustive and
detailed description of Australasian progress is impracticable. No
adequate representation of the advance which has been made during the
last fifty years can be accomplished without the introduction of elaborate
statistics. These, however, are fortunately too easy of access and too
familiarly incorporated with the stereotyped history of the colonies to
necessitate more than a very general summary of the increase in trade,
population, and industry.
In attempting to condense the enormous mass of data which yearly
issues from the departments of the Government statists in the several
colonies, we naturally turn in the first place to the statistics referring
to the population. The following summary shows the population of the
colonies at the end of each decade since 1820, and the relative rate of
increase per cent.


IN 10 YEARS
105
isa. 8
141.2
152.6
INCREASE
INCREASE
YEAR.
POPULATION. PER CENT.
YEAR.
POPULATION. PER CENT.
IN 10 YEARS.
34,400
1,902,774
2,769,158
70,581
200,353
483,365
2,103,003
3,091,887
1,221,047
The years 1873 and 1883 are included to show the present state of
the population, and the ruling rate of increase, according to the most
recently published returns
To the outbreak of the gold mania is due the large increase in the
decades 1840—1860. So rapid an influx of people was not, however,
an unmixed advantage. In their then unsettled state the colonies were
unable to support so inordinate an increase; nor were the new arrivals,
on the whole, a desirable class. Men of energy and perseverance were
mixed with adventurers from America, malcontents from Ireland,
liberated malefactors from Tasmania, and motley scoundrels from all
parts of the world. The result was that the Government, especially in
Victoria, seemed utterly unable to cope with the turbulent crowd which
was only too eager to magnify the weakness and incapacity of their
rulers into an excuse for the open defiance of all rule and order. The
treasuries of the colonies reaped but little benefit from the immense
wealth so suddenly disclosed. The worst passions of the people were
inflamed ; an undiscerning rapacity affected every class of society, and
much of the good which accrued to Australia from her newly acquired
notoriety and wealth was counterpoised by the demoralisation of the
people, the complete neglect of the permanent industries of the country,
and the lawless profligacy of thousands who had suddenly become
possessed of enormous riches without desiring or knowing how to use
them properly.
But the rate of increase in the population since 1820 (irrespective
of that exception of it to which we have just alluded), is worthy of the
most careful attention. It seems unlikely, in the light of the precedents
of the United States, that the present rate of increase will show any
material diminution. Should this supposition prove correct, the
rapidity of our prosperity will be seen in the justifiable inference that
in a little more than 70 years the population of United Australasia will
amount to over fifty millions.
The growth of the colonies, as far as it is indicated by the
population, is strikingly exhibited when compared with that of other
countries. The subjoined table shows the population of the colonies and
of the chief countries of the World, at the opening and close of the
decade 1871-1881, the rate of increase per cent, in the ten years, and
the density of the population. This decade (1871-1881) has been
selected because the returns for foreign countries are the most recent
6


that are available, and also because in each of these years the census
making the fig
mere estimates,
figures free
was taken in most of
the countries named, thus
that are inseparable from
ailed from the returns pub
1883, and the Victorian T
from the inaccuracies
published in the
an Year Book, 1
e State man’s
1882-3.
The table is compiled
Year Book, 1874 and 188
POPULATION.
Increase
No.of persons)
to the square
mile in 1881.
COUNTRY.
per cent, in
the 10 3’ears.
Australasia.
United Kingdom ..
India
Ceylon
Canada
France
Germany
Holland .
Italy .. .
United States f
1,919,432
31,484,661
191,018,412
2,405,287
3,686,096
36,102,921
41,009,999
*3,674,402
26,796,253
38,558,371
2,740,127
34,862,566
202,275,983
2,638,540
4,324,810
37,672,048
45,234,061
4,114,077
28,459,451
50,442,066
It will be seen that the only countries which show an increase in
an}' way approaching that of Australasia are the United States and
Canada. Canada was, however, very far behind ; for, although her
population was nearly fifty per cent, greater than that of Australasia,
the gross increase was nearly 200,000 less.
The density of the population of Australasia was less than one
person to the square mile, as against 287 in Great Britain, and 14 in the
United States of America. It will be seen at once that there is still an
enormous disparity between the population and the area of the colonies.
This cannot be explained away by the theory that the country is not
sufficiently developed to support a greater number of inhabitants, since
the rate of increase in the industries, and in the extent of country settled,
is very greatly in excess of the increase in population. In the decade
1873-1883, while the population increased at the rate of 47 per cent.,
the rate of increase in the quantity of land under cultivation was 134
per cent. ; the quantity of wool exported increased 112*7 percent.; the
wheat crop, 152*2 per cent.; the oat crop, 157 per cent. ; the shipping,
(tonnage) outwards and inwards, 120 per cent.; and the number of
miles of railway opened, 280*5 per cent. The foremost statesmen of the
colonies and the most distinguished visitors from the old world have
proclaimed our chief want to be—population. Neither the agricultural,
the pastoral, nor the mineral areas are supporting a tenth part of the
people they should. The vast deposits of iron—destined to create in the
future so valuable an industry—are almost entirely neglected. More
* The figures for France and Holland are for 1872-81, and the percentages given are for 0 years,
t These figures arc for the decade 1870-80.


colonists are wanted in every part of Australasia: colonists who will
develop the resources of the country ; who will assist in steadily
augmenting its trade and commerce, and who will help to make
Australasia what she is destined eventually to he—a great industrial and
producing power amongst the nations of the world.
But, admitting all this, it is still true that beyond a certain
point the greatness and prosperity of a country depend less
on the number than on the energy, both physical and mental,
of its inhabitants; and it augurs well for the future of
the colonies that the debilitating influences of a climate
have in no way diminished that peculiar vigour of mind and
body which through centuries has distinguished the Anglo-Saxon race.
Every page in the history of Australasian progress discloses the
influence of this racial characteristic. It has increased rather than
diminished amidst the privations incident to the foundation of a new
country. The fierce struggle with physical difficulties, which the
settlement of a vast, unknown continent entails, has called into existence
new energies and greater self-reliance —qualities which, as the primal
elements of a nation’s greatness, are far more valuable than men;
numerical strength. There can be no doubt that this desirable state of
things is largely due to the overwhelming preponderance of Australian
and British-born subjects. According to the last census 50 per cent, of
the inhabitants of Australasia were native born, 45 per cent, were from
Great Britain and her colonies, and only five per cent, from foreign
countries.*
Turning from the population to the financial condition of the
colonies, the official returns published by Mr. Hayter showed that in the
last decade the value of the assets of the combined colonies, in the shape
of permanent reproductive public works, had increased over 300 per-
cent., while the total liabilities had only increased 150 per cent. The
receipts from railways and telegraphs were more than sufficient to
pay the interest on the public debt, and an additional security was
offered to the English capitalist, in the form of 70,000,000 acres of
unalienated Crown lands. The financial condition of the Governments
and Corporations of Australasia could scarcely be on a sounder basis ;
nor could a wiser policy be pursued than the employment of large sums
of borrowed money in the development of the resources of the colonies,
and in inducing the general settlement of the country by opening up
the more distant and inaccessible parts of the interior.
The enormous extent of internal and external trade, as shown in
the imports and exports alone, is worthy of notice. At the end of
1883, with a population of 3,091,887, the total value of Australasian
imports and exports amounted to £117,290,489, or £37'9 per head.
The magnitude of this trade becomes still more apparent when
compared with that carried on by the chief countries in the world.
* Victorian Year Book, 1883, page 40.


The following table shows the imports and exports for 1880 of
Australasia and other countries, and their relation to the population :
snows tne imports ana exports
countries, and their relation to the ]
imports. | EX I
Value per head i
Total Value. of the Total Value,
population. !
£ £ s. d. £
45,060,665 16 17 0 1 48,866,168
425,483,448 12 5 2 305,303,969
259.734.000 6 17 11 I 206,661,000
222.151.000 4 18 2 221,580,000
158.539.000 3 2 10 177,662,000
100.574.000 1 4 0! 83,513,000
69.979.000 17 0 2 52,479,000
53.703.000 1 17 9 49,969,000
18,018,697 4 3 4 18,314,887
8,078,048 6 9 3 4,488,872
10.509.000 4 2 9 10,437,400
Argentine Confederacy are for 1881, and are takei
the other countries, the figures are those given b;
ne are included in this Table. If i
es the comparison is still more cone
le Australasian Colonies exceeded th
Hope, Mauritius, Natal, Portugal
iared with that of India it was in t
on at the same time beine - in the nr
EXPORTS.
COUNTRY.
Value per head
of the
population.
Australasia
United Kingdom
France
Germany
United States....
Russia
Holland
Italy ...
Canada
Cape of Good Hope ...
Argentine Confederacy
£ a.
18 5
8 15
5 9
4 18
3 10
1 0
12 15
1 15
4 4
3 II
4 2
Noth. — The figures for the (Argentine Confederacy are for 1881, and are taken from the “ States-
man’s Year Book,” 1883. For the other countries, the figures are those given by Mr. Hayter in the
“ Victorian Year Book,” 1883.
The chief countries alone are included in this Table. If we extend the
inquiry to smaller States the comparison is still more conclusive. Even
in 1880 the trade of the Australasian Colonies exceeded that of Canada,
Ceylon, Cape of Good Hope, Mauritius, Natal, Portugal, and Greece
combined; while compared with that of India it was in the proportion
of 3 to 4, the population at the same time being in the proportion of 3
to 300.
Excepting Austro-Hungary, Belgium, and the long established
countries mentioned in the foregoing Table, no other countries in the
world have such a large import and export trade as Australasia ; while
that of many which possess a much larger population is insignificant
compared therewith. Belgium is the only foreign country which has as
great an external trade per head of the population; and the only portions
of theßritish Dominions which equal Australasia in this particular are the
Straits Settlement, Labuan, and the Falkland Islands. The population
in none of these exceeds 500,000 ; in Labuan it is only 7,000, and in the
Falkland Islands 2,000.
Taking a more comprehensive view it will be seen from the statistics
given in the annexed Appendix, that while the population of these colonies
increased six-fold in the period 1850-83, the total imports and exports
increased thirteen-fold ; and, coming still closer to the present time,
during the decade 1868-78 the trade of England with her colonies
increased 43 per cent., and with the rest of the world only 19 per cent.
Studied from any standpoint whatever, the growth of Australasian
trade is unequalled by any state or dependency; it is unique in the
history of commerce, and is still more striking when we bear in mind its
9


129,006.059 lbs.
349,905,850 ,,
66,662,750 ,,
300.000. „
231,840,000 ,,
138.000. ,,
78,320,000 ,;
115.000. „
117.000. ,,
69,000,000 ,,
permanent nature, the rapidity of its progression, and the short time in
which such a marvellous amount of wealth has been brought into
existence.
The chief factor in the wealth of Australasia is the wool trade, to
which reference has been already made. The wonderful strides made
in the production and perfection of Australasian wool forms one of the
most remarkable features in the history of modern colonization.
Virtually, the wool trade of these colonics is little more than fifty years
old ; yet within that time an enormous industry has been created—an
industry the actual magnitude of which it is difficult to realise from
mere tabular statements; nor can a just appreciation be easily formed of
the important position to which, on this account alone, we are entitled
amongst the civilized peoples of the world.
The vast proportions of the wool trade of Australasia, like the
increase of its population, becomes more evident by comparison with other
nations. The subjoined Table gives the number of sheep depasturing and
the amount of wool produced in these colonies and in the chief wool
producing countries of the world in 1881.*
COUNTRY.
No. OF SHEEP.
QUANTITY OF WOOL.
Great Britain 27,449,500
Australia and New Zealand 78,156,486
Cape Colony and Natal 20,01)0,000
United States 50,000,000
Argentine Confederacy ... . | 68,000,000
Russia [ 50,000,000
German Empire 25,200,000
France ~j 24,000,000
Austria-Hungary 40,000,000
Spain I 22,000,000
It will be seen that, as far back as 1881, Australasia had out-
stripped all other countries in the production of wool, depasturing ten
million more sheep than its closest competitor, and producing nearly
fifty million lbs. more wool. In 1882, of the 500 million lbs. of wool
imported into England, 350 million lbs. were contributed by the
Australasian colonies alone. In 1883, the number of sheep had
increased to nearly 80 millions (79,872,350), and the total output of
wool for the year was 445,116,558 lbs. f The creation of a trade of
such dimensions, representing annually nearly £22,000,000 sterling,
within so short a time, is unparalleled in history. It is, however, their
quality rather than their quantity which has made Australian wools so
celebrated. Blessed with conditions of soil and climate peculiarly
favourable to the production of the highest classes of light-conditioned,
* These figures are taken from the Australian Year Book, 1884, page 234.
t Australian Statistics, 1883, R. M. Johnston, Tasmania, pp 4 and 5.


soft-haired wools, the squatters and sheep farmers of these colonies
have been able to supply the Continental and American markets with
fleeces with which the finest merinos of Saxony and Silesia cannot
compete. New South Wales and Victoria, in this particular, have far
outstripped the sister colonies. Over the vast succession of lightly
timbered plains in the south-west of New South Wales and north of
Victoria, immense flocks of high-class sheep depasture. The mildness of
the winter prevents the finer description of fleeces from becoming hard
and heavy, but does not check the exudation of the fatty substance
known as “yolk ” ; while the heat of the summer is not so severe as to
perish the tip of the staple, or produce the high shrinkage so fatal to
the wools of warmer latitudes. The wool produced in these parts of
the colonies stands unrivalled as the finest in the world, and it is
chiefly from these gigantic river-encompassed plains that the enormous
quantities exported from New South Wales and Victoria come. The
Mudgee and New England districts of New South Wales also produce
high qualities of wool; but the greater humidity of the atmosphere and
the hilly nature of the country are not so favourable to the growth of
the fine-conditioned and most valuable descriptions.
In Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia immense
tracts of country, eminently suited for sheep farming, exist. From
many of these localities peculiarly fine and bright wools are exported,
and the type is being rapidly improved by the introduction of the best
blood of the Riverina flocks.
In New Zealand and Tasmania, the variety of climate affords
facilities for the production of almost every style of wool; but the
moisture of the air does not favour the light superfine classes, for which
the recent improvements in the manufacture of the staple, and the
demand for the finest textures of cloth, have created such a ready
market.
The future of the w'ool trade of Australasia has never appeared
more promising than it does at present. The causes which have retarded
its growth in the past are yearly becoming less frequent and violent.
It is improbable that we shall have another gold mania similar to that
of 1854, and the droughts which will overtake the colonies in the future'
will find the pastoralists of the interior possessed of improvements in
the shape of artesian wells and stored flood waters, the absence of which
has involved so much distress and ruin in days gone by.
As will be seen by referring to the comparative table on page 10
our chief competitor in the wool trade is the Argentine Confederacy.
Over the immense fertile plains which slope eastward from the Andes
to the Atlantic are scattered the estancias of the sheep farmer. But
the south-east trade winds, laden with moisture from the South Atlantic,
sweep the whole area, and produce the same defects that are noticed
in the staple of Tasmania and especially of New Zealand. The
Argentine wools therefore do not compete, even in the American
market, with anything better than our medium classes.
11


The following table shows the quantity of wool (in lbs.) exported
from the Australasian colonies about every fifth year since the inception
of the trade in 1807. It would be unnecessary and tedious to give the
amount for each year. The rate of progress can be easily seen by the
method adopted, which is sufficiently complete even to indicate the
falling off of the industry at the time of the gold fever (compare 1850
with 1855). The figures represent the amount of wool exported in the
one year named ; and are compiled, as regards Australia and Tasmania,
from the statistics given in the Australian Year Book, 1884 (page 231),
and as regards New Zealand, from the Statistical Register of that
colony for 1883 :
QUANTITY OF WOOL
i ejAK. EXPORTED.
QUANTITY OF WOOL
EXPORTED.
YEAR.
32,971
99,415
411,600
1,893,729
5,836,727
13,364,290
29,200,435
59,149,267
53,937,176
63,014,946
112,476,571
160,012,679
243,215,015
344,913,648
445,116,558
The mineral products of Australasia are second only to the pastoral
industries in importance, and are, probably, of greater prospective value
to the colonies, since the prosecution of mining, and the avocations
which follow in its train, must mean employment to a much larger
portion of the community than can possibly be absorbed on the runs
and sheep walks of the great stockowners and woolgrowers of the
interior. Some idea of the tremendous strides already made in
mining can be gained from the fact that up to the end of 1883 the
total value of precious and useful minerals raised in the Australasian
colonies was £352,199,709, while in 1883 the value of the gold and
tin alone, which was shipped for export abroad, was £9,046,351.
It may not be out of place here to add that at the present time
(1885) the mineral resources of these colonies are being examined and
worked with increased vigour and success. In New South Wales
recent events point to the creation of a silver mining industry which
may rival those of Nevada and Mexico. In the same colony renewed
efforts are being made to work the magnificent deposits of iron ore
with which the eastern highlands abound. The vast auriferous area
which the combined colonies contain is more extensively and exhaustively
worked than ever before. On many of the fields the independent
prospectors and surface miners have long disappeared, and their places
have been filled by the costly labour-employing machinery of large
companies and capitalists. For every ounce of gold now raised, fully
12


double the amount of capital and labour is being employed, as com-
pared with the results obtained by mining in the early days. The
total amount of gold exported from Australasia up to the end of 1883
was 65,054,0390z5., value £256,126,864.
Mr. G. Mulhall, in his “ Balance Sheet of the World,” gives the
amount of gold raised in the chief goldmining countries for the periods
1851-1860 and 1861-1867 asunder;
1851—1860.
OZS, OF GOLD RAISED,
1861-1867.
OZS. OF GOLD RAISED,
Australasia
California
Russia
Australasia
16,800,000
11,200,000
California & British
Columbia
America (excluding
California)
America (other than
California) and
Russia
8,900,000
In the production of coal, New South Wales and Queensland are
the only two colonies wherein the industry has, as yet, assumed any
dimensions. From recently published statements, relating to the
composition of the coals of Australasia and other parts of the world,
it appears that the seams of the Newcastle, Illawarra and Western
districts of New South Wales, of the Grey River in New Zealand, and
Ipswich in Queensland are equal, and in some instances superior, in
quality to those of England and Wales and the chief coal raising parts
of America* The quantity of coal in New South Wales alone is
practically inexhaustible, the area of known carboniferous land being
over 16,000,000 acres. The total output in New South Wales up to
end of 1883 was 26,000,000 tons.
A large quantity of silver, copper, and tin is also exported, and most
of the rarer metals are found, including antimony, lead, bismuth, cobalt,
asbestos, quicksilver, zinc, manganese, and plumbago; also diamonds,
sapphires, opals, and marble.
Turning to the agricultural products, the extent of the trade may
be gathered from the fact that at the end of 1883 nearly eight millions
of acres were under cultivation, yielding wheat, oats, barley, and hay
to the value of £19,000,000 sterling per annum. This does not include
two and a-half million acres under miscellaneous tillage, nor four and
a-half million acres, in New Zealand producing sown grasses.
The amount of land under cultivation has increased from 496,000
acres in 1850, to 12,452,000 in 1883. The number of bushels of wheat
raised in 1850 was 3,127,219, and in 1883 it was 45,541,592 ; the yield
per head of the population being 64 bushels in 1850 and 14.7 in 1883.
The increase in other agricultural products has been commensurate with
that of those we have mentioned.
* Report by W. A. Dixon, F.C.S., to Department of Mines, Sydney.


No less remarkable are the strides made in individual and national
wealth, as shewn by the Banking statistics and the returns of the Public
Revenue. Sufficient, however, has been said to prove, that, in all the
industries which go to make up the wealth and influence of a country,
Australasia has been progressing with a great and uniform rapidity.
The effects of this are to be seen on every hand. Wealthy and popu-
lous cities are springing up in all the colonies ; the temporary tenements
of early days are being replaced by stately edifices, whose marble
columns and massive masonry would grace the great seats of learning
and power in the Old World; the outposts of civilization are being ex-
tended into the heart of the continent; the conservation of water in
the interior is rendering fruitful many regions which were once re-
garded as uninhabitable; a network of railways and telegraphs is
extending in every direction; the achievements of science are daily
bringing us into closer communication with the great seaports of the
Atlantic; schools and churches and institutions for the elevation of the
masses, are multiplying in every quarter of the colonies; in short, all
the indications of vitality and wealth are everywhere increasing.
In attempting to explain the progress that has been made in every
department of industry, as shown by the figures already quoted, we
intuitively turn to the climatic advantages of Australasia, which have
so greatly assisted in the development of her resources, and to the
political and social conditions which have rendered that development so
easy. Unfortunately we do not possess sufficiently comprehensive data
to make, an accurate comparison between the climates and meteorolo
gical phenomena of the different colonies and those of the great
countries in the other hemisphere. The only practical ground of com-
parison is that of geographical position. It is well known that equal
latitudes in different hemispheres are by no means a certain indication
of similar climatic conditions. But what difference has been noted,
however, has been found largely in favour of the Southern latitudes,
the temperature south of the line being very much more uniform than
in corresponding positions north of it.* This fact has doubtless been
very helpful in accelerating the prosperity of Australasia.
But it is not to physical and climatic advantages alone that we can
trace the remarkable successes of the past. Our political and social
privileges have also been great. What the passage of the Blue Moun-
tains was to Australia materially, the initiation of Responsible Govern-
ment was politically and intellectually. It was the one thing needful to
attract to our shores the culture, the ambition, and the industry of
civilization. It quickened at once the pulse of colonial enterprise, and
lent a new aspect to all the affairs of Government. ■%
The influence which so equitable a provision for the preservation
of independence and public spirit has had upon the general growth of
Vide Physical Geography and Climate of N. S. Wales, by H. C. Russell, p. 19.
14


the colonies, is very marked. In 1856 (the date of the first Colonial
Parliament under Responsible Government) the colonies were rapidly
freeing themselves*from the taint of convictism ; a steady stream of
emigrants of the right class, from the United Kingdom, was setting in ;
the true industries were recovering from the depression of the gold
mania, and Australasia was fairly launched upon that career of pros-
perity which has continued with increasing promise up to the present
day. The introduction of liberal political institutions at such a time
was singularly opportune. While in older countries the traces of
feudalism and the prescriptions of aristocracies confined the energies and
ambitions of the lower and middle classes to limited spheres, here, in
Australasia, surrounded by new scenes, invigorated by cheerful antici-
pations, and supported by the public profession of perfect and uncon-
ditional equality of rights, the industrious and honourable colonist, of
whatever class, found his chances of advancement practically unlimited.
Stimulated to great exertions by his encouraging prospects, and
unimpeded by the hereditary prerogatives of favoured families, he was
able, under the potent segis of British prestige, to prosecute with vigour
the peaceful avocations of commerce and settlement, and at the same
time by taking an intelligent interest in matters of public moment to
help in perfecting the new form of Government.
If in discussing this branch of the subject we endeavour to gain an
idea of the growth of the colonies by taking a brief glance at their
political constitutions, we find that although less than thirty years have
elapsed since the first Colonial Parliament under Responsible Government
sat, yet we can find abundant evidence that during the whole of that
period the public life of Australasia has been essentially progressive.
Not even in England or America do those great measures for social
improvement, which have already left their mark upon the present age,
fall upon a more kindly soil than in these new lands. Both in the
statute books of the colonies, and in the habits and spirit of the
colonists themselves, we can find a ready recognition of all those great
principles which are most essential to the intelligent self-government of
a free people. At present all the colonies (with the exception of Western
Australia) enjoy elaborate systems of self government, the very exist-
ence of which postulates a high state of intellectual progress. Indeed,
it is difficult to conceive of a form of government more conducive to
individual liberty and national greatness, than that which the several
colonies now possess : more expansive than the venerable traditionary
constitution of England, it possesses all its “memorable safeguards,”
combined with the salutary elasticity of a temperate and well-ordered
democracy. And if, continuing the review, we revert from the State to
the individual, we shall find that the adoption of universal suffrage and
universal education has spread throughout Australasia a watchful con-
cern in its government and laws. The thoughtful colonist recognises
how intimately the prosperity of the country is associated with his own.
He perceives that the privilege of making the laws entails the obligation


of obedience and respect. No irritating limitations of birth curtail his
possibilities ; and the power to aid in the government of the country is
consequently cherished as an inalienable right, instead of being regarded
as an irksome duty.
Any review of the growth of Australasia would be incomplete, and
to a certain extent misleading, if some notice were not taken of the dark
as well as of the bright side of colonial life—however much the latter
may predominate. The fact cannot be disguised that, from causes which
perplex, even if they do not altogether baffle, the political economist,
most of the undesirable elements of civilization—which have popularly
been considered indigenous to the old world and were never expected to
reappear in new communities like these—are manifesting themselves in
shapes which are only thrown into bolder relief by the background of
general prosperity. In the midst of all our wealth, and with (theoreti-
cally and apparently) abundant opportunity for everyone to dwell in
ease, respectability and comfort, we have our paupers, our vagrants,
our criminals; we have trade depressions, strikes, lock-outs, class
antagonism, larrikinisra, and numerous other social disorders which, to
the thoughtful observer, are utterly incongruous with our liberal institu-
tions and wonderful material progress. Indeed, considering these dis-
orders and reflecting upon the natural advantages and resources of the
country, one feels a strong inclination to sympathize with the sentiment
expressed by Bishop Heber in his somewhat homely and familiar
lines—
“ Every prospect pleases.
And only man is vile. ”
It is not necessary here to enter into any discussion as to the
actual causes of this state of things, nor even to suggest a remedy, were
the task never so easy and tempting. It is sufficient in an account of
colonial growth, to state that such things have grown and do exist.
One cheering circumstance, however, in connection with this phase
of the subject, is the earnestness with which, everywhere, social prob-
lems are discussed, and the respect with which, for the most part, any
proposed reform is examined and debated. There are, of course,
exceptions ; but the general spirit of the press and the platform in Aus-
tralasia is in favour of fair play, and it may be truly said that, upon the
whole, these colonies are as free from the trammels of tradition, either
in politics or religion, as any country on the face of the globe. Social
inequalities—nay, even iniquities—exist; but there is hope in the fact
that they are not ignored. The intelligence and the philanthropy of the
community are concentrated upon them ; and the man who promulgates
a doctrine having for its object the reformation of social evils, or the
more equitable distribution of the comforts of life among the toilers
of the world, meets nowhere with a heartier welcome than in Australasia.
Of the many social and political questions which have engaged the
attention of the statesmen of Australasia, upon none has public senti-


ment been more violently agitated, or party feeling more intense, than
upon that of State Education. And certainly the subject deserves all
the prominence that has been given to it. It is one which deals with
humanity at its formative and impressionable stage, and were it only
possible to discover, beyond doubt, the proper ideas to instil into the
minds of the young, and the proper method of so doing, the moral
problem of humanity would reach solution in two generations.
It is the misfortune of most new countries that the development of
their physical resources is usually prosecuted in the first instance at the
expense of the mental and moral elevation of the rising generation, in
whom the absence of the mollifying influences of domestic associations
speedily displays itself. A class is thus created which with all the in-
stincts and habits of ignorant and uncultured proletai’ians combines the
wealth (and the power that attends wealth) of patricians. The influence
exerted by the example of a class like this is not felt immediately, per-
haps ; but through multitudinous channels it penetrates into the body
politic, and permeates it with a coarseness and lack of refinement, the
visible and most objectionable manifestation of which, in the lowest
strata of society, has corruptly named itself “ Larrikinism.” To the
gigantic task of eradicating this scourge from our midst the Parliaments
of the various colonies have set themselves with commendable energy,
and with results that may be gauged with tolerable correctness by a
review of the Educational movement and a study of our Educational
statistics.
Owing to the peculiar circumstances of the colonies, the growth of
their Educational systems has been unique. Unable to follow the pre-
cedents of older countries, they have wisely adopted the most valuable
principles therefrom, while securing at the same time many estimable
innovations tending to decrease the enfeebling influence of sectarian
distinctions.
The value placed upon the mental culture of the young can be
estimated from the annual outlay for educational purposes, which by the
combined Australasian Governments is, in round numbers, £3,000,000,
or slightly more than £1 per head of the entire population ; and its
results may also be seen in the fact that in 1881 out of every 10,000
adults 9,373 were able to read, and 8,865 to read and write.
It is gratifying to notice in connection with this branch of the
subject (and to what degree the extended facilities for intellectual im-
provement have tended to bring about such a state of things it is of
course impossible to say) that, according to the published returns of our
prison departments, crime in Australasia has of late years been decrea-
sing. In the quinquenniad 1876-1881 the gross number of convictions,
after committal, fell,in Victoria, from 384 (in 1876) to 332 (in 1881), and
taking Australasia as a whole, while in 1876 one person was convicted
after committal for every 1310 inhabitants, in 1881 the proportion fell
to one in 1865. Almost the whole* of this improvement took place
during the last two years of the period, the total number of com-


mittals being in 1879, 4061, and in 1881 only 3,506. The convictions
arising from these committals were 2,311 in 1879, and 2,076 in 1881,
showing a decrease in the number of committals of 15.8 per cent
in the two years, and in the convictions of 22.7 per cent.*
There are many other indications of the growth of the Australasian
colonies, but for present purposes it would be as unnecessary to cite
further statistics in proof thereof, as it would be superfluous to dwell at
length upon the facts and figures already quoted.
In studying the broader question of the relations of the
colonies to the Mother Country, we stand before a series
of social and political phenomena of startling significance.
The great cardinal tendency of the British people during
the last two centuries has been the colonization of enormous
areas of country in newly discovered continents. Professor
Seeley, the well-known author of “ The Expansion of England,” some-
what piquantly remarks that “ Great Britain appears to have colonized
and peopled half the world in a6t of absence of mind.” Certain it is,
that while the British historian has been busy narrating the
wranglingsand petty by-play of the parliamentary lobby, and converting
the history of a great nation into a mere biography of its aristocracy,
new lands—other Britains—have sprung almost unnoticed into
existence. Of these Australasia is not the least, and it is at this, the
most eventful period in the history of these colonies, that we have to
consider their relation to the mother country.
To Great Britain, and therefore to English-speaking people all over
the world, the question is one of vital importance. Already in the
British Isles the population is very dense ; competition in every industry
is daily becoming more keen, and the struggle to live more intense.
In confronting these difficulties the most momentous problem of the
century will present itself to the rising statesmen of the Empire ; either
an enormous amount of distress must be endured by the people of
England, Ireland and Scotland, or immigration must take place to the
vast, thinly populated lands of Australasia and America. The latter
will commend itself to earnest reformers as at any rate a preferable
course to pursue than to await the adoption of schemes, more or less
Utopian, for land nationalization or redistribution of property. It is
this which lends importance to the subject and suggests at once the
question,—Do our present relations to the Mother Country favour the
continuance or dissolution of the Imperial connection? Will the
thousands of our countrymen, who in the future must flock to these
shores, come to an integral part of Great Britain, or to a great
congeries of states whose connection therewith will be merely a formal,
and therefore feeble, tie of expediency or profit ? The reply to this is
* V'ictorian Year Book 1882-3, p. 5-14.


greatly facilitated by the consideration of recent events. The virtues
of Federation have been freely discussed throughout the Empire, and
the idea of a Great United Britain has been steadily gaining ground.
Many of the leading public men, at home and abroad, maintain that
the time has either arrived or is fast approaching when the expansion of
the central governing power of England can be no longer safely or fairly
delayed. The contention has acquired fresh force from the prominence
which Australasian affairs have recently assumed. For the first time in our
history we have stepped outside the limited arena of colonial politics.
Oar interest in the future of Australasia is far too great to permit us
us to look on with indifference while New Caledonia is being
peopled with French convicts, and the more adjacent islands appropriated
by Germany. The consideration of so many grave matters of extra-
colonial moment has repeatedly directed public attention to the question
of our relation to the mother country, and the expressions of opinion
thereon are particularly helpful in forming an estimate of the attitude
of the colonies towards her. As far as can be gathered from the
utterances of men of every shade of opinion, the feeling of attachment to
the parent country has never been more general or sincere than at pre
sent. It has not been governed by the cautious calculations of expediency ;
but has steadily increased as the necessity for Imperial protection has
disappeared. Never has the loyalty of Australasia to Britain been
greater than it is to-day : never has our dependence on the mother
country been less. In the thriving cities of the coast, and in the hut
of the solitary settler away in the heart of the continent, enthusiastic
expressions of continued loyalty proclaim that Australasia is not merely
content, but proud to remain an integral part of the British Empire;—
proud of the splendid past of her island ancestry, and the glory and
renown of British institutions and prowess.
Still, mingling with this feeling, but by no means overpowering it,
is a patriotism essentially Australian. Our conceptions of Australasia
can hardly be realised by those who, unacquainted with our resources,
regard us from a distance as a mere handful of well-meaning agricul-
turalists. In the profusion of our natural wealth and the perfection of
our political and social privileges, we believe we are as fortunate as the
most favoured nations of the world, and it is therefore with feelings of
lively and well-grounded hope that we contemplate our future ; but our
allegiance to the spirit of British national life never wanes. The
distracting surroundings of a new and distant land have not engendered
a sentiment of isolated, local patriotism. Because we are thoroughly
Australian, we are not becoming less thoroughly British ; nor are we
so foolish as to believe that the great centres from which radiate the
controlling forces of Christendom can be easily transferred to the
southern hemisphere. Our confidence in the future of these colonies is
as firmly rooted as the hope that the Imperial connection may
become more indissoluble as years roll by, and that the influence of a
mighty name may enhance our prosperity, and entrench and confirm the
peace, not alone of Australasia, but of mankind.


These sentiments are not the mere transitory manifestations of an
unreasoning instinct. The ties of kinship, of common institutions, of
language, and of religion, though powerful while they last, can be
effaced and are liable to decay. It is only when they are combined
with a close community of interest that the permanent solidity of a
great confederacy is assured. When not only are the sympathies of
scattered portions of one race of men identical, but also their common
commercial prosperity and individual safety, then an additional and
very powerful protection against disintegration is established. In our
relations with Great Britain we can fortunately claim this safeguard. As
nearly as is possible in two countries where separate centres of govern-
ment exist, the commercial relations between Australasia and England
are those of one province of a country to another, A very much larger
portion of the trade of the colonies goes to England than to all the
remaining countries of the world combined ; indeed, almost the whole of
the trade of these colonies beyond their borders is transacted with the
mother country. What we have produced, England has manufactured ;
and what she has manufactured, we have consumed.
This question of commercial reciprocity is manifestly no light
matter. It was purely a monetary difficulty which brought about the
separation of America. The only thing which tends, in any way, to
interfere with the freer interchange of commerce with England, is the
varied, and in many cases antagonistic, fiscal policies of the colonies
themselves. This is especially to be regretted since it also forms the
chief obstacle to the federation of Australasia—a step which must neces-
sarily precede any organised efforts having for their object the closer
union of the Empire at large. But as the necessity for federation
increases, these difficulties will naturally disappear ; as the advantages
of union amongst the colonies become more generally recognized, they
will outweigh all opposing tendencies. The same remark applies to the
larger question of Imperial union. The happy power of adapting the
political institutions of the nation to meet every demand for reform and
expansion will no doubt devise a way to overcome the technical diffi-
culties of representation and united control.
Reverting to the commercial relations, it is assuring to note the
growth of that portion of the commerce of the mother country which
finds its way to these shores. In addition to the figures quoted on page
9, it may be mentioned that in 1881 a larger export trade was
transacted by Great Britain with Australasia than with any other
country except the United States and British India, the figures
being * :
United States, ... £29,796,298.
British India ... £29,244,007.
Australasia ... £21,377,931.
* Statesman’s Year Book, 1883.


With no other country did the English export trade for that year
exceed £20,000,000 sterling.
The diversion of the English trade from foreign to colonial markets
during the period 1871-1880 is also worthy of notice. In 1871 the total
export trade of Great Britain with Europe and the United States was
£109,627,395 ; in 1880 it had fallen to £87,091,706, a decrease of 25'9
per cent. In the same period the British exports to the colonies in-
creased from £51,250,213 in 1871, to £75,254,179 in 1880, thus show-
ing an increase of 46’8 per cent, for the colonies, as against a decrease of
259 per cent, for Europe and the United States. In the imports enter-
ing the British isles the proportionate increase in the colonial over the
foreign trade is still more striking. Taking for convenience sake the
total import trade of England, Ireland and Scotland as 100, the
amount contributed by foreign countries in 1871 was 73, and by the
colonies 27, while in 1880 the foreign imports had fallen to 55, and the
colonial had increased to 45 *
Facts so conclusive as these go very far towards proving that dis-
tance alone is powerless to weaken the Union of the Empire. The time-
saving improvements in large ocean-going steamers are daily bringing us
nearer the Mother Country and every inducement is afforded to the mer-
cantile community by the low rates of freight—the cost of carriage between
London and Sydney, for instance, being considerably less than between
New York and San Francisco. Telegraphic communication has brought
us still nearer the heart of the Empire. We know almost as soon as the
residents of Birmingham or London what is being done in the Council
Halls of Great Britain or on the battle-fields of Europe.
The question of defence is a vital one. The altered relations between
Great Britain and Australasia, resulting mainly from the wonderful pro-
gress of the latter, have rendered a system of common defence as valuable
to the one as it will be useful to the other. Deprived- of her colonies,
Britain, as a great power, must necessarily wane; but, strengthened
by their permanent and active allegiance, her military resources must
steadily increase. Similarly, Australasia, separated from Great Britain,
will, as a nation, recede into comparative insignificance; united with her
she will form a large and growing part of the first nation in the world.
Amongst the reasons which impel us to desire a system of common
defence is the fact that we could neither defend ourselves so well nor so
cheaply if isolated. The security which the protection of Great Britain
has ensured in the past, has added a link of gratitude to the chain of
sentiment and interest which unites the colonies to the Mother Country.
That Australasia is willing to contribute her share towards main-
taining the military prestige of the Empire, has been amply proved by
the enthusiasm lately displayed in connection with affairs in the Soudan.
No better indication of that practical loyalty which has already been
* The figures are those published by the Board of Trade, and are quoted in
the proceedings of the Royal Colonial Institute. Vol. 14., pp. 406-7.


alluded to could be found than in the fact that, at a time when consider-
able friction had been caused by the wavering attitude of the Colonial
Office towards the Government of Germany; when Great Britain was
involved in serious embarrassments ; when she was endeavouring at
enormous sacrifices to emancipate the enslaved races of Lower Egypt;
and when the difficulties of this unfortunate Soudan campaign seemed
to have culminated in the death of the bravest soldier and most devoted
humanitarian of the age—a spontaneous feeling of sympathy with the
mother land was expressed by the whole of Australasia. Generous offers
of men, material, and money poured in on every hand, and asserted in
the most unmistakable manner our patriotism and loyalty.
In considering the question—how may the closer union of Austra-
lasia and Great Britain be accomplished?—we meet many indications
that the first step will doubtless be the federation of the colonies, and
it does not seem improbable that their association will be the signal for
a closer union of the segregated members of the Empire. As a fore-
runner of such a scheme the suggestion recently made by Earl Grey,
for the revival of a sub-committee of the Privy Council, on which the
Agents-General of the colonies should have seats, is deserving of
attention; for, unlike many attempts to deal with the question, it is
neither impracticable nor unprecedented. The whole question of the
future connection which may exist between these colonies and the
parent country is, however, too large to be dealt with here, besides
being surrounded by the uncertainties which naturally cluster
round futurity. That Australasia must prosper by virtue of the many
advantages to which reference has been made, seems beyond doubt;
and that the close'and friendly relations towards Great Britain which have
existed without any signs of decay for so long will continue,
equally certain ; but oPthe changes in the outward form of the union,
which must assuredly take place as time rolls on, it is impossible to
speak with even approximate certainty, and useless to surmise.
We quit with unaffected reluctance the study of a subject, the
pleasure and instructiveness of which have been equally great. The
eagerness of man to believe that which he desires to be true has passed
into a proverb. But the steady and vigorous growth which we have
traced ; the evident stability of our present position, and the abiding
nature of the relations which bind us to the mother country, are
sufficient to show that the belief of Australians in the coming greatness
of their native land has a much firmer basis than mere desire. We
look forward with enthusiasm—perhaps with too warm an enthusiasm—
to the splendid future which seems opening before us. For if the past
is crowded with memories of prosperity, the future is even still more
radiant with promise. The mighty progression which time will bring
must far exceed the conceptions of the most sanguine. We may
estimate the increase in population ; we may speak of the strides that
commerce and industry will take; we may imagine to what an extent


the facilities of international communication will be improved, and
how science will ameliorate the conditions of existence :—all this
we may attempt to picture and to feel. But material progress
is not all ! None can marshal forth in fitting terms an
adequate description, or even form a remote idea of the mighty nation
which may flourish in these Austral seas before another century has
passed. For who can place a limit to the aspirations, or foretell to their
full extent, the glorious possibilities and ultimate destiny of a great and
free people 1
APPENDIX SHOWING THE PROGRESS QF AUSTRALASIA
FROM 1850 TO 1883.
The following table (compiled from statistics by R. M. Johnston, Government
Statist, Tasmania) shows the progress of Australasia during one-third of a
century, i.e., between the years 1850 and 1883. The figures for 1882 are also
given to mark the rate of progress going on at the close of this eventful period
in the history of Australasia.
Area : 3,079,571 square miles.
1850 t
Population .. ... ... j 483,365
Exports ... ... ... ... 4,661,043
Imports 4,447,375
General Revenue ... ... 1,188,770
Public Debt 57,917
Railways open and in ) ..
construction (miles) )
Telegraphs (miles wire) ... nil
Lands in Cultivation (acres) ... 496,945
Wheat (bushels)... ... ... 3,127,219
(Sheep 22,128,626
Live Stock < Cattle 2,290,566
Cattle 2,290,566
Horses ... .. 186,535
Wool Exports (value) ... ... £2,843,031
Gold and Tin Exports, in- )
eluding Specie from N. S. > ni q
Wales and Victoria )
2,936,409
50,633,334
63,844,359
22,064,108
99,219,682
7,682
56,132
11,390,597
31,763,098
76,466,450
8,429,448
1,219,342
£21,258,417
£9,046,351
3,091,887
55,719,558
61,570,930
21,319,818
109,132,395
8,413
57,175
12,452,095
45,541,592
79,872,350
8,403,780
1,235,717
£21,337,610
£9,144,195
*The gold of Victoria and New South Wales is largely minted prior to export,
fEstimated in part.
Note.— ln this essay, some difficulty has arisen with regard to the use of the
words Australia and Australasia, which may render a little explanation necessary.
Wherever statistics are given, they refer, unless specified otherwise, to the whole
of Australasia ; but for the sake of euphony—and especially in portions of the
essay where the word is used in a national sense—the adjective Australian has
been employed, although the remarks made apply in almost every instance to
New Zealand and Tasmania as well.
23


