

THE RAILWAYS
PAMPHLET No.
SHOWS THE PRESENT STATE OF THE RAILWAYS
AND TRAMWAYS OF THE COLONY OF NEW
SOUTH WALES, THEIR MANAGEMENT
AND MONETARY CONDITION.
WITH AN APPENDIX CONTAINING STATEMENTS
THAT SHOW THE NECESSITY FOR A NEW FORM
OF GOVERNMENT, WITH PAID MEMBERS.
By HENRY FRANCIS,
Author of Six Pamphlets on Lije Insurance, $-c., fyc.
fV 2-7




X6S-77
THE RAILWAYS Al\iD TRAMWAYS.
nnss/FfllT
The Government of tlie colony is borrowing millions of money to
pay for the construction cf Railways and Tramways. The means
of travelling and transporting goods in the most economical way,
is one of the most important elements for the prosperity of this vast
colony of New South Wales. Therefore the public ought to have its
attention called to the mismanagement of the railways, which is
universally complained of, and which I shall clearly prove by the
Commissioners’ own report for the year 1882.
The last specimen of management of the Tramways, one which
has outraged the feelings of every thinking colonist, is the action of
the present Ministry and the Commissioner, who have, between
them, devised a law to imprison men and women, and actually have
imprisoned under their law two Working men for tendering the
current coin of the realm in payment of the full amount of their
tram fares. These two men were handed over to policemen, who
imprisoned them in Darlinghurst gaol. The tram servants at the
present time have assured me that they have received instructions not
to touch money, the alternative is to hand the passengers over to
the police if they have not tickets to give the collectors. Such
outrageous conduct, infringing the liberty of the subject, is
sufficient evidence of the character, intellect, and business capacity
of the men whom the public have entrusted with the management of
tlie railways and tramways.
Tii is culminating point of stolidity, this action amounting to
insane conduct on tlie part of the Minister for Works and the
Commissioner of the Railways and Tramways of the colony, is the
very thing that was wanted to open the eyes of the outside public and
Parliament. A rigid Parliamentary investigation of the railway
accounts, and general management, is required, and must take place,
to explain the extraordinary statements in the Commissioner’s
Railway and Tramway report, and other documents published by the
Government, which no one takes pains to understand.
The Railway and Tramway capital account, working expenses,
and receipts, and other charges, are given in so diffuse a manner,
and with such a want of order, that it is only by the most careful


analysis of the figures given under the different headings, that even
an approximate estimate of the amounts can be arrived at. I will
prove my statements by comparing the Commissioner’s report
with three English railway reports lying before me, of which I give
a short description.
London and North-Western Railway Report, August
24th 1878. Capital, £75,475,800. —This report is printed on
fourteen pages. All the departments give their information
separately, and so fully in detail as to perfectly satisfy the share-
holders as to the expenditure of every pound. The profit on the
earnings to pay interest on the above capital is clearly shown : and
all figures showing the different items are so explicit, that it would be
very difficult to ask a question the report does not answer in a
satisfactory manner.
The Great Northern Railway Company’s Report,
August 12th. Capital, £27,029,941 —Report printed on four-
teen pagis, giving a balance sheet containing all that can possibly
be desired to show the monetary state of accounts ; and every detail
is given, affording such information as to perfectly satisfy the
shareholders.
Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Report, December
81st, 1879. Capital £84,000,000. —Printed on eight pages, con-
taining every required information given in the like manner as the
two before described reports. All of these reports are issued to the
shareholders a reasonable period of time before the half-yearly meet-
ing of the Board of Directors takes place, to enable the shareholders
at the meetings to ask any questions in reference to the amounts as
shown by figures ; or any statements submitted in the report that
require explanation or investigation as affecting the interests of the
shareholders of the company.
New South Wales Railways and Tramways Report,
December 81st, 1882. Capital £16,776,642. —The report of
Commissioner Goodchap is a folio volume of 156 pages of
closely printed matter, illustrated with thirteen pa,yes of beautiful
many coloured diagrams at the end of the book. This report does
not contain a balance sheet or any summary of figures by which a
man of business can form an opinion as to the nature of the expenditure
or other monetary state of the railway accounts ; the £ 15,776,642
expended is exclusive of the Tramway accounts.
The railways here are the property of the Public, who are the
shareholders, and who should insist upon having annual reports
furnished by the departments, in the same manner as the English
Railway Companies, on formula showing indisputable accounts to the
members of Parliament and the public, giving to both the power to ask
any questions for information, or to suggest necessary improvements,
without being snubbed by the department.
The above comparison made between the English railway
reports, and the Commissioner’s report, is to show that the latter is not


only useless, but a wasteful expenditure for the printing, because the
figures ami statements it contains occupy the time of the Parliament
in endless angry debates as to the state of the railway accounts, the
Government supporting their officers, and the Opposition flatly
denying the truth of the report.
Whether a railway be well or badly managed may be a subject
for discussion, but the want of the necessary returns from the
department for making the monetary state of the railway accounts
clear, is a subject that will admit of no discussion, and shows such a
state of disorganisation in the railway department, that the Parlia-
ment ought at once to investigate and rectify. It is currently
reported outside Government buildings that the railway departments
have for a long time been in a state little better than civil war, arising
from the departments sudden growth into great importance, elevating
men to positions, who from their early associations and education
should have been superannuated as being incapable of improvement,
and unfit to occupy higher stations in life.
To reform this state of affairs, a Parliamentary Committee
ought to be appointed to investigate the present state of confusion,
and discover the cause why the piublic is not well served for its
money ; that it is not well served by the railway department, nor
does it receive its full value in services, my quotations, taken from
Government documents, now placed before the leader in a way to bo
understood, will clearly prove.
The Commissioner’s report is put forth as a most extraordinary
achievement in railway account keeping, and is furnished with
thirteen diagrams beautifully coloured, evidently the work
of an artist, but employed by some one who did not understand the
application and construction of diagrams to show quantities, or
the years to correspond with the figures shown. The bottom and
vertical lines of the diagrams are divided into twenty-eight parts to
represent the same number of years ; the cross lines are not divided
to show twenty-eight parts, but every diagram is divided as if by
chance into different spaces, without reference to the number to be
indicated, and the year required to correspond. The diagrams are
divided into spaces represented by the following numbers—l 3, 11,
17, 16, 10, 22, 18, 12, 27. How these divisions are to give twenty-
eight parts at a glance I leave the reader to conjecture.
I commence with the last pages of the report for the same
reason that a lady reads the last pmges of a novel to discover the
essence of the pilot. The pilot of the report is to make it appear
that the railways arc earning high interest for the money invested in
them, and the larger the amount of earnings the Commissioner’s
report can be made to show, the more credit he assumes for his
faculty of managing railways, and the most wonderful expedients are
used to increase the amount shown as earnings and profits, the
whole report being devoted to that one object; and so great is the
zeal to show large earnings, that money received for water and


property sold, and work done, is shown as if received for carrying-
passengers on the lines. I quote the Commissioner’s report to
prove the truth of my statement ; and in every' case give tbe
number of the page and the figures correctly. Page 88, year 1882,
Mails, Advertising, Sale of old materials, &c., £31,597 19s Id ;
Less credits, £20,191 12s 2d. These amounts show £11,40(5
added to the total earning for year 1882. Mails, Advertising. Sale-
of old materials, &c,, £14,258 15s 5d ; less credits, £11,2(58 (5s 4d.
These amounts give nil to the total earnings of 1881. 1882, gross
earnings, £1,701,01(5 Is Id ; pages 20 and 147 only give
£1,(598,83(5. The receipts, not only of old materials sold, but new
work and materials supplied to Members of Parliament, Contractors
and others, can only be accounted for when paid into the traffic
department, and the amount added to the gross earnings, shown as
if received lor tonnage and coaching. From information received the
police are investigating the nature of one of these accounts, as the
report shows no credit for such receipts that I can discover ; and the
fact of mixing together the monies paid for materials and labour
with the earnings of the lines, can only be done for some object
requiring explanation. This muddling of the earnings accounts with
materials, labour, and traffic, is evidently the expedient used to give
an appearance of railway profit, and to hide the cost of upholding,
maintaining, and working expenses of the railways. Railway
funds ought to be shown in only two separate accounts, Capital
account and earnings. The jockeying of the accounts in the report
between these two sums of money, is as clearly to be seen as any twn
jockeys between the two winning posts of a race course, and in both
cases to disguise the trickery is the art of success.
To charge every expenditure on the finished lines that is
incurred in working them to the capital account, would show the
earnings as clear profit more than sufficient to pay the interest
on the money for the cost of construction.
If every expenditure was charged on the finished railways
incurred in working them, also on the permanent way, since they were
handed over to the Government as finished lines, represented by
the Capital account of the railways, there would be no profit whatever
to pay interest on their cost of construction, but be largely indebted
to the capital account. I can, by the Commissioner’s report,
obscure as it is, analyse the figures in such a way as to prove
my statement.
The year of the report, 1882, the total earnings are jockied up
to the amount of £1,(598,863, by the additional money not earned
by the traffic of the railways as a 1 ready shown, but which has been
derived from the capital account, as it is not accounted for in any
other way. For the same year the working expenses, on the same
principle, are jockied down to the amount of £934,(535. The
following items will test the dependence to be placed on the figures
of the report as to accuracy or truthfulness.


Cost of Head Office
£50,000 a year
Page 155—Amount paid for wages
788,873 „
Pages 74, 75—Fuel, Oil, and Tallow ...
1.17,000 „
Head Office—Page 148 ; Commissioner, £lOOO, with 223
officials, all chargeable to the open lines, exclusive of the Eugineer-
in-Chiefs Branch and office staff.
£955.873
These items have cost the colony £21,238 more for the year than the
Commissioner’s report shows as the total amount expended on the
maintenance of the permanent way, and every other expense con-
nected Avith working the railway for the year 1882. These figures
are sufficient to prove the inaccuracy of accounts in the report, and
their fallacy in showing profit on the traffic of the railways.
Deducting the cost of these three items shoAvn from the amount
of the total earnings—£955,878 from £1,098,863 —leaves the
balance £742,987, to pay for wear and renewal of 1208 miles of
permanent way, part double lines, sidings, stations, station houses,
signals, telegraphs, accidents, and every charge of that department ;
Avear and tear of locomotives, carriages, trucks and sheets, and
stationery, besides the interest on the Capital. A detailed list
of requirements to be found on pages 74 and 75 of report.
The amount of capital spent upon the open lines in addition to
the total earnings of 1882, see pages 5 and 6
Year —1882. £15.776,642 Expended upon the open lines
„ 1881. 13,301,597 ~ „ „
3,475,045
Less 924,520 The sum paid on lines not opened
£2,550,525
This balance Avas expended upon the open lines during
the year 1882. Earnings as shoAvn by the report, £1,689,863.
These tAA T o amounts are nearly four millions and a quarter.
£4,249,288 expended upon the open lines during the year of
the report, in Avhich the Commissioner assures the public the
total working expenses are only £934,635, leaving a balance of
£764,226, as clear, profit, to pay more than five per centum
per annum on the capital invested in the railways. The above
figures, and the result of table No 55, page 147, clearly expose
the incredibly mendacious report of the raihvay accounts, and general
mismanagement of the raihvays of the colony. The GoA'ern-
ment ought to investigate its own report, and ascertain the truth
of my quotations here given from its oavu Commissioner’s
document, or the public Avill infer that the Government is so
corrupt as not to dare to venture the risk of exposure of the true
condition of railway accounts if it do not at once bring the subject
before the House.


No. 55, page 147— Report by the Commissioner for Railways for the year 1882.
Returns of the number of passengers, tonnage of goods, earnings and working expenses, total and per train mile,
percentage of working expenses to gross earnings, not earnings, capital invested on lines open, and interest on capital
for the years 1881 and 1882 inclusive 1
Year.
Length
of
Line.
Number
of
Passengers.
Tonnage
of
Goods.
Earnings
from
Coaching-
Traffic.
Earnings
from
Goods
Traffic,
Total
Earnings.
Working
Expenses.
Earnings
per train
mile.
Working
Expenses
per mile.
Working-
Expenses
to
Earnings
Net
Earnings.
Capital on
the
lines open
and
expended.
Interest
on
capital
as
stated.
1882
Miles.
1268
No.
8.984,313
Tons.
2,619,427
£
587,825
£
1,111,038
£
1,698,863
£
934,635
d.
84-5
d.
4624
Per cent.
55-02
£
764,228
£
15,843,616
Per cent.
5-135
1881
995
6,907,312
2,033,850
488.675
955,551
1,444,226
738,334
88*3
45-16
51-12
705,892
13,301,597
5-307
1882
273
2,077,001
585,577
99,150
155,487
254,637
196,301
40
1-8
36
58,336
2,542,019
0 00
The result of this railway return here shown bv the above table, No. 55, for the year 1882 over 1881, is that 278 more
miles are opened for traffic ; 2,077,001 more passengers carried on the lines and 585,577 tons more goods carried ; with the
wear and tear of engines, rolling stock, and permanent way to be paid for, besides two and a half millions more capital
expended upon the open lines, at 4 per cent., £100,000 a year interest. £58,836 is the net earnings in full payment for interest
on tlie additional capital and the cost of labour and materials on this immense amount of additional work done during the
iqqi -*' ie additional number of passengers in 1882, at the same average rate of passage money, Is. 5d. each, as in
88 , amounts to £147,000. The 585,57/ additional tons of goods carried at the average rate of the previous year, at 9s. 4d.
per ton, amounts to the sujn of £270,000. The longer the lines the average ought to be higher. These immense discrepan-
cies, and with obvious errors shown by comparing the report with the Statistical Register in two items, amount to £9 G70.
Coaching traffic in the Report £587,825, in the Register £582,428, in the Register goods traffic £1,106,770, same items in
the railway report £1,111,038. The figures in the Register I have always found to be correct, and coming from the
iQco SU1 f’ "hich receives the railway money, are doubtless correct. The railway accounts in my pamphlet, published in
1869, always did show loss money paid into the Treasury than the receipts of the railway. The description then given in
ni} pamphlet of the railways is not equal to the present mismanagement. The only information that is clear in reference to
the tramways I take from the Statistical Register, 1882 over 1881.
1882.
1881.
Number of passengers 15,269,100
» „ 7,091,125
Earnings... £125,836
„ ... 61,921
Expenses over earnings, 1882... £6963
„ „ „ 1881... 4010
1882
Extra number of passengers 8,167,975 Earnings... £63,915 Loss over the year 1881...
1882 railway money deficiency, earnings and interest, £517,000 (less £58,336) over 1881.


Hejul Office : The Commissioner £1250 a year, with
22.3 officials in 1882, increased in number to 276
in 1883. Expenses of Head Office a year
£60,000
1883 (page 189) : Wages
952,*61
The Commissioner's Railway Report for the year 1884 is not
yet published, in August, 1885.
The railway report for 1883 contains 190 pages, and on
comparing the tables No. 55 and No. 57 in the two reports in the
way I have for 1881 and 1882 I find they give the following results.
The year 1883 over 1882 shows 52 miles of railway open for
traffic, with £1,061,398 capital expended upon the finished lines ;
1,287,906 more passengers, and 245,139 more tons of goods carried
on the lines. With the above outlay of capital and additional
traffic the year 1883 has resulted in £10,550 less net earnings than
1882. The railway returns show the additional working expenses
for the traffic of 1883, including the interest on the above capital,
to be £285,600, while the total additional earnings for the same
year are £232,600, and yet the report shows 54 and 44 per cent,
per annum interest on the capital.
This conclusively proves the fallacious character of the railway
reports. The working expenses for 1883 are shown to be
£1,177,788, while the following item of expenditure on the railways
comes to more than the total amount :
Fuel, Oil, Tallow, Waste Sheets,and Repairing Furniture 167,769
£1,180,630
The present extravagant railway expenditure can only be carried
on by an unlimited supply of borrowed money, used without control,
as is now practically the case.
TRAMWAYS.
The name is derived from Ottram the engineer, who introduced
oast iron rails at the collieries in the Midland counties, England,
used many years before the railways and exclusively for coal. An
Engineer, one of the committee of the first railway, the Liverpool
and Manchester, assured me when the scheme was initiated the
practicability of carrying passengers for profit was never suggested.
The profit on carriage depends upon the goodness of the road, and
the best possible material to make a good road of is steel, as now
used in rails for many years.
The railway capital account excludes the cost of the old tram-
way in Pitt-street, worked by horses That line was constructed of
broad, cast iron plates, which so impeded the usual horse vehicle
traffic that it had to be taken up in 1867. The end of the tramway
—at the railway station, Redferu, finished on the usual railway bars,
which answered perfectly.
The next tramway was constructed for the object of carrying
passengers from the railway to the Garden Palace Exhibition. The


line was laid with iron rails rolled in the colony, of such a bad
quality they had to he renewed every week. Several lots of rails
were used on the lines to afford eveiy opportunity for improved
manufacture. Success was known to he impossible, because steel
Avas required to stand the Avear, and in spite of this knoAvledge, and
in opposition to the advice of the highest and most competent
officials, the railway authorities did enter into large contracts to re-
roll the old raihvay iron into tramway rails. One of the contractors
assured me it Avas a Avaste of money to lay them down.
To prevent the present tramways sharing the same fate as the
old traimvay of Pitt-street, I here slioav their present condition ; and
to reduce their chaotic state into comparative order, 1 suggest these
additions, alterations, and improvements. The waste of time
suffered by the public that hoav takes place, often an hour Availing
for the required tram, arises, in a great measure, from shunting a
thousand tramcars daily into a small yard out of Bridge-street, close
to the Government offices. This is the resting place for the loco-
motive engines Avhich do the work, and take the place of horses,
therefore are rested as if they Avere tired horses. This Avaitmg
arrangement is in constant vieAv under the Commissioner’s AvindoAvs.
This loss of time necessitates double the number of engines and cars,
Avith double the number of engine drivers, conductors, and ticket
collectors, fuel, and every other expense, and the traffic reduced to
one-tenth of Avhat it Avould he, but for the labour of Avalking up to
this out of the Avay place, and paying fifty per cent, too much
money. The trams between Bridge and King streets start and
return comparatively empty. The miles run by the thousand trams
a day passing over this portion of the lines is obviously a further
loss of time and money, incurred merely for the object of shunting,
to enable the engines to he removed from one end of the cars, and
brought to the front for a new trip. This is the real necessity for
stabling the thousand trams a day in the small yard. This unneces-
sary loss of time and money Avill he obviated by carrying out my
plans, Avhich, if adopted, avi'll giA r e the public hotter accommodation,
and quicker travelling by more frequent trams, for less money.
The tramways, in their present condition and management, are,
commercially, a total failure. Page 155 of the Commissioner’s
report, shows the Avages to he £91,792 for the year 1882, exclusive
of the official staff and all the other Avorking expenses. These
Avages alone are £30,000 in excess of the total earnings of the
tramways for the year 1881. Such amounts are only a part of the
deficiencies shoAvn, and that, with the present advantage of ucav
rolling stock and lines. My figures clearly show that the Govern-
ment must inform the Parliament it Avill require neAv taxes for the
purpose of carrying the citizens of Sydney about in the tram-
cars ; or the Government must make such improvements in the
present machinery and management of the tram department as to
prevent imposing the necessary taxes. The tramways are


now in such an incomplete state that it is impossible to work them
at a profit from the obvious causes I have described. The first
thing to be done to make them pay is to continue the lines now laid
through the following streets. The lines in Phillip-street to be con-
tinued to the Circular Quay, along the side of which at a convenient
distance from the steamer ferry wharves ; turning out by the Queen’s
wharf into George-street, and through that street to Dawes’ point;
then by Lower Fort-street to KenLstreet, through it to the properties
near Dickson-street, passing by the railway depots through the
best route available, to go under George-street near to the
present railway bridge, up into the Redfern railway station, and
then by an easy curve to join the present lines in George-street ;
thus forming two unbroken tramlines through the two most suitable
streets, terminating in the best parts of the city to facilitate its
traffic, the cross streets, east and west, feeding the lines with
passengers. The required number of tramcars running in opposite
directions to be at the cross streets every two or three minutes,
or as fast as the public require them, and the number of
cars can be adjusted according to the different hours of the day,
when it is known there is a great influx or departure of passengers,
and as the cars will run so often that there will be no congregation
of passengers, nor waiting for a particular tram ; thus avoiding the
present danger of rushing for fear of not getting a seat in the right
tram ; and there will be no need of the name boards, nor time tables,
for every tram will go to the stopping place of every suburban line, and
the railway station. The charge from or to Dawes’ Point, to and
from the railway station, either by Kent-street or Elizabeth-
street, one penny. The few that will travel the whole dis-
tance compared to those picked up half way, and leave at a short
distance during the hot summer months, will surprise the Govern-
ment here as much as the traffic on the underground railway, London,
surprised its engineers, who had to confess that they were quite
unprepared for the amount of traffic when first starting the line.
Trams can be on continuous lines increased almost to any number,
only limited by the necessary distance between them for stopping,
which need never be so close together and dangerous as the blocking
of the lines that now takes place at several junctions, and stopping
places, and at the terminus, Phillip-street.
The suburban line which carries most passengers is the
Paddington. To accommodate this traffic the require I number of
trams are to be run between the Liverpool-street waiting-room and
the Paddington terminus ; these trams also to carry the Crown-
street and Moore Park passengers, who will have coloured paper
passes given to them for those two lines that will stop at Oxford-
street instead of these trams curving into that narrow street, stopping
its horse traffic and dangerous to foot passengers, this will save
the unnecessary loss of time from the trams waiting to take their
turn, as now takes place—penny fares to these three sections.


The Woollahra trams already stop at the Paddington section to
carry the passengers to that locality. The Waverley trams are to
stop at the Paddington section, and to run between that section
and the Waverley section—fare one penny. The Bondi trams to
run from the Waverley section to the terminus—twopence fare.
The Randwick trams to run from the Moore Park section to the
Randwick—fare, twopence ; the Coogee trams to run down to the
bay—fare twopence. The Waterloo trams to run from the Redfern
station to their jiresent section—fare one penny ; the Botany trams
to run from the Waterloo section, the route to be divided fairly int»
penny sections to Botany.
All the Southern tramways are to run to and from the railway
station, Redfern, to the waiting-room at the Glebe—fare one penny ;
the Newtown, Glebe Point, Forest Lodge, Leichhardt trams to
run from this part of the Glebe, each to their own terminus, fairly
dividing into penny sections the different routes. These arrange-
ments, I believe, would give to the public the advantages of cheap
and quick conveyance, and the minimum risk with the trams, which
from their so frequently passing through the streets and dividing
the routes into short sections, the present anxiety to catch the
desired tram is avoided, and where the change from one tram for
another takes place it will be on sites having ample space, saving the
ladies the annoyance of forming a part of the crowd that is generally
assembled at the corner of King-street and other stopping places,
besides the loss of time.
What I have stated of the tramway accounts and the general
management, shows there is ample room for improvement in both
departments.
THE RAILWAYS.
My statements of the railway accounts show that they require
rigid examination, and my remarks on working the railways
mechanically and on the traffic prove that immediate altera-
tions are equally necessary. I shall now state nothing but
what I have seen, or is so notoriously public as to be indisputable.
One of the most important conditions of the permanent way is that
the gauge be kept true. If it be not true the locomotives run off the
lines. That locomotives do run off the lines can be ascertained
from the drivers’ reports. Some time ago I saw a locomotive turned
over on its side close to the Sydney entrance of the first
tunnel. I at once examined the lines, and could hardly
have believed that locomotives could run on rails in such
bad condition. I found some railway chairs for a considerable dis-
tance had no keys whatever. I took out one of the keys, a rotten
one made out of the sap of colonial pine logs, from the first chair I
came to, in the presence of a friend of mine, who, if necessary, could
bear testimony to the state of the lines. I replaced the rotten key


by a sounder one. The key I removed I took away to show the
Engineer-in-Chief, who said he had protested against the use of such
material, but the lines were then out of his department so had ng
control, but kindly sent to me some good English keys so that any
one could compare the rubbish supplied to the Government
with the proper material. I have this same key in my possession.
The lives of the public and railway property are lost by such reckless
conduct. I have had interviews on the Redfern engineering and
carriage building part of the station with the chief locomotive engineer,
and sympathised with him on the littered state of the premises. 7
assured him that to me it appeared a combination of Quilp’s property
Bank side, and a Johnny-all-sorts shop. For years the wood of
broken trucks with the iron on it piled up rotting, old iron and new
materials thrown about all over the station. The sanitary inspec-
tors should inspect the filthy sheds the labourers occupy and have
their meals in. One of these sheds I was offered the use of for an
experimental apparatus. I was informed that it had not been
opened for four years and only contained old useless machinery, and
the stink of the surroundings was so great I declined it. This shed
is between the two principal workshops, most centrally situated, in
the best part of the premises. I have first described (what the
officials may call) petty things because they are evidence of disorder
that the public can understand the nature of. My friend, chief of
the locomotives, assured me he was not allowed to employ labour
to improve this state of things because the wages would appear in
the working expenses of the line. The waste and useless expenditure
upon the lines of another character can only be supported by borrow-
ing money by millions. At Eveleigh, close to the Redfern station,
some thousands have been spent upon a station to accommodate
some thirty to forty persons a day, while Summerhill, with five to
six thousand persons a day, has not a shed sufficient to protect this
traffic from sun or rain. It is obviously unnecessary to pay interest
on money to build stations until the traffic requires it. If I were to
continue my observations of a most unpleasant character to the
railway officials, I could fill a book as large as the Commissioner of
Railway’s report. The object I have in making these comments is
to obtain a Parliamentary committee to stop the present expenditure
and to devise plans for the better working and management of the
lines. I will now enter upon the more agreeable task of suggesting
improvements. The grand future of the colony is evident, and
that which is thought grand now in a comparatively short time will
take a very humble position. The basis of continued prosperity is
integrity. The paramount evidence of integrity is given by full and
clear accounts. That is the exhibit which will maintain our credit
throughout the world. Nothing will inspire confidence in creditors
like good book-keeping, this is the first point to urge. Railways
are the principle cause of our borrowing, so their accounts are the
first to be put in order, and to do the work promptly and effectively


it is necessary to have good premises, the Government House could
not be occupied and employed for a better purpose. The Governors
costs the colony £7OOO a year for very negative services.
Commissioner Goodchap’s head office staff costs £50,000 a year
exclusive of every other department of the railway, and eighteen
millions invested is of such importance to the colony that the official
residence of a Governor should not in any way impede the operation
of the railway, which is the basis of the prosperity of the colony. A
house can be found suitable for the Port Admiral. Let the next
Governor have house rent allowed him, or let him be paid to stop in
London like the Bishops, and be communicated with by telegraph, and
have things explained to him by the colonial agent, and if future
Governors know no more about the Royal prerogative and other duties
than the present Governor, then they can, when in a difficulty, refer to
their colleagues in Downing-st, for instruction. The Government house,
when vacated by the present Governor, ought at once to be prepared for
offices, as it is on the site required for the railway to the harbour by
Macquarie Fort. This line should be completed as soon as practicable
and laid with eight rails, for the usual double line will not be equal
to the traffic from Redfern to the harbour, and as it is only a short dis-
tance, no foolish economy should be allowed to interfere with the
profitable success of the line which ought to have been the initiatory
railway of the colony. The Corporation has borrowed £200,000 to
pave the streets of the city which are being destroyed for the want
of eight steel rails. I never see the railway wheels on the horse
drays going through the street, but it reminds me of the fable of the
man, his friends and his ass. The advantage of the railway is to
carry heavy goods, and the drays carry the railway. The amount of
money paid for carrying by drays all the imported goods that ought
to go direct from the ship’s side into the country, and the exports
conveyed to the ship’s side by drays from the railway station with
the passenger traffic will give earnings to this short line that will in
some measure compensate for the loss on some of the distant lines
which cannot at first be expected to pay. It is evident in propor-
tion to the concentrated wealth and density of the population, so the
railway can be made to earn great profits with proper management
which ought to be obtainable here on the same terras as in other
parts of the world. Reader, put yourself in the place of an energetic
official, desirous to have the work done quickly and in the best pos-
sible manner, subject to this kind of infliction Mr. Member goes
to Minister. Young Useless must have a billet. You know the
number of votes are about even, so an appointment is made and
given to some one, to the annoyance of men who can and would
do the work but for this kind of interference which so disgusts
them that they become apathetic and indifferent. Parliamentary
corruption is the foundation of the extravagance and disorder of
Government departments, supported by borrowing money, the supply
of which may be stopped at any time ; no time is so favourable


10
54
—
3
20
—
66
30
37
—
67
8
40
29
552
69
6
50
21
702
71
8
60
14
347
74
4
70
8
496
78
6
80
4
750
84
9
90
2
357
92
4
to make good business arrangements as when there is money to be
had cheap. Now is the time to set the house in order. Without
assumption of mock humility, I respectfully submit my comments
and suggestions to the colonists of New South Wales.
APPENDIX.
An appendix like a postcript as a rule contains the most important
information in the document, and this one is not an exception to the
rule. I have exposed the most extraordinary condition of the
accounts of two of the principal institutions in the colony. The railway
accounts in this and former pamphlet, and the utterly insolvent state
of the Life Insurance Societies, in my six pamphlets, dating from
1872 to 1884. The societies have had my pamphlets, so cannot plead
ignorance. The whole scheme of life insurance consists in making
calculations on the expectancies of the duration of life to pay
premiums. I will prove by a few figures taken from the table used
by the Australian Mutual Provident Society as the basis of the
immense profits advertised by that and other societies to be a perfect
fallacy, and with the expenses of the office and promised bonuses
the institutions are perfect South Sea bubbles. I prove my
statement from the report of the Australian Mutual Provident
Society, and give the number of the pages where the figures are to
be found.
Report of the Mortality Experience of the Australian Mutual
Provident Society, pages 33, 34, 35 :
Age. Expectancy. Duration of Life
Years. Months.
212 000 669 0
Divide the two sums by nine, the first one gives the expectation of
life for the payment of all premiums, 24 years on the average. The
second sum calculates that all the members of the society are to live
to the age of 74 (seventy-four) years on the average, such are the
calculations by which the public are duped ; and future payments are
based upon such expectancies. I will now abandon expectancies for
bona-fide facts : money paid by the Australian Mutual Provident
Society, and the premiums paid by deceased members. More than
4000 policies have become claims on account of death, and the
average duration of the whole number of policies that the premiums
that have been paid on is for five years only ; see report, page 13,
the table. The average age of the persons at the time they insured


1688 Policies paid at £400 each
Receipts, Premiums, and Interest
... £675,200
... 169,180
Balance of loss
... £506,020
their lives, thirty-four years ; and the average age of the insured at
death, thirty-nine, proving five years the duration of the life of the
members and payment of premiums. See table, page 27 of the
report, which gives the duration of life in sixty offices to be only eight
and a-half years on the average. The past experience of the
A. M. P. S. has realised about one-fifth part of their expectan-
cies, the other fifty-nine offices about one-third of their
calculated expectancies, not including expenses or bonuses.
The result of this state of the gambling houses called Life
Insurance offices can easily be foreseen, and like the hundreds that
have become bankrupt, these will soon become bankrupt, as they are
now irredeemably insolvent, as clearly proved in my pamphlets on
this subject. I here reprint part of the last page of my last
pamphlet:—
I have made a table showing the receipts and payments of the 1688
policies, a copy of which I have given to a gentleman holding one of the
most responsible offices in the colony. The total figures of the table give
the following results :
The A.M.P. Society during the period of the payment of these 1688
policies up to the year 1878, had expended and got rid of nearly three
millions of money, the said policies being four per cent, of the total
liabilities of the Society. By the last report, 1884, upwards of four and a
half millions out of the total receipts (£8,516,785), have been expended, got
rid of to pay the same proportion of policies. The payment of life policies
was the only object for the establishment of the institution of the A.M.P.
Society, and constitutes its only real legitimate business.
I challenge the Life Insurance Societies to disprove the truth of the
figures and statements contained in my pamphlets.
HENRY FRANCIS,
Sydney, N. S. Wales, 201 Cumberland-strect.
September 15 th, 1884.
I have sufficiently exposed the state of the Railway and Life
Insurance accounts to show they require rectifying. The query is
how is this to be done, and who is to do it; the cause of the evil
will continue it. “By the tree ye shall know its fruit.” From a
corrupt Government is the growth of every evil, and history tells us
it is the cause of the ruin of every degraded country, past and present.
Here we have a new unoccupied country large enough to be grand.
Having wealth in gold and silver and every other produce that can be
desired by the human race, and all that is required to share these
bounteous gifts of nature equitably amongst the people of Austra-
lasia is new Government, the very opposite in character and con-
struction to the Governments that are now inflicted upon the
colonies. In the language of the great Dr. Johnson on one occasion
when he proved to be a true prophet, I say there is a potentiality of
wealth in the colonies of Australasia that Croesus never dreamed of,
and that the wealth will be so fairly divided as to make Plutocracy
weep. When a man speaks in this manner of the present Governments


and has even the presumption to propose a new form of Government,
he ought to give a short history of the origin and the character of
the present Governments which lie has inherited from his ancestors.
The Governments of the colonies, when they became elective, were
formed on a similar plan to the English Parliament, and carried out
that idea by introducing a parody of the House of Lords and House
of Commons, with a Governor for a Queen. The energy and genius
of the English people have made wonderful material progress, not in
consequence of their Government being good, but in spite of bad
Government, as is now the case in this colony. How much more
happy and prosperous on both sides of the world the people would
have been under good government it is impossible to conjecture. The
English House of Commons, according to history, is shown to have
been one of the weakest and most corrupt institutions that ever
existed, and it only existed at the will of the King, who
dismissed the members directly they became disobedient. To
reform this state of things, that grand man Oliver Cromwell,
cut the King’s head off, but on the Restoration the Kings
found it safer to depute the management of Parliament to Ministers
whose-success v* ith the King depended upon persuading the members
to grant to the King everything he desired. The Prime Ministers
to keep in favour with the reigning Powers had to use every expe-
dient to control the votes of the members, for his position depended
upon the number of votes he could command. On trading principles
the demand for votes was supplied by purchase, the consideration
money was paid openly as bribes during the last century. This
would not be tolerated now, and the Ministers can do the work
cheaper and better by granting petty titles and by promising and
giving good appointments to the supporters of a Ministry and other
private arrangements. Before the Reform Bill passed in the year
1830, seats in the House of Commons were sold as openly as seats
in an opera house, and some of these seats represented places depo-
pulated by Parliamentary corruption, and large landed estates had
enhanced value in proportion to the number of members their
owners could seat. These members occupied the seats on condition
of obeying instructions. I was present at the meetings that
compelled the passing of that Reform Bill. At these meetings
the exposure of the iniquitous conditions of the English Parliament
with the wretched poverty and depressed condition of the people so
filled my young mind with indignation and horror that the impres-
sion then made has never left it. I was present at two incidents.
The Duke of Wellington, in the House of Lords, said he was
opposed to all reform, and for the wisdom of his speech got pelted
through Pall Mall with rotten eggs and cabbages, and if it had not
been for the great courage displayed by his groom the consequence
would have been serious. The Iron Duke was the first man in
London to introduce iron outside window shutters for his own protec-
tion. On the evening after the passing of the Reform Bill I


attended a meeting at the Birckbeck Institution, Southampton
Buildings, London, I heard there Mr. Thelwell, professor of elocu-
tion, describe the year of his imprisonment and the tyrannical perse-
cution he had suffered for twenty years for proposing a reformed
Parliament not nearly so thorough as was then parsed. His feelings
so overpowered him that he fainted on the platform and had to be
taken to his residence. The House of Lords is supposed to stand
halfway between the King and the Commons to see that the King
did not get too much nor the Commons get too much,
so the Lords, like the lawyers between the two clients, have
got the best part of the public estate for themselves, with
special privileges and advantages. The Upper House in the
colonies is to represent the House of Lords, but it is evident it can-
not work for want of a King. Honourable members of the Upper
House are doubtless as ready to investigate the cases brought before
them as lawyers would be. In the House of Lords the King is
plaintiff, the Commons defendant. A law court is useless where
there are defendants only, especially when the defendants find all
the money which there is no dispute about, and should have the sole
control of expenditure. We must either get a King or abolish the
Upper House. A patriotic individual would name King Dailey
who can send an army to the field in a week, and if he won’t reign over
us the House must die. The legal John Doe and Richard Roe,
deceased, have departed from the courts for ever, and it is possible
that the absence of the honourable members from the Upper House
will be regretted with the same feelings that the absence of the two old
names caused to the legal mind. Parliament Houses to keep them
going cost money, and one house will cost less than two, and the
more complicated machinery is mechanical or legal, the more likely it
is to break down. The numberless abuses of our Parliamentary
forms cannot be reformed. They must be abandoned. Such as con-
verting the Parliament House into an hotel. The law courts are not
used as hotels, and the Parliamentary business is of far greater
importance than private personal matters. The only check to
Parliamentary corruption is the reports of the proceedings
in the newspapers. Our papers are so bribed by Govern-
ment advertisements as to gloss over the Government mis-
management so as to amount to misrepresentation. A gentle-
man connected with one of the most liberal newspapers, when I
asked him to expose a Government delinquency, replied, “Do you
suppose I am going to quarrel with ray bread and butter to please
you, by exposing Government abuses ?” This proves the colony has
not the same protection from the Press as England has. A good
Government will make a desert a paradise, a bad Government a
paradise a desert. The admitted evils that exist in the colony prove
the want of good government, although we have not yet the
depressing poverty of the poorest classes of England, we have the
same causes at work to produce them ; the poor become poorer, the


rich become richer. Our archbishops, bishops, curates, and privates
in the Salvation Army all tell us our religious state makes us worthy
of perdition, and I am aware that the practical result of the present
state of the different religions in the colony produce the most intense
animosity amongst men who ought to associate in sincere friendship.
From our religious state to our bodily state, the Sanitary Society
shows that Sydney and more particularly its suburbs, from want of
drainage and insanitary condition of the houses, the mortality is
greater than the worst cities in England, and I, from my investiga-
tions of vital statistics and life insurance returns, know the average
duration of life here is loss than one half what it would be if a good
Government carried out with vigor known sanitary improvements for
the preservation of the life and health of the colonists. If saving
human life is beneath the consideration of the wise legislators who
occupy our Parliament House, the sooner their places are taken by a
different class of men who do believe that Godliness and cleanliness go
together, and that moral improvement is impossible, while the people
are inhaling fever-generating and death producing gases. To show
the moral state of the colony I begin with the Parliament and
gradually descend. The most important institution is the Parlia-
ment. ' Work that is done for nothing, as a principle, is worth
nothing ; and the general conduct of the House proves the axiom.
Men take every means to become members to give themselves
importance, and their position affords them opportunities for making
money or to gain credit, from the general belief that their influence
may be turned to profitable account. Members show their
utter indifference to the duties they have sworn to perform,
by continued absence from the House ; some of them only putting in
an appearance two or three times during the session as the amount
of time they are prepared to sacrifice from their private affairs for the
performance of their Parliamentary duties. The members most
constant in their attendance are those who by perseverance see the
probability of becoming Ministers, which, besides Ministerial pay
make them kings like the present Minister of Works. He com-
menced his reign by asserting that he would not be controlled by the
departments but act upon his own judgment and responsibility, and
he has kept his word in a royal manner, and his authority is not
likely to be disputed while he lias the power to suspend (not hang)
or dismiss any officer that has the temerity to question his
authority. This fortunate Minister’s firm pays for the carriage
of goods by the railways about a quarter of a million pounds
sterling a year. On his own responsibility he has imported £40,000
worth of dump cars that have not given complete satisfaction to the
official whose duty it is to pass the rolling stock, who has declined to
pass the cars, but they, by contrivance, have been smuggled on the
lines without his sanction. The following particulars or even those
published by the newspapers will show the character of this importa-
tion supplied to the Government without the usual form of tendering.


The want of proper documents would justify the officials in refusing'
to let them run on the lines. These cars I have examined and they
are unworkmanlike in construction, made of Oregon pine (the most
perishable wood when exposed to the weather), the ironwork bad, so
bad that 69 axles were condemned out of 75. Their length and
strength out of proportion. Large sums of money have been
expended upon them in the attempt to make them usable, and the
plea of novelty is untrue, as dump cars, both side and end, are in
common use in railway cuttings. £60,000 to be paid without
tendering for a water-shoot is another instance of the character of
our present Government. I mention these two items because they
are much discussed by the public, and it is the principle involved
that gives them importance, for if the Ministers are to set the laws
of the colony at defiance, who is to abide by them ? The money
expended upon the Soudan expedition, without the authority of
Parliament, and the usurpation of power by sending 700 citizens to
a deadly climate in the good old times that we are taught to respect
would have cost the Minister his head, with the confiscation of his
property. The man who injures his country by the reckless sacririce
of life, and takes the public money, is a traitor, however much he
may proclaim himself patriot! That stern old moralist, Dr.
Johnson, said, “ Patriotism, the last refuge of a scoundrel.” The
Ministry illegally appropriating the public money is a venial offence
compared to the evils the colony is now suffering under from the
worst form of corruption that can degrade a community—placing
unfit men on the judicial bench. We have had men appointed who
were known to be incapable of doing the duty of a clerk—men who
from bad temper wore unfitted for the position of judge. Judges
that set the verdict of the juries at defiance by inflicting punishment
by means of cost, when one farthing was the award. Judges that
arc reintroducing hanging, flogging, and such long durations of
imprisonment for trivial offences that surprise the public and fill it
with indignation. Such judges arc reducing the colony to its
original state, when it was a convict gaol land, and their very earliest
impressions received were from that kind of brutality which is now
being restored for the government of the colony. Such conduct
indicates the worst kind of Government.
The true condition of the law courts of the colony has never
been published. Reform of a law court is impossible—abolition
first, and then reconstruction. All judges must have equal rank and
equal pay. Ought a prisoner to have it in his power to say, “If I
had been tried by the chief it would have saved my life, and the
lowest judge will hang me!” Prisoners very properly have the
power to challenge any juror they object to ; the same privilege
ought to be extended to one or more Judges. Judges thatcoerce juries
must be removed from the bench ; the juror is the only protection
of the liberty of his fellow-man ; judges historically the tyrants.


Religionists and lawyers are the conservators of the ignorance
of mankind. The first professes to teach that which is impossible
to teach. The second obscures evident facts that form the basis
of all law—the Ten Commandments, complicating them with the
sophistry of ages, accumulated in acres of books made by men who
are paid to take up causes, both right and wrong, with equal zeal.
Society is compelled to employ this class of men for the supposed
protection of property, but in reality to confiscate a large portion of
it. That such a state of robbery is necessary I deny ; and such
robbery is not submitted to in other parts of the world. In the
West India island of St. Thomas, at the time my father resided
there—it was under the Danish Government, and it was a free port—
the commerce was stated to be greater than all the other islands put
together—lawsuits were comparatively unknown, although merchants
and others had as frequent trade disputes and as many other causes
for litigation as the rest of the world ; but not being influenced by
the vindictive spirit generated by lawyers, they were wise enough to
submit all their differences to impartial citizens of known integrity,
who formed courts of conciliation, where the disputants in person
stated their cases, and received the best information and soundest
advice'and remained good friends, instead of becoming vindictive
enemies, ruined by the robbery of lawyers in the courts, as is now
the case in the colonies. In case of appeal from the conciliation
court, all the evidence taken in the Court is handed over to the
upper Court for its guidance. The district Courts of the colonies
are the seed-plots of vice and poverty ; by a wit thus described :
Is this the court of perjury or no ?
Is this the court that's called the little go?
From time immemorial the meanest character of man has been
associated with the law. Can the law be made to understand that,
no one should be deprived of the necessaries of life, and that every
homestead should be protected from the fangs of the law, as is now the
case in America ? All law for the recovery of petty debts should be
abolished. 1 have not the power of language to describe the iniquitous
vices generated by our petty law courts, as clearly shown in M‘Culloch’s
Commercial Dictionary, the highest commercial authority known in
England. The pitiable condition of our police courts, where the
lowest degradation of humanity is made a jest of, coming again and
again before the same magistrates for the same misconduct and
vices, to be committed to foetid gaols. Bumble says the “law is a
ass.” So the law can find no other way for the improvement or
reformation of vices and infirmities but gaols. Our gaols are over-
flowing, and country towns petitioning to be embellished with gaols.
Such institutions ought to be in localities as much hidden as possible,
and constructed on large sites of land, with space to teach and
compel industrious employment, so that the prisoners can earn the
cost of their living, and by manual labour be put in such a
physical condition by the expiration of their sentences as to enable


them to earn their living in suitable employments on leaving the
gaol. Our gaols should be constructed in circles of large diameter,
a mile or more, surrounded by walls, and divided by radial walls.
1 n the centre a high tower, to be occupied by lookout men, good
shots, not less than three at a time, armed with repeating rifles, for
the moral security of the prisoners—the prisoners being assured
of perfect safety while they behaved with order, and did not attempt
to escape The sanitary condition and the morals of the prisoners
will certainly then have a more favourable opportunity for improve-
ment than by the cosseting up of young men by weak women, Avho
by their affection make the romance of a novel a tragic
fact. Love and jealousy caused an attempt to murder, the rival
recovers completely, in fact was never much hurt, but the true lover
is hanged, proving truth is more extraordinary than fiction, for who
could believe such events would take place within the walls of a
gaol.
A new name is invented to characterise our youth larrikinism,
which is so well understood in the colony as to need no explanation,
and larrikins are of both sexes.
Gambling, leading to swindling and robbery, is so prevalent
that the bookmakers paid £4OOO fees into one institution only, and
yet gambling is illegal ; and this statement is published in the news-
papers, to show the contempt in which the law is held.
From the investigation of the Government accounts and
documents, and by private information, there would be discovered
such a mass of errors and discrepancies, to use the mildest terms
that would astonish the public. I have made my railway accounts
perfectly clear to show' their utterly worthless character ; and who
but the most simple-minded persons would believe that all the errors
and deficiences in the Government accounts are exclusively confined
to the railway accounts.
The report of the Commissioner of Railways given on page 5,
expended in the year 1882 as under :—Construction, £1,666,381
for the same items the department for construction only admits of
£1,482,1)12 expended. Here is a difference requiring explanation ;
£233,46!), or nearly a quarter of a million, in one year, show
such accounts to be a mass of confusion. Also the extraordinary
charges made for the different localities, and the classifications of the
goods carried on the lines are as incomprehensible as the railway
accounts.
History proves that corrupt governments have existed for long
periods, and in proportion to their duration have been the suddenness
of their overthrow. The overthrow of governments has always arisen
from the same causes—the demoralised state of the governing
powers—neglecting their duties—and treating the governed as if they
were compelled to submit to their authority.
The English Government lost America by its mad conduct, and
similar mad conduct is inflicted upon the colony by our highest


officials at the present time, who in reality govern with as little
wisdom as Old King George the Third governed America,
The colony is borrowing millions of money, and expect our
children to pay the interest, which they may object to do. America
has found its own money to carry on the most expensive and just
war (the abolition of slavery) that was ever fought. The money was
expended by honest men, who have repaid it. Had we a Government
equally honest and intelligent, surely we could find our own money,
not for the destruction of property by war, but for the production of
public property of the most profitable character, backed up by the
land of the colony. Our weak Government, headed by a weaker
Governor has degraded the colony by placing it in such a
position as to make it live in a state of terror for fear the
stockbrokers of London will not lend more money. Our
Governments have proved themselves as incompetent to deal
with money as our Governments’ clerks are to keep the
accounts. Digression—My father was accountant to William
Crawshay, the Iron King, who died and left seven and a half
millions fortune. The amount of money that must have passed
through* Crawshay’s hands to enable him to accumulate such a
fortune must have been enormous. He said that he considered
that he had a population from 40,000 to 50,000 people
dependent upon him. He never wanted money, because he was his
own banker, and issued his notes and copper tokens, which did
represent gold, and gold could be obtained for them at any time.
Surely it is possible to make the credit of this grand country equal
to that of a private individual, or even equal to that of America,
which stands the highest in the world, these solvent conditions
can never exist in the colony until we have a totally different class
of men to govern it.
...... . .
I will compare the minutiae with which Crawshay conducted his
business with the conduct of our railway officials. He opened a
separate account to every item of expenditure —paper, sealing wax,
pack thread, &c.—and year by year used to compare the accounts to
check extravagance.
I required the following information from the Railway Depart-
ment for ray own calculations of profit, and the saving to be effected
by the Government. All I wanted to ascertain was the amount paid
yearly for the coal and coke consumed by the railways and tramways,
in the report I find fuel, men’s wages, and coal mixed up in the
same sum, and during much time lost in enquiry ascertained the
information was not obtainable, but heard at the time that a member
of Parliament was highly indignant because his truck wheels (which
the Minister of Works had supplied him with,) the tires of which had
not been fresh turned as soon as he required. At this same time
the public made a great outcry for the necessary trucks to carry
freight on the lines, and had not wheels for them because they could
not be turned as fast as necessarv. This member informed me that


he was a strong supporter of the present Government. I have made
these statements to prove the necessity for a government on a better
principle.
NEW PARLIAMENT.
The new Parliament must be formed of men neither rich nor
poor, as the payment of members will prevent the latter state, and
give the electors the choice of men in their own circumstances and
condition to be their true representatives.
The rich are the minority, and by Parliament the minority
cannot be represented, and from the great influence and power
derived from money they are the class best able to protect their own
interests, therefore must be content to be governed by the majority
until dignity is preferred to wealth.
The Parliament must be constructed upon and governed by
these principles.
The members are to hold the highest and most honourable
position of any men in the colony.
The Parliament House is to be treated by the public and con-
ducted by the members as if they were the judges of the highest
court in the colony.
No man under the age of forty years to bo eligible for a member
of the House.
Any man having from rents or permanent income from invested
property a sum exceeding £lOOO a year, exclusive of business profits
and professional earnings, must be disqualified.
The Parliament during session to commence punctually at ten
in the forenoon, and adjourn at four in the afternoon ; and every
absent member fined unless excused by the chairman for some
sufficient cause. The debate only to bo continued after the hour of
four by the consent of the majority of the House and the Chairman’s
vote.
Members on being duly elected to have the privilege of making
oath or affirmation on taking their seats.
The members shall swear or affirm that they will act as
impartial persons on all business submitted to their consideration in
the House.
Any member who does not conduct himself with propriety and
according to the rules of the House the nature of the complaint shall
be sent to the principal magistrates of his electorate to expostulate
with such member, and if the contumely is continued the electors to
have the power to withdraw their member and elect another in his
stead.
All candidates to be elected upon the same day and hour.
Candidates to be proposed by not less than three well-known
electors, who will be answerable for the character of the man they
propose.


Every precaution for the care of the ballot box, character of the
returning officer, and for impartial scrutiny of the voting papers to
be taken.
The constitutional forms of government under the rule of the
British Empire are dried up corpses, used as I have seen the priests
of South America use ghastly corpses in glass cases, in order to
extort money and keep their dupes in subjection. The parliamentary
power of the British Empire is wholly devoted to taxing the people,
and ascertaining their power of paying taxes. By corrupt parlia-
mentary influence the taxers of the people vote to themselves
thousands yearly, these men would not be paid a shilling of it if the
voice of the public could only be heard ; nor would it have their
services'on any terms whatever.
Parliamentary corruption has produced the confused state of
the accounts that I have shown, and the two factions of the House
are always scrambling as to which is to have the handling of the
money. Parliamentary corruption is considered only a venial matter,
and to rob the Government is generally taken as a privilege when an
opportunity occurs. Such is the dishonesty generated by our much-
vaunted'Government. A Parliament must be improved by paying
the members for the following causes.
When the electors pay their representatives an equal amount of
money to each man it becomes a mutual agreement between them ;
on the one part to pay the money and on the other part to honestly
perform the duty for the money, and if the member does not perform
his duty to the satisfaction of his constituents it is at the penalty of
his removal. Paid members in a well-ordered House will have
leisure to devote their intellect to any question brought before the
House, and will have no object but for the public benefit. The
present members devote the whole of their cunning to oppose
whatever business their opponents bring forward, although when
they were in power the same question was brought in by themselves.
In this way the whole interest of the public is sacrificed in the strife
of endeavouring to obtain the pay and power of Ministers.
The members must be all paid, then the prizes (Ministerial
pay) which form the bones of contention will no longer be caught
by the most greedy dogs, for contention is ended when the spoils
are taken away and labour fairly paid for. Order—the basis of
wisdom —will be ensured by payment of members in a way the
present form of Parliament can never achieve. The notoriously
disorderly disgraceful scenes in the House during night time with
members in a condition that no respectable merchant would enter
into transactions with them privately for ten pounds, voting away
millions of money, which the community have to pay the interest of.
The condition of the Government is too well known to need
further comment, but its last scheme to gag the newspapers by the
bribes of Government advertisements must at once be put a stop to.
The editors and servants of the newspapers waiting on the Ministers


and Commissioners to receive instructions as to the way information
should be communicated to the public should also be put a
stop to. All Government information should be given by pro-
clamation, as done in other parts of the world, leaving the press
unfettered for the public security, also saving an unnecessary
expenditure of the public money in advertisements.
The repeated alterations in our land laws show something
radically wrong—the want of laws for the protection, conservation
and supply of water, and the numerous wants to be supplied by good
government, which it is impossible to pass while the members
who form the obstruction of the House in reality are only playing a
game of cricket, to get their opponents’ places, and that by every
undermining stratagem.
Napoleon the Great said that “ impossible ” was the word in
the mouth of a fool. It is quite possible at the next general
election the Parliament of the colony may consist of a completely
different class of men to those who have misgoverned the colony for
so long a period.
The new members are to go into the House with well-digested
measures, to be at once carried out. The measures and reforms
require to be distinctly printed, so that every elector shall say to his
proposed representative, “On that paper is printed that for which
you will be elected member of the House to pass into law.”
All trades unions and societies of every description, and every
other class of electors should forthwith call public meetings, to state
what the future Parliament is required to do, and not trust to the
cajoling electioneering promises made at the hustings. Now is the
time to do the work, and only the working man can do it from
numbers.
The first requirement is reform in the Government expenditure.
No official should be paid a sum exceeding one thousand a year.
The oldest, most valuable and esteemed public servants are not paid
in excess of that sum. The most objectionable public servants are
paid in excess of that sum, and there is no doubt but the necessary
talent sufficient for tire colony can be obtained for that amount in
every department.
The second requirement for the protection of the colonists is
the establishment of conciliation courts, to prevent the ruin
occasioned by the proceedings of our law' courts as now conducted.
The third requirement for the protection of the colonists is the
establishment of vigilance committees, to investigate the condition
of societies and institutions that individuals are powerless against.
They are demoralising the colony commercially, and sapping every
virtuous principle out of the community.
In my next pamphlets I propose to take up the subject of
Government borrow ings and the state of the banks of the colonies.
JAS. MILLER k CO., Machine Printers, 78 Clarence-st., Sydney.




