

N 021. 41 AHR


THE
A. H. R.
(Australasian Home Reader)
PUBLISHED BY THE
PusUalagian Home Reading Union;
CONTAINING
Original Papers upon the Prescribed Courses of Ebading,
Notes of the doings of the Union throughout the Australasian
Colonies, and many articles of general literary interest.
VOLUME' 111.
1894.
<§s6tus :
William Andrews & Company, Printers and Bookbinders,
315 Pitt Street,


Australasian Home Reading Union.
OFFICERS FOR 1894.
President;
HIS HONOR CHIEF JUSTICE WAT, Lieut.-Governor op South Australia,
Chancellor of the University of Adelaide.
General Secretary-Treasurer:
Mrs. WOLSTENHOLME, Maybanke, Dulwich Hill, Sydney.
Editor of Journal :
Mr. P. ANSELL ROBIN, M.A., Edistan, Audley Street, Petersham.
General Council:
The PRESIDENTS and SECRETARIES OF SECTIONS.
Executive Committee :
The PRESIDENT, The GENERAL SECRETARY, The EDITOR OF THE
JOURNAL, Mbs. DAVID, PROFESSOR ANDERSON,
PROFESSOR DAVID, and Mr. J. S. SCOTT.
OFFICERS OF SECTIONS.
New South Wales;
President. Mbs. EDGEWORTH DAVID.
i Miss STUDDY, 8.A., Fairmount Street, Petersham, and
Joint Secretaries: j j g> SCOXXj Box 830 j G.P.0., Sydney.
Victoria :
President: Professor E. E. MORRIS, M.A.
Secretary: Mrs. FOX, M.A., Ravensberg, Daudenong Road, Armadale.
Sub-Editor of A.H.8.; Rev. J, S. HA RT, M.A., St. Paul’s, Geelong.
New Zealand :
President: THE RIGHT REV. BISHOP OF CHRISTCHURCH.
Sejretaty: Northern Section: Mb. T. R. FLEMING, M.A., L 1.8., Wellington.
Southern Section : Miss EDITH FUSSELL, Russell Square, Tirnaru.
Sub-Editor of A.H.B. : Mb. CLEMENT WATSON, 8.A., Te Aro School,
Wellington.
Queensland :
President; Mb. R. H. ROE, M.A.
Secretary and Sub-Editor of A.H.R.: Mr. L. E. GROOM, M. A., LI.M., 31 Town
Hall Chambers, Brisbane.
South Australia :
President; HIS HONOR CHIEF JUSTICE WAY, Lieut.-Governor.
Secretary; Mr. G. G. NEWMAN, 8.A., Whinham College.
Sub-Editor of A.HE. ; Mb. J. MOSS SOLOMON, 8.A., L 1.8., Waterhouse
Chambers, King William Street, Adelaide.
Tasmania :
President: Dr. AGNEW.
Secretary: Mrs. A. MORTON, Iliavara, The Domain, Hobart.
•' ub-hditor of A.H.R.: Mb. F. J. YOUNG, 8.A., Fairfield, Augusta Rd., Newtown


CONTENTS OF VOL. 111.
PAGE
A Dedication, a Poem .. .. 99
Altiora Peto, ~ 32
Ala Fin de V Ann£e, a Poem ... 210
Announcements 12,56,109,155,197,215
Australian Explorers 74, 148
Australian Literature Course ... 21
Balance Sheet of A.H.R.U., 1893...11
Biology Courses 24, 200
Botany Course 47
British in India Course 199
Browning 27, 91, 138
Browning’s Treatment of Love 91
~ Victory 138
Capital? Is Money 126
Carlyle and Social Problems, 140, 192
~ on Work 122
Chemistry Course 201
Classics and English Literature 165
Common Prayer, Book of 152
Computation of Time 100
Courses of Reading for 1894 ... 20
„ „ 1895 198, 210
Distribution 172, 216
Duties of a Leader 26
Dying Hildebrand, a Poem ... 116
Drifting Away ~ ... 215
Editor’s Report, 1893 13
Education Courses 21, 202
Elizabethan Drama Course ... 200
English Literature and Classics 165
~ ~ Courses 20, 198
Ethics Course 200
European History Course 22, 33, 89
Excalibur, Meaning of 55
Executive Council Meeting ... 118
French Literature Courses 20, 198
■General Council Meeting, 1894... 5
~ Secretary’s Report, 1893 9
Geography and Travel Courses, 21, 201
Geology Courses 23, 200
German Literature Courses 21, 210
Greek History Course 23
History of British Empire Course, 22
Holy Roman Empire, The ...33, 89
How a Group Works 96
~ Circles may help one another, 40
to work with the A.H.R.U. 18
Lady Macbeth 179
Leader, Duties of a 26
PAGE
Leaders in Council 36, 96
Literary Study of Literature ... 57
Merchant of Venice, Text of the 119
Music Course 24
New South Wales Section ... 50, 78,
106, 132, 156, 183, 202, 221
New Zealand Section, North ... 53,
107, 160, 184, 223
~ ~ South, 108, 159, 224
Notes and News ... 50, 78, 106. 132.
156, 183, 202, 221
Outlook for 1894 3
Patria Cara, a Poem 220
Physics Courses 24, 201
Physiology Courses 24, 201
Plutarch’s Lives 205
Political Science Courses 23, 66, 201
Queensland Section .. 52, 133, 184,
204, 221
Question Box 55, 126
Reading, About 135
Report, General Secretary’s, 1893 9
~ Editor’s, 1893 13
Review 48
Revised Constitution ... 16
Roman Empire, The H01y... 33, 89
Romola, Characters in ... 187,211
Sabbath of God, a Poem 171
Sea Power, The 45
Sesame and Lilies 61
Shakspearean Characters, Two 83
Sonnets 44, 105
South Australian Section, 79,107, 158
Stella, a Poem 44
Swift, a Poem 44
Tasmanian Section 160, 222
Tennyson’s In Memoriam... 69, 111
Treasurer’s Statements ...56, 68, 95,
121, 160, 186, 204, 226
University Extension and the
A.H.R.U 131
Valedictory Address 170
Victorian Section... 50, 78, 106, 133,
156, 183, 202, 222
What is Love? a Poem 178
Wordsworth ... 161
Work and Wages Course 201
Young People’s Course 25


LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS.
Mr. Arthur H. Bayldon
Rolf Boldrewood
Mr. S. H. Bowden
Mr. C. 0. Burge
Mr. William J. Byram
Mr. E. H. Cooke
Mrs. T. W. E. David
Miss Helen Downs
Mr. G. Essex Evans
Mr. T. R. Fleming, M.A.
Mr. G. Fleuri
Mrs. Fox. M.A.
Miss Edith Fussell
Mr. Arthur Galton, M.A.
Mrs. Clement Giles
Mr. L. E. Groom, M.A., LI.M.
Miss Kate Ham
Rev. J. S. Hart, M.A.
Mrs. E. W. Hawker
Mrs. Hogben
Mr. Francis Kenna
Prof. Laurie, M.A., LI.D.
Prof. MacCallom, M.A,
Prof. Morris, M.A.
Mrs. A. Morton
Mr. G. G. Newman, B.A.
Mr. G. W. Power, M.A., LI.M.
Mr. D. S. Robertson, 8.A., Ll.B.
Mr. R. H. Roe, M.A.
Mr. P. A. Robin, M.A.
Mr. J. S. Scott
Prof. W. Scott, M.A.
Mr. J. Brunton Stephens
Miss A. Studdy, B.A.
Miss Lorna Todd
Miss Maud Todd
Mr. Edward Tregear, F.R.H.S,
Mr. W. H. Williams, M.A.
Mrs. Wolstenholme
Mr. W. Yaldwyn
Mr. F. J. Young, B.A.


MRS. WOLSTENHOLME,
HON. GEN. SEC. A.H.R.U.


February, 1894.
Vol. 111., No. 1.
THE A. H. R.
THE OUTLOOK FOR 1894.
ITJF the Australasian Home Reading Union were in want of a motto
sT 1 ! for its ■work, a worse might be found than Sir Philip Sidney’s
description of a poet in his Apologie for Poetrie : “ He doth not only
show the way, but giveth so sweet a prospect into the way, as will
entice any man to enter into it.” To give guidance and to inspire
enthusiasm are our two main objects. We have reason to be gratified
at the increase in our numbers and the improvement in our work
during the past year : what we must now consider is—how far we have
failed in carrying out our aims, and how we may improve our methods.
The chief benefit conferred by the Union upon its members
hitherto has been the systematising of their reading : we have not on
any large scale induced habits of reading among those who would not
otherwise read at all. In fact, the missionary spirit has been lacking.
It is very characteristic of the average reader to cry, “ O for a book and
a shady nook,” and to “let the wide world slide.” But this is not the
spirit of brotherhood: this does not reflect the genius of the Home
Reading Union. What is wanted is that the most capable members of
our flourishing Circles should individually form new Circles for them-
selves, and attract to membership some who would otherwise read
unwisely or not at all. There is a wide sphere of influence among
young people who have just left school, among literary societies, and
wherever there is a centre of social, intellectual, or religious activity.
Every Church, every School of Arts or Mechanics’ Institute, every
Debating Club should have in connection with it one or more Circles
for systematic private reading. It is the first step that is the difficulty ;
but unless individuals strike out independently, the Union will never
expand beyond its present limits, and indeed its vitality will begin to
ebb. We need more leaders, and yet many who might do good service
in that capacity shrink from the responsibility, owing to a mistaken
idea of the necessary qualifications. If we could have an unlimited
staff of specialists to conduct our Circles, it might be a great advantage ;
but as this is out of the question, we must take a practical view of the
situation. Perhaps the most useful work that could be accomplished is


for a leader to induce all his members to read set portions of the
selected Course, to study the books with them, to read and discuss with
them the monthly journal, and to use all the resources of the Union for
the solution of difficulties. These are but modest requirements ; yet
such a leader would probably do more good than one who, while
capable of displaying wide knowledge and critical acumen, makes no
effort to ensure systematic study.
We earnestly request leaders of Circles to make a more practical
use of this journal than they have hitherto done. Every article bearing
upon the Course of Reading should be read and discussed in the Circle
meeting, or if the reading can be taken for granted, the various points
of the paper should be emphasised, illustrated, or combated by the
leader or by some member deputed for the purpose, and general
discussion should be stimulated. All moot points upon which it is
possible some light can be thrown by specialists, and all special
difficulties that block the way, should be sent to the Editor for solution.
A new feature will this year be introduced into the A.H.8. , in
order to meet the requirements of smaller Circles. Space will be
allotted to the announcement of “Wants of Circles,” and any leader
who would like the loan of an essay upon a given subject can have a
request published under this head. This opens a new field for the
co-operation of members, in order to make our society a true Union.
If writers of papers are willing to lend them to distant readers, a strength-
ening element will be introduced into the weaker Circles, and better work
will result. It will be understood, of course, that the borrowing leader
will be responsible for the safe custody and the return of the paper : all
that the A.H.R. can do is to make known the needs of Circles. Further,
an endeavour will be made this year to arrange a symposium to deal
with the methods of conducting Reading Circles. Some of the most
successful leaders will be asked to explain fully their methods of
working, and to make practical suggestions that may be helpful to
others.
The question of co-operation between the A.H.R.U. and the
University Extension Boards in the various colonies has been remitted
to the Sectional Committees for consideration and report. We venture
to believe that the two organisations supplement each other so aptly
that both will be strengthened and extended by mutual assistance. The
University Extension Scheme needs for its development in the provincial
districts some such organisation as the Union is maturing, and the
Reading Circles need the help and stimulus of experienced and
thoughtful lecturers. If our members will give earnest consideration
to the schemes of Extension Lectures devised by the different academic
bodies, they may find it possible, with very slight trouble and expense,
to secure very valuable aid to their reading from the Universities.
4
A. H. R.


MINUTES OF THE SECOND ANNUAL GENERAL
MEETING OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL
OF THE
Australasian Home Reading Union.
WHE second annual general meeting of the General Council of the
JL Australasian Home Reading Union was held in the Stenhouse
Library of the University of Sydney on January 2nd, 1894.
There were present Professor David, as a delegate from the New
South Wales Section, to represent Mrs. David, President of the Section ;
Miss Hunt, B.Sc., of Ipswich, Queensland, as a delegate from the
Queensland Section; Mr. J. Moss Solomon, 8.A., L.L.8., of Adelaide, a
delegate from South Australia; Mrs. Wolstenholme, General Secretary
of the Union, and Mr. Robin, Editor of the Journal.
Mr. Robin moved, and Mrs. Wolstenholme seconded, a proposal
that Professor David take the chair.
The chair was taken by Professor David at 10.30.
An apology was read from Chief Justice Way, Lieutenant-Gover-
nor of South Australia. Mrs. Wolstenholme explained the absence of
Professor Anderson, elected to represent Melbourne. Owing to the
lateness of his appointment and his absence from Sydney, it had been
impossible to send him notice of the hour of meeting. Mr. Robin re-
presented New Zealand, and Professor David, Tasmania.
The minutes of the last meeting, held on January 18th and 19th,
1893, having been already printed in the February number of the
A.H.R. and widely read, were taken as read.
Mrs. Wolstenholme then read her report as General Secretary and
presented her balance sheet. The report was adopted and the balance
sheet held over for examination.
Mr. Robin, Editor of the Journal, read his annual report. Mr.
Solomon moved and Miss Hunt seconded that this report be adopted.
The motion was carried.
Professor David then called on Miss Hunt to bring forward her
sectional report from Queensland. Miss Hunt said that there was a
great advance in the progress of the Union in Queensland. In 1892
they had 53 members and only one circle in existence. They now
numbered 205 duly registered members with 11 circles. Six of these
at Rockhampton were formed into a group. Floods, drought and
financial disaster had impeded the progress of the Union, but they had
nevertheless sent out a considerable number of printed circulars, Ac., and
had held two Sectional meetings, both of which had been very successful.
They had started with an initial debt and now had a small credit
balance.
5
A. H. R.


The chairman called on Mr. Solomon to report for the South Aus-
tralian Section. Mr. Solomon said South Australia had since the large
public meeting held in the University in the beginning of the year made
very great progress. There were now 336 members in South Australia,
being an increase of 71 per cent, of the total increase of the Union for
the year. The Sectional Committee was not elected in accordance with
the Constitution, but a meeting was held monthly at the University to
which all leaders of circles were invited, and great interest in the
business of the Union was thus maintained. The South Australia
Section proposed this year to send lists of the books of reference recom-
mended in the Courses of Reading to the Committees of the country
institutes so. that members might borrow them or refer to them in
public libraries.
Mr. Robin then read a short report of the work in New Zealand,
and Professor David gave some information of progress in Tasmania.
In the absence of Mr. Scott, Secretary for New South Wales, Mrs,
Wolstenholme spoke of the work in that section. Mrs. Wolstenholme
moved, and Mr. Robin seconded, that the reports of the Sections be
received. A letter from Professor Morris was then read in which
matters relating to progress in Victoria were discussed, and in which
he gave an opinion as to the election of the President for 1894.
Mrs. Wolstenholme then proposed, and Miss Hunt seconded, that
His Honor Chief Justice Way, Lieutenant-Governor of South Australia,
be President of the Union for 1894. The motion was carried and a
telegram at once sent to the Chief Justice informing him of his election.
Mrs. Wolstenholme was re-elected General Secretary, and Mr.
Robin was re-elected Editor of the Journal.
The Executive Committee was arranged as follows, to consist of
Mrs. David, President for New South Wales ; Mr. Scott, Secretary for
New South Wales; the General Secretary and the Editor, being the
principal officers of the Union resident in Sydney, with Professors
David and Anderson.
The Council then proceeded to deal with special matters relating
to the work in the different sections.
Miss Downs’s application for a special general course for her circle
at Rockhampton was sanctioned.
An application for an Elementary Literature Course was read, and
it was decided to publish one in the February Journal.
Mr. Robin presented a suggestion from New Zealand that the
Council should prescribe courses similar to those drawn up by the New
Zealand University. Mr. Robin was asked to reply that such a method
was impossible this year, and to invite New Zealand to send her lists
of books for 1895, so that they might if possible be considered in
drawing up courses for that year.
Miss Hunt presented a request from Queensland that the Union
should draw up a course similar to that drawn up by the University
Extension Board. It was resolved that Miss Hunt call the attention
6
A, H. R.


ivir. xvoum muveu -o’ - — -a. <i • -■» ’«• **
circles that they send reports of their meetings to the Sectional
Secretaries, and, whenever possible, the best papers read before them to
the sub-editor of their Section.
Tasmania desired that a critical analysis of some of the books
prescribed, and of the poems, should be published in the Journal. The
matter was left to the discretion of the editor.
A request came from New Zealand for a course on Political
Economy. It was decided that the course drawn up by Professor
Laurie would meet their requirements.
The question of publishing a number of the Journal for February
was discussed, and it was decided that the number be published.
A telegram was received from the Chief Justice, Adelaide, South
Australia, as follows : “ 1 thank the Council for the honour they have
done me in electing me President. My best efforts will be at the
service of the Union. I wish the Council a successful meeting and
regret my inability to be present.”
It was resolved that the New Zealand Section be recommended to
elect such joint secretary-treasurers as they find necessary for the efficient
working of the Section, as suggested by Mrs, Wolstenholme, and Mr.
Fleming, Secretary of the New Zealand Section.
Constitution. —Rule s—lt was proposed by Mr. Solomon and
seconded by Mr. Robin “ That Rule 5 be altered, 1 not fewer than 12,’ to
read,’ not fewer than six.’ ” The motion was carried.
Committee of Section. —lt was proposed that the Rule relating
to the Committee of Management for the Section should be altered,
Rule 12 to read : “ The affairs of each Section shall be managed by a
Committee consisting of Sectional Officers and Leaders of Circles. If a
leader is unable to attend any meeting a delegate may be elected by the
Circle.” The alteration was approved and carried.
Courses of Reading. —Mr. Robin proposed and Mrs. Wolsten-
holme seconded, “That in the June number of the A.H.R. Sectional
Committees be invited to send in suggestions as to courses of reading,
so that the whole of the courses may be in future published in the
November number of the Journal.”
The Council then proceeded to decide on the names of those who
should be asked to draw up lists of books on several subjects for 1895,


motion, which was earned, and the Ueheral Secretary was instructed
to write accordingly.
It was decided that the work of printing Constitution leaflets, &0.,
he left in the hands of the Editor and General Secretary.
Calknoab. —Mr. Bobin brought forward the question of a
Calendar. A list of names was submitted and passed. The question
of a motto was left to the Executive Council.
A letter was received, through Mr. Bobin, from the National
Home Beading Union, by Dr. Baton, Nottingham, who proposed that
the A.H.B.U. should co operate with the N.H.B.U, The matter was
fully discussed, and Mr. Bobin was requested to reply.
It was resolved that it be a recommendation to the Executive
Council that, if convenient to the majority of members, the next annual
meeting of the A.H.B.U. be held in Brisbane.
The balance-sheet, having been examined and found correct, was
presented and passed. It showed a small deficit, and a kind offer of
help from Professor Morris, in the name of the Victorian Section, was
received with much pleasure. It was generally agreed that the
deficiency would be soon made up.
Mr. Solomon proposed and Professor David seconded a very cordial
vote of thanks to Mrs. Wolstenholme, with a similar vote to Mr. Bobin,
which expressed hearty approval of the work done during the year.
Mrs. Wolstenholme and Mr. Bobin replied and expressed the
pleasure they felt in meeting representatives from other Sections of the
Union.
The proceedings terminated at six o’clock.


THE GENERAL SECRETARY-TREASURER’S REPORT
TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL.
SpIHE account of the second year of the Australasian Home Reading
_jj Union is one of steady work and quiet progress.
After the meeting of the General Council in January, 1892, it was
decided to issue an additional number of the journal, as No. 1 of the
second volume, to contain the revised Constitution and the completed
list of Courses for 1893. Four thousand of this number, and five
thousand copies of the Constitution and directions “ How to Work ”
were distributed over all the Sections, and were useful in makingjthe
work of the Union widely known.
This has been done with results as follows: We closed 1892 with
a membership of about 1,407 members meeting in 7(5 circles,
and with about 485 members. At the end of 1893 we
number 2,218 members, who meet in 134 circles, showing an increase
of 326 members and of 58 circles, distributed as follows :
New South Wales ... 664 members meeting in 42 circles.
Yictoria ... ... 427 ~ 24 ~
South Australia ... 336 „ 29 ~
Queensland ... ... 205 „ 12 ~
New Zealand ... ... 177 „ 13 ~
Tasmania ... ... 166 ~ 14 „
Total ... 1,975 134
Besides these there are 243 individual members in the colonies and in
various parts of the world.
As will be seen, Queensland lias more members than either New
Zealand or Tasmania, though the number of her circles is smaller. This
is accounted for by the fact that nearly all the members in Brisbane
meet in the Brisbane Literary Circle, which numbers over 60.
New South Wales still maintains the lead in numbers, though she
has fewer members than last year. The defection of one country town
in which there was no recognised leader accounts for this; as the number
of her circles is increased we must believe that interest in the work is
increasing also. In New Zealand and Tasmania there is also a decrease
in the number of members. In New Zealand this is probably owing to
the great distance between the centres, and the consequent delay in
communicating with head-quarters. It seems necessary that at least
two Sectional Secretaries should organise in New Zealand, one in
Wellington and one in the South Island, at Christchurch or Dunedin.
As Auckland has shown great interest in the work of' the Union it
might be desirable that a third Secretary should take charge of the
work there. From Tasmania the Secretary writes that though financial
depression and a very wet season have combined to make their numbers
small, they still hope that the Union will attain a robust growth in
that country where its roots are set.
9
A. H. E.


From Tasmania as well as from every other Section I have complaints
of the difficulty of the Courses, and the high price of, or trouble in obtain-
ing, the books.
In South Australia and in Queensland the numbers have very
much increased—South Australia in particular, which worked
quietly last year, made a very decided step to the front, and now, with
29 circles, stands second only to the parent section. Victoria shows an
increase of members and of circles, and promises to make a great stride
next year. In one or two of her country towns, groups or circles are
doing excellent work.
The number of our individual members is considerably reduced.
As the main reason for our existence is union of readers, and as our
total membership is much increased, this must be counted a gratifying
result. At the same time I must believe that the value of our journal
is such that it would be more widely subscribed for it it were more
widely known.
A few days after the close of the last General Meeting I received
from the Countess of Jersey the resignation of her position as President,
which resignation I now lay before this Council, this being my first
opportunity for doing so.
In November elections took place in most of the Sections. In
New South Wales Mrs. David was elected President, and Mr, Scott and
Miss Studdy remain Joint-Secretaries. In Victoria, Queensland, South
Australia, and Tasmania, President and Secretary remain unchanged.
In New Zealand no meeting had been held up to the date of last letter.
The Executive Council, as appointed by the last General Council,
has met four times during the year, and has given valuable advice and
encouragement to the officers, especially during the financial difficulties
which followed the closing of the banks. The Council has also arranged
the Courses of Reading for 1894. These courses were suggested by
those kind helpers of the Union who were invited by the last General
Council to do so, and they were printed in the November and December
numbers of the A.H.R. Additional courses asked for by different
circles have also been drawn up, approved and printed.
The work of distributing the journal has gone on very smoothly
this year, and has been greatly helped by the Directory printed at the
end of the journal, which also has served admirably as a bond of union
between secretaries and the head office.
As each Sectional Secretary is present either in person or by
delegate, there remains no detail for me to report. I have to thank
Secretaries and Leaders in all the colonies for the courtesy and prompt-
ness in correspondence, which has enabled me to carry out my work
regularly.
By my financial statement it will be seen that we close the year
with a small deficit; this amount will probably be covered by sales, but
if not, certainly by advertisements, which our increasing circulation
should enable us to obtain.
M. S. Wopstenholme, Hon. Gen. Secretary-Treasurer.
10
A. H. R.


©r.
BALANCE
SHEET FOR 1893.
Receipts.
Expenditure.
Balance from 1892
... £10
6
10
Printing, Andrews & Co.
£182
8
6
Prom New South Wales
67
14
0
Postage, ,,
30
10
7
,, Victoria ...
42
14
0
Wrapping
4
10
0
„ South Australia ...
33
10
0
South Australian Sectional Expenses
10
12
6
„ Tasmania...
16
10
0
Postage, Carriage, General Secretary...
11
3
1
„ New Zealand
13
4
0
Editor’s Expenses
1
9
6
„ Queensland
20
12
6
Exchange, Orders, &c.
1
2
8
,, Western Australia
2
6
Cash in hand ...
3
ID
o
,, London
9,
6
Subscriptions for 1892, Balance
1
0
0
Sale of Journal, Petherick & Co.
1
4
0
Advertisements in Journal, 1892
12
15
0
>! i) n 1893
4
0
0
Overdraft in A.J.S. Bank Dec. 31,
1893 21
11
6
Total
... £245
6
10
Total
£245
6 10
Audited and found correct,
M. S. WOLSTENHOLME,
January 2nd, 1894. P. ANSELL ROBIN.
Provisional General Secretary -Treas
rer.
AUSTRALASIAN HOME READING UNION.
11
A. H. R.


STATEMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES.
LIABILITIES.
Overdraft A.J.S. Bank ... ... ... £2l 11 6
ASSETS.
Cash in Hand ... ... ... ... ... £3 10 0
Debts due to Union—
Advertisements ... ... ... 400
Hew Zealand ... ... ... 400
£ll 10 0
Deficiency of Assets ... ... ... ... 10 1 6
£2l 11 6
Announcements.
The Australasian Home Reading Union now enters on the third
year of its existence. Subscriptions are due and should bo sent in at
once either to the Circle or Sectional Secretaries.
The General Secretary requests that names and addresses of
members and other particulars may be forwarded to her when sub-
scriptions are paid. Suitable forms are provided for the purpose, and
may be obtained by Circle Leaders from Sectional Secretaries or direct
from head quarters.
Attention to this request is necessary to ensure punctual delivery
of the Journal.
Any article intended for publication in next number should be
sent to the Editor not later than March 30 th.
12
A, H. R.


THE EDITOR’S REPORT TO THE
GENERAL COUNCIL.
the year 1893 there were nine issues of the A.H.R. , the
first being an extra number in February as directed by the
General Council, and the remainder being published monthly from May
to December.
The recommendation of the General Council in January last, that
each Section should appoint a sub-editor to co-operate with the
Editor-in-chief in securing suitable matter for the journal, has been
carried out in each colony except New South Wales, where it seemed
unnecessary. The result has been that a larger supply of articles has
been available ; and hearty thanks are due to the Sub-editors for their
services. At the same time I cannot but think that this agency is
capable of considerable extension. The number of articles sent to me
by the sub-editors during the year was only nine, and five of these
were published. It seems desirable and necessary that the leaders of
circles should secure for the journal the best original papers read at
their meetings, and send them to the sub editors for transmission.
An endeavour was made at the beginning of the year to secure
serial treatment for each of the most important courses of reading, but
as the year advanced it was obvious that nearly two-thirds of the
members were mainly interested in English Literature and History.
From the first it has been difficult, if not impossible, to secure scientific
articles. Several gentlemen, who were approached on the subject, con-
sidered that without observation and experiment a series of articles on
chemistry or physics would be valueless. This of course has been
recognised by the Union from the first, but it seems necessary, if we
are to justify our science courses in the eyes of men of science, that
their practical side should be more openly encouraged. No difficulty
has this year been found in obtaining literary articles. Special thanks
are due to Professors Scott, Wood, and Wilson of Sydney, Professor
Morris of Melbourne, and Professor Williams of Tasmania respectively,
for their valuable series of papers.
Summarizing the contents of the A.H.R. during the past year, I
have to report that 48 original papers in all have appeared in the 8
ordinary numbers. Of the courses in English Literature, the Arthur
Story has been treated in 7 articles, the Pre-Restoration Drama in 5,
while three each have been devoted to the Shakespeare and to the general
course. If we add 3 papers treating of English authors outside the
courses, the total number given to English Literature amounts to 21.
This preponderance is explained by the fact that a large majority of
readers have been reading along one or other of these lines. The other
courses have not been neglected. English History has received 6 articles
(a series of 5 on the Mediaeval, and one on the Modern Period), Roman
13
A. H. B.


Literature 5, Roman History 4, Physiology 3, Botany 2, and the courses
in French Literature, Geography and Travel, and Logic, one each.
Four articles of general interest complete the list, which is further
augmented by 7 pieces of original verse. Greater use has been made
of the Question Box, which has apparently been of considerable benefit
to those who have taken advantage of it. Still, the main body of
readers has not yet realised the value of this means of gaining help in
their studies, for nine questions in the course of a year cannot represent
the difficulties of 2,000 readers. Every circle should act on the
assumption that the journal is designed expressly for the solution of its
difficulties, and the leader should nob pass over an unexplained passage
or an unsolved problem without sending it on to the editor for elucb
dation.
The chief editorial difficulty has been (and will be increasingly in
the future) that the subjects comprised in the syllabus of the reading
courses are so many that none can receive adequate treatment. Selection
is necessary, and the result is at best only a compromise. The principle
that must be established is without doubt the “greatest good of the
greatest number,” This will often result in difficult subjects receiving
less attention in the journal than others that are manifestly simpler, but
there seems to be no alternative. lam glad to have this opportunity
of explaining what appears to have been in some quarters a cause of
dissatisfaction—the large proportion of articles written by University
professors and graduates as compared with those read by ordinary
members before their own circles. The explanation is twofold. First,
the number of papers sent in during the whole year by ordinary mem-
bers has been very small (35, including prose and verse), and 70 per
cent, of these have been either published or accepted for future use.
The second reason is that it has been, my aim during the first two years
of the existence of the A.H.R. to establish a good standard of writing,
and if a larger proportion of its contents had had to be taken from
proffered contributions, the standard must have fallen far below that
which the Union ought to maintain, and has a right to expect. One of
the chief dangers of our society is that of being content with inferior
work, instead of endeavouring to bring out the best of which our
members are capable. I venture to think, on the other hand, that the
standard has not been set too high for the average circle : and those
who are less advanced will receive more profit from a paper on a high
plane (if it be not too high) than the more advanced will obtain from
an article of inferior standard. In any case too much stress cannot be
laid upon the importance, and indeed the necessity, of making full use
of the articles published. In some circles they are never discussed, and
the journal merely takes its chance of being read along with the daily
and weekly papers or the monthly magazines. The A.H.R. does not
aim at competing with other publications : such an ambition would be
its destruction. If it is not used by leaders and members of circles as
14
A. H. B.


an aid and an incentive to genuine study, it has no reason;for its
existence.
During December last, overtures were made by the Sydney
University Extension Board in the hope that some arrangement might
be devised for utilising the A.H.B. as a means of extending the benefits
of the University, and at the same time strengthening the Union by
giving it a direct connection with the University. The general question
of the co-operation of the two organisations is a very important one,
which it is for the General Council to consider ; as regards the special
requirements of the Sydney University Extension Board, I have con-
cluded an arrangement whereby, without any expense to the Union, the
leaflets of the Board may be distributed to our New South Wales and
Queensland members, to whom I venture to believe they will be very
beneficial.
In conclusion I tender my sincere thanks to the officials of the
Union for their zealous co-operation in making the A.H.B. worthy of
this great intercolonial movement: to the General Secretary, Mrs.
Wolstenholme, for wise counsel, of which I have often availed myself ;
to the Secretaries and Sub-editors of Sections for their contribution of
news and articles ; and to the writers who have generously placed their
compositions at my disposal.
P. ANSELL ROBIN,
January Ist, 1894.
Editor A.H.B.
“The foundation of knowledge must be laid by reading Books
are faithful repositories which may be a while neglected or forgotten, but when
they are opened again will again impart their instruction. .
Johnson.
15
A. H. R.


CONSTITUTION
OF THE
Australasian Home Reading Onion.
(Revised January, 1894).
1, The objects of the A.H.E.U. are (1.) To draw up and
publish courses of reading adapted to the tastes and
requirements of different classes of readers. (2.) To publish
a Journal giving help for each course of reading, answers
to questions, and information with regard to the proceed-
ings of the Union. (3). To promote the organization of
assemblies, the delivery of lectures, and the holding of
social gatherings.
2. Any person may become a member of the Union on payment
of the usual annual subscription of 2s. 6d.
3. A Circle may consist of any two or more members who shall
have chosen the same course of reading.
4. Each Circle shall appoint a leader, who shall send to the
Sectional Secretary a complete list of members, and shall
remit their subscriptions.
5. If any number of members, not fewer than 6, shall desire to
form a Circle to pursue any definite course of reading, other
than the course prescribed by the Union, the Sectional
Committee shall have power to recognise that Circle.
6. An individual member not belonging to a Circle shall send
subscription and address to the Sectional Secretary.
7. Any combination of members, or of Circles, with a minimum
of 25 members, may form a Group.
8. The affairs of a Group shall be managed by a Board chosen by
the members.
9. If the Group be not a Circle or combination of Circles, the
Board shall elect a Secretary, who shall send to the Sec-
tional Secretary a complete list of members and shall remit
their subscriptions.
10. The members of the Union in each colony constitute a Section.
11. The officers of each Section shall be a President and a Secretary-
Treasurer, to be elected annually in November by the Com-
mittee of the Section.
Objects.
Membership.
Circles.
Individual
M EMBERS.
Groups.
Sections.
16
A. H. E.


12. The affairs of each Section shall be managed by a Committee
consisting of Sectional Officers and Leaders of Circles.
If a leader is unable to attend any meeting a delegate may
be elected by the Circle,
13. Each Sectional Committee shall have power to add to its
number.
14. The Treasurer of each Section shall have power to retain for
sectional expenses a sum not exceeding one-fifth of the
members’ subscriptions.
15. The officers of the Union shall be a President, a Secretary-
Treasurer, and the Editor of the Journal, who shall be
elected annually by the Council.
16. The affairs of the Union shall be managed by a Council)
meeting in session at least once a year, consisting of the
President, the General Secretary, the Editor of the J ournal,
the Presidents and Secretaries of the Sections.
17. If any representative of a Section be unable to attend a
meeting of the Council, the Sectional Committee shall have
power to appoint a delegate in his place.
18. The Council shall have power to appoint an Executive
Committee.
19. The quorum of the Council shall be five.
20. It shall be the duty of the Council to prescribe the courses of
reading, and to publish the Journal.
21. The Treasurer of the Union shall, at the Annual Meeting of
the Council, produce a balance sheet showing the receipts
and expenditure of the Union during the preceding year,
and shall publish the same in the next subsequent number
of the Journal.
22. The central office shall be in Sydney.
23. The Council shall have power to amend the Constitution of
the Union.
Council.
17
A. H. R.


HOW TO WORK WITH THE A.H.R.U.
First, join the Union yourself, by sending name, address, and
subscription to the Secretary of the Section. Interest others in
the Union, and if possible form a Circle.
At your own house, or at some convenient place call a meet-
ing of those interested, however few ; enrol members and let the
meeting choose a course and elect a leader. All in the same
Circle should take the same course • if some strongly desire a
different course, it is better to form a new Circle.
As soon as possible elect a leader. The leader should guide
and stimulate the work of the Circle, and act as Secretary for it,
supplying names and addresses to the Secretary of the Section, and
forwarding subscriptions. It will be generally found that a Circle
will prosper best where one who is interested in the work is both
leader at the meetings and Secretary. But in some oases the
leader who acts as Secretary entrusts the guidance of the meeting
to a chairman for the evening.
At the first meeting of a Circle it is advisable for an expla-
nation of the objects of the Union to be given. Assistance in
the formation of a Circle will be rendered by a member of the
Sectional Committee. To this introductory meeting non-members
might be invited. At the first meeting the members of a Circle
should agree on the order in which the books will be read.
The first few meetings should be made specially attractive.
It may be advisable that these should be “ Social Evenings,” when
songs and recitations should have a place with papers and discus-
sions. But never let the idea be abandoned of encouraging
systematic and thorough reading at home.
A definite book or part of a book should always be appointed
to be read between meetings, and the papers at a meeting should
have a bearing on this book or part of a book. A paper should
be followed by discussion. Those who have already read books
on the course should be encouraged to read them again, with a
view to the discussion.
Whenever a new author is taken up, there should, if possible,
be an introductory paper on the life and influence of the author,
and on the method and scope of the book to be read.
Meetings of Circles should be held at least once a month,
oftener if practicable.
If at any meeting a difficulty occur, to which no satisfactory
solution is found, the leader should write to the editor of the
Journal ( A.H.8, ). He will submit the question to a competent
specialist, and will publish the answer. The enquirer’s name need
Join.
Howto Form
a Circle.
The Leader.
First
Meeting.
Bead
Between
Meetings.
Use Journal
for
Difficulties.
18
A. H. K.


not be given. It is hoped that attention will be paid to this
matter. Those who write articles in the Journal would much
prefer to know the difficulties felt by readers, or the matters that
require elucidation. A large number of question constantly sent
to the editor would furnish proof of the vitality and usefulness
of the Union. Papers of special merit read at any meeting of
the Union should be forwarded to the Secretary of the Section
for transmission to the editor of the Journal.
In scientific subjects a few simple experiments may be
arranged, and the microscope and telescope utilised, or botanical or
geological rambles planned. Every member should be encouraged
to bring specimens, pictures, photographs, or diagrams to illustrate
the reading. Local science and art collections or museums, public
and private, may be visited. Every available means should be
employed to stimulate thought and widen the sphere of intellectual
interest, e.g., debates, papers, essays, dramatic readings in parts,
recitations, &c.
With the habit of reading will come the need for more
careful study. Atlas, dictionary, and books of reference should
be at hand, if possible; and members should have pencil and
notebook to take note of points discussed.
Where there are several Circles, their leaders should arrange
periodical gatherings, to which every member of every Circle in
the Group should be invited.
Membership of the Union will secure to any member a hearty
welcome at any Group or Sectional meeting.
The Australasian Home Reading Union does not enter into
competition with either school or university, nor does it interfere
with existing societies for mutual improvement or systematic study.
It is not restricted by limits of age, or condition of life, but is
open to all who wish to add to their knowledge by methodical
reading, whether living isolated lives in the back blocks, or in-
habiting centres of population. Its plan includes courses of
reading and study in science and general literature, sufficiently
popular to be easily intelligible to those who have not had the
advantage of university or school education, and yet sufficiently
thorough to instruct and interest the more learned. The Union
offers to its members, guidance and help as well as a sense of
brotherhood. The guidance in reading is given by the careful
selection of courses ; help of different kinds is furnished in the
Journal.
Helps to
Study.
SUMMARY.
19
A. H. R.


Dourses of Re ading for 1894.
ENGLISH LITERATURE. [General Courses.)
A. Poetry,
1. Cowper—The Task (Cassell’s National Library), 6d.; 2. Burns—Selections
by A. M. Bell (Longmans) 25.; 3. Scott—Lay of the Last Minstrel (Macmillan’s
English Classics), 25.; 4. Byron—Childe Harold (Cassell’s National Library), 6d.;
5. Wordsworth—Selections by Matthew Arnold (Macmillan), 3s.
B. Shakspeare Course.
Twelfth Night, As You Like It, Richard 11., Henry VIII., Macbeth, Antony
and Cleopatra, Cyrabeline (any editions).
Recommended for reference or further study —Hudson, Shakspeare’s Life,
Art and Characters, 2 vols. (Boston), 17s. 6d.
ENGLISH LITERATURE.
* Recent Writers.
A. 1. Selections from Browning (Smith, Elder & Co.), Is. ; 2. Selections
from Swinburne (Chatto & Windus), 65.; 3. Selections from Matthew Arnold
(Golden Treasury Series), 35.; 4. Ruskin—Frondes Agrestes (George Allen), 55.;
5. Hawthorne—Our Old Home, Is.; 6. Newman—Callista (Silver Library), 3s. 6d.
B. 1. Carlyle — Past and Present (Chapman & Hall), Is.; 2. Buskin — Unto
This Last (George Allen), 35.; 3. Arnold—Culture and Anarchy (Smith, Elder
and Co.), 2s. 6d.; 4. Kingsley—Alton Locke, 6d.; 5. Clough—Poems (Macmillan),
6s.
C. 1. Hamerton — Human Intercourse (Macmillan), 2s. 6d.; 2. Helps — Social
Pressure (Chatto & Windus), 25.6 d.; 3. Charlotte Bronte—Villette ; 4. Tennyson—
The Princess (Macmillan), 3s. 6d.; 5. Kingsley—Poems (Macmillan), Is. 6d.
*Mr. A. W. Jose writes:—“ I enclose three courses in recent English Literature adapted for three
sets of readers. The second is in the main that which a Sydney Circle has been reading in con-
tinuation of an Extension Lecture Course ; and X think it is too difficult a course to be taken up
except with some such guidance as a course of lectures or a very able head of Circle would give.
The other two explain themselves : in the first 1 have endeavoured to bring together contrasting
styles, all good and all at opposite points on a circle, to show what can be done with English : A in
the third I have sought more for diversity of views on similar subjects.”
Sydney, Oct. 28,1893.
ENGLISH LITERATURE.
Additional General Course .
1. George Eliot —Romola (Smith Elder), 2s. 6d. ; 2. Tennyson—ln Memoriam
(K. Paul), Is. ; 3. Scott —Guy Mannering ; 4. Shakspeare—Much Ado about
Nothing (Cassell), 6d. ; 5. Ruskin —Sesame and Lilies (Allen), ss. ; 6. Carlyle—
Heroes and Hero Worship (Chapman & Hall), 2s.
FRENCH LITERATURE.
Required.—l. Victor Hugo—Les Odes et Ballades (Hetzel, Paris), 2 francs ;
2, Victor Hugo—Les Travailleurs de la Mer, ed. Boielle (Longmans), 3s. 6d.;
3. Balzac —Selections by Van Laun (Longmans) 3s. 6d.; 4. Prosper Merimee
Colomba, (Rivington) 3s. 6d. ; 5. G. Sand—Les Maitres Mosaistes
6. Hal6vy—L’Abbc Constantin, 2s. 6d.
20
A. H. R.


GERMAN LITERATURE.
Required.—l. Grillparzer—Die Ahnfrau (Cotta and Nutt), 2s. ; 2. Freytag—
Die Journalisten (with English notes, Whittaker), 2s. 6d. ; 3. Scheffel—Ekkehard
(Whittaker), complete, 6s. ; abbreviated, with English notes, 2s. or 3s. ; 4.
Heinrich Stilling—Jugend (Spemann), Is. ; 5. Goethe—Gedichte (Cotta and Nutt),
3s. ; or a .selection (Meyer’s Volksbiicher), 3d. ; 6. Heine—Such der Liedsr
(Meyer’s Yolksbticher), 4Jd.
AUSTRALIAN LITERATURE.
1. Henry Kendall—Leaves from Australian Forests, Songs from the Mountains
(in Collected Works), (G. Robertson) 7s. 6d. ; 2. Adam Lindsay Gordon—
Romance of Britomarte, Prom the Wreck, Sick Stockrider, Rhyme of Joyous Guard,
Whisperings in Wattle Boughs, Finis Exoptatus (in Collected Works), (Mullen)
2s. 6d. ; 3. James Brunton Stephens Convict Once, Spirit and Star, The
Dominion of Australia (in Collected Wor ks), (G. Robertson) 7s. 6d.; A Hundred Pounds
(a Novelette, Is.; 4. Charles Harpur, Creek of the Four Graves, Witch of Hebron
(in Collected Works), (G. Robertson) 65.; 5. Rolfßoldrewood—Robbery Under Arms
(Macmillan), 2s. 6d.; 6. Rolfßoldrewood—Old Melbourne Memories ; 7. Deniehy—
How I became Attorney General of New Barataria (if procurable); 8. Charles
Badham—Speeches and Lectures.
EDUCATION.
A. Elementary Course.
Required. —l. Baldwin—Elementary Psychology and Education (International
Education Series), 45.; 2. Quick —Educational Reformers (Longmans), 3s. 6d.;
3. Fitch —Lectures on Teaching (Pitt Press), 65.; 4. Laurie—Life of Comenius
(Camb. Univ. Press), 3s. 6d.
Recommended for reference or further study. —1. Sully—Teacher’s Handbook
of Psychology (Longmans), 6s. 6d.; 2. Compayrb —History of Pedagogy (Sounen-
sohein), 6s.
B. Advanced Course.
Required.—l. Painter —History of Education (International Education
Series), 45.; 2. Bain —Education as a Science (K. Paul), os,; 3. Calderwood—On
Teaching, (Macmillan) 2s. 6d.; 4. Newsholme —School Hygiene (Sonnensohein)
2s. 6d.
Recommended for further study : -1. Sully Teacher’s Handbook of
Psychology (Longmans), 6s. 6d.; 2. Spencer—Education (Williams) 2s. 6d.;
3. Great Educators Series (Heinemann), os. per vol.; volumes already published ;
Aristotle, Alenin, Abelard, Loyola, Froebel.
GEOGRAPHY AND TRAVEL.
189i'f. Worth America.
1. Helps—Life of Columbus (Bell), 65., or Crompton—Life of Columbus
(Bell), Is.; 2. Voyages in search of the N.W. Passage (Cassell), 6d.; 3. Prescott —■
Conquest of Mexico (Routledge), 3s. 6d.; 4. Whymper—Heroes of the Arctic
(S. P.C.K.), 55.; 5. Milton and Cheadle —North West Passage by Land (Cassell),
2s. 6d.
21
A. H. E.


HISTORY OF BRITISH EMPIRE.
1899-1608 .
Required. —I. Green —Short History (Macmillan), Bs. 6d. or Parts II and
111 only, 3s. each,; 2. Sir Thomas More —Utopia (Morley’s Universal Library).
Is., or (Cassell), 6d.; 3. Scott—Kenilworth, The Abbot, 6d. each.
Recommended.—l. Stubbs—Constitutional History, voI.III. (Clarendon Press).
125.; 2. Seebohm—Protestant Revolution (Longmans) 2s. 6d., and Oxford
Reformers (Longmans), 145.; 3. Creighton—Wolsey (Twelve English Statesmen,
Macmillan), 2s. 6d.; 4. Beesley—Elizabeth (Twelve English Statesmen, Mac-
millan), 2s. 6d.; 5. Bridgett—Sir Thomas More, 7s. 6d. 6. Corbett—Drake
(Macmillan), 2s. 6d.
EARLY EUROPEAN HISTORY.
Required. —1. Bryce—Holy Roman Empire, chaps. 1-16 (Macmillan), 7s. 6d. :
2. Church—Beginning of the Middle Ages (Longmans), 2s. 6d.; 3. Cox—The
Crusades (Longmans), 2s. 6d.; 4. Johnson —Normans in Europe (Epochs of
Modern History, Longmans), 2s. 6d.
Recommended for further study.—Froude —Julius Caesar (Longmans), 6s.
Note on the Early European History Course.
The members of the Australasian Home Reading Union have just com-
pleted a course of English History ; and I have been asked to choose a course of
European History, as a supplement to the other. The difficulty was to choose a course
that was neither irrelevant nor scattered. The history of France is too great, and
that of Italy is too interesting, to be treated superficially. The other great Powers,
as they exist to-day, scarcely had an history until after the period you are considering.
It occurred to me, therefore, that the best subject was the Holy Roman Empire,
from its foundation in SOO to the reign of Maximilian the First; after whose time
the Crown became hereditary in the House of Hapsburgh ; and then the Imperial
system, to use Voltaire’s phrase, was neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire.
The advantage of choosing the Empire is, that it binds together the whole
community of Mediaeval Europe, either by containing some parts of it within its
dominion, or by its continual relations with the others. The volume which 1 have
recommended for your principal study is Mr. Bryce’s Holy Roman Empire ; in
that essay the early period is sketched in, and the period from Charlemagne
onwards, the period which corresponds with your last course in English History, is
treated with sufficient fulness to illustrate some of our foreign relations during
the Middle Age.
That you may understand better the origin of the Empire itself, the genius of
the great man who founded it, and the devotion of the Middle Ages to his person
and memory, I have recommended you to study Mr. Froude’s Ccesar. I don’t
consider this a necessary part of the course, but I do consider it a most valuable
foundation.
To these works I have added three small volumes from the “ Epochs of
Modern History ” Series, viz ; Church’s Beginning of the Middle -Ages, Cox’s
Crusades , Johnson’s Normans in Europe.
The two last treat of people and events, which had great influence upon the
history of the Empire ; the first speaks for itself, and I need not point out its
function.
Should the opportunity be given me, I_hope to enlarge upon all these subjects
in a more satisfactory way.
ARTHUR GALTON.
Government House, Sydney.
22
A. H. R.


GREEK HISTORY COURSE.
Required.—l. Abbott—Pericles (Putnam’s Heroesof Nations Series), price 55.;
2. Sankey—The Spartan and Theban Supremacies (Epoch Series), 2s. 6d. ; 3.
Curteis —Rise of the Macedonian Empire (Epoch Series), 2s. 6d. ; 4. Plutarch’s
Lives (Routledge), 2s. ; read Lives of Solon, Themistooles, Cimon, Aristides,
Pericles, Nicias, Aloibiades, Lysander, Agesilaus, Pelopidas, Phocion, Demosthenes,
Alexander.
Books for reference or further study.—Mahafiy—Social Life in Greece (Mac-
millan), 9s. j Cox —General History of Greece (K. Paul), 7s. 6d.
GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.
A. Elementary Course.
Required—l. Paul Bert—First year of Scientific Knowledge (Relfe), 2s. Gd.;
2. Geikie—Class Book of Geology (Macmillan), 4s. 6d.; 3. Rev. Joseph Campbell—
Simple Tests for Minerals, or Every man his own Analyst (E. A. Petherick & Co.),
3s. 6d.
Recommended for further study—l. Judd—Volcanoes (International Scientific
Series, K. Paul), 55.; 2. Darwin—Coral Reefs, Volcanic Islands, South America,
with critical notes by Judd (Minerva Series), 2s. ; 3. Life of Robert Dick, the
Baker Geologist (Murray), 95.; 4. H. R. Mill—Realm of Nature. (Murray) 65.; 5. R.
F. A. Murray—Geology and Physical Geography of Victoria ; 6. Sir James Hector
—Handbook of the Geology of New Zealand.
B. Advanced Course.
Required—l. Grenville Cole—Aids in Practical Geology (Griffin), 10s. 6d.;
2. Dawson—Geological History of Plants (International Scientific Series) 55.;
3. Frank Rutley—Mineralogy (Murby’s Science Series).
Recommended for further study—l. Lyell —Principles of Geology (2 vols.),
325.; 2. Lyell—Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man (Murray), 14s. ;
3. James Geikie—The Great Ice Age ; 4. G. F. Wright —Man and the Glacial
Period (International Scientific Series), 55.; 5. Boyd Dawkins—Cave Hunting
(Macmillan) ; 6. Boyd Dawkins—Early Man in Britain, 255.
Recommended for reference—l. Alleyne Nicholson, Richard Lydekker—
Manual of Palaeontology, third edition (Wm. Blackwood & Sons),, £3 3s. ; 2. A.
Liversidge—Minerals of New South Wales (Triibner), 21s. ; 3. R. L. Jack, R.
Etheridge—Geology of Queensland (Government Printer,Brisbane), £2 25.; R. M.
Johnston—Geology of Tasmania (Government Printer, Hobart); 4. Mineral
Products of New South Wales by Harrie Wood ; Notes on the Geology of New
South Wales by C. S. Wilkinson ; Description of the Coal Seams worked in New
South Wales by John Mackenzie (Government Printer, Sydney, 1887), 10s. 6d.
POLITICAL ECONOMY.
Required.—l. Jevons—Political Economy Primer (Macmillan), Is. ; 2.
Marshall—Economics of Industry (Macmillan), new edition, 3s. 6d.; 3. Walker—
Political Economy (Macmillan), 12s. 6d.
Books for reference or further study.—l. Rae—Contemporary Socialism
(Isbister), 7s. 6d. ; 2. Ingram—History of Political Economy (Black), 6s. ; 3.
Marshall—Principles of Economics, vol. 1. (Macmillan), 15s.
23
A. H. K.


PHYSIOLOGY AND HYGIENE.
Second Year.
Required.—l. Huxley—Physiology (Macmillan), 4s. 6d.; 2. Wilson—Manual
of Health Science (Longmans), 2s. 6d.
As an acquaintance with Physiology and Hygiene must necessarily be based on
some knowledge of structure, the student should obtain the latter by a practical
study of anatomy of one or more of the lower animals. To this end Marshall’s
The Prog, an introduction to Anatomy and Histology (Smith Elder) 55., and
Lloyd Morgan’s Animal Biology (Rivington) Bs. 6d., are recommended.
Recommended for reference and further study.—l. Starling—Elements of Human
Physiology (Churchill), 7s. 6d. ; 2. M’Kendrick and Snodgrass—Physiology of
the Senses (University Extension Manuals, Murray), ss.
PHYSICS.
Required.—l. Wright—Elementary Physios, (Longmans), 2s. Bd.; 2. Sir H.
T. Wood—Light, (Whittaker’s Library of Popular Science), 2s. 6d.; 3. Tyndall—
Light (Longmans), ss.
Recommended for reference or further study. —l. Stokes—Light, (Macmillan’s
Nature Series), 2s. 6d.; 2. Lewis Wright—Light, (Macmillan), 7s. 6d.
* BIOLOGY.
Required.—l. Buckley—Life and Her Children (Stanford), 65.; 2. Buckley—
Winners in Life’s Race, 2 vols., (Stanford), 95.; 3. Thomson—The Study of
Animal Life (Murray), £s.
Recommended for further study.—l. Parker—Elementary Biology (Mac-
millan), 10s. 6d. ; 2. Romanes—Evidence of Organic Evolution (Macmillan),
4s. 6d. ; 3. Wallace—Darwinism (Macmillan). 3s. 6d.
Recommended for reference.—Cassell—Natural History (Cassell), 4 vols., 9s.
each; or J. G. Wood—Natural History (Routledge), 65.; Le Maout and
Decaisue—System of Botany—(Longmans) 31s. 6d.
* Professor Parker writes as follows :—“ In answer to your letter of the 9th inst., will you allow
me to suggest, in the first place, that it might be as well if your Union would bring prominently
before its members the fact that a year’s course of Reading in Science is a very different thing from
a similar course in Literature. The latter is intended, I suppose, to encourage reading ; the former
should attempt to encourage observation and experiment, reading being employed merely as a
guide. In fact a book in Science should have the same subordinate place assigned to it as a Primer
of English Literature in a literary course. Pray pardon these very trite observations, but the
essential distinction between literary and scientific work is so often lost sight of.
Am I correct in assuming that the A.H.R.U. deals with amateurs rather than with serious
students ? In that case I should propose dropping the more technical book from the Biology
Course and substituting those calculated to excite interest in living things generally. On this
principle I have selected the course enclosed.”
Dunedin, N.Z., September 23rd, 1893.
MUSIC.
Preliminary Technical (if required).—l. * Dr. Marx —General Musical
Instruction (Novello), 6s. 6d.; or Banister—Music (Bell), 55,; or the Trinity
College Text Books (in 3 grades), Is. each.
A. —l. * Bauer —The Beautiful in Music (Novello), Is.; 2. Pauer—Musical
Forms —chief sections of (Novello). 25.; 3. Lussy—Musical Expression (Novello), 35.;
4. * Haweis—Music and Morals (W. H. Allen), 7s. 6d.; 5. F. L. Ritter—Musical
24
A. H. R.


History (Reeves). 7s. 6d.; or Maofarren—History of Music, (Black), 65.; 6. Dr.
Stone —Scientific Basis of Music (Novello), 2s.
B. —l. * Dr. Pole — Philosophy of Music (Triibner), 7s. 6d. ; 2. * Banister —
Musical Analysis (Bell) 7s. 6d. ; 3. Ehlert—Letters on Music (Reeves), 4s. ;
4. * Goddard—Musical Development (Goddard); 5. * Schumann—Music and
Musicians (Reeves), Bs. 6d.; 6. Rowbotham—History of Music (Bentley), 7s. 6d.;
7. Special articles from Grove’s Dictionary, such as Bach, Handel, Haydn,
Mozart, Notation, Song, Form, Variation.
C. —l. * Special articles from Grove’s' Dictionary, such as Beethoven, Weber,
Schumann, Chopin, Wagner, Harmony, Modulation, Overture, Concerto, Sonata,
Symphony, Oratorio, Opera, Orchestra and Orchestration, Schools of Composition,
etc.; 2. * Thibaut—Purity in Musical Art, (Murray) 7s. 6d.; 3. *Dr. Marx—
Music of the Nineteenth Century (R. Cooks & Co.) ; 4. ** Gurney—Power
of Sound (Smith Elder), 255.; 5. Helmholtz—On the Sensations of Tone (Longmans),
28s.
YOUNG PEOPLE’S COURSE *.
1. Lamb—Tales from Shakspeare (Chambers), 6d. ; 2. Lady Brassey—Voyage
in the Sunbeam (Longmans), 2s. ; 3. Church —Stories from the Iliad and the
,Lneid (Seeley), Is. 6d.: 4. Kingsley —The Water Babies (Macmillan), 6s. ;5.
Dickens—Nicholas Nickleby ; 6. R. L. Stevenson —Travels with a Donkey in the
Cevennes (K. Paul), 2s. 6d. ; 7. Buckley—-Fairy Land of Science (Stanford), 6s. ;
8. Conan Doyle—The White Company (Petherick) 2s.
* This Course has been specially selected for young people who have just left school, and it is
hoped that many may thus be attracted to join the Union, and form Circles amongst themselves
for methodical reading.
“ No book is worth anything that is not worth much ; nor is it serviceable
until it has been read, and re-read, and loved, and loved again.”-
Ruskin.
25
A.H. R.


Duties of a Leader.
(Adapted from a Circular of the National Home Reading Union.)
1. —To send to the Sectional Secretary and to the General Secretary a
schedule containing the names and addresses of the members of the
circle.
2. —To collect and forward all sums due from members of the circle to
the Union.
3. —To meet the members at regular intervals, weekly, if possible, for
conversation and discussion on the reading. It is suggested that
these meetings should take a social and recreative character, without
losing sight of their chief aim, to induce members to read systema-
tically.
4. —To distribute among the members their tickets of membership and
the copies of the monthly Magazine, which will be sent in a
parcel.
5. —To send reports of the progress of the circle at least once in three
months to the secretary of the section.
6. —To give notice to the General Secretary should the circle from any
cause disperse before the end of the Reading season.
The Council will give all assistance in their power to Circle
Leaders, whose work they regard as of the utmost importance, and upon
whose skill and devotion the success of the Union largely depends.
26
A. H. R.


May, 1894.
Vol. 111., No. 2.
THE A.H.R.
Pocket Selections from Browning.
sJ/pVjN the principle that one should not inspect the teeth of a gift
iHH horse, it may be doubted whether it is quite right to criticise this
little volume for what it does not contain. A pocket volume of
Selections from Browning to be sold at a low price was long asked for.
Browning’s poems were spread through many volumes, which could not
be described as cheap. To buy them all even now requires an ex-
penditure of eighty-five shillings. If the selection that was to give the
essence of Browning for a single shilling be not all that each individual
admirer could imagine it, yet it is a good thing that the world has this
handy little volume. Probably Browning never has the least chance of
being a popular poet ; his subjects are too recondite, and his language
frequently too difficult. But this little volume, published a few months
after the poet’s death, offers his best chance. A poet is never really
popular as long as readers have to procure his volumes one at a time
from a library and to return them thereto. The true popularity comes
with the volume owned, pocketed, thumbed, learnt by heart. Yet,
whilst grateful for the volume, we may fairly examine it. Of course, it
would be well nigh impossible to obtain a consensus of admirers as to
any selection, for different people have different tastes; yet I feel
certain that I could win greater approval for a different selection.
When this volume was announced, an English newspaper, that indulges
in a fancy for the plebiscite, called for lists of 50 favourite poems from
admirers of Browning, who by the way are far more numerous than the
jeers of the heedless would lead the world to think. The lists poured in, and
poems were arranged in an order of popularity according to the number of
lists in which their title appeared. The resultant list was very different
from the table of contents of this volume. Some universal favourites,
and short withal, are not in this book ; for instance “ Home Thoughts
from the Sea,” in which the poet’s feeling for England is so strongly
put. The lines are but seven in number, and no reason should have
been permitted to keep them out of the book. The same strong state-
ment may be made as to “ Home Thoughts from Abroad,” —•“ Oh, to be
in England,”—eighteen wonderful lines that contain the three about the


thrush, as to which the American critic, himself a poet, said : — 11 Having
in mind Shakespeare and Shelley, I nevertheless think these three lines
the finest ever written touching the song of a bird.” Similar shocking
omissions it would not be difficult to point out. It is not known who
made the selection—probably one of the publishers, Smith, Elder & 00.
Unfortunately, however, that firm had previously published at a higher
price two series of selections from the poetry of Browning, and we
cannot but fear that it is in the interest of the sale of these former
volumes that sundry favourite poems do not appear in this. The only
principle on which this selection has been made must be to give
specimens of all kinds, and it is a principle that can easily be defended.
The book is certainly not intended as an introduction to Browning’s
poetry through the entrance hall of the easier poems. Several such selec-
tions have been issued in the United States, where Browning was read
and studied, whilst in England, his home, he was still a mark for scoffers.
Though this is on the whole not a difficult volume, for, as a rule, it is
not Browning’s shorter pieces that present most difficulties, it yet
contains such poems as “ Childe Roland,” into which more explanations
have been read than the poet could possibly have intended, and Master
Hugues, whose name is invented to rhyme to “ fugues,” whilst the
object of the poem is to express the difficulty of catching a fugue’s
meaning. The order in the book is the order of publication.
But a truce to criticism on the selection ! Let us be thankful for
what we have. My present duty is to advise how to make use of the
volume. In the first place read it. Read it straight through, not at
first stopping over difficulties—and I am inclined to advise, read the
lyrical poems aloud. It is not so necessary to read the blank verse
aloud, such as “ How it Strikes a Contemporary,” “ The Epistle of
Karshish,” or “ Andrea Del Sarto.” Many people say there is no music
in Browning, though even these generally make a few exceptions, such
as “ The Lost Leader.” Perhaps it may be suggested that the only
way to test the music in Browning’s lyric poetry is to try it by the ear.
Not very long ago it fell to my lot to try a friend with the “Gram-
marian’s Funeral,” a poem in which Browning takes plenty of liberties,
and is especially himself. At first my friend scoffed at its apparent
unevenness. Next time we met he thought there was something in it.
Then he liked it very much, and finally learnt it by heart. The
“Grammarian’s Funeral” is not altogether an easy poem, but its lofty
note yields itself to those wh > will persevere. Browning’s last lines, the
“ Epilogue to Asolando,” is another poem on which to try the experiment.
When first it appeared it was often contrasted with the exquisite melody of
“ Crossing the Bar,” the poems being given to the world on two successive
days. The Epilogue does not occupy a page. Let any reader master its
meaning and then its rhythm, and he must be prejudiced indeed not to
allow that noble thoughts are there expressed in noble lines. But the lines
are not such as one who runs may read, and few people can master the
little poem either as to meaning or melody at a single perusal. There
28
A. H. K.


are those who say that modern poems do not deserve an effort such as
they make gladly over Shakspeare or over a classical passage. On this
point Browning’s admirers at once join issue, for we think he deserves
a reader’s effort, and that he will repay study. A generation fed on
Tennyson finds it hard to believe that when first the laureate’s poems
appeared they were frequently called unintelligible. In one review
they were described as “ enveloped in speculative doubt, and an
intellectual darkness that may be felt.” It would almost seem as if
intelligibility were a question of fashion. Gray’s Odea were once
reckoned a model of obscurity ; yet Gray and Tennyson are now
counted amongst the easiest of all poets to understand. Browning as a
whole will never be ranked in that category, but in most of his shorter
poems his meaning will not be found beyond the compass of a reader of
ordinary education and moderate discernment. In a well-known letter
to a friend, the poet once wrote (it was a quarter of a century ago);—“ I
never designedly tried to puzzle people, as some of my critics have
supposed. On the other hand I never pretended to offer such literature
as should be a substitute for a cigar, •or game at dominos to an idle
man.” “With Browning the first requisite for a poem is thought, the
development of a soul, and perhaps the particular thought cannot be
easily expressed, or the development is not easily followed.” Then
again the poet’s thought travels quickly, even at lightning speed, and
he fancies that he can carry slower readers with him as rapidly as his
own thoughts change. Another element never to be forgotten is that
this particular poet is full to the brim of humour, and prefers quaint
modes of speech, especially quaint and odd rhymes, only to find
parallel in Hudibras, whilst oftentimes the humour follows with
startling rapidity on the grave parts of his poetry. Religious questions
are common in Browning, and not ordinary puzzles on religion, but
whilst these are frequently treated in a mode that seems irreverent, it
should be always remembered that it is seeming only. The great
English preachers never hesitated to press the gift of humour into God’s
service, though in more mealy-mouthed days it is counted naughty to
raise a smile in church. Browning is an intensely believing Christian ;
nevertheless he does not mind humorous and odd presentments of high
moral and spiritual truth. To all these ways on the poet’s part the
reader has to grow accustomed. What I wish to urge now is that it is
well worth the trial.
To write a commentary on the 320 pages of this little pocket
volume would require another volume certainly as large ; indeed some
self-restraint would have to be exercised to prevent the commentary
overshadowing the text, which would be a palpable evil, A number of
volumes, large and small, have been written on Browning’s poetry. I
have 16 on my shelves, and I cannot suppose that I have all. To any
Circle that means to read Browning I should be inclined to recommend
either Mrs. Orr’s Handbook or Dr. Berdoe’s Browning Oyclopadia. The
latter is the more full, for Mrs. Orr comments on a whole poem, but
29
A. H. R.


seldom explains the parts, and though the Cyclopaedia is disfigured by
some very ridiculous mistakes, it contains valuable information. One
might say to readers, “ Go to one or other of these books for your facts,
for explanations of allusions and the like, but form your own opinions
on the poem and its meaning. Don’t let the critics do that for you.”
An obscure allusion a reader cannot solve for himself, but, if the
difficulty is in the language, to read once again may help the reader
to solve the puzzle himself. In the little volume there are not a
hundred poems, and some of them are very short. The subjects of the
more important are classified in the following table :
Art. Painting. Pictor Ignotus (who prefers to be unknown lest he
should sell his soul).
Andrea Del Sarto (the technically faultless Painter, but,
his wife having no sympathy, he fails in his ideals).
The Guardian Angel (description of one picture).
Music. Master Hugues (the confusion of fugues).
Abt Vogler. (Would that Music were permanent!)
Poetry. How it strikes a Contemporary. (The poet’s function.)
House. (Poet does not sing of himself.)
Popularity. (Illustration of murex fisher.)
At the Mermaid. (Shakspeare.)
Ballads.
How they brought the good news from Ghent to Aix (fictitious).
Herve Riel.
The Pied Piper of Hamelin.
Pheidippides.
Character-Sketches and Lessons.
My Last Duchess. (Soulless virtuoso.)
A Grammarian’s Funeral. (He resolved not to live but know.)
In the Laboratory. (A woman poisoner.)
In the Confessional. (Shameless betrayal by a priest.)
Muleykeh. (Arab’s love for his horse.)
Halbert and Hob. (Conscience in brute men.)
Waring. (Disappearance of one of whom much was expected.)
Shop. (There ought to be far more in a man than can be put in
the window.)
Elegy. May and Death.
Nature described. Englishman in Italy.
Politics. The Patriot. (How the popular voice changes !)
Italian in England. (For Italian unity.)
Love. His own. One Word More. To E. B. B.
His own “in soul, though not in circumstance.” By the
Fireside.
Any Wife to any Husband. (Love should be eternal.)
Dls aliter visum. (What might have been.)
Rudel to the Lady of Tripoli. (Devotion.)
30
A. H. R.


Love. The Statue and the Bust. (False in thought.)
Evelyn Hope )
and > (unexpressed.)
Too Late J
Religion. Immortality. Rabbi Ben Ezra.
Prospice.
God’s Protection. Instans Tyrannus.
False views of religion. Ixion (eternal Punishment).
The Bishop orders his Tomb (mediae-
val).
Gold Hair (human corruption).
Holy Cross Day (intolerance).
Australasia has a small place in the volume, for on page 124 it
stands written :
“ How rolls the Wairoa at your world’s far end ? ”
The Wairoa is in the North Island of New Zealand, and flows into
Hawke’s Bay. The beautiful poem called “ The Guardian Angel ”is
written to “Alfred, dear friend,” who is Mr. Alfred Domett, the hero of
the longer poem calling “ Waring.” In 1862 Mr. Alfred Domett was
Premier of New Zealand: in 1887, two years before his friend Browning,
he died in London. Poet as well as politician, he wrote a long poem
full of New Zealand legend and scenery called “ Ranolf and Amohia.”
In it occur the following lines on Browning, which, written at our
“ world’s far end,” are not as well-known as they deserve to be.
“ Impassioned Seraph from his mint of gold
By our full-handed Master-Maker flung ;
By him whose lays, like eagles still upwheeling
To that shy Empyrean of high feeling,
Float steadiest in the luminous fold on fold
Of wonder-cloud around its sun-depths rolled.
Whether he paint, all patience and pure snow,
Pompilia’s fluttering innocence unsoiled ;
In verse, though fresh as dew, one lava-flow
In fervour—with rich Titiau-dyes aglow—
Paint Paracelsus to grand frenzy stung
Quixotic dreams and fiery quackeries foiled ;
Or—of Sordello’s delicate Spirit unstrung
For action, in its vast Ideal’s glare
Blasting the Real to its own dumb despair,—
Or that Venetian water-lapped stair-flight,
In words condensed to diamond, indite
A lay dark-splendid as star-spangled Night ;
Still —though the pulses of the world-wide throng
He wields, with racy life-blood beat so strong —
Subtlest Assertor of the Soul in song.”
The last line, often quoted, is very expressive.
EDWARD E MORRIS.
Melbourne University,
April 23, 1894,
31
A. H. E.


Altiora Peto.
0 for a vision of the perfect light
To shame the splendour of the morning star !
0 for a breath from out the Infinite
Where the great heart of Being throbs afar !
0 for that sound, too fine for mortal ears,
The music of the silence of the spheres !
The Masters fathomed not that song sublime,
Tho’ oft on straining ear and brain o’erwrought,
And heart gro.wn faint at heights too sheer to climb,
The roll of some immortal wave of thought
Swept by and left, adown its troubled verge,
The lingering echoes of its mighty surge.
To each there came the passion and the fire,
The breadth of vision and the sudden light,
And for a moment on an earthly lyre
Quivered a tremor of the Infinite ;
Yet to each poet of that deep-browed throng
’Twas but the shadow of Immortal Song.
’Twas but the presage of th’ Omniscient Soul
That moves and throbs thro’ all this wondrous plan,
Unseen, unheard, unknown : That is the Whole,
Yet stirs in atoms and the heart of Man ;
That thro’ all phase of change and form and name
Remains and works eternally the same.
That seems to whisper us : —“ All life is one,
Reborn in death it blossoms from decay,
The same when first the fury of the sun
Belched forth his satellites of fiery spray,
The same when he and and all his planet train
Shall plough the Ether, cold—to glow again !
Whither, 0 whither ? Still th’ eternal cry,
That from the ages rolled and yet shall roll !
Who shall declare to man his destiny—
A unit in the Cosmos of The Soul —
A spirit-germ, storm-tossed in doubt and strife,
That feebly dreams of larger light and life ! ”
Systems and stars their courses onward sweep,
And creeds and nations flower and fade away,
Still Nature worketh out her purpose deep—
New life, new thought for that of yesterday,
Unto the utmost confines of her range
One law abideth of unchanging change.
Around us dwells the secret no man reads !
About us swells the music none can hear !
Behind us lie the ruins of the creeds !
Before us loom the mystery and the fear !
To Love and Hope our souls are clinging fast,
What giveth these, perchance, gives Truth at last !
G. ESSEX EVANS.
Brisbane, Queensland. April, 1894.
32
A. H. K.


The holy Roman Impire.
HOSE, who are fortunate enough to visit Rome, can still see the
JS fragments, or at least the site of the Milliarium Aureum ; that
is, of the gilded mile-stone erected by Augustus, in the Forum, to mark
the distances from The City, along the great military roads, to the chief
towns and provinces of the Empire. The saying, that “all roads lead
to Rome,” was then literally true ; and, in studying the past, we can
say with equal truth, that all roads in ancient history lead us on to
Rome, and all roads in modern history take us back to her. The
histories of Greece, of Asia Minor, of Syria, of Egypt, of Carthage, all
converge, sooner or later, into the history of Rome : the Pharaohs,
Hannibal, Alexander himself, were but purveyors and pioneers of
Caesar. The author of the third Gospel is perhaps excessive, and is
certainly mistaken, when he asserts, that Augustus was able to decree
that “ all the world should be taxed.” Gibbon is at once more accurate
and more modest in saying, that “ the Empire of Rome comprehended
“ the fairest part of the earth, and the most civilized portion of
“mankind”; and he goes on to describe “the frontiers of that ex-
“ tensive monarchy,” which “ were guarded by ancient renown and
“ disciplined valour ”; and confined “ within those limits, which
“ nature seemed to have placed as its permanent bulwarks and
“ boundaries : on the west, the Atlantic Ocean ; the Rhine and Danube,
“on the north ; the Euphrates, on the east; and towards the south,
“ the sandy deserts of Arabia and Africa.”
This great inheritance was obtained, for the most part, in the long
wars of the Republic; but the northern and western boundaries, the
Rhine, the Atlantic, were secured, when the conquest of Britain was
begun, when that of Gaul was achieved, and that of Spain was
completed, in the campaigns of Caesar. We don’t know how many
ages were occupied by those events ; the conventional date assigned to
the foundation of the city is 750 years before the birth of Christ; but
all this chronology is mythical; and we can only assume, that in the
seven centuries, which elapsed before the reign of Augustus' Rome
developed, from a small settlement near the mouth of the Tiber, into
that great Empire, of which the boundaries have been described.
There are certain vague traditions, which lead us to suppose, that
Rome was governed first by Kings; and that the monarchy was at
length converted into an aristocratical commonwealth, to the dis-
advantage, probably, of the lower and middle classes. At any rate, we
find for many ages, side by side with external wars, a civil fight, no
less bitter and enduring, between the great families and the people.
The latter extorted the license to become corrupt, and the nobles
retained the privilege of plundering a conquered world. The republican
form of government, as is usual, became ineffective and mischievous;
33
A.H. R.


and its last agonies were attended by wholesale massacres and spoli-
ations : one soldier after another had the vigour to destroy, but not the
genius to reform, the constitution; and when Caesar entered upon
public life, in the year 68 b.c., we find a turbulent, a servile, and a
venal crowd, instead of the old families and tribes of Roman citizens ;
instead of allies we find oppressed and plundered provinces ; instead of
the heroes of the young Republic, we find a set of worn-out, lewd, and
greedy nobles, by whom the spoils of the world were appropriated, and
its government abused. Not that the people were any better; for they
received in bribes a large part, of what the nobles had acquired by
extortion. At the right moment, however, the Roman State was saved
by Julius Caesar, who had the genius to see, and the courage to say,
that “ the Republic is nothing but an empty name, a phantom and a
shadow.” Caesar’s policy restored order, and breathed a new life into
the exhausted constitution. He established that majestic “ Roman
Peace,” under which the provinces lived secure for many ages : he gave
the helpless peoples a legal sovereign, or rather, a legal representative
and administrator of the sovereign power, and he preserved them from
the lawless tyranny of a thousand masters. The benefits of the
Imperial system were extended throughout the Empire; and the
judgment seat of Caesar was the protection of innumerable citizens.
The change from the Republic to the Empire was hardly a revolution ;
as the venerable names and forms of the old administration were
religiously preserved. Still, the Consuls were elected ; the Senate met,
and legislated; Praetors and Legates went forth into the provinces;
the Legions watched upon the frontiers; the lesser magistrates
performed their office : but above them was Caesar, directing all things,
controlling all things; the “Imperator” and Universal Tribune, in
whose name all was done; the Incarnate Providence, on whom the
whole depended; at once the Master of the Imperial Commonwealth,
and the Minister of the Roman People.
The genius of Caesar is shown best in the endurance of his work.
His name was given to all his successors; his Empire prospered and
increased; and under its protecting care, trade, laws, the arts, every-
thing, which we mean by civilization, was fostered and encouraged.
The frontiers were guarded against external enemies, and the various
provinces were kept at peace among themselves. Of all these benefits,
the chief were, undoubtedly, the steady growth of Roman Law, and the
firm consistent nature of the provincial administration. Whatever the
personal character of the Emperor, the general course of administration
was, on the whole, beneficent and wise.
In the fourth century, a new capital was established in the East;
and, as Constantinople grew, Rome declined. The Eastern Empire
continued, a great barrier against Asiatic invasions, until 1453. The
fortunes of the West were darker: Rome declined, as all states do,
chiefly through financial embarrassments ; the barbarians came in, and
the old order was disturbed, though not so much as many writers have
34
A. H. B.


imagined. The western people still remembered, still loved, the Imperial
administration: they longed for the prosperity and repose, which it insured.
At length, in the ninth century, if we are to believe the chronicles,
Caesar’s office was revived, and his authority restored, in the person of a
Frankish sovereign, Charles the Great, or Charlemagne. The organi-
zation, which was then established, is known as the “ Holy Roman
Empire”: it was less Roman, than the old Empire of the genuine Caesars,
and not a bit more holy. That title is, of course, only conventional, and
must be retained. The old Caesars were, in many senses, more religious
than their successors ; because the whole spiritual, as well as secular,
functions of the State were united in their persons ; and there were, in
consequence, no quarrels between the Church and State ; for the
Ancients were too wise to allow, or too religious to perceive, any
difference between the two.
ARTHUR GALTON.
Reading for May.
In response to some requests, we suggest the following portions of some of
the prescribed courses, to be read during the present month. It will of course be
understood that they are not obligatory, being intended only for those who desire
guidance in systematising their reading. Other courses will be subdivided if
desired.
English Literature Courses :
Modern Poetry ... ... C'owper’s Task. (Recommended: Mrs. 01i-
phant, Literary History of England in
Nineteenth Century, chap. I.).
Shakespeare Course ... Twelfth Night.
Recent Writers: A ... Selections from Browning. (Recommended:
Defries, Browning Primer),
do. B ... Carlyle’s Past and Present,
do. C ... Hamerton, Social Intercourse (first half).
Addit, General Course... George Eliot, Romola.
Young People’s Course... Conan Doyle—-The White Company.
Education :
A Elementary Course ... Quick, Educational Reformers, cc. 1-6.
(Recommended : Com pay re, History of
Pedagogy, cc. 1-6).
B Advanced Course ... Painter, History of Education, pp. 1-118.
(Recommended : Sully, Teacher’s Hand-
book of Psychology, cc. 1-5),
Geography and Travel ... Life of Columbus.
Hist, of England,l399-1603 Green’s Short History, chap. 5, pp. 211-264.
(Recommended for reference : Stubbs,
Constitutional History, iii., chap. 18).
Political Economy ... Jevons, Political Economy Primer.
35
A. H. R.


Leaders in Council.
I.—A GEOGRAPHY AND TRAVEL CIRCLE.
For the following acccount we are indebted to Mrs. E. W. Hawker,
Medindie, S.A.:—
Before commencing the regular meetings we held a preliminary
meeting to decide what course we should take up for the year, to elect
a leader, and generally to arrange as far as possible how the work for
the year was to be carried on.
It was decided to have the meetings in the evening, and, unless
something interfered, at intervals of four weeks—the idea being that
during that time all the members would have time to read the book to
be discussed, and that it would also allow those who were going to write
papers to have time to get them up.
At the first meeting the book for discussion was Prescott’s Conquest
of Peru. As this meeting was held very soon after the preliminary
meeting we had only one paper of any length—a biographical sketch of
Prescott. The rest of the evening was occupied in looking over
illustrated books of travels in Peru, and in reading short extracts from
them and from Prescott. Some time was also taken up in discussing
what papers would be good to get up for the next meeting. The plan I
pursued was first to get suggestions of interesting points for inquiry and
further investigation, either occurring in the book itself or suggested by
the subject treated of, and then to find out who was willing to work up
a paper on the subject chosen. Generally more than one person helped
with the same paper—as for instance the illustrations were usually
drawn by some one who did not write the paper, and in the case of
lantern illustrations as many as four have been occupied in preparing
the slides.
At the second meeting we had several papers—one on the state of
Europe, and Spain in particular, at the time of the discovery of Peru ;
another on the “Knights of Malta," as being an interesting episode
treated of by Prescott and occurring about the time of the conquest of
Peru. One member prepared a very clear little digest of the book with
the dates and names of the various Governors. Then we also had a
paper on the present state of Peru, and the remains now extant of the
old Inca buildings. This paper was extensively illustrated with lantern
slides, most of them of our own drawing. Wherever it was possible,
I have endeavoured to have the paper illustrated, either with lantern
slides or with large drawings pinned on a screen and easily seen by the
whole meeting. The illustrations always seem to make the subject so
much more interesting and easy to understand.
At the third meeting we took Waterton’s Wanderings and Raleigh’s
Discovery of Guiana. The papers read, or rather the subjects spoken
36
A. H. K.


on, for in most cases those who spoke did so from rough notes only,
were (1) “Raleigh’s Life and Times,” (2) “The Urali Poison.” This
was most interesting, as the member who undertook to get up the
subject had been able to procure some of the poison in its dry state,
which he brought to the meeting, and he gave us an account of the
modern investigations and experiments with regard to the composition
and action of the poison. The third paper, which was illustrated with
large maps prepared for the occasion, as I have described already, was
on the state of geographical knowledge at the time of Columbus, and
proved most interesting as well as instructive.
Our fourth meeting was on Darwin’s Voyage in the Beagle. We
began with a short paper on geology, with lantern illustrations and
specimens of the different classes of rocks. 1 had also been able to
procure a copy of the illustrated works on the “Zoology of the Voyage
of the Beagle,” and they were shown round. There was a great deal of
general discussion and arranging for papers for the next meeting
(the fifth), at which two most interesting papers were read—one on
the “ Life and Work of Darwin,” and the other on “ Darwinism and
Evolution.” This latter paper has been published in the A.H.R.
Extracts were also read from Saville Kent’s book on the Great Barrier
Reef, and the beautiful illustrations to the book excited great admiration.
At the sixth meeting we had an excellent paper, with illustrative
maps, on Coral Reefs, with the latest theories and facts bearing on the
subject. Also a sketch of the lives of Wallace and Bates, besides a
discussion on the course to be taken up next year. As, however, the
whole list of courses was not yet published, we decided to wait till
the next meeting, which was postponed a week, so that we might receive
the December number of the with the rest of the courses, before
it was held.
At the seventh and last meeting we decided on continuing with
Geography and Travel, though some were greatly in favor of the Biology
course which would have followed very well after Darwin and Wallace.
We also decided to begin the next year’s course with the Conquest of
Mexico —the book to be read during the holidays, as we did not propose
holding another meeting till after Easter. At this last meeting the
attendance was small, as many of the members were out of town. One
paper was read, comparing the views of Evolution held by Bates,
Wallace and Darwin, with extracts from Wallace’s latest articles on
the transmission of acquired characteristics. Extracts were also read
from Bates’ book of travels, bearing on the subject of the fine gradation
of varieties connecting various species.
I have often been asked if I found it hard to get all the members
to read the books. Now this a point to which I attach very little
importance, as I consider that the members will read the books if the
subjects are made interesting, which it is my aim to accomplish ; and
even if they do not, they learn much from- hearing the discussions, and
the papers read by those who really were interested, and who read not
37
A. H. R.


only the books set, but many more bearing on the subject. In fact, it is
these readings of other books, and writing of papers on them, that are
the life and soul of the Circle. It is difficult to lay down any exact
rules for the guidance of leaders of other Circles ; so much depends on
the members and on the subject. The very freedom of action allowed
was to me, and is, I know, to many, the great charm of the A.H.R.U. My
endeavour was to find out good subjects for papers—and, with such an
interesting course in itself as we had, there was no lack of such subjects
—and to apportion the subjects chosen to those who were most willing
and able to write. I have also been glad to have visitors to the
meetings, and have received much help in the way of books and
materials for papers, and in one case of the paper itself, from people who
were not members of my Circle.
II.—AN ENGLISH LITERATURE CIRCLE.
Mrs. Edgeworth David (Ashfield, N.S.W.) kindly contributes
the following;—
The method of conducting the Ashfield Circle is very simple, but
may perhaps be of service to newer Circles.
Each year there is a preliminary meeting in which are settled
several matters, e.g. :
(a) The leader for the year.
(h) The course for the year.
(c) Times and numbers of meetings.
(d) Social arrangements.
First as to the leader.—All members of the Circle are supplied
with slips of paper, on which they write the name of the leader they
may wish elected. When the papers are handed in, two members are
asked to act as scrutineers, and the person who scores the largest
number of votes is declared leader for the year. When the leader is
elected, the Circle then places all power and responsibility on his
shoulders—he has to arrange programmes, places of meeting, reading
for each interval, and the work for the various members to take at the
Circle meetings. Of course any member is at liberty to growl and
refuse to do what the leader has placed on the programme for him ; but
Ashfield Girders are sensible and don’t growl and make things un-
pleasant for their leader.
The course for the year is chosen, after a short discussion, by
counting of hands,
The times of meeting have so far been once a month, on Mondays,
at 8 p.m.
The social arrangements contribute largely to the success of the
Ashfield Circle. Each meeting takes place at a different house, ladies
with the largest drawingrooms doing all the entertainment. The
38
A. H. R.


hostess provides refreshments, which are never to exceed the modest
comfort of coffee and cakes. Of course if the hostess chooses to give
tea and sandwiches, or cocoa and bread and butter, that is all right; but
it is an understood thing that nothing more extensive, expensive, or
elaborate in the way of refreshments is to be provided—for reasons too
obvious to need mention.
The programmes are drawn up by the leader and distributed at
least a fortnight, more often the entire month, before the meeting.
The leader reads the book, selects likely subjects for papers, names the
members to write these papers, also names those who are to read, sing, or
recite when required. While on this subject it is perhaps well to state
that every member of the Circle is not bound either to write papers, or to
sing, or to read aloud, or in fact to take any active part at all in the Circle
meeting. Any member who from lack of time, or nervousness, or any
such reason, wishes to be a listener only, is allowed to attend the
meetings as a part of the audience. When the Union is a home reading
Union, it would be manifestly absurd to exclude people who do read at
home, but who don’t wish to read abroad. Then again there is always
an attempt at a discussion after each paper, but great care is taken to
render this as informal as possible ; no one is called upon by the leader,
any one speaks who wishes to do so, but without standing up and
formally addressing the chair. The discussion is decidedly conversational
and in no sense an attempt at a debate. Most of the Circle know that
if a formal debate were attempted all the younger members would be
stricken dumb, there would be a feeling of tension, and the pleasure and
profit of the meeting would be lost.
In arrangements for the evening, again, there is an absence of
formality, there is no visible chairman (he is audible when necessary),
the seats are scattered carelessly,’and all sit where and how they list; no
one dreams of standing up to read a paper or a poem.
The evening goes somewhat thus:—The leader calls, say on Mr.
Jones, for his paper, all are respectfully quiet while Mr. Jones reads,
unless he happens to be funny, in which case every one dares laugh
audibly. After Mr. Jones has finished, the leader thanks him, and the
conversational discussion begins. It lasts from sto 10 minutes, and then
the leader calls for the next song, or reading or paper as the case may be.
Of course the success of the evening depends on the skill with which
the programme is varied. So far the variety and the quick changes of
work make the time fly, and all are surprised when the refreshments
appear —the signal for a general movement and buzz.
This is all Ashfield Girders do, and yet they like it.
39
A. H. K.


111. (a) HOW MAY CIRCLES HELP ONE ANOTHER 1
(h) HOW MIGHT THE A.H.R. BE MADE MORE
USEFUL ?
{From a Paper read by Mr. E. J. Young, 8.A., before the
Hobart Group).
®NION is force; and this force, hitherto neglected by us, may be
made to take a variety of forms : among others, one peculiarly
welcome in these bad times—l mean, economy. Let me put my idea
into concrete shape. Suppose that there are two Circles, each with
nine members, willing to adopt courses in English Literature. They
should, after due consultation, select two which would be satisfactory
to all concerned. In order to work out the illustration in pounds,
shillings, and pence, we will assume that they choose (1) a Shakespeare
Course, and (2) an American Essayists’ Course. In that case they
might do worse than take the six plays so ingeniously criticised by Mr.
Moulton in his Shakespeare as a Dramatic Artist, viz., The Tempest,
The Merchant of Venice, Lear, Macbeth, Julius Csesar, and Richard
111. Assuming that everyone possesess a copy of the plays, 1 should
then recommend the purchase of the following books : single copies of
the Clarendon Press editions of the six plays, 10s. ; nine copies of
Dowden’s Primer , 95.; four of Watkiss Lloyd’s Critical Essays, 10s. ;
four of Hazlitt’s Shakespeare’s Characters, 45.; also single copies of
Dr. Abbott’s Shakespearian Grammar, 6s. ; Craik’s English of
Shakespeare, ss. ; Dowden’s Shakspere, His Mind and Art, 125., and
the volume by Moulton, above-mentioned, 6s. These would constitute
an abundant equipment for a year’s good work, at a total cost of 625.
barely 7s. a head, if purchased from a local bookseller; or, if the sense
of duty to one’s neighbour could be sufficiently stifled and the order
were sent to a London discount bookseller, they might be got for about
6s. less, even after allowing for the post-office orders and postage.
If you will allow me a short digression at this point, 1 may add
(from my experience of a successful Shakespeare Course), that the
working method should be somewhat on the following lines. The
leader would keep the copies of Dowden and Moulton, make digests of
their criticisms, and select the best passages to be read at the fortnightly
meetings. A sub-leader, with a taste for grammar and word-mongering,
should be appointed to extract the most valuable material from Craik
and Abbott in the same way, and otherwise to assist the leader. The
copies of the Clarendon Press editions of the plays should be divided
among the other members of the Circle, each of whom would be made
responsible for a careful study of the notes on one play, paying
particular attention to obsolete and unusual words, to important
variations in the text, and the meanings of obscure phrases and difficult
passages. Each member would have a copy of Dowden’s Primer, and
there would be one copy of Lloyd’s Essays and also of Hazlitt’s Notes
40
a. n. u.


between every two, omitting the leader. When studying any play, the
leader should divide the preparatory work ; requiring one member to pay
especial attention to the plot and construction ; another to collect the
finest passages or striking specimens of wit and humour; others, to
write short papers on different characters in the play; and so forth.
All the best papers and criticisms would be carefully kept by the
leader, who should also take notes of any additional books, essays, or
magazine articles that might be found helpful to the work in hand.
Unless the objects of the Circle were confessedly amusement without
instruction, each member should keep an extensive note-book, and till it
as full as possible.
The other Circle, we will suppose, invest in nine copies of half-a-dozen
volumes of the Camelot Series, namely, Lowell’s My Study Windows,
and Essays on English Poets ; Thoreau’s Walden and Essays ; the
selection entitled Writings of Emerson (or perhaps in preference his
Orations and Lectures in Bohn’s cheap series); and Walt Whitman’s
Democratic Vistas. They should also get two copies of Dr. Garnett’s
Emerson, in the Great Writers Series, and two of Mr. Clarke’s
delightful little volume on Whitman, published in the Dilettante
Library. These could all be bought locally for fils. , that is to say, as
in the former case, the expenditure on outfit would be a trifle under 7s.
apiece.
After going through one of the Courses, the two Circles would
exchange books ; by which plan the two years’ reading would only cost
each member about 125., including subscriptions to the Union. The
notes kept by the leaders, and the best papers read at the meetings,
might also be advantageously exchanged ; and thus we should introduce
a little real Unionism into our work. Might I further suggest that,
when both Circles had completed the courses, after reserving two or
three of the more valuable books as prizes for the writers of the best
papers, the rest should be handed over to the Secretary, to help in
forming a small Working Library for the Section? As a further step
towards Unionism, we might also invite an interchange of Papers
between all Circles in any particular Section adopting the same course.
Only the best papers read at the meetings would be thus sent round ;
and if a sufficient number were available at any time, a general meeting
of all the Circles interested might be called, at which these papers could
be read and discussions follow. The Secretary or Sub-editor would be
most happy to receive the papers and arrange for such meetings, when
practicable.
Let us now pass on to what may be termed the larger Unionism of
our Association. It is not perhaps desirable that the community of
books should be extended to Circles in different colonies; but some
interchange of papers and critical notes might be managed through the
medium of the magazine. If leaders of Circles could forecast their
wants sufficiently in advance, it should be quite possible thus to make
them known to those who might be able and willing to lend a helping
41
A. H. R.


hand. And there are several other ways in which the A.H.B. might be
made more practically useful than apparently it is now considered to be.
For example, many leaders would be glad to have exact and detailed
accounts of the working-methods of other Circles. It is no doubt
gratifying to read of the successful meetings which—all too briefly and
vaguely—are from time to time reported: but it would be more useful
if we could be told the precise details of the work that has led to that
success. Again, Model Papers would be of great assistance to many of
us, by showing the right lines to follow when treating any particular
subject. The various Essays and Papers that have appeared in the
A.H.R. during the past two years, are of course excellent in their way,
but that way is hardly one to l>e attempted by an average Circle.
After all, however, Paper-manufacturing is not the main object of
the Home Beading Union. There are too many little Associations
already in the field, foolishly beginning their work at the wrong end,
and attempting to teach their members to run before they can walk.
What we primarily have to do is to learn how to read, and what we
should beg the experienced contributors to our magazine to give their
best attention to is the teaching ns how to set about it. This is such an
important matter—the very end and aim of our Association—that I am
glad to be able to bring it before yon in the words of a thoughtful critic
(Professor Dowdeu), rather than attempt painfully to say it in my own.
In a noteworthy essay on “The Interpretation of Literature,” this
writer says:—
“ A discussion in which many eminent persons took part, was held,
not long since, with a view to finding an answer to the question, “ What
hundred books are the best ? ” But it would have been more profitable
for us had we been advised how to read any one of the hundred; for
what, indeed, does it matter whether we read the best books or the
worst, if we lack the power, or the instinct, or the skill by which to
reach the heart of any one of them 1 Books for most readers are, as
Montaigne says, a‘ a languid pleasure ’; and so they must be, unless
they become living powers, with a summons or a challenge for our
spirit, unless we embrace them or wrestle with them.
“ Now if some of those who have proved their power of getting
to the heart of great books were to tell us of their craft, or heart, or
their method, we should listen with interest and attention; and if we
were to compare method with method, we could not fail to learn some-
thing worth learning. One would like to know, for example, the
process by which Sainte-Beuve dealt with an author; how he made his
advances; how he invested and beleagured his author; how he sapped
up to him, and drew his parallels and zigzags of approach ; how he
stormed the breach and made the very citadel his own If
some fine interpreter of literature would but explain how he lays hands
on and overmasters the secret of his author, we should feel like boys
receiving their lessons in woodcraft horn an old hunter; and we are all
42
A. H. K.


hunters, skilful or skilless, in literature—hunters for our spiritual good
or for our pleasure,”
I ask then, cannot the XJiiion do something of this kind for all
classes of its readers ? To continue taking my illustrations from English
literature, could not Professor Morris tell ns how he has read Adam
Bede or The JTewcomes : what “ revelations of finer modes of feeling, of
new horizons of thought, of the widening possibilities of human life,”
these books have given him ? Gould not Mr. Williams help us to read
Sir Soger de Cover ley or The Vicar of Wakefield with keener appreciation
and delight 1 Could not Mr. Roe and Professor McCallum explain to us
how they have succeeded in “ getting to the heart ” of Hamlet and Lear,
or at all events much nearer than most of us have done ? Then by
comparing method with method, as Professor Dowden says, we could not
fail to learn something worth learning. If this kind of help were given,
the A.H.R.TJ. would have established a grand raison dtUre. At
present the scornful outsider throws in the teeth of the faithful that he
can surely read what he wants without joining any association; and the
faithful subscriber does not always find a reply ready to his hand.
But the publication in our Magazine of the “ methods and secrets ” of
our best scholars would make it a welcome guide to every reader who
can plead “not particularly guilty” to the charge of laziness or
conceit. For what, after all, should be the final object of our studies ?
Let me give you the answer in Professor Bowden’s own words :
“Of all our study the last end and aim should be to ascertain how
a great writer or artist has served the life of man ; to ascertain this, to
bring home to ourselves as large a portion as may be of the gain where-
with he has enriched human life, and to render access to that store of
wisdom, passion, and power, easier and surer for others. If our study
does not directly or indirectly enrich the life of man, it is but a drawing
of vanity with cart ropes, a weariness to the flesh, or at least a busy
idleness.”
" I make not my head a grave, but a treasure of knowledge ; I intend no
monopoly, but a community of learning; I study not for my own sake only, but
for theirs that study not for themselves. ” —'
Thomas Browne, Religio Medici.
43
A. H. B.


Sonnets
SUGGESTED BY THACKERAY'S “ENGLISH HUMOURISTS OF THE 18TH
CRNTURY.”
I.—Swift.
Labor through the mist of years his form doth loom.
And still to each a differing aspect shew;
Whilst one beholds him bright with radiant glow,
Another but descries him wrapped in gloom.
Which is the true presentment 1 Why presume
To pass a verdict 1 What is it we know 1
A warm and constant friend—a bitter foe—
A man most deeply loved—an awful doom.
Ended long since that fierce indignant strife,
The “ lacerated heart ” has ceased to bleed.
Oh ! let the history of his strenuous life
Move us not all ungently as we read,
Remembering that to those who sore have striven,
And loved and suffered much, is much forgiven.
ll.—Stblla.
If praise unstinted fall to Fielding’s share
Because his heroines are sweet and true,
Have we no gratitude for him who drew
Of one he loved a portrait full as fair 1
Fondly he dwells upon her virtues rare!
“ Detraction never passed her lips ” —how few
Merit such tribute 1 “No delight she knew
In trivial tattle.” Maid beyond compare !
She wore the ornament St. Peter praised;
Went plain herself that she might clothe the poor;
On fairer face no lover e’er hath gazed;
Of truer heart no friend hath e’er been sure;
So Stella lived her life, unwitting Fame
Should make a lode-star of her simple name.
ISABEL COCKBURN GILES.
44
A, H. R.


The Sea Power.
1803—1804—1805.
is now some years since Captain A. T. Mahan’s Influence of Sen
Power upon History was published, and the work has become
pretty well known to students, but some who are acquainted with it
may not have read the later volumes on the Sea Power in the period of
the great struggle with the Revolution and Napoleon, which also
possess a high interest.
Much that is discussed in this book is familiar to commonplace,
even to readers of elementary history, but the well-known facts assume
a new meaning and importance from the way in which the author treats
them. As we read we recognize the inevitableness of many historical
events which had seemed to be fortuitous. We see that Hannibal
could never have conquered Rome, and that the defeat of France in
India and America was a foregone conclusion. We learn under what
conditions England was bound to lose, and lost, her American colonies.
The sea power of Home was fatal to the Carthaginian; the sea power
of England drove France to relinquish the struggle for supremacy
abroad with the power that commanded the only means of communi-
cation ; the loss of the control of the sea, though but for a time, led
directly to the capitulation of Cornwallis at Yorktown and made
America free. The work also gives us the views of a naval expert on
questions of such importance and uncertainty as the probable loss which
commerce would sustain in a modern naval war, and the result of the
substitution of steam as motive power for wind.
The history of the Sea Power for the last 200 years is the naval
history of England, and a very wonderful record it is. That power
forced the conquerors of Europe “to live without commerce, without
shipping, without colonies, subjected to the unjust will of their
enemies,” to use Napoleon’s own words. It drove France to adopt
measures, in a vain attempt to injure it, which ‘exasperated the other
European nations, and brought about the general rising which delivered
the Continent from Napoleon’s yoke, I allude to the Continental
System established by the decrees of Berlin and Milan, which proclaimed
a blockade of all British ports, and treated as “ enemy’s ships ” all the
ships of neutrals which touched at a British port when voyaging to any
place under French control.
The chapter on the campaign of Trafalgar and the account of the
events which led up to it is perhaps the most interesting part of
Captain Mahan’s book. When England in the struggle with the
Revolution more and more assumed the position of leader, it became
necessary for the French to try and attack her power in a vulnerable
point, and with this object the Directory sent out the Egyptian
45
A. K. R.


expedition of 1798. In 1803 Napoleon, who had been made First
Consul in 1800 and was soon to become Emperor, meditated a bolder
stroke, an invasion of England itself. With the direct attack was to
be combined an attack on her foreign possessions, and troops under
Mortier entered Hanover, while troops under St. Oyr occupied the
Peninsula of Otranto as a first step to securing Egypt and proceeding to
the conquest of the East. The preparations for the invasion of England
were made at Boulogne, where an army of 130,000 men was assembled.
Not only the harbour of Boulogne but those of Yimereux, Ambleteuse,
and Etaples were filled with the fleet of flat-bottomed boats in which
the troops were to cross the Channel. So numerous were they, that it
took two tides to get them all out of harbour at Boulogne. If,
however, the flotilla of boats was ever to land the French army of
invasion in England, it was necessary that the French fleet should have
the command of the Channel for a time sufficient for the transit. There
lay the difficulty that Napoleon could never overcome, viz., “to unite
his fleets and bring them to the strategic centre in the face of an enemy
that controlled the communications.” The big ships of France were in
the fortified ports and outside lay the English. Cornwallis watched
Brest, Collingwood watched Rochefort, Nelson watched Toulon. “ Not
one but several successful evasions had to concur to enable the French
to unite,” and without a concentration of the whole naval force of
France the hope of securing even a temporary control of the Channel
was vain. Under the pressure of these difficulties Napoleon often
changed his plan. At one time the chief part in the operations was
given to the fleet of Toulon ;at another to that of Brest. An invasion
of Ireland was added to the programme, and again a scheme for the
conquest of the English islands in the West Indies. The division of
the English forces, with the object of facilitating the crossing, was the
result hoped for from the latter operations. Eventually a concentration
of the fleets of France and Spain, which joined France in 1804, was
determined upon, to cover the crossing directly. The junction of the fleets
was to take place in the West Indies, but the English divisions were
still before the porta, and although Yilleneuve got away in March,
1805, the French in Brest were blocked and could not get out without
a battle, which Napoleon would not risk. Yilleneuve, who had the
Spanish fleet with him, was followed to the West Indies by Nelson,
who arrived only to find that the Frenchman had given him the slip
and was hurrying back to France. The crisis had come. If Yilleneuve
could now effect a junction with the fleet of Brest in the absence of
Nelson, the command of the Channel could be secured and the long-
delayed crossing accomplished. It was not to be. The English
Admiralty received the news that Yilleneuve was returning, and met
the emergency with a promptitude and skill that excite the admiration
of Captain Mahan. The squadrons of Ferrol and Rochefort rapidly
united, and intercepted Yilleneuve, with whom they fought an
indecisive action, July 22nd. By the 31st July Yilleneuve was at
46
A. H. R.


Ferrol, and if he had then obeyed Napoleon’s orders and joined the
Brest fleet at all hazards, the united fleet might have secured the
Channel. But the resolution of the French Admiral faltered, and he
took his fleet to Cadiz. All hope of invading England was gone, and
Napoleon immediately broke up camp at Boulogne and ordered that
march to the Danube which was to end in the victories of Ulm and
Austerlitz.
Captain Mahan makes it very clear that Napoleon’s plan failed
through Yilleneuve’s failure to effect a junction, not in consequence of
Nelson’s victory. The great sea-fight of the 21st October was indeed a
crowning victory, but the quiet, dull blockading of the French ports did
the real work.
The forces of the belligerents in the years 1804-5 were nearly
equal, the English ships-of-the-line numbering 73, and the united
French and Spanish ships about 67. No less than 22 of the latter were
taken or destroyed at Trafalgar or immediately after the battle, and
five French ships with 4,000 seamen which took refuge at Cadiz, and
remained there till 1808, were in that year seized by the Spaniards who
had risen against Napoleon.
D. S. ROBERTSON.
BOTANY COURSE *
1. Sir J. D. Hooker—Primer of Botany (Macmillan ft Co.), Is.; 2. Dendy
and Lucas—lntroduction to the Study of Botany (Melbourne, Melville ft Co.), 65.;
3. Sir John Lubbock —Flowers, Fruits and Leaves (Macmillan & Co), 4s. 6d.;
4. Prof. George Henstow—The Origin of Floral Structures through Insects and
other Agencies (Int. Science Series, Kegan Paul), ss.
Recommended for reference or further studyl. Asa Gray—Structural
Botany (Macmillan ft Co.), 10s. 6d.; 2. Prof. Goodale—Physiological Botany
(Macmillan ft Co.), 10s. 6d,; 3. Goebel—Outlines of Classification and Special
Morphology of Plants (Oxford, Clarendon Press), 215.; 4. Rev. W. Woolls, Ph. D—
. Indigenous and Naturalised in the neighbourhood of Sydney (List)
(Government Printer, Sydney), Is. 6d.
* Mr. A. H. S. Lucas, M. A.. B.Sc.. writes“ The course is an elementary one, while it will be
advanced enough for other students, if the books recommended are studied. The books numbered
1 and 2 can be obtained at once, either in Sydney or from Melbourne, and would occupy the Circle
while 3 and 4 are coming from England, as 1 doubt if a number of copies could be obtained
immediately.”
The last book in the “ recommended ” list is specially adapted to a Sydney Circle which
asked for the course; if any Circle in another colony should adopt the course, the readers should
substitute some book dealing with the plants in their own district.
47
A. H. K.


Review.
Tennyson’s Idylls of the King and Arthurian Story from the XVlth
Century, by M. W. MacOallum, M.A., Professor of Modern
Literature in the University of Sydney.
iyp'lßOM those of our readers who last year studied the Idylls of the
King, and from the still larger number who read with interest
Professor Morris’s series of papers in the A.H.R., this volume will
receive a cordial welcome. Being as it is the fruit of many years’
loving study of Arthurian legend, and the ripe product of a cultured
and scholarly mind, it commends itself at once by the fulness of its
information, the masterly and sympathetic treatment of its fascinating
subject matter, and the profound insight into the inner meaning of the
large body of literature inspired by the old Arthurian romances. The
essay proper is preceded by half-a-dozen introductory chapters which
summarise the researches of scholars into the origin and early history of
the legend. These are all eminently readable, especially the brilliant
chapter on “ Chivalry and its requirements,” and form an invaluable
introduction to the study of Arthurian literature. The main substance
of the book begins with the sixteenth century when the Round Table
was, in literature at all events, in evil case. To Rabelais’ contempt
and Roger Ascham’s earnest condemnation, recorded by Professor
MacOallum, we may add Montaigne’s sneering indifference when he
says :—“ For of King Arthur, of Lancelot du Lake, of Amadis, of
Huon of Burdeaux, and such idle time-consuming and wit-besotting
trash of bookes wherein youth doth commonly ammuse it selfe, I was
not so much as acquainted with their names, and to this day know not
their bodies, nor what they contain : so exact was my discipline.”
Professor MacOallum shows how the spirit of the Reformation and that
of the Renaissance in turn sought to capture the Arthurian story and
caught nothing but its mantle as it fled from them ; how it was seized
upon by the rising English drama, like Apollo assigned for a brief space
to the service of Admetus; how Shakespeare could not away with its
fantastic trappings and so passed it by; how Spenser borrowed its outer
habit to adorn an Arthurian allegory of his own begetting; how
“ Milton, like Dryden, takes it up to let it fall.” And so through the
later centuries he passes in review the writers of England, France, and
Germany who have expressed in modern song whatever essence they
could draw from these old British (or Breton) legends. Since the
beginning of this century the Arthurian romance has been “ reinstated
in a position of interest and honour,” and the nearer we get to Tennyson
the more is its spiritual significance recognised and the more artistic
and sympathetic is its treatment. “ The problem of Arthurian poetry,”
says the author, “ was to unite sympathy for the romantic colour with
the sense of present needs, and do this by fixing on the meaning of the
48
A. H. R.


story,” and he shows that Matthew Arnold “ lays almost exclusive
stress on the modern aspects of the tale ” ; W illiam Morris is “as
distinctly medieval ”in his treatment. Though Swinburne has given
to an isolated Arthurian legend the most genial and sympathetic
treatment, yet Tennyson alone, in Professor MacCallum’s view, has
solved the problem and presented the whole story “in the highest
perfection of which it is capable.” The four concluding chapters to
which all the preceding ones lead up, and which form the climax of a
sustained and masterly exposition, deal with “ Tennyson as Arthurian
Poet,” “The general meaning of the Idylls of the King,” and “The
Idylls as a Series.” It is these chapters which will most attract the
general reader, and we will not spoil the pleasure of a first perusal even
by suggesting some of the conclusions reached. It may be confidently
asserted that there is no better introduction to the subject nor any that
is more likely to stimulate enthusiastic study.
Wants of Circles.
A country Circle in N.S.W. desires to borrow a paper on Kingsley’s
Alton Locke. Any person willing to lend such an article will be good
enough to communicate with the Editor.
We shall be glad to receive the names of members who will lend
original essays upon subjects comprised within the A.H.R.U. courses of
reading. A list of available papers will then be published in this
journal, as well as a list of subjects on which original articles are desired.
“Books must be read as deliberately and reservedly as they were written.”—
Thoreau’s
Walden (Essay on Reading).
49
A.. H. K.


Notes and News.
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
The opening of our new year has so far forcibly impressed the fact
that leaders are needed for the ultimate success of the Union. Several
Circles have disappeared from the Directory chiefly through the want of
competent and enthusiastic leaders, who by a little self-sacrifice are
willing to devote some of their energies in promoting a systematic course
of reading among their fellows. This, though unfortunate, is not altogether
unnatural, and until the Union can command the services of a body of
earnest leaders there will always be such dispersals to chronicle at this
season. Happily there is a silver lining to every cloud —the steady
progress of some, and the formation of new Circles at Rand wick and
Wagga —and these are, let us hope, but the forerunners of many more.
Mrs. Bates, of Wagga, has gathered together a Circle of 22 members,
who held their first meeting this month.
The members of Parramatta Circle, desirous of studying Botany,
made a request for a course in that subject, which has been duly
drawn up.
On the 4th of April, at a large and representative Committee
meeting, it was decided to hold the Second Annual Assembly at the
Sydney University. The arrangements were delegated to a sub-
committee of the President (Mrs. David), Mrs. Wolstenholme, Mr. H.
Allard, and the joint Secretaries.
The gathering has now been fixed for Friday evening, 18th May.
Mrs. David and Mrs. Wolstenholme will receive the company at 8 p.m.,
after which Professor MacOallum and Mr. A. W. Jose will each deliver
a short lecture. Mr. Neville Barnett will give some selections on the
organ, and light refreshments will terminate proceedings. The designed
informality of the occasion should add to its attractiveness, and as the
success of the Assembly is intimately connected with the advancement
of the Union, it is hoped members will consider it an obligation to be
present and to bring their friends also. The small charge of one shilling
will be made to cover bare expenses. Visitors from the other colonies
will be cordially welcomed. At such a time distinctive badges would be
appreciated. The Executive Committee of the General Council have
had the matter under consideration, we believe, but a suitable design at
moderate cost is the difficulty.
A. STUDDY
J. S. SCOTT.
VICTORIAN SECTION.
The outlook for the Home Reading Union in Victoria is a promising
one. The members’ roll is already larger than it was this time last
50
A. H. E.


year, and the names of some new Circles now in process of formation
have yet to be entered.
At the meeting of the Victorian Council held the last week in
March, a discussion took place about the co-operation of the A.H.R.U.
with the University Extension Scheme. Eventually a Sub-Committee
was formed to consider the matter, consisting of Professor Morris, Dr.
Laurie, Dr. J. P. Wilson, and the Hon. Secretary. It seemed as if no
definite conclusion could be arrived at, though several possible schemes
were put forward ; it was ultimately determined to ask the opinion of
the Local Secretaries’ Union about the matter, and on receiving their
report, a further discussion will take place.
The Council intends holding an entertainment about the middle of
May. This will serve the double purpose of bringing the members
together and of making known the aims of the Union to the general
public. The entertainment will take the form of a concert, with an
address by the President, and probably one or two lecturettes by
well-known public men. The lateness of the year prevents the holding
of an outdoor entertainment.
The inaugural meeting for 1894 of the Ballarat Group was held on
Monday evening, in Christ Church hall, Lydiard Street. A large
number of ladies and gentlemen were present, the hall being completely
filled. Archdeacon Green, as secretary to the Ballarat board of the
A.H.R.U., read the report for 1893, from which we extract the
following:—
“ A branch of the A.H.R.U. was formed in this city in June, 1893.
At the initial meeting it was resolved that the local board should
consist of the leaders of the various Circles as formed. Accordingly,
through 1893 the board has consisted of six members, viz., Mrs. Flower
(History), Dr. Phelps (English Literature), Mr. A. H. Buley (English
Literature), Mr. E, Lidgey (Geology), Mr. J. W. Griffiths (Logic), and
Archdeacon Green (History). Eighty-two subscriptions of membership
were received during 1893, but some of the members did not attach
themselves to any of the Circles formed.”
A first-class musical programme then followed. The members of
the Ballarat Orchestral Society largely contributed to the pleasure of
the evening. Over twenty members were present, and Mr. George
Herbert conducted. The numbers played were “ Nautoh Danse,” the
overture to “ Banditenstriche,” and the very popular intermezzo from
“ Oavalleria Rusticana,” which was played so well that even the
conductor seemed pleased. Miss Gale, a young lady amateur from
Melbourne, played one of Sarasate’s piquante Spanish dances in a
charming manner, and was recalled, her double-stopping and octaves
being particularly pure. The vocal numbers contributed, all of which
were much appreciated by the listeners, were “The sea of glass,” a duet
by Misses Gray and Alexander ; “ The refuge of the Soul,” by Mr. W.
Ooltman ; a solo (with violin obligato played by Miss Gale), by Miss
51
A. H. E.


Salter ; “ Whisper and I shall hear,” and a solo by Mr. Shepherd,
“Alla Stella confidente ” (with cello obligato). The Rev. Dr. Bevan,
of the Collins Street Congregational Church, Melbourne, was present as
a representative of the Victorian Council of the A.H.R.U. He
addressed the audience in a most bright and happy style, basing his
speech upon “ What to read and how to read it.” He advised his
hearers to read specifically that which lay nearest to their own work
in life; but also generally that which lay farthest from them. Some
books should be read “ diagonally,” not through, glancing the eye from
corner to corner across the pages; others had to be thoroughly mastered
that they might enter into a person’s whole life. Dr. Bevan described
the work of a similar society over which he presides in Melbourne, and
concluded a very interesting and witty address by high commendation
of the activity shown by the A.H.R.U. in Ballarat.
An address was also given by the Rev. J. J. Brown, who spoke of
the benefits he had found to accrue from membership of the A.H.R.U.
through his experience in 1893.
Archdeacon Green moved a vote of thanks to the speakers and
singers who had assisted so largely in making the evening the remark-
able success it proved. This was seconded by Dr. Mitchell, and carried
with acclamation. After the orchestra had played the National Anthem
an opportunity was given for new members to enrol their names, of
which several availed themselves. (Abridged from Ballarat Courier).
Shortly after this gathering, Archdeacon Green was appointed Bishop
of Armidale and Grafton. Victoria’s loss will be the sister colony’s
gain. Victoria in general, and Ballarat in particular, will feel the loss
of such an able and energetic worker.
Already many of the Circles are in active work, including two new
ones in Stawell and Portland respectively.
I cannot close this notice without placing on record the kind offer
of Mr. C. H, Davis, of the Bankers’ Institute, Melbourne, who under-
takes to lend, to any member of the Union, books out of the library,
which contains most of those on the list of Courses of the A.H.R.U.
L. M. FOX.
QUEENSLAND SECTION.
The Queensland Circles have commenced work early this year.
Instead of rigidly adhering to the courses selected, and reading one
course only, several of the Circles have drawn up a Syllabus from
several courses prescribed.
The Brisbane Literary Circle has elected the Hon. T. J. Byrnes as
President, and Mr. W. Hill as Secretary for the year. At its meetings
papers have been read on “Literary Fellowships,” by Mr. J. Shirley ;
and on “ Past and Present,” by Mr. S. H. Bowden.
52
A. H. E.


Before the Highgate Hill Circle Mr. R. H. Roe road an excellent
paper on Universities. The Ipswich Circle opened with “ Browning.”
Miss Hunt read, at a subsequent meeting, a paper on “ Villette,” In
Rockhampton the four Circles will read the courses on English
Literature, Logic, Education, and Physiology. A Circle to take up the
“ Music” course is in contemplation. The St. Andrew’s Literary Circle
begins the English Literature course with “Wordsworth.”
Two new Circles have been formed in Toowoomba, numbering in
all 30 members. The Sectional Secretary, Mr. L. E. Groom, attended the
opening meeting, explaining the aims and methods of the Union. After
it had been decided to form a Circle, a paper on “Wordsworth” was
read by Mr. Groom. Miss Billing, of “ Newnham,” was elected
Secretary. The Circles have selected the courses of English Literature
and Physiology. The Rev. J, Orookstone has been chosen leader of the
“ English Literature ” Circle, and Dr. A. McDonnell leader of the
“ Physiology ” Circle.
L. E. GROOM.
NEW ZEALAND SECTION.
A very pleasant evening was spent by the members of the Timaru
Group on November 30, when the united Circles held a conversazione
to bring their year’s work to a close. There was a very large attendance,
as it was not confined to members, the idea being to spread the know-
ledge of the Reading Union; and for this purpose, during the
evening, some remarks were made by the President on the working of
the A.H.R.U., and mode of forming fresh Circles.
The hall had been very prettily arranged for the occasion, the
initials of the Union, in blue and gold, being conspicuous among the
decorations. As far as possible the programme had been drawn up to
bear on the work done during the year.
The feature of the evening was a series of tableaux from “ Lancelot
and Elaine ” splendidly worked out in every detail, the effect being
heightened by coloured lights. There were six scenes; the first
showing King Arthur, the Queen, and Lancelot at Court; then came
the interchange of shields at Astolat; next Elaine presenting the
diamond to the wounded Lancelot in The Hermit’s Cell; the fourth
was Elaine in the garden declaring her love for Lancelot; the fifth,
Lancelot presenting the diamonds to the Queen; and the last was
Elaine on the bier surrounded by the Court. A short summary of the
story, interspersed with quotations from the poet, connected the scenes,
and Elaine’s song “ Love or Death,” most beautifully rendered, was
sung after the fourth tableau.
There was besides some very good vocal and instrumental music,
songs, and glees from Tennyson and Shakespeare. A reading of the
“ Northern Cobbler ” was given by the President. The Biological
Circle had brought their microscopes, and amusement was also afforded
by a collection of some old and interesting books.
53
A.. U. R.


The lady members provided refreshments, and a most enjoyable
gathering was brought to a close by a pretty and amusing tableau,
entitled “ Pastoral without Words.”
The Literature Circle have since held their last meeting for the
year. Selections from Wordsworth were given, and a most interesting
essay, written on the poet’s haunts by a lady who had spent a very
pleasant holiday at Grasmere and in Bowdoin Woods.
The absence of our President from New Zealand would have
hindered our work if I had not taken upon myself the privilege of
keeping things going on my own authority. After consultation with
Mr. Hogben, we decided to divide the colony into two sections, a
northern one, to embrace the North Island and the provinces of Nelson
and Marlborough in the north of the South Island ; and a southern one,
to embrace the provinces of Westland, Canterbury, and Otago. At
present we retain one President only : Bishop Julius has been re-elected.
Miss Edith Fussell, of Russell Square, Timaru, has been elected
Secretary of the “ Southern Section,” and I have been elected for the
“Northern Section.” We have started in Wellington; the Newtown
Circle met and elected Mr. H. Anderson as Leader, and Mr. J. S.
Fleming as Secretary. A course of English Literature was decided on.
Instead of taking any particular course prescribed, they selected
authors from the different English courses in the magazine. Tennyson’s
Princess, Kingsley’s Alton Locke, Scott’s Lay of the Last Minstrel,
Ivanhoe, and Fair Maid of Perth, George Eliot’s Romola, Shakespeare’s
Cymbeline and Julius Caesar, and selections from Longfellow. Miss
Liddle is unfortunately leaving Wellington for the country in a short
time, but she will endeavour to extend the influence of the A.H.R.U.
wherever she can. The Masterton Circle had a very successful meeting.
The resident Magistrate was in the chair. Mr. Kay informs me, about
30 gave in their names as members, and Mr. A. Sanderson was elected
Leader. Mr. Kay himself is going to Carterton, and he intends to
form a Circle there. The Masterton Circle, which has a large number
of members, began their reading with Js You Like It, and intends to
go through the additional course in English Literature. I have just
had a letter from Te Ante, Hawke’s Bay, to inform of the formation of
a Circle of seven or eight in that place. Several unattached members
have already joined, and I feel certain that the North Island will have
more members this year than last.
T. R. FLEMING.
[The Editor will be obliged if the Sectional Secretaries will
send direct to him their monthly reports, as the compilation of news
from letters to the General Secretary makes too heavy a demand upon
his scanty leisure].
54
A. H. R.


The Question Box.
[Questions to which answers are desired should be sent to the Editor, who will
endeavour to provide for their solution.]
What is the meaning of Excalibur, and what is it intended to represent
in the allegory ? Why was it of such importance that it should be
cast away before the Passing of Arthur ? And why did he entrust
it to his knight instead of doing it himself? (for as soon as Sir
Bedivere had cast the sword into the water Arthur caused himself
to be carried to the water’s edge.)
To the last of these questions the Idylls themselves
supply an answer, quite apart from the allegory. The magic
brand Excalibur, received “ one summer noon ” from an arm that
“ rose up from out the bosom of the lake,” has to be thrown “ far
into the middle mere,” and the dying king (though he has spirit
enough to threaten to arise and slay the twice disloyal Bedivere) has
but strength sufficient to raise himself a little, “ slowly, with pain,
reclining on his arm.” To hurl the sword over the “bulrush beds ” and
“ the many knotted water flags ” called for more physical power than
Arthur’s deep wound had left him. But what was the spiritual signifi-
cance of this mystic sword, and why must it be cast away ? Here we
may quote Professor MaoOall urn’s book reviewed in another page of
this issue : “So too we learn of his sword that it bears
“ On one side,
Graven in the oldest tongue of all this world
‘ Take me, ’ but turn the blade and ye shall see,.
And written in the speech ye speak yourself,
‘ Cast me away ’ 1 ”
It is taken up at command of the oldest tongue of the world, for
it represents the yearning to give effect to the ideal which men have
felt ever since they were men; it will again be rejected when the
present time requires ” (p. 324).* It must be remembered that if
Arthur in the allegorical explanation is the “spiritual principle,”
“ the ideal which governs the lives of men, the eternal pattern
which they seek in time to realise” {lbid. p. 323), he is of
necessity unique, and the sword, whatever its spiritual significance,
cannot be conceived as being capable of transmission to Sir Bedivere or
any other of the human personages of the allegory. That which came
from the central principle of all things as an endowment of the human
spirit can only be rendered back to the One who gave it. When it has
become impossible to attain the ideal, then the king resigns the instru-
ment which is at best imperfect, and out of seeming failure passes to a
triumphant realisation “beyond the limit of the world.”
P. A. R.
*May we without presumption suggest that it is perhaps not merely the ‘yearning/ but the
spiritual power to win the way towards that ideal, a power which is bestowed upon one who ia
supremely loyal, who ‘ keeps a virgin heart in work and will ’ ? Thus Tennyson makes Sir Galahad
sing ‘My strength is as the strength of ten, Because my heart is pure.’ This spiritual power ever
retains its virtue, but is finally neutralised in the allegory by the conflicting elements that war
within the human spirit.
55
A H. K.


Announcements.
The February number of this journal has been distributed to
leaders of Circles partly in accordance with returns furnished this year
and partly on the basis of last year’s membership. Any leaders that
have not yet sent in their membership returns are requested to do so
without delay, in order that every member may receive a copy of the
A.H.R. in due course.
If any member has spare copies of the February number, it is
particularly requested that he will forward them at once to the secretary
of the Section.
Notice to Contributors.
All news of Circles should be communicated to the secretary of the
Section, and all articles or poems intended for publication should be
sent to the sub-editor. If no sub-editor is appointed, the latter may be
sent direct to the Editor.
Every article must be legibly written (type-written by preference)
and not longer than six pages of foolscap.
Articles intended for publication should reach the Editor not later
than the 20th of the month.
The Editor cannot undertake to return manuscript in any case.
TREASURER’S ACCOUNT.
Receipts foe these months ending Apeil 25th.
Erom Victoria ... ... ... ... ... £23 8 0
~ South Australia ... ... ... ... 11 4 0
„ Queensland ... ... ... ... 913 0
„ N. S, W 7 16 0
~ Tasmania ... ... ... ... ... 4 8 0
~ New Zealand ... ... ... ... 4 4 0
Donation from Victoria ... ... ... ... 5 00
Donation from Hunter’s Hill, N.S.W. ... ... 10 0
Total ... £66 13 0
56
A. H. E,


Von. 111., No. 3.
June, 1894.
THE A. H. R.
The Literarg Study of Literature.
An Address delivered before the SF.S.W. Section at Sydney University,
May 18th, 189 f
fiJO|)TKHEN asked to deliver an address at the great annual gathering
sWwr of the A.H.R.U., it seemed to me that I could most fitly speak
on what is the chief object of the Association and what also happens to
be my own chief business, viz., the reading of books. Everyone, of
course, has his own methods and will take his own way ; and he should
not lightly let himself be turned aside from them by the practice and
theories of other people. Still, through comparison, hints may be
suggested. So I venture to speak to-night of the matter as it presents
itself to me. And as my knowledge of books is almost entirely
confined to books of a particular class, my subject is further restricted
by my experience and narrows itself down to what I shall call The
Literary Study of Literature.
Now it should be observed that a good deal of our reading, and
even, I think, of the reading that is most beneficial to us, is not to be
described as study at all. It is a mere perusal of books. And it is
inspired far less by interest in the authors than by interest in ourselves.
“ I seek in books,”says Montaigne, the grand representative of this way of
reading, “ only to give myself pleasure by innocent amusement, or if I
study, I seek only the science that treats of the knowledge of myself
and teaches me to die well and to live well ; to this goal my steed must
strain. If I meet difficulties in ray reading, I don’t distress myself
about them ; after one or two attempts I leave them alone ; if I settled
on them I should lose myself and my time.” Now precisely the example
of Montaigne shows how very profitable this kind of procedure may be.
We don’t, of course, by such a method enter into the secret of a work of
art, or learn to understand the individuality of another mind, but we do
appropriate, easily and at once, the nutriment that we can most
readily digest. We obtain in all quarters suggestions that do not
perhaps widen our mental horizon, but that confirm our natural bent
and gives wealth and variety to our particular view of life.
This method of reading, then, has its value, and a value which in
our day, when reading has become almost a trade, it is difficult to


exaggerate. Every lover of books will confess the delight of taking
up a volume and treating it as one’s servant, opening it when one likes,
closing it when one likes, refusing to consider its difficulties, and taking
from it just what one wants. At the same time, this is in no sense
study, and the book as a book is left unapproached, because we make it
subordinate to our own tastes and aptitudes.
Then we have another kind of reading, which may be and generally
is thoroughly studious and earnest, which interprets books in a different
sense from that in which they were composed. The point of view is
really very similar to that which we have just noticed (though the
results are as opposite as can be), for in both cases the books are not
considered in themselves, but as means to some other end—our own
satisfaction or some external interest. Thus, how often are the Greek
and Latin classics read as though they were intended to teach grammar ;
how often has Shakespeare been commented on as though his aim were
to point a moral—generally of the most obvious and home-baked
kind. Now I don’t suppose that we are apt now-a-days to confuse
linguistic instruction or ethical exhortation with literary criticism, but
in more subtle shape the same principle is still influential among us,
and I believe we often think we are reading for the sake of literature
when we are really reading for the sake of something else. Thus we
may find interest in a poem for the light it throws on a particular
period. For example, historians tell us that we should read Milton in
order to understand the state of things in England in the 17th Century.
Or again, we may trace the development of a particular subject; we may
investigate the sources of Shakespeare and note the alterations that he
introduces in his treatment of them, or the literature of visions of the
Future State, and their contrasts and resemblances with Dante’s Divine
Comedy, or the various versions of the Faustus legend from the 16th
Century story-books till the Faust of Goethe. Or we may adopt the
biographical method and look for the characteristics and growth of
a man’s mind in his works. As for instance, when Carlyle says, “ All
(Dr.) Johnson’s writings, laborious and in their kind genuine above
most, stand on a quite inferior level to (his life); already, indeed, they
are becoming obsolete for this generation, and for some future gener-
ation may be valuable chiefly as prolegomena and expository Scholia to
this Johnsoniad.”
Now, of course, there is not a word to be said against those various
ways of reading. They have justified themselves by their fruits, they
may be, and frequently are, of inestimable interest and value. But I
think we should note that when we take books, to quote Carlyle’s words,
as prolegomena and expository Scholia to something else, we are not
taking literature as literature, but using it as a means to some alien end.
And though we are fully entitled to do this for any particular purpose,
still to think that this is literary criticism seems in the strictest sense of the
words preposterous ; it is putting the cart before the horse, and treating
imaginative work as subordinate to some external use, when in point of
58
A. H. R.


fact it exists for itself. If we regard a work of art as illustrating the
thought and feeling of the time, we may learn many important lessons ;
but let us remember that the artist produced it, not to suggest the trend
of the age, but to embody his own inspiration. If we investigate the
history of a subject, much too may be learned; but again let us
remember that though we may profitably look on its treatment by this
man and that as moments in its literary progress, still they are not mere
phases of a development, not mere links in a chain of cause and effect,
but may have each an independent and supreme value of its own. Even
when we try to get to a man’s mind through his works, let us remember
that if he is a really great artist, he did not give us these works for the
purpose of self-revelation, but as so many separate creations complete
and organic in themselves. “ For myself,” writes one of the best known
critics of the day, “ I should like to have the whole works of every
author of merit, and I should care little to know anything whatever
about his life.” This is putting it in an exaggerated and heightened
form, but the principle implied seems to me a sound one.
The first thing, then, that in the literary study of literature we
should strive to recognise is, that every masterpiece of the art, from the
daintiest lyric and simplest ballad to the loftiest epic and compaotest
drama, is there for itself, and appeals to us on its own merits. It is a
little universe, self-centred and self-closed, a bit of life or feeling that is
lifted out of the flux of time and exhibited in its ideal truth ; therefore
it is no fragment, but has a certain wholeness and eternity of its own.
And the function of the literary student is just to understand it as
such. In a sense he is not opposed to the two methods of reading that
we have previously noticed, but will use them in his own way. The
immediate impression, the direct gratification, the interest at first sight
will not be undervalued by him, for first thoughts are often the best
thoughts. But he will try to explain them to himself, and find out on
what qualities of his author they depend, and whether they need no
further modification. And if his first impression disagrees with the
view of competent authorities, he will do well to suspend his judgment,
Not that I would have him for a moment belie his own likes and
dislikes in deference to the critics ; an opinion on literature that is merely
adopted at second-hand, and is not the outcome of one’s own mind, is
not only worthless but pernicious. Let us therefore frankly confess
what we find pleasure in, however eccentric our taste may seem, and
what we find no pleasure in, however superior persons may jeer. But
let us also understand that we may very probably like what we ought
to dislike, and dislike what we ought to like. And let us remember
that we may educate our taste, and that with a little study and pains
we may acquire a relish for what repels us at first. So do not let us
shirk the difficulties, when we have a really good book before us,
especially one that has been the admiration of cultured minds for many
generations. The difficulties are often the key to the best, and when
they are faced and overcome a richer pleasure awaits us.
59
A. H. R.


Further, in the solution of difficulties and in the mastery of the
book, the literary student if he be wise will take advantage of all the
help that is offered to his hand. And here he will find himself in close
agreement with readers of our second type. All that can be supplied
him in the way of grammatical or textual criticism, in knowledge of the
times, of the personality of the writer, of the subject or the treatment as
affected by literary progress, will be to him welcome aids, but he will
treat them as the means, not as the ends, of his study, and will ever keep
in view as his chief aim the appreciation, full and thorough, of the
particular play or poem or romance with which he has to deal.
Now the first requisite of appreciation is to get at the author’s
intention, his thought, what he wishes to say. And this, in the case of
the greatest books and the best works is often the reverse of an easy
task. Sometimes the difficulty is greatest when it is least apparent. If
I were asked to mention the typical example of a puzzling writer, I
would name not Browning who is, perhaps rather unjustifiably, a
by-word for hardness, but Shakespeare, who is, again perhaps without
justification, considered a popular classic. If we don’t understand
Browning, we don’t understand him, and there’s an end of it, if it is not
a beginning, for it should stimulate us to go on till we do. If we don’t
understand Shakespeare, we probably misunderstand him, and
that is considerably worse, for we may rest satisfied with our
half truth. “I am often ashamed before Shakespeare,” say
Goethe, “ for it often happens at first glance that I think to
myself, I would have done that differently, but soon I perceive
that I am a poor sinner and that Nature prophesies through
Shakespeare.” If that is the confession of the great poet of the
nineteenth century in regard to the great poet of the sixteenth, I think
it should be our principle in regard to most of the poets we read. Do
not let us be too easy-going and light-hearted in our study of them. If
they are worth reading at all, they will probably need to be read
several times before we have a full, intimate knowledge of their
meaning.
And observe that this does not mean that their expression is
necessarily at fault. The difficulties may arise from its very perfection.
A style that is hard for the sake of hardness, whether by being elliptical
or harsh or fantastic, is so great a blemish as to be incompatible with
the highest imaginative work. But just as the expression of a scientific
truth, say a formula in mathematics, may be hard to understand at
first, but when understood may be seen to be the most perfect way of
putting it, so some of the supreme expressions of imaginative truth are
the most difficult to grasp at first sight, but when we have grasped
them, they sink into the heart as the unique, inevitable utterances for
the emotions or ideas they convey.
Thus having got to the meaning of a work of art, its thought and
content, we have next to examine its form. And this will bring with
it the consideration of plot-construction, of style, of diction, of metre;
60
A. H. R.


for even the placing of a pause or an accent may affect the power or
charm with which the meaning is brought home to us.
But indeed in the masterpieces of the master poets, this distinction
between matter and form, between meaning and expression becomes,
strictly speaking, impossible. We may, for the purposes of our study,
start with it and find it useful as a preliminary. But, when we get into
the real spirit of the men, we must give it up. It has well been said,
that at the lower levels of composition, style is the garment of thought,
but that at the higher levels, it becomes its tissue. And in a fine
passage Littre, grammarian and philologist though he is, compares
genuine poetry to the spells and incantations of the magician: it has
only one possible form—it must be repeated word for word and letter
for letter; then it will raise spirits and work marvels, but alter a sound
and its efficacy is gone.
How, if the note of true poetical creation lies in this blending of
spirit and sense, of thought and speech, of matter and form, the literary
student should aim at discovering in a particular work how far and in
what way this has been done. He will find that writers attain this
absolute beauty more or less intermittently, in longer or in shorter
pieces, or in a smaller or a larger range of subjects. And we must gauge
the perfection of a work of art according to the success with which this
beauty is sustained throughout; we must gauge the riches of a work of
art according to the variety of motifs in which it is attained; we must
gauge the loftiness of a work of art according to the difficulty of finding
for the idea its predestined form.
H r TTT It .r /■*
M. W. MAcCALLUM.
Sesame and Lilies.
S.EAVEN forbid that we should decry the Ideal. Enthusiasm in
the cause of humanity has been at all times one of the noblest
incentives to great and good actions, and must be reckoned a powerful
factor in the history of civilization.
It may not, indeed, in many instances, have resulted in any
immediate advantage, but it has nearly always been a true and worthy
impulse in the right direction, and productive of ulterior benefit and
progress. Therefore, far be it from our intention to disparage the hot
zeal and high-flown sentiments of the author of Sesame and Lilies.
That he is a man of lofty ideals and almost passionate enthusiasm in a
good cause will be apparent to everyone who carefully reads even this
one small volume of his pen, and it is impossible not to be captivated
by the fervour of his imagination, his earnest eloquence, and the
exquisite felicity of his style.
61
A.H. R,


Yet there is perhaps room for adverse criticism, although in no
unkindly spirit. If we take exception to these lectures it is solely on
practical grounds. If we differ from the author it is surely more in
sorrow and discouragement than from any active disapproval of his
teaching, for his zeal is Heaven-born, and his aim is towards exalted
virtue only.
Indeed, if this little book were termed “ A Rhapsody on Education ”
we should have no objection whatever to take to it, but only words of
praise ; it is because it professes to be a practical discourse on a very
practical subject that we humbly take exception to its flighty and
unpractical character. For the Ideal should always be in touch with
the Real, otherwise it becomes purely visionary and Utopian; even if
it soar to High Heaven it must start from the lowly Earth, and have a
useful purpose in view. There is no advantage in drawing a strong
bow, to borrow Macaulay’s simile, if you shoot at the stars.
Now, our principal objection to Professor Ruskin is that he is too
prone to star-gazing, and to directing his shots at those heavenly bodies.
The shafts may be keen and brilliant enough, the display of intellectual
fireworks dazzling, but the effort must needs he vain, and the result
disappointing.
The ostensible subject-matter of these lectures is the Choice of
Books—“how and what to read”—a most excellent and desirable
theme, upon which most reading people are glad to be instructed, and
thankful for any practical hints. But we look in vain for any such
guidance in the volume under consideration. The author does not
condescend to details; he deals almost entirely in abstractions.
In the first place he would be systematic, and range the countless
multitude of books under two great fundamental divisions —the books
of the hour, and the books of all time. The distinction is not one, we
fear, that could be turned to any practical account, for there is no such
dividing line in the nature of things. The extremes of these two
branches of literature are, indeed, as wide apart as pole from pole, but
there is a vast middle space, an immense area of debatable ground,
covering many of the most interesting subjects of thought and study,
and comprising innumerable works which cannot be brought under any
such classification, and upon the respective merits of which opinion is
often hopelessly divided.
Who is to decide concerning the permanent character of most
publications 2 In what are their lasting qualities to be sought? The only
safe criterion is Time, but we, of the present day, cannot afford to wait
for posterity, and it would be unduly hard on poor authors to be
relegated to the distant future—nothing under a couple of centuries
would answer—for fame and recompense.
Many books are received with public enthusiasm, and looked upon
as for all time, but forgotten within the year; others creep humbly and
slowly into notice, are regarded as mere effusions of the day and of no
permanent value, and yet live for ever.
62
A. H. R.


We fear, therefore, that it is with books, as with most other
things of choice and conduct in our lives—we have to rely to a great
extent on our individual good sense and judgment. We have to select
for ourselves. We have to form our opinion on books as well as from
books. The choice of books is like the choice of companions, and each
one must find out for himself what suits him best, and is calculated to
afford him the greatest amount of good.
But this is not at all Professor Ruskin’s opinion ; indeed, he would
denounce such a proposition with wrath and indignation. He belongs
to a somewhat authoritative and doctrinaire school, which inculcates
passive obedience before all things, and with which individual opinion is
nowhere. “To think ”is the privilege of the great and wise, the Elect,
of whom, of course, he is one; the Intellectual Rulers of mankind, the
Master Minds, before whom all the common herd should bow their
heads to the dust. Speaking in a very masterful way to his meek
audience, the lecturer exclaims : —“ Unless you are a very singular
person, you cannot be said to have any 1 thoughts ’ at all, you have no
materials for them, in any serious matters ; —no right to ‘ think,’ but
only to try to learn more of the facts. Nay, most probably in all your
life (unless, as I said, you are a singular person), you will have no
legitimate right to an ‘ opinion ’ on any business except that instantly
under your hand.”
So there we have it 1 Rather sweeping, perhaps, and lowering to
our self-esteem, but from a high authority. Therefore, ladies and
gentlemen, unless, perchance, one of you happens to be a singular
person, which is hardly likely considering how few of them the age
produces, you will please to take back seats, to draw in any pretensions
to having ideas of your own, and to subside.
We dare say that most of us would not object to this if we could
thereby be relieved of the worry and uncertainty of cogitating on our
own account. Who is not glad to secure the services of someone else to
work for him 1 And how pleasant and acceptable it would be to find a
substitute for the trouble of thinking. How delightful to be relieved
of all perplexity in matters of doubt, and to find an opinion ready-made
on all vexatious questions, merely for the asking !
According to our sanguine author, this can be accomplished readily
and surely enough by simple reference to “ books of all time.” There
we can obtain advice gratis, and from the highest sources. Purchase a
library and the difficulty is solved. Would that it were so ! But alas !
hard as it may be for any one of us to make up his own mind on a
pinch, it would, we fear, prove much harder to have that mind made up
for him. We sincerely pity the unfortunate man who endeavours to
steer his troubled course through life, to secure a strong faith and
resolute purpose, or even to gain peace of mind, merely by reading.
That he will fail, and fail miserably, in an atmosphere of disenchant-
ment, may be taken for granted, for the wise experience of the world,
sad to relate, is not to be purchased at that price.
63
A. H. R.


In the first place, the number of counsellors is much too great;
secondly, they will generally be found to disagree with one another.
There is hardly a grave and essential question for thought and
investigation upon which the greatest thinkers of all time are not at
variance—often in direct contradiction. May not this be the reason
why the most learned of men are often the most unsettled in their
opinions, the most wavering in their faith? Small satisfaction, indeed,
to pass whole years of our short lives in anxious research, poring over
musty volumes, seeking advice from the mighty dead, and consulting
recognized authorities on all points, only to find ourselves in the end
lost in a labryinth of controversy, dazed with changing views, or crushed
under the weight of conflicting evidence.
Professor Ruskin does not dwell on this phase of the student’s
work, but he tells us pathetically: —“You will discover that the
thoughts even of the wisest are very little more than pertinent
questions. To put the difficulty into a clear shape, and exhibit to you
the grounds for indecision, that is all they can generally do for you !
and well for them and for us if, indeed, they are able ‘ to mix the
music with our thoughts, and sadden us with heavenly doubts.’ ”
And is that all 2 Then the question, blunt and commonplace as it
may appear, rises in our minds, whether it is worth while going through
so much to get so little ?
But we differ from Professor Ruskin, both in his sublime ideal of
the spiritual influence of books, and equally in his fall to the opposite
extreme of universal misgiving and nothingness.
We submit in all humility that it is not necessary to soar so high
or to fall so low. There is a middle course, not altogether strewn with
roses, or possessing the “ open sesame ” to all the King’s treasures, but
nevertheless offering good fruit, and capable of salutary results. Books
cannot be all in all to us, but they may yet be a great deal to us ; a
help, a benefit, and a consolation. Books will not regenerate the
world, nor can they be looked upon as the sovereign remedy for all the
ills that flesh is heir to, nor is there any good purpose to be served by
indulging in extravagant notions on the subject. The student is not
the highest type of man, nor can the bookworm be fairly described as
the happiest either. But no sensible person will deny that literature is
a great power, both for good and for evil, and that under all conditions
of life it may be turned to beneficial account. Our endeavour should
be, therefore, to deal with the value of books fairly and truly, and to
bring practical discernment to their choice, instead of wild poetical
flights and brilliant metaphors.
With the author’s fiery denunciation of the barrenness, the un-
righteousness, the meanness, and the all-absorbing selfishness of the
world we live in, we agree, in sorrow and regret.
His words are well spoken, although, perhaps, exaggerated in the
righteous heat of his passion ; for it is a hard saying of his : —“ It is
simply and sternly impossible for the English public, at this moment, to
64
A. H. E.


understand any thoughtful writing—so incapable of thought has it
become in its insanity of avarice.”
Yet when we turn to him for some remedy for these crying evils,
some alleviation, however slight, for the miseries of existing society,
with the furious conflict of its opposing interests, the crushing exactions
of the rich, the hopeless sufferings of the poor, the vile hypocrisy of
conventional existence, what has he to offer 2 Books, only books ! A
very mild remedy, indeed, for such a desperate case.
“ This book plan,” he remarks, “is the easiest and the needfulest,
and would prove a considerable tonic to what we call our British
Constitution, which has fallen dropsical of late, and has an evil thirst,
an evil hunger, and wants healthier feeding.”
But what avails a “ tonic ” to the body politic, so woefully diseased,
so dilapidated, so torn with internal commotions, so rotten at the core ?
And if such is the case with our political constitution, what shall
we say of the body social, which is ten times worse? A “ tonic,” indeed 1
As well might you propose pacifying a furious strike with public
readings from Plato’s dialogues, or softening a usurer’s heart with a dose
of Shylock from Shakespeare, or prescribing a course of Pastoral poetry
for an ejected Irish tenant!
This sort of panacea reminds us of an anecdote of one of the ladies
of the Court of Louis XIV. who, when hearing the murmurs of a
starving crowd outside the palace gates, enquired what the rabble were
asking for.
“ The people are crying for bread,” was the answer.
“ For bread ? ” exclaimed the sympathetic lady, “ for bread ? Poor
people ! Why don’t they eat cake ? ”
The author, at the end of his first lecture, can suggest nothing
better for the distress of the nation, and the internal evils of society,
than a nice cake, in the shape of public libraries, which should, he
thinks, be established in every “ considerable city,” together with art
galleries and museums of natural history; a goodly sop of standard
books, to be selected by authority, “ their text printed all on leaves of
equal size, broad of margin, and divided into pleasant volumes, light in
the hand, beautiful and strong, and thorough examples of binders’ work.”
Well, apart from the binding, “ beautiful and strong,” we may
claim, in these colonies, to have adopted this book treatment, but with
what practical result let experience judge. Nearly every little township
in this country has its Institute and Circulating Library, and books are
cheap enough and accessible enough, in all conscience. This is an age,
we will not say of learning, but of information. Education is no longer
what it used to be, or confined to certain classes of the community. It
is open to all. Public instruction has been taken in hand by the State,
and distributed broadcast throughout the land, and almost as a gift.
Plenty of books everywhere ! It cannot be from the lack of books or
school teaching that crime and sin and misery continue to exist, and
65
A. H. R.


even to increase in some quarters, or that gross social and political
wrongs remain unredressed.
The spirit must be moved and the heart touched before much moral
good can be derived from books ; otherwise it is like setting a sumptuous
repast before a dyspeptic patient, whose stomach turns at the sight of
food. The menu may be exquisite, but what avails it if the healthy
appetite is wanting 1 What, for instance, would be the use of a choice
library in the mansions of most of our rich men ? It might be an
embellishment to one of the rooms of a grand house, and the backs of
well-bound books afford a goodly view, but there the benefit would
probably end.
The Spirit of Philosopy cannot, any more than the graces of Art,
enter into the hearts of a sordid generation, intent on money making
and material prosperity only; and it is doubtful whether if every
householder in this colony were presented with Professor Ruskin’s own
selection of “ books for all time,” the community, as a whole,
would be much the better for it. For, to adopt the sense of the old
saying—you can take a horse to the water, but you cannot make him
drink.
North Sydney.
G. CHAMIER.
Notes on the Course of Political Economy.
fflpHE political questions which are most warmly disputed at present
tsds turn very largely on differences in economic theory. One might
imagine therefore that a systematic study of political economy would be
deemed indispensable for the legislator, and that some knowledge of its
principles would be acquired by every citizen. But this, as we all
know, is very far from being the case. Now, as in the time of Socrates,
there are many who treat the art of legislation as one which, unlike
every other, may be practised without preliminary training. Even in
the study of economic questions we are apt to begin in the middle
rather than at the beginning. We rush into the consideration of such
o o
disputed topics as free trade or protection, or the relations of capital
and labour, or the comparative merits of socialism and individualism,
without taking the trouble of acquiring the elements of economic science.
The course which has been presented for home readers in political
economy has at least the merit of seeking to begin at the beginning,
taking it for granted that the learner should master the elementary
principles of economics before he attempts to apply them. This may
appear laborious; but it will be found in the end to be the shortest and
most satisfactory method.
66
A. H, B,


Jevons’ Primer has been presented as a short and popular in-
troduction to the subject. Of much greater importance is Professor
Marshall’s Economics of Industry, including as it does, though in an
abridged form, “ the chief results of the work of the present generation
of economists ” on questions of value, wages, and profits. Professor F. A.
Walker’s Political Economy is the work of an American writer, who
deals with economical theories freely and vigorously, under the
traditional headings of Production, Exchange, Distribution and Con-
sumption. If these books be mastered, the reader will then be in a
position to turn his attention effectively to other works. Among the
books for reference or further study, the first place is given to Mr.
Rae’s Contemporary Socialism. This will prove of especial interest at
the present time, giving the student a clear knowledge of the different
forms which contemporary socialism has assumed, and showing its
connection with economic theories. While believing socialism to be
impracticable, Mr. Rae disclaims, for himself and for English economists
generally, the extreme individualism of Herbert Spencer. Professor
Ingram’s History of Political Economy is worthy of attention, not only
for its historical details, but because the author represents the recent
movement which favours the historical method in economic study, and
which would merge economics in a wider science of society. Professor
Marshall stands in the foremost rank of political economists, and the
first volume of his principles deals fully with the scope of the science,
and especially with the questions of Consumption, Production, Dis-
tribution and Exchange, and the equilibrium of demand and supply.
I have been asked to divide the course into eight parts, extending
over eight months. There are grave objections to any hard and fast
rule as to the time which a Circle may judiciously expend over its work.
In such a study as this it is as well to “ hasten slowly ” ; no effectual
progress can be made unless what is learned be duly assimilated. Some
Circles may find their time fully occupied with the first three books on
the list, while others may be able to press on to those prescribed for
further study. For those who may be content with the lesser pro-
gramme, I should be inclined, by way of suggestion only, to map out
the course as follows:—Jevons’ Primer has already been prescribed for
one month’s study. Marshall’s Economics of Industry is composed of
three books, each of which may occupy one month. Walker’s Political
Economy consists of six parts, and its study may be conveniently
divided into four sections, —the first consisting of Parts 1 and 2, the
second of Part 3, the third of Parts I and 5, and the fourth of Part 6.
It will be greatly to the advantage of a Circle to secure a leader who
has already given some attention to the subject, and who can guide
discussion on questions which are open to controversy.
I may point .out, in conclusion, that Political Economy is an
abstract science. A science which deals with the production, the
distribution, and the consumption of wealth, does not take into
consideration the whole nature of man, and the conclusions at which it
67
A. H. R.


TREASURER’S
ACCOUNT.
Receipts pop. Month
ending May
26th.
From
N.S.W
... £23
14
0
South Australia
... 10
0
0
Victoria ! ...
... 8
16
0
Queensland ...
1
12
0
Total
... £44
2
0
arrives cannot in all cases be safely translated into practice. “ Political
Economy,” as Mill said long ago, “ has never pretended to give advice
to mankind with no lights but its own, though people who know
nothing but political economy (and therefore know that ill) have taken
upon them to advise, and could only do so by such lights as they had.”
This remains true, whether we adopt the older idea of “ economic man ”
as simply actuated by the desire for wealth, or take into consideration
the various sympathies and weaknesses and desires of men and societies,
in so far as these affect their economic condition. As long as political
economy remains a separate department of study, having wealth for its
subject, there are aspects of human nature which it cannot exhaust; and
therefore it cannot be trusted, in its single strength, to lay down rules
for the conduct of life. At the same time, it has an intimate bearing
on practice. Though we may study it in the first instance as a theo-
retical science, our main incentive is to obtain practical guidance as
members of a social organism. In our legislation and our social arrange-
ments we cannot ignore economic principles, for man is a wealth-making
and wealth-distributing animal, though we must not overlook the fact
that he is a great deal more. And in later economists we may discern
an evident disposition to come closer to the actual life of man. Thus
increasing attention is paid to the problems of the distribution of wealth
and of the extinction of poverty. Even from an economic point of view
man is seen to be actuated, not merely by self-interest, but also by
altruistic motives. Stress is laid on bodily and mental efficiency as a
factor in the increase of material wealth. In the relations between
employers and employed, it is recognised in theory—though we are slow
to learn the lesson in actual fact—that no arrangement can be lasting
or beneficial which treats any one as a mere instrument to another’s
gain, or which rests solely on a “ cash nexus between man and man.”
The industry and freedom which have given rise to excessive competition
may, it is pointed out, be used for purposes of combination and co-
operation. In these and other w'ays, political economy, though it must
be distinguished from ethics, leads to a wider survey of human nature,
from which moral considerations cannot be omitted.
HENRY LAURIE.
University of Melbourne.
68
A. H. R.


Tennyson's "In Memoriam.”
A Paper read before the Brisbane Literary Circle, 26th April, 1894-
flj'lEW subjects can have more attractions for a literary society than
jf, the study of the friendships of men of letters. The range of such
subjects is not large : it is probably more restricted than that of literary
squabbles ; for eminence in literature as in politics and the fine arts
brings in its train jealousy and detraction as well as love and admiration.
We possess a greater mass of literature emanating from the hatred of
authors for their enemies than from love for their friends. And if
death has, on the one hand, in most instances, put a decent limit to
literary quarrels, it has not often, on the other, increased or accentuated
the manifestations of friendship. Short epitaphs, sincere or perfunctory,
are common enough; but sustained laments are few in number and
inconsiderable in effect. Among the more important in English litera-
ture are the “ Lycidas ” of Milton, Shelley’s “ Adonais,” Matthew
Arnold’s “ Thyrsis,” and the subject set apart for our consideration this
evening.
Tennyson’s life was from beginning to end remarkable for its
seclusion. When at school he cared little for the sports of the play-
ground, though in every way well fitted to enjoy them ; at college he
was one of the pets of a select coterie ; in later life he never became a
man of the people. It is true that he was in theory a democrat, a hater
of social barriers and distinctions, and an upholder of the rights of
women; that he looks forward to the brotherhood of man, the federation
of the world, and the diffusion of universal peace and goodwill; but his
patriotism and federalism are tinged with a Tory spirit that bids us
hasten slowly, and show a due regard to precedent. The Duke of
Wellington is in his eyes the prince of statesmen; and he frequently
exhorts his readers to seek true freedom, avoiding the example of the
French, and the falsehood of extremes. From first to last he shrank
from contact with the public; and he cannot be said to have shewn,
either in his life or in his poetry, which must reflect his life, that all-
enveloping effusive love for his fellow men which makes poets national
or cosmopolitan. Byron and Burns will always be more popular than
Tennyson, because their sentiments are more gushing and effusive, and
their language less measured and self-contained, and also less concen-
trated and more easily comprehensible. But it would be false to say
that because the more refined poet avoided familiar intercourse with
individuals with whom he had little in common, he thereby shewed
himself destitute of love for mankind at large. If he had been less
exclusive, he would perhaps have been a greater man; but if his
exclusiveness were the outward sign of inward indifference he could
not have been a great poet at all, for the great poet must necessarily
love nature and all her works. And in truth the apparent coldness,
69
A. H. R.


which viewed in another aspect is absence of ostentation, reveals the
greater sincerity of the man. Less diffusion means greater intensity.
Nothing is more striking in Tennyson than his dislike or disdain to
express all he feels. Yet he never refuses to recognise true merit
wherever found ; and when he does choose to treat of humble
people, he is no less happy than when he is fulfilling his duties as the
poet of the court. No one who was not thoroughly in sympathy with
the feelings of the people pourtrayed could have written “ Enoch
Arden,” “ The Miller’s Daughter,” “ The Grandmother,” or “ The
Northern Farmer.”
Chiefly for the reasons suggested, but partly also owing to the
comparatively high prices of the volumes, Tennyson’s poetry has been
“ caviare to the general.” And as in his works, so also in his life, he
was the focus of a comparatively narrow circle. His familiars were not
numerous, but they were rare and constant spirits. If one may be allowed
to be paradoxical, he had few acquaintances but many friends. We are
immediately concerned with one of his college friendships. When at
Trinity College, Cambridge, Tennyson formed one of a notable band who
called themselves “The Apostles.” Included in this body were Trench,
Spedding, Monokton Milnes, and Alford, and the “ master bowman ” of
the band was Arthur Henry Hallam.
An uninformed reader of the “ In Memoriam ” might think that
the endowments ascribed to a young man of 22 were the exaggerations
of a mind too strongly dominated by grief and loving admiration. But
all contemporary testimony is corroborative ; and the literary remains of
Hallam are themselves sufficient to show his potentiality, if nothis absolute
title, to rank high among the men of letters of the period. There is no
voice raised in contradiction to the universal acclamation of his talents
and his merits, and there can be no doubt but that, if his life had been
spared, he would have built himself a reputation as enduring as the
noble literary monument raised in his memory by one who was to him
“ more than a brother.” For his early death there was some compensa-
tion in the brilliance of his short career, in the friendships he enjoyed,
above all in his possession of a rates sacer whose verse makes him live
for ever as
“ The divided half of such
A friendship as had mastered time ;
Which masters time indeed, and is
Eternal, separate from fears ;
The all-assuming months and years
Can take no part away from this.”
Tennyson has written nothing greater than the “ In Memoriam ” ;
and his best qualities are prominent in the poem. In respect of matters
of jorm (with which alone this paper purports to deal), of all the poet’s
excellences none are more notable than his powers of versification, and
of artistic expression. A few words with regard to the metre of the
poem. It had the advantage of not being a hackneyed metre ; and of
its appropriateness to the subject there can be no doubt. Rhymed
70
A. H. R.


couplets are not stately or impressive enough ; and are less suitable for
elegiac poetry than for narrative and satire. Alternate rhymes are
“ jingly ” and calculated to pall upon the reader of a long poem. The post-
ponement of the rhyme to the end of the fourth line creates a balance
corresponding in some measure to what we have in Latin elegiacs, and
awakens a mental expectancy which acts as a relief to the monotony
arising from length. Surely we lend dignity to the nursery rhyme by
transposing its verses as follows :
‘ ‘ Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
Up above the world so high
Like a diamond in the sky ;
How I wonder what yon are.”
Tennyson’s mastery of blank verse would no doubt have made the
poem a success if written in that metre. But it was very happily
reserved for the Idylls of the King.
As an artist Tennyson may be fitly compared and contrasted with
Pope. Pope proudly hints at his own greatest merit when he thus
accuses his predecessors :
“ But Otway failed to polish or refine,
And fluent Shakespeare scarce effaced a line ;
Even copious Dryden wanted or forgot
The last and greatest art—the art to blot. ”
Want of care or revision is an offence Pope himself was never
guilty of. He was largely under the influence of the French classical
poets, who are more notable for their precision of form than for their
fulness of matter. His primary aim was to be methodical and clear ;
and his greatness consists in this, that to secure perfection of form he
never sacrificed sense or substance ; as, for instance, Swinburne, another
master of form, has frequently done. In command of his favourite
metre Pope has never been equalled ; but Tennyson has tried his hand
at many varieties of metre and has adorned them all. Both poets are
adepts at making the sound seem an echo to the sense. (Examples of
this faculty in Pope are endless ; and see “In Memoriam ” vil., XIX.,
lvii.). In lucidity Tennyson is inferior to Pope, but in variety incom-
parably superior. In the matter of lucidity Tennyson offends more in
the “In Memoriam ” than elsewhere; and many stanzas, if not
absolutely obscure, demand at least very considerable reflection. 1 think
this arises partly from the metre (which if stately is also somewhat rigid :
this makes it comparatively difficult to fit the picture m its framework),
partly from the depth and intensity of the subject, which render poetic
condensation apt to produce obscurity. This fault is specially notice-
able in his illustrations and similes, some of which could be more lucidly,
because more amply, expressed in prose (see poems iv., xlix., xcii.). The
contrary fault of undue periphrasis is not entirely absent. To call
champagne “ the foaming grape of Eastern France ” (see Epithalamium)
does not conduce to lucidity and savours of affectation. Speaking
broadly, however, whatever there is of obscurity is produced by too
great fulness of matter, which is surely a good fault.
71
A. H. R.


Monotony is avoided by’variety of treatment. True it is that the
construction of each stanza is uniform, but the length of the poems,
which form sections of the whole, ever varies. Ajid although the
groundwork of the poem is throughout the same, namely, the relation
between the poet and his dead friend; although, as one critic says, “he
never wanders far from the grave,” the thought and language are quite
free from repetition, except such as conduces to the concentration and
accentuation of the subject. Although only two persons are directly
concerned, the hateful ego is suppressed throughout, and the dead friend
appears in what Mr. Edison would call a series of kinetographic
representations.
The greatest difficulty which confronts the reader of the “In
Memoriam ” is to realise its unity and the relations of the different
parts to one another. When once the adjustment of the parts is under-
stood, their apparent incoherenoy vanishes, and the complete beauty of
the whole work, and the lesson it is intended to convey are more easily
grasped. A masterly treatise on the poem has been written by Genung.
As his book is not readily procurable, the following analysis of the poem
has been adapted from it;
Introduction (written last —in 1849).
Prologue (i.-xxvil).
Prospect ------ i.-vi.
Defining Point (beginning) - - vn.
First Cycle (xxviii.-lxxvii.).
Christmas-tide xxvm.-xxx.
Spring-tide xxxvm., xxxix.
First Anniversary of Death - - lxxti.
Second Cycle (lxxviii.-ciii.).
Christmas.tide ----- lxxviii.
New Year - LXXXIII.
Second Anniversary of Death - - XCIX.
Third Cycle (civ.-cxviii.).
Christmas-tide ----- civ., cv.
New Year - cvi.
Birthday of A.H.H. (Feb. Ist) - - evil.
Spring-tide cxv., cxvi.
Epilogue (cxix.-cxxxi.).
Defining Point (end) - - - cxix.
Retrospect and Conclusion . - cxx.-cxxxi.
Epithalamium.
For him who has his book in hand the above table requires but
little explanation. A few explanatory notes are added.
The word “ cycle” is the poet’s own (cv. ad finem).
Arthur Hallam was to have married the poet’s sister Emily, who
72
A. H. E.


subsequently married a naval officer, Captain Jesse, and on whom
Hallam’s father settled a liberal allowance on the occasion of her
marriage.
Another sister, Cecilia, married Edward Lushington, Professor of
Greek at Glasgow University, in 1842. He is the person addressed in
Poem lxxxv., and referred to in the Epithalamium.
The “ dark house ” apostrophised in Poem vn., where the poet sets
out definitely on his task, and again in cxix., where he pauses from it,
is the house where Hallam lived in London (67 Wimpole St.) after
leaving Cambridge.
Hallam died at Vienna on 15th September, 1833, The autumn
season explains the poetic moods in lxxii. and xcix.
Poem lxxix. quotes a line from ix. The “ noble heart ” addressed
in lxxix. is Charles Tennyson, who had adopted the surname of Turner,
and who with Alfred had published the volume ’■'•Poems by Two
Brothers ” in the year 1827.
In c. and the following poems Tennyson’s birthplace (Somersby
Rectory in Lincolnshire) is referred to. In civ. the surroundings are
probably those of Aid worth in Surrey, whither the family had afterwards
removed.
The “ living will ” of cxxxi. means not “ Divine Will ” but human
“free-will.” See Miss Chapman’s “Companion to In Memoriam ”
{Macmillan, 1888).
To deal with the substance of the “In Memoriam,” as a record of
friendship and a treasure-house of philosophical and religious speculations,
is beyond the limits of this paper, which was written merely as an
introduction to the study of the poem. Its chief aim has been to
explain the construction of the poem and to supply a few finger-posts to
guide the earnest student, who will not take long to recognise that this
is a work demanding reflection and concentration of thought, and that
he who would discuss it in public, must first read it, very carefully, at
home.
GEORGE W. POWER.
Notice to Contributors.
All news of Circles should be communicated to the secretary of the
Section, and all articles or poems intended for publication should be
sent to the sub-editor. If no sub-editor is appointed, the latter may be
sent direct to the Editor.
Every article must be legibly written (type-written by preference)
and not longer than six pages of foolscap.
Articles intended for publication should reach the Editor not later
than the 20th of the month.
The Editor cannot undertake to return manuscript in any case.
73
A. H. R.


Australian Explorers.
1,-1605-1813.
ffIHE history of Exploration in Australia is one long series of thrill-
ing incidents and heroic adventures, which, if recorded at length,
would fill more than one volume. This sketch, therefore, will be found
to be very short and fragmentary, and to have omitted of necessity the
names of some explorers, and descriptions of the country which was
subsequently opened up by them.
Although the northern coasts of Australia might possibly have
been seen by the early navigators of Spain and Portugal, still, since
they made no direct allusion to such a discovery, we may say that the
first attempt to explore this land was due to the Dutch.
In 1605 the Duyfhen yacht was despatched by the Dutch govern-
ment of Bantam to examine the islands of New Guinea; and although
before this it was thought by some that there was such an island, it was
not until March, 1606, that the existence of the Great South Land was
authentically proved. About this time the great navigator Torres
passed, all unwittingly, through the great strait, which, later, was called
by his name ; and in 1644 Tasman, who two years later discovered and
named Antony Yan Diemen’s Land (after the governor-general) is
supposed to have sailed round the Gulf of Carpentaria. The only other
Dutchman of importance who visited the continent was Dirk Hartog,
who arrived on the 25th of October, 1616. In 1686 and 1699 the
celebrated English navigator, William Dampier, visited the N.\V. coast,
and on his return to England published an interesting account of his
discoveries, of which Defoe availed himself for his Robinson Crusoe.
We might say that we owe the complete discovery of Australia to
Oapt. Cook, who was then engaged in the first of his voyages round the
world.
Captain Cook, leaving Cape Farewell, in New Zealand, on March
13th, 1770, first sighted the south-eastern headlands of the new con-
tinent on April 18th, and to this promontory, which, however, is now
called Cape Conran, he gave the name of Point Hicks. The whole of
the coast from this point to Cape York, its most northern limit, was
now navigated in the “ Endeavour.” Botany Bay was the first place at
which a landing could be effected ; and here the “ Endeavour ” was
anchored while Cook and his party enjoyed a week among the strange
sights and sounds of New Holland, as the continent was first called.
During the voyage to Cape York several bays and inlets were
noticed, some of which were examined, and afterwards described at
length by Captain Cook ; but, unfortunately, among those which were
only named, but unvisited, was Port Jackson ; and the crew were all
unconscious that this harbour, which was named after a friend of the
captain, was one of the finest in the world. Names were also given to
74
A. H. E.


Point Danger and Mount Warning, positions which now form the
coastal boundary between New South Wales and Queensland.
The news of Cook’s great discovery was eagerly welcomed by the
English nation, chiefly, it must be confessed, because of the great oppor-
tunity afforded by this continent of forming new penal settlements for
convicts sentenced to transportation. Owing to the war with the
American colonies, transportation to Virginia was at an end, and the
English gaols were beginning to fill in an alarming manner, when an
outlet was found for this stream of vice and misery by means of New
Holland.
In January, 1788, a fleet of eleven ships, carrying two hundred
soldiers and seven hundred and fifty-seven convicts, under the command
of Captain Phillip, landed at Botany Bay. Soon, however, the nascent
colony, not satisfied with this position, started forth to examine Port
Jackson ; and finding what an ample, magnificent harbour this was,
they determined to make it their permanent home. The first spot upon
which they settled is contiguous to the modem Circular Quay ■ and hers,
on the 7th February, 1788, the inauguration of the settlement took
place, and it was henceforth recognised as one of the crown colonies.
Ere three months had passed we find these new arrivals starting out
in various directions to try and learn something about this strange,
unknown land, of which, as yet, the horizion was their utmost limit of
discovery. The explorers to whom we owe most of our early knowledge
of the coast line are George Bass and Matthew Flinders, who came to
the colony in 1795. The romantic voyage of these two bold adventurers,
with only a boy besides themselves in the tiny craft, the “Tom
Thumb ” (not more than Bft. long !), reads more like a fairy tale than a
sober reality. In this smallest of boats the southern coast was examined
as far as Providential Cove or Wattamolla, This undertaking was one
of great danger, for often the poor little “ Tom Thumb ” was tossed like
a cork by the angry billows, and once, in a storm, it was washed high
up on a beach, where it looked more like a toy than a boat
on which the lives of three men had many a stormy night depended.
The next expedition of importance was conducted by Bass alone ;
and during the seven weeks that he was absent from Sydney
(the name given to the settlement at Port Jackson) he had
examined more than 600 miles of the southern coast. Men were
anxious at this time to prove the insularity of Van Diemen’s Land
(Tasmania), and Bass had, without knowing, passed through the strait to
which his name was afterwards attached. Since Bass was not aware of this
achievement, he, conjointly with Flinders in the year 1798, undertook to
prove the existence of a strait, and the consequent insularity of Van
Diemen’s Land. A rapid voyage was made from Sydney, Oct. 7th, in
the “ Norfolk” ; and when at length the desired strait was proved, they
cruised about in the channel and examined a number of islands, which
were found to abound in sea-fowl, especially the peculiar sooty-petrel,,
a bird which, like the rabbit, burrows in the ground.
75
A. H. H.


Next they commenced the circumnavigation of Van Diemen’s
Land, which was carried out successfully, several valuable discoveries
Vieing made, and the errors in previous observations corrected. The
merit of the discovery of the insularity of Van Diemen’s Land is due to
both the navigators, but Flinders generously desired Governor Hunter
to call the strait after Bass. The discovery of this strait was of
inestimable value to the progress of international commerce, since hence-
forth the tedious route round the south of Van Diemen’s Land could
easily be avoided, and a passage gained into the Southern Indian
Ocean.
The name of Flinders, although not preserved in the Strait, will
long be affectionately remembered by all patriotic Australians ; and
here it is fitting to state that it is to this indefatigable navigator that
we owe the euphonius name of Australia. The west coast, dis-
covered many years ago by the Dutch, had been called New
Holland ; but when the English began to colonise the east
coast they called the continent New South Wales. Since it would not have
been just either to the Dutch or to the English to call the continent by one
of these names, Flinders first proposed to call it Terra Australis, but
added : “ Had I permitted myself any innovation upon the original term,
it would have been to convert it into Australia, as being more agreeable
to the ear, and an assimilation to the other great portions of the earth.”
His suggestion was followed, and New Holland, New South Wales,
and Terra Australis, became henceforth (and shall we say forever 1)
Australia.
The circumnavigation of Australia was undertaken by Flinders in
the “ Investigator,” and for this purpose he sailed from Spithead on the
18th June, 1801. He sighted the continent at Leeuwin, which he
proved to be a cape, not an island as was formerly supposed.
After visiting King George’s Sound, he sailed along the Great
Australian Bight; and after this stage of the journey was passed, several
original discoveries were made, chief of which were Spencer and St.
Vincent’s Gulfs, with Yorke’s Peninsula, and last, but not least, Kangaroo
Island. This island was found to contain no human inhabitants, but it
abounded with kangaroos and seals, which at first evinced no fear of the
intruders. However, finding that the only response made to their
gentle trust and shy attempts at friendliness was the sharp, cruel shots
which worked such havoc among their companions, they came to regard
all the sons of Adam as their most deadly enemies. Shortly after
leaving Kangaroo Island, Flinders, who imagined himself to be in
entirely strange waters met, to his unbounded surprise, the French ship
the “ Geographe ” commanded by Captain Baudin, who ill concealed his
annoyance at thus finding that an Englishman had already explored the
coast line which he had hoped to be the first to visit. This is the reason
why we find that most names to the west of this point are English,
•whilst those to the east are French.
76
A. H. R.


Flinders, when passing Port Phillip (which had been previously
named by Lieut. Murray) examined the neighbourhood, and prophesied
that “ a settlement would probably be made at Port Phillip sometime
after ; ” and the locality where this prophecy was uttered is the site on
which the present city of Melbourne stands.
The next great feat of Flinders was the discovery of a gap in the
Great Barrier Reef, or, in other words, he succeeded in showing naviga-
tors how to “ thread the needle.”
The two other navigators who made any important discoveries
along the coast were Lieut. Phillip Parker King, and Lieut. Stokes, the
latter of whom discovered and named the Flinders and Albert Rivers.
The colony had been founded for nearly a quarter of a century
before inland investigation made much progress. This was owing to the
insuperable barrier formed by the Blue Mountains. Time after time
men had started out with the intention of scaling these frowning, in-
hospitable heights, and finding a path to the west side of the mountains ;
but this success was not achieved till many years had passed, and much
heroic labour spent in useless efforts.
George (Bass, the navigator, Lieut. Barrellier, and the botanist
Clayley are only a few of the heroic men whose almost superhuman
efforts were only met with the disappointment of a repulse. The
memorable trio who at last succeeded in crossing the Blue Mountains
were Gregory Biaxland, William Lawson, and William Charles Went-
worth, the latter being but a youth just out of his teens. Often for
many miles they had to hew their way with axes—step by step—through
the brushwood ; and this toilsome work necessitated their travelling the
same ground three times ! First, there would be the clearing to make,
then the return for the horses, and then the same road must be travelled
again as they advanced on their weary way. No sooner was a track
discovered than the Government sent gangs of convicts, under the
command of one Cox, to make a road that would lead to the Bathurst
Plains on the west, since it was of the greatest importance that new
pasture land should be found for the flocks and herds. We like to boast
that this road was made in such an “ incredibly short space of time; ”
but if we could only realize one tenth of the misery which those poor
convicts (but, although convicts, men!) suffered from the atrocious
cruelty of their task-masters, we should soon feel that each moment in
that “ incredibly short space of time” meant agony to those poor men.
As we tread this path over the Blue Mountains, winding in and out as
it does among some of the grandest and most beautiful scenes in nature,
it were good for us to turn our eyes aside for a moment from the peace-
ful scenes around us, and look down at the rough, rude stones of the
wayside—for they have been dyed, not alone with the crimson glow of
the sunset, but with the life-blood of many a poor, weary, homeless
man.
K. I. H.
77
A. H. B.


Notes and News.
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
The event of the month has of course been the Second Annual Assembly,
held at the Sydney University, on the evening of the 18th May. Despite
the gloomy weather some 400 members and friends gathered in the Great
Hall, and kept the Reception Committee fully occupied for over half an hour.
As numbers increased, conversation became general, and until Professor
MacCallum’s lecture was announced, the noble chamber presented quite
an animated spectacle. The Professor’s lecture, which was a thoughtful
discourse on “ The Literary Study of Literature” was listened to with
earnest appreciation. Refreshments were then served, and distributed
by the gentlemen present ] after this interval the Chairman, Professor
David, introduced Mr. A. W. Jose, who described in witty terms the
pedigrees of the modern magazines. In moving a vote of thanks to the
lecturers and others, the Chairman made special reference to the labours of
Mrs. Wolstenholme and Mr. Robin on behalf of the Union. The pleasure
of the occasion was much enhanced by the music most generously rendered
on the organ by Mr. Neville Barnett. A message from Chief Justice
Way, President of the Union, conveying the kindly wishes of the S.A.
Section, read during the proceedings, was received with plaudits.
Miss Wilson, Secretary of the Croydon Circle, has started a new
branch in Ashfield with 10 members. They look forward to doing good
work in the English Literature Courses.
A second Circle, comprising nine gentlemen led by Mr. Braund,
has been instituted in Armidale; this speaks well for the interest
displayed by members of that district.
West Maitland Circle reappears this year, headed by Miss
Grossman.
A. STUDDY.
J. S. SCOTT.
VICTORIAN SECTION.
Since the publication of the last journal, the second annual
entertainment of the Victorian Section of the A.H.R.U. has taken
place. To quote from the Argus of May 16th :—“ A soiree, given under
the auspices of the Australasian Home Reading Union, was held last
evening at the Athenaeum Hall, and was largely attended. Professor
Morris, President of the Victorian Branch, took the chair, and delivered
a short address, in which he explained that the object of the Union was
not primarily to direct the reading of the student, but to furnish
guidance to the general reader. The number of members had advanced
from 1,892 in the year 1892, to 2,218 at the present time. All members
of the Union could help by assisting to establish new Circles wherever
78
A. H. R.


practicable, and by encouraging the objects of the Union in every way.
An admirable programme was presented during the evening, including
a paper by Dr. Sevan, entitled, “ What is in a Book, and How to Get
it Out,” and a lecturette by Professor Tucker on “ The Sanity of
Genius,” in which the lecturer combated the theory of Lombroso, and
put in a strong case for the sound mental balance of every great genius.
Miss Clara Mongredien, Miss Alice King, and Mr. Rofe were the
vocalists, and part songs were also rendered by St. Paul’s Cathedral
quartette party. Miss Barbara Sisly contributed a pleasing recitation.
A letter was read during the evening from Chief Justice Way, of South
Australia, President of the Australasian Union, regretting his inability
to be present, and stating that the South Australian Section was doing
good work.”
The number of members has been steadily increasing, over 60
having joined during the last month. A new Circle has been formed in
Stawell, under the leadership of Mrs. Ollaret, and one in Windsor,
under Miss A. Templeton. The Portland Circle, under Miss E. Must,
has more than doubled its numbers, and Ballarat has largely added to
its roll of members, while it has also formed two new Circles, one at
Loretto Abbey, and one under the leadership of Miss Hale. Ballarat
bids fair to surpass its record of last year, for already it has more
Circles than in 1893, and full particulars of two additional Circles are
not yet to hand.
A member of the Kew Circle writes :—“ A very pleasant study of
the reading for the month was held on December 12th, at the house of
Mrs. Luke, the members of the Jolimont Circle having invited the Kew
Circle to read with them previously arranged selections from “Macbeth.”
Short instructive papers and an animated discussion upon the merits of
the different characters of the play followed, and all felt at the close of
the afternoon, that amidst most pleasant social surroundings the time
had been well and profitably spent.”
L. M. FOX.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SECTION.
The annual meeting of the South Australian Section was held at
the University on Tuesday evening, May 15th. There was a large
attendance in the Library, when the President (His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor), occupied the chair.
Mr. G. G. Newman (Hon. Secretary), read the Annual Report,
from which we extract the following;—“ This annual meeting ushers
in the third year of the existence of the Australasian Home
Reading Union in South Australia. The year that has passed has been
one of steady progress both in the city and suburbs, and in the country.
At this time last year we numbered 152 members, meeting in 11
Circles, and after the inaugural meeting, which was held in this
building, and by which the objects and scope of our work were made
79
A. H. E,


more widely known, the numbers gradually increased, until in December
last—the end of our reading year—we numbered 335 members meeting
in 29 Circles.
We are deeply conscious of our obligation to His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor, who as our President for the past year, has
shown so great and continual an interest in the work and welfare of
the Union. He has presided over our Committee meetings, and in our
discussions upon the courses of reading marked out for study, and in
our efforts to make the Union of helpful service to those who seek for a
pleasant recreation from the common round of daily duties, His
Excellency has given us the ripe thoughts and varied gleanings of a
cultivated, scholarly and cultured mind. We are grateful to him for
his help in the past, and were pleased to learn that the General Council
of the Union, meeting at Sydney in January last, upon the resignation
of Lady Jersey, elected His Excellency as President of the Union in
Australasia for the year upon which we enter to-night.
It will have been noticed, by all readers of the A.H.R., how great
an interest is manifested in the work by the Professors at the
Universities of Sydney and Melbourne. Professor Anderson and
Professor David, of Sydney, and Professor Morris, of Melbourne, as
well as several others, have by writing articles for the magazine, and by
encouraging the spirit of the Union, assisted to extend its beneficial
influences over the length and breadth of our land. We, in South
Australia, cannot express too strongly our appreciation of the efforts in
the same direction of Professor Bragg. He has been present at all our
meetings, has written articles for the magazine, has assisted in the
preparation of the scientific courses, and is himself an active member of
Mrs. Hawker’s Circle at Medindie. By his courtesy and kindness he
has placed his room at our disposal for our Committee meetings, and
his kindly advice, coupled with his characteristic energy, have in no
small measure contributed to our success in the past year.
An effort was made to induce the literary societies of Adelaide to
set apart one evening for the work of the Union, but this was only
successful in two instances. One Circle meets at Wellington Square
Church, under the leadership of the Rev. J. Day Thompson, and we are
to listen to some of their papers to-night, and the other meets at
Medindie, under the Rev. S. Lenton. Mr, W. Maggs, who reads a
paper to-night on “ Harry Esmond,” belongs to this Circle. With Mr.
Solomon—one of our most ardent members—as Secretary of the Literary
Societies’ Union, we hope to see a greater number of Circles formed
among them this year.
In closing this Report, I would like, on behalf of the members of
the South Australian Section, to express our thanks to the press of
Adelaide. We are not a wealthy society, our subscriptions are barely
enough to cover expenses; but both the daily papers have by their
leaders and paragraphs helped us to spread the work of the Union in a
way we could not have done without their assistance. Those most
80
A. H. K.


opposed to our Union cannot fail to admit that some solid work has
been accomplished during the last reading year, and it is with feelings
of hope and pleasure that we look forward to the year’s work which we
inaugurate to-night, trusting that the good work done in the past will
continue to grow and flourish, and help even in a small way to diffuse
sweetness and light wherever its beneficent influences are felt.”
The President said he was sure they had ail listened with
very great pleasure to the exceedingly well-written report by the
Secretary. All those best acquainted with the working of the
Union would agree with him that they owed a very great debt of
gratitude for the painstaking and efficient services of the Secretary
during the past year. In these times of depression it was exceedingly
encouraging to hear of an association which during the twelve months
had doubled its revenue and doubled its membership. It would be
remembered that at the beginning of the year they made a vigorous
attempt to capture the country districts, and they had met with some
success, for there were now 12 country Circles. He hoped the number
of country members would be doubled, if not trebled, in the coming
year, and that before the year closed they might be, as in Victoria,
turning their attention in the direction of University Extension Lectures
in connection with their work. (Hear, hear). There was one other
subject which, if he was as modest as the Secretary, he would not
mention—the fact that the President of the South Australian Section
had also been elected President of the Union. (Hear, hear). He was
deeply sensible of the compliment to himself, but he begged to point
out that this compliment was really a tribute to the work of the South
Australian Section, which had been the most successful of any during
the past year ; 71 per cent, of the increases of the whole of the Union
had to be credited to South Australia. (Hear, hear). No one could
turn over the pages of the magazine for the present month
without recognising what an important factor it is in their work. On
the literary side they had solved the federation question. Their
organisation extended over all Australia, except Western Australia,
which he hoped they would soon annex, and they had 2,500 fellow-
readers. To-night their Victorian friends were listening to addresses
from Professor Morris, Dr. Sevan, and other gentlemen, and he had sent
them a message of friendly greeting and good wishes for success in their
work. (Hear, hear). He had just received a telegraphic reply
reciprocating the compliment. (Hear, hear).
A number of papers were then read in the various rooms. In the
mathematical theatre Mrs. E. W. Hawker read a paper on “ Peru ” ;
Dr. C. E. Todd gave an interesting address on “ Coral Reefs,” in which
he differed from the Darwinian theory as to the formation of atolls and
reefs; and Professor Bragg spoke on “ Ancient Geography,” dealing
with geographical knowledge from the earliest times up to those of
Columbus, and showing the maps of ancient and mediaeval geographers.
In the chemical theatre Miss Lillie Thompson spoke on “Tasmania,”
81
A. H. R.


and Mr. J. M. Solomon on “ Tennyson and Modern Doubt,” and Mr.
Simpson on “ Genius.” In the literature lecture-room papers were read
by Mr. G. K. Soward on “Woman in the hearts of some of the
Eighteenth Century Humorists,” by Mr. W. T. Maggs on “ Harry
Esmond,” and by Miss Holtje on “ Das Lied von der Glocke.” In the
Classics lecture-room Miss F, Ingham read a paper on “ Henry II,,”
Miss Allan Wright gave readings from Browning, and Miss Kate
Gilmore read a paper on “ Richard and John.” Many of the papers
were illustrated by diagrams and limelight views.—Abridged from the
S.A. Advertiser.
Reading for June.
English Literature Courses:
Modern Poetry ... ... Burns—Selections. Recommended: Carlyle,
Essay on Burns (Cassell, 6d.)
Shakespeare Course ... Richard 11.
Recent Writers: A ... Swinburne —Selections,
do. B ... Ruskin —Unto this last,
do. C ... Hamerton, Human Intercourse (concluded).
Addit. General Course ... Tennyson—ln Memoriam.
Young People’s Course... Lamb —Tales from Shakespeare.
Education :
A Elementary Course ... Quick, Educational Reformers, chaps. 10
and 11 ; Laurie, Life of Comenius.
Recommended : Oompayre, History of
Pedagogy, c. 7.
B Advanced Course ... Painter, History of Education, pp. 119-212.
Recommended ; Sully, Teachers’ Hand-
book, cc. 6-8. Great Educators’ Series :
Abelard, Loyola.
Geography and Travel ... Voyages in search of N.W. Passage.
Hist, of England,l399-1603 Green, chap. 6, Sections 1-4. Recommended:
Seebohm, Oxford Reformers
82
A. H. E.


Vol. 111., No. 4.
July, 1894.
THE A. H. R.
Two Shakespearean Characters.
(Papers read before the New Town Circle , Tasmania.)
I.—THE MELANCHOLY JAQUES.
ypN As You Like It Shakespeare introduces an entirely new type
Sgjj! of character. Jaques stands first on the list of those “ Oensurers
of Mankind,” as Hallam calls them, who afterwards appear so frequently
in the tragedies and serious dramas of Shakespeare’s third period.
These characters, though all fulfilling the same critical function, set
about the task in very different ways, each in accordance with his
idiosyncrasies,—Hamlet and Duke Vincentio, Lear and Timon,
Thersites and Apemantus.
I never appreciated the character of Jaques, until I saw the part
played by that fine, scholarly actor, Hermann Vezin. Before this
enlightenment I had always accepted the verdict of the critics, who one
and all rather look down on the melancholy philosopher as a morbid
and disagreeable sort of monomaniac, incapable of feeling satisfaction
except when things are going wrong. But Vezin brought out qualities
below the surface, and you saw that Jaques is sad because his heart is
tender and sympathetic ; that he feels the contact of things too keenly,
and so what leaves others indifferent makes him weep; that he has
passed through imagination to a sorrowful scorn of the human comedy.
I never heard anything on the stage finer than this actor’s delivery of
the great speech of the Seven Ages (11. vii. 139). One felt that
Jaques’ whole soul was wearily disgusted with the pettiness of life,
with its little motives and mean results. The half-contemptuous
humour with which he describes the first five ages, is toned down by
pity for “ the lean and slippered pantaloon,” and sinks into a whispered
sadness when he reaches the final picture :
* ‘ Last scene' of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.”


Vanitas vanitatum ! Here we have no smooth prophet dealing out
comfortable deceit, but one crying: It is bad to-day, but it will be
worse to-morrow; and woe to those who reach extreme old age, for
then it will be worst of all!
As the humour which is allied to wit depends on the minor
incongruities of life, so that which is allied to pathos depends on what
we may call its grand incongruities. It is by a touch of pathos that,
just as in the case of Lear’s Fool, we are prepared to make the
acquaintance of Jaques. There is humour and genuine feeling shown
in the episode of the wounded stag ; nor should we overlook the point
that the story is told of our philosopher by an unseen observer. Jaques
was alone, not posing before an audience, when he was “ weeping and
commenting upon the sobbing deer.”
Many of the characters in the plays seem like transcripts of the
moods, more or less transitory, of Shakespeare’s own mind. Four of
them, especially, let us into the secrets of his inner life—Romeo,
Jaques, Hamlet, and Prospero. Do not imagine that I wish to
identify Shakespeare with any of his dramatic personages; but in these
four in particular we find intimate touches which he must have felt in
himself before he could have depicted them with such delicacy of
detail. His complex nature contained a love-idealist like Romeo—you
have only to read the Sonnets to see that; it contained the “ humourous
sadness ” of Jaques, the sceptical philosophy of Hamlet, the reasonable
tranquillity of Prospero. And these all have one marked characteristic
—the contemplative mood. Romeo, for instance, broods over the luxury
of his sorrow; he nurses his love, and sheds tears over it; solitude is
dear to him, but he also loves to take others into his confidence, and to
stimulate his fancy with curious, fantastic phrases. So Jaques, with
his melancholy. Of course, the complete Shakespeare was far more
than Romeo, or Jaques, or Hamlet: they represent successive developments
of the conscience, feelings, and thought of the dramatist, and his passing
mood is depicted, now in the one, now in the other, —finally culminating
in the grave serenity of Prospero. I take it that Shakespeare was
aware of certain predispositions and weaknesses in his own nature; of
an excessive sensitiveness to love and sorrow, for example; and that he
used his work consciously as a means of self-discipline, knowing no
better way to mastery than through his analysis and art. The theory
may seem at first glance fanciful: I recommend it to your merciful
consideration.
The lively wit and chopped logic of Touchstone, good though they
are, are yet inferior to Jaques’ humour, and not to be mentioned beside
his fine fantastic philosophy. The best specimens of this are, I
think, to be found in 11. v. 9, 111. ii. 235, IV. i. 1. Please to observe
also that there is no sourness, no misanthropy, about him : though
he enjoys the solitary companionship of his own thoughts well
enough, he is glad to come across original natures like Touchstone,
Rosalind, or Orlando; and above all he is grateful to any one who will
84
A. H. R.


sing to him : —“ I can suck melancholy out of a song, as a weasel sucks
eggs.”
The melancholy of Jaques is the earliest hint we have in the plays
that the Dramatist had gained his experience—and that his experience
had made him sad. (IV. i. 23.) The character seems to me to be one
of Shakespeare’s favourites, to be, as I have already said, a mask that
conceals the poet’s own face. For the grounds of this belief we must
turn to the Sonnets. These were written about the same time as the
Play, and the story they tell is plain enough, when we read them in a
natural sense and don’t attempt to make an allegory out of them. This
interpretation has been accepted by the best judges. Coleridge believed
them to be autobiographical; Wordsworth was certain that they
expressed Shakespeare’s “own feelings in his own person”; and Goethe
declared, in his emphatic way, that “ not a syllable of them but was
lived, experienced, thought, enjoyed, suffered.” If you desire more
authorities, this opinion about the Sonnets is also held by Furnivall,
Dowden, Palgrave, Rossetti, Hallam, Henry Taylor, Swinburne, Ulrici,
and Gervinus. “ The Sonnets consist of two series,” says Dowden,
“ the first from 1 to 126, addressed to a young man; the other,
127-154, addressed to or referring to a woman. The young friend,
whom Shakespeare loved with a fond idolatry, was beautiful, clever,
rich in the gifts of fortune, of high rank. The woman was of stained
character, false to her husband, the reverse of beautiful, dark-eyed, pale-
faced, a musician, possessed of a strange power of attraction. To her
fascination Shakespeare yielded himself—and in his absence she laid her
snares for Shakespeare’s friend and won him.”
In addition to this painful story of a lawless love, the Sonnets tell
us of the poet’s disgust with his profession as an actor; that public and
private ill weighed heavily on him ; that he was beginning to feel the
first seriousness of age—the autumn time of life. He acknowledges
concealed faults, the stain of sensuality—“ a bewailed guilt”; he com-
plains of self-love as “ grounded inward ”in his heart; in a word, he
confesses the very sin, and sorrow, and bitterness, which so evidently
sum up the story of Jaques’ life.
Jaques is a purely contemplative character; he does absolutely
nothing. He represents the frame of mind for which inaction is a
necessity; nothing seems worth the doing ! Cui bono 1 When his feelings
must have relief, he seeks it in words, not deeds. One characteristic of
this mood is to regard undeserved misfortune—whether one’s own or
another’s—with a certain grim satisfaction. To such a mood, the
injustice and wrongs of life, and moral discrepancies in fact, are
gratifying, because one hates and despises life, and these things are the
warrant and justification of one’s feeling. Let no man flatter himself,
because he has never felt this mood of “ high disdain and sense of
injured merit ”; “ the fullest head of which we have record ” knew
what it was, or some of his greatest dramas would never have been
written.
85
A. H. R.


lI.—FESTE, THE CLOWN
tI&ET us devote a few minutes to the consideration of the proper
standpoint from which, if we wish to judge fairly and intelligently,
we ought to estimate the character and humour of the light-hearted
Feste, the Clown in the Countess Olivia’s household.
The institution of the Court fool or jester is an interesting scrap of
ancient history. The ideas on which it was based were, firstly, the
barbarous tendency to find food for laughter in mere personal deformity
and defects : thus in the good old times our ancestors thought that the
incoherence of idiocy was decidedly funny, and so they made the imitation
of it a profession. Then, secondly, it used to be a very general belief
that there was a close connection between madness and inspiration ;
and so the fool had a small sort of prophetic function to fulfil : he was
expected “to speak the truth the next way,” as the Clown in “All’s
Well ” expresses it, and at times to make hard personal hits. The third
idea lay in the ordinary notion of “ wit ” which prevailed in past times,
and which we may frequently note in Shakespeare’s plays ; namely,
that it was a kind of mental battledore and shuttle-cock, where the
quality of the jokes was unimportant, since the whole point of the game
lay in readiness of repartee and in keeping it up as long as possible.
Of course, we have to make allowance tor the type of wit which
we can only enjoy historically. Most of Shakespeare’s mirth is for all
time and bears no passing contemporary stamp ; but this elaborate play
upon words and bandying of nonsense to and fro it is not so easy to
appreciate. Our notion of wit is that it is a kind of biting common-
sense—an effective weapon with intelligent people—the main purpose of
which is to make truth forcible and amusing. The artistic wit of
Shakespeare was, on the other hand, a daring rush of quibbles, paradoxes,
badinage, strange fancies—the whole full of movement and imagination.
The good folk of his day laughed not merely from a sense of the
ridiculous as we understand it, but from a good-humoured love of
laughter. Folly was in full bloom, as one may sometimes see it now at
an uproarious gathering, where it is often the worst jokes that are most
successful. The Elizabethans loved to play upon words, to contort
their sense and draw absurd inferences. Conversation was a merry
masquerade of ideas, where smartness and readiness were everything;
no pause, no reflection was permissible. They only sought to heap together
conceits and subtleties, far-fetched and difficult to understand. Their
expressions were ultra-refined, unexpected and extraordinary. And so,
in judging the word-play which abounds in the Comedies, we must
beware of the error of testing this part of Shakespeare’s work either by
the taste of the present day, or by the standard of an aesthetic ideal.
When he wrote, “punning” was something new • it had been introduced
into English Comedy by John Lilly, whose euphuism (which was mainly
verbal quibbling of every possible form) entered largely into the con-
versation of the fashionable world. We must remember, then, that these
86
A. H. R.


extravagant puns and allusions, the sham learning imitated from
Rabelais, the exaggerated images and similes, were elements that
Shakespeare had to introduce : they were simply the then recognised
forms of wit, without which no comedy could be written.
About this time the institution of the Court Fool was beginning to
disappear from Society, and was passing to the stage, where the proper
function of the clown was to play the part of the humorous philo-
sophical critic, who showed up the weaknesses of the other characters in
the play. But it was no easy task to give to the part its due force and
artistic merit. The two leading comedians of the day, Tarleton and
Kemp, used to play the clowns grossly and ludicrously ; and the coarse
taste of their audiences enjoyed this vulgar buffoonery. Only when
these actors finally left his theatre, could Shakespeare venture to bring
upon the stage the fools of As You Like It, Twelfth Night, All’s
Well, and Lear : only then could he put into the mouth of Hamlet
those more refined instructions for the actor of the fool’s part“ Let them
that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them: for
there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of
barren spectators to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered : that’s villanous, and
shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it.” ( Hamlet , 111.
ii. 37).
And so, in considering such a character as Feste, there are two
opposite errors which we have to avoid. We must not pass over all
his chatter as unmeaning folly, nor, on the other hand, must we expect
to find a meaning in everything that he says: it is amid much nonsense
that the truths he utters make their appearance.
With regard to our Twelfth Night clown these points are
worth noting: 1. His is the longest clown’s part in all the plays ;
Touchstone himself has not so many lines by some fifty or so. In this
play Viola and Sir Toby come first with 340 lines each, then Olivia and
the Clown follow with 310 each.
2. Feste is far the most important singing clown in Shakespeare ; he
has four songs—the final one inserted as a special epilogue or tag to the
play. Note too that in the Comedies produced about this time (1599-
1601) — As You Like It, Much Ado, Twelfth Night, All’s Well, —
there are always good singing parts.
3. It looks, then, as if these parts had been written with some
particular singer and actor in view. The personal remark in Act IV.
ii. 6, seems to bear this out, suggesting that he was a short, stout man.
(“ I am not tall enough to become the function well, nor lean enough to
be thought a good student.”) It is not unlikely that Feste was played
by the famous singer, Wilson, whose name actually appears in the First
Folio, substituted for that of Balthazar, in Much Ado, where one
of the stage directions reads—“ Enter Prince, Leonato, Claudio, and
Jacke Wilson ! ”
87
A. H. R.


One of the best criticisms of this character is that of Gervinus,
who writes:—
“ Peste appears as a singer by profession, singing with equal skill
love songs of a merry or tragic nature, comic jigs or heart-rending
canons. With all this, he is a careless, cheerful fellow, troubling
himself about nothing, placed in the midst of the busy company, a wise
fool amongst the foolish wise. No other of Shakespeare’s fools is so
conscious of his superiority as this one He is fit for anything ;
he lives with each after his own fashion, knowing their weaknesses,
considering their natures, carefully adapting himself to the mood of the
moment With natural, fresh, free natures, such as Sebastian
and Viola, he is at once on a friendly footing. On the other hand, he
punishes Malvolio for the contempt with which he speaks of him and
his profession; he joins in playing him the trick which is to cure him
of his self-conceit, and tells him this with impressive warning, in case of
repetition. To Sir Andrew he talks glaring nonsense, which enchants
him; he knows that he passes for no fox with the coarse Sir Toby, but
craftily and easily he watches Maria, and praises her as the most witty of
her sex, if she can wean the old scamp from drinking. To his mistress
Olivia he is faithfully devoted ; he condemns the extravagance of her
melancholy; he distinctly designates the affair between her and the
Duke as foolish, but promotes the connection with Viola and Sebastian.
He keenly penetrates the Duke’s changeable disposition, and bitingly,
though good-naturedly, upbraids him with it; at the same time telling
him of a remedy which exactly gives a key to the inward condition of
the lover’s character. If the fool be cleverly played, it can therefore be
a guide through important points of the comedy.”
Wants of Circles.
A Geography and Travel Circle in New Zealand would like to
borrow a paper on “ The Addition to Scientific Knowledge from Polar
Exploration.”
Who made the heart, ’tis He alone
Decidedly can try us ;
He knows each chord, its various tone ;
Each spring, its various bias.
Then at the balance let’s be mute,
We never can adjust it;
What’s done we partly may compute,
But know not what’s resisted.
Burns, Address to the Unco Quid.
88
A. H. R.


The Holy Roman Empire.
11.
‘‘CTfeF the jurisdiction of Pilate were not legal, sin was not rightly
Sag punished in Christ: ” so wrote the author of the treatise “De
Monarchic,” in the Thirteenth Century ; and he goes on to argue, that
Pilate was not a lawful judge, unless Tiberius were a lawful Emperor.
In other words, the truth of the Christian doctrine; that is, the
possessions and the power of the Clergy ; depended upon the sword of
Caesar, and the authority which he bequeathed to his successors. Such
were the necessities of theology, and the ingenuity of theologians, in
the Thirteenth Century. The Middle Ages, though bounded in
knowledge, were singularly keen and logical in handling what they
knew. Our theologians hardly own to more science, and they are not
capable of so much logic. The attitude of Dante, or of whoever wrote
the treatise “De Monarchia,” is curious to us, who have other
difficulties and less able Apologists ; but, if we would understand the
theory of the Holy Roman Empire, we must realize the attitude and
the reasoning of the Middle Ages. These were as logical on paper, and
as untrue to the complex facts of life, as the arguments of several
modern Professors of Political Economy.
As I explained in ray last paper, the nations of the Western
Empire still remembered, still loved, the Imperial administration. The
barbarians came in; the provinces were divided from one another, and
from Rome : culture diminished : mediaeval Christianity, ignorance, and
misery increased ; and Europe was probably never more wretched, nor
more hopeless, than in the dreary interval between the Fifth and the
Ninth Centuries. In this interval, for the only time in history, so far
as wo know, the people converted their superiors, their rulers, to better
things; but the people were, or had been, civilized, and their rulers
were barbarians. Among the people, the Roman tradition lingered,
and they longed for the prosperity and repose which it insured. The
Roman tradition was based on the prerogatives of Caesar. The whole
mediaeval order, such as it, was, depended upon the memory of Roman
Law, and upon the authority of the Church. The claims of the Church,
such as they were, depended upon Caesar too. It is hardly surprising,
therefore, that the office of Caesar was revived in the person of
Charlemagne, the greatest monarch of his time. In the year 800, in
the old basilica of Saint Peter, Charles was transformed from a barbarian
chieftain into the successor of the Caesars. In that moment, Rome
triumphed over her Germanic invaders. In that moment “ was
“ pronounced the union, so long in preparation, so mighty in its
“ consequences, of the Roman and the Teuton, of the memories and the
“ civilization of the South with the fresh energy of the North, and
“ from that moment modern history begins.” So writes Mr. Bryce,
with dubious rhetoric: dubious in fact, more than dubious in form.
89
A. 11. R.


Did the Roman and the Teuton ever unite, can they ever 1 No one
doubts the “civilization of the South” : but what of the “fresh energy
of the North ? ” Tacitus describes the Germans as people “ dediti somno
“ ciboque,” people given up to sloth and gluttony; and hereditary
genius is almost the only genius of the Germans, except the capacity
for taking pains. “ Modern history begins,” surely, with the art of
printing, when historical characters become tangible and human, instead
of being shadowy and mythical, like the mediaeval chronicles. Mr.
Bryce, however, is sometimes correct, except in his punctuation, and in
his outrages to the subjunctive mood.
The personal monarchy of Charles extended over France, Switzer-
land, and a large part of Germany. By his alliance with, or his
authority over, the Pope, he ruled in Italy ; and it was a great advantage
to Europe, that this large extent of it should be united under one
authority. In this sense, European history may be said to revive,
though modern history can hardly be said to begin, with Charlemagne.
Over the other countries, over Spain, Scandinavia, Britain, the
Emperor, or successor of Caesar, had shadowy claims, which were
always repudiated on the one side, and never enforced by the other.
The French are in the illogical position of claiming Charlemagne as
their own, and yet of repudiating the authority of his Empire.
Let us consider, for a moment, the proper meaning of the term
“ Emperor.” It is derived, of course, from the Latin “ Imperator,” a
military commander; and it was one of the titles assumed by Caesar,
the master of the Roman world, and therefore the “ Lord of the
World.” The Lord also of the Creator of the world, as the mediaeval
theologians were brave and logical enough to say ; because the mother
and step-father of God obeyed the decree of Augustus, that all the
world should be taxed ; and because Christ was legally condemned by
the officer of Tiberius. The Emperor, therefore, was the Lord
of the World, the only real sovereign, alone, supreme. All other
sovereignty was inferior, and derived from his. There could, in
consequence, be only one Imperial Authority, though it might be
visible and active in more than one person. Here, again mediaeval
theology and politics were dangerously analogous.
The universal sovereign ruled over an universal dominion, at least
in theory ; and his dominion was the Holy Roman Empire. It was
not a national, but an universal power. It was co extensive with the
Catholic Church, which again has never been Catholic, or universal,
except in theory; and was the Catholic Church considered from its
temporal and civil aspect. Hence the conventional attribute of
“ Holy ” ; which is equally conventional when applied to the Church,
as she is known to history.
The mediaeval Empire was called “ Roman” ; because the authority
of her chief was derived, or rather continued, from the authority of the
Roman Caesars ; and because all the mediaeval traditions of order,
of civility, of greatness, came from Rome.
90
A. H. R.


In the next paper, I hope to trace the varying fortunes of the
Empire: the quarrels between the Emperor and the Pope: the
degradation of the Imperial Office : the disintegration and weakness of
the Imperial authority ; until the system became neither Holy, nor
Roman, nor an Empire, and perished ignominiously under Napoleon.
ARTHUR GALTON.
Browning’s Treatment of Love.
Cgjnl HE selections from Browning’s poetry that were published in
CIK 1872, have this advantage over the pocket volume recently issued,
that they were arranged by the poet himself. In his preface he says ;
“ In the present selection from my poetry, there is an attempt to escape
from the embarrassment of appearing to pronounce upon what myself
may consider the best of it. I adopt another principle ; and by simply
stringing together certain pieces on the thread of an imaginary
personality, I present them in succession, rather as the natural
development of a particular experience than because I account them the
most noteworthy portion of my work.” One who takes up those two
volumes with the hope of getting to understand something of the poet’s
mind, at once notices that the first hundred pages or so are given up
almost entirely to the varied presentment of human love, and that the
love between the sexes. This love has always been the theme of poets :
we may even say that it is itself poetry. “No man ever forgot,” says
Emerson, “ the visitations of that power to his heart and brain, which
created all things new ; which was the dawn in him of music, poetry,
and art; which made the face of nature radiant with purple light, the
morning and the night varied enchantments.” And therefore this
theme—the love of man and woman—is in fact one touchstone of poetic
inspiration. Milton stands the test: none but a great poet could have
penned his exquisite descriptions of the love of Adam and Eve.
Tennyson stands the test; Coleridge, however (to take one modern
instance of a poet who misses greatness), in this particular is of baser
metal. For, while love has many aspects, and its physical side must
be regarded as well as its spiritual, yet that mind knows most of love
which finds a home in its spirituality and mystery. Coleridge was but
a stranger and a sojourner in this earthly paradise : he sings the songs
of his adopted country, but ever an obtruding note reveals his uneasy
consciousness of a lower nature.
In method Browning is above all things dramatic. His personages
speak for themselves, and the titles of the volumes which contain his
short poems, e.g., Dramatic Lyrics (1842), Dramatic Romances and
Lyrics (1845), Dramatis Personae (1864), show that this method was
91
A. H. E.


deliberately adopted. His poetry is no spontaneous carolling. He does
not sing as the skylark sings, and pour forth his full heart “in profuse
strains of unpremeditated art.” His lyrics are full of grace, but they
are hardly ever perfect art. Some ruggedness of diction ever and anon
breaks the spell, or else some quaintness of expression divorces the
thought from the music. And in those poems that are not lyrical, it
must be confessed that we are often diverted from the train of ideas by
grotesque, unmusical rhymes or by meanness of diction. But, as
Matthew Arnold has said, in our estimate of all poets except the few
supreme masters we must be content to strike a balance, “to forego
something here, to admit compensation for it there.”
To an inferior poet such difficulties as Browning presents would be
absolutely fatal.
The dramatic method makes the first personal pronoun pre-
dominant ; each experience is described at first hand (by one of the
principal actors). Thus the poet identifies himself in turn with the
most diverse personalities : now it is a happy wife (in Count Oismond),
tenderly recalling her husband’s knightly prowess, now (in My Last
Duchess), a soulless aristocrat who values a work of art for its rarity or
for the speed of its execution, and to whom the portrait of his sainted
wife suggests merely jealous memories of her simple nature that “ liked
whate’er she looked on.” They are all, as he said himself in his
preface to a collected edition in 1867, examples of “ poetry always
dramatic in principle, so many utterances of so many imaginary
persons.”
In speaking of the poet’s treatment of such an ample theme as
human love, we can only mention and illustrate two or three of his
leading characteristics. The very first of the selections, My Star,
strikes the keynote of spirituality. Love is the opening of one
individual soul to another “ mine has opened its soul to me : therefore
I love it." Insight is given only to the one : the mystery is sacred and
ineffable. This dominant theme of spirituality and mystery he
maintains through all his poetry, while yet the mellow undertones of
passion swell the rich harmony. Of all modern English poets, Tennyson
alone presents human love with like delicacy of thought and depth of
spiritual insight, but even he seems lacking in warmth and fulness
when compared with Robert Browning. For the latter was rich beyond
all other poets in his personal experience of the warm and tender
devotion of a woman intellectually almost his equal. We cannot read
Mrs. Browning’s Sonnets from the Portuguese side by side with her
husband’s One Word More, or By the Fireside, without recognising what
a perfect union theirs must have been. This it is that gives the ring of
sincerity to all Browning’s references to human love. We can trust both
his heart and his head.
He is the poet of dramatic situations. Even when, as in Sordello,
he tells a connected story, the movement of the poem is compressed into
small compass, and the persons concerned tell out their own thoughts-
92
A. H. E.


and feelings at great and often tedious length. Eor a complex dramatic
situation, affording the effects of contrast and irony, the Song from
Pippa Passes may be cited as a brilliant example. And accordingly he
rather presents the effects of love upon the individual soul than describes
what it is in itself. Browning’s ideal was a love that awakens one soul
to the unique charm of another, that absorbs its whole devotion, that
stirs the possessor to achieve the impossible for love’s sake ( Song from
P. P.), that proves its faith by avenging slighted honour ( Count
Gismond), that loves too well even to praise the object (Song— Nay hut
you, who do not love her), that links two souls till they “ mix as mists
do ” {By the Fireside). Love, in his view, is an end in itself, to be
sought for its own sake, for without it the soul loses what it lived for.
Doubt you if, in some such moment, as she fixed me, she felt clearly,
Ages past the soul existed, here an age ’tis resting merely,
And hence fleets again for ages ; while the true end, sole and single,
It stops here for is, this love-way, with some other soul to mingle ?
Else it loses what it lived for, and eternally must lose it.
Cristina.
It is an essential element in the experience of life which every soul
must go through to attain perfect development. And this bearing of
love upon spiritual development is one of Browning’s distinguishing
characteristics as a love poet. Even a love that is but a momentary
rushing of two souls together will open up a new world of thought and
feeling, and become a great interpreter of life’s mysteries. “ God’s
secret,” as Browning calls it in this same poem, is read under the flash
of this illuminating ecstasy.
Such am I: the secret’s mine now ! She has lost me, I have gained her ;
Her soul’s mine : and thus grown perfect I shall pass my life’s remainder.
Cristina.
But the love that is the “ true end, sole and single,” must be
spiritual and ennobling. It has its place in the perfecting of the
individual nature, and if it does not minister to this, it stands
condemned.
So grew my own small life complete
As nature obtained her best of me—•
One born to love you, sweet!
By the Fireside.
In Cristina the poet shows clearly that it is a terrible passion to trifle
with ; as he says in A Light Woman, “ ’Tis an awkward thing to play
with souls”; and condemnation is dealt out alike to the heartless coquette
and to the man who, in order to save his friend from the fascinations of
an unworthy woman, sets himself to win her love. And again, in
Mesmerism, where he vividly images the fascination of love, the subject
checks himself in the moment of supreme joy :
I admonish me while I may
Not to squander guilt,
Since require thou wilt,
At my hand its price one day !
And the price is, who can say ?
93
A. H. R.


Thus Browning limits the sphere of love by ethical boundaries—
by which is meant not the conventional limitations of Christian
civilization, though he was too sound a philosopher not to see the prime
wisdom of a settled code of ethical propriety. He does not hesitate to
shock the recognised proprieties, where he has a profound truth or a
strong conviction to enforce ; this we can see in The Statue and the
Bust, where his comment on the guilty lovers is thus concluded :
And the sin I impute to each frustrate ghost
Is the unlit lamp and the ungirt loin,
Though the end in sight was a vice, I say.
You of the virtue (we issue join)
How strive you ? £>e te, fabula !
Here perhaps the variance is rather apparent than real : the difference
lies chiefly in the relative estimate of the two delinquencies.
And in that poem called Which 1 (included in the pocket-volume)
he solves a problem in no conventional fashion :
The love which to one and one only has reference
Seems terribly like what, perhaps, gains God’s preference.
But the poet does not construct a special ethical system of his own. He
links on the passion of love to the larger issues of life, and brings it to
judgment according as it takes its proper place in God’s universe, or
claims for itself a spurious independence.
Love beats its wings against other bars than those of ethics.
Could it always find quick and perfect response, could it ever attain
complete and blissful satisfaction, could it remain unbroken for ever,
there would be no room for the “pain of finite hearts that yearn.”
But love is often unreturned ( Andrea del Sarto, The last ride together).
And even when there is a close union of hearts, such as Browning
knew and loved to picture {ln a Gondola, By the Fireside, Any Wife to
any Husband), love’s misgivings often voice themselves. However
close the union, yet each soul must stand apart in its own individu-
ality : each must bear its own burden of thought and feeling and
responsibility.
No. I yearn upward, touch you close,
Then stand away.
—Two in the
Campagna.
And in Any Wife to any Husband we hear the pathetic misgivings of
the dying woman lest her husband may be weaned from perfect loyalty
to her memory.
It is as the poet of wedded love that Browning speaks with
distinctive earnestness and sincerity. .
My own, see where the years conduct!
At first ’twas something our two souls
Should mix as mists do ; each is sucked
In each now ; on the new stream rolls
Whatever rocks obstruct.
By the Fireside.
94
A. H. E.


TREASURER’S ACCOUNT.
Receipts for Month ending June 26th.
From New Zealand (Southern Section)... ... £9
10
0
„ N. S. W 4
14
0
,, Victoria ... ... ... ... ... 4
6
0
,, Queensland... ... ... ... ... 1
12
0
Total ... £20
2
0
And the view of the past years of wedded happiness leads naturally to
the thought of the future, and evokes a clear expression of the poet’s
confidence of immortality.
Think when our one soul understands
The great Word which makes all things new,
When earth breaks up and heaven expands,
How will the change strike me and you
In the house not made with hands ?
Oh, I must feel your brain prompt mine,
Your heart anticipate my heart,
You must be just before, in fine,
See and make me see, for my part,
New depths of the divine !
—By the Fireside.
And the same confidence is elicited by the thought of reunion beyond
the grave in Prospice :
0 thou soul of my soul ! I shall clasp thee again,
And with God be the rest!
Not the least noble note from Browning’s lyre is that struck in the
Song from James Lee :
If you loved only what were worth your love,
Love were clear gain, and wholly well for you.
Make the low nature better by your throes !
Give earth yourself, go up for gain above 1
Here love is subordinated to the noblest of ethical ideals, and finds its
highest manifestation in self-renouncing devotion to another’s good.
It were a vain task to gather up the poet’s utterances upon this, or
indeed upon any subject, and endeavour to weave a consistent philosophy
to include them all. In the first place, the poet rarely speaks in his
own person, and may, therefore, have merely an artistic sympathy with
the thoughts he records. And in the second place, a poem is often the
outcome of a passing mood, a temporary inspiration, and in poems
produced at intervals stretching over more than a quarter of a century,
it would be a marvel of psychology to find perfect consistency.
P. ANSELL ROBIN.
95
A. H. R.


Leaders in Council.
IV.—HOW A GROUP WORKS.
By MISS HELEN E. DOWNS, Rockhampton, Q.
&/ISJ GROUP consists of federated Circles including all the members
JSpjt in a district. It is officered either by the Leaders of the various
Circles or by a Board (consisting of both ladies and gentlemen), elected
by ballot at a Group meeting, and a Secretary-Treasurer. The Board
meets, when necessary, at the summons of the Secretary-Treasurer. Its
functions are to suggest names of persons to be asked for papers, and
dates of Group meetings, to authorise the spending of money, to share
the responsibility of the Secretary’s doings, and to help generally by
advice and consultation. A Group has some advantages over a large
Circle, and the Group system has been found to work well in Rock-
hampton. As the object of the A.H.R.U. is to encourage profitable
reading, mainly at home, it seems wise to work, where possible, so as to
meet individual tastes, scientific as well as literary, historical as well as
artistic, and if the reading done at home is to be a real bond of union,
this can hardly be managed with one large Circle, but is easy enough
with a combination of small ones, each being made up of a few like-
minded students. Last year Rockhampton had six such Circles—for
Logic, English Literature, Hygiene, Botany, Greek and Roman
History,—a range wide enough to afford interest for all classes of
minds. The numbers in these Circles varied from 29 in the largest to
three in the smallest, and as an A.H.R.U. Circle may consist of two
(one to be centre and the other circumference?), the least of these was
above the necessary minimum. A Group meeting is called early in the
year. This “ gathering of the clans ” takes the form of a conversazione.
Music, songs, addresses, readings of selections or of original papers,
occasionally dramatic recitals, intersperse chat and business. The
modest refreshment of tea, coffee, and cakes, loosening the tongues and
removing stiffness, is handed round. During the evening names and
subscriptions are taken by the Secretary and friendly assistants, and
readers are asked what subject they are going to read. Circles are thus
formed in the room, and the place and date of first meeting agreed
upon. A friend is usually found, among those who have for some time
been members, to attend the first meeting of each Circle and put it in
the way of getting on ; if not, the Secretary goes, gives hints as to
procedure, and assists in the election of a Leader. The Leader
consults with his Circle, and decides the date of future meetings and
the portion to be read at home, and if possible, gives a short sketch of
the subject or portion in preparation for the next meeting. Most of the
Circles meet fortnightly, some monthly, and a Circle meeting is
generally given up in a week that a Group meeting is held. The place
of meeting is in most cases a room in the house of the Leader, or of
96
A. H. R.


each member in turn, and to avoid social and domestic difficulties, it is
not usual to offer refreshment except at Group meetings, so that
members may feel themselves on the neutral ground of a public body.
It would be still more free and open perhaps, if Circle meetings could
be held in some public place, as a Schoolroom, Literary Institute, or
School of Arts, but this, where it involves a rental, is too costly for our
very small subscription (which no one in these “ hard times” wishes to
see increased), so we are indebted to the kindness of the friends who
open their houses to us. Two of our Circles meet in schools, with the
kind welcome of their principals, and the Group meetings in the
assembly hall of the Girls’ Grammar School. Group meetings, after the
first in the year, are held at irregular intervals, when we have some
special attraction—as a friend to read a paper, a party of members to
do some theatricals. We get at these meetings as many pictures,
specimens, diagrams, curios, as we can, to talk about, and appoint a
member from each Circle to cicerone them, giving, of course, the
scientific Circle members scientific objects, the artistic, pictures, &c.,
<kc. Each Circle thus represents its own department, and is able to
link on its hobby to others. A good result from this is seen at the end
of a year’s work, when a member who has “ had enough ” of his
particular subject, instead of dropping off altogether, is attracted to
“ fresh fields and pastures new,” yet still remains attached to the Union.
Members who have more abundant leisure can join two or more Circles,
as the reading, being only set for each on the basis of half-an-hour a
day, is not very toilsome. All the Circles are well-attended, and most
of the members faithfully read the portions laid down for them by their
Leader. At one Circle a plan is adopted, with good results, in
awakening the powers of more diffident members. A list of suggested
subjects is given out at each meeting, volunteers to write on them are
invited. Those who have no objection to appearing in public, promise
a paper, and the subjects not chosen are left to chance. Then at each
meeting a bag is hung up in a particularly dark entrance-hall, and in it
modest endeavour, passing into the meeting-room, places its contribution
to the information of the evening. After the opening business, the
Leader dives into the bag, and reads aloud what is to be found there,
preserving silence as to the writer’s name. Friends too diffident to
make their debut in any other way, finding their efforts appreciated, are
encouraged to promise further contributions openly, others are taught
the true value of their productions by the way in which they are
received. In either case nobody is the worse. Should a paper of
inordinate length be received, the Leader would hold it over for a
suitable opportunity. Usually they have been short critiques on the
week’s reading, explanation of allusions and difficulties, and on one
occasion some sprightly verses descriptive of the previous meeting of
the Circle, in which the interest had become so vehement that every-
body had talked at once ! But that was in our youthful days, since then
we have sobered down, and usually decorously “ address our remarks
to the Chair.”
97
A. H. K.


V.—A NEW ZEALAND LITERATURE CIRCLE.
BY MRS. G. HOGBEN, Timaru.
SEjcJHE May number of the A.H.R. contains accounts of the way in which
uJ&C several Circles are conducted in Australia, and I thought it
might perhaps be interesting to some readers of the journal to hear
something of the working of a Circle in a small town in New Zealand.
We have 24 members, with an average attendance of about 16 at
the meetings, which take place twice a month, once in the evening at
the Leader’s house, and the other fortnight in the afternoon, at different
members’ houses in turn. Our evening meetings are principally devoted
to discussion; all our members are ladies, consequently we do not have
perhaps such lively discussions as we should if we had some members of
the sterner sex, but we generally have a very interesting conversation.
We began the year with Ruskin’s Unto this Last; as there were
very few copies to be procured, we read it aloud, having one or two
extra meetings for the purpose.
This was followed by Cymbeline which we also read aloud>
parts having been allotted to each member at a previous meeting. Then
we took Childe Harold.' We spent one evening in discussion and
examining views which we had obtained of the different places
mentioned, and an afternoon we devoted to reading aloud the greater
part of the last Canto.
We are now studying Browning with great interest. We had the
advantage of beginning our studies with the reading of a most able
essay on his life and works, which was lent us by a friend ; then we
have had Mrs. Sutherland Orr’s Life, a life in the Great Writers Series
by William Sharp, and a small life by Kingsland. These we have
passed round from one member to another; we have also Defries’
Primer, of which we have made good use. At one meeting one of the
members brought a magazine containing copies of all Browning’s
portraits taken during his lifetime, and this added great interest to our
studies.
At our last afternoon meeting each member read aloud her
favourite short poem. For our next meeting we are to study for
discussion Aht Vogler, The Flight of the Duchess, and In a Balcony.
Some of us who have never read Browning before, have become most
enthusiastic admirers of his works, and I think we shall all be sorry
when we have to turn our attention to another author.
We meet in the evening from eight till half-past nine; we talk in
an informal way, sometimes read some favourite passages, and before
we separate decide what we shall read before our next meeting. Our
afternoon meetings are of a rather more social character ; we read aloud
for an hour and a quarter, then afternoon tea appears, and we spend
another half-hour in conversation, principally about the subject of our
reading. After each meeting the Leader sends notices to those who
98
A. H. R.


were absent, stating what is to be taken for next time, so that no one
has an excuse for not reading at home.
We do not have any very deep study in connection with our
reading ; most of us lead very busy lives, and cannot devote very much
time to it, but we certainly read many books we should not know
anything about if it were not for the reading Circle, and we derive a
great deal of pleasure in a simple way, both from our reading, and from
the intellectual intercourse we have with one another.
A Devication.
Within my breast encaged, I held you long,
Wild, white, song birds ;
I heard you sing, and strove to write your song
In these poor words.
I heard you beat your wounded breasts, all night
Against the bars,
For you were of the things that loved the light,
The sky, the stars.
You were a part of me, and of the air,
The sun, the sea ;
Shy wild white things, whose songs, so full of care,
Were dear to me.
Now, where the seas eternal wastes expand,
I stand, and lo !
I take you one by one within my hand,
And let you go.
FRANCIS KENNA.
Brisbane, May 28th, 1894.
99
A. H. K.


Geography and Travel Course.
THE COMPUTATION OF TIME.
tN the present day, inheriting as we do the results of the labour
and works of philosophers of all ages, it is no easy task for us
fully to realize or appreciate the difficulties experienced in the beginning
of establishing any system of chronology and a means of measuring
time.
To us, with our accumulated knowledge, and fixed ideas of the
movements of the heavenly bodies, the rotation of the earth, and its
revolution in its orbit, it appears very easy to fix the length of the day
and the year. But in the dawn of civilization every step in the
advancement of knowledge was only attained by patient and even
painful efforts. We have thought that the perplexities the Aztecs
encountered in framing their calendar, and their wonderfully accurate
measurement of time, will be better understood and appreciated if we
give a short account of how some of the well-known nations of the old
world met their similar difficulties. We have, therefore, gathered
together a few facts about the Roman, Egyptian, and Chaldean
Calendars.
One of the hardest tasks was that of establishing units of time.
Naturally the first division of time was that of day and night, yet the
precise point at which the day should be held to begin and end, was by
no means so easily settled. We find that the day of the Babylonians,
Persians, Syrians, Greeks, and almost all nations of Asia began at
sunrise, lasting through the ensuing daylight and darkness. The
Turks, Jews, and others, began theirs at sunset; Ptolemy and the
Arabians, like the astronomers and navigators of the present day,
commenced the day at noon. Midnight was the beginning of the
ancient Egyptian day, and is still the case with most modern nations,
including the Chinese. The division of the day into morning, after-
noon, and evening was natural, and probably was marked by man, even
in his rudest state. It was*not till the fifth century after the
foundation of Rome, that the day was divided into hours. The twelve
hours of the Greek day were designated “ temporary hours,” from the
fact that they varied in length according to the season of the year, one
being equal to our hours, at the equinoxes.
The ancient Romans and Greeks had a very interesting method of
measuring time by means of dials, water and sand clocks, and similar
timekeepers. The water chronometer or clepsydra, in its simplest
form, consisted of a short-necked globe of known capacity, pierced at
the bottom with several small holes, through which the water placed in
the vessel flowed. The escape was measured by symbols corresponding
to the figures on the face of a modern clock. One excellent use to
which it was put, was to set a limit to the speeches in the Courts of
100
A. H. R.


Justice. It was also very generally used instead of a sun-dial. This
time-keeper had two great defects. First, that the flow of water varied
with the temperature and the pressure of air. Secondly, the rate of
flow became less as the vessel emptied itself. This latter fault was
remedied by keeping the level of the water in the clepsydra uniform,
the amount of the discharge being noted.
The subdivision of the month into weeks of seven days is very
ancient, the seven stars of the Great and Lesser Bear, the seven
principal stars of Orion, and the sun, moon, and five then known
planets, giving the reason for this number being chosen, and, merging
into religious views, seven became a sacred number. The week owes
its unalterable uniformity to its having no reference to celestial motions.
It did not enter into the Greek calendar at all, and was not introduced
at Rome until after the reign of Theodosius, 379-395 a.d., but we find
that in almost all Eastern countries it has been in use from time
immemorial. It was from the East that the Saxons borrowed the
week, naming the days after their own national deities. By the
ancients the days were named by the planet which presided over the
first hour of the day, such as Saturn’s Day, Sunday, Moon’s Day, &c.
This really has no reference to the physical planets, but was purely
astrological. The month, probably from being so distinctly marked by
the changes of the moon, has held its own in the calendar of all nations.
Until comparatively recent times, there was no decided rule for the
commencement of the year, that of the Athenians beginning in June,
the Macedonians and the Jews in September, the Romans in March,
and afterwards in January, the Persians August 11th, Mexicans Feb-
ruary 23rd, Mohammedans July, and astronomers at the vernal
equinox. Among the early Christians, Christmas, the Day of the
Circumcision, the Day of Conception, and the Ist of January and
Easter Day have all at various times been used as the first day of the
year. Until the time of Pope Gregory XIII., Christmas Day was the
ecclesiastical New Year. In 1582, when the Calendar was reformed,
January Ist was finally decided upon as the beginning of the Civil
Year.
The Roman Calendar. —The civil calendar of European countries
has been borrowed from that of the Romans. Romulus is said to have
divided the year into ten months, comprising in all three hundred and
four days; how the remaining days were disposed of is uncertain.
During the reign of Numa Pompilius two months were added to the
year, January at the beginning, February at the end, and this arrange-
ment continued till the year 452 8.C., when the Decemvirs changed the
order of things by placing February after January. The months now
consisted of twenty-nine and thirty days alternately, to correspond with
the revolutions of the moon, so that the year contained three hundred
and fifty-four days, but one day was added to make the number uneven,
which was considered more lucky. This differed from the solar year by
101
A. H. R.


ten whole days and a fraction; so to right matters, Numa ordered that
everyjsecond year an additional month of twenty-two and twenty-three
days alternately should be inserted between the 23rd and 24th of
February. This month was called Mercedonius from “ Merces,” wages,
from the fact that the wages of workmen and domestics were paid at
this season of the year. This again led to confusion, as the mean length
of the year was now a day and a quarter too long, therefore they were
obliged to drop this month every twenty-four years, thus keeping the
mean year nearly correct. The calendar was placed in the hands of the
Pontiffs, who abused their trust by intercalating more or less days to
serve their political purposes, sometimes hastening the general elections,
or prolonging the term of magistracy, as suited them best.
Thus the calendar was thrown into utter confusion, so little care
being taken to regulate the year, that, at the time of Osesar, the civil
equinox differed from the astronomical by three months, carrying the
Winter months back into Autumn, the Autumn into Summer, and so
on. To remedy this, Osesar regulated the year entirely by the sun,
fixing its length at three hundred and sixty-five days and a quarter, and
he decreed that every fourth year should have three hundred and sixty-
six days. It seems hard that in spite of all his trouble, his meaning
should have been misinterpreted after his death. The mistake arose
through the priests counting the leap year just elapsed as number one of
the fourth, thus adding a day every third instead of every fourth year.
This error was, however, rectified thirty-six years later by Augustus.
The names of the months Quintilis and Sextilis, were changed to July
and August in honour of Julius Osesar and Augustus, during the lifetime
of the latter. Even this compliment did not satisfy the vanity of
Augustus, as his month only contained thirty days, so in order to make
it the same length as July, he robbed February of a day. In order to
compensate February for this loss it was decided that in leap year the
extra day should be given to this month, and was, therefore, inserted
between the 24th and 25th of February.
Although the Julian method of intercalation was a very convenient
one, still, as it made the year eleven minutes fourteen seconds too long,
it was not very correct, as in the year 325 the equinox fell on the 21st
instead of on the original date, March 25th, and at the time of the
reform (1582) had retrogaded to March 11th. In order to restore the
equinox to its right place Gregory XIII. directed ten days to be
suppressed in the calendar. The Gregorian rule of intercalation is, as
we all know, that every fourth year a day should be added, excepting
in the centennial years not divisible by 400. This calendar was
adopted by all Roman Catholic countries, by order of Pope Gregory.
Their example was gradually followed by all Protestant nations,
England being almost the last. Russia is the only country still
adhering to the old style, which now differs from the new by twelve
days.
102
A. H. K.


Egyptian Calendar. —Among the ancients the sun was not
necessarily taken as the measurer of time, as is the case with us. It is
true that with the Egyptians we find that the moon as a time measurer
held quite a subordinate position to the sun, but, with the Chaldeans
matters were reversed for two reasons, one being that the moon was the
chief object of worship, and the other, that when so much desert
travelling had to be undertaken by night the movements of the moon were
naturally watched with great care. In Chaldea, therefore, the month
was used as the unit of time, whilst the Egyptians, taking the sun as
the basis of measurement, adopted the solar year as their unit of reckoning.
Hence when periods of time were in question, it was quite easy for one
nation to conceive that any period mentioned by another nation should
mean years, when in reality months were meant and vice versa.
This probably explains the age of Methusalah and others, whose
years are possibly not solar but lunar years, corresponding to our lunar
months. This is all the more likely as when their ages are divided by
twelve their years are much the same as those of the present day.
There are difficulties in accepting this explanation, as it does not fit in
with some of the recorded events of their lives, but these discrepancies
are explainable by assuming that the ancient chronicler has indifferently
used both the solar and the lunar year. There is little doubt that
Egypt was the first country where the sun was accepted as the most
accurate measurer of time. After determining the motion of the sun as
seen from the earth, they divided the year in so scientific and practical
a way, that their method was adopted by Julius Csesar and introduced
into the Roman Empire.
This earliest of all years known to history began at the summer
solstice. When the ancient Egyptians first settled in the valley of the
Nile, their New Year began at the overflowing of that river, which
occurred about the time of the summer solstice, but, the latter being
more dependable, they ultimately regulated their year by that alone.
The solstice fell originally on the Ist of Thoth (which corresponds with
the end of June Gregorian), but as the length of the solar year was
365-242392, or roughly speaking three hundred and sixty-five days
and a quarter, instead of three hundred and sixty-five, as they reckoned,
about every fourth year the solstice came a day later, taking, therefore,
a cycle of 1506 years before recurring on the Ist of Thoth. The
variations between the fixed and these so-called vague years, were
known for many centuries to the priests alone, and so great was the
power this knowledge gave them, that every king on his accession to the
throne was made to swear that he would not alter this year of three
hundred and sixty-five days, since termed the vague year. The value
of this knowledge possessed by the priests will be easily understood,
as they alone knew what part of the cycle they had reached, and from
this they were enabled to calculate the day and the month in which the
Nile would overflow. In order to gain this knowledge they had
merely to go once a year into the Holy of Holies (as the priests after-
103
A. H. R.


wards did at Jerusalem) and watch the little stream of sunlight shining
into the sanctuary, calculating by this means the relation of the
true solar solstice to their year. Many of the ancient temples were so
built that on the longest day of the year the sun’s rays shone on the
High Altar.
Some authorities assert, that before the settlement of the
Egyptians in the Nile Valley, their year consisted of twelve lunar
months of thirty-two days, giving a year of three hundred and sixty
days, or five and a quarter too short. This must have been decidedly
confusing, as, in a cycle of about seventy years, New Year’s
Day swept through all the months. Amongst some religious
usages we find curious coincidences tending to confirm a belief
in the existence of this ancient Egyptian year. We shall merely
state two examples : at the temple of Osiris at Philoe we find there
were three hundred and sixty bowls for sacrifice, filled daily with
milk by the priests, and at Acanthus one of the three hundred and
sixty priests daily poured water into a perforated cask. As previously
mentioned, after their settlement in the Nile Valley, they attempted
to make the beginning of their year coincide with the overflow of
that river, and the summer solstice. The result was a confusion
baffling all description, as local intercalation of days and even months
was effected, now in one place, now in another, according to the over-
flow of the Nile in different parts. This year had eventually to give
way to one of three hundred and sixty-five days, a month of five days
being added.
It is very interesting to find that the desire to worship and offer
the morning sacrifice at the instant of sunrise was the germ of our
present knowledge of the stars. In order to determine exactly when
the sun would rise each morning, it was necessary for the priests to
watch for the rising of a star, between the first glimmering of which and
the sunrise, they knew by experience that they would have time ta
prepare for the sacrifice. The warning star watched by the ancient
Egyptians at Thebes 3000 years b.c. was Sirius.
The Aztec Calendar. —Like the Egyptians, the Aztecs adjusted
the Civil year by the Solar. It was divided into eighteen months of
twenty days each, five complementary days being added to make the
number three hundred and sixty-five. These five days belonged to no
particular month, and were considered very unlucky. The month
consisted of four weeks of five days, this arrangement being more
convenient than that adopted by many nations of the old world, as it
has the advantage of giving an equal number of days to each month,
and of comprehending entire weeks without a fraction both in the
month and in the year. As the true year has six hours more than
three hundred and sixty-five days, there still remained an excess, this
error was corrected by an intercalation of twelve and a half days
every fifty-two years. This method of reckoning is more convenient
104
A. H. K


than that presented by any European calendar of that time, as the error
only amounted to a day in five hundred years.
The Aztec era began in 1091, when they reformed their calendar by
dividing it into bundles or cycles of fifty-two years. The Mexicans like
the Hindoos imagined the world to have been already destroyed several
times, and firmly believed that the next destruction would occur at the
completion of one of these cycles. Every fifty-second year was, there-
fore, a period of grave anxiety. At sunset on the last day of the cycle
the priest set out in procession for the hill of Huixcatilla, there to
watch the approach of the Pleiades to the zenith, which they took as a
sign of the commencement of the new cycle. It seems to have been a
time of mourning and preparation ; and we read that their houses were
swept and garnished, and the fires throughout the land were extinguished.
The rekindling of the sacred fires on the teocallis was a sign that the danger
was past, and that for fifty-two years at least the world was safe. The
solar year, for reasons best known to themselves, did not satisfy the
priests ; they constructed, therefore, a lunar reckoning for their own use.
This is somewhat misleading, as their calculations were not really based on
the movements of the moon. Twenty months of thirteen days completed
this lunar or astrological year of two hundred and sixty days, at the
end of which time their reckoning began again.
Most of our knowledge of the Aztec mode of reckoning has been
gained from a stone, which was discovered in 1790 at Mexico, with
the calendar engraved upon it.
MAUD TODD.
LORNA TODD.
Adelaide.
Sonnet.
THE SPHINX.
Alone upon the desert bleak and bare,
Still gazing with thy melancholy eyes,
While ages sweep and Empires sink and rise,
Thy solemn Image stands, whose features wear
The same fixed look thy sculptor carved there;
No shadow falls but what thy form supplies—
Unchangeable as thy familiar skies
And thine eternal kingdom of despair.
Like visions by thine Image come and go
A host of curious pilgrims from each land,
To disappear as ages swiftly flow;
And then the vast and scorching sheets of sand,
With solitude, and thy still-steadfast face
Break on our dreams of some forgotten race.
ARTHUR A. D. BAYLDON.
Brisbane.
105
A. H. R.


Notes and News.
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
There is little news to report this month beyond the fact that
all the Circles are hard at work. Prolific Ashfield has added a German
Circle to the Directory, Miss Stockfeld, leader; Lessing’s “ Minna
von Barnhelm ”is the first book chosen. The North Sydney General
Literature Circle have discussed Oowper’s Task and Shakespeare’s
Twelfth Night at their last two meetings ; interesting papers on both
being contributed. Alton Locke is the subject for their next meeting.
The Hon. Secretaries will be glad to receive reports of the work
done by the Circles from time to time.
A. STUDDY.
J. S. SCOTT.
VICTORIAN SECTION.
The members’ roll is steadily increasing, for during the past
month two new Circles have been formed, both for the study of English
Literature, and the existing Circles have most of them been augmented.
Ballarat adds yet another to its already large number of Circles*
The Rev. W. S. Macqueen has undertaken the leadership, and his
Circle is the fifth in that city formed for the study of English
Literature.
Dr. Gil ray, of Canterbury, is the leader of the Circle in that suburb.
Next month there is a prospect of one new Circle at least. A few
energetic people met and resolved to form a Circle for the systematic
study of English History, and, judging from the zeal shown and the
promise of papers for the first meeting of the Circle, good work should
result.
Mrs. Parsons, of Geelong, writes : —We are doing Green’s
“ Modern England,” “ American War of Independence,” Seeley's
“ Colonial Expansion,” and Morley’s “Walpole.” At the meetings I
have tried to get each member to undertake certain work and to write a
five minutes’ paper on that subject, hoping that by this means we should
get more real good out of our study. At the last meeting Miss S. Dixon
read a paper on the “Literature of the Period,” Miss Goodman on the
“ Ecclesiastical History of the time,” Miss Parsons on “ Pastimes and
Sports,” Mrs. Parsons on “ Trade and Commerce,” Mr. W. Moore on the
“ Constitutional History,” and Mr. Shannon on “ The Massacre of
Glencoe.”
Miss Robertson, of Castlemaine, also writes:—We have now a
roll of 24 members, and our Circles are well-attended. The Physiology
Circle meets every fortnight and has an attendance of 15 to 20 on an
106
A. H. R.


average. Dr. Hill, our leader, is most enthusiastic in the cause. In
our Literature Circle we have had several papers read by members, the
two last being on “ Viola ” and “ King Richard II.”
There seems to be a good field for the A.H.R.U. among the old
pupils of the different schools and colleges. Will no other follow the
example of the old pupils of the Presbyterian Ladies’ College or of
Tintern ?
L. M. FOX.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SECTION.
The death of the Rev. W. Roby Fletcher, M.A , has removed one
of the greatest friends and supporters of the A.H.R.U. As the first
President of the South Australian Section he took a warm interest in
the movement and rendered it very valuable service. The following
estimate of Mr. Fletcher is taken from the &'.A. Advertiser :—“ln Mr.
Fletcher, as a Christian minister, intense earnestness was combined with
large and liberal culture. But he was more than an intellectual,
powerful, and popular preacher. He supplemented his usefulness as a
pulpit-preacher by throwing himself heart and soul into movements
concerned with the moral and religious training of the young and the
educational progress of the people. His valuable support of such
organisations as the Young Men’s Christian Association will not
speedily be forgotten. His labors in connection with the University of
Adelaide date almost from the foundation of that school of
learning. He was profoundly interested in its gradual expansion, and
for five years held all but the highest position in its gift. In Mr.
Fletcher, South Australia loses one of the ablest and most useful of its
ministers—an eloquent preacher, a ripe scholar and a practical worker
who never wearied in well-doing.”
NEW ZEALAND SECTION.
The Circles in the Northern Section are working earnestly. The
Masterton Circle holds meetings regularly in the Wesleyan schoolroom.
The Newtown Circle has read “ The Princess ” and “ Ivanhoe,” and is
now engaged on “Julius Caesar.” The Rev. Mr. Shirer read an
excellent paper on the “ Princess,” Mr. Gifford gave an excellent lecture
on “ Ivanhoe,” and at the next meeting Miss Cray read a most
interesting paper on “Rebecca and Rowena, a contrast.” “Julius
Caesar ” was introduced by Mr. McDermid, who read a paper in which he
endeavoured to uphold the character of Brutus.
The Wellington Circle has met regularly. Papers have been read
by Mr. Clifford (“ Ivanhoe ”), Mr. James (“ Milton ”), and Mr. Fleming
(“ The Princess A delightful evening was spent with “ Tennyson” at
the last meeting. Recitations and songs were contributed by members
107
A. H. R.


and friends. At the next meeting Mr. Tregear is to read a paper on
“ Carlyle.”
The Auckland Circle now numbers 27. The Rev. Mr. Beattie
gave two addresses on “ Carlyle, Past and Present,” which the Circle
have been reading. The Rev. Mr. Bates, Devonport, Auckland, is
trying to form a Circle in his parish.
A Circle has been formed at Wairoa under the leadership of Mr.
S. A. Browne. There are fourteen members, but no word has as yet
been received as to whether the magazine is to be sent to this Circle
or not.
The individual members now number 25. I enclose revised
list.
Wellington.
T. R. FLEMING.
I beg to report that since the formation of a Southern Section in
New Zealand I have tried to further the interests of the A. H.R.U. by
starting Circles in fresh places. In one or two cases these efforts are
likely to be successful ; but in the smaller districts the chief difficulties
are always want of books of reference and suitable persons to act as
leaders. Besides, several replies stated that, where there were already
Mutual Improvement Societies, there would not be room for reading
Circles.
Most of the old Circles are again at work this year, the following
are the reports of those as yet sent in :—Dr. Thomas’s Biology Circle
resumed work early in the year, commencing with “ Life and Her
Children." They decided, in addition to the usual monthly meeting in
the evening, to meet once a fortnight in the morning (Saturday) for
practical work. This course has also been adopted by Dr. Hunter,
who has formed a Biology Circle in Ashburton. There, too, under the
leadership of Mrs. Mayne, an English Literature Circle has been at
work for the last two or three months, meeting every fortnight, and
have read Tennyson’s “Princess” and Carlyle’s “Past and Present.”
In Timaru it has been found necessary to start a third Circle for
English Literature—leaders have found from experience that when a
Circle gets beyond twenty members discussions are not so general.
They have been very fortunate in obtaining for their leader the Rev.
C. E. Beecroft, who at their Srst meeting in May gave a very interesting
account of “ Guy Mannering,” which was followed by a good discussion.
For their next meeting they read the “ Princess.” Mrs. Inglis writes
that the Wai-iti Road Circle have met every Monday for the last three
months. “ Unto this Last ” was read aloud and warmly discussed.
“Guy Mannering,” “ Alton Locke,’’and Oowper’s “ Task ” have been
read at home for discussion, and in connection with the last a paper was
read on the poet’s life. Two good papers were given whilst reading
“ Antony and Cleopatra,” one on Egypt in the time of Cleopatra, the
other on Rome during the time of Antony. For the next meeting a
108
A. H. E.


paper is being prepared on Scandinavian Mythology to read with the
first lecture of “ Heroes and Hero Worship.” In Geraldine, under the
leadership of the Rev. B. Todd, an English Literature Circle has just
been started with nine members, beginning with “ Antony and
Cleopatra.”
From Christchurch Mrs. Kinsey writes:—We started the third
session of our Circle on May Ist. It was decided to repeat the
Elementary course. We have read and discussed Geikie’s “ Geology,”
illustrated with excellent specimens of sedimentary, organically derived
and igneous rocks. We have also done a great deal of work with the
microscope. The greatest interest has been taken by each member.
The Political Economy Circle, Timaru, began work, after an earlier
meeting, on the 16th April. Eleven members have joined, all eager
for work, and the leader is Mr. George Hogben, M.A. Jevons’
“ Primer ” has been taken to determine the order in which the several
parts of the subject shall be read, and the other books, especially
Marshall’s “ Economics of Industry,” are to be used for a somewhat
fuller treatment. The Circle consists entirely of men, who are of all
shades of opinion. It has been resolved that most attention shall be
given to those portions of the subject that have a direct bearing on
current, social and political questions; and a definite topic, connected
with the work of the evening and announced before-hand, is selected for
discussion during a part of each meeting.
Timaru.
E. M. FUSSELL.
Announcements.
Suggestions are invited from members of the Union with the
object of adopting a distinctive badge or token for the A.H.E.U., to
be worn by members wherever it seems desirable to announce the fact of
membership. Any suggestions may be sent to the Editor, who will
submit them to the Executive Committee.
The Editor would be glad to hear of any members who are willing
to lend original papers to distant Circles. The list of subjects will be
published, and Circles desirous of borrowing will be put in private
communication with the writers.
To make a happy fireside clime
To weans and wife,
That’s the true pathos and sublime
Of human life.
Burns, To Dr. Blackloch,
109
A. H. R.


Reading for July.
English Literature Courses:
Modern Poetry ... ... Scott, Lay of the Last Minstrel. Recom-
mended : Carlyle’s Essay on Scott (Cassell,
6d.)
Shakespeare Course ... As You Like It.
Recent Writers: A ... Newman, Oallista.
do. B ... Arnold, Culture and Anarchy,
do. C ... Helps, Social Pressure.
Addit. General Course ... Scott, Guy Mannering.
Young People’s Course... Lady Brassey, Voyage in the Sunbeam.
Education :
A Elementary Course ... Quick, Educational Reformers, cc. 7,8, 12,
13 ; Baldwin, Elementary Psychology
and Education, pt. 1. Recommended:
Sully, Teacher’s Handbook, Chaps. 1-5.
B Advanced Course ... Painter, History of Education (concluded).
Recommended : Sully, Teacher’s Hand-
book, cc. 9-11. Great Educators Series :
Eroebel.
Geography and Travel ... Prescott, Conquest of Mexico (half).
Hist, of England,l399-1603 Green, Short History, chap. 6, section 5, to
chap. 7, section 2 (inch). Recommended :
Creighton, Wolaey; Seebohm, Protestant
Revolution.
Political Economy ... Marshall, Economics of Industry, Book I.
Notice to Contributors.
All news of Circles should be communicated to the secretary of the
Section, and all articles or poems intended for publication should be
sent to the sub-editor. If no sub-editor is appointed, the latter may be
sent direct to the Editor.
Every article must be legibly written (type-written by preference)
and not longer than six pages of foolscap.
Articles intended for publication should reach the Editor not later
than the 20th of the month.
The Editor cannot undertake to return manuscript in any case.
110
A. H. E.


Vol. 111., No. 5.
August, 1894.
THE A. H. R.
Commentaries on “In Memoriam”
“ O&N MEMORIAM ” is a poem which has been before the world for
44 years. It has delighted a generation and a half of readers.
Mourners especially have in its verses found consolation, and those who
have tried to solve religious problems as presented to thoughtful minds
some half a century ago, have followed with care the line of thought
which Tennyson has indicated. There are many parts of the poem that
yield their meaning at once to the reader, but the general tendency and
drift of the poem can hardly be clear upon a first perusal. Individual
beauties reveal themselves first, gems of thought and of expression :
later it becomes evident that the parts of the poem bear definite
relations to each other, that its moods are graduated, and that the
structure of the whole is artistic. In Memoriam read, as some people
think the Bible should be read, “ without note or comment,” will give
pleasure to a thoughtful mind that is appreciative of poetry. But a
great poem thus read without the natural assistance of other minds can
hardly be expected to furnish the ordinary reader with the full enjoy-
ment that the poem is capable of giving. Occasionally even a reverent
commentary jars on the feelings, especially where poetry is paraphrased
and done into prose: but the question arises whether it is better to
retain indistinct or even wrong impressions of the meaning of poetry
than to receive an explanation of the meaning conveyed in comparatively
poor prose. Explanation of poetry has been compared to an attempt to
convey the scent of the rose or the violet by an analysis of the parts of
the flower. Of course it must be confessed that there is much in poetry
which evaporates in paraphrase and explanation, but at the same time
explanation has its rightful purpose. Poetry should give us beautiful
thoughts in beautiful dress. The beauty of the thought, though greatly
helped by it, does not of necessity depend upon the dress, and if the
thought is not obvious, it can be unfolded and links in it supplied by a
commentator. I have known an able man contend that there are
magnificent passages in Shakespeare, the meaning of which cannot be
explained, so much does their excellence depend upon their sound and
language : but I have always thought that was dangerous doctrine, for
poetry ought always to have a meaning which should be capable of


expression in other words. The difficulty of translation may be great,
and complete translation is impossible, for charm consists in the
combination of the dress with the thought, and in the process of its
transference the charm is dropped altogether.
As distinct from readers, there have been many students of In
Memoriam : many have even written a running commentary, who have
never sent nor dreamt of sending it to the printer. Many years ago that
early leader of the Broad Church, Frederick Robertson, of Brighton, an
early and an ardent lover of Tennyson’s poetry, wrote a line or two o’f
abstract at the head of each poem of In Memoriam , and after Mr. Robertson s
death these were published in a tiny little book. But hundreds must
have done what Mr. Robertson did. There has been lately published
an interesting volume of addresses on various subjects by the Rev. T.
Campbell Finlayson, of Manchester. To it is prefixed a short memoir
by Professor Wilkins, of Owen’s College, in which will be found the
statement that Mr. Finlayson had prepared, but never published a
commentary on In Memoriam. Many of us must have friends who to
our knowledge have annotated their copies, but have never thought of
printing their lucubrations. In the books written upon Tennyson’s
poetry as a whole, studies of In Memoriam will of course be found ; two
chapters for instance in Mr. Stopford Brooke’s recent admirable
volume. Mr. Tainsh, who watches over the poet’s orthodoxy, especially
in matters of dealing with the spirit world, has some useful and some
halting notes on In Memoriam.
It is advisable here to call especial attention to two books
exclusively devoted to In Memoriam. One is called Tennyson’s
'ln Memoriam’ Its Purpose and Its Structure—a Study, by John
F. Genung, published by Macmillan & Co., and a Study of 'ln Memoriam'
by Joseph Jacobs. The latter is a part of a pretty little volume
published by David Nutt, of which the first part is an expansion
of an article contributed to the Academy just after the death of the
poet. Booksellers must be asked for Tennyson and 'ln Memoriam ’ —
an Appreciation and a Study. I have the greater pleasure in mentioning
this little book in the A.H.R., because criticsand reviewers have permitted
it, apparently because of its size, to escape their notice, so that it is not
widely known, but chiefly because Mr. Jacobs is a Sydney man.
Educated at the Sydney Grammar School, he went home to Cambridge,
and is now doing excellent literary work in London, especially in the
matter of folk-lore and fairy tales. For several consecutive winters he
has delighted children with a volume of fairy tales, not only excellently
told, but carrying also interesting notes on the folk-lore for the children
of older growth. Mr. Jacobs writes for the Athenaeum, chiefly
“ Necrologes,” as he is pleased to call them, from which paper various
articles by him have been gathered into a charming little book called,
George Eliot, Matthew Arnold, Browning and Newman. The Study of
‘ In Memoriam ’ can be commended to the student, but I doubt if it
will be found half as useful to the ordinary reader as Mr. Genung’s
study. The two books are wholly different in their treatment. Whilst
112
A. H. R.


Mr. Genung follows the poem and indicates the development of its
structure, Mr. Jacobs’ method is analytical. The order of the thought
he only indicates by what he calls a Chart or Map : but he groups his
comment under various heads, e.g., rhyme, alliteration, various readings,
metaphors, passage about Arthur Hallam’s life, and the like. It could
almost be inferred from the Study itself that Mr. Jacobs wrote it some
time ago, and on the poet’s death brought his manuscript out of a
drawer, and ran it through the press : in his preface he tells his readers
that this was the case. There are some careless misprints, perhaps due
to a change in sympathy. On page 28, “M. Arnold in Spanish Gypsy.”
One who wrote both on George Eliot and on Matthew Arnold might
find the name of the poem of one slip from the pen by mistake for the
poem of the other, but what was Mr. Nutt’s reader doing? There are
other misprints—on page 27, pretiose, for pretioso ; on page 48, chtasmie,
for chiasmic, and the way of quoting the verses at the foot of that
page; on page 68, autonomasia for antonomasia. There is a very careless
misprint on page 76—“ at the lips,” as if apparently it was a sort of
kiss ! Surely “ interweaved,” on page 86, is an unsatisfactory substitute
for the correct past participle, “ interwoven.” The quotation from the
Morte d’Arthur on page 96 is appallingly inaccurate. On page 100
“ John Sterling ? the J. 5.,” <fec. It is surely quite certain that
Tennyson’s J. S. was James Spedding, to whom much more than to
Oarlyle’s friend the lines are applicable.
Gently comes the world to those
That are cast in gentle mould.
With respect to the opening lines about
him who sings
To one clear harp in divers tones,
if Tennyson said he meant Goethe, but had forgotten the passage, his
readers must perforce accept the statement, but for a student of Faust
may it is a little difficult to follow Mr. Jacobs when he writes—“ If so, we
perhaps trace an allusion to the Witches’ Sabbath in Faust.” It would
be very interesting to see the connection traced. Is the climb up the
Blocksberg typical of the Ascent to higher things ? In this connection it
is interesting to notice that Mr. Jacobs anticipates Professor Drummond
in using the phrase which the latter has converted into an expressive
and attractive title —The Ascent of Man. Much of what Mr. J acobs has
written is admirable. To the student who has plenty of time to work
at In Memoriam his book is most useful. If to the busy man the lists
are not exactly reading matter, Mr. Jacobs has at least clearly shown
how the methods of scientific analysis can be applied to literature.
Mr. Genung’s careful and thoughtful book can be recommended to
any and every student of In Memoriam. It is a book which a reader
can keep open side by side with the poem, and experto crede he will find
it very useful in following out the consecution of the poet’s thought.
Mr. Genung, let it be here said in passing, is most readable. So
strictly does he adhere to the analysis of the structure, that he does not
offer any notes or explanations of difficult passages. He does not
113
A. H. E.


comment on the unknown poet of I, nor furnish Hallam’s address (67
Wimpole St.), as a comment on the “ long unlovely street of 7,” nor even
assign the date (September 15th) to 72, about the anniversary of
Hallam’s death. He does not give various readings, e.g., the loss of the
sonorous “ sacramental ” in 37, though as illustrating the thought, he is
very full of explanation of the reasons that persuaded the poet to add
39 to the edition of 1872, and 59 to that of 1851. He does not remove
the scientific obscurity of 4, stanza 3, nor of 24, nor of 43, stanza 2. It
is not his to draw attention to the effect of the monosyllables in 57,
stanza 3, that produce the effect of tolling the bell, nor of the epithets
‘ wintry ’ and ‘ fruitless ’ in 56, stanza 3, nor to furnish such a parallel
as Horace, Od. m., xxix., 12, fumum et opes strepitumque Eomae, to
“ the dust, and din, and steam of town ” of 89. At the end of 89
the “ crimson-circled star ” is the evening star sinking into the sea,
which is “ her father’s grave.” “ The sea-blue bird of March ”of9l is
the halcyon or king-fisher. Parallels to the thought of 96 are not hard to
find. 107, Hallam’s birthday was February 1. The explanation of the
last stanza of 117 is to be found in the hour-glass, the sun-dial, the
clock and the apparent path of the sun. The “ ampler day ”of 118
suggests comparison with the Dedication of the Idylls. There are
many other passages to which similar brief notes might be attached, but
it should always be remembered that the whole is greater than the parts.
This wholesome doctrine Mr. Genung bears steadily in mind, and it
makes his analysis of the poet’s thought very valuable.
In the Journal of the Union for June {A.H.R., p. 72) my friend,
Mr. George Washington Power, has set out the general scheme of the
poem as given by Mr. Genung. It is, however, merely the general
framework that is there given, and as the only object of this brief
article is to help the reader in following the thoughts of the poem, I
venture to reprint Mr. Genung’s analysis, with a few slight variations,
in greater detail.
Prologue, 1-27.
Prospect, 1-6.
Ascent to higher things (from depression to resolution).
Despair (2). Questioning (3). Resolution (4). Poetry the inter-
preter (5). Loss irreparable (6).
Defining Point. Beginning (7). Desolation of sudden shock.
Unquiet Present, 8-16.
a. Heart with coming ship.
b. Heart in calm.
c. Heart in storm.
Arrival and Burial of the Body, 17-22.
Hallowed Past, 21-25.
Its influence on the Survivor, 26, 27.
First Cycle. Op the Past, 28-77.
Christmas, 28-30.
Eternal things and the Apprehension of them, 31-36.
Spring, 38,39.
114
A. H. R.


Questionings. A. Life beyond the Grave.
a. Progress in Another World, 40-43.
h. Memory in Another World, 44-46.
c. Separate Existence, 47.
Answers, not logical, but poetical, 48.
B. Life on Earth, 49-59.
a. As seen from the other world, 50, 51.
b. Pursuit of high ideal, 52.
c. Wild oats, 53.
d. Ultimate restitution, 54-56.
Transition, 57-59.
G. Relation of the two lives. Does the friend in the
other world forget the friend on earth, 60-65.
The Calmer Mood, 66-67. Four Dream Poems, 68-71.
First Anniversary of Death, 72. Thoughts of Arthur’s fame, 73-76.
The Poet’s justification.
Second Cycle. Of the Present, 78-103,
Christmas, 78.
The Divided Nature and Its Complement, 79-82,
New Year, 83.
The Bereaved finds peace with all, 84-89.
A new friend, 84-86,
Old associations, 87-89.
Communion with the Dead, 90-95.
The ministry of doubt, 96.
Nature of love’s communion, 97, 98.
Second Anniversary of Death, 99.
Farewell to old scenes, 100-102.
A Dream, 103.
Third or Closing Cycle. Op the Future, 104-119.
Christmas, 104, 105.
New Year, 106.
Birthday of Arthur Hallam, 107.
His Character, suggesting the future type, 108-114.
Spring, 115, 116.
The Days to Come, 117, 118.
Defining Point. End, 119. No longer in despair, but in hope.
Epilogue. Retrospect and Conclusion, 120-131.
1. The fight of faith proves dignity of man, 120.
2. Survey of the Three Cycles, 121-123.
3. How the Divine Power was found, 124.
4. Ministry of Poetry, 125.
5. Love, the ruler of the Past, Present and Future, 126-128.
Concluding invocation of Love, 129-131.
Epithalamium.
July 25th, 1894.
EDWARD E. MORRIS.
115
A. H. R.


Dying Hildebrand.
“ Dilexi justitiam, et odivi iniquitatem ; propterea morior in exilio.”
Last words of Gregory VII.
*HAYE loved right, and hated wrong ;
Therefore I die a banished man.
The wicked triumph ; yet I can
Look back, look forward, and be strong:
Yea, strong to die ; for death, in sooth,
Is something to be strong against;
Though many a soul I’ve armed and fenced
To brave its terrors, yet the truth,
And close approach, and felt embrace,
Of that which all must feel at length—
The inmost citadel of strength
A-tremble, battlement and base—
The chill that creeps from foot to thigh,
And, slowly winding throngh the maze
Of tortuous life, by secret ways
Usurps the heart and seals the eye—
Ah, these are things, however fenced
A man may be by sense of right,
However clear in conscience’ sight,
Not easy to be strong against.
Yet, ’tis the flesh that fears to die;
The impeccant soul is calm and strong.
I have loved right, and hated wrong—
Thereon I lean, thereon I lie.
My very exile speaks my praise;
Had I been of more pliant mould,
And winked at wolves within the fold,
My Rome had seen my latest days.
Had I been of less weighty hand,
And smoothed sin o’er with gentle touch,
I had been ruler yet; but such
Was not the soul of Hildebrand.
Christ took me first from whence He came,
Prom household of a carpenter,
And made me head and arm of her
Who is His Bride, and bears His name.
116
A. H. R.


I found her fall’n to low estate ;
I made her Queen from sea to sea ;
Yea, in her name I gave decree
To Caesar kneeling at her gate.
And not alone I raised her up,
But made of her an holy thing ;
And that no taint of earth should cling
To hands that touch the blessed Cup,
I bade her priests put far from them
The idol-wives who shared the throne
In temples which are Heaven’s alone,
Usurping Mary’s diadem.
And seeing lewd report will shame
My zeal as born of carnal pride,
I call God witness on my side
To stay reproach, and cleanse my fame.
For when I spread my hands abroad,
And shed for better and for worse
The blessing and the dreaded curse,
It was as Thou, as Thou, oh God !
And when I trod on crowns and priced
At low account all rank and birth,
And made my throne the throne of earth,
It was as Thou, as Thou, oh Christ !
And when from hands that lift the Host
I tore the bonds of marriage vows,
And made Thy priests a virgin house,
It was as Thou, oh Holy Ghost!
* * *
The darkness comes, the long eclipse ;
And I who was the arm of Rome
Am powerless now to wipe the foam
That gathers on my dying lips.
And all Salerno’s skill is vain ;
I die a broken, banished man.
The glories of the Lateran
Shall never glad mine eyes again.
Ah me, the strife is sore and long,
But blessed angels in mine ear
Are whispering “ Why shbuldst thou fear 1
Thou hast loved right, and hated wrong.”
J. BRUNTON STEPHENS.
117
A. H. K.


Executive Council Meeting.
jJIpIHE second meeting o£ the Executive Council of the Union for the
present year was held on July sth. Every member was present,
and Professor David was requested to take the chair. The Secretary’s
report gave an account of 119 Circles, consisting of (approximately)
1,445 members; there were also about 103 isolated members. An
account of receipts and expenditure to date showed a balance of
£43 9s. 10d., and the Secretary pointed out that as six more issues
of the journal had yet to be printed, and as each issue cost for printing
and postage more than £2O, an increase of members must take place, or
the Union would reach the end of the year with an overdraft.
Correspondence was then read. A letter from Mrs. Pox, Sectional
Secretary for Victoria, suggesting that in future the February number
should be the last of the past year instead of, as now, the first of the
new series. The Council decided that as the February number must
contain the Courses and necessary information for the new year, it was
better to adhere to the original plan.
A letter was read from Miss Fussell, Secretary of the Southern
half of the New Zealand Section. Miss Fussell desired to bring under
he notice of the Council the fact that where many members of one
family attended a Circle, they did not all pay the 2s. 6d. subscription
to the Union. The General Secretary was instructed to reply to the
Sectional Secretary that although the A.H.R.U. could not assume the
right to prevent the attendance at Circle meetings of those who were
not members of the Union, it must be distinctly understood that only
those who are members of the Union can be counted as members of the
Circle, and that as the existence of the Union and the maintenance of
the present standard of the journal depend on the receipt of the very
low subscription of 2s. per member (an amount which, deducting
postage, is less than a number), it was earnestly hoped that all those
who are loyal to the Union and who can appreciate the literary merit
of the journal, will endeavour to increase the number of subscribers,
and discourage attendance without payment of fee. The Rev. Stephen
Hart, of Geelong, submitted a course of books asking for the sanction of
the Council to their use in a Circle desiring to study Botany under his
leadership. The Course was approved, and is as follows : — Botany,
Joseph Oliver (Blackie), Is. ; Making of Flowers (Henslow), 2s. 6d. ;
Our Secret Friends, P. Frankland, 2s. 6d. ; Diseases of Plants, Marshall
Ward, 2s. fid. Letters from Miss Fussell on the publication of the
Courses, and from Chief Justice Way, President of the Union, and Mr.
Groom, Sectional Secretary, Queensland, on the progress of the Union,
were read and discussed, and after some arrangement of details, the
meeting terminated.
M. S. WOLSTENHOLME,
Hon. Gen. Sec.
118
A. H. B.


Reamarks on some Difficulties of Text and Interpretation
in the Merchant of Venice.
CCTSHE textual and explanatory difficulties of this favourite comedy
of Shakespeare are not very numerous, but some of them are
peculiarly stubborn. The notes which follow contain a little that is
believed to be original in matter of interpretation, but in textual
criticism I have confined myself to stating the views of the editors,
except in one or two instances. The most difficult passages of the
Merchant of Venice are in Acts iii. and iv. I take them in order, and
in each case the reading first given is that of Staunton’s edition (1865)
which is before me.
Act in., Scene 2. the beauteous scarf
Veiling an Indian beauty ; in a word
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest.
Staunton is sure that beauty is wrong, but thinks the original expression
“ must be left to the reader’s sagacity to determine.” Feature, adopted
by Hudson (Harvard edition), seems to be the most likely conjecture.
Theobald read :
Veiling an Indian ; beauty in a word, &c.
The objection to this is that there is real beauty. I adopt it and change
The in the second line to with, which gets rid of the objection.
Act m., Scene 2. but the full sum of me
Is sum of nothing; which, to term in gross,
Is, an unlesson’d girl, unschool’d, unpractis’d :
This is the reading of the First Folio. Stevens and Malone following a
quarto read sum of something. Warburton read some. Mason adopts
the reading of the Folio because Portia’s intention was to undervalue
herself, and is followed by Delius, who remarks, “ the reading of the
Folio agrees better with the modesty of Portia as it is here expressed.”
Hudson prefers something, because nothing would savour too much of
“ affectation of humility ”to agree with Portia’s character. The
Clarendon Press editors condemn nothing as an anti-climax, and read :
la sum of something, which, to term in gross, &c.
Act in., Scene 2. You lov’d, I lov’d for intermission :
No more pertains to me my lord than you.
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there
And so did mine too as the matter falls.
This is the reading of all the old copies, but modern editors are almost
unanimous in reading
You lov’d, I lov’d : for intermission, &c.
explaining intermission as pause, delay. Delius, who adopts this view,
rendering intermission by Zwischenzeit, is severe on Staunton. Never-
119
A. H. K.


theless, if intermission can mean pass-time, the old reading gives a good
sense. Ido not, however, hold with Staunton that the second line
means “ I owe my wife as much to you as to my own efforts.” Does it
not rather mean that the personal element in both cases was subordinate
to the lucky choice of the right casket; that Gratiano’s “ oaths of love ”
could gain nothing from Nerissa but a promise to follow the result of
the fortune of his lord 1
Act m., Scene 5. It is very meet
The lord Bassanio live an upright life :
For, having such a blessing in his lady,
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth ;
And, if on earth he do not mean it, then
In reason he should never come to heaven.
How can mean it be explained here ? Pope conjectured merit it, since
improved to merit them. Delius approves this conjecture, but ventures
to paraphrase the old reading by,—“if he does not recognise, if he does
not acknowledge, that in possession of such a wife he tastes the joys of
heaven here below, in all fairness he should never enter heaven.” The
C. P. editors also approve merit them conditionally, and, not so bold as
Delius, think we rather require a word with the sense of appreciate.
Staunton reads moan, it is, &c., explaining the passage —Bassanio should
live virtuously, for, possessing in Portia the joys of paradise, he could
not atone on earth by suffering for his errors, and would therefore be
excluded from heaven. This seems rather theological for Lorenzo’s
“ infidel,” but is not therefore un-Shakespearian. I read merit them and
explain,—Bassanio must lead an almost perfect life as he obtains not
one but two rewards. If he does not merit the first, a fortiori he
cannot merit the second.
Act iv., Scene 1. for affection,
Master of passion, sways it to the mood, &e.
The old copies all put a full stop at affection, and read Masters and
swayes. This being so, the best reading seems to be that of Steevens :
for affection,
Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood, &c.
Mistress was formerly spelt maistres, from which the false reading
masters was obtained by transposition. The union of masters and
swayes is thus explained.
for affection
Masters our passion, sways it to the mood, &c.,
is Staunton’s conjecture, and is decidedly good.
Act iv., Scene 1. So please my lord the duke and all the court,
To quit the fine for one-half of his goods :
I am content, so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it,
Upon his death, unto the gentleman
That lately stole his daughter :
The idea that in use meant upon interest seems to be abandoned by the
120
A. H. R.


SECRETARY-TREASURER’S ACCOUNT.
Receipts for Month ending July
28th, 1894.
From
South Australia
... £11
0
0
JJ
N. S. W. (Donation to General Fund)
5
0
0
>}
,, Subscriptions
3
2
0
Tasmania ...
4
10
0
)>
Queensland
2
10
0
Ji
Victoria
1
16
0
Total
£27
18
0
editors, but is it so certain that it means in trust for Lorenzo and
Jessica 1 If the only idea in Antonio’s mind was a wish to benefit the
lovers, why did he not demand the immediate transfer of the moiety to
them ? Perhaps he was deterred by the rumours of their extravagance,
which, as we know, had reached Shylock. lam inclined to think that
despite Antonio’s generosity, which was never conspicuously displayed
towards Shylock, and also despite the fact that, as the 0. P. editors
remark, Shakespeare knew his argosies were safe, Antonio was to have
a life-use of the moiety for himself. Otherwise would not the dramatist,
who knew the trade of noverint, have used the words upon use or on
use 1 Consider Antonio’s position at the time. He was bankrupt; “ all
his ventures had failed ; ” so far as he knew, perhaps so far as Portia
knew, who urged him to enact the tine, for the time at which she
received the letter which she afterwards gave to Antonio is
uncertain. Probably she received it from Shylock himself, for, in the
absence of foul play, how could a letter addressed to the “ royal
merchant,” Antonio, at Venice, fail to reach him ? If that is the case,
Shylock had the letter in his possession before the time fixed in the
bond determined. The facilities which the Jews have always enjoyed
for obtaining early information are notorious. “ Every Jew in
Alexandria has known it for a week ! ” cried the monk in Hypatia who
announced the defeat of the Count of Africa to the trembling Orestes
and his accomplices. The London Rothschild was the first man in
England who had the news of the victory of Waterloo. If there had
been foul play, who would venture to confess it but Shylock, who had
been pardoned for this very crime of compassing the death of a citizen ;
and his object must have been to make a last effort to divert the
alienation of his property to relieve the supposed necessities of Antonio.
D. S. ROBERTSON.
121
A. H. R.


Tarlyle on Work and its Significance.
(A Paper read before the Lalbert Circle, Armadale, June 14th.)
CglplO appreciate a man’s writings on any problem of human life, it
tAK is needful first to ascertain from what standpoint the views this
humanity of ours. Whether with one laughing philosopher he cries—
Life is a jest and all things show it,
I thought so onoe and now I know it;
or with the Epicurean, “ enjoy what and where you can ; ” or, with the
subject of this slight sketch, thinks that life is real and earnest, and its
results eternal; he must for the purpose of catching an author’s spirit,
endeavour first of all to understand from what standpoint that author
views life and its purpose here. As the book in special review at
present is the series of essays by Thomas Carlyle entitled Fast and
Present, I will as a rule illustrate my points by short references to
passages in that splendid work of truth, courage, and hope. Carlyle’s
gospel is the gospel of true work, and for him there is at least one
thoroughly noxious insect in animate creation, and that is the idle
human ; for instance (page 134), “ The only happiness a brave man ever
troubled himself with asking much about, was happiness enough to get his
work done.” To him “ it is the one unhappiness of a man that he cannot
work, that he cannot get his destiny as a man fulfilled.” Again,
(page 169), “Of an idle unresolving man the kindest destiny, like the
most assiduous potter without wheel, can bake and kneed nothing but a
botch. Blessed is he who can find his work, let him ask no other
blessedness. He has a work, a life purpose ;he has found it and will
follow it.” “ Labour is life, and from the inmost heart of the worker
arises his God-given force, the sacred celestial life-essence breathed into
him by Almighty God.”
This is Carlyle’s position and standpoint—a belief in the worth and
value of human life, a heart-conviction that human existence has a
mighty meaning, and is capable of a superb result, and a consequent
certainty that man’s first business in the world is to find his work and
do it; do the very best of which he is capable, use his talents to the
utmost, and that just in the measure he fails of this, he is a poltroon, a
coward, and a cumberer of the ground. Samson, the monk of St.
Edmonds, is Carlyle’s ideal of a man—prompt to obey, doing the lowest
and most menial labour to the very best of his capacity, and this
without regard to the pay it brings (page 62) ; danger, prison,
banishment, promotion, or the reverse—each fails to swerve him from
his ideal of duty. A polite man, not lacking in official courtesy to his
King, or other official superiors; but at the same time a man who
respects himself, and cringes to none ; a man who as servant, monk,
messenger, Lord Abbot, County Court Judge, and even as member of
Parliament, did honest, hard, courageous, and capable work, proving
122
A. H. H.


himself, in all positions and under all circumstances, every inch a man.
This is Carlyle’s message to all men of honest heart and earnest
spirit—find thy work, the very best of which you are capable, by at
once doing, to the very best of your capability, that which you have,
and you can be certain that your life will not be without fair and goodly
fruit. What about those who from want of capacity, or want of will,
cannot or will not find their work 1 or, if they should stumble across it,
cannot or will not do it; what of them ? His answer is in Latter Day
Pamphlets (page 37), “ Your want of wants I say is that you be
commanded, in this world not being able to command yourselves. He
who has proved that he cannot travel there (free), or be master of
himself, let him in the name of all gods become a servant and accept
the just rules of servitude.”
Carlyle has for the idle nothing but contempt, holding that to
justify his living, every man should do something. “Be no longer a
chaos, but a world, or even a worldkin. Produce, produce. Were it
but the pitifullest infinitesimal fraction of a product, produce it in God’s
name ! Tis the uttermost thou hast in thee; out with it then.” ( Sar.
Res., page 136). His idea is that as inheritors of the world of the
past, we each should endeavour to add the best contribution we can,
and that, though here and now it brings us no praise, nor fame, nor
gam, as men we must do our duty (as in page 114 Past and Present).
“It is all work, and forgotten work, this people-clothed, articulate-
speaking, high-towered, wide-acred world. The hands of forgotten
brave men have made it a world for us, —all honour to them, they, in
spite of the idle and the dastard.” Though Carlyle has been called the
apostle of force, he is no lover of conflicts and fighting, save when they
are necessary to overcome chaos and make or restore order, then for
him war is work, and thinking thus he writes, “ Who can despair of a
government that passes a guardhouse 1 That a body of men could be
got together to kill other men, when you bade them, does it not seem
one of the impossibles! Yet look, and behold in the stolidest of
do-nothing Governments that impossibility is a thing done ”; or (page
164;, “A battlefield too is great, it is a kind of quintessence of labour
—labour distilled into its utmost concentration, the significance of years
pressed into an hour.” This is true, and not only for the actual struggle
itself, for many a battle has been won because of the good work of those
who supplied the materials of warfare, as well as many a conflict lost
because of the idleness and scamped work of mere mercenary labour.
Further, Carlyle points out the naturally revolting work of fighting
because done honestly and well, and not for money alone, has become
the centre of chivalry, and the great theme of poetry. His view of
constructive as in essence far grander than destructive work (page 215),
gives us the key of his position. “ But what an aristocracy, or what
new, far more complex and cunningly devised conditions than that old
feudal fighting one; for we are to bethink us that the Epic is not now
Arms and the Man, but Tools and the Man ; an infinitely wider kind
123
A. H. K.


of Epic.” If we allow some play to our imagination, it needs little
more to show us that true, wise, and far-reaching is the seeing of the
Seer of Chelsea. Before the work of British men the world is bowing
low, order follows their steps, heat nor cold, mountain nor wave, stops
their pathway of steam and iron ; or as Carlyle puts it (page 135),
“ The English are a dumb people, they can do great deeds, but not
describe them ; like the old Romans and some few others, their Epic
poem is written on the earth’s surface—England her mark,” He has
hope also for the dumb Russian, the contemplative German, and even
for the energetic Yankee; for all of them in as much as their work is
genuine, and that of true men.
Work thus viewed becomes worthy of the highest thought and the
grandest expression, and though its poet has not yet arisen, Carlyle’s
writings contain matter for an epic of labour—matter that in many
instances reaches the height of poetic expression, because for him all the
virtues of humanity cluster round this conception of work (page 173).
“ Labour wide as the earth, has its summits in heaven, sweat of the
brow and up from that to sweat of the brain, sweat of the heart, which
includes all Kepler calculations, Newton meditations, all sciences,
all spoken epics, all acted heroisms, martyrdoms, up to that
agony of bloody sweat, which all men have called divine.”
Looking then at work from Carlyle’s sublime point of view, we can
understand how for him the true workman in whatever sphere of life
he may be in, and in whatever manner of work engaged, must be brave.
“ Work is of a brave nature, all work of man’s is a swimmer’s, a waste
of ocean threatens to devour him, and if he front it not bravely it will
keep its word.” Noble (page 132) —“All work, even cotton spinning, is
noble, work is alone noble, be that here said and asserted once more.
In the same manner all dignity is painful ; a life of ease is not for any
man, nor for any god. The chief of men is he who stands in the van of
humanity, fronting the peril which frightens back all other. Every
noble crown on earth will be a crown of thorns.” “In modern and in
ancient and in all societies, the aristocracies are they that assume the
functions of an aristocracy, doing them or not, have taken the post of
honour, which is the post of difficulty, the post of death, if the difficulty
be not overcome.” Sane (page 177) —“All works each in their degree
are a making of madness sane ; truly a religious operation, which can-
not be carried on without religion, you have not work otherwise but
eyeservice—greedy grasping for wages, swift and ever swifter manu-
facture of semblances to get hold of wages.” Sacred (page 173) —“All
true work is sacred, in all true work were it but true hand labour
there is something of divineness. Properly speaking all true work is
religion.” “ One Liturgy that remains, that of praying as the old
monks did by working.” This at page 200 is followed by a brilliant
eulogy on work, commencing “ Work is Worship.”
Work of this kind—Brave, Noble, Intelligent, Sacred, is rare, but
happily not altogether •wanting even here and now, and the nation that
124
A. H. R.


can produce even a few righteous 'men of this description need not
despair of financial and general salvation. But to attain such an
end the community itself must be sufficiently noble not to stone its
saviours, but to recognise and to find them out (Diogenes with an
electric light would hardly discover many such in our Legislative Halls,
Law Courts, or Council Chambers), and, having found its capable man,
on pain of disaster to give him loyal obedience ; for as Carlyle truly
says (page 102), “ All Democracy lies in this—that the able man be
chosen in whatever rank he be found.”
Work to be true and effective must be free from, all so-called
protective bonds; must not be so made an instrument of injustice. The
Trade Hall orator is ready enough to quote Carlyle in his denunciation
of the iniquity of regarding free trade gospel as the be-all and the
end-all of the question of master and workman ; is ready enough to hold
that this great writer was correct in his demand that the worker has a
right to strive for sanitary regulations for workshops, for fair chances of
recreation, for the opportunity of acquiring an elementary education —
shown at length in pages 227 and 228 —but not to acknowledge with
him that protective duties are a lie and an injustice, that supply and
demand shall do its full part, and free trade shall be free as the air.
“ That trade made free, it is as good as certain that this paralysis of
industry will pass away. We shall have another period of commercial
prosperity,” but still “in this of itself is no salvation,” but mere
money making and temporary relief. Again these orators cannot see
that if men cannot command themselves they must be commanded by
better men, and that the organisation of industry is the great
problem of the day. (Page 240). “ Permanence of contract is almost
possible already ; this once secured, the basis of all good results were
laid.” The key-note to Carlyle’s idea of effective labour is Permanent,
not Temporary ; is the feudal system reincarnated in the army of labour,
the members of which, having permanent interest in the success of their
leaders and commanders, will be able to reconcile despotism with
freedom, because that despotism is just. This attained, strikes and
lock-outs will be both impossible ; but for the attainment of such an ideal
much true work is needed. (Page 236). “ God knows the task will
be hard, no noble task is ever easy. This task may wear away your
lives and the lives of your sons and grandsons, but for what purpose, if
not for tasks like these, were lives given to men 1 ”
Let us sum up by one more quotation, from that book of Carlyle’s—
Fast and Present, worthy to be accepted as the creed and gospel of the true
workman : —“ It is to you, ye workers, who do already work, and are as
grown men, noble and honorable in a sort, that the whole world calls
for new work and nobleness. Subdue mutiny, discord, wide-spread
despair, by manfulness, justice, mercy, and wisdom. Chaos is deep,
dark as hell; let light be, and there is instead a green flowery world.
Oh, it is great, and there is no other greatness —to make some nook of
God’s creation a little fruitfuller, and better, more worthy of God;
125
A. H. R.


more blessed, less accursed, it is the work for a God Ploughers,
Spinners, Builders, Prophets, Poets, Kings; Brindleys and Goethes,
Odins and Arkwrights, all martyrs, and noble men, and gods, are of one
grand host, immeasurable, marching ever forward since the beginning of
the world. The enormous, all conquering, flamed crowned host, noble
every soldier in it, sacred, and alone noble.”
E. H. C.
The Question Box.
Is Money Capital?
V;3&S MONEY capital t That depends on the meaning which we may
choose to give to the word capital; and different writers have
used the word in many different senses. A full statement and criticism
of the various definitions of capital that have been put forward may
be found in Bohm-Bawerk’s Capital and Interest , and Positive Theory
of Capital (translated by W. Smart), on which the following note is
based.
The primary meaning of the word capital seems to have been
“ wealth from which its owner intends to derive a revenue.” And that
is perhaps the most convenient definition to adopt.
How can the owner of wealth derive a revenue from it ? Either by
lending it to another man, and stipulating for interest on the loan ; or,
by investing it in his own business.
Take first a simple loan. A. lends £lOO to B. for a year at 5 per
cent, interest. That is, A. gives B. £lOO now, on condition that B.
promises to give him £lO5 a year hence. A., then, so uses his £lOO as
to get from it a revenue of £5 in the course of a year ; and we call that,
using the £lOO as capital.
The service in payment for which the lender receives that £5 is the
service of waiting. The owner of the £lOO consents to wait for a year
for all the goods and services which he could, if he chose, purchase at
once from others with that sum of money ; and by so doing, he enables
the borrower to get goods and services to the same amount at once,
instead of waiting a year for them. The borrower finds it worth his
while to pay £5 for that convenience.
“ Is money capital ” in this case 1 Clearly, the capital invested may
be either money or any other form of wealth ; the loan may be a loan
of a hundred sovereigns, or of a hundred sacks of corn.
But secondly, the owner of wealth may employ it to yield him a
revenue (i.e., may use it as capital ), in another way, by investing it in
his own business, —using it “to assist production.” (And of course the
borrower also may, and in most cases does, use in that way the money
he has borrowed).
126
A. H. B.


Capital thus invested being a very important kind of capital, it is
well to distinguish it by a special name. Let us call it “ productive
capital.”
But how does productive capital “ assist production,” and conse-
quently yield a revenue to its owner?
A manufacturer needs capital in his business for three purposes :
(1) To advance wages to his employes; (2) to buy materials; (3) to
pay for the “ instruments of production,”—buildings, machinery, &c.
Why must he advance wages to his workmen ? Because they are
not as a rule able and willing to wait for their share till the goods on
which they are working are finished and ready for use. A shearer, for
instance, will not wait for his wages until the wool he has just shorn is
woven into cloth and made up into a coat; he wants clothes, food, and
other finished goods for use at once. His employer, therefore, must pay
his wages in a form that will enable him to satisfy his wants at once,
i.e., must advance to him “ finished goods,” or money to buy them,
taking in exchange the goods which will be ready for use some time
hence, or their equivalent in the money he will then get for them. The
payment of wages in such cases is in reality a “loan for present
consumption,” as much so as the simple loan we discussed before. And
the employer will decline to carry on the business unless he can get
men to work for him at such wages as will leave him, when he has
realised his profit, a surplus equivalent to the current interest on this
advance.
“ Is money capital ” in this case ? If the employer pays wages in
money, the money so invested is capital. If he pays wages partly in
goods or services, —if, for instance, ho supplies his workers with food,
and cooks it for them, that food, and the service of cooking it, constitute
part of the “capital” he invests. (But even in that case, he would
usually buy the food, and hire the cook, with money ; and if you asked
how much capital he was using in his business, he would most naturally
reckon it all, that part included, in money, instead of mentioning
beef steaks and cooking as distinct forms of capital).
But what of the capital which the manufacturer invests in
materials and instruments ?
A little consideration will show that the payments made for these
things also are really “ advances,” or “ loans for present consumption.”
Advances to whom ? To the producers of the materials, and the makers
of the instruments. These people are not, as a rule, disposed to wait
for payment till the materials are, by labourers using the instruments,
worked up into finished goods ready for use. That might mean waiting
for many years; and in the meantime, the makers of these still
“ unfinished ” goods want finished goods for their own use at once, and
must have money in hand to buy them with. Thus, the cloth-
manufacturer must, as a rule, pay the wool-grower some time before the
wool he buys is ready for use in the form of a finished coat; and
consequently he (or someone else who takes over this function by buying
127
A. H. R.


from him the still unfinished product), must take on himself the service
of waiting, —and expects his payment for that service, in the form
of interest on the capital he has thus invested.
We can now see how “productive capital” assists production.
Most productive processes take time, —some of them many years ; and,
as a rule, the more productive process takes a longer time, i.e., involves
the expenditure of much labour a long time before the desired result is
produced. (Compare the primitive process of grinding corn by pounding
it between two stones, with our modern method of building and
equipping a steam flour-mill). Therefore, if the more productive process
is to be employed, someone must consent to wait for months or years
after the process begins, before getting any return. If no one were
prepared to do this waiting, i e., if there were no capital available, we
should have to give up these more productive processes, and live
“ from hand to mouth,” as the blackfellows do; and we should be as
poor as they are.
Now if the workers engaged were willing to do that waiting them-
selves, there would be no need for anyone to make an advance to them,
no need, that is, for any investment of capital ; or, to express the same
thing in another way, each man would be his own capitalist,—investing
his present labour and waiting for its future yield. But as a rule the
workers at the earlier stages of a long production-process will not and
cannot wait for its result, because they have not enough to live on in
the meantime ; therefore, if the work is to be done at all, someone
who has more must come forward to relieve them of the necessity of
waiting, must supply their wants in the meantime, waiting for the
return himself till the process is finished, and expecting to get back
in compensation for that waiting something more than he has paid away.
The person who does this is the capitalist ; and to do it is to invest
capital (usually, though not necessarily, in the form of money) in
production.
There is, however, a common variety in the usage of the word
capital, which still needs explanation. In those oases in which the
investment of capital takes the form of buying material goods (raw
material and instruments) those goods themselves, when bought, are
often called the investor’s capital. Thus a factory and the machines in
it may be called part of the manufacturer’s capital; the stock for sale in a
shop may be called the shopkeeper’s capital.
It is clear, however, that the term can be thus applied only in the
case of productive capital, and not even in every form of that. If I have
lent £IOO at interest there is no material thing to which I can point
and say “ There is my capital,” unless 1 choose to give that name to the
bond lying in my desk. If I have invested capital in paying wages I
may have in my possession unfinished goods the value of which has been
increased by the labour bought with those wages, and I can if I choose
call those goods my capital ; but in many cases the wage-payer has
no such material goods in his possession to represent his investment.
128
A. H. R.


If a shipowner, for instance, pays sailors to sail his ship to a distant
port, and does not realise his profit till after its arrival there, where is
that part of his capital in the meantime ?
It would seem, then, that this special use of the word capital —its
application to material goods in which money used as capital has been
invested—is not quite consistent with its other uses. “I have invested
so much money or money’s worth as capital ” is a statement that fits all
cases alike ; but “ I now possess so much capital ” is a statement that
in some cases (that of the loan, for instance) does not convey a very
clear meaning. And it might be better if we could agree to give up
this use of the word altogether, and confine the term capital in all cases
alike to the sum of money or other wealth originally invested. Or, if
this would be going too far from ordinary usage, we should at least
remember that when we call a building or a machine capital we are
using the word in a special and derived sense.
No doubt the man who has invested wealth as capital, and con-
sequently is deriving an income from it, can, as a rule, sell his investment
as it stands to another man, i.e., can cease to render the service of waiting
himself and let the other take it over. Thus, if I have lent £IOO to a
government I can at any time sell my Government Stock to another
man who wants to invest ; if I have a mill in working order, I can sell
that. And in that sense, reckoning up the present money value of my
investments, loans, and “ productive ” investment together, I can say
“ I now possess so many hundred pounds of capital.” There is no harm
in so putting it, provided that we clearly understand our own meaning.
If we adopt this explanation of the word capital it is clear that
any form of wealth may be used as capital, but that, in our society, the
most usual form of capital is money ; that is, when we invest wealth
with the intention of deriving an income from it, it is usually a sum of
money, or a promise to pay money on demand, that we pay over.
Money spent in certain particular ways then is capital; money spent in
other ways is not capital.
“/.s Money Fixed or Circulating Capital ? ”
For the distinction between Fixed and Circulating Capital, see
Mill’s Political Economy , Book 1., ch. vi. Mill, in making this
distinction (in which he follows Adam Smith) was thinking solely of
productive capital, and he applied the term capital to material goods
which the owner has bought in expectation of deriving an income from
them (the raw material and instruments of production) as well as to the
money or money’s worth thus invested.
“ Of the capital engaged in the production of any commodity,” says
Mill, “there is a part which, after being once used, exists no longer as
capital; is no longer capable of rendering service to production, or at
least not the same service, nor to the same sort of production.” This
part is called “ circulating capital,” because “ it does its work not by
129
A. H. B.


being kept but by changing hands.” He places under this head (1) the
raw material used, for having been once worked up it cannot be used a
second time as raw material; and (2) the portion of capital which is
paid as wages of labourers, for the employer can so use it only once.
“ Another large portion of capital consists of instruments of
production, of a more or less permanent character ; which produce their
effect not by being parted with, but by being kept; and the efficacy of
which is not exhausted by a single use.” This part Mill calls “ fixed
capital”; and under this head he places buildings, machinery, imple-
ments, and tools; and also “ the capital expended ” in opening a mine,
cutting canals, making roads and docks.
To which class does money used as capital belong? According to
Mill’s statement, money paid for materials, and money paid as wages to
the workmen who work up those materials, is circulating capital. But
what of the money spent in buying instruments (or in wages to the
workers who make the instruments, if they are made by the same firm
which uses them) ? If the distinction is to be of any value, this ought
surely to fall into the other class; yet, according to Mill’s definition, we
should be obliged to call this money also “ circulating ” capital ; for “it
produces its effect not by being kept, but by being parted with.”
There is evidently some confusion here, caused by applying the
term capital indifferently to the money invested, and to the material
things bought with that money.
The truth is that Mill’s whole theory of capital requires re-
statement ; and a judiciously revised statement should perhaps drop out
the terms “ fixed ” and “ circulating ” capital altogether, substituting the
threefold division of the applications of productive capital which I have
already given. Capital (usually money), invested in production is spent
in three different ways: (1) in advancing wages; (2) in buying
materials ; (3) in buying instruments.
The important fact underlying Mill’s distinction is this. Materials
worked up, and labour expended in working them up, are used up in a
single operation ; consequently, if the business is to succeed, the single
operation must yield a result valuable enough to repay with interest the
whole of the capital invested in these ways. On the other hand, the
same machine or instrument is used repeatedly in many successive
operations, and consequently, it is enough if the sale of any one article
produced by means of it repays with interest a small fraction of the
capital invested in buying the machine, or in paying the wages of the
labourers who made it.
W. SCOTT.
Wants of Circles.
A Sydney suburban Circle desires the loan of an Original paper on
“ Hamerton’s Human Intercourse.”
130
A. H. R


University Extension and the A. H. R. D.
4&YjD VANTAGE was taken of the presence in Sydney of Professor
E. E. Morris,'M. A., of Melbourne University, to arrange a con-
ference on the subject of the co-operation of the Home Reading Union
with the University Extension Boards. Professor Morris is at once
President of the Yictorian Section of the A.H.R.U., and Chairman of
the Melbourne University Extension Board. There were present also
Professor Wood and Mr. A. W. Jose (Chairman and Secretary
respectively of the Sydney University Extension Board), Professor
David (representing the President N.S.W. Section of A.H.R.U.), and
Miss Studdy, B.A. (one of the Joint-Secretaries N.S.W, Section).
The following resolutions were agreed to :
1. It is desirable that the Home Reading Union and the Extension
Board should have as many courses as possible in common.
2. To bring this übout, the executives of the two should confer
each spring about the coming year’s courses.
3. Stress should be laid by the A.H.R.U. on Rule 5 as allowing
the formation of Circles at the close of any Extension course.
4. Sectional Committees of the A.H.R.U. and lecturers under the
Extension Board should as much as possible encourage the formation
of Circles and centres reciprocally.
Reading for August.
English Literature Courses:
Modern Poetry ... ... Byron, Childe Harold. Recommended ;
Matthew Arnold’s Essay on Byron
(Essays in Criticism, 2nd Series).
Shakespeare Course ... Henry VIII.
Recent Writers: A ... Selections from Matthew Arnold,
do. B ... Kingsley —Alton Locke,
do. C ... Charlotte Bronte —Yillette.
Addit. General Course ... Shakespeare—Much Ado about Nothing.
Young People’s Course... Church —Stories from Iliad and Aeneid.
Education :
A Elementary Course ... Quick —Educational Reformers, cc. 14-16;
Baldwin—Elementary Psychology and
Education, pt. 2. Recommended: Sully’s
Teacher’s Handbook, cc. 6-8.
B Advanced Course ... Calderwood —On Teaching. Recommended;
Herbert Spencer—Education.
Geography and Travel ... Prescott, Conquest of Mexico (concluded).
Hist, of England,l399-1603 Green, Short History, chap. 7, sections 3-6.
Recommended : Beesley Elizabeth ;
Corbett—Drake.
Political Economy ... Marshall—Economics of Industry, Book 11.
131
A. H. B.


Notes and News.
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
On the evening of the 20th July a large Group meeting was held
at the Carlton Hall, Summer Hill. Professor and Mrs. David issued the
invitations, some thirteen of the suburban Circles were represented, and
over 180 persons present. Professor Morris, on a visit from Melbourne,
took the chair at 8 p.m., expressing his special pleasure at presiding on
the occasion and complimenting H.S.W. for having so far maintained
the lead as regards the number of members. It was his aim, he said,
to excite a feeling of friendly rivalry on this point, and he urged every-
one present to go out and annex a new member forthwith. A violin
solo, rendered feelingly by Miss M. Sydney Jones, was the first item on
the programme. A reading from The Tempest followed, with an
accompanying tableau, the latter obtaining much applause and admira-
tion. Papers were read by Miss Studdy on “ Australian Poets,” and
by Mr. Rose on the “ Study of History.” Songs were sung by Miss
Sydney Jones and Miss Ratcliffe, and Mr. Beaver contributed a
denunciation of the “ Leading Article.” Mr. A. Allard gave a reading
of Browning's Andrea del Sarto , Professor MacCallum making some
interesting introductory and elucidatory remarks with regard to the
real and legendary life of the painter. A reading from Macbeth and
two illustrative tableaux, very strikingly and naturally presented by the
Strathfield Circle, brought the meeting to a close. Light refreshments
were handed round during an interval, and the arrangements generally
were such as to leave the impression of a most pleasant evening.
At a meeting of the Committee, on the 18th July, the Assembly
accounts were presented showing a credit of £8 15s. 3d. A donation
of £5 was made to the general fund, and Mr. Arthur Galton was
elected to a seat on the Committee. A letter from Bishop Green of
Grafton and Armidale was read, in which he expressed his willingness
to forward the interests of the Union in the coming year.
Mr. Moore, of Scone, has formed a Circle for English Literature,
and there is a probability of some interested in the neighbouring towns
following his example.
At the Croydon Circle’s July meeting papers were read on
Romola and on “ George Eliot.” A discussion on the book and its
character passed to the theories of Heredity and Environments and
their respective powers.
The Hunter’s Hill English Literature Circle have done much and
varied work in their course. They find, in common with others, con-
siderable difficulty in getting the necessary works.
Different views were freely expressed as to the extravagance or
naturalness of Tennyson’s In Memoriam at the last meeting of the
Summer Hill Circle.
132
A. H. R.


List of courses may be had on application to the secretaries for
distribution to possible members, or will be forwarded to any address
desired, with full information regarding the Union.
A. STUDDY.
J. S. SCOTT.
QUEENSLAND SECTION.
A well attended social gathering of the Circles of Brisbane was
held last month, when an excellent programme of songs, recitations and
papers was provided. Mr. J. G. Drake, M.L.A., read a very sug-
gestive paper on “ Emerson,” outlining briefly his thought. Mrs. A.
Morton, Sectional Secretary of Tasmania, explained “ How to help the
A.H.R.U.,” and her ideas should prove of assistance to those in charge
of Sections. The Rev. E. G. Thatcher, M.A., contributed a scholarly
essay on “ The Political Conditions of Europe in the Age of Elizabeth.”
The Brisbane Literary Society discussed “ Kendall’s Poems,”
introduced by Mrs. T. W. Poott. Mr. L. E. Groom conducted an
evening on Marshall’s Economics of Industry , and the Hon. T. J.
Byrnes, M.L.C., read a paper on “ Brunton Stephens.”
In Toowoomba an excellent work is being done. Preparations are
being made for the production of scenes from As You Like It. Courses
of lectures on Physiology are being delivered by the doctors of the
town, who have kindly volunteered their services. Dr. Faulkner gave
the last, a very interesting and lucid lecture on “ Respiration.” He
illustrated with the organs of a sheep specially prepared for the
purpose of the lecture. This course is really in the nature of University
extension work, and is of a strictly educational nature.
L. E. GROOM.
VICTORIAN SECTION.
The South Yarra Circle, of which mention was made in the July
number, has had its first meeting, British History is the subject
chosen, and three papers were read, each being followed by animated
discussion.
Miss Templeton, of the Windsor Circle, writes that they are
enjoying the readings very much, and are now studying Carlyle’s Past
and Present and Selections from Browning.
Mr. Farran, of Warrnambool, sends the following account of his
Circle :—The Warrnambool Circle numbers 20 members, fewer by 3 than
were on the roll last year. The meetings are held on the first Tuesday of the
month, in the evening from 8 o’clock to 10, in the leader’s house ; and
there is an understanding that they take priority of all other engage-
ments for the same night. The understanding is more loyally respected
perhaps than such agreements usually are. The attendance is, notwith-
standing, rather irregular and fluctuates greatly. English Literature is
again the course of reading chosen. Before the first meeting of the
year a list of books for the ensuing twelve months was prepared by the
133
A. H. K.


leader in order that members might be able to provide themselves with
copies of the various books, some difficulty having been experienced in
this respect last year. In making the selection it was the leader’s aim
to suit a variety of tastes as far as possible within the limits of the
English Literature Course ; poetry and prose in equal proportion ; and
a preference being shown to books on social subjects, these occupying
some prominence in the “ official ” syllabus, deservedly so, seeing that
they have a bearing on some of the burning questions of the hour.
We began in February with The Ahhot, which was followed by the Lay
of the Last Minstrel, Unto this last, Ghilde Harold, Social Pressure, and
Henry VIII. Utopia was next on the list, but, in deference to
objections made to the style, the prevailing tastes favouring more
modern authors, Hamerton’s Human Intercourse has been substituted
for Sir Thomas More’s work. Selections from, Browning, Our Old
Home, As You Like It, and Selections from Matthew Arnold make up the
tale for 1894. The last two paragraphs of Mrs. Hogben’s account
of “A New Zealand Literature Circle,” in the A.H.R. for July,
might serve for a description of our mode of meetings, our proceedings
and circumstances are so similar; our Circle, however, includes some
members of the male sex. “ How a Group works,” in the same
magazine, contains much that is suggestive ; and we may with advantage
take some hints from it for the improvement of our mode of working.
I shall be glad to receive similar reports from leaders of Circles.
L. M. FOX.
Notice to Contributors.
• All news of Circles should be communicated to the secretary of the
Section, and all articles or poems intended for publication should be
sent to the sub-editor. If no sub-editor is appointed, the latter may be
sent direct to the Editor.
Every article must be legibly written (type-written by preference)
and not longer than six pages of foolscap.
Articles intended for publication should reach the Editor not later
than the 20th of the month.
The Editor cannot undertake to return manuscript in any case.
The following papers and poems are declined with thanks :—“ In the
Moonlight,” “ The Burthen of the Sea,” “ Callista,” “ Kimon,” “ In the
Mount Gambier District.”
Acknowledged with thanks, and accepted for future insertion (if
space permit):—“ The White Company,” “ Browning’s Victory,” “ The
Sabbath of God.”
134
A. H. K.


Von. HI., No. 6.
September, 1894.
THE A. H. R.
Abouth Reading.
<§UtfyLTHOUGH prevented by absolute want of leisure from taking an
active part in the management of the Australasian Home
Reading Union, the movement has my warmest approval and sympathy.
A “Home Reader” myself from the days of infancy, I can hardly
recollect a time wholly unconnected with books —with the love and the
study of them. Perhaps I should hardly say study—as, though an
omnivorous reader, I was always disinclined to the student’s steady,
persistent assimilation of the graver tomes. A rapid assimilator, blessed
with a tenacious memory, I ranged over an extensive field, and must
claim to be credited with a fair harvest of general knowledge in despite
of a reprehensible lack of method. No doubt exists in my mind of the
great advantage of fostering, directing, and developing a love of reading
by all known ways and means, among which the A.H.R.U. and kindred
societies are most valuable. But the inborn love of letters must first
exist. JSascitur non fit, is true of the reader even as of the poet ;
otherwise books may be read, according to rules laid down, for certain
hours, times, and seasons, and, the task once performed, the compulsory
exercise has little better result than that of the practising of that
musical pupil, to whom nature has denied an ear. With regard to the
precious habit and early love of reading, often indeed a product of
heredity, I would go so far as to say that inferior literature, even the
so-called “ trashy ” novel, is distinctly preferable to nothing at all. The
patron of the sentimental, romantically inaccurate narrative is on the
high-road to appreciation of superior mental pabulum ; he will not long
rest contented with cheap mental excitement; gradually must he
develop curiosity as to historical or scientific events, from mention of
which few romances, however inferior, are wholly free. This leads to
the study of books of reference, and often, step by step, to solid
attainment.
While by no means debarring young people from works which
excite the imagination, and arouse admiration of the qualities and
achievements which ennoble the race, it is imperative to devote a portion
of each day to more serious studies. These are indispensable if the
character is ever to acquire that solidity and balance without which the


so-called brilliant gifts are often valueless, even harmful. For
intellectual labours, which tend to strengthen the mind and develop
the reasoning powers, the early hours of the morning are the most
suitable. Then the head is clear, the bodily and mental powers at
their best, the task, in whatever department of knowledge, more easily
performed. When the mind, as the day advances, becomes more relaxed,
and interruptions are apt to occur, lighter reading may be indulged in,
the charm of which is sufficient to arrest the wandering attention.
Next to thoroughly enjoying a book, the process of talking it over
with congenial companions, is the equivalent luxury. Happy is the girl
or boy whose school friend delights in the same poet, the same novelist,
the same historian. No pleasanter sight can there be than to mark
them walking, with arms perhaps around each others’ necks, dilating
upon passages or incidents which have excited their admiration. Sports
and manly exercises are valuable and health-giving in proper place and
proportion, but surely the mutual appreciation of the masterpieces of
our own age, or the deathless records of the heroic past, must more
directly tend to the general elevation of character. On this account,
the practice pursued in Home Reading Circles of choosing one book,
poem, or scientific treatise for study and examination, to be followed
perhaps by essays and oral amplification, is perhaps the most improving
that could be pursued.
Having, in some slight form, directed attention to the importance
of the reading habit, let us consider what course should be pursued. To
what department of “ knowledge with her ample store, rich with the
spoils of Time,” should we hold forth our hands 1 What a world of
wealth, what a treasure-house, glittering as Sinbad’s valley, is spread
before us! And so easily acquired ! Nothing to do, as one may say, but
to pick it up. And yet to think how many there are whose minds have
never been thus enriched, who are all ignorant of the tens of thousands
of beautiful ideas, of noble thoughts, of heroic deeds, of holy meditations
which they might have had for the gathering! How barren
must be the minds of such ! How uninteresting their conversation !
How dull their solitude ! And shall we contemn, and have hard words
for them, if they fly to hurtful distractions from the intolerable dulness
of the unlettered mind 1 No ! rather let us pity them sincerely, and feel
a daily thankfulness, mingled with gratitude to those true friends,
whether parents or teachers, who have made this fair earth so different
a place of entertainment for us.
“ And now, after this perhaps prolix dissertation,” says the
“ young person,” a personage indeed to be reckoned with in politics,
literature and morals, “ what is one to read 1 ” Begin, my dear child, I
will say (for what but a child are you between the ages, the golden
ages, of fifteen and five and twenty years 1) with a daily meal of history,
a light repast of science, a “ souffle ” of poetry, and a dessert of
romantic fiction to follow.
136
A. H. R.


First of all, as pieces de resistance, the history of the world’s
masters; —the Egyptian, Jewish, Greek, and Roman demigods,
majestic figures who marched across the stages of the elder world and
left to us their imperishable records; left a heritage of valour and
philosophy, of art, and religion; left their immortal languages, in
which rest embalmed pictured presentments of the noblest achievements
of our strangely-fashioned common nature. Without some acquaintance,
however rudimentary, with these foundations of knowledge, how can one
hope to take a place, ever so humble, in our complex social system 3 In
science, if there be no natural bent, just so much of the gist of
elementary treatises should be secured as will suffice for the compre-
hension of leading principles, and for arousing an interest in the great
and manifold discoveries of the day.
Poetry I And now the field spreads widely, even to the horizon,
and lustrous stars arise, as though earth and heaven alike supplied
legendary lore, melody, and inspiration. Whom shall one name 3
Whom omit 3 Browse amid the earlier poets, amid whose oft-times
rude or too familiar verse lie thoughts of priceless value, like ingots of
pure gold. The study of Shakespeare, Byron, Scott, Keats, Tennyson,
Mrs. Hemans, Longfellow, Wordsworth, Milton, Pope, Oowper,
Browning, Coleridge will absorb more leisure than is granted to most of
us. Brunton Stephens, Gordon, Kendall, Harper, and of later date
Heney, Jephcott and O’Hara have struck the Australian lyre with force
and skill; their wild word melodies and forest symphonies are rife
with tones to which Australian hearts will never cease to thrill.
In Fiction, that vast and widely extending field, it were wise to
move cautiously. If confined to one author, Sir Walter Scott would
supply the needs of any moderate student. Where shall we find so
many ennobling thoughts, deeds of high emprise, examples of knightly
honour, womanly devotion, maiden purity, touching generosity, delicate
humour, religious fervour, preserved within the compass of one main
work, the whole framed in a setting of attractive and correct historic
record 3 I feel wrath with my young compatriots, many of whom know
little or nothing of Waverley or Ivanhoe, Old Mortality or Guy Mannering,
while they are familiar with the flimsy trash or suggestive psychical
rubbish of the novel of the day. As Mr. Andrew Lang most justly
demands, (I quote from memory) :—“ Are not the fierce Templar, the
Saxon Squire, the knightly Wilfred, the high-souled Rebecca, the lovely
Rowena, the immortal Robin Hood (that chivalrous outlaw), the Robber
Baron, the jester Wamba, better worth reading than Mrs. Haliburton’s
Troubles or A Pretty Horsehreaker 1 ”
Read anything you like afterwards, my dear young person, with
such enviable eyesight, and yet a dweller in “the land of lots o’ time,”
but read Sir Walter first, I implore. After him Dickens, Thackeray,
George Eliot, William Black, Mark Twain, Bret Harte, Rudyard
Kipling, Frank Stockton. And if you ever think about writing—but
137
A. H. H.


that is another story—Sydney Smith, Macaulay, the essays of Elia, even
Paley’s Evidences, will give you various “ points,” as the journalist
saith. But this life is all too short for the reading we ought to do, not to
mention other things scarcely less necessary, such as marrying, <fec. My
benison upon all good and staunch readers, and so farewell.
ROLF BOLDREWOOD.
Browning’s Victory
(Part of a Paper written for the Tintern Circle, Hawthorn, Victoria).
“ 06 WAS ever a fighter,” says the writer of Prospice, and in no way
Sjp could he have described his poetic character better. Whatever
is terrible, whatever is ugly, whatever is unsuccessful, has for him a
certain fascination. He delights in presenting before us all that can
arouse our instincts of opposition. And yet no one can be saddened by
his poetry, overpowered by the vision of the tragedy of life which he
gives. Rather we rise from studying him to meet the evil with renewed
hope and strength—-we also become fighters.
But how much he does show us of that tragedy throughout his
writings ! The longest poem, The Ring and the Book, is but the story of
a horrible murder, terminating a long series of sordid crimes, of which
every detail is dwelt on, every motive examined, every incident probed
to its lowest depths. And of the next in importance nearly every one
is a tragedy, as even their titles tell us. So are the short pieces full of
misfortune and fault, in either case full of failure. Death and dis-
appointment, friends found wanting, and love crossed meet us at every
page. And it is the most remarkable feature in Browning’s character,
that in spite of the tragedy with which he surrounds himself, he is in
himself not gloomy at all. One after the other come his scenes of
weakness and folly and sorrow, suffering and sin, and in spite of it all
this world “ means intensely, and means good.” Pippa’s song is never
far from his lips—
God’s in His heaven—
All's right with the world.
All is well now. For the secret of his serenity is not the hope that
some day all the evil will be subdued, but the assurance that even now
this strange mixture of good and evil, in the world and in man, is right,
and that all things are working together for good. This thought, ever
present, the keynote to his strange temper, finds expression in the first
138
A. H. E.


of the Pisgah Sights —
Roughness and smoothness,
Shine and defilement, ■
Grace and uncouthness :
One reconcilement !
Everywhere “Joy demands sorrow, angel weds devil.” And though'he
cannot in the least understand why, he is sure that “ Such things should
so be.”
It is in this that we perceive the greatness of his victory—that
with this perfect faith in the world’s goodness as a whole, he understands
as little as any of us why the evil is allowed, how it works good. It is
indeed a continual source of wonder to him. He gazes out into the
world with his poet’s eyes, honest and enquiring as a child’s, far-seeing
and deep-seeing as those of a sage, and always the same wonder is
written in them that in God’s good world there should be such horrors.
Porphyria’s lover sits all night with the murdered girl in his arms, —
the story makes us shudder as we think of it, so terrible is it, so terribly
told. And can Browning have missed one jot of the terror which his
readers feel 2 And yet in his mind that thought is not uppermost:
And thus we sit together now
And all night long we have not stirred,
And yet God has not said a word !
There is the mystery at which he is never tired of gazing—how God can
look on all this evil, and yet never say a word. He gazes on it from
every possible point of view. In Porphyria’s Lover he paints the evil in
clearest colours, and stands face to face with it, unflinching. He shows
in Golden Hair how it hides in the fairest forms, in The Blot in the
’Scutcheon how fiendishly clever is its attack, how delicately it aims to
plant its torturing sting just where it will be most felt. He dwells on
the complexity and manifold variety of it in The Ring and the Book.
He shows how the issue turns on the merest trifles in Pippa Passes. In
Strafford we see the great soul of the hero waging unsuccessful war
against it, and it in Strafford fighting against the good in Pym and
the rest.
He is fascinated, we must say again, by the wonder of evil and
sorrow, and yet he never for a moment loses sight of his saving truth,
that it only exists in order to play its part in the history of a good
world. And so believing, he is victorious in his life-battle. He rises
above all that seems wrong, all that seems sad. Evil is no longer an
evil. “The evil,” says Abt Vogler, “is null, is nought, is silence
implying sound.” Nor is sorrow or death.
I end with Love is all and Death is nought, quoth she.
Nor is age, nor the flesh with all its allurements. Rabbi ben Ezra is
bold to say that spirit needs flesh, as flesh spirit, and even
What I aspired to be
And was not, comforts me,
because the broken arcs of earth prove that in heaven there is the
perfect round.
139
A. H. R.


Such a view of life, such a perfect acceptance of evil, without
understanding it, as part of a good whole, can only spring from one
source. “ This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our
faith.” And Browning has the unclouded faith which sees God in all
things, always working, perfectly good and wise and mighty, and he
sees that the All-great is the All-loving too.
This prevents him writing such a poem as In Memoriam. For him
there can be no groping on the altar stairs, no sighing for the resolution
of doubts and the smoothing of difficulties, no longing for rest of body
and soul. And therefore, too, he gives us no Crossing the Bar, but an
Epilogue to Asolando. To him death is the passing to new work, to
new scenes, in which he still will be “ ever a fighter,” still “ never turn
his back' but march breast forward.” He must always strive and
thrive, fight on, fare ever there as here.
J. STEPHEN HART.
Carlyle and Social Problems,
I.
jJpN drawing your attention to one of the works of the great thinker,
Thomas Carlyle, there is an almost indescribable glamour of the
mind attending such an attempt. It is as though one had come upon a
masterpiece of sculpture in the arid desert, and yet as if there is borne
in upon the reason that this sublime and godlike form on which we gaze
is not of solid stone. It is rather as if some of the old Eastern fairy
tales had come true, and we see before us some great prince of the
ancient giants slowly petrifying into stone, and yet, not wholly dead,
but only slowly, slowly stiffening and petrifying with “ the process of
the suns.” To the men of a generation now passing away he was fully
alive ; we sat at his feet in reverence, and far above our heads thundered
out to the world that magnificent gospel, “Work is worship.” But
already to the younger men the vitality has stiffened into the mortal
cold of the heroic statue, and they turn away to newer preachers and to
later social evangelists than he whose words were like the sound of the
eternal sea in the ears of Arthur the King.
“ Hearest thou this great voice that shakes the world 1 ” But we
cannot believe him wholly dead, because the truths he uttered were
undying, and if the memory of the man himself has to be left with the
sands of Time for ever creeping higher round his feet, it is good for us
to consider what claim he had in life to be considered one of the
Immortals. To properly appreciate one of his books, it must first be
made clear what sort of a man he was in himself, and to do this I will
proceed to give a very brief and concise account of his life.
140
A. H. R.


Thomas Carlyle was born in the county of Dumfries, Scotland, on
December 4th, 1795. He was the eldest of the nine children of a
working mason, his father being a man sturdy and self-reliant. Carlyle’s
mother was pious, fond, and always anxious about the son whose great
ability she recognized, while she half-feared the pursuits into which his
intellectual powers might lead him. Carlyle’s case is another proof of
the truth of the idea that extraordinary men always have mothers above
the intellectual average, for she must have had unusual powers of mind
and character, seeing that after middle age she mastered the knowledge
of writing on purpose to be able to communicate with her gifted son.
Those who know the difficulty of acquiring such an arc at an advanced
age, will appreciate the determination and ability needed. From her
deep love of the Bible, and Puritan form of thought, her son derived
many of those ideas which afterwards made him pay such intense
veneration and respect to the life and deeds of Oliver Cromwell.
The excellent system of education which gives an admirable start
in life to all young Scotsmen did its work with Carlyle, who, when he
quitted school at Annan, had acquired “ Latin and French, read with
fluency, some geometry, algebra, arithmetic thoroughly well, and vague
outlines of geography.” In 1809 Carlyle set out on his long eighty-
mile walk to Edinburgh, to attend the classes at the University and
prepare himself for the ministry of the Kirk. Here he seems to have
succeeded poorly with Philosophy, Greek, or Latin, but in mathematics
the professors found him an apt scholar. Gradually, during the years
at the University, doubts sprang up in his mind as to his fitness for the
theological profession. During this time he was earning his bread as a
tutor, and at last obtained a post as mathematical master at Annan
Academy, with a salary of £7O a year. Thence he went to another
school for some time, and in 1818 (he being then 23 years of age), he
determined to cease altogether to teach children. He learnt German
by means of his great power of self-application, and, helped by presents
of food from home, eked out existence by making translations of French
books. It was at this wretched time of his life, that, badly fed in body,
and overworked in mind, he fell under the influence of that complaint
which ever after tortured him with its pangs. Dyspepsia, brought on
by irregular meals and long fasts, gave him constant agony. It was, as
he says, as if a rat were always gnawing at his stomach. How thankful
may we be for the fact of his poor digestion. Had he been comfortable
in his internal processes he might have degenerated into a mere sleek
alderman, or even if the divine fire within the man had prevented this,
he might have been led astray by material comfort till the fate of
Tennyson overtook him. To say “the fate of Tennyson ” seems, I dare
say to most of us, a frightful heresy ; a blasphemy against the high
thoughts and noble words of the greatest bard of the nineteenth century,
whose memory is sacred indeed. I yield to none in admiration of
the genius of the poet, and of the magnificent literary structures he
raised, but, as one of those moving forward, I cannot help sadly crying,
141
A. H. R.


“Think of all that we have missed.” If, instead of a life of pleasant
ease, of luxurious herrait-like retirement from the cares and worries of
life, Tennyson had been forced by necessitous circumstances, or by the
cruelty of social inequalities, to sympathise with the great social
upheaval of the present era, what songs of progress, what tender,
sympathetic poems, what strong, clear-pointed shafts of philosophy
would he have flung abroad ! Even if he had suffered from some touch of
bodily pain, not continuously with carking fret as Carlyle did, but
sufficiently to humanize him down from that lofty atmosphere of
personal luxury where the gods “ lie beside their nectar,” what would
not the world of action have gained 1 For the last thirty years of
Tennyson’s life, he understood none of the painful problems that have
shaken us to the heart, he stood as a bystander apart, looking at the
strain and stress, the sweat and blood of the world’s battle. Not so
Carlyle; the painful perplexity of this time of flux and flow in the social
system wrung the heart of one who was himself a man of sorrow, and
who could speak from sad experience as he sat looking out with brave,
steadfast eyes from under the shadow of suffering. In the first stages
of his disease he tried hard to find some means of cure. He smoked
incessantly, and then gave it up on being told that it was the cause of
his trouble. “ Cave it up,” he says, in his own fierce, quaint way,
“ gave it up and found I might as well have poured my sorrows into
the big hairy ear of the first jackass I came upon, as of this select
medical man.” Then he took mercury, without avail; then swallowed
immense quantities of other drugs. His incessant pain was added to by
the gnawings of his heart as he struggled on under continual failure and
money troubles. He obtained work on the Edinburgh Encyclopedia, and
at last his mental deliverance came. Those who have read Sartor
Besartus will remember Teufelsdrbck’s duel with the Everlasting No.
The Everlasting No said, “ Behold, thou art fatherless, outcast; and
the universe is mine ” (the Devil’s), to which my whole Me made
answer, “I am not thine, but Free, and for ever hate thee.” Carlyle
tells us that the incident is literally true, and that while the Everlasting
No had harassed him with believing that his poverty and pain was as
actual reality as the world of the higher mind in which his real existence
was passed, he was suddenly surprised by the discovery that it was the
mind only that was real, that the imprisoning flesh and its surroundings
were only delusion. At once he leapt up to a new position ; he says
that he felt that he was a man “ strong, of unknown strength, a spirit,
almost a god.” It is in this vivid sense of spiritual emancipation that
the only life worth living is to be found; those human beings who drag
on existence, intellectually halt and maimed, deaf and blind, never reach
that clear outer world of the free soul, but they think as they writhe
about in the dust together that they are alive.
Up to this time Carlyle had never fallen under feminine influence,
but henceforth his life was to be marked by the acquaintance he formed
with Miss Jane Baillie Walsh, the lady who was afterwards his wife.
142
A. H. E.


He went on with his work of German translation, from which he
derived great benefit, not so much from the actual books, as from the
mental enlargement arising from the discovery of fresh sources of ideas.
He translated Schiller’s Thirty Years’ War for Longmans, and sent an
essay on Faust to the New Edinburgh Review, He threw himself with
delight into the thoughts and aspirations of Goethe, and his obligations
to Jean Paul and Fichte are not light. His translation of Wilhelm
Meister gave him his first assured position in the literary world. He
married Miss Walsh, who was a beautiful, witty, and original girl ; a
woman highly suited to him intellectually, but quite unsuited to him
spiritually. If the union had been blest with children, it is possible
that the tenderness which they both really possessed might have flowed
out towards each other, but the two powerful minds were not fitted for
the close bonds of wedlock. She had great faith in his genius, and was
a true support and stay to him in the early days of his struggles and
poverty, yet each was so strong without the other that they lacked
harmony. Carlyle went to London after his marriage, and spent the
greater part of his remaining years at his residence in Cheyne Row,
Chelsea. From this place he issued the Sartor Resartus, which was a
decided “ frost,” and few copies were sold. This book is a gospel of two
philosophies ; one of Idealism and the other of Realism ; this is typified
in the name of the hero, Diogenes Teufelsdrdck, “ God-born Devil’s-
dung.” Then, after Miraheau and the Diamond Necklace came that
magnificent work, the French Revolution. Having finished the last line
of this book, it is stated that Carlyle said to his wife, “You have not
had for a hundred years any book that comes more direct and flamingly
from the heart of a living man.” The world acknowledged this ; the
effect was enormous. Then followed Hero-Worship, Chartism, and the
work we shall examine to-night, viz., Past and Present. Cromwell, the
Latter-day Pamphlets, Frederick the Great, and other well-known books
were published. Honours were poured upon him, but on the 21st April,
1866, Mrs. Carlyle died, and her husband poured out upon her grave
those pent-up floods of tenderness which only a virile rugged nature like
his could have kept so long in check. Bitterly, and full of self-reproach,
did he mourn the misunderstandings which had kept them apart, but
the great silence had spread between them. The grey, world-weary man
sunk to his “death with honour ” on February sth, 1881, and passed
To where beyond these voices there is peace.
Let us now turn from the story of the man’s life, which has I hope
given some faint outline of his nature, to one of his smaller books, the
Past and Present. In this he breaks at once into the heart of his
subject, and grapples with the great social problem in its most practical
form, viz., the relation of work to wages. The book must really be
read as a whole to form a just opinion on its great merits, but I may
briefly indicate the line of his argument. He dwells on the waste of
human life and noble material which allows two millions of workers to
143
A. H. B.


pass their time in English poorhouses and workhouses. • He asks,.
“ Whose fault is it ? ” “To whom does the great wealth of Britain
bring blessing ?” And going back to ancient fable, reminds us that
Midas, whose touch turned all things to gold, had the long ears of an ass.
Is it so with nations ? He says ;
“ Behold us here, so many thousands, millions, and increasing at.
the rate of fifty every hour. We are right able and willing to work,
and on the planet Earth is plenty of work and wages for a million
times as many. We ask, if you mean to lead us towards work ; to try
to lead us—by ways new, never yet heard of till this new unheard-of
Time? Or if you declare that you cannot lead us? And expect that we
are to remain quietly unled, and in a composed manner perish of
starvation ? What is it you expect to do with us ? This question, I say,
has been put in the hearing of all Britain ; and will be again put, and
ever again, till some answer will be given us. Unhappy workers,
unhappy idlers, unhappy men and women of this actual England. We
are yet very far from an answer, and there will be no existence for us
without finding one. ‘ A fair day’s wages for a fair day’s work ’ —it is
as just a demand as Governed men ever made of Governing. It is the
everlasting right of man. Indisputable as Gospels or as arithmetical
multiplication tables. ‘ A fair day’s wages for a fair day’s work ’
exclaims a sarcastic man : alas in what corner of this planet since Adam
first awoke on it was it ever realised ? The day’s wages of John Milton’s
day’s work, named Paradise Lost and Milton's Works were Ten pounds
paid by instalments, and a rather close escape from death on the gallows.
Oliver Cromwell quitted his farming ; undertook a Hercules labour and
life-long wrestle with the Lernean Hydra-coil, wide as England, hissing
heaven high through its thousand crowned, coronetted, shovel-hatted
quack-heads, and he did wrestle with it, the truest and terriblest
wrestle I have ever heard of ; and he wrestled with it, mowed it, and
cut it down a good many stages, so that its hissing is ever since pitiful
in comparison, and one can walk abroad in comparative peace from
it; and his wages, as I understand, were burial under the gallows-tree
near Tyburn Turnpike, with his head on the gable of Westminster
Hall, and two centuries now of mixed cursing and ridicule from all
manner of men. His dust lies under the Edgeware Road, near Tyburn
Turnpike, at this hour; and his memory is Nay, what matter what
his memory is? His memory, at bottom, is or yet shall be as that of a
god ; a terror and a horror to all quacks and cowards and insincere
persons ; an everlasting encouragement, new memento, battle word and
pledge of victory to all the brave. It is the natural course and history
of the Godlike, in every place and time.”
Carlyle then goes on to show that the whole progress of society
lies in the better apportionment of wages to work, and cries that though
the Godlike never could be paid, that until now the earthly always
could, and that looking at the sleek English horses no one believe it
possible that starvation could overtake the English men. Such a.
144
A. H. R.


platitude of a world, he calls it, where working horses can be fed and
working men die of hunger ; better let us get back to the old chaos and
the world of night. I cannot help noticing here how exceedingly slowly
“ the Mills of God ” have been grinding in this matter. Carlyle,
writing half a century ago, believed that nothing could be worse than
the condition of workers in his day, and that some social cataclysm was
surely at hand. Yet the world has gone through its seasons of sunshine
and rains, and we to-day, noticing how the millions of unemployed are
fermenting in Europe and America, believe that some great catastrophe
is near. We may be deceived, and in the slow but certain evolution of
the race a breathing space may yet be afforded us before the foundations
of ancient society are broken up into new combinations. Our author
asks if in our search for light we can get no information from the past,,
if we can find no glimmer in old history as to the way men chose their
leaders and searched out their great men in former days. Then he
selects an old book telling us of facts which have long become hidden
from our knowledge, and asks if we will look into the future by its aid,
because the Life-tree is one, and although its roots are buried down in
the old, dead dust of men, its boughs reach always beyond the stars.
This brings us to the heart of the book—the motif on which it is
founded.
It is a Diary, the work of a certain Jocelin de Brakelonda, and is
the chronicle of certain events which took place at the Abbey of St.
Edmunds, seven centuries ago. Except as the author of this Diary,
Jocelin is quite unknown, and would have remained so to us
had it not been for the antiquarian labours of his faithful editor,
Mr. Rokewood, who has deciphered and translated the dog-latin of the
old monk. Just as Boswell, in the diary of Dr. Johnson, while writing
about his greater patron, unconsciously revealed his own character, so in
every word does Jocelin show us himself. He was undoubtedly a
cheery-hearted, innocent, yet withal shrewd, noticing, quick-witted man.
A wise simplicity is in him, much natural sense ; a veracity that goes
deeper than words. The good man, he looks on us so clear and cheery,
and in his neighbourly, soft, smiling eyes we see so well our own
shadow, we have a longing always to cross-question him, to force from
him an explanation of much. But no ; Jocelin though he talks with
such clear familiarity, like a next-door neighbour, will not answer
questions ; that is the peculiarity of him, dead these six hundred
years, and quite deaf to us, though still so audible. “The good man, he
cannot help it, nor can we.” So he shows us how men lived and died
in the year 1200 ; how they dug and ditched and fed their cattle and
looked after their families. It is however of one man that the real
picture is presented ; that of a certain monk named Samson, whom we
see at first in a humble position, and looked upon rather with dislike.
The scene opens with a visit paid to the Abbey by King John ; —John
Lackland, who afterwards signed Magna Oharta. We see little of him,
Jocelin only writes down what interests him, and will not satisfy our
145
A. H. R.


curiosity. “As through a glass darkly we discern ; a blustering,
dissipated human figure, with a kind of blackguard quality air, in
cramoisy velvet or other uncertain texture, uncertain cut, with much
plumage and fringing ; amid numerous other human figures of the like;
riding abroad with hawks; talking noisy nonsense; tearing out the
bowels of St. Edmund’s Convent (its larders namely and cellars), in the
most ruinous way by living at rack and manger there. Jocelin notes
only, with a slight sub-acidity of manner that the King’s Majesty,
Dominus Rex , did leave, as gift for our St. Edmund’s shrine, a handsome
enough silk cloak —or rather pretended to leave, for one of his retinue
borrowed it of us, and we never got sight of it again; and on the
whole that the Dominus Rex at departing, gave us thirteen sterlingii,
one shilling and one penny, to say a mass for him ; and so departed—
like a shabby Lackland as he was.” The next scene shows us the Abbey
of St. Edmund’s with the old Abbot Hugo, who has allowed the
monastery to fall into debt and disrepair. His account books had got
into a dreadful state; he was in the hands of the Jews. Hugo for
instance had a debt of two hundred pounds to a Jew, and by means of
ever-growing interest it had become eight hundred and eighty pounds,
and was still mounting upward. Altogether Abbot Hugo was in a sore
plight, and so he did what was best for men of his type ; worn out and
weary he closed his eyes and went to sleep for ever. So poverty stricken
was our poor Abbey that we had not even one penny to distribute to
the poor that they might pray for the repose of the Abbot’s soul, but
providentially, just then, fifty shillings of our dues were paid in by one
of the farmers of the Abbey lands, so that this disgrace was averted.
Then, after the Dominus Rex Henry 11. has set Inspectors or Custodians
over us, it is necessary to appoint another Abbot. Before this can be
done time lapses, and to keep the poor monks from starving taxes their
energies to the utmost. The Cellerarius goes out to collect his dues, but
rich people, as such people always do, have got some excuse or other
not to pay ; they pretend that the dues are commuted, are this, that,
and the other ; in fact they will not pay. “ Our Cellerarius gives up
calling on the rich. In the houses of the poor, our Cellerarius, finding
in like manner neither penny nor good promise, snatches without
ceremony what pledge he can come at, a joint-stool, a kettle, nay, the
very house-door, and old women, thus exposed to the unfeeling gaze of
the public, rush out after him with their distaffs and their angriest
shrieks.” What a picture of our poor old spinning grandmothers
rushing out shrieking as the monk disappears with the kettle
and the house-door. “ Jerusalem was taken by the Crusaders
and again lost by them, and Richard Goeur-de-Lion veiled his face as he
passed in sight of it.” These things we have heard of, but the old
shrieking housewives give us a new impression of that queer, distant,
foreign time. In addition to these troubles of getting in small moneys
and procuring food, the monks have internal anxieties. In the solemn
cloisters they gather continually, chattering under their breath their
146
A. H. E.


curious election-gossip. They hope that the new Abbot will be chosen
from among their own number, and that the King will not send a
stranger to ravin as a wolf among their flock. But, if not a stranger,
who then? Which of themselves is to be chosen? We can fancy what
solemn little conclaves they held; what tittle-tattle, what wire-pulling
was going on. Jocelin discusses each as if he were talking into our
ears. He tells us how this man would be a good Abbot because he is
really a good fellow, but then he is unlettered, and could not preach a
respectable sermon. Another is eloquent and sagacious, but then he is
an unjust man, and apt to slight his weaker brethren; another
too fond of food and wine, and so on, and so on. They seem
continually to revert, half in fear and half in respect, to one
Samson, a man of extremely taciturn and reserved habits. He is
described as “ a personable man of about seven and forty; stout-made,
stands erect as a pillar; with bushy eyebrows, his eyes beaming
into you in a really strange way; the face massive, grave, with a
very eminent nose ; his head almost bald, its auburn remnants of hair and
the copious ruddy beard streaked with gray —this is brother Samson, a man
worth looking at.” At one time this brother had been sent on a mission
from the Abbey to the Pope, but at that time Europe was disturbed
by two. claimants for the Papacy, and Samson was unfortunate in his
embassy. When he returned he found himself in disgrace, which he
bore in the same way in which he would have received praise, viz., in
calm silence. The day of the election arrived, and the Prior, with
twelve monks, proceeded to the presence of the King at Waltham.
Carlyle here speaks of the importance of the mode of election. He says,
“An election, whether managed directly by ballot-box on public
hustings, or indirectly by force of popular opinion, or were it even by
open ale-houses, landlords’ coercion, popular club-law, or whatever
electoral methods, is always an interesting phenomenon. A mountain
tumbling in great travail; throwing up dust-clouds and absurd noises,
is visibly there; uncertain what mouse or monster it will give birth to.
Besides it is a most important social act; nay, at bottom, the one
important social act. Given the men a people choose, the people
itself in its exact worth and worthlessness is given. A heroic people
chooses heroes, and is happy ; a valet or flunkey people chooses sham
heroes, what are called quacks, thinking them heroes, and is not
happy. The grand summary of a man’s spiritual condition, what
brings out all his herohood and insight, or all his flunkeyhood
and horn-eyed dimness, is this question put to him : 1 What man dost
thou honor ? Which is thy ideal of a man ; or nearest that ? ’ ”
EDWARD TREGEAR.
Wellington, N.Z.
147
A. H. R.


Australian Explorers.
II.
®P]HE passion for discovery received a fresh impetus now that the
Blue Mountains had been crossed, and several expeditions were
set on foot for the purpose of examining the country to the West of the
range.
Mr. George W. Evans did good service by his discovery of the
Bathurst Plains, and also the rivers Lachlan and Macquarie. These
two rivers were more carefully examined by John Oxley, who was
accompanied on his journey to the Lachlan by Allan Cunningham, the
botanist, who is worthy to be reckoned as one of the greatest of
Australian explorers, and is especially remembered for his discovery of
the luxuriant Darling Downs. Oxley is one of the chief pioneer
explorers of Australia, for besides making known the existence of
several mountains and rivers, he discovered the fertile Liverpool Plains,
which splendid area, embracing as it does about 17,000 square miles,
lies to the East of Arbuthnot Range, or the Warrambungle Mountains.
Owing to a mistaken idea of Oxley “ that the country South of the
parallel of 34 deg., and West of the meridian 147 deg. 30 min. was
uninhabitable or useless for all the purposes of civilized man,” it was
not until the year 1824 that a journey was made from Lake George to
Port Phillip, when this statement was then proved by Hume and Hovell
to be one of the most erroneous ever made. The success of this
expedition is mostly due, however, to Hamilton Hume, a daring young
bushman, whose only literary education consisted of the little learning
his poor mother could give him ; but he, who knew so little of the
knowledge of man, had been nursed in the lap of nature, and she had
revealed to this brave, “ sincere ” child of hers much of her wisdom, and
mysteries which were as a sealed book to the professional navigator,
Hovell. The disappointments and trials of this journey were many
and severe; and then again, the leaders, Hume and Hovell, frequently
disagreed about matters of importance, —and once they separated,
though eventually Hovell returned and acknowledged Hume to be in
the right. It is interesting to remember that the last encampment of
these, the first civilized men who gazed upon the rugged heights and
snow-capped peaks of the Australian Alps, was a few miles from the
present town of Geelong, and here they rested, having travelled over as
many as C7O miles.
The two most capable explorers, at this time, to whom also we owe
the most fortunate discoveries, were Captain Sturt and Sir Thomas
Mitchell. Sturt, who was naturally brave, and possessed indomitable
courage, was a well-educated man, particularly fond of scientific studies.
Having held, for some considerable time, the position of officer in the
army, he was thus used to command ; and since he possessed an unusual
amount of natural tact, he seldom found it difficult to manage either the
148
A. H. B.


aborigines or his own men, most of whom were convicts. Hume
accompanied Sturt on his first expedition, and their chief discoveries
this time were Oxley’s Table Land, New Year’s Creek (the Bogan
River) and the Darling River, which was named for the Governor. It
is to Sturt that we owe the discovery of the noblest river of Australia,
which he named the Murray after the Imperial Colonial Secretary ; and
although at the termination of this river he found most rich and fertile
tracts of land, still, Sturt was most unfortunate in discovering so many
deserts,—the last, which is known as Sturt’s Stony Desert, being one of
the most dreary, barren, forsaken regions on the face of the globe. Sir
Thomas Mitchell during his four expeditions made many valuable
discoveries, but his greatest achievement was his journey to Portland,
by which he opened up the way to the future settlement of Victoria. It
was for this splendid success that he received knighthood from the
British Crown, which distinction he deserved if ever man did, for he
had wandered in the bush, amid perils and sufferings, for seven long
months, having travelled over 2,400 miles of country !
The expedition of Edward John Eyre, who was son of a Yorkshire
clergyman, and who was born in the memorable year 1815, is one of the
most marvellous records that we have of individual suffering and privation.
In 1840 young Eyre, accompanied by only one other European, Baxter,
a faithful servant, and three black boys, started out on the most
hazardous journey ever undertaken by reasonable men. This was the
attempt to travel for more than 1,500 miles along the Great Australian
Bight, from a small encampment on Fowler’s Bay to King George’s
Sound. The condition of this land was known to be so bad, that the
difficulties to be faced in crossing it were overwhelming. Often for
miles together, the only means of obtaining water was by digging in the
base of the sand-hills, which were rolled together in dreary heaps. Who
has not heard of the awful suffering and misery of this expedition—-the
faithful Baxter shot, and nearly all the provisions stolen by the two
treacherous black boys, while Eyre and the native boy, Wylie, were left
600 miles from their journey’s end with but 40 lbs. of flour, a little tea and
sugar, and four gallons of water ! When at last Eyre with Wylie did
reach his destination, it must have been a bitter disappointment to
realize that this perilous journey only proved the utter impossibility of
that part of the country being of use for travelling purposes.
The history of exploration contains many a tale of horrible suffering
and hardship, but perhaps none are so tragic as the disastrous expedition
of Edmund B. Kennedy, who with thirteen brave men set forth to discover,
if possible, the route to Cape York, which would thus serve as an
entrepot for trade with India. This expedition is unparalleled in its
misfortunes from beginning to end. On the first of June, 1848, they
landed at Rockingham Bay, but, since the landing had been made
among swamps, much precious time was wasted before they could
get across. Next, their way was greatly impeded by a strange, new
creeper, the Calamus Australis, the tendrils of which, forming as
149
A. H. R.


they did a thick net-work, had to be hewn away with the axe
before any progress could be made. Besides being attacked by
the blacks, they suffered much from sickness; till at length Kennedy,
with only one faithful aboriginal, Jacky Jacky, and scarcely any
provisions, determined to try and reach Port Albany alone. They
struggled on till near the end of their weary journey : and Kennedy, pain-
fully dragging his aching limbs up the steep heights of a mountain, could
even see in the dim distance the much-desired port,—but just as his
hopes were about to be realized he was killed by his dreaded foes, the
blacks. Kennedy’s faint glimpse of Port Albany and subsequent death
recalls to our memory the death of Moses —the patient old patriarch who
had led his expedition for forty years through the wilderness —for he
too, longing with all the passionate enthusiasm of his oriental nature to
enter the promise land, could only see from the rugged heights of
Pisgah its waving palms and fertile plains, and then “ the servant
of the Lord died there in Moab.” ...
Dr. Ludwig Leichhardt did good service in opening up a way to
Port Essington ; but the dark mystery as to the disappearance of him and
his party on their expedition to the interior of the continent has never
been solved from that day to this. Mr. A. C. Gregory explored the
North-Western interior of the continent, which had formerly been
thought by some to consist of an immense inland sea.
The heroic expedition of Burke and Wills, accompanied by Grey
and King, across the Australian continent is surely too well-known
to need repeating ; and is it not with something of impatience
that we read of the terrible sufferings and privations endured by them,
after having accomplished their great purpose , owing to the cruel
indifference of Wright and negligence of the Melbourne committee ? As
sad as is the death of Grey and Burke, still, they had the consolation of
a human presence, and of human sympathy with them ; but of poor
Wills, the infinite pathos of those lines of the Australian poetess are all
too true :
“ Then with one deep prayer for mercy—ere the last glow eaves the skies,
Resting on his Father’s bosom, calm, the lone explorer dies.
None are there to close the eyelids —none weep o’er the bronzed face,
Only night is stealing softly, shrouding him with tender grace.”
True King did return in a few days, having first left the dead body of
Burke, but then, that brave, trusty soul had passed the dark portals of death,
and was beyond all human help —“where the weary are at rest.”
The next four expeditions were undertaken about the same time to
search for Burke and Wills; and King, the only surviving member of
their party, was found by Mr. Alfred W. Howitt, son of William and
Mary Howitt. King was in a half-starved condition, and was living
among the natives, by whom he had been most kindly treated. Shortly
after Mr. Howitt led a party for the mournful purpose of conveying
the bodies of Burke and Wills back to Melbourne. The other search
parties were led respectively by Mr. J. MoKinlay, Mr. F. Walker, and
150
A. H, R.


Mr. W. Landsborough, and even when they found that Mr. Howitt had
been successful in the quest, they continued their explorations, thus
making many new discoveries, and materially advancing the geography
of Australia.
The man, however, who stands foremost in the annals of Australian
exploration, and to whom we gladly yield the palm of glory, is John
M’Dougall Stuart. A strong, brave bushman, he took his first lessons
as an explorer in 1844 from Sturt, “ the father of Australian explor-
ation.” The first journey in which Stuart acted as leader was
undertaken on June 10th, 1858, to examine the West and North West
of Lake Torrens. Subsequently, he led five other expeditions, in which
he never failed to make important discoveries; and what was still
more remarkable, he was always successful in bringing his men home
afterwards. Stuart found that to the North-West of Lake Torrens the
mirage in the desert was so deceptive as to make small bushes resemble
large trees, and often the country for miles round appeared to be
submerged. The two greatest achievements accomplished by Stuart
(who was despatched by the government of South Australia) were the
exploration of the centre of Australia, and, in his own words, “the crossing
of the entire continent of Australia from the Southern to the Indian Oceans,
passing through the centre.” The heroic endurance, and indefatigable
labours of this prince among explorers, ere he realized these, the darling
projects of his life, can scarcely be exaggerated. His joy at reaching
the Indian Ocean, on the 25th July, 1862, was expressed in the
patriotic hoisting of the Union Jack; and then, on that lonely shore,
with the wild dashing of the waves as their only music, the whole
party broke forth into one enthusiastic shout of “ God save the Queen.”
This discovery of a passage to the Indian Ocean “ led directly to three
important results, —the annexation of the Northern territory to South
Australia, the establishment of a colonial settlement at Port Darwin,
and the construction of the transcontinental telegraph along
almost the whole route of this expedition.” In 1872, South
Australia availed herself of the opportunity now offered for a
transcontinental telegraph, and spent £370,000 on a line which runs
from Adelaide to Port Darwin, Stuart’s unparalleled success acted as
an incentive to other expeditions, the three most important being
Colonel Warburton’s journey across the interior, and that of the Hon.
J. Forrest and Mr. Ernest Giles in Western Australia.
This wonderful record of exploration has all taken place within
the first century of Australian History. Still, although we know much
of our continent, we do not know all; and while there remains a spot
undiscovered there are men eager to aid the cause of exploration, chief
of whom is our celebrated botanist, Baron von Mueller, who, besides
accompanying the expedition of Mr. A. C. Gregory, personally assisted
most liberally Mr. Giles in his journeys to Western Australia.
K. I. H.
151
A. H. H.


The Book of Common Prayer from a Literary
Standpoint.
fN putting before the readers of this journal a few notes on the
literary characteristics of the English Prayer Book, it will, in the
first place, be necessary to allude very briefly to the origin of its
component parts. It is a very common belief, owing to its representing,
in its present form, the doctrines of the reformed Church of England,
that the book is almost wholly the composition of the sixteenth century
and later reformers, whereas a historical analysis of its contents shows
that not more than a tenth part of it dates from such recei t times,
except as a translation. Translation, of course, forms an important
feature of literary style and form, as we see in the contrasts between
Chapman’s, Pope’s, and Lord Derby’s Homer, but the original shines
distinctly through all translations ; for example, we might refer to the
marked difference, in diction and style, between the Old Testament
English of the Bible, and that of the New, by the same translators, the
one coming from the Hebrew, and the other from the Greek.
The Common Prayer, taking the whole book, as regards the
language in which it was originally composed, may be divided into four
parts, the Hebrew and Greek, which have partly come down to us
through the Latin of mediaeval times, the Latin, which originated
mostly in the middle ages, and the English which was chiefly composed
by Archbishop Oranmer and others in the sixteenth century, and partly
by the last revisers of the Prayer Book in the time of Charles EL
The originally Hebrew portion is the Psalms, which came partly
through the Latin; the Greek portion is the Epistles and Gospels and
the more ancient parts of the Holy Communion Service ; the Latin part
forms the bulk of the book which is not composed of extracts from the
Bible; while the English or modern parts are those which, in the
morning and evening prayer, precede the sentence, “ Open Thou our
lips.” These, as the words imply, began these two services before the
Reformation, * and are altogether inappropriate in their present position
now. Some of the Collects for saints’ days and festivals, some of those
under the head of “ Prayer and Thanksgivings for several occasions,”
and the services for adult baptism, for those at sea, the Catechism, <fec.,
are also modern.
Practically, therefore, the great bulk of what English Churchmen
hear and repeat every Sunday, as well as at baptisms, marriages, and
burials, is the composition of the primitive fathers of the Church, and
of mediaeval divines, pruned, however, here and there, in the latter case,
* It is generally assumed that the service in England before the Reformation was the same as
that now used by Roman Catholics in England and elsewhere, but this was not the case. The old
service in England, revised in Edward Vl.th’s time, was that called the Sarum or Salisbury Use,
which is therefore the basis of the present Prayer Book. The Roman Catholic service now in use
was not introduced into England till about the beginning of last century.
152
A. H. K


of a few words implying doctrines which were considered untenable by
the sixteenth century reformers and translators.
In a literary sense, there is perhaps no more sublime poetry ever
composed than that of the Psalms, and it is hard to conceive that they
could have fallen into the hands of more competent translators, in that
sense, than those of the sixteenth century who have given us the Prayer
Book version of them. The Bible translation of the Psalms, which is
much later in date, though possibly more accurate, reads flat indeed in
comparison with the majestic roll of the Tudor English which,
fortunately, was retained in the later Prayer Book revisions.
Of the other Bible extracts referred to, which are of Greek
origin, we should not be in order in speaking here, as, though
essentially part of the book and bound up with it, they are not, like the
Psalms, strictly speaking, common prayer or praise.
We proceed therefore to note the difference between the Latin part
and the English, and that between the Tudor English of Oranmer and
the later style of the seventeenth century. The exquisite beauty of the
language of the Prayer Book is largely due to the mediaeval or Latin
portion. The severe simplicity of the Collects, which mostly date from
the fifth and sixth centuries, is due to their source; there is no
redundancy of language, there is no literary hydrogen, so to speak, or
expanding of ideas to extreme tenuity—all is compact and terse, and, in
this respect, how superior are they to the modern attempts at public
prayer composition. Indeed it may well be said that, in a literary
sense, public prayer composition, like the colouring of the old masters,
is a lost art. One of the causes is the modern tendency to pile up
adjective on adjective, like the language of an auctioneer’s catalogue, or
of such a speech as the writer heard the other day, in which the speaker
described his insignificant native township as a place of enormous
possibilities and magnificent potentialities—four big, solid words, but an
extreme rarefaction of ideas.
There will be found in the Prayer Book, especially in the older
parts, a very sparing use of adjectives, and when they are found, it will
be seen that, with few exceptions, and those generally are reserved for
the attributes of the Deity, they are absolutely essential to the sense,
that is to say, if omitted, the whole meaning would be lost. The Collect
for the sixth Sunday after Trinity might be quoted as an example :
“O, God, who hast prepared for them that love Thee, such good
things as pass man’s understanding; pour into our hearts, such love
toward Thee, that we, loving Thee above all things, may obtain Thy
promises, which exceed all that we can desire; through Jesus Christ,
our Lord.”
In this prayer, which dates from about the year 490 A.D., and read
in the English Church for 1,300 years, the only adjective proper is
“ good,” and without this the meaning would be lost.
The modern prayers occasionally put forth by authority in the
Church of England, in case of special need or distress, are invariably
153
A. H. R.


diffuse and wordy, and indeed this is the case with most modern writers
and speakers even of the best class. How many words of such persons
might be called up for judgment to know why they became thrust into
their positions, and how many could give any satisfactory account of
themselves 1
Cranrner, it is said, had most to do with the translation of the
Latin, and he did it, on the whole, with great accuracy as well as true
literary instinct. There are one or two mistranslations however, the
most unfortunate perhaps being that in the “Te Deum,” where the
expression “ noble army of martyrs ” should have been “ white-robed
army,” which is a much more literal as well as a more picturesque
rendering, as it conveys the idea of purity, innocence, and constancy, for
which the word noble is altogether inadequate. Candidatus is the word
in the original. This means clothed in white and, symbolically, clothed
with purity, constancy, and innocence; and from this word, which was
applied to aspirants to certain Roman honours, who were thus attired,
comes our word candidate, a name which we give more or less
appropriately, having the figurative meaning of the word in view, to
those wishing to enter Parliament. Perhaps it is as well, in view of the
degradation of the word in these later times, that the old martyrs should
be governed by some other adjective.
We have good authority for believing that Henry VIII. himself
was the translator and reviser of the Litany. This King, as we all know,
pushed things rather to an extreme in the number of the successive
retrenchments and reconstructions of his matrimonial establishments ;
but posterity must partly set against this, the glorious legacy he has left
us of this most perfect specimen of Tudor English prose—it is music
itself. The way in which each petition of this sublime composition rises
to its climax, rings on the ear like a musical crescendo ; for example, in
the invocation by the great events of our Saviour’s life, death, resur-
rection, and ascension, and in the prayers that we may be delivered not
only in all time of our tribulation, which would be the ordinary
connexion of the two ideas, tribulation and deliverance, but in all time
of our wealth, which the early fathers, who composed this service,
regarded, in the asceticism of their own lives, as a source of spiritual
danger much more vividly than we do, in our days of more comfortable
Christianity.
The fourth part is that which was originally composed in English,
at the time of the translation, chiefly by Archbishop Oranmer, and
since. If we examine these parts which comprise the opening portions
of the daily prayers, and the others mentioned above, we shall find a
tendency, increasing later, as we get away from the Tudor period, to
wordiness and amplification.
Fortunately, in a literary sense, 1662 was the last date of Prayer
Book revision ; in fact it is one of the slight redeeming features of the
well-known indifference to religion of the English Church in the
eighteenth century that, in that period of wordy literature, it left the
Common, Prayer alone.
154
A. H. R.


It is perhaps, strictly speaking, wide of the subject to allude to the
reading.of the prayers, but this does so much to make or mar their
literary form, that it cannot altogether be omitted. It almost amounts
to sacrilege to hear the way in which the prayers are sometimes gabbled
over. How often, for instance, does it jar on the ear and on the sense,
to hear one of the most beautiful prayers of the Litany so read that the
three words, devil-or-man, are given almost as one connected utterance.
This prayer was originally in an old mass called pro tribulatione cordis,
and it is certain that the old mediaeval writer of it had a very distinct
and personal idea of the devil, and no notion whatever that such a
jumble would be made of his work in after times. Surely, even in these
evil times, there is some slight difference between the devil and man,
and in reading, a small gulf, so to speak, might be left between them.
In conclusion, we may quote the words of Froude, that master of
modern English prose, who says of the Common Prayer ;
“ Next to the Bible, there are few things which have affected the
character of the modern English more deeply than the Liturgy. The
beautiful roll of its language mingles with the memories of childhood, it
is the guide of our dawning thought, and accompanies us through each
stage of our life, with its chaste ceremonials, from the font, to the edge
of the grave. As the translation of the Bible bears upon it the imprint
of the mind of Tyndale, so, while the Church of England remains, the
image of Oranmer will be seen reflected on the calm surface of the
Liturgy. The most beautiful portions of it are translations from the
Breviary, yet the same prayers translated by others, would not be those
which chime, like church bells, on the ear of the English child. The
translations, and the addresses which are original, have the same silvery
melody of language, and breathe the same simplicity of spirit.”
C. O. BURGE.
Announcement.
N.S.W. Section.— Mr. J. S. Scott, one of the sectional secretaries,
having accepted an appointment in Japan, has been obliged to resign his
secretaryship. The Union in general, and the N.S.W. Section in
particular, owes a debt of gratitude to Mr. Scott for his self-denying
labours, which he has cheerfully undertaken for nearly three years with
great ability and tact. It is requested that all N.S.W. Circles will in
future direct their correspondence to Miss Studdy.
Wants of Circles.
A New Zealand writer is willing to lend an original paper on
Carlyle’s Past and Present. Application should be made to the Editor.
155
A. H. R.


Notes and News.
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
The first regular meeting of the Scone Circle was held last month.
Subject : The Merchant of Venice. The following programme was
carried out : —l. A paper was read by the leader on the “Nature and
History of the Drama ” ; 2. An address by Rev. P. Norman on the
character of Shylock ; 3. An address by the Rev. A. C. Thomas on the
history of Venice; 4. A paper by Mr. Kennedy on the character of
Portia : 5. A dialogue was rendered by the Misses Asser, “Portia and
Nerissa.” Some discussion ensued.
A very successful inaugural meeting was held by the ex-pupils of
Wellesley College and some of their friends, on Monday the 13th
instant, for the purpose of forming a branch of the A.H.R.U. This
Circle now numbers 28 members. Rev. P. W. Dunn, leader, and Miss
Cooke, secretary, were unanimously elected.
On Monday, the 23rd of July, the two Armidale Circles, severally
led by Mrs. Gordon and Mr. Braund, held a Group meeting which took
the form of a conversazione and drawing-room entertainment; various
members assisted in a programme of songs, recitations, tableaux vivants,
etc.; refreshments were handed round.at the close of a very successful
and pleasant evening.
On 22nd of August, the North Sydney English Literature Circle
held their usual monthly meeting, when the adjourned discussion on Mr.
Leaver’s paper on Kingsley's Alton Locke was concluded. Kingsley’s
poems were then discussed and some of them read. The next meeting
is to be on 26th September, when a paper on Byron’s Ghilde Harold is
promised.
A. STUDDY
J. S. SCOTT.
VICTORIAN SECTION.
During the last month news has Teen received of the Eaglehawk
Circle, which is now under the leadership of Mrs. Oowen, the former
secretary, Mrs. Jolly having left the district.
Several of the Circles have also added to their list of members, so
that the members’ roll now numbers 436, and there is a prospect of one
more Circle at least before the next Journal is issued.
A very pleasant gathering took place at the residence of Mrs. Ham,
Talbert, Orrong Road, Armadale, on the afternoon of Thursday,
August 9th. Miss Ham very kindly invited the Windsor Circle and
one branch of the Rippon Lea Circle to meet the Armadale Home
Readers. The afternoon was spent in reading papers (including a most
interesting one by Miss Webster on Browning’s shorter poems), in
recitations, music and singing. It concluded with afternoon tea and an
interchange of ideas on the working of Circles.
156
A. H. R.


Miss Hale of Ellerslie College, Ballarat, writes : —“ The Circle
meets at the College the last Saturday of every month. There are but
six members, and we are studying As You Like, It. lam glad to find
a paper in the July number upon “ Jaques.” Miss Gregory is to read
an original paper on “Rosalind” next Saturday. There are two or
three other English Literature Circles in Ballarat, but my idea
in forming another for the same course was to enlist the interest of our
own ex-pupils, and as they have not yet had the opportunity of reading
many books we digressed somewhat from the rules of the Union ;
instead of keeping only to one of the suggested lists of books, we made a
choice from three courses. Probably next year we shall find it wiser to
follow the plan and rules fully. The Union is proving a great boon in
Ballarat. I hope the enthusiasm will spread to the smaller towns.”
I enclose reports also from the Superior of the Loretto Convent
and Miss Must of Portland.
“ The interest of the members at Loretto Abbey continues active.
Of the four Circles formed, viz., History, Science, Travel, and Literature
respectively, the last named seems to prove the most attractive.
Several sociable meetings have been held, at which notes and essays
were shown which gave evidence of careful work. Difficulties and
obscure or knotty points which had been met with were satisfactorily
solved, and finally the leader in council spoke on some useful literary
subject. Last meeting having been devoted to the discussion of
Longfellow and his works ; a pleasant variety was introduced by the
singing at intervals of some of the poet’s most charming songs, some
in chorus, others as solos. The monthly journals are watched for
and read with interest, and the Group hopes in time to produce some
essays fit to be sent in for your selection.”
“ Our Circle at Portland consists of thirteen members, and we have
taken the British History course. We meet once a fortnight in the
afternoon, at six different members’ houses, turn about, for an hour and
a half each time. As a rule all the members attend most regularly and
seem very interested in the work. We began by reading history, and
so far have devoted all the time to it, with also Scott’s Abbot. Several
essays have been written, the best being one on Chaucer by Mrs.
Mills, one on Oaxton by Mr. Osborne, and another by Mr. Wilson on
Copernicus. The method we have is, for several members to write
short sketches on any character or subject in the part allotted for the
next day’s meeting and read them aloud, then discuss ; and occasionally
asking a member to write an essay more extensive and complete than
the sketches. One of these sketches, read by Mrs. Corney on “ Church
Music prior to the Reformation,” was most interesting. The next book
for study is to be Sir Thomas More’s Utopia, after that Scott’s
Kenilworth. It is intended during the course of reading to have one or
two social evenings, inviting a few friends not belonging to the Circle,
and having music, songs, recitations, etc., and ending the course for the
year with one of the same gatherings.”
L. M. FOX.
157
A. H. R,


SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SECTION.
A committee meeting was held at the University on Thursday
afternoon, July 19th. His Honor the Chief Justice presided, and there
were present Miss J. Marryat, Miss Bundey, Miss Dutton, Miss George,
Mrs. Clement Giles, Miss B. Arnand Wright, Miss Vivian, Miss F.
Haycraft, Miss Jacob, Mr. T. H. Bowen, and the Secretary, Mr. G. G.
Newman. Letters were read from many of the Leaders of Circles,
Miss Diana Hope sent a long and very interesting account of the work
being accomplished in Clare. The Circle numbers fifty—the largest in
South Australia this year—and papers had been read by the Rev.
H. H. Teague, Mr. Jones, of Armagh, Rev. R. B. Webb, and Miss
Lipse.tt; and at this week’s meeting two were to be read—one by Dr.
Bain, and the other by Mrs. Barnard. Mr. E. R. Lucy, of Yongala,
reported that much enthusiasm was manifested in the Petersburg Circle.
The meetings were looked forward to with interest, and would shortly
be held in the new Institute Buildings. Mr. John Moyes gave a good
account of the Gladstone Tennyson Circle. Mrs. E. W. Hawker detailed
the work done at the Menindie Circle. A paper had been given by the
Misses Todd on “The Computation of Time,” which had been published
in the A.H.R.. Mrs. Clement Giles then said that the Burnside Circle
was reading Browning and Hamerton’s Human Intercourse, and was
doing good work. Mr. T. H. Bowen gave a detailed account of the
formation of a Circle under his leadership at Mill-terrace, North
Adelaide, and said papers had been read on “ The Development of
Printing,” “ The New Learning,” and “ The Discovery of America.”
Miss Jacob spoke of the flourishing state of the Circle at Unley Park.
Miss Vivian said her Circle was composed mostly of young people who
were beginning to take an interest in Browning. They were using the
Browning Primer recommended by the Chief Justice. Miss Marryat
said that Mr. A. R. Lungley had undertaken the duties of Leader in
her Circle during the illness of the Rev. B. 0. Stephenson. Miss
Dutton mentioned that her Circle were engaged in reading The History
of the British Empire. Miss B. Amand Wright said a brilliant paper
had been read in her Circle by Mr. Rupert Ingleby. Miss Bundey gave
a good account of the reading accomplished in the Circle to which she
belonged—an excellent paper had been read by Mr. Isbister. Miss
Irwin had succeeded in forming a Young People’s Circle. Miss George
gave an interesting account of a Group meeting, and said that another
would be held shortly. Miss Haycraft said that members of her Circle
were preparing lantern slides for illustrations of the works they were
reading. A good report was sent by Rev. Thomas Weatherill, of
Mallala. Miss Florence Saunders wrote to say that the meetings of the
Menindie Young Men’s Society Circle were thoroughly interesting under
the skilful leadership of Rev. S. Lenton. Miss Raston reported the
successful formation of a Circle at Kent Town. Miss Sells, of the
Advanced School, reported that the reading of Browning had given rise
to good discussions. Miss Stephen, of Jamestown, gave a long and
158
A. H. R.


most interesting account of good work being accomplished at that town.
Good accounts were also read from Mr. J. G. Lewis, of Port Pirie ; Dr.
J. H. G. Drummond, of Moonta ; Mrs. Gault, of Mitcham ; Mrs. C.
Drummond Morier, of Nairne; and Rev. John Garde, of Millicent.
G. G. NEWMAN.
NEW ZEALAND—Southern Section.
In Timaru the English Literature Circles are increasing in numbers
and enthusiasm. On June 22nd the members of the Wai-iti Road
Circle were invited to the Priory for a social afternoon, when a
programme was gone through by the latter members, consisting of glees,
vocal and pianoforte duets, piano solo “Papilions” (Schumann), a
recitation from Browning, reading from Kingsley, and two scenes from
Shakespeare’s As You Like It (the Forest Scenes, where Rosalind,
disguised as Ganymede, meets her lover Orlando, and goes through the
pretended “ love-making ”). A most enjoyable afternoon was closed
with tea and friendly criticism.
On July 22nd the members of the West Belt Circle were invited by
the Wai-iti Road Circle to spend an evening with them at the house of
one of their members. A large number from both Circles was present,
and a most enjoyable social evening was spent. The programme was
most varied, the musical part consisting of songs from Tennyson and
Browning, instrumental selections, and a very pretty glee. Then
there was a reading from the Merchant of Venice, a recitation from Antom/
and Cleopatra, and a most charming recitation of Tennyson’s To-morrow
given by an Irish lady, whose bewitching “ brogue ” gave the poem just
the local colour that it needed. Three of the younger members had
prepared a tableau representing the “ Death of Cleopatra,” which
was extremely pretty, and most effectively carried out in all its details.
The programme was brought to a close by a delightful rendering of a
“ Largo ” from one of Beethoven’s Sonatas. After the programme was
over, refreshments were handed round and conversation was indulged
in, the guests being unanimous in their expressions of enjoyment of
a most pleasant evening.
The Priory Circle had a very interesting meeting on the North
West Passage, when a very graphic paper was given by the leader on
“ Modern Exploration and Discovery in the Arctic Regions up to date,”
and illustrated by an enlarged map of the North Polar regions.
The Rev. C. E. Beecroft’s Circle spent an evening over George Eliot’s
Romola. A paper was read on the author’s life, as bearing on the work
under discussion, by Mr. Polsen, and one on the ethics of the book by
the leader, followed by the characters of Savonarola and Tito, in which
great interest was taken, especially the former.
The Wai-iti Road Circle are beginning with Selections from
Browning.
E. M. FUSSELL.
159
A. H. R.


SECRETARY-TREASURER’S ACCOUNT.
Receipts for Month ending August 28th, 1894.
From N. S. W. ... ... ... ... ... 4 6
0
,, Victoria ... ... ... ... ... 4 16
0
Total ... £9 2
0
NEW ZEALAND.— Northern Section.
A social in connection with the Masterton Circle was held in the
Wesleyan Schoolroom last evening, when a large number of members
and their friends were present. The programme of the evening was to
have been taken completely from the works of Lord Tennyson, but
owing to the illness of several members, a number of other items in the
second part had to be substituted. During the evening refreshments
were handed round. The following was the programme given : —Piano
solo, Miss Feist; reading, In Memoriam, Miss J. Perry; quartette,
“ Sweet and Low,” Messrs. W. and J. Simms and Misses McGregor and
Johnston; reading, The Children's Hospital , Miss Pearson ; recitation,
Locksley Hall , Mr. Hutchison; song, “Ring out Wild Bells,” Miss
Watson; song, “The Brook,” Mrs. Butement; piano solos, Miss
Watson and Miss Pearson ; reading, The Northern Farmer, Mr.
Jackson; song, “Good Company,” Mr. J. Simms; reading from
Pickwick Papers, Mr. Hutchison ; song, “ Crossing the Bar,” Mr. Lee ;
song, “Home they brought her Warrior Dead,” Mrs. Butement.
Altogether a most enjoyable evening was spent, and judging from last
night’s gathering, the welfare and stability of the Masterton Circle is
well assured. —
Wairarapa Daily Times.
TASMANIAN SECTION.
A tery largely attended social gathering of the Hobart Group of
Circles was held on Thursday, August 16th. With the Rev. Father
Kelsh in the chair, and the handsome and recently much-improved
Picture Gallery as the place of meeting, a pleasant meeting was
inevitable. On the suggestion of the Sectional secretary (Mrs. Morton)
there was a short discussion about the courses of reading for next year.
One new course—Sociology, including the elements of Ethics, Politics,
and Economics—was proposed, as being calculated to supply “ a long
felt want,” and this was advocated by a majority of the speakers.
Later on in the evening, Mr. Williams read an excellent paper on
Classics and English Literature ; after which an adjournment was made
to the Library for a discussion of a more material character. The
thanks of the Group are due to those lady members of the Local
Council, in whose hands the arrangements for the meeting had been
placed.
F. J. YOUNG
160
A. H. R.


Vol. 111., No. 7.
October, 1894.
THE A. H. R.
The Poetry of Wordsmorth
WORDSWORTH is pre-eminently England’s nature-
poet, and this, notwithstanding the fact that in English
poetry, from the time of Chaucer onwards, there has never been wanting
utterance upon external nature. Nature to Wordsworth was a living,
personal reality capable of inspiring with high thoughts and hallowed
fervour the not only “ haunted-like passion,” but elevated by noble
discipline. “He had a conscious ideal of what human life might be
made through simplicity of desire and communion with Nature, and he
resolutely set himself to the fulfilment of his ideal.” He was never out
of sight of this ideal, realising that contact with Nature’s beauties
was essential to the working out of his poetic genius. He sings :
The moving accident is not my trade,
To freeze the blood I have no ready arts :
’Tis my delight, alone in summer’s shade,
To pipe a simple song for thinking hearts.
His manner of receiving Nature’s message is well worthy of special
notice, and is best expressed in his own words. After briefly outlining
Scott’s method of observation, he writes:—“Nature does not permit an
inventory to be made of her charms. He should have left his pencil
and notebook at home, fixed his eye as he walked with a reverent
attention on all that surrounded him and taken all into a heart that
could understand and enjoy. Then after several days had passed by he
should have interrogated his memory as to the scene. He would have
discovered that while much of what he had admired was preserved to
him, much was also most wisely obliterated ; that which remained—
the picture surviving in his mind—would have presented the ideal and
essential truth of the scene, and done so in a large part by discarding
much which, though in itself striking, was not characteristic. In every
scene many of the most brilliant details are but accidental; a true eye
for nature does not note them or at least does not dwell upon them.”
I have quoted this passage at length since it so clearly sets forth the
poet’s poetic procedure. Scott merely described, though the beauty
and effectiveness of his word-pictures are everywhere allowed.


Wordsworth also described magnificently, but he added to his
descriptions,
The light that never was on sea or shore,
The consecration and the poet’s dream,
officiating as Nature’s high priest and interpreter.
It is mainly due to this “ consecrating ” power that his verses so
readily awaken responses in the heart. An excellent example of the
effect of this heavenly ‘ light ’ may be observed in The Daffodils. The
first three verses of this short poem describe delicately and melodiously
the external phenomena; but although the poet’s gaze is searching and
accurate, he does not at once realise the importance of the spectacle.
I gazed—and gazed—but little thought
What wealth the show to me had brought.
“ Emotion recollected in tranquillity ” brings him the full harvest of a
quiet eye
That broods and sleeps on his own heart.
And in the last verse we read ;—•
For oft, when on my couch I lie
In vacant or in pensive mood,
They flash upon that inward eye
Which is the bliss of solitude,
And then my heart with pleasure Jills,
And dances with the Daffodils.
Again in A Poet's Epitaph we read :
The outward shows of sky and earth,
Of hill and valley he has viewed ;
And impulses of deeper birth
Hare come to him in solitude.
The following selections also accentuate his habit of brooding “ on
outward shows ” in solitude until his “ tranquillity gradually disappears
and an emotion kindred to that which was before the subject of
contemplation is gradually produced and does itself actually exist in the
mind ”:—
Share with me fond thoughts : that inward eye,
Then, and then only, Painter, could thy art
The visual powers of nature satisfy.
Often as thy inward ear
Catches such rebounds.
Yea : what were mighty Nature’s self,
Her features could they win us,
Unhelped by the poetic voice
That hourly speaks within us ?
The music in my heart 1 bore
Long after it was heard no more.
Wordsworth’s heart filled with the second emotion and over-
flowed ; it is this overflow of soul that has proved such a potent force
to those intellectually so very dissimilar to the Poet of the Lakes.
162
A. H. R.


John Stuart Mill has written in his Autobiography: —“What
made his poems a medicine for my state of mind was that they expressed
not mere outward beauty, but states of feeling and thought coloured by
feeling under the excitement of beauty.” Nature, indeed, has “healing
power ” when Wordsworth interprets her utterances; for, speaking
himself from the fulness of his heart, his voice seldom fails to shoot a
bolt back somewhere in the breast. In many passages our poet has
spoken about the personality of Nature and the moral forces set in
operation by contact with the mighty mother. A very few citations
must suffice here.
In the Sonnet on Calais Beach we find these lines :
It is a beauteous evening, calm and free ;
The holy time is quiet as a nun
Breathless with adoration : the broad sun
Is sinking down in its tranquillity ;
The gentleness of heaven is on the sea.
Again notice the closing words of Nutting :
I felt a sense of pain when I beheld
The silent trees and the intruding sky,—
Then, dearest Maiden ! move along these shades
In gentleness of heart ; with gentle hand
Touch—for there is a spirit in the woods.
Elsewhere
One impulse from a vernal wood
May teach you more of man
Of moral evil and of good
Than all the sages can.
Wordsworth pictured everything as rejoicing with exuberance of
life.
In To May he sings of that genial season :
Earth, sea, thy presence feel, nor less
If yon ethereal blue
With its soft smile the truth express
The Heavens have felt it, too.
His highest expression about the vitality of Nature, however, is
in his poem Lines composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey. This is as
follows :
And I have felt
A presence that disturbs me with the joy
Of elevated thoughts : a sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the light of setting suns,
And the round ocean and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the mind of man :
A motion and a spirit, that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
And rolls through all things.
In Wordsworth’s youth the “glad animal movements ” in Nature
delighted him.
A gentle shock of mild surprise
Has carried far into his heart the voice
Of mountain torrents.
163
A. H. R.


He then felt no need of “a remoter charm by thought supplied,” since the
externals of Nature awed and subdued him. But this stage of un-
reflective pleasure was but a temporary halting place. Soon the great
mysteries of life crowd in upon his mind, and Nature seems to change
her aspect, for the “ excursive power ” of the human mind is making
itself felt within the poet, “ the glory and the freshness of a dream ”
have passed away, and Wordsworth sadly sings “that there hath passed
away a glory from the earth.” However, he was no pessimist, bemoan-
ing the vanity of all things, and set himself courageously to face the
facts of his position, and to effect a reconciliation between himself and
these. He knew that though much had been taken, much still remained,
and he contentedly declares ;
Though nothing can bring back the hour
Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower,
We will grieve not, rather find
Strength in what remains behind
In the primal sympathy
Which having been must ever be,
In the soothing thoughts that spring
Out of human suffering,
In the faith that looks through death,
In years that bring the philosophic mind.
He thus links nature to humanity. The real value of the former is to
be found in the fact that the latter is stimulated and encouraged by the
contact. Abundant recompense had been given for the lost “ dizzy
raptures ” of youth.
The still, sad music of humanity,
Not harsh, nor grating, though of ample power
To chasten and subdue,
had imprinted itself upon the poet’s heart, and Wordsworth has risen
to the full height of his poetic function. Nature has a moral significance
now,
For she can so inform
The. mind that is within us, so impress
With quietness and beauty, and so feed
With lofty thoughts, that neither evil tongues,
Rash judgements, nor the sneers of selfish men,
Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all
The dreary intercourse of daily life,
Shall e’er prevail against us, or disturb
Our cheerful faith that all which we behold
Is full of blessings.
It is significant that this assured belief is the outcome of reflection and
contemplation, and is uttered when the impetuosity of youthful
exhilaration has been left far behind.
S. H. BOWDEN
Brisbane.
164
A. H. E.


Classics and English Literature.
(Read at a Meeting of the Hobart Group , August 16th, 1894.)
Q6N all revolutions there is the risk of running into reactionary
excesses, and the modern revolt from the traditional supremacy of
Classics in literature is no exception to the rule. Not satisfied with
advocating the claims of English literature to an equal or even superior
consideration, zealous champions on the side of the Moderns have sought
to strengthen their cause by disparaging the Ancients, and have some-
times gone so far as to represent the two studies as incompatible and
antagonistic. I must confess I have not found them so. In the double
position which I have the honour to hold, it is my privilege to study
both departments of literature, and I cannot say that I have ever found
the one prejudicial to the other. In reading English literature I have
not found familiarity with the ancient languages make it more difficult
to trace the meaning of obscure or obsolete words originally derived
from those languages. I have not found the references and allusions to
o O
ancient mythology, history, and literature, with which our own literature
is studded, less intelligible through an intimate acquaintance with the
works from which those references and allusions were taken. I have
not found my perception of the meaning of an abstruse or intricate
passage blunted by constant practice in interpreting classical authors. I
have not found my appreciation of the charms and graces of style
diminished by the fact that my taste has been formed by the study of
Greek and Latin models. I have not found my sympathy with an
author impaired by an admiration for those masterpieces of literature
which have exerted the most subtle and potent influence on his
imagination and art. My own experience has been that so far from
being antagonistic, the two studies are mutually helpful. The extension
to English literature of the more exact and scientific methods that have
long been applied to Classics, will serve to save it from degenerating
into loose and arbitrary aesthetics. While the literary study of Classics
will invest them with that humanizing influence which was often
lacking under the old system of too exclusive devotion to linguistic and
philological investigation.
The influence of Classics on European literature can hardly be over-
estimated. “ Eor nearly two thousand years,” it has been well said, “ from
the time of Homer to the age preceding Dante, the Greek and Latin
were the only cultivated tongues, the only literatures of the European
world. The first bright with its own brightness, and strong in its own
strength ; the second beautiful, though with borrowed lustre, were the
sun and the moon of the intellectual firmament, and by their light men
thought. Long after the birth of its destined rival, namely, modern
literature, the influence of the ancient literature continued paramount
165
A. H. B.


and supreme. ‘ Thou art rny master, my authority,’ cries Dante to the
venerated, almost deified, shade of Virgil; and it would not be easy to
point out any author of that and the three following centuries who was
not far more indebted to the treasuries of antiquity, and a far closer
copyist of its models. Afterwards the imitation becomes less conscious
and less obvious ; but the debt due to antiquity is not cancelled by non-
acknowledgment. Men talk contemptuously of the 1 dead languages,’
when, to this day, all the intellect of civilized Europe breathes their
spirit and takes their form. Are they dead to us 1 From the teaching
of schoolmen, legists, and churchmen, from the study and imitation of
classical authors ; from our personal intercourse with France, from the
influence of modern ‘ romance ’ literature, the English language has
become crowded with classical words, Latin and Latinized Greek, and
often recast in a classical mould. No writer who is bound by the laws
of the English language can emancipate himself from the fetters of
Rome. We must accept the past, which we cannot alter.
“ Wherever men have surpassed their forefathers, they have done so,
not by ignoring the efforts and advances previously made, but by
studying and mastering them, and by making the ultimate attainment
of former men a starting point for their own investigations. But we
cannot, if we would, rid ourselves of the inheritance bequeathed to us by
our fathers—an inheritance which consists not only of lands and houses,
nor yet of institutions, language, and manners, but also of sentiments,
opinions, and habits of thought. Man has a collective as well as an
individual life. The great human soul never dies ; and the noblest
study to which any one man can devote himself, next after the study of
Him in whom we live and move and have our being, is the birth and
nurture and growth of Human Intellect. And it is a fact beyond doubt,
that the first fruitful germs of philosophy were planted, the first flowers
of immortal poetry blossomed, by the banks of the Grecian Sea. Except
only that deeper philosophy and that sublimer poetry which sprang
beside the Brook of Siloam, beneath the breath of God.”
But the field of enquiry thus indicated is too extensive for the
limits of a paper in which brevity is to be the redeeming feature. For
our present purpose it will be enough to confine our attention to one
issue—the bearing of Classics upon the study of English literature.
And I make bold to affirm that for a serious student—not a dilettante
sraatterer who takes his literature in homoeopathic doses of elegant
extracts—some acquaintance with Classics is an indispensable quali-
fication. For, to take the lowest and most obvious ground, there is a
considerable portion, especially of our own earlier literature, which, by
reason of its very language, must be more or less unintelligible to one
who has no knowledge of Latin, Take for instance such a book as
Bacon’s Advancement of Learning , where, not to speak of the allusions
and quotations with which it is richly adorned, the actual words are
constantly used with a Latinized meaning very different from the
vernacular. But, to pass from this rudimentary knowledge, which may
166
A. H. E.


be laboriously culled from copious notes and cunningly constructed
glossaries, to the higher sphere of sesthetic appreciation, where no
vocabularies avail—can we fully enter into the spirit of much of our
best literature without some knowledge and love of Classics 1
Imaginative literature realises for us the Pythagorean dream of the
transmigration of souls. By it our souls pass into the soul of genius.
We exchange for the time our narrow, sordid, ignoble souls, with their
petty thoughts, their foolish imaginations, and their mean ideals, for the
wise and beautiful spirits of the mighty dead. We see with their eyes,
we hear with their ears, we understand with their minds. Our young
men see visions—visions of purity and loveliness ; and our old men
dream dreams—dreams of peace and Sabbath rest; visions and dreams
suffused with that mysterious light which never was on sea or land. We
sit in heavenly places with Milton and hold communion with princi-
palities and powers. We tread with Keats the groves of Latmus, and
see the brain-sick shepherd-prince Endymion wandering forlorn. We
hear that vale in Ida, lovelier than all the valleys of lonian hills,
thrilling with the melodious lamentation of Oenone. And with
Shakespeare we “ take upon’s the mystery of things, as if we were God’s
spies,” and “ see life steadily and see it whole.”
But the artist’s vision is never adequately expressed. Partly
through the weakness of humanity, which makes the real always fall
short of the ideal—that impotence of colours, or sounds, or words, to
embody the full significance of the thought which Marlowe felt in his
yearning after the unattainable, and Browning calls “Artistry’s haunting
curse, the Incomplete ” —partly through defective sympathy in our-
selves. Without sympathy with the artist no artistic creation can be
fully understood. The artist himself needs sympathy with his subject
for successful representation, and in proportion to his power of
identifying himself with it will be his ability to affect others. The
highest form of sympathetic art is the drama, and the most consummate
example of the sympathetic creator is Shakespeare. In him the fusion
of subject and object, the metempsychosis, is complete. In his dramas
he becomes not Shakespeare but the individual soul whose emotions he
is representing. So, for a poet of Nature, like Wordsworth, there must
be that sympathy with Nature which he describes when he says :
“ The sounding cataract
Haunted me like a passion ; the tall rook,
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
Their colours and their forms were then to me
An appetite,—a feeling and a love,
That had no need of a remoter charm
By thoughts supplied, nor any interest
Unborrowed from the eye.”
But sympathy is impossible without knowledge, and the depth of our
sympathy is limited by the extent of our knowledge. We often see a
want of sympathy caused by a want of knowledge, as in the case of
cruelty to animals, insensibility to music, and indifference to picture*.
167
A. H. R.


When Lear knew by personal experience the sufferings of poverty he
felt sympathy for the first time with the poor
“ Poor naked wretches, wheresoe’er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Your loop’d and window’d raggedness defend you
From seasons such as these ? 0, I have ta’en
Too little care of this ! Take physic, pomp,
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou may’st shake the superflux to them
And show the heavens more just.”
We may gain a sorb of instinctive sympathy by living with persons,
though even this is due to that knowledge of their characters, interests,
and circumstances which we unconsciously absorb from the intercourse
of daily life. But how can we have sympathy with the past without
knowledge ? Take a period of history. How can we understand it
without some sympathy with the ideas that actuated its tendencies and
movements ? And how can we have that sympathy without first
acquainting ourselves with the circumstances, the conditions, and the
personalities of the period 1
To apply these principles to classics and English literature. Our
understanding of an author’s meaning will be limited by our sympathy
with him, and our sympathy with him will be limited by our knowledge
of what he knew. If he was deeply read in classic lore, which from his
youth upward formed the staple food for his intellect and imagination,
and we are ignorant of classics, we are to that extent debarred from
perfect sympathy with him and incapable of appreciating his artistic
creations. This will isolate us in varying degree from some of our
greatest poets. It will estrange us from Milton. Can we be in full
sympathy with him, when such a passage as that in Paradise Regained
beginning “ Athens, the eye of Greece ” (iv. 226-280), falls on our ears
like a tale of little meaning, though the words are strong 1
This splendid eulogy of Athens, “ the eye of Greece, mother of
arts and eloquence,” shows not only profound learning but
enthusiasm for “the glory that was Greece.” What better example can
we have of the intimate connection between classical and modern
literature ? Surely Milton is no insignificant part of English literature.
And Milton loved and revered Athens, and wrote of her in imperish-
able poetry ; but wrote of her with such fulness of knowledge that only
those who are familiar with her history, her literature, her oratory, and
her philosophy, can properly understand his allusions. If through lack
of knowledge we are strangers to that influence of which Macaulay
said, “Wherever literature consoles sorrows or assuages pain ; wherever
it brings gladness to eyes which fail with wakefulness and tears, and
ache for the dark house and the long sleep,—there is exhibited in its
noblest form the immortal influence of Athens ”; if we are such
strangers to that influence which has inspired our greatest poets that
we can read some of their noblest passages without any kindlings of
168
A. H. E.


sympathetic enthusiasm, can we in any serious sens© profess ourselves
students of English literature ?
Time will not allow me to do more than remind lovers of our
literature of Spenser, of Bacon, and of Hooker; of the so-called
Classical Period of Dryden, Pope, Swift, Steele and Addison ; of Gray
and Collins, and Cowper’s translation of Homer ; of Wordsworth’s
Laodamia and Dion ; of Byron, Shelley and Keats—the most Grecian
of our poets; of Tennyson, and Mrs. Browning, and her greater
husband ; of Matthew Arnold, who found his moral support in Homer,
Epictetus, and Sophocles ; of Swinburne, who has renewed the spirit of
the Greek drama in Atalanta in Calydon, and Erectheus ; and of
William Morris with his Earthly Paradise and Life and Death of
Jason.
Surely even the most cursory survey of English literature will convince
us of the importance of some knowledge of the Classics. When we see
our greatest writers, with singular unanimity, professing their love and
veneration for the ancients, whom they are not ashamed to call their
masters ; when we see them one and all steeped in classic lore, and by
reference and allusion presuming the same knowledge in their readers;
when we see how completely Greek and Roman literature has influenced
our own in form, in language, and in subjects; when we see how
inextricably their very words are interwoven with the texture of our
language; when we see all this, as we cannot fail to see if we study our
literature with open and candid minds, can we doubt that some
acquaintance with Classics is desirable, if not essential, for the right
understanding and full enjoyment of what is best in our own literature?
In the triumphant renaissance of modern literature is there no danger
of becoming as arrogant and bigoted in our opposition to antiquity as
its champions have been in its defence 1 Surely it is more in accordance
with the liberal and enlightened spirit of this age to recognise what is
good in each, to render honour where honour is due, and to receive
with generous catholicity of taste the artistic creations of true genius in
whatever age or country they are manifested. We go far afield nowa-
days in our search after new forms of literary production. We are
cosmopolitan enough in taste to admit the possibility of some good
thing coming out of Norway or Russia, to acknowledge the claim of an
Ibsen or a Tolstoi to a niche in the great Valhalla of immortals. We
are approaching Matthew Arnold’s conception of “ the whole group of
civilized nations being, for intellectual and spiritual purposes, one great
confederation, bound to a joint action, and working towards a common
result; a confederation whose members have a due knowledge both of
the past, out of which they all proceed, and of one another.” Shall we
withhold from the mighty spirits of the past, because they spoke with
other, yet not alien, tongues, that homage we freely pay to their
successors? We marvel at the critical blindness of our forefathers, who,
in their admiration for the faulty faultlessness of Pope, failed to
recognise the transcendant genius of Shakespeare. Can it be that, when
169
A. H. K.


the fervour of the anti-classical crusade has died away, the calmer
verdict of posterity may condemn us for doing scant justice to Homer
and Yirgil? There is no danger now of allowing our judgments to be
carried captive by classical rules, of testing the merit of modern poetry,
as Addison did the ballad of Chevy Chase by its conformity to
Yirgilian standards. There is no danger of our saying, as the Edinburgh
Reviewer did of Keats, “ this will not do ” to anything that dares to
deviate from classical correctness. There is no danger of our stopping
our ears against Carlyle, Browning, or even Walt Whitman, because
they forsake the beaten paths of literary form. The danger is that we
may forget those immutable laws of beauty that are embodied for
us in the calm severity of Grecian literature, as they are embodied in
Grecian statuary and Grecian architecture, and then having no
standard whereby to regulate our judgments, we may become a law
unto ourselves, until we insensibly drift further and further away from
the True and Beautiful into the chaos of literary anarchy and aesthetic
confusion.
W. H. WILLIAMS.
Valedictory Address.
Sydney, September 3, 1894.
To J. S. Scott, Esq.,
Joint Hon. Secretary of the N.S.W. Section of the A.H.R.U.
Dear Sir.— We, the undersigned, members of the Council and of
the N.S.W. Sectional Committee of the Australasian Home Reading
Union, desire to express our hearty appreciation of the work you have
so ably and successfully done for the past two years as joint honorary
Secretary of the N.S.W. Section of the Union.
We feel that much of the success of the Union has been due to
your generous work, and that this Section will suffer a great loss in
being deprived of your services.
We all unite in wishing you every success and happiness in your
new sphere of action.
C. M. DAVID, President N.S. W. Section
A. STUDDY, Joint Hon. Secretary N.S.W. Section
E. LILLIAS STEPHENSON, Leader Geog. Circle, Hunter’s Hill
T. VV. EDGEWORTH DAVID, Leader Ashfield Circle
W. R. BEAVER, Leader Croydon Circle
HORACE ALLARD, Member Committee
P. ANSELL ROBIN, Hon. Editor A.H.R,
M. S. WOLSTENHOLME, Hon. General Secretary
K. V. PRATT, Leader Petersham Circle
C. 0. BURGE, Leader North Sydney Circle
G. SYDNEY JONES, Leader Strathfield Circle
A. T. FAIRCLOUGH, Leader Parramatta Circle
M. BTOCKFELD, Leader Ashfield German Circle
EDYTHE H. MARTIN, Member Sectional Committee
170
A. H. K.


The Sabbath of Boy.
all that I might have rest! The tyrant hours,
Each following fast on each, upon me lay
Increasing burdens, and their sum devours
By minutes all the day.
One hour I stole from them at eventide,
One hour of peace, if peace might come to me ;
Day’s memories still her presence me denied,
And thought of cares to be.
And more than toil, and memories, and care,
The grief of these endured in loneliness;
Peace would each evening bring that brought me her
Whose love would all days bless.
Under the stars that o’er her too are bright
Shall I not find the strength to persevere?
Speak to me, O deep silence of the night,
My weary heart to cheer.
How deep the silence is! And hark, for clear,
Solemn and awful, as the full-voiced sea,
Silence herself is stirred to music : Hear
What she shall speak to me.
Yet no 1 the voiceless message that I heard,
Passes the power of language to express;
The Heavens declare the glory of the Lord,
And sing His Holiness.
But deeper yet the stillness grows ; and I
Wait too in silence, and at last I know
It is God’s Sabbath, though unceasingly
His Hand guides all below
On Earth as in the Heaven above. For rest
And labour in the Infinite are one:
And resting in His Love, I shall be blest,
Working, till work is done.
J.
171
A. H. K.


Political Economy.
DISTRIBUTION. I.
jKAfjN industrial society collectively produces, week by week and year
by year, a certain amount of “ want-satisfactions,” in the form
of valuable services mutually rendered by its members. (The service
may consist of working up and supplying some material goods, or may
be a personal service not “ fixed and embodied ” in any material object).
To the individual, a certain money income means power to obtain,
up to a certain value, the services of others, in whatever form he may
prefer. In other words, it means power to obtain a certain share of
the total want-satisfaction producible in the society.
How, then, is it determined what share of this total will fall to
each individual ! That is the question of Distribution.
In the words of J. S. Mill, “ The Distribution of Wealth [or of
want-satisfactionJ is a matter pf human institution only. The things
once there, mankind, individually or collectively, can do with them as
they like. They can place them at the disposal of whomsoever they
please, and on whatever terms. In the social state, any disposal of
them can only take place by the consent of society, or rather of those
who dispose of its active force. Even what a person has produced by
his individual toil, unaided by anyone, he cannot keep, unless by the
permission of society. Not only can society take it from him, but
individuals could and would take it from him, if society only remained
passive ; if it did not either interfere en masse, or employ and pay
people for the purpose of preventing him from being disturbed in
the possession. The distribution of wealth, therefore, depends on the
laws and customs of society. The rules by which it is determined, are
what the opinions and feelings of the ruling portion of the community
make them, and are very different in different ages and countries ; and
might be still more different, if mankind so chose.”
The distribution of want-satisfaction, then, is determined (apart
from illegal force and fraud) by the action of the society as a whole.
The rules of distribution are constituted, in primitive societies, by the
customs of the tribe or village-community ; in civilized societies, by the
Law of the State, —or perhaps it should rather be said, by the one
custom which tends with us to substitute itself for the whole body of
primitive customs; namely, the custom of obeying the law deliberately
adopted by the State, whatever that law may be.
Let us see how the action of society takes effect in the matter. At
any particular moment, we find that the goods already in existence
have been assigned as •property to this or that person or group of
persons, (including, in some cases, the whole corporation of the State).
And if we trace the process onward from this point, we find that
individuals get their wants satisfied from day to day by exchanging
172
A. H. R.


goods which are their property, or services which they have power to
render, for the goods or services of others.
In order to understand distribution, then, we must understand
(1) property, and (2) exchange.
What makes a thing my property 1 Simply the recognition of the
society in which I live that it is my property; that is, that I may do
what I like with it, within certain limits, and that no one else may
take it from me without my consent. And in our society, this
recognition is given through the law of the State ; that is, through
certain regulations deliberately laid down or maintained by us
collectively as citizens, and enforced, when necessary, by our collective
power. Property is, in fact, the creation of the State.
In many cases, the State visibly and directly assigns property to
this or that owner. Thus, when a man dies, the State determines who
shall own the goods he has left. Our State, indeed, delegates to the
present owner the power of deciding to whom his property shall pass at
his death ; but it does so only because we have thought it best that it
should do so, and other communities have settled the question very
differently. And if the owner dies intestate, the State directly decides,
by its law, to whom the property shall go. Moreover, the State often
takes to itself a part of the property of the deceased, in the form of
succession duty; and it could, if we thought fit, take the whole.
Again, the State from time to time takes away part of the property of
living persons, in the form of taxes ; and there would be nothing to
prevent it from taking the whole, if we should see fit so to order it.
Then too, the State, by its laws, directly decides whether ownership
of lands shall be assigned to individuals, and if so, on what terms. The
parliament of New South Wales is at this moment considering this
question, with regard to that part of the land which the goverment has
not already assigned to private owners.
But it is equally true, though perhaps less obvious, that even in
the every-day transactions between private persons, wherever property
changes hands, it is really the State that confers the ownership on the
new owner. Unless he becomes the “ lawful ” owner—unless, that is,
the law ratifies the transaction, —some other person can call in the
power of the State to take it from him. When there is a dispute as to
the ownership of a piece of property, the disputants “go to law ” ; that
is, they appeal to State officials to decide to which of the two the Law
assigns it.
It is the State, then, that lays down the conditions under which
each member can claim a certain portion of the total goods in existence
as his own.
Some people have imagined that there are “ rights of property ”
independent of, and sometimes inconsistent with, the rights of property
constituted by the law of the State. They say that a man has a
“ natural right ” of property in this or that thing ; and whatever else
they may mean by that very ambiguous phrase, they probably mean to
173
A, H. R.


imply that such rights are prior to and independent of the recognition
of society through the law of the State. Every man, it is asserted, has
a “ natural right ” to “ the product of his own labour,” —or to “ a living
wage,”—or to “ three acres and a cow,” —or to 5 per cent, interest on
his capital,—or to “ freedom of contract,” —or “ to flog his own nigger ”;
the supposed content of the “ natural right ” varying according to the
position and point of view of its assertor. Those who (rightly or
wrongly) think it undesirable that individuals should be allowed to
receive interest on capital, or the rent and “unearned increment ” of
land, often assert that the capitalist or land-owner is a “robber,” i.e., a
person who takes by force the property of others ; and some men, con-
sidering it undesirable that property should be assigned to individuals
at all, have expressed that opinion in the form of the paradox that
“ property is theft.”
What those who use such language really mean seems to be this ;
that it would be better if the State, which has in fact assigned property
in certain ways, were to assign it in certain other ways instead, or to
refuse to assign it to individuals at all. That is an intelligible propos-
ition, and one that can be discussed on its merits in each case. Few of
us would assert that the assignment of property as now established is
perfect in its working ; and most of us could indicate some particular
alterations of the laws affecting property which we think desirable.
But if we would avoid being misled by our own words, it is better to
confine the word “ property ” to that ownership which is in fact laid
down by our existing laws, imperfect as they may be, and to apply the
words “ robbery ” and “ theft ” only to infringements of those laws.
This need not prevent us from doing our utmost to get the law altered
in any points in which we consider it defective ; nor need it prevent us
from recognising that there are cases in which to insist on one’s legal
right of property is to do a moral wrong.
A man’s property, then, in the sense which it is most convenient
to give to the word, is that which the law of the State has assigned to
him as his own, and which the law courts, if appealed to, would declare
to be his.
Starting from a position in which each member of Society has a
portion, larger or smaller, of existing goods (money or money’s worth),
already assigned to him, let us see how the income of each individual, or
his share of the total of valuable want-satisfactions, will be determined
from this point onward.
It will be determined by exchange. The question how much want-
satisfaction each man can get within a given time is simply the question
what is the exchange-value of the services he can render to others
within that time (including the production of goods for others, and the
transference to others of goods which are his property, among the many
kinds of “ services ”). The money income of a carpenter or shearer, of
a doctor or lawyer (supposing him to have no other source of income
than his work), is the amount of money which he can get in exchange
174
A. H. R.


for his work. The income which a capitalist derives from his capital
is the amount of money which he can get in exchange for the service of
“ lying out of ” his capital; that is, as we have seen, the service of
waiting for some want-satisfactions within his power, and thereby
relieving someone else of the necessity of waiting. The income which a
land-owner derives from his land is the amount of money which he can
get in exchange for the service of allowing another to use his land, or
else an equivalent amount which he gets by using it himself and selling
its products.
How, then, is the exchange-value of every kind of goods and
services determined 1 When we have answered this question, we shall
have found out how distribution is carried out. (Avoid confusing this
with the quite distinct question how it would be best that distribution
should be carried out).
Assuming (1) that each person concerned seeks to make the best
bargain he can for himself; (2) that the parties are allowed to bargain
freely ; and (3) that there is complete competition, or “ a perfect
market,” the rate of exchange is determined in accordance with the
well-known principle that “ the price of any kind of goods or services
tends to settle at that rate at which the amount demanded and the
amount supplied become equal.” (For explanations of this principle,
and statements of its various applications, see the text-books).
Note the assumptions here made. As to the first, —that each
person, in his business transactions, seeks to make the best bargain he
can—anyone can observe for himself how nearly that assumption
corresponds with the facts in his own transactions and in those of his
neighbours. Without being absolutely and universally true, it is,
among us, so near the truth that we are not likely to be led into any
great divergence from the facts in making it for the purpose of
argument. This must, I think, be admitted even by those who say
that to make the best bargain one can for oneself is wicked. (Is it
wicked 1 More probably, it is in some cases wicked, and in other cases
quite innocent and right. But that is a question of Ethics, —a question
of how people ought to act; and we are just now considering how
people do act).
As to the assumption that there is complete competition, —which
implies that each person concerned knows what is the best bargain for
him that any other person can be induced to make with him, and acts
on his knowledge,—that is a condition that is seldom perfectly fulfilled ;
the assumption is more nearly true in the case of some kinds of goods
and services, and less nearly in the case of others; and on the whole,
agrees less closely with the facts in the sale of labour than in that of
material goods. It must be remembered also, that the extent of the
“ market,” —that is, the range within which competition is active, —
varies greatly ; it may, in the case of fresh fish and perishable fruit,
for instance, be temporarily limited to a particular market building; or,
as in the case of the precious metals, and of important stocks and
175
A. H. R.


shares, it may be co-extensive with the civilised world. And further,
the tendency of prices, under the influence of competition, to settle at
the rate which equalises demand and supply, may take more or less
time to work itself out. Hence, in applying our rule of “ demand and
supply ” to particular cases, we must always be careful to note how far
competition actually prevails in each case, and within what limits it
works. Used with this precaution, the formula may properly take its
place as the central principle of Economics ; but it will lead into serious
errors those who attempt to apply it without observing the conditions of
its validity.
But competition depends on and implies free bargaining; and
what right have we to assume free bargaining at all 1
That condition exists, for us, in many matters, though not in all.
But so far as it exists, it is the State that has established and maintains
it. For bargaining implies (a) property owned by one or both parties ;
(that is true at least in all cases where a money payment enters into the
bargain) ; and (J) a mutual agreement to transfer property or render
other services. If, for instance, I engage a man to do a day’s work in
my garden for a wage of 65., that implies (a) that I own 65., and ( b )
that we agree that the ownership of that sum is to be transferred from
me to him in exchange for work done by him for me.
Now property or ownership, as we have seen, is created and
transferred by the authority of society, acting through the law of the
State. And the fulfilment of contracts to render services is also based
on the collective authority of society, and where necessary, enforced by
the compelling power of the State.
Of course the power of the State is not called in on every occasion
to enforce respect for property and fulfilment of contracts ; but none
the less, the fact that this power is present in the background is an
essential element in the transaction. Most of us, it is to be hoped,
fulfil our engagements, and abstain from picking one another’s pockets,
because we prefer to deal honestly, rather than from fear of the
policeman and the law-court; but it is the law of the State (together
with the public opinion that goes with and supports that law), that
determines what constitutes “ honest dealing ” in each particular case ;
and it is the State that, as far as possible, ensures that all shall deal
honestly, including those misguided persons' who would prefer not
to do so. If it were not for the security thus afforded, no economic
transactions beyond the most rudimentary would be possible.
The conditions on which all bargaining depends, then, are provided
by the State. And further, the terms on which bargains may be made
are settled by the State. So far as “ free contract and free competition ”
prevail, it is the State that has established and maintains them. The
State says to its members, as the case may bo, either “ you may ” or “ you
shall not bargain freely.”
The State can, and our State in many cases does, forbid free
bargaining. If, for instance, I pay a voter to vote for me in a
176
A. H. R.


parliamentary election, or if I sell intoxicating liquors without a
license, the State will have something to say to me. And the State
could (and would, if a majority of the voters thought fit), fix the prices
of all goods and services, or, —as some people desire, —make it a penal
offence for any one of its members to sell his services to another, or to
buy the services of another, at any price whatever. If, our State says
to us in many cases, though not in all, “ the price of the goods or
services in question shall be whatever price you may fix on by free
bargaining,” that state of things is established by act of State, as much
as any other economic relation between its members would be.
As things are at present, however, the chief aim of our State
institutions in the matter is to prevent me from taking goods or services
from my neighbour without his consent, but to allow me to receive them
from him on any terms to which he does consent; that is, to prohibit
the individual from satisfying his wants by robbery or fraud, and to
facilitate the satisfaction of his wants by free bargaining. And it is
chiefly by means of exchanges made on this principle that distribution
is carried on.
It all started with an equal amount of property, or with none at
all, the incomes of all persons, (at least until some had acquired more
property by saving), would depend solely on the exchange-value of the
services they were capable of rendering by their own exertions. But we
do not start equal in this respect. For the State has, in our society,
assigned a much larger amount of property to some persons than to
others, in the form of inherited capital and land. And the persons to
whom this benefit—if it is one—has fallen are able to derive incomes
from their capital or land without personal exertion, by exchanging for
the services of others the service of lending their capital or letting
their land. Moreover, those who are receiving larger incomes are in a
better position to give their children such an education as will enable
them in turn to render services which command a high price in the
market. Hence, existing inequalities of wealth tend to perpetuate
themselves from generation to generation.
Some people hold that it would be better if the State, —that is, if
we collectively, as citizens, —were to put a stop to this, and make all
start equal in respect of property. What would be the results, good
and bad, of an attempt to carry out that policy, is an interesting
question; but it would take us beyond our present subject to discuss it.
This only may be remarked in passing, that there is no “ Economic
Law ” to prevent our trying that experiment, or any other, if we choose;
subject, of course, to the penalty of suffering from the results of our
folly if we choose foolishly.
W. SCOTT
177
A. 11. K.


What is Love ?
I.
ove, what is Love ? All natures own the spell ;
Yet what, or whence, it is, ah ! who may tell ?
Whence come, or whither flitting, who can say ?
For love at times will fold his wayward wing,
And nestle in the heart, and sweetly sing;
While oft, though one entreat, he will not stay.
Is love a rose, sweet though in thorns arrayed,
A little while to bloom, and then to fade,
The fleeting glory of a summers day ?
Is love a jewel ? A pearl of price untold ?
Pearls may their lustre lose, and gems and gold
By thievish hands full oft are stol’n away.
Is love our sun ? The night draws nigh apace.
Our guiding star ? Thick clouds may veil the face
Of heaven, and shroud in gloom that cheering ray.
Is love a fire, clear shining in the heart,
In earth’s chill darkness warmth and light to impart ?
All hearths flamed once where now lie ashes grey !
11.
Is love a bird ? Behold his empty nest !
Wouldst track his flight ? Ah ! fruitless were the quest
As search for vanished snow, or scattered spray !
Ah, love, so bright, so brief I What gain is ours
To have walked with love in spring-tide ’mid the flowers,
When autumn wraps us in its dank decay ?
Nay, this is gain—to cheat the weary time
With sweet remembering of the year’s fair prime,
Since joys departed are not fled for aye.
Nay, dreary winter ushers in sweet spring ;
Again beside the nest the bird will sing,
And flowers will bloom, and all the world be gay.
Nay, treasures may be guarded, flames be fed ;
Still sweet are rose-leaves when the bloom is shed ;
Still after darkness comes once more the day.
And love ? Ah ! Love is Zore, and shall endure ;
Forth from the furnace gleams the radiance pure,
Tis but love’s dross which Time can burn away.
ISABEL COCKBURN GILES.
178
A. H. R.


Lady Macheth.
(A Paper Read before the New Town Circle, Tasmania.)
I&I|*IIGHTY years ago, Coleridge gave a series of six lectures on
ssJ||i Shakespeare, at Bristol, of which unfortunately only scanty notes
have been preserved. In his second lecture, dealing with this play, he
was reported in the Bristol Gazette as opposing the ordinary view taken
of Lady Macbeth, and speaking of her constant effort throughout “ to
bully her conscience.” Coleridge’s idea was that “ she was a woman of
a visionary and day-dreaming turn of mind ; her mind was fixed on the
shadows of her solitary ambition. But her conscience, so far from being
seared, was continually smarting within her ; and she endeavoured to
stifle its voice by inflated and soaring fancies, and appeals to
spiritual agency.”
The view of the character, thus suggested by Coleridge, has
gradually crept into acceptance. In the Westminster Review for 1844
appeared and able and lengthy paper by Mr. Fletcher, in which the
same interpretation is given ; and again, in 1867, in the pages of the
Fortnightly, Mr. Clayden took up a similar position. It has since
been adopted by Dr. Hudson, the American critic, as well as by
Professor Dowden and others in still later years. In his work on
Shakespeare’s Life, Art, and Characters, Hudson remarks: “ Two
characters, however, may easily be made out for Lady Macbeth,
according as we lay the chief stress on what she says or what she does.
For, surely, no one can fail to remark that the anticipation raised by
her earlier speeches is by no means sustained in her subsequent acts.
When she looks upon the face of the sleeping king, and sees the
murderous thought passing, as it were, into a fact before her, a gush of
womanly feeling or of native tenderness suddenly stays her hand :
‘ Had he not resembled my father as he slept, I had done’t.’ That
such a real or fancied resemblance should thus rise up and unsinew her
purpose in the moment of action is a rare touch of nature, indeed; and
shows that conscience works more effectually through the feelings in her
case than through the imagination in that of her husband.”
Finally, in the recent revival of Macbeth by Mr. Irving, this con-
ception of the part at length found its way on to the stage, and, thanks
to the admirable acting of Miss Terry, was received with favour,
modified with popular distrust. For the old, straightforward view of
the character still holds its ground with the majority, Average
readers of the plays still cling to the theory that Macbeth was a brave
soldier and fairly honourable man, with a decent conscience, until
opportunity and a bad wife converted him into a villain. Ever since
the original disaster in Eden, any story of man being led by woman
as her victim into crime has met with a too easy credulity
179
A. H. R.


And so Lady Macbeth is regarded as a woman of one idea—ruthless
ambition—devoid of every human affection, every sympathetic feeling :
the evil genius of her husband, she crushes the promptings of his better
nature by force of her obdurate individuality. This interpretation of
her character is probably due to the process of stage distortion, whereby
what the great Dramatist drew has been replaced by what the great
Tragedian, Mrs Siddons, acted. To be more precise, this conception of
the character should be credited to Mrs. Pritchard, the actress who
played the part with Garrick twenty years before Kemble and his
sister produced the play. Lady Macbeth has not much to say,—about
one-third as much as her husband—but the wonderful genius and
personality of Mrs. Siddons made her part the centre of the whole
drama, and the Macbeth of Mr. Kemble sank into a minor, co-operating
personage. As contemporary critic, Professor Bell has left on record :
“ Her turbulant and inhuman strength of spirit does all. She turns
Macbeth to her purpose—makes him her mere instrument—guides,
directs, and inspires the whole plot. Like Macbeth’s evil genius, she
hurries him on in the mad career of ambition and cruelty from which
his nature would have shrunk.” Boaden also spoke of her in this part
as “an exulting savage,” and Campbell said that “ the moment she
seized the part, she identified her image with it in the minds of the
living generation.” A better known critic, Leigh Hunt, gives us more
information in his description of Mrs. Siddons as “ a somewhat
masculine beauty, a mistress of lofty, queenly, and appalling tragic
effect; but failing in the highest points of refinement , and without the
power of representing love.” Such was the impression produced by the
powerful acting of Mrs. Siddons, and it shows how important a factor
in determining characters is the personality of a great actor. In this
particular instance it is a noteworthy fact that this creature of
“ turbulent and inhuman strength of spirit” was not at all what the
actress herself believed to be the true reading of the part. Some notes
of hers have been preserved, giving a very different interpretation;
insisting upon Lady Macbeth’s essentially feminine nature, and on the
“ striking indications of sensibility, tenderness, and sympathy,” which
she exhibits. The many expressions of affectation used by Macbeth to
his wife bear suggestively on this point. “My dearest love,” “ Dearest
Chuck,” “ Sweet remembrancer,” would certainly be somewhat out of
place if the lady were not supposed to be remarkable for genuinely
feminine charms and graces.
The object of this paper, then, is to show, that the mainspring of
the tragedy is not to be found in the passionate and self-willed ambition
of Lady Macbeth, but in the disproportioned, imaginative soul of
Macbeth himself, with his intense selfishness and superstitious fancies.
The prophecies of the Weird Sisters, the temptations of opportunity,
his wife’s obstinate ambition, are but collateral agents, however
indispensable to the action of the drama
180
A. H. R.


Of Lady Macbeth, previously to the opening of the play, all we
know is that she had accepted her husband’s plot and become his willing
accomplice. (Act I. vii. 47). In passing, note this point : that had
Shakespeare intended us to regard hers as the ruling spirit, he would
probably have made her the author of the scheme, and not Macbeth.
We can imagine her then, alone in the Castle at Inverness, brooding
over her husband’s plot, until it has completely possessed her. She
cherishes the scheme of ambition and treachery as his object, the attain-
ment of which will make him great and happy. She has seen him
restless and miserable between his growing desire on the one hand and
his growing irresolution on the other. There will be no rest, no
satisfaction, for either, until the deed is done. She has persuaded
herself that the crime must be committed, and the sooner the better for
both. There is no self seeking in Lady Macbeth’s character : it is solely
for her husband that she covets
“ The golden round
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
To have thee crowned withal.” (I. v. 26).
As Professor Gervinus well says:
“ The courage necessary for these projects, and the firm resolve to
carry them out, rest in her boundless confidence in this strong man, to
whom she trusts everything, to whom she thinks all greatness due, and
on whose high qualities she delights and leans. This is the peculiarity
of her nature and her history, and it is just this which must so far
reconcile us to her character, and which prevents her from wholly
forfeiting our pity. Almost every commentator has discerned in this
character a better side, but few have succeeded in seeking it in the right
place and seeing it in its proper light. . . . She is far more a
dependent wife than an independent masculine woman, for she wishes
the golden circlet rather for him than for herself. Her whole ambition
is for him and through him ; of herself and of elevation for herself she
never speaks. She lives only in him and in his greatness.”
A careful study of the three “ consultation ” Scenes before the
murder of Duncan (l. v. vii., and 11. ii.), indicates one predominant idea
throughout; namely, that Macbeth is relying on the superior courage
.and resolution of his wife to support his own faltering steps. He
recognises that she is free from the uneasy dread of possible failure, so
that, though the plot is his, it is for her to determine when and how the
deed shall be done. In the fifth Scene of the first Act observe the
.affectionate expression with which he begins :
{Lady M.) “ My dearest love,
Duncan comes here to-night. ”
(M.) “ And when goes hence ?
To-morrow, as he purposes.”
•Could words more clearly show that, shrinking from a plain avowal of
his thought, he hopes to draw from her the first proposal to seize this
181
A. H. R.


golden opportunity 1 The answer he desires, conies :
(Lady M.) “ Oh never
Shall sun that morrow see !
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
May read strange matters.”
Thus subtly does Shakespeare suggest to us the selfish cowardice of the
man. Eager above all things for the accomplishment of the murder, he
would fain leave the actual effort and responsibility on his wife. She
answers at once, as he knew well she would, to the hint. But still he
pretends hesitation : —•
(M.) “ We will speak further.”
And then in pity for the fear and anxiety shown in his tell-tale, down-
cast face, she takes all upon herself, exclaiming,—
“ Only look up clear ;
To alter favour ever is to fear ;
Leave all the rest to me,” (I. v.)
Which is precisely what he is only too glad to do. We miss the force
and meaning of these scenes altogether, by looking on Lady Macbeth as
striving to overcome her husband’s virtuous repugnance : it is simply his
cowardice and hesitation which are in the way. He is seeking en-
couragement from her lips to carry out his own plot. Exactly the same
thought runs through the seventh scene, which opens with the famous
soliloquy. Here too Macbeth shows his desire to be supported and
urged on by his wife. In feigned but too brief opposition he pleads
gratitude and manliness as reasons against the murder, but we see by
the exclamation—“lf we should fail?” what is the real cause of his
hesitation.
Here then, I believe, we have a conception of the relation between
the two characters which agrees with the evidence taken as a whole.
There are no doubt passages which strongly support the other view ; but
as they consist mainly of those strained and exaggerated expressions
forced from Lady Macbeth by her husband’s fear and vacillation, it
would be a mistake to insist on their full, literal meaning.
Putting all the evidence together, is it not more natural to regard
her as a woman of a highly sensitive organisation, whose passionate
intensity of will springs from her deep devotion to her husband ?
Nowhere is it suggested that there is a trace of self-seeking in her
character; she has no sphere but in the career of her husband. Her
children have all died, and thus the whole energy of her passion is
brought to bear upon her husband and his ambition, to advance which
is her one aim in life. To gain her great end, she commits this one
crime, but she is only capable of it under the influence of the violent
excitement into which Macbeth’s letter and the arrival of Duncan have
thrown her.
182
A. H. K.


Notes and News.
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
No new Circles are reported this month, but additional members
are enrolled among several Circles.
Mrs. Williams has again taken up the leadership of the Geology
Circle in Parramatta, which has for some time been held by Miss
Fairclough.
At a meeting of the Sectional Committee, on September 3rd, Mr.
J. S. Scott, one of the Joint-Hon. Secretaries was presented with an
address of thanks for his able services to the Union since the beginning
of 1892.
On Monday, September 17th, a large party composed of members
of Sydney and suburban Circles witnessed the production of Henry V.
by Mr. George Rignold at Her Majesty’s Theatre. The party numbered
104. Much admiration has been expressed for Mr. Rignold’s magnifi-
cent impersonation of Henry V., and for the general excellence of the
interpretation and staging of the play.
A. STUDDY.
VICTORIAN SECTION.
At a meeting of the Victorian Committee, held in the Bankers’ Institute
on September 6th, the following members were present : Professor
Morris (in the chair), Mrs. Oliver, Mrs. H. G. Turner, Madame Joske,
Mr. Davis, Mrs. Dwyer, Mr. Dutton, Dr. Wilson, and the Hon.
Secretary. Apologies were received from Lady Sargood, Mrs. Copeland,
Mr. Adamson, and Mr. Campbell. The resignations of Mr. Love and
Miss C. M. Davis were received with regret. After the usual routine
business, it was proposed by Mrs. Fox, seconded by Mr. Dwyer, “ That
Dr. Phelps, of Ballarat, who had taken such an interest in the Union,
being Secretary for the Ballarat Group and Leader of a Circle, should
be elected a member of the Committee.” Carried unanimously.
A discussion took place as to the next entertainment. It was
decided to hold it about March of next year, but the details were to be
discussed at the next Council meeting.
Appended is a report of the German Circle in St. Kilda under the
leadership of Madame Joske. Similar reports of Circles will be gladly
received.
“ Goethe’s birthday was alluded to, and the German words from
Faust, a translation of which is given in the A.H.R.U. Calendar for
August, were read by Madame Joske, who also showed pictures of
Goethe taken at different times, of his parents, his friend, Carl August
Duke of Weimar, Amalia, the Duke’s mother, Frau v. Stein, and
others; also a facsimile of his handwriting. During the month
183
A. H. R.


Schiller’s Wallensteins Lager had been read; it was discussed, and
Madame Joske read from Emil Palleske’s Schiller’s Leben and Werke,
his criticism on it. From Heine’s Buck der Lieder several of the
romances and sonnets were read by the several members and much
admired, especially the sonnets to his mother :
Ich bin’s gewahnt den Kopf recht hoch zu tragen.
and
Im tollen Wahn halt’ ich
dioh einst verlaasen.
The home reading for September will be Piccolomini, of which some
scenes will be read at the next meeting. The impossibility of getting
the books prescribed is still much complained of.”
L. M. FOX.
QUEENSLAND SECTION.
A numerously attended Group meeting of the Rockhampton
Circles of the Australasian Home Reading Union took place on Friday
night at the Girls’ Grammar School. The main object of the gathering
was to hear a paper read by Dr. Hawkes on “ Air,” which formed a
valuable supplement to the one read by Dr. Yoss last year on “ Water.”
The lecturer gave a brief sketch of the opinions which had prevailed in
the past of the nature of the air, described its composition and physical
properties, and illustrated his paper by a number of most successful
experiments. Dr. Voss presided at the microscopes, in which were
exhibited slides showing the composition of particles of dust floating in
the air. The lecturer summed up the hygienic aspect of the subject by
advising free ventilation and a cultivation of the habit of breathing
through the nostrils. The Music Circle provided the musical part of the
evening’s programme, which consisted of Haydn’s “Gipsy Rondo” (duet)
by Misses Allen and Brand; songs by Miss R. Davis, the Rev. A.
Richards, and Mr. E. Parker ; a violin solo by Miss Hay, and piano
solos by Mrs. E. W. Sandford-Wills and Miss Davis. A reading was
given by members of the English Literature Circle of a scene from
Shakespeare’s Tempest. Several books of views in Europe, kindly lent
by Mrs. Ferguson, formed an attraction during the intervals of the
programme. —i
Local Paper.
NEW ZEALAND. —Northern Section.
The A.H.R.U, work in this Section has been steadily progressing.
Miss Girdler, the energetic Secretary for the Auckland district, reports
that the number of members in her district has increased during the
year. The Auckland and Devonport Circles met this week (September
2nd), at the Grammar School, when Canon Bates gave a lecture on
Arnold’s Culture and Anarchy. The members of the Wairoa Circle
184
A. H. R.


have read and discussed Kingsley’s Alton Locke, and Carlyle’s Past and
Present. The Newtown Circle meets every fortnight, and has been
studying Julius Gcesar, David Copper field, The Lay of the Last
Minstrel, and Eomola. Mr. McDermid gave an interesting paper
on Julius Caesar, and Mr. Anderson one on Brutus as the hero of the
play. Mrs. J. S. Fleming wrote on “ Charles Dickens,” the Rev. Mr.
Shirer on “ Savonarola,” at successive meetings. Alton Locke is the next
book for discussion, and a paper on the social questions there dealt with
is promised by Mr. Anderson.
I have paid visits to the Newtown, Masterton, and Wellington
Circles, and it was most pleasant to notice the intimate acquaintance
with the books set which the majority of the members showed. The
younger members are not content with listening to what the older
members have to say, but they read and study the books for themselves.
Miss R. M. Laing, Leader of the Geography Section writes ;—“We
have had great difficulty in getting the books required, in fact we have
been unable to get more than two copies of any one work ; one book,
on Arctic exploration, was unprocurable, and therefore each member
undertook to study and write a paper on one or more of the most
famous Arctic explorers. Of the list of books given to read, we have
finished the North- West Passage by Land, Hakluyt’s Voyages, Life of
Columbus, and we are now reading Prescott’s Conquest of Mexico. We
have articles on “The Niagara Falls, “The Fur-bearing Animals of
North America,” “ The Present Condition of the West Indies,” “The
Yosemite Valley,” “The Settlement of the Red River District,” and
several others. At the close of the meeting, the work to be done for
the next fortnight is settled, and suggestions are offered for future
readings or essays.”
Mr. 0. Watson, 8.A., Leader of the Wellington Circle, sends a
report, of which the following is an abstract :
“ The Wellington Literature Circle has read Ivanhoe, introduced
by a paper from Mr. Giffard, M.A., and has discussed its various
characters. Tennyson’s Princess was next read, Mr. Fleming, M.A.,
LL.B., reading a preliminary paper on Tennyson. At later meetings,
Mr. James, 8.A., read an essay on Paradise Lost-, and Mr. Tregear,
F.R.H.S., a valuable paper on Carlyle’s Past and Present, which is now
appearing in the A.H.R. The Rev. Mr. Evans introduced the Circle
to the little book of Selections from Browning in a very able paper.
Many members declared their determination to get better acquainted
with Browning in the future, having been deterred hitherto by the not
inconsiderable difficulty of much of his work. Ruskin’s Unto this Last
was treated in an original article by Mr. Levi, M.A., and many pages
of the book were read aloud, that members unable to procure a copy
might get some taste of Ruskin’s quality.”
The Northern Section now contains 132 members. Many others
who do not subscribe to the magazine attend the meetings regularly.
T. R. FLEMING.
185
A. H. R.


From
N.Z. (North Section)
... £13
4
0
»
N. S. W
2
2
0
>>
Queensland
12
0
>»
Victoria
10
0
Total
£16
8
0
Notice to Contributors.
All news of Circles should be communicated to the secretary of the
Section, and all articles or poems intended for publication should be
sent to the sub-editor. If no sub-editor is appointed, the latter may be
sent direct to the Editor.
Every article must be legibly written (type-written by preference)
and not longer than six pages of foolscap.
Articles intended for publication should reach the Editor not later
than the 20th of the month.
The Editor cannot undertake to return manuscript in any case.
SECRETARY-TREASURER’S ACCOUNT.
RECEIPTS FOR MONTH ENDING SEPTEMBER 28TH, 1894.
186
A. H. E.


November, |lB9l.
Von. 111., No. 8.
THE A. H. R.
The characters in Romola.
( Part of a Paper read before the Brisbane Literary Circle on the
23rd August, 1894)-
I.
TITO MELEMA.
CEpHE character of Tito Meloma is a minute psychological study of
the fatal effects which flow from what Tennyson has happily
called “ the seeming-genial venial fault,” in a nature which, so far from
being intrinsically bad, has all the promptings to good. With striking
force and directness are depicted the dire consequences of self-indulgence,
the dread of pain, and the shirking of disagreeable duties. Here we
have no character like Shakespeare’s Gloster, determined from the
outset to prove a villain. “It may be doubted,” says Professor Huxley,
“if any sane man ever said to himself, ‘ Evil, be thou my good.’ ” Tito
is certainly not out of love with goodness, and his good qualities are
many : he is bright, clever, learned, good-natured, free from any trace
of vanity, and of that gentle disposition which shrinks from giving pain.
But there is weakness; there is self-indulgence; there is the over-
mastering desire to escape from unpleasant duties and from pain ; and,
as Charles Dickens says, it is the unhappy lot of weak, self-indulgent
men “ that their very sympathies, affections, confidences —all the
qualities which in better-constituted minds are virtues, dwindle into
foibles, or turn into downright vices.” We thus see Tito’s self-indulgent
nature leading him to commit, almost simultaneously, a number of
actions, venial at first, but forming the precursors of others, which are
baser and baser, until at last he drifts into falsehood, treachery, and
infamy. The neglect to go at once in search of his foster-father after
the sale of the gems, leads to the suppression of the truth to Bardo and
Romola, to the casuistry by which he stifles the promptings of
conscience and persuades himself that Baldassare is dead ; then to the
more flagrant neglect and concealment of his foster-father’s message
delivered by Fra Luca, to his joy at the Friar’s death, to his over-
powering dread when Baldassare clutches his arm, to his cruel words,


“ Some madman surely ! ” to the sale of Bardo’s library and the loss of
Romola’s affection, to the carefully-framed falsehoods in the Rucellai
Gardens, and to the infamy with which he persists in his denial of his
foster-father to the end. The kiss with which he awakens little Tessa
leads to the meeting with her in the Piazza, the lingering under the
plane-tree in the Prato, the mock marriage by the conjurer, the failure
to undeceive the little peasant, and to the breach of his marriage tie.
These two series of actions unite in bringing him to perpetual dread for
his own safety, to the imperative need of maintaining that safety at any
cost, to treachery to the Mediceans, treachery to Savonarola, and to the
terrible closing scene on the bank of the Arno. But through all the
devious windings of his career, Tito retains something of the kindly
nature, something of the winning lowliness and fascinating charm,
which are among the salient traits of his character at first. The author
not only by the most subtle power of her consummate art keeps these
good qualities ever before our eyes, but her transcendent genius is such
that she forces us to believe that they actually enhance his infamy.
There is no set-off allowed to Tito : those good qualities upon which any
other writer would have based an appeal ad misericordiam, are insisted
upon by George Eliot with an almost fierce triumph merely for the
purpose of showing that in the presence of moral obliquity they are but
“ the sounding brass and the tinkling cymbal ” ; nay, she even seems to
imply that his innate gentleness, his geniality, his graceful modesty and
lack of assumption, have some intimate connection with the infamous
tendency to falsehood, and the selfish preference of self-indulgence to
duty. The question which Tito asks when he has drifted far on his
downward course, “ Am I alone to be beyond the pale of your extensive
charity ? ” comes with a pathetic ring to the reader. He feels at once ;
Is there nothing wanting in the other characters that, if present, might
have led to the reclamation of so bright and beautiful a being 1 And
pondering upon these characters, he can see the defects which prevent
them from saving him. Not so his creator : Tito is beyond the pale of
her charity : in delineating his character she is giving expression to
some secret memory of her life, to some inexorable theory which holds
her in its iron grasp,—that same memory or theory which has given
birth to Arthur Donnithorne in Adam Bede and Godfrey Cass in Silas
Marner. Even when Tito at the eleventh hour seeks his cruelly-
wronged foster-father for the purpose of begging his forgiveness, his
repentance is represented as unreal, for it is merely a desire that all
things should be pleasant again ; yet it is at the same time allowed to
be the offspring of his softheartedness and his indisposition to feel him-
self in harsh relations with any creature. Though the granting of Tito’s
prayer, even if not preferred on the highest grounds, was the surest way
to his reclamation, there is no appeal to our sympathy that it was
denied : on the contrary, care is taken to divert our feeling into the
opposite channel by telling us that, though the sentence of unchangeable
hatred grated on him terribly, he but reflects that things will only be as
188
A. H. R.


they have been. Even in the terrible scene on the bank of the Arno,
when Baldassare displays all the qualities of a wild-beast in human
shape, there is no suggestion of pity for the once bright and gifted being
whom he strangles while disabled from exhaustion, there is no con-
demnation of this act of fiendish revenge—only the question, “ Who
shall put his finger on the work of justice and say, ‘ It is there 1 ’ ”
The author insists that human nature is plastic, that it may be
degraded to ignominy, or won back to goodness and truth ; she agrees
with Tennyson that
if there be
A devil in man, there is an angel too ;
yet her whole object is to show that, when the devil is self-indulgence,
and the angel a gentle, kindly nature, the angel is wholly powerless to
save. Nay, rather her attitude is one of remonstrance that, when such
a devil exists, there should be any angel at all. There is an almost
exulting sternness, untinged with any pity, which, in spite of the
unparalleled force of the author’s genius, calls forth a perpetual protest
on the part of the reader. Only too true are Sir Walter Scott’s lines :
Such is “ the tide of human time
Which, though it change in ceaseless flow,
Retains each joy, retains each crime,
Its former course was doomed to know,
And darkly as it downward bears
Is stained with past and present tears ; ”
but that this is so, is the theme for mourning, not for triumphant
inexorable austerity, and, if only the latter is exhibited, it is surely a
defection from the highest art.
ROMOLA.
Romola is in every way the antithesis of Tito. Her life is an
image of self-repression, of the patient endurance of distasteful tasks,
and of loving, pitying devotion. With graceful fitness does the
eccentric Piero di Cosimo call her Madonna Antigone, for she ministers
to her blind old father with a self-sacrificing love transcending that of
the heroine of Colonus. Stately, beautiful, graceful, with her crown
of golden hair, she is, to borrow Tennyson’s lines, a very
daughter of the gods divinely tall
And most divinely fair.
She is the very child of the Renaissance brought up in paganism and in
a proud exclusiveness which makes her deem herself above the frivolity
of ordinary life. Learning has been imparted to her beyond the
measure of women, and her scholarship is by no means slight even in
her father’s eyes. As a pagan she despises what she deems the
grovelling superstition of monks and churchmen, but her innocence and
purity are those of an angel. She moves in the circle around her like a
superior being, and stoops to them from her maidenly reserve and
189
A. H. R.


dignified calm. The coming of Tito is like a wreath of spring dropped
into her young and wintry life—a life which has thrown all its passion
into sympathy with aged sorrows, aged ambition, aged pride and
indignation. His bright face, the finished fascination of his manner,
and still more the ardour with which he applies himself to gratify her
father’s wishes, win her heart, and when he whispers his love to her,
she looks at him with the same simple majesty as ever and answers
directly, “I do love you.” As long as Tito is worthy in her eyes she
stoops to him from the pedestal of her proud self-control with deep
tenderness. “ How should I not care for you,” she says to him, “more
than for everything else? Everything I had felt before in all my life—
about my father, and about my loneliness, was a preparation to love
you.” After her marriage, when she finds that Tito, though no less
tender to her, excuses himself more and more from the irksome task of
reading with her father, her affection is mingled with heartache. As
she sits with Bardo in the last months of his life, she realises that there
is a wide difference between her own and her husband’s nature. After
her father’s death, her longing for completer harmony with Tito becomes
deeper, but the discovery of the wearing of the chain armour, and the
sight of Piero di Oosimo’s painting of her husband recoiling in terror
from the escaped prisoner, leave a terrible flaw in her trust; and, when
Tito openly violates that trust by betraying her father’s sacred wish and
selling the library, her love for him is annihilated upon the instant, and
she has no feeling left but withering scorn. As her love came almost
at first sight, so it dies at the first knowledge of unworthiness in the
beloved object—dies with startling suddenness and completeness.
Romola experiences none of those painful yearnings, those heart-
rendings, that agonising vacillation, which precede the death of love in
many a lower nature. Even before the commission by Tito of the
unpardonable sin of selling the library, her trust in him, and consequently
her love for him, are drooping. Hers is a love which can only live so
long as it sees its own ideal in the beloved object—a love which fades as
that ideal grows dim, and dies when it is lost. At the first act of
deception, she severs herself at once and completely from her young
husband. Her one thought is to leave him, leave him for ever. There
is the sudden, sharp recoil, but no after-spring of tenderness. The
existence of the first is most natural, that of the second most unnatural.
We find ourselves asking, “ Can this be really love! ” and answering,
“ No, for real love suffereth long and is kind,” and will have many
painful relentings even in the face of baseness and breach of trust.
Tito’s love for Romola is no more than a transient passion for her
beauty, and her love is not for him at all, but for her ideal. Thus it is
only the arresting voice and mighty influence of Savonarola which, after
stern exhortation, can induce her to retrace her steps, and, even then,
she returns, not from any reviving tenderness or any thought of saving
her young husband from further swerving from the right, but to take
her place amongst the people, to help the starving and needy, to
190
A. H. R.


minister to the sick and dying. Even these offices of mercy she
performs with a lofty compassion, and she moves amongst the people
like an Olympian goddess—an emblem of the cold, pure, stately
Athene. Although now in name a Christian and a Piagnone, she is
really as much a pagan as when her horizon was bounded by the walls
of her father’s library. Her nature has no affinity for Christianity. It
is the mighty personality of Savonarola which draws her—it is the
influence of his passionate faith, the sense that she is called to something
unspeakably great, which sustains her. She can never overcome her
repugnance to monks in general, and but accepts Era, Salvestro as her
confessor on sufferance. She never gives any thought to dogma, and
shrinks from the scrutiny of Fra Girolamo’s prophecies as from some-
thing alien to the grand energies of his nature; and when by his
refusal to intercede for her godfather, he wounded her in her tenderest
susceptibilities, she has but one feeling left towards him—that of
passionate repugnance. The very duty to which his great voice has
called her seems for the time being as nothing, and she drifts away
without bonds and without motive. Yet at the very time when she is
longing for and indirectly courting death, a new pathway to duty is
opened to her. In saving the little Hebrew baby, in succouring the
plague-stricken villagers, she finds all egotistic repining vanish, and she
says : “It was mere baseness in me to desire death. If everything else
is doubtful, this suffering that I can help is certain ; if the glory of the
cross is an illusion, the sorrow is only the truer. While the strength is
in my arm I will stretch it out to the fainting. While the light visits
my eyes they shall seek the forsaken.” But in the midst of the glowing
words, we find in spite of ourselves that chilling question obtruding
itself: “Am I alone to be beyond the pale of your extensive charity ?”
And we see her bright young husband carried away—beyond all hope
of redemption now—by the tide of infamy. Might not the efforts of
true love have stemmed that tide? How different too is her attitude
towards Savonarola ; though her trust in him is shattered at first, there
is the reactionary forgiveness, because she can make allowance for his
weaknesses, and in the last glimpse which we have of her, she is about
to keep sacred the anniversary of the Frate’s death.
The character of Romola recalls that of Dorothea in Middlemarch ;
there is the same lofty ideal, the same devotion to duty, the same
stateliness, the same proud self-control. But Eomola is the child of
another age, a citizen of that proud Tuscan city of which she is the very
personification.
WILIAM J. BYRAM.
191
A. H. R.


Carlyle and Social Problems.
II.
SpIHE thirteen monks, after much prayer, enter the presence of the
JjS King, Henry 11. King Henry himself is in Jocelin’s narrative
visibly there; a vivid, noble-looking man, with grizzled beard, in
glittering uncertain costume; with earls around him, and bishops and
dignitaries. The election proceeds in a very stately and formal
manner; the voting (by casting out names) being conducted by the
monarch himself. It ends by Samson being chosen Abbot, and being
led forward to the King. The King’s Majesty, looking at us somewhat
sternly, then says : “You present to me Samson, I do not know him \
had it been your Prior, whom I do know, I should have accepted him ;
however, I will now do as you wish. But have a care of yourselves.
By the true eyes of God, per veros oculos Dei , if you manage badly I
will be upon you.” Samson, therefore, steps forward, kisses the King’s
feet, but swiftly rises erect again, swiftly turns towards the altar,
uplifting with the other twelve, in clear tenor-note, the Fifty-first
psalm, Miserere Mei Deus :
“ After Thy loving-kindness, Lord,
Have mercy upon me —”
with firm voice, firm step and head, no change in his countenance.
“ That one,” said the King, “ will, I think, govern the Abbey well ” “I,
too, am of the same opinion; long life to Abbot Samson.” Now comes
his day of trial; he has been upright and stedfast in the dark days of
humility and inferior position; how will he bear prosperity ? “ Yester-
day a poor mendicant, allowed to possess not above two shillings of
money, and without authority to bid a dog run for him, —this man
to-day finds himself a Dominus Abbas, a mitred peer of Parliament.
Lord of manorhouses, farms, manors, and wide lands; a man with
‘ forty knights under him,’ and dependent, swiftly obedient multitudes
of men. It is a change greater than Napoleon’s ; so sudden withal.
We shall now get the measure of him by a new scale of inches,
considerably more rigorous than the former was. For if a noble soul
is rendered tenfold more beautiful by victory and prosperity, springing
now radiant as into his own due element and sun-throne, an ignoble
one is rendered ten-fold and hundred-fold uglier and more pitiful.
Whatsoever vices, whatsoever weaknesses w r ere in the man, the parvenu
will show us them enlarged, as in the solar microscope, into frightful
distortion.” It is a sign of what true vitality and social capabilities
could exist in those barbarous ages, that, even under the disguise of
poverty and low position, they could detect the true governor. For a
true governor and leader Samson turned out to be. He found the
convent dilapidated and ruinous, devoured by Jews, harpies, and
without bread for the inmates. For the first four years of his rule the
192
A. H. R.


new Abbot never went abroad without being surrounded by a crowd of
duns and creditors; his officials are remiss, his revenues nil. He was
without experience; his only master, however, had been that best of
masters, Discipline : he had learnt well the first lesson of the ruler,
himself how to obey. His first care was to get his accounts straight, to
call in the bills of every debt the Abbey owed, and consider them as a
whole. There shall be no more increase of debt, the Abbot, and the
Abbot only, is henceforth to obtain credit. He has two ways only to
pay off his debt, one to increase income by industry, the other to save
by thrift. Sternly and perseveringly Samson works in both directions;
he has to deal with cunning farmers, and unjust knights, and lazy
monks, yet stedfast and severe he perseveres till in the waste whirlpool
appears solid ground, and order out of chaos. The mild, grave face
of the man can flash into terrible anger ; the monks often murmur,
“He rages like a wolf.” But the result 1 After four years the Jews
have been bundled bag and baggage out of the liberties of St. Edmund’s.
New life springs up everywhere. The bibations cease, drunken,
dissolute monks had better keep out of the new Abbot’s way. He did
not forget those who had been kind to him in the days of his poverty,
but he never allowed any softness of this sort to interfere with his
sense of justice. Samson was one of the most impartial of judges, he
insisted on understanding a case to the bottom, and then swiftly
decided without fear or favour. The King made him one of the new
Itinerant Judges, such as exist to this day. “My curse on that Abbot’s
court,” a suitor was heard to say, “ a court wherein neither gold nor
silver can help me to confound my enemy.” He was very hospitable,
and proud of the hospitality of the Abbey, but was severe on men,
especially monks, who murmured about their food. And the monks
murmured much. This strict, austere, just man was a plague to them,
used as they had been to the old easy-going ways, and they at last
refused to do their chanting or perform their convent duties, in fact
broke out in open rebellion. Swiftly the Abbot met the difficulty;
hurls out the bolts of excommunication ; has one disobedient monk into
custody with shackles on his limbs, strikes fear into the heart of the
others. Let Jocelin describe the scene : “On the morrow morning we
decide on humbling ourselves before the Abbot by word and gesture,
in order to mitigate his mind. And so accordingly was done. He, on
the other side, replying with much humility, yet always alleging his
own justice, and turning the blame on us; when he saw that we were
conquered, became himself conquered. And bursting into tears he swore
that he had never grieved so much for anything in the world as for
this, first on his own account, and then secondly, and chiefly, for the
public scandal which had gone abroad, that St. Edmund’s monks were
going to kill their Abbot. And when he narrated how he went away
on purpose till his anger should cool, repeating this word of the
philosopher, 1 1 would have taken vengeance upon thee, had I not been
angry,’ he arose weeping, and embraced each and all of us with the
193
A. H. R.


kiss of peace. He wept; we all wept.” This was a man, this Abbot,
one who knew when to soften. He was getting grey and grizzled under
his labours, his debts, his Jews, his monks ; but the clear, brave eyes
were as keen as ever. He attended in his place in parliament, especially
when the news reached London that Richard Cosur de Lion was a
prisoner in Germany. Indeed the Abbot himself volunteered to wander
forth in search of him. But loyal as he was, he was still more jealous
for his Abbey, and when the proposal was made to strip the shrine of
St. Edmund of its golden coat in order to help to pay Richard’s ransom,
he exclaimed, “ Let him that dares come forward ” —and the sacred
gold was left in peace.
But Samson did not keep his courage for his monks and creditors ;
he actually bearded Richard the Lion-hearted himself. There came a
question between those two as to a certain young lady who was a ward
of the Abbey, and whom the King desired should be wed to one of his
followers. Abbot Samson replied that his ward’s hand was already
disposed of. Richard wrote again, letter after letter; was answered
with deep humility but also with unfaltering firmness. King Richard’s
anger was aroused, the messengers rode fast with emphatic orders to
obey or tremble. The Abbot replied, “ The King can send if he will
and seize the ward; force and power he has to do his pleasure, and
abolish the whole Abbey. But I, for my part, never can be bent to
wish this that he seeks, nor shall it by me be ever done. For there is
danger lest such things be made a precedent of, to the prejudice of my
successors. Videat Altissimus, Let the Most High look on it. Whatso-
ever things shall befall, I will patiently endure.” Richard swore great
oaths, but he knew a man when he saw him, and soon forgave his path
having been crossed, like the big fellow he was.
Not all this time had the Abbot’s eye been turned from his priestly
duty ; his struggles with monks and Jews and Kings had never dimmed
the great simplicity of pious fervour. His eyes, as the eyes of all
Christian men in those days, were turned upon the Holy Sepulchre and
the war for its recovery. When Jerusalem was re-taken by the Pagans,
Abbot Samson put on a shirt of hair-cloth, and this garment of penance
he wore till his death. He built many churches and hospitals, he
embellished with polished marble the shrine of St. Edmund, and was
taken away from his duties among his monks to advise King Richard in
some new difficulty. He prepared to set out on his journey, and then—
silence—for abruptly the diary ends. There are no more words, only
sheets of blank paper. It will be thus with all of us.
After the recital of the diary, Carlyle give us chapters on many
different, but kindred subjects. He speaks of the Gospel of Mammonism,
and the creed of those who believe in the Hell “of not getting rich.”
He tells us of the Gospel of Dilettantism preached by the yawning
humbugs of the fashionable world. He denounces those whose aim and
aspiration it is to be “ happy ” —they forgetting that Duty is the true
194
A. H. E.


belief of all who wish for better things. He cries that Labour is the
only emblem of God on earth, of God the World-worker, the Eternal
Maker, and that if Labour would leave his worship of Mammon he
might ascend his throne. Then, discussing a working aristocracy, and
an unworking aristocracy, Carlyle reaches almost the heart of our social
troubles of the present day in the chapter on “ Plugson of Undershot.”
There is much of interest in the remainder of the book, but time
prevents my dilating thereon ; of Plugson I must quote a few lines here
and there. “ The indomitable Plugson, of the respected Pirm of
Plugson, Hunks & Company, in St. Dolly Undershot, is invited to
reflect on this. Book-keeping by double entry is admirable, and records
several things in an exact manner. But the Mother-Destinies also keep
their tablets, and we shall have to dismiss the Cash-gospel rigorously to
its own place. Plugson, who has indomitably spun Cotton merely to
gain thousands of pounds, I have to call as yet a Buccaneer and a
Choctaw. His hundred Thousand-pound notes, if there be nothing
other, are to me but as the hundred scalps in a Choctaw wigwam.
The blind Plugson ; he was a Captain of Industry, born member
of the Ultimate genuine Aristocracy of this Universe, could he
have known it. These thousand men that span and toiled round him,
they were a regiment whom he had enlisted man by man; to make war
on a very genuine enemy; over whom all creatures will wish him
victory ; Bareness of back and disobedient Cotton fibre, which will not,
unless forced to it, consent to cover bare back. He enlisted his
thousand men and said to them, ‘ Come, brothers, let us make a dash at
Cotton.’ They follow with cheerful shout, they gain their victory over
Cotton. Plugson, Buccaneer-like, says to them, Noble spinners, this is
the hundred thousand we have gained, wherein I mean to dwell and
plant vineyards ; the hundred thousand is mine, the three and sixpence
daily was yours; adieu, noble Spinners.’ The entirely unjust Captain
of Industry say I ; not Chevalier, but Buccaneer ! ‘ Commercial Law ’
does indeed acquit him ; asks with open eyes ‘ What else 1 ’ ”
This lesson of Plugson given us by Carlyle is the greatest lesson
that we have to learn to-day, viz., the Higher Law of Property and
wages. Slowly, and perhaps mainly through the teachings of Carlyle,
has grown up the recognition of the principle that “ a man may not do
what he will with his own,” or rather, with what he thinks is his own ;
that property has duties as well as power and purchased pleasures. A
most admirable object-lesson on this subject has been wrought within
the last few years by the uprising at Homestead, in the United States,
of the labourers of Andrew Carnegie. Would that Carlyle could have
had such an example; we can imagine with what scathing words, with
what double-edged verbal swords of sharpness he would have described
this social cancer, and led us to see not only its morbid growth, but its
necessary causes and unclean sources. The trouble arose somewhat in
this wise. Andrew Carnegie, once a poor, penniless boy-adventurer,
195
A. H. R.


had
“ Burst the bonds of circumstance,
And grappled with his evil-star,”
until he had succeeded in reaching the American heaven, the seat of the
millionaire. Greedy for gain, he drove in the industrial wedge, that is,
he forced wages down and profits up. Unable to press wages down too
low on the American workmen on account of their organised resistance,
he introduced hordes of degraded immigrants from Europe—low-class
Poles, Italians, <fec., to work for small wages. But even on these the
screw could be turned too far, and on their refusing to accept the last
reduction, the employer from his far-off palace in Europe sent the
message to “ shut down” the Works. Here the Individualist says that
this employer was strictly within his rights ; he had made a fair contract
with his servant: “ I give you so much cash per week ; you give me so
much labour per week ; these conditions being fulfilled, there is no
claim from me to you, or from you to me.” This is “ freedom of
contract,” of which we hear so much —“ freedom,” according to the laws
of the Buccaneer. Relying upon work in the vicinity of Homestead,
ten thousand people had made their homes in that locality, many of
them in dwellings belonging to the employer. When Carnegie, with a
flash of his pen signed the order to “ shut down,” it meant for him that
he would cease for awhile to make profit; but for the workers,
dependent hour by hour on the scant food-supply derived from their
poor wages, such an order meant Death ! Death to the worker, death
to the wife, death to the little children. Is it any wonder that the fierce
half-civilised creatures he had imported, maddened and in despair, tried
to turn and rend the tyrant-hand, and that tor a moment the world
held its breath to watch the smoke of the rifles around the fortified
walls of the Homestead factories? This was because Carnegie
was acting in the spirit, not of the Hero, but of the Buc-
caneer. To him this multitude of human beings with their
loves and sorrows, their many bodily and infinite spiritual
needs were only parts of a machine for grinding out money
for himself. The recognition of humanity was not there; his
showy philanthropy beyond seas in Scotland was shown in its true
colours by the glare of the burning kerosene poured out on the water
for the destruction of Pinkerton’s detectives. The man was a pirate,
not a Captain of Industry. He could not recognise that when he had
paid the weekly counters which he considered the share his workman
had in his enterprises, he had not done with them ; and thus the name
of Carnegie, in spite of dazzling alms and specious gifts, is make to
stink in the nostrils of tens of thousands of men all over the world.
Think of this, and of how little the world has gained in the centuries
since Jocelin wrote his diary, if you place such conduct against the side
of that of some illiterate Crusading Baron. With the objects of the
Crusader we may not have sympathy, probably not, but according to
the light that was in him he was doing his best and highest by leaving
196
A. H. R.


home and wife and pleasant things in order to fight and struggle under
the blazing sun and on the burning sands of Syria. Returning to his
home with his little band of war-worn men, would he have said to them
“ My contract with you is ended, I have got out of you all the success
and hard work possible, now go and die in a corner, anywhere.”
Plugson speaks like this, Carnegie speaks like this: “ Our contract is
ended ; for you it is well that your wages kept life and soul together
long enough to do my work, You are free—to go and starve.” Indeed
for these and other buccaneers, who recognise no bond between man and
man except “cash payments,” and who fight under the flag of
“ Freedom of Contract,” the end is drawing very near.
EDWARD TREGEAR.
Wellington, N.Z.
Announcements.
The General Secretary requests all sectional secretaries to send in,
as soon as possible, balance of subscriptions, if any, and corrections in
number or name in Directory, in order that the December Directory
and the annual report and balance sheet may be prepared without
unnecessary delay.
Some of our members who joined the Union late in the year are
without the August number (No. 5). Will those who have spare
copies of this number kindly forward them without delay to the General
Secretary 1
As the annual meeting of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science will take place in Brisbane, beginning on
January 11th, and as it is probable that many members of the Council
of the Union may attend that meeting, it is proposed that the
A.H.R.U. shall hold its annual meeting in Brisbane also, on a date to
be fixed. Suggestions from presidents and secretaries, as to date and
place of meeting, should be sent at once to the General Secretary, so
that they may be laid before the Executive Council at its meeting in
December.
N.S.W. Section. — The Annual Meeting of the Sectional Committee
will take place on Thursday, November 29th, at 8 p.m., in Mr. Allard’s
office, Pitt Street, near Hunter Street. Business : election of President
and Secretaries, and yearly statement of accounts.
197
A. H. R.


Courses of Reading for 1895.
ENGLISH LITERATURE.
A. Poetry Course.
1. Gray (Bell), Is. 6d, ; 2. Byron (Golden Treasury), 4s. 6d. ; 3. Keats
(Golden Treasury), 4s. 6d. ; 4. Shelley (Golden Treasury), 4s. 6d. ; 5. Matthew
Arnold—Essays in Criticism, 2nd Series (Macmillan’s Colonial Library), 2s. 6d.
B. Course of Novels.
1. Frances Burney—Evelina (Bohn), 3s. 6d. ; 2. Jane Austen —Northanger
Abbey (Routledge), Is. and 6s. ; 3. Scott—The Antiquary ; 4. Dickens—Hard
Times; 5. Thackeray—Vanity Fair (Smith Elder), 2 vols., Is. 6d. each; 6.
George Eliot—Silas Marner (Blackwood), 2s. 6d.
G. Elizabethan Drama.
1. Marlowe—Edward 11. (Clar. Press), 2s. ; 2. Shakespeare —Richard 11. ;
Henry IV., parts 1 and 2; Henry V.; 3. Ford—Perkin Warbeck (Mermaid
Series), 3s. 6d.
D. Recent Writers.
1. Carlyle—Heroes and Hero-worship (Cassell), 6d.; 2. Emerson—Selected
Essays (Camelot Classics), Is. ; or Nature (Macmillan), 3s. 6d. ; 3. Landor—
Imaginary Conversations (Camelot Classics), Is. ; 4. Ruskin —Time and Tide
(Allen), ss. (Each of these should occupy three months.)
A COURSE IN MODERN FRENCH LITERATURE.
Taking “ modern literature ’’ to include the literature of the nineteenth
century from the beginning of the great evolution of the Romantic School, it is
somewhat difficult to adequately illustrate so remarkable a period of literary
production, one unequalled in France, both in value and quantity. Another
difficulty is this : amongst the Latin nations, authors are accustomed to use a
freedom of language which does not accord with the temperament of the English
readers. And for that reason even many of our French chef's-d’ceuvre would be
regarded as unsuitable for reading aloud in literary circles.
However, everything being considered, I think that the following may fairly
represent the nineteenth century French literature :
From Victor Hugo one of the two plays, Hernani or Huy Bias. Ruy Bias is
perhaps more perfect; there is more “go” in Hernani. Victor Hugo being the
undisputed chief of the great romantic school, any list not including him would be
imperfect; on the other hand, as he is essentially a lyric, I was bound to confine
my choice amongst his works in verse, though, no doubt, they are more difficult
to read for a foreigner.
Next, from Alex. Dumas the father, a romantic also. La Dame de Monsorreau,
a novel which can be fairly taken as the type of what we call roman de cape et
d'ipee (i.e. , a novel full of battles and adventures). Alex. Dumas, though not so
refined in his style as the generality of the romantics, was more popular than any.
He has such a wonderful dash ! A French writer, Michelet, says of him that
he was a “force,” and this word defines his importance perfectly. Besides,
no writer has ever equalled him in dialogue (except perhaps Mery). As a matter
of fact, all modern authors —whether English or French—of novels de cape et
d'ipee are simply deriving their material from Alex. Dumas the father. La Dame
de Monsorreau is the second part of a trilogy including La reine Margot, La
Dame de Monsorreau, et Les Quarante-Cinq, but forms quite a separate novel by
itself.
From Theophile Gautier, the close follower and enthusiastic admirer of Victor
198
A. H. R.


Hugo, you may take the volume entitled Caprice* et Zigzags, which consists in a
collection of articles written whilst Gautier was in the height of his power.
Among these articles, the description of two journeys to England, and London
principally, may prove of interest to you. Gautier was renowned for his
“ Voyages, ’ and the volume I have chosen is perhaps the best in the collection.
Besides, as art critic, Gautier stands unrivalled. Scarcely ever was he mistaken
in his estimations of painting, sculpture, architecture, and even literature. As
the volume in question contains several criticisms, you will have the opportunity
to appreciate it. I may add that among all French writers, Gautier is the one
who best knew his native tongue, which becomes wonderfully rich under his pen.
The so-called “ realistic school ” can only be represented in this list by
its mildest exponents. The C&sar Birotteau of H. de Balzac, the earliest and
perhaps the greatest of all the realistic writers, may convey to you a fair idea of
that kind of work. Balzac was the first to give to money its full significance in
modern life, and its all-powerful influence is the main feature of his Gomedie
Humaine. To really appreciate the great value of Balzac’s work, it would of
oomse be necessary to study his novels in their entirety. However, a perusal of
Cesar Birotteau will, I am sure, impress you with the power and simplicity of that
writer.
More modern is the Tartarin de Tarascon, by Alphonse Daudet. It is our
Pickwick, a book in which a very keen observation and satire underlies the fun
which appears at the surface. Being himself a Provencal, Daudet knows the
Frenchmen of the South of France thoroughly, and depicts them in his books
under the most amusing colours. To a certain extent the very defects and
qualities with which he entertains his readers form a part of his own personality.
As a sequel and a conclusion to Tartarin de Tarascon, Daudet has written at
intervals two other books —Tartarin sur les Alpes, and Port Tarascon, also very
amusing, but both —the latter especially—are inferior to the first.
A chef-d'oeuvre from every point of view is Pecheur d’Jslande, by Pierre Loti
(Julien Viaux), a very sensitive but perhaps a somewhat effeminate author.
Pbcheur dTslande however is well worthy of your attention.
To close the list, I may as well give the titles of two plays of E. Labiche,
which may be taken as fairly representing the modern Freuch comedy, La Poudre
aux yeux, and Le misanthrope et I’Auvergnat ; they are amusing, and very true to
human nature.
Although I have refrained from making the preceding list longer than you
require, I will take the liberty to add here three other works as representing
different branches of French literature : A. de Lamartine, Oraziella (a direct
descendant of the old Greek and Latin Idylls) ; Mery, La guerre du Nizam {un
conte) ; Paul Bourget, Essais de Psychologic contemporaine. Were Ito mention all
the books which are worthy of admiration, your patience would be exhausted, so I
will now close this list with the words of Hernani :
“ —j’en passe et des meilleurs.”
Sydney, October, 1894.
G. FLEURI.
[The published prices of the above books will be given in the December
number.— Ed.]
THE BRITISH IN INDIA.
Required.—l. Hunter—Brief History of the Indian Peoples (Clarendon Press),
3s. 6d. ; 2. Lyall—British Dominion in India (Murray), 4s. 6d. ; 3. Seeley
Expansion of England, pp. 163-309 (Macmillan), 3s. 6d. ; 4. Ransome—Our
Colonies and India, pp. 53-100 (Cassell), Is. ; 5. Knight—Where Three Empires
Meet (Longmans), 3s. 6d.
Recommended for further study.—l. Novels and Tales by Meadows Taylor.
e.g. —Confessions of a Thug ; 2. Rudyard Kipling, e.g. —Many Inventions; 3s
Mrs. Steel, e.g. — Klower of Forgiveness; 4. Cunningham—The Caerulean,
199
A. H. K.


<Macmillan), 3s. 6d. ; 5. Ly all--Asiatic Studies (Murray), 13s. ; 6. M. Williams—
Hinduism (S.P.C.K.), 2s. 6d. ; 7. Rhys David—Buddhism (S.P.C.K.), 2s. 6d. ; 8.
Volumes on Clive, Warren Hastings, Lawrence, and Havelock in “ Rulers of
India ” Series.
GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.
A. Elementary Course.
Required.—l. Paul Bert—First Year of Scientific Knowledge (Relfe), 2s. fid.;
2. Judd—Volcanoes (International Scientific Series, Kegan Paul), os. ; 3. Geikie
—Class-Book of Geology (Macmillan), 4s. fid.
Recommended for further study.—l. Jukes Brown —Handbook of Physical
Geology, 6s. ; 2. Darwin—Coral Reefs, Volcanic Islands, South America, with
Critical Notes by Judd (Minerva Series), 2s. ; 3. Life of Robert Dick the Baker
Geologist (Murray), 9s. ; 4. H. R. Mill —Realm of Nature (Murray), 6s. ; 5.
R. A. F. Murray—Geology and Physical Geography of Victoria ; 6. A. R.
Wallace—lsland Life (Second and Revised edition, Macmillan), 6s.
B. Advanced Course.
Required.—l. Grenville Cole—Aids in Practical Geology (Griffin), 10s. fid. ;
2. Dawson—Geological History of Plants (International Scientific Series) ss. ;
3. Frank Rutley—Mineralogy (Murby’s Science Series).
Recommended for further study.—l. Lyell—Principles of Geology (2 vols.),
325. ; 2. Lyell—Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man (Murray), 14s. ;
3. James Geikie—The Great Ice Age ;4.G. F. Wright—Man and the Glacial
Period (International Scientific Series), ss. ; 5. Boyd Dawkins—Cave Hunting
(Macmillan) ; 6. Boyd Dawkins —Early Man in Britain, 255.
Recommended for reference, —Alleyne Nicholson, Richard Lydekker—
Manual of Palaeontology, third edition (Wm. Blackwmod & Sous), £3 3s. ; 2. A.
Liversidge—Minerals of New South Wales (Triibner), 215.; 3. R. L. Jack, R.
Etheridge—Geology of Queensland (Government Printer, Brisbane), £2 2s. ; R. M.
Johnston—Geology of Tasmania (Government Printer, Hobart); 4. Mineral
Products of New South Wales by Harris Wood ; Notes on the Geology of New
South Wales by C. S. Wilkinson ; Description of the Coal Seams worked in New
South Wales by John Mackenzie (Government Printer, Sydney, 1887), 10s. fid.
BIOLOGY.
Required.—l. T. J. Parker —Elementary Biology, 2nd ed., (Macmillan),
10s. fid,; 2. W. R. McNab —Botany (The London Science Class-Books,
Longmans), 2 parts, Is. fid. each.
Recommended for further study—l. Thomson —Outlines of Zoology,
(Pentland), 12s. fid.; Lloyd Morgan—Animal Life and Intelligence, (Arnold),
165.; 2. Kerner v. Marilaun —Plant Life (translated from the German), 40s.
MENTAL SCIENCE.—ETHICS.
Required. —1. Sidgwick —History of Ethics (Macmillan), 3s. fid. ; 2. Mac-
kenzie—Manual of Ethics (Clive &Co ), 6s. fid. ; Muirhead —Elements of Ethics
(Murray), 3s.
Recommended for advanced students. —1. Abbott—Kant s Theory of Ethics
(Longmans), 12s. fid. ; 2. Sidgwick—Methods of Ethics (Macmillan), 14s. ; 3.
Green —Prolegomena to Ethics (Clar. Press), 14s. ; 4. Spencer—Principles of
Ethics (Williams and Norgate), 15s.
200
A. H. K.


POLITICAL SCIENCE.
Required.—Fawcett—Manual of Political Economy (Macmillan), 12s. ;
Pollock —History of the Science of Politics (Macmillan), 2s. 6d.
Books for reference or further study.—l. Rae—Contemporary Socialism
(Isbister), 7s. 6d. ; 2. Ingram —History of Political Economy (Black), 6s. ; 3.
Marshall—Principles of Economics, vol. 1. (Macmillan), 15s.
WORK AND WAGES.
Required.—l. J. E. Byrnes—Short Text-Book of Political Economy
(Rivingtons) 2s. 6d. ; 2. Carlyle—Past and Present, Books 1., m., and tv.
(Chapman & Hall) Is. ; 3. J. A. Hobson—Problems of Poverty (Methuen & Co.),
2s. 6d. ; 4. Schulze-Gaevernitz —Social Peace, translated by C. M. Wicksteed
(Swan & Sonnenschein), 3s. 6d.
Recommended for further study.—l. Marshall—Elements of Economics of
Industry (Macmillan), 2s. 6d. ; 2. Ruskin—Unto this Last (George Allen), 3s. ;
3. Toynbee —The Industrial Revolution (Rivingtons), 10s. 6d. ; 4. Graham—
Socialism New and Old (Kegan Paul), ss.
PHYSIOLOGY.
Required.—l. Foster —Primer of Physiology (Macmillan), Is.; 2. Huxley—
Lessons in Elementary Physiology (Macmillan), 4s. 6d. ; 3. Clifford—Seeing and
Thinking (Macmillan), 3s. 6d.
Recommended for further study.—l. Waller—Human Physiology (Longmans),
18s.
PHYSICS.
Required.—l. Wright—Elementary Physics, (Longmans), 2s. 6d.; 2. Lodge—
Modern Views of Electricity, Nature Series (Macmillan), 6s. 6d. ; 3. Bottone—
Electrical Instrument .Making for Amateurs (Whittaker Sl Co. ), 3s.
Recommended for reference or further study.—l. Sylvanus Thompson—
Elementary Lessons in Electricity and Magnetism (Macmillan), 4s. 6d. ; 2.
Sylvanus Thompson —The Electromagnet (E. &. F. N. Spon), 12s. 6d. ; 3.
Electricity in the Service of Man (Cassell &Co.) 21s.
CHEMISTRY.
Required.—l. Roscoe—Chemistry Primer (Macmillan), Is. ; 2. Remsen—
An Introduction to the Study of Chemistry (Macmillan), 6s. 6d.
Recommended for further study.—l. Cook—The New Chemistry (Inter-
national Science Series. Kegan Paul & Co.), 55.; 2. Tilde—lntroduction to Chemical
Philosophy (Text-Books of Science), 4s. 6d. ; 3. Mendelejeff—Principles of
Chemistry (Longmans), 2 vols., 38s.
GEOGRAPHY AND TRAVEL.
1895. Africa.
1. Herodotus—Egypt (Cassell), 6d. ; 2. Mungo Park—2 vols. (Cassell), 6d.
each; 3. Kingston—Great African Travellers (Routledge), 55.; 4. Tom Hughes—
Livingstone (Macmillan), 2s. 6d. ; 5. Galton—Travels in Tropical South Africa
(Ward & Lock), 2s. ; 6. Stanley—Through the Dark Continent (Sampson Low),
7s. 6d.
Recommended for further study.—l. Baker—Nile Tributaries of Abyssinia
(Macmillan), 6s. ; 2. Livingstone’s Journals.
201
A. H. R.


EDUCATION.
A. Elementary Course.
Required.—l. Baldwin—Elementary Psychology and Education (International
Education Series), 4s. ; 2. Davidson—Aristotle (Heinemann), ss. ; 3. Fitch—
Lectures on Teaching (Pitt Press), 6s. ; 4. de Guimps—Pestalozzi, translated by
Russell (Sonnenschein), 6s.
Recommended for further study.—l. Sully—Teacher’s Handbook of Psychology
(Longmans), 6s. 6d. ; 2. t ompayiv—History of Pedagogy (Sonnenschein), 6s. ; or
Quick —Educational Reformers (Longmans), 3s. 6d. ; 3. Geikie—Teaching of
Geography (Macmillan), 2s. ; 4. Bain—On Teaching English (Longmans), 2s. 6d.
B. Advanced Course.
Required.—l. Painter—History of Education (International Education
Series), 4s. ; 2. Bain—Education as a Science (Kegan Paul), ss. ; 3. Calderwood
—On Teaching (Macmillan), 2s. 6d.; 4. Newsholme—School Hygiene (Sonnens-
chein), 2s. 6d.
Recommended for further study.—l. Sully—Teacher’s Handbook of
Psychology (Longmans), 6s. 6d. ; 2. Spencer—Education—Williams), 2s. 6d. ; 3.
Great Educators Series (Heinemann), os. per vol. ; volumes already published :
Aristotle, Alcuin, Abelard, Loyola, Froebel.
Notes and News.
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
The usual monthly meeting of the North Sydney English
Literature Circle was held at Eitzjohns on Bth October, when an
excellent paper on Byron’s Childe Harold was read and discussed.
Ruskin’s Sesame and Lilies will be dealt with at the next meeting.
Wellesley College held their second monthly meeting in the School-
room ; Rev. T. W. Dunn occupied the chair; subject—Carlyle’s Heroes
and Hero-worship, on which several papers were read. Forty members
are already enrolled in this Circle.
Mr. Pratt, Leader of the Petersham Circle, read an interesting
paper at the Summer Circle on the first part of Ruskin’s Sesame and
Lilies, and Mr. Farrell one on the second part.
A course of extension lectures is being given by Mr. Jose to the
Ashfield Home Readers and others upon The Life and Times of
Shakespeare. The attendance at the first two lectures was about 160.
A. STUDDY.
VICTORIAN SECTION.
There is but little to chronicle this month. The different Circles
are in full working order, and since the October A.H.R. no new Circles
have been formed, though several new members have joined existing
ones. Interesting reports have been received from members of the
202
A. H. R.


Balaclava and Port Fairy Circles, and are here added.
“On Wednesday evening, 17th, at the High School, the Port
Fairy Circle of A.H.R.U., in conjunction with the Seaspray Literary
Society and their friends, spent a very pleasant time. Darwin’s Coral
Beefs having been taken up by the members, who found it a tough
subject, they enlisted the assistance of Mr. Smale, who very kindly gave
a graphic description of his experience among coral reefs in various
parts of the world, ranging from the Mediterranean and Red Sea to the
Indian Ocean and the Great Barrier Reef of Australia. The whole was
found most instructive and enjoyable, and was greatly appreciated by
those present, Our Circle consists of seven members ; we hold our
meetings monthly, and have taken an English Literature Course. A
great deal of interest has been taken by the members in the subjects
chosen, and many pleasant evenings have been spent, our time having
been devoted to the reading and consideration of Selections from
Browning, Yillette, Henry VIII., Stones of Venice, The Princess,
Selections from A. L. Gordon. We are pleased to see a paper on Lady
Macbeth in the October number, as we are to take Macbeth in
December.”
“ The work done by the Balaclava Circle has not been of an
arduous or ambitious character. We have strayed amongst the lighter
forms of literature as our fancy led us, regarding the A.H.R. Union
as an organisation not for the propagation of useful knowledge, but
rather for the cultivation of a love of reading and literature for its own
sake. We first assayed Hawthorne’s Our Old Home, and much enjoyed
its affectionate and often humorous sketches of the far off mother-land
which we and America still regard as home. The method we adopted
was to go through the book, chapter by chapter, and each one called
attention to passages he or she had marked as specially worthy of notice.
We took two evenings to go through the book in this way. The
selection most admired was perhaps Hawthorne’s description of a visit
to Westminster Abbey; the most laughable was his satire of the
English dowager. Our second choice fell on Kingsley’s Alton Locke ;
the sad picture he draws of the condition of the artizan of his day
might, we felt, be distantly foreshadowed even in this country. Next we
attacked sterner stuff in Carlyle’s Past and Present; this was divided
into sections, each member giving an outline of the contents of his
section. We got through it in two nights, and perhaps derived more
enjoyment from this than any of the series. Our choice then fell on
Shakespeare’s As You Like It, and we enjoyed its healthy sentiment
and humour. Various members undertook to give delineations of its
leading characters, aud some very interesting papers were read. Two
books which helped considerably our study of the play were Miss Helena
Fauoit’s Shakespeare’s Female Characters and Moulton’s Shakespeare as
a Dramatic Artist. The book on which we are now engaged is George
Eliot’s Middlemarch. A short life of the author was read at our last
meeting, and we hope to finish the discussion of the book itself on our
203
A. H. R.


From
SECRETARY-TREASURER’S ACCOUNT.
Receipts foe Month ending October, 1894.
N. S. W £3
16
0
Tasmania ... ... ... ... ... 5
2
0
>)
Queensland
16
0
>»
Victoria
12
0
Total ... £10
6
0
next evening. Our meetings have been mainly characterised by their
lack of formality—we have no silent members —and by uniform good
attendance, in spite of some very wet evenings, which might well damp
much literary ardour.”
L. M. FOX.
QUEENSLAND SECTION.
The Queensland Circles are working steadily. The Brisbane
Literary Circle has discussed the following papers :— Bomola, introduced
by Mr. Byram; Plutarch’s Lives, the Greek ones by Mr. Roe, the
Roman by Mr. S. W. Brooks; Gordon, by Mr. J. L. Woolcock. An
evening with The Princess proved most attractive and instructive. Miss
Burdorff read an able paper, which was illustrated by readings and
songs.
At Ipswich an outdoor meeting was held at Pine Mountain.
Tennyson was the poet who accompanied the excursionists on their
outing.
The Toowoomba Circles meet regularly to discuss Physiology and
English Literature. Miss Billing has worked with great success during
this first year of the Union on the Downs.
The Highgate Hill and St. Andrew’s Circles are reading the
Literature Courses..
The Literary and Debating Societies of Brisbane have formed a
Union. The Council of the A.H.R.U. is giving them all assistance
possible. At a public social held by them, Mr. R. H. Roe and Mr. J.
Shirley, members of our Council, read excellent papers. This co-
operation we hope will produce most beneficial results. It is proposed
to hold a river picnic of the Queensland Circles early in November.
L. E. GROOM
204
A. H. R.


Vol. 111., No. 9.
December, 1894.
THE A. H. R.
Plutarch’s Libes
“ LIVES,” exclaimed a young lady who was helping
ggS me to sort my books, and was expostulating against the number
of his volumes that required dusting and arranging, “he has more lives
than a cat,” and the merry flippancy of the remark set me reflecting on
the vicissitudes of literary greatness, by which a reputation once so high
and universal has become for the majority of modern readers merely the
empty shadow of a name. Even amongst modern scholars, he is spoken
of more than he is read ; you will find but the scantiest description
of him in standard hooks of Latin Literature, because he wrote in
Greek, and he has no place in the history of Greek Literature because
his works were produced under the Roman Emperors, and deal with
Roman history almost more than Greek; and though his Greek is fairly
pure and moulded on classical models, still he is not studied by those
who are reading Greek for the sake of acquaintance with the most
perfect specimens of its literary beauties. The modern world indeed
derives the little it does know of Plutarch, and will continue to derive
it, mainly from translations, and it is probably due to his connection with
Shakespeare’s plays that he still remains even a well-known name in
English Literature. Yet at the Revival of Learning Plutarch’s Lives and
Morals were both fountains from which plenteous streams of
inspiration and illustration flowed into its master minds. He
was studied closely by Montaigne, who says, “ I never settled myself
seriously to the reading of any book of learning but Plutarch and
Seneca, and there like the Danaides I eternally fill.” Rousseau tells us
that it is one of the few books which he had never studied without
profit. Bacon quotes freely, and we know that to Shakespeare he was
the treasure-house of ancient history; whole pages of North’s trans-
lation pass into Shakespeare’s Roman plays, with only a few alterations
to suit the metre. It may indeed be fairly claimed for him, that in the
age of Elizabeth he was one of the main inspirers of English gentlemen,
when England’s men of highest culture and refinement were to be found
foremost also in the field of adventure and heroic enterprise.
With regard to Plutarch’s life, the remark of my young lady friend
shows that it may not be amiss to state the few facts that we know


about him. Few indeed they are, as is the case -with great authors in
many national literatures ; their works have been immortal, their lives
forgotten. He lived between a.d. 50 and a.d. 125, neither limit being
known for certain. Born at Ohseronea, a town of Central Greece, he
shows us incidentally in his own writings that he visited several parts
of Italy and spent some time at Rome, but he states that he did not
learn Latin in Italy-because he was occupied with public commissions
and in giving lectures on philosophy, and it was late in life before he
busied himself with Roman Literature. He was lecturing in Rome
during the reign of Domitian, but the statement that he was the tutor
to the Emperor Trajan rests on doubtful authority. The later years of
his life were certainly spent at his native town, Ghseronea, and here he
discharged various municipal duties and held a priesthood ; during this
period probably he wrote the greater portion of the Lives. These are
the bare facts about the man ; his character must be learnt from his
works, and no one can read these without genuine affection for this
generous-hearted student of the past, who feels as he writes that he is
holding converse with the mighty dead, and lovingly dwells upon the
pictures which he is painting to display their greatness for his own
elevation and that of future ages.
The Parallel Lives are, of course, written in pairs, one Greek and
one Roman, with a short comparison for each pair ; there are twenty-
three such pairs, and four single lives, which bring the total up to fifty,
and the lives of many others have been lost. Montaigne, in his
admiration for Plutarch’s work, declares that his comparisons form the
most admirable part of the whole, but modern criticism would hardly
agree with this verdict; the world’s historical sense has improved since
Montaigne’s time, and we should be inclined rather to say, that for the
sake of symmetry Greek and Roman are often linked together and
balanced against each other when their characters and motives and acts
have really nothing in common. For instance, what real connection is
there between Pericles and Q. Fabius Maximus, or between Pyrrhus
and Marius ? In historical details he is, on the whole, fairly accurate,
but he has little critical power in balancing evidence, and he admits
tales on very doubtful authority if it suits his purpose. Still, though
special facts may sometimes be incorrectly stated, the general impression
conveyed by him about the whole man is wonderfully true. We must
remember that he does not profess to be writing histories, he is writing
lives, and in the introduction to Alexander the Great he tell us his
purpose : “We are not writing histories, but lives; nor is it always in
the most distinguished achievements that men’s virtues or vices may
be best discerned ; but very often an action of small note, a short
saying, or a jest, shall distinguish a person’s real character more than
the greatest sieges or the most important battles. Therefore as painters
in their portraits labour the likeness of the face, and particularly about
the eyes, in which the peculiar turn of mind most appears, and run over
the rest with a more careless hand ; so we must be permitted to strike
206
A. H. R.


off the features of the soul in order to give the real likeness of these
great men, and leave to others the circumstantial detail of their labours
and achievements.” He, in short, presupposes a general knowledge of
the history on the part of the reader; there is therefore little attempt
at strict chronological order, important events are often only slightly
noticed, and many of the stories given seem paltry for historical
purposes. To the student of history there appears a prolixity about his
work which needs the apology that he himself gives after introducing a
number of the sayings of Dionysius into the Life of Timoleon ; “ This
account of the sayings of Dionysius seems to me neither foreign from
biography nor without utility to such readers as are not in a hurry, or
taken up with other concerns.” Yes, it is certain that if we would
appreciate fully Plutarch’s work, we must not be in a hurry ; just as to
value duly a portrait by a master-hand, we must sit before it by the
hour, and come back to it day by day that the depths of its soul
may be entered into by ours. This is just what readers in the past with
their limited libraries were able to do, and this is just what we find
ourselves unable to do, and therefore Plutarch’s portrait-painting has
not the effect on our characters that it had on the readers of the
Renaissance. “ Plutarch's Lives," says George Long, “is the book
of those who can nobly think and dare and do. It is a
book for all ages, for the same reason that good portraiture is the
painting of all time ; for the human face and character are ever the
same. It is a mirror in which all men may look at themselves.” This
estimate will probably be agreed with by all who make a leisurely study
of the work ; but unfortunately, too many of us have no leisure to look
quietly into the mirror ; we go stumbling on through the darkness with
little real knowledge of our inmost selves.
The form and tone of Plutarch’s work have been largely determined
by the prevailing influences of his age, and we shall best understand
him if we look at some of the leading features of this interesting period.
In his time the leading minds of the Roman world were growing
reconciled to the absolute despotism with which the world was saddled.
The old Roman aristocracy had been in revolt against the first Csesars
because the figure of the Emperor loomed so larged upon the stage that
there was no room left for the other Romans to play the grand parts to
which they had been accustomed in the world’s drama ; later on, the
spectacle of an unmitigated despotism crushing out all that remained of
noble aims and character, by its savage barbarities, or debasing it by
the example of its debaucheries, embittered the souls of men like
Tacitus and Juvenal, who looked with loathing on a regime which
deified a Nero and a Caligula. But the rule of better Emperors like
Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, and Nerva, had produced a more general
contentment. There is in Plutarch’s writings what has been called “an
abiding calm,” a satisfied acquiescence in the existing order of things, in
fact a respect for the grandeur of the Roman rule, and gratitude for the
blessings which it brought to the provincials in contrast with past
207
A. H. E.


sufferings. A cosmopolitan spirit was gradually spreading throughout the
provinces of the Empire. Plutarch, a Greek of Ohseronea, can describe
with fairness and pride the virtues of Greeks and Romans in parallel
lives, as if they were equally to him a glorious inheritance. A well-
known Oxford lecturer on Roman History once told us, I remember, on
his return from a visit to modern Greece, that to his surprise in many
parts of that country he found the knowledge of the past glories of
Greece had departed, but that there still lingered a sense of pride that
they had once been called Romans, and once belonged to the Empire
which ruled the world. So strong had been that pride that it had
survived all the shocks and changes of 1800 years. Something of this
feeling we see in Plutarch, who shows that in painting Greek and
Roman alike, he feels he is setting forth the virtues of the two races
whose glories he has inherited.
Still even in these happier times the Emperor’s personality so over-
shadowed the rest of the world that history seemed to most writers to
consist of details about the Emperor’s exploits and fortunes. It
becomes, in fact, more and more coincident with biography, a form of
writing which had always been in favour with the Romans who, from
the earliest times, had delighted in the stories about Cincinnatus and
Regulus and the Pabii, and other national heroes. The general circum-
stances and tendencies of the time were overlooked, for biography
naturally deals chiefly with individual peculiarities and characters. The
Viri lllustres of Suetonius and his lives of the 12 Emperors are typical
works of their age; Plutarch is only one of its many biographers, but his
portraits have outlived the rest because they came from a master-hand.
Another characteristic of Plutarch’s contemporaries was their heavy
erudition. Plutarch himself quotes some 250 authorities, of whom
about 80 are men whose works are almost entirely lost. Original and
independent work was rare, and the number of epitomisers who made it
their life’s business to fill their note-books with gleanings from the riches
of the past was constantly on the increase. The description of the elder
Pliny, given in a letter from his nephew, furnishes an accurate picture
of the marvellous devotion to study which the literary men of this time
displayed. Nor indeed was this love of learning confined to professed
men of letters. Another letter of Pliny’s which gives a description of
the daily life of the noble Spurinna, shows plainly that many of the
highest citizens possessed a genuine taste for the acquisition of
knowledge. Still there was little real “ historical sense,” and Plutarch
like the rest of them is on the whole insensible to the value of a critical
examination of the facts which he is describing. The fact is that his
biography has a moral rather than a historical purpose. His Lives were
intended to be a companion volume to his Morals ; in the latter he
discusses the principles of moral action, the former shows those principles
in action. The introduction to the JEmilius Paullus opens with these
words : “ When I first applied myself to the history of these lives, it
was for the sake of others, but I pursue the study for my own sake,
208
A. H. E.


availing myself of history as a mirror from which I learn to adjust and
regulate my own conduct. For it is like living and conversing with
these illustrious men, whom I invite as it were and receive them one
after the other under my roof ; when I consider how great and wonder-
ful they were, and select from their actions the most memorable and
glorious,
“ Ye gods ! what greater pleasure,
What happier road to virtue ? ”
In this love of moral philosophy he but shares the spirit of the times.
In spite of the selfish luxury of dissolute nobles, and the mad cruelties
of vicious emperors, we must allow that moral philosophy became in
these days a more real power in men’s lives than it had ever been
before. Stoicism took the place occupied by modern religion in
ennobling men’s lives. The writings of Seneca and Marcus Aurelius
show us that the leading minds of Rome were intensely moral, striving
to find out the truest and best principles of human action, and to solve
the mystery of God’s dealings with men. “In these dark days,” says
Church, “ Stoicism pointed to a higher standard than the will of any
Csesar ; it showed men the path of duty, and enabled them to keep a
brave and quiet heart amongst all the passing ills of life, it spread a
belief in a ruling and beneficent Providence in spite of the general
corruption of the world ; it made light of the accidents of nationality
and rank, and insisted mainly on the rights of conscience and the
dignity of manhood.”
Further, there had been a distinct revival of earnestness in the old
religious observances : Augustus had rebuilt the ancient temples and
renewed the celebration of the old rites, and the intermixture of
nationalities brought about by the Roman conquest of the world, had
led to a strange interchange of devotional ceremonies. The mystic
religions from the East, such as the worship of Mithras and Astarte,
Isis and Osiris, were now introduced to Rome and her provinces, and
awakened a renewed and fervid belief in the supernatural powers, and
in their action upon the ordinary events of men’s lives. In the writings
of a man like Plutarch we see a strange admixture of thought, long
details of portents and prodigies and ghostly visitors which control
men’s fortunes, side by side with beautiful passages about the absolute
justice of a supreme beneficent Providence. The age really was in a
transition stage, still clinging with reverence to much of the traditions
of the past, while rising in its better conscience to a higher conception
of God’s nature and of His dealings with man.
The Roman Empire in the second century of our era really deserves
a closer study than it commonly receives in modern times. The
civilisation of its cultivated classes was in many respects strikingly
similar to that of modern Europe. Engineering works on a gigantic
scale, like Trajan’s bridge over the Danube, artistic finish in the
adornments of the home, comfort and luxury of all kinds among the
well-to-do, furnish a parallel to our own days which can hardly be
209
A. H. K.


found elsewhere in history. The erudition of its writers, carried to an
extent which crippled their originality, naturally suggests comparison
with much of the literature of the present day. But in the attitude of
the Homan mind towards the conflicting conceptions of the old and new
theologies the most striking similarity to our difficulties may be seen.
There was then, as now, the same reluctance to break with the past, and
the same yearning for something more consistent and ennobling than
the past had given. To the seekers after God in those days came the
message of Christianity, satisfying the yearnings, and lifting their lives
to a higher level; and it is assuredly a common hope and belief now
that the spiritual unrest and moral earnestness of the best European
life of to-day are leading to a further advance in our conceptions both of
man’s duties to his fellow-men, and of God’s dealings with mankind.
R. H. ROE
A la fin De I' Annee.
Helas ! les Heures de la vie
Toujours s’enfuient !
Sept de nos journees—c’est a peine
Une setuaine 1
Pourquoi arrive tant de fois
Une autre mois ?
Et vite la nouvelle annee
S’est Leonide !
Bientot notre siecle aussi
Sera fini;
Et puis alors ? La fin de tout;
Partirons—nous !
I. C. G.
Burnside.
GERMAN COURSE.
1. Nathusius—Langenstein und Boblingen (Nutt), 35.; 2. Kinkel—Otto der
Schiitz (Nutt), 3s. 6d. ; 3. Korner—Der Grune Domino (Reolam, Leipsic), 3d. ;
4. Korner—Rosamunde (Reolam, Leipsic), 3d. ; 5. Heyse —Novellen (Nutt), 6s.
Recommended. —1. Dahn —Nurnberge Novellen ; 2. Ebers—Die agyptische
Konigstochter (Nutt), 14s. ; 3. Uarda (Nutt), 14s. ; 4. Dahn—Die Kampf um
Rom, 4 vols (Nutt), £1 Bs.
210
A. H. E.


The Characters in Romola.
II.
BARDO DE’ BARDI.
aWOMOLA’S father, the blind old Bardo de’ Bardi is a typical
scholar of the Renaissance. He is proud of coming of that old
stock of the Bardi, the brilliant soldiers and merchant-princes of days
gone by ; but pride of race and every other emotion is absorbed in his
passion for the revived culture of antiquity. This his master-passion
is in very truth that intense delight of learning, which, as Lewis Morris
says:—
grows great
And stronger and more keen, for slower limbs,
And dimmer eyes and loneliness, and loss
Of lower good—wealth, friendship, aye, and love.
But it is the learning of the Renaissance, which looks to the past
with an enthusiasm approaching worship, which makes light of the
present, and entirely neglects the future. “ For me,” he says, “ even
when I could see, it was with the great dead I lived ; while the living
often seemed to me mere spectres—shadows dispossessed of true feeling
and intelligence.” He, therefore, looks upon the poetical and philo-
sophical treatises of his own time as superfluous and presumptuous
attempts to imitate the inimitable. In Politian he can only see
superficial ingenuity ; and he thinks he is assigning a high place to
Petrarch, when he calls him “ the modern, who is least unworthy to be
named after the ancients.” Before his blindness his whole soul has
been centred in the production of a great work, which was to have been
the vintage of his life ; but failure of sight and want of a coadjutor have
frustrated his purpose. His bitterness and disappointment at Dino’s
desertion are relentless. He has disowned his son, and forbidden the
very mention of his name. Being, moreover, himself a pagan in
religion, his resentment is doubled by the fact that his son has become
a monk, for monks in his eyes are but “ insect-swarms of besotted
fanatics or howling hypocrites.” Imbued with Greek and Latin
erudition he can see nothing in his son’s conduct but filial disobedience
and debased fanaticism. But the extinction of the great hope of his
life has not quenched his craving for fame, and this craving now takes
the shape of a fervent desire that his library and collection of antiquities
shall be preserved as a perpetual inheritance for his fellow-citizens, and
always bear his name. He is querulous and fretful, and afraid that
some other scholar may after his death profit by his work, and rob him
of his meed of fame. Yet neither his querulousness, his craving for
fame, nor his vast erudition, have been able altogether to eliminate his
fatherly tenderness for the Antigone, who tends him in his blindness.
The coming of Tito arouses anew his hopes with regard to the execution
of a great work ; but these hopes are soon extinguished, and the old
211
A. H. R.


scholar mournfully falls back on his only consolation—the desire for
the preservation of his library. It should be noticed as most character-
istic that notwithstanding his scepticism and his vast erudition, he has
not escaped the strange superstitions which were so incongruously
mingled with the learning of the age, for he is not without belief in the
occult medicinal virtues of gems, and himself wears two rings as a
specific against a certain infirmity of sudden numbness. Bardo is,
indeed, the personification of the Renaissance, of its hyperbolical, yet
narrow erudition, of its scepticism and superstition.
NELLO.
Not less typical of the Renaissance is the mercurial little barber,
Nello. He is light and joyous in his disposition, and has such an
inexhaustible fund of material for conversation that “ his loquacity,
like an over-full bottle, can never pour out a small dose.” But his
conversation does not consist of mere trivialities. The age has set its
mark upon him. He not only knows what is passing in the world of
scholarship ; but his own erudition is so extensive that he can enter
into its spirit, and retail it with great zest to his customers; for, as he
says himself, his shop is the “ focus of Florentine intellect, and in that
sense the navel of the earth.” Not only is this little barber acquainted
with the Italian poets, of whom Luigi Pulci is his favourite, but he has
considerable, though as might be expected, superficial acquaintance
with the classics also. Even for the purpose of lulling himself into his
siesta he takes a “ potion of potent poesy.” Bardo with all his mighty
erudition does not consider him altogether illiterate, and thinks that he
would have made respectable progress in learning if he had “ abstained
from the frivolous productions of Luigi Pulci, and the gossip of the
street corner.” In Bardo we have symbolized the intensity of the
learning of the Renaissance, in Nello we see the manifestation of its
diffusion —Bardo the profound scholar, Nello the brilliant smatterer.
FRA LUCA.
From these Renaissance types we pass to one of a totally different
character. Dino, or to call him by his monastic name, Fra Luca, is the
emblem of the mental attitude of the Middle Ages. His contrast to
his father brings out with the greatest vividness the irreconcilable
difference between the two habits of thought. From the studies, which
are his father’s very life, he has recoiled as from the stifling poison
breath of sin. He speaks of having been called from his father’s side
by a never-ceasing voice, and he has stifled the promptings of filial love
as demon-tempters. He has realised to the full the inexorable words
of the Great Master, “ I am come to set a man at variance against his
father and the daughter against her mother ; he that loveth father or
mother more than me, is not worthy of me.” Therefore Dino’s thoughts
are not of this world : he has become a Dominican brother; he has fled
212
A. H. E.


to distant lands and lived as a hermit: he has blotted out by asceticism
and suffering every earthly affection, every earthly hope : he has been
guided but by visions and dreams. When he is dying he returns to
Florence, not to learn how it fares with father or sister; but to
stimulate his brethren to acquire the Eastern tongues, to go out to the
Tsast, and take up the work he has left. He summons Romola to his
death-bed, not to renew the bonds of earthly affection; but to relate a
vision, which he believes to be a heavenly warning meant for her ; and
his last words are not those of tenderness or farewell, but a broken
expression which Frit Girolamo interprets as a gift of the Crucifix.
Dino is in very truth the personification of the spirit of the
Middle Ages.
BALDASSARRE CALYO.
In Baldassarre Calvo is presented to us a nature wholly absorbed
by the one master-passion—revenge. Cruelly forsaken and robbed by
the foster-son, whom he has cherished with such loving care, left to
suffer the tortures of slavery and bereft of his erudition by a severe
illness, which has left his mind a blank, he has but one motive in life—
the supreme yearning for vengeance. “If I might but clutch his heart-
strings for ever,” is the expression of this soul-hunger. “ For ever ! ”
nothing less than an eternity of agony can satisfy him. Therefore,
though in preference to bread he buys a poniard, he rejects the thought
of the speedy punishment of a dagger-thrust, —that must be but a last
resource, and meanwhile he gloats over the idea of that eternity of
vengeance, where he, an undying hate, may clutch for ever an undying
traitor, and hear his cries and moans of anguish. It is only the sense
of feebleness—the sense of the impossibility of this eternal requital that
makes him resolve to use the poniard, that makes him spring like a
wild-beast when he realises whose face it is that is looking in upon him
in the outhouse. For all he can know to the contrary Tito’s petition
for forgiveness, which is preferred so gently, so humbly, may be the
expression of the deepest penitence; at any rate he makes no effort to
test its sincerity, but rejects it with the relentless words : “ there is one
draught of sweetness left—that you shall know agony.” When he
experiences the full revival of his faculties, and with them the return of
that scholarship which has been the harvest of his life, there comes no
relenting thought that the once beloved Tito has actually begged for
forgiveness, and that, though his sin had been most infamous, the very
fact of such a petition being made asks some measure of mercy, some
effort for his reclamation. On the contrary the return of his scholar-
ship is but the spur to his revenge, and the cause of the open
denunciation in the Rucellai Gardens. He never reflects that this
course of all others is just that which must drive Tito into deeper
infamy. Yet such is its effect. Baldassarre fails : like a dying flame
that has leapt up with a last sudden flicker his faculties and scholarship
213
A. H. E.


relapse into nothingness at the very moment when the crucial test is
proposed to him, and he suffers a long, weary imprisonment as a
madman. But when he is again free, revenge is still his only thought.
The whole tenor of his conversation with Romola is “ Help me—help
me to wring one drop of vengeance on this side of the grave. I have
nothing hut my knife. It is sharp ; but there is a moment after the
thrust, when men see the face of death—and it shall be my face that he
will see.” In the sickening scene on the bank of the Arno, when his
vengeance is glutted, he is a very fiend in human shape—waiting,
waiting till the exhausted swimmer can so far recover consciousness as
to recognise him. Then the gloating “Ah yes, you see me, you know
me,” then the strangling of the returning life. The inexorable author
tells us that this is justice—no more.
WILLIAM J. BYRAM.
“Drifting Away.”
ROMOLA, BK. III., CH. LXI. ET SEQ.
0 God ! what is there in this world of Thine
Of human sympathy, or love Divine?
Father, and husband, friend, and faith in Heaven,
All lost, all lost. Oh, whither to be driven !
Alone I wander, every ideal shattered,
Alone, for all my hopes are widely scattered—
Hopeless, and homeless—anywhere to be !
Floating upon the bosom of the sea !
Bear me, O bark, to Lethe’s darkest stream,
And let this life seem but a dreary dream.
I’ll draw the cowl about my face, the light
E’en of the stars, for me, is far too bright.
How soothing is the heaving of the swell!
Upon the sail, how sweet the land-breeze fell!
What beauty in the shimmering wave, foam-flecked.
In the blue vaulted ether, star-bedecked !
Gone is the power (dark as my father’s sight)
That made fair nature’s beauties my delight.
Tito, with thee love, light, and living came.
From thee, Girolamo, I craved the same.
Alas my aspirations ! Love, belief,
Both perished ! Oh for some sad swift relief !
Ah, there’s my father! and his eyes are bright,
Shining with an intense supreme delight,
214
A. H. R.


Talking with Apollonius Rhodius,
Dante, and Petrarch, and Callimachus—■
Ah God ! but who is that upon the dark
Deep Stygian tide, floats by so still and stark 1
Tito, my spouse! Oh shield me from the sight
That once I looked on with so much delight !
Oh bless’d relief, Bernardo’s kindly smile
Beams from his noble face, whereon no guile
Of any sort could find a halting place,
Most noble Florentine, last of his race !
And am I then in the Elysian fields 1
This blue expanse of sky and sea but yields
Me pleasures of an earthly kind. Ah, no.
How sweet, if only in my dream, below
Again to be. Here is the little boat
In which I scarcely e’en desired to float.
Is there more work to do on this dull earth ?
Can my sad mind do ought of any worth 1
I know not. It were better far to die.
Hark ! What is that 1 A childish piteous cry !
A human cry—To what has it given birth ?
A purer sense of Heaven, and a new Earth.
W. P.
Ballarat, Nov., 1894.
Announcement
No suggestions have been received by the General Secretary as to
date and place of the annual meeting of the Council of the Union.
Time and place will therefore be arranged by the Executive Council at
its meeting in December, and due notification of the arrangement will
be forwarded to each member of the Council.
FRENCH LITERATURE COURSE.
1. V. Hugo—Hernani (Hachette), 9d.; 2. V. Hugo—Ruy Bias (Longmans),
2s. 6d.; 3. Dumas pere —La Dame de Monsorreau ; 4. Oautier—Caprices et
Zigzags; 5. Balzac—Cesar Birotteau ; 3. A. Daudet—Tartarin de Tarascon (per
Brockhaus), 45.; 7. Pierre Loti— d’ Islande (per Brockhaus), 45.; 8. E.
Labiche—La Poudre aux Yeux ; 9. E. Labiche—Le Misanthrope et P Auvergnat;
10. Lamartine—Graziella (Hachette), 25.; Mery—La Guerre du Nizam ; 12. P.
Bourget—Essais de Psychologie contemporaine (Lemerre), 3s. 6d.
Readers should select from the above list. Difficulty has been found in
obtaining information as to published prices.
215
A. H. R.


Political Economy.
DISTRIBUTION. II.
«HE chief questions to be asked about distribution are these :
I. How are the incomes of people of each industrial class and
grade settled when they are left to he settled by free bargaining 1
11. In what respects is the settlement thus arrived at unsatis-
factory 2
111. So far as it is unsatisfactory, what, if anything, can be done
to alter it for the better 2
I. The price of every kind of service alike, so far as it is settled by
free bargaining, tends to the point at which demand and supply are
equalised ; it is the special conditions of demand and supply in each
case that we have to ascertain.
A. The Wages of the Worker (including the Tenderer of direct services,
the independent producer, and the wage-earner taking part in complex
production for sale). Each kind of labour has its own price; and the
price of the more skilled and the more efficient labour is, as a rule,
proportionately higher.
The demand for each kind of work is the amount of that work
which people find it worth their while to buy, at the price at which it is
offered, rather than to spend the same money in some other way.
The supply of each kind of labour is, for short periods, a nearly
fixed quantity ; and consequently, increased demand for some one kind of
labour causes, for a time, higher wages for that kind. But those higher
wages will, in time, increase the supply by attracting more workers
from other occupations.
But this being so, why does not competition equalise the wages in
all employments (or, at least, equalise the “net advantages” of all
employments) 2
Because competition is imperfectly active between different grades
of workers ( e.g., a cabman is not usually in a position to enter the
medical profession).
In each grade, the supply is, in the long run, limited, and there-
fore the reward prevented from permanently falling below a certain
point, by the “ standard of living ” established in that grade.
But the “ standard of living ” is itself variable ; and assuming it
fixed, it fixes only the lowest limit permanently possible for wages; not
the rate at which they must stand. There is no “ iron law ” keeping
wages down to the “ margin of subsistence.”
B. The Profit of the Employer (incomplete production). This is a
special case of wages of highly skilled labour; the boot-manufacturer
being only -the village shoemaker on a larger scale. He will engage in
the business only if he sees a prospect of getting a return high enough
216
A. H. K.


to make it worth his while to undertake this business as compared with
other courses open to him, i.e., of having enougli left to himself out of
the gross return, after paying the working expenses, including com-
pensation to himself for undertaking the risks. And in this, as in other
kinds of work, an increased supply of qualified men will, other things
being equal, lower the average rate of the reward.
The working expenses he has to pay are (setting aside rent for the
present), wages to workmen, price of raw material, and price of
machinery and plant : and he must have capital at his command {i.e., a
fund in hand, either his own or borrowed), to advance these payments
to his workmen, and to the producers of the material and plant, until
the time when the finished goods reach the consumer.
C. The Interest of the Capitalist.
The rate of interest, i.e., —the price of the use of capital for a
certain time—is brought by competition nearly to one level (after
allowing compensation for risk).
The demand for capital depends on the amount of profitable
openings for its employment.
The supply of capital, on the whole, depends on the general
disposition to save ; and for any one country, may be largely increased
by importation to meet increased local demand.
D. The rent of the land owner.
Both property in land and use of land, so far as the State
authorises their transfer by free contract, have their yirice ( land-values
and rent). The price or selling value of land is the capitalised value of
all its future rents.
The utility, and therefore the rent, of different pieces of land
varies, from nothing upwards.
The whole area of land available for any one community is fixed ;
and so is the area of land of any particular quality and advantage of
position.
Hence (regarding those owners who use their land themselves as
competitors in the market for land-use, paying rent to themselves, we
may say), that the supply of use of land of each quality is fixed.
(The term “ land-monopoly,” as commonly used, is an inaccurate
way of describing this fact. There is, in the proper sense of the word,
no “ monopoly ” of land, unless all the land available is owned by one
proprietor—whether a private owner or the state).
Supply being fixed, the competition-rent of land will depend on the
demand—the would-be occupiers bidding against one another till the
rising price reduces the amount demanded to equality with the fixed
amount available.
On what, then, does the demand for land of each quality depend 1
(1) All people want land to live on. Hence the ground-rents of
residential sites; and where a large number of people wish
to live within the same small area ( e.g ., in Sydney), the rents
of suitable sites will rise high.
217
A. H. R.


(2) Some people (not all) want the use of land as a means of
making an income by production (agricultural land, and sites of
business premises). And the rent of land for this purpose will
vary as the land varies in productiveness—that is, in the net
value of its yield.
The competition of would-be occupiers for this purpose will raise
the rent of each piece of land to such a point that the occupier, after
paying the rent, will have left for himself, clear of working expenses, a
share of the produce about equal in value to the normal profit in his
trade.
The rent of each piece of land, therefore, tends to equal the surplus
value of its net yield above normal profit; or (what comes to the same
thing) to equal the excess of its net yield above that of the land which
it only just pays to use.
Thus competition-rent equalises the advantages of the occupiers of
all lands, by sweeping off whatever surplus the more productive lands
are capable of yielding.
Any increase of demand for the produce of land raises the surplus
yield (and therefore the rent and value) of land hitherto used, and
enables more land to yield a surplus.
And such increased demand will result from any increase of the
total purchasing power of those whom the produce can reach.
Hence “ industrial progress ” tends on the whole (though not in
every case) to raise rents and land values. This increase in the surplus
yield of land is the so-called “ unearned increment.”
But in what sense “ unearned I ” The owner has, by authorisation
of the State, acquired the varying surplus yield of the land for all
future years,—usually by purchase or inheritance. (In this country,
the owners of land have got their title, directly or indirectly, out of a
purchase from the State). If he has bought it, the prospective increase
of value formed part of the consideration for which the buyer paid ; and
the “ increment ” is earned or unearned by him according as he earned
or did not earn the money he paid for it. If he has inherited it, then
the increment is as much or as little earned as any other inherited
property.
No distinction in principle then, can be drawn between private
ownership of land and private ownership of other forms of property of
varying and possibly increasing value.
Whether the community has acted and is acting wisely in transfer-
ring the ownership of lands from itself to individuals, is a question of
expediency, and stands on quite a different footing from the question
whether the community is to repudiate such contracts when it has once
made them.
11. There must in every transaction, be some rate of pay which is
best for society as a whole, and which a judicious and impartial observer
would accordingly approve. And if both parties to the bargain agreed
218
A. H. K.


as to what that rate was, and aimed only at that, there would be no
opposition between them.
The rate at which free bargaining settles the payment for services
may not always be the best rate. But if not, what is 1 On what
principle is one rate of pay for any particular service to bo judged better
than another.
The mere desire of either party to get more for himself, and leave
less for the other, yields no such principle.
Two possible principles.
(1) Distribution according to need. “ We want ‘ a living wage.’ ”
It is bad that anyone should get less than “ the necessaries for
efficiency.”
(2) Distribution according to (economic) merit. “We want fair
wages.” But what is the meaning of the word fair ? “It is
fair that each man should get the amount of wealth he has
produced.”
But it is impossible to calculate how much he has produced. If
each worked in isolation, the product would be too little to support
life; and the excess of actual wages above this is an “ unearned
increment,” due to the activity of numberless other people, living and
dead. How sort out from the total the exact fraction contributed by each 1
The produce of the labour, then, does not afford a practicable basis
for distribution ; and on this principle, supposing that it could be carried
out, some would get too little to sustain life.
As a working principle under our present social institutions, we
may perhaps take fair wages to mean normal wages, as they would be
settled by free bargaining if all parties were in a position to bargain on
equal terms.
(It is “ unfair,” in this sense, for one party to take advantage of
helplessness or ignorance in the other, so as to exact from him terms to
which he would not otherwise consent.)
This principle at least seems to be the nearest practicable approxi-
mation to payment in proportion to the service rendered. (If all
started with equal opportunities, it might approximate to “income
according to efficiency”; but the existence of inherited wealth enables
some to derive income from capital and land irrespective of personal
efficiency,—and also makes men’s opportunities of becoming efficient
very unequal.)
But such a method of distribution is inconsistent with “ income
according to need," and requires to be supplemented by some provision
for those who would, under it, get too little.
HI. Can anything be done to raise the incomes of those who, at
the rates of pay settled by free bargaining, get too little ? If so, what,
and by whom ?
(Consider (1) action of individuals; (2) action of voluntary-
associations, e.g. Trade-Unions ; (3) action of Government).
W. SCOTT
219
A. H. R.


Patria rara.
With the sound of a dirge everlasting, like a wail from the limitless past,
Are the waves of the rolling Pacific, on the Austral littoral oast;
From the green coral sea of the Barrier, where the madrepore buildeth
a home,
In the depths, with the pearls its foundation, and its tempest-torn
top in the foam ;
All the orient coast of our island, with its beaches and headlands that mock
The ocean’s fierce fury for ages, and the rive of the hurricane’s shock ;
To the islands, like sentinels, standing and menacing stern at the gate
All the mariners heedlessly sailing on the waves of the treacherous
strait; —
Here the gloom of a forest primeval, there the valleys and prairies
outspread,
And the scrub covered flank of the mountains, dark veiling the azure
o’erhead ;
Away, from the slumberous tropic, far South to the temperate zone,
Lieth, bathed in a summer of sunlight, the beautiful land that we own.
What an infinite storage of treasure will these ranges and valleys
upyield
From the gold-bearing mountain of Morgan, to the wash of alluvial field;
For a glory of limitless riches are enwombed, for the miner who seeks,
In the heart of the mountains and gorges, and the gem bearing sands
of the creeks;
And the wild and mysterious forests, and the prairies extending
around,
They will yield to persistence of labour all the wealth of their
virginal ground ;
Here the germ of an Empire is lying, in its embryo untainted and good,
That should burgeon to strength and to beauty, unsoiled by ambition
and blood ;
Be worthy the land of your birthright, of your freedom, ye sons of the soil!
And a future of fulness and foison will respond to the touch of your toil;
The experience of ages before you, should guide your endeavours aright,
To filter the good from the evil, in your march to the haven of light;
For you is the past with its warnings, the crystallized wisdom of years,
A far shining beacon outstanding in an ocean of sorrow and tears ;
The crash of the cymbals and trumpets, and the crimson-stained
banners of war,
Have roused the wild passion of peoples, in the aeons of ages before ;
And the shout of the fierce eyed Bellona, the prelude of slaughter’s
increase,
Has broken the pinion of progress, and strangled the angel of Peace ;
But you, sons of Australia united, will bear a white banner unfurled,
With the motto of Love and of Duty to press to the van of the World.
W. YALDWYN.
220
A. H. R.


Notes and News.
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION.
The annual Committee Meeting of the N.S.W. Section of the
A.H.R.U. was held on Thursday, November 29th, in Mr. Allard’s
office. The report was read in which the Secretary intimated a fall in
members, the numbers this year standing at 480 compared with 677 of
last year. This may be accounted for partly by the fact that the
existence of whole Circles has ceased through want of enthusiastic
leaders, but where such exist much earnest work has been done
throughout the year.
“ That the Leader or Secretary of any Circle of this Section shall
be ex-officio a member of the Committee for the ensuing year ” was
re-affirmed.
Professor MacCallum was unanimously elected President and Miss
Studdy remains Secretary. A hearty vote of thanks was accorded to
the retiring officers.
The Geology Circle at Parramatta have been reading Fire Fountains
by Miss Gordon Cummings, and are now deep in Wright’s Man and the
Glacial Period. The reading of Kingsley’s Saints’ Tragedy caused the
discussion attending the members of Parramatta Literary Circle to turn
on Asceticism and Spiritualism.
Ruskin’s Sesame and Lilies was the book selected for the last
meeting of the North Sydney Circle. The discussion on this took a
wide but not excessive range, the author’s rather cynical views of the
motives of men’s ambition, and of representative government, and his
appreciation of women, each having its criticism from several sides.
A. STUDDY.
QUEENSLAND SECTION.
The River Picnic of the A.H.R.U. having been postponed until
March of next year, a River Picnic was arranged by the Brisbane
Literary Circle. The members went by steamer a considerable distance
up the river. After a stroll ashore and tea, an impromptu programme
of readings and recitations was arranged. At the indoor meetings the
following papers were discussed :—Mr. Geo. Scott, Much Ado About
Nothing ; Mrs. Banks, Trades Unions ; Mrs. L. Cooper, Childe Harold.
At Rockhampton, on November 6th, a meeting was held at the
Girls’ Grammar School. Mr. W. Mcllwraith gave an interesting
description of Mollusca, making particular reference to the shore-fauna
of Emu Park. Mr. T. Parker, 0.E., wrote on the study of Geology,
and exhibited a diagram of a theoretical section of the Fitzroy Valley
at Rockhampton, and some fossils from the Athelstane Range quarry.
Miss Downs introduced the study of Botany, illustrating with specimens
of insect-loving plants from the Botanical Gardens. Songs were
221
A. 11. E.


rendered, and a charming conversazione thoroughly enjoyed. Miss
Downs deserves the thanks of members for her untiring zeal in the
work of the Group.
Miss Hunt has also been exceedingly zealous in forwarding the
Ipswich Circle. A very interesting social was held at Ipswich at which
the Australian poets were appreciatively discussed.
At Toowoomba the Physiology lectures continue to be very
popular. A meeting has been called to elect officers and choose courses
for next year.
The St. Andrew’s Circle holds a social on Tuesday, December 4th.
L. E. GROOM.
VICTORIAN SECTION.
Thirteen new members have joined the Victorian Section during
the last month, most of whom belong to Ballarat.
An enjoyable re-union of the members and friends of the Ballarat
Group in connection with the Australasian Home Reading Union was
held last night at the City Hall. There was a large attendance,
including the Mayor of the city and other prominent citizens. The
proceedings were opened by the President (Dean Stretch), who in a brief
speech congratulated the Group upon the progress made. Thirty new
members have lately joined the Ballarat Group, bringing up the number
of members to over 100. During the year three new Circles have been
formed. An address was also delivered by the Rev. Father Rogers.
During the evening an excellent musical programme was given, the
various items being greatly appreciated by the audience. A special
word of praise is due to the Ballarat Orchestral Society, who rendered
several selections in a delightful manner. The following was the
programme :—Overture, “ Marco Spada,” Ballarat Orchestral Society ;
song, “ The Garonne,” Mr. Swan; song, “La Serenata,” Mrs. Bean
(with violin obligato, Mr. Harrie West); song, “The Conquerors,”
Mr. Johnson; (a) “Graceful Dance,” ( b ) “ Intermezzo,” (by request),
Ballarat Orchestral Society; “ Maypole Dance,” Ballarat Orchestral
Society ; song, The Brave Sentinel,” Mr. Johnson ; song, “ Gondala
Dreams,” Mrs. Bean ; song, “My Queen,” Mr. Swan ; pot pourri, “ A
Night in Berlin,” Ballarat Orchestral Society; “God Save the Queen.”
Mr. Herbert officiated as Conductor, and Mr. H. West as Leader. The
general arrangements were ably supervised by the Hon. Secretary, Dr.
Phelps. —Ballarat Star.
L. M. FOX.
TASMANIAN SECTION.
The annual meeting of the Sectional Council was held at the
Museum on Friday, November th, to elect officers for the ensuing
year. The Bishop of Tasmania was elected President in the place of
JDr. Agnew, Mr. W. H. Williams, M.A., Vice-President, Mr. B. T.
Solly, Sub-Editor, while the election of Secretary was held over to a
222
A. H. B.


later meeting. Votes of thanks were passed to retiring officers, and
arrangements made for th§ annual meeting. The annual report, which
was read at the meeting, showed that there were ten Circles, principally
in Hobart and Launceston, and a total membership of 140. The
•country Circles find it difficult to get books, and extremely difficult to
meet together owing to the distances and the bad roads. New Norfolk,
however, is going on cheerfully, and the energetic secretary has formed
a Young People’s Circle, the work in which is more elementary than in
the adults’ Circle.
The reports of all the Circles are not yet to hand ; but one, that of
the Battery Point Circle, is selected for publication as a specimen of one
■of the most popular, if not the most workful, of the Circles in the
Hobart group.
“ The Battery Point Circle has entered on the third year of its
•existence and appears to be increasing in popularity, for it commenced
with twelve members and numbers now sixteen. Works ranging from
Shakespeare’s plays to Hamerton’s Human Intercourse have been read
and discussed ; and Scott’s novels and Kingsley’s poems have also been
taken in hand, while Byron found many enthusiastic admirers. Carlyle
also has been approached, but most of the members found the Apostle
of Work needed more time and study than they were able to give to
him, though it was determined to take him up again later on, when
better results are hoped for. The meetings are held fortnightly at the
various members’ residences, and the discussions are carried on in an
informal manner, the member at whose house the meeting is held being
the leader for the evening. The Circle concluded their winter session
of 1894 on Thursday evening, 19th October, with the usual entertain-
ment in a schoolroom that had been kindly placed at their disposal.
The first item on the programme was a reading of Sheridan’s Rivals ,
judiciously cut down so as to occupy about an hour and a half in render-
ing. This was followed by a reading of Burns’s Cottars Saturday
Night, which had been discussed during the session ; six tableaux,
appropriately costumed, of the Cottar and his family, with Jamie,
serving as illustrations. The concluding piece was Addison’s essay on
The Use of the Fan, read by a member and illustrated by seven ladies
ranged on the stage ; the fan-drill and incidental by-play being both
effective and amusing. That such gatherings go far to popularize the
Union and extend the sphere of its usefulness seems certain; and that
further Circles will be formed for the ensuing session may confidently
be looked for. The Battery Point Circle is the only one in Hobart
giving entertainments, and if others were to launch out in a similar
■direction the Union would assuredly be a gainer thereby.”
C. E. MORTON.
NEW ZEALAND—NORTHERN SECTION.
All the Circles in the district of Wellington have closed the
session for 1894. Unsuccessful attempts have been made to form
223
A. H. R.


Circles in Nelson, Wanganui, Otaki, Greytown, and other places.
Everyone praises the work the A.H.R.U. is doing, hut few seem to-
have time to give any assistance. At the last meeting of the Newtown
Circle Mr. Anderson, the chairman, on behalf of the members of the
Circle, presented Mrs. J. S. Fleming, leader for 1894, with Daniel
Deronda, and George Eliot’s Life by her husband, J. W. Cross.
The following is taken from the Wairarapa Daily Times of Friday*
October 12th;—“The closing meeting of this year’s session of the
Masterton Circle of the A.H.R. Union, was held in the Wesleyan
Schoolroom last evening and took the form of a social. There were a
large number of members and their friends present, and a very pleasant
evening was spent, several members and others contributing to the
evening’s entertainment with dialogues, readings, recitatiohs, and songs.
Refreshments were handed round by the lady members. At the con-
clusion of the programme Mr. T. R. Fleming, who was called on to say
a few words, said he had a very pleasant duty to perform, which was to-
present Mr. Hutchison with a slight token of the esteem in which he
was held by the members of the Circle of which he was the leader. He
then presented Mr. Hutchison with a handsomely-bound volume of
John Ruskin’s work The Seven Lamps of Architecture. Mr. Hutchison
having suitably replied, the company broke up after singing 1 Auld-
Lang Syne.’ ”
I have forwarded to the General Secretary subscriptions for 132
members who have been taking the magazine. I should like to remind
some of the members that subscriptions are still due.
T. R. FLEMING.
NEW ZEALAND—SOUTHERN SECTION.
The following are the reports sent in from Circles.
Mbs. J. B. Maynb, leader of the Ashburton Literature Circle
writes:—“We began our work this year with two books—Carlyle’s-
Past and Present and Tennyson’s Princess. In connection with the
former, an essay on Carlyle’s life and works was read. This book in
particular evoked a great deal of discussion and was thoroughly
enjoyed. One of our members also read a very interesting paper on the
work as a whole. We then took up the Merchant of Venice. We were
able, fortunately, to obtain a series of most interesting lectures on this
play, given by Professor Brown of Canterbury College. We are now
reading As You Like It and Charles Kingsley’s Alton Locke. Our
meetings are held once in three weeks, and our members seem thoroughly
interested in the work. We may look upon the A.H.R.U. as fairly
established here.”
Dr. Hunter, leader of the Biology Circle, Ashburton, writes ;
“ We have read Thomson’s Study of Animal Life, and the first five
chapters of Buckley’s Life and Her Children, and hope to finish this
work before the end of the current year.”
224
A. H. E.


In Timaru, the Rev. Mr. JBeecroft’s Circle have read As You Like
It, in connection with which a paper was given on the grammatical
forms used, and also songs and readings from the play. They are now
reading Carlyle’s Heroes and Hero-Worship.
Dr. Thomas’s Circle, taking the Biology course, have finished
Buckley’s Life and Her Children, and in connection with insect life
were very fortunate in obtaining some splendid specimens of moths and
butterflies, kindly lent by an ardent collector. They are now reading
Winners in Life’s Race.
Mrs. Inglis’s English Literature Circle have been making a
thorough study of Browning’s life and poems.
Mrs. Hogben sends the following : —“ The Priory Circle has met
very regularly once a fortnight, and the attendance has been extremely
good, and the interest well sustained. Two of the afternoon meetings
were devoted to Tennyson ; another afternoon was given to Kingsley’s
poems. Haraerton’s Human Intercourse has been read and discussed.
A short account of Kingsley’s life and works was contributed, and one
evening was devoted to his Saints' Tragedy ; short papers were read on
the characters of Conrad, Elizabeth, and Count Walter, and the tragedy
as a whole, and these were followed by animated discussion. The last
evening meeting in October took the form of a “ surprise ” evening,
when each member was expected to contribute something to the
evening’s amusement, but was not to divulge beforehand what it was to
be. A most enjoyable evening was spent, the first “ surprise ” being a
serenade sung outside the windows by six of the members. There were,
besides songs, piano solos, readings and recitations, a scene from the
School for Scandal, and another from Princess Ida, in costume. After
refreshments and general conversation, the evening’s amusement closed
with the singing of a lovely “good-night” song by the serenading
party. During the evening, the Leader was greatly pleased and
surprised by the kind present of a beautiful photogravure of Long’s
picture, “ Diana or Christ,” made to her by all the members of the
Circle. The Circle is now studying Antony and Cleopatra, and will
probably hold two more meetings, after which there will be an interval
for a short time. During the year, not only have the meetings been
well attended, but the books have been thoroughly well read at home,,
and the younger members, of whom there are a good number, have
shown quite as much interest as those of maturer age.”
Mr. G. Hogben, M.A., writes : —“ The meetings of the Timaru
Political Economy Circle have been continued, but the numbers have
fallen off somewhat, chiefly in consequence of the fact that most of our
members are busy men, and it has unfortunately been impossible to hold
our meetings at times that do not clash with other engagements.
Interesting discussions took place over the question of Rent and Land
Nationalisation ; of the respective shares of the landlord, capitalist, and
workman in the products of labour; and in connection with strikes and
arbitration, the Leader gave a sketch, chiefly based upon Howells, of the
225
A. H. R.


TREASURER’S ACCOUNT FOR
NOVEMBER.
From New Zealand (S. Section)...
... £2
6
0
„ N. S. W
1
2
0
,, Victoria
1
6
0
Total
£4
14
0
history of trades unions. The next subject is Co-operation in Production
and in Distribution. A paper summing up the chief arguments for and
against Bimetallism would be very acceptable to our members.”
In Geraldine, the Rev. W. Todd’s circle have read and discussed
Kingsley’s Alton Locke and Antony and Cleopatra , in connection with
which a very interesting paper was read. They are now reading
Matthew Arnold’s Culture and Anarchy.
E. M. FUSSELL.
Timaru, November 2, 1894.
Answers to Corespondents.
We acknowledge with thanks the receipt of the following articles
and poems, and regret that space has not allowed us to publish them :
Ghilde Harold’s Pilgrimage ; Culture and Anarchy ; Notes on
Thackeray’s English Humorists; The White Company; The Vicar of
Wakefield ; The Holehrook Place Geology• Matthew Arnold ; A Plea for
the Torture; The Colour of Plants and Flowers ; Music and Moonlight;
Shells and Flowers; After Sunset ; Silent Ministry ; Burnside in
Spring.
226
A. H. R.
