

LIMITATION OF OFFSPRING.
Bradlaugh-Besant Prosecuted Work.
THE
Fruits of Philosophy,
OR
PRIVATE COMPANION FOR MARRIED PEOPLE.
ADAPTED TO
The Wants of the Married and all Mature Persons.
The Book for which, in England, Edward Truedove was Imprisoned, and
in the defence of the Publication and Sale of which , Charles Bradlaugh
and Annie Desant maintained a long, gallant, and finally victorious fight.
CONTAINS BRADLAUGH-BESANT PREFACE.
[?]ld the following to be important and undeniable truths That
[?]an has a natural right both to receive and convey a know[?]ge
[?]e facts and discoveries of every art and science [?]
[?]ay be secured to some particular person or person or pers[?] by copy-
[?]tent. That a physical truth in its general effect cannot be a
That no fact in physics or in morals ought to be [?]eale[?]
[?]quiring mind.
[?]v make a misuse of knowledge, but that is their fault; and
[?]ht that one person should be deprived of knowledge, of
[?]s, or of anything else which is harmless in itself and
[ ?]im, because another may misuse it.”—EXTEACT.
[?] securely wrapped








INDEX.
Animal Reproduction 10
Advice to a Mamen 69
Abuse of the Sexual Function ... 90
Amenorrhoea ... 142
Abscess ... 150
Ague , 151
Apoplexy ... 161
Aphrodisiac or Sexual Remedy 217-224
Asthma 162
Amativenesa, Abuse ot 61
Babies, Care of 84
Back, Pains in ... , M ... 163
Baldness M ... 163
Biliousness „. 164
Bladder, Irritation of ... ... 154
Blear Eye ._ ... 154
Bleeding at the Nose 155
Bleeding from Wounds .„ .. 158
Blood, Spitting of ... 156
Blotches ... 157
Bladder, The ... 16
Breeding In and In ,„ .„ ... 98
Burns ... 158
Bronchitis ... 168
Conception ,„ - 32
Childbirth ... 40
Courtship 69
Children, Management of 86
Cats from the Flesh.. 211
Cuts ... ill
Childhood, Sexual Morality for ... 89
Clap 11l
Chordee ... 118
Childless Couple* 136
Chlorosis 138
Change of Life in Women 143
Child-Crowing ... 169
Chilblains ... 169
Cholera „. 169
Cold in the Chest 160
Cold Feet ;60
Colic 161
Consumption ... „ 161
Constipation ... ... 162
Cross Alliances ... ... ioi
Convulsions ... .„ ... 162
Corns ~ 162
Costiveness 163
Cough 163
Cramp ... 164
Croup 164
Childbearing. Too Frequent 18
Disordered Urine 117
Diseases Resembling Gonorrhoea... 120
Diseases of Women 131
Dysemenorrhwa ui
Defective Appetite 162
Development of the Embryo ... 34
Duration of Pregnancy 40
Diarrhoea 166
Domestic Infelicity 103
Diet of Pregnant Women 41
Deafness 165
Debility 165
Depression of Spirits 166
Dropsy 167
Dysentery I<>7
Embryology -3
Early Yioes 93
Early Marriages 64
Egg. Human, The 28
Emissions. Involuntary 134
Errors of Sexual Morality 91
Eruptions of the Skin ... -.. 168
Exhaustion 169
Byes Weakness of 169
Fission, Process of 10
pish. Generation of 12
Female Organs of Generation ... 14
Fecundation 16
Postal Life 32
Fornication 58
Falling of the Womb ... ... H 5
Flnor Atbus 146
Face-Ache ... ... ... 170
Painting 170
Freckles 170
Frost-bite 170
Fructification of Flowers and
Plants 8
Father's Influence on on the Physi-
cal Being of the Child ... 99
Germs 13-18
Generation, Organs of ... ... 14
Germination 16
Gestation 32
Gonorrhoea ... ... ... ... 11l
General description of Aphrodisiacs 217
Green Sickness 138
Gravel 171
Gleet 120
Human Germ 19
How to Select a Partner 51
Head, Odd in 160
Hair, Weakness of ... 171
Hair, Grey ... • 171
Headache 171
Heart, Palpitation of 172
Heartburn 173
Hoarseness 173
Hysterics 173
Healthy Children, to Secure ... 90


umuni/U
a
tf.
■udujwc
S',
tit
M
£
*
c
•a*
fe
m
Cv-
S?
Sgf
■T,
Pft
<
*
&
/ POPULAR WITH THE LADIES.
“The Ammird o£ Q-iigtare ” is a f •»»•!•■ and audacious recital of the amorous iritvig-ie* of
the here. whose ii : ~-hri- y - "o=.. th» orprtSHe so* •>'.-\-■■ ■_■ ■'■: •■ ■ n
scrape ■ -■••■'•- ..••• --r . •.■ *•■ »;•
‘**>V ;• *}« ■ civ ' ’
folil”' 3* p.;.i . ot at . - v rbV' * •
one ui hfusotioe ; Ica'u 10 -v.-)>«v 1/aws tUft.UJfCf>t--h : » tc.
say tome ; Vkju! ■•«;■.. t V■apperers * office ■’ to ado that yon should gefrthe bo;:
From aii tsookseilers, PRICE Is., OR POST FREE Is. 3d.
From Sir Robert Bear, Box 22, Park Street Post Office, Sydney.


How to Overcome the Passions ... 93
Hereditary Transmission 92
Hypochondria, a Cause of 97
Impregnation 20
Intermarriages 77
Irritability of the Bladder 117
Ingenual Glands ... ••• ••• 125
Inflammation of the Bladder ... 117
Impotence 136
Indigestion ... ... 174
Influenza 17®
Jaundice 176
Kidneys, The 16
Labor 39
Love and Marriage 42
Love, Varieties of -« 42
Lencorrhoea ... .. ... ••• 146
Laws of Sexual Intercourse ... 88
Love, Analysis of ... •• 61
Life, Origin of H
Lust, Evils of 69
Lumbago 176
Multiplication of the Species ... 10
Male Organs of Generation ... 13
Maidens, Counsels to 69
Marriage, who should abstain
from
Menstrual flow H
Mother's Influence 85
Mother, about to become 88
Menstruation, Obstructed 137
Menstruation, Profuse ... ... 140
Menstruation, Painful ... ... 141
Menstrual Colic ... h. ... 141
Menses,Cessation 0f... ... ... 143
Menses, Suppression of 142
Marriage, Happy 60
Matrimonial Errors ... 104
Mouth, So»c... 176
Mumps * ••• 176
Nocturnal Emissions ... ... 131
Nausea 177
Nails, Ingrowing 177
Nervousness 178
Neuralgia 179
Nightmare - 18°
Organs of Generation 13
Origin of Life 11
Ovarian Life *4
Offensive Breath 167
Ovary
Organs of Plants ... 8
Obstructed Menstruation 137
Plant Life °
Pregnancy
Parental Interference 73
Puberty 21
Prostate Gland - H 7
Prolapsus Uteri 145
Parturition 41
Persons who should not marry ... 4b
Paralysis
Piles
Pimples ••• 4°^
Poisons, to counteract the effects loz
Proportionable Development ... 52
Parent’s Influence in determining
the Sex of a Child 98
Rheumatism 183
Ringworm 185
Seminal Fluid SO
Spermatozoa 20
Sexual Intercourse 88
Sexual Diseases HO
Syphilis 126
Stricture of the Urethra 121
Self-Abuse 128
Sterility 135
Stomach, Acidity Of 131
Seminal Emissions ... 133
Spontaneous Generation 11
Seminal Weakness 134
Spermatorrhoea 136
Self-Pollution 129
Sensua.ity, Evils of 69
Scald Head 185
Scalds 185
Scarlet Fever 184
Skin Blisters 166
“ Scrofula 185
Scurf 186
Scurvy 186
Si ie, Pains in 186
Sight, Dimness of 187
Sleep, Want of 189
Sore Throat 181
Spasms 191
Sudden Accidents and Injuries ... 207
Sexual Life or Aphrodisiac Remedy 216
Stabs 211
Stomach-Ache 191
Sunburn 193
Swooning 193
Semen, Uses of .. 21
Testicles 19
Tongues, Sore 185
Toothache lt-5
Teeth, Decayed 195
Urethra, Stricture of 121
Ung ateful Children 104
Ulcers 205
Varicose Veins 197
Vegetable Reproduction ... .. 5
Venereal Diseases .. 110
Voice, Loss of 199
Vomiting 199
Wife, Duties of 109
Whites, The 146
Wives, Counsel to 107
Wife, How to Select ... ... 52
Womb 18
Woman, Distinctive Character-
istics 22
When to Marrry 46
Wasting ... 201
Watery Eye 207
Worms 206
Young Men, Important Counsels 55
Young Women, Special Chapter ... 66
Zoosperms 22


SEXUAL POWER
Positively & Permanently Restored.
EFFECTS IN 24 HOURS !
ALMOST IMMEDIATE RELIEF!!
Ho Nauseating Drugs, Minerals, or Poisons, but
DR. F. HOLLICK’S
■WKPHRODISIKO.*
—OR —
Sexual Life Remedy.
This Eemedy is adapted to every condition of Nervous Debility
fnd Weakness in either Sex, and especially in those cases resulting
rum imprudence.
The recuperative powers of this restorative are truly astonish-
ing, and its use continued for a short time changes the Languid,
debilitated, Nerveless condition to one of Renewed Life and Vigor.
If you are Weak, Nervous, Debilitated, and wish to become
strong (new) send for a package of Dr. F. HOLLICK'S
SEXUAL LIFE REMEDY.
PRICE, POST FREE, ss. 6d.
Or Four Packages, sufficient to permanently cure almost any case,
sent free from observation for £l.
SOLE AUSTRALIAN AGENT,
SIR ROBERT BEAR.
BOX 22, PARK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF APHRODISIACS,
AND BISTORT OF
DR. HOLLICK'S
APHRODISIAC REMEDIES.
217
Medical Remedies are classified and named according to
the mode in which they act. Some affect one part oI the
system, and others affect other parts. Those which act upon
the sexual organs, so os to preserve or restore their powers,
are called Aphrodisiacs. Remedies of this kind have alwayi
been eagerly sought, and paid for at any price; even gold
itself has not been more eagerly prized, and at this hour will
be given in profusion for a good Aphrosidiac, though begrudged
lor anything else —for nothing does a man more crave than
sexual power, and nothing does he more fear or regret to
lose.
Numerous remedies called Aphrodisiacs have been in use in
different parts of the world for ages pest, with more or leas
repute; but their employment never resulted in much good,
and often in much positive injury. It is the same at ihs
present day—the greater part of such remedies now in om
have no effect at all, and those which do aot had better be left
alone. This arises from the fact that they are administered
only empirically, and without any knowledge of their tros
powers or of their variable effects under different oiroaia-
stances.
When I first began to use the common remedies of this kind,
I found that they were, for the most part, only traditional
compounds, often dating back to the dark ages, and given


merely because the physician did not know what else to give
Some of them, it is true, acted as powerful stimulants, giving
them temporary power at the cost of future debility, but the
greater part were either utterly inoperative, or else acted only
on 'other parts of the system; in short, they were not
Aphrodisiacs ! . , , . .. ,
I, therefore, set to work to investigate the whole subject or
man’s sexual nature, and the action of all Aphrodisiac Reme-
dies upon it for myself. For years I experimented with them,
In thousands of cases, both simply and variously combined,
carefully noting their effects, and thus by degrees finding out
the true value of each, and how and when to use it. No one
else, I really believe, ever went into this subject more
thoroughly, or with more extensive opportunities for ex-
periment and investigation. My lectures and my books made
me so extensively known in connection with this subject, that
oases of every kind came to me in abundance from all parts,
and I was thus enabled to study practically what had been
before only speculated upon.
The result was, after endless trials, the formation of a
compound possessing true Aphrodisiac Powers 1 which, when
judiciously employed, invariably increases and maintain*
sexual power, or restores it when lost. This remedy, from its
great success in all cases not past aid, of impotence, sterility,
and natural deficiency became very celebrated and my
practice —which comprised only such cases—rapidly extended.
Every day the demand for my Aphrodisiac increased, and I
soon found a difficulty in procuring enough for my professional
aee, on account of the limited supply and great cost of many
of the ingredients.
Many of the most powerful and reliable Aphrodisiacs are
among the rarest of Nature’s products, and are obtained only
from the least known and most inaccessible parts of the
world; Musk, for instance, which is a powerful Aphrodisiac,,
and of which I use a large quantity, is always worth its weight
in gold, and often much more. There are, however, other
substances still more valuable, for which I have often given
hundreds of dollars for a few grains. Some of these are
natural and some artificial products, obtained by chemical
xieans, and which can be produced only at immense cost,
fhe great power of most of these articles fortunately makes a
small portion go a long way in use, or they could scarcely be
employed at all. In my remedy, there are altogether thirty-
three different ingredients, and some of them not more than
the hundredth part of a grain can be used at a dose. Each of
these ingredients has some peculiar power of its own, or is
necessary to the full development of the power of some otner
ingredient, so that the whole act together in producing that
wonderful effect for which this Remedy is so celebrated.
At the same time, however, that it acts so energetically ae^


an Aphrodiaiac, it has no ill-effect in any other way, but i*
perfectly harmless to all parts of the system. v,
It wifi be readily seen that such a remedy must necessarily
be costly, and can never come into common use: it must, in
fact, ever remain a special luxury for those who have been
favored with Fortune’s golden gifts, or for those who are
willing to make great sacrifices. As a natural consequence,
my constantly increasing demand for these rare articles made
them still more scarce and dear, till finally, I began to fear
that my supply would run short; I, therefore, sent agents to
all those parts from which they are obtained with instructions
to regularly boy up, and pre-engage, all that could be pro-
cured. This, of course, took a long time to accomplish, and
entailed an enormous expense, but it was the only sure course,
and was crowned with success. A supply has thus been
ensured, which enables me not only to provide all my patients
with sufficient, but also leaves -a surplus, so that I can now
prepare the Remedy for public sale, as I have constantly
been importuned to do, but fo* the reason given was unable
to do previously.
In this way originated the Aphrodisiac Remedy, the most
unique medicine perhaps ever compounded, and the most
exceptional in its effects. No advertising or other means for
disposing of it are necessary, for its value is so well known
that the difficulty will rather bo in supplying all who want it.
Numbers of my patients always keep as much by them as I
can spare to one person for fear of running short, and many
of them would give thousands of dollars rather than run any
risk of ever being without it.
Ah regards the obtaining of this Remedy, or any similar one,
I may as well remark here that no one else but myself can
possibly supply it 1 Not only because the proportions of the
various articles comprising it, and the manner of combining
them, is a secret only known to myself, but because the whole
quantity produced of many of the most valuable articles, ia
in my hands, or secured to me alone, by always paying large
sums in advance, so that no one else can obtain a grain.
This I was compelled to do in order to secure a sufficient
supply, and to make sure that my patients would not be
disappointed. Many of the artificial products are not made
for public sale, and, to obtain them, I am obliged to purchase
all that certain skilful chemists can produce, and at a rate,
too, which offers inducement enough to them to keep up the
manufacture for me alone; besides this, some of the articles
are made by myself, by a process which I have never disclosed.
It is, therefore, impossible for any one else to supply an
Aphrodisiac Remedy like this, because no one else can obtain
the components, nor knows how to combine them AH other
■o-called Aphrodisiacs can be formed only of the more com-
mon and inefficient remedies, such as are to be found in most


apothecaries’ shops, but they in no respect resemble min*.
The subtle and apparently mysterious way in which thi*
Remedy operates surprises most people, and it is therefor*
“necessary to give an explanation of its physiological action.
Medical agents act in different ways, some as stimulants to
particular parts of the body, some as alternatives, and others
again as special excitants of particular organs ; thus some
act on the bowels, some on the kidneys, some on the heart,
and others on the skin. A few act on the nervous system
through the brain, like alcohol and opium. Usually, they
excite in the first place, and afterwards act as sedatives, or
stupify The Indian Hemp or Uaschisch, is of this class, and
usually forms one of the main ingredients in all common
Exhilirants and Aphrodisiacs. It is a dangerous drug when
so used, and utterly valueless, when used alone, for any such
purpose, but when properly combined with other articles, it
becomes a valuable auxiliary.
Woe to those who use it and opium for the purpose of in-
toxication ! Alcohol is harmless compared with them !
The true Aphrodisiac, as I compound it, acts upon the
brain and nervous system, not as a stimulant, but as a tonic
and nutritive agent, thus sustaining its power and the power of
the sexual organs also, which is entirely dependent upon the
nervous power.
A man's sexual vigor represents merely his excess of nervous
vigor. All the functions, both of body and mind, are carried
on only by nervous power, which enables each organ to per-
form its peculiar function. The heart, stomach, lungs and
every other organ, act only from the stimulus which the
nerves bring to them from the brain and spinal marrow. Cut
these nerves through and stop the supply, and they act no
longer.
Now, every man only possesses a certain amount of
nervous power, which varies in quantity according to the
health and natural vigor of his system ; if, therefore, too
much of this power is employed in one of the functions, the
others must run short, and of course be imperfectly per-
formed. Thus, if a man thinks too much, his brain uses up so
much of his nervous power that he has not enough for other
purposes, and some organs must act imperfectly. Most
likely his stomach will be one of those, and then be becomes
dyspeptic, or he may have heart disease or liver complaint,
or any of these numerous diseases which we commonly
see—all of which spring originally from impaired nervous
action.
An imperfectly acting stomach again re-acts on the whole
system, because it prevents proper nutrition, and thus causes
general weakness or debility. No act, however, exhausts
more of nervous power than the sexual act I and this is why
•its too frequent performance is so terribly injurious, and why


the rotaries of Venus, so frequently become debilitated,
«reak-minded and impotent.
Whenever the system generally, or any particular part
becomes debilitated, and performs its peculiar function im-
perfectly, we use some medicine to stimulate it or improve its
action. Thus we employ various bitter tonics to help the
stomach in dyspepsia, and use aphrodisiacs in sexual im-
potence.
It has long been known, as a general truth, that there is
an Intimate connection between the nervous and sexual,
systems, but it has hitherto been generally thought to be
merely sympathetic. It is now known, however, that the
composition of the nervous substance and the seminal fluid
are almost identical, that in fact they are essentially nearly
the same thing. It has also been ascertained that in all
cases of severe nervous or mental derangement, the actual
substance of the brain and nerves either wastes away or un-
dergoes a destructive change. And in the same way, in all
oases of confirmed loss of sexual power, the seminal sub-
stance either wastes or becomes destructively changed in a
similar manner. But what is still more important, the
destruction or injury of either one of these elements of our
systems brings on inevitably a similar evil to the other.
Every man, therefore, who becomes impotent, is in imminent
danger of becoming of weak intellect, and every one whose
nervous substance is seriously impaired will almost certainly
lose his sexual powers. The two are intimately dependent,
the one on the other, and are affected for good or for evil, by
the same external and internal causes.
At the present time a number of causes are in constant
operation on most men, exceedingly destructive both to their
nervous and their sexual powers, causing an actual waste of
bram and seminal substance, and entailing bodily suffering
and mental deficiency to an unknown extent.
This has, of course, originated plenty of remedies as they
are called, which are put forth as infallible by those who know
nothing of the nature of these evils, and who care nothing for
the effect which follows after the remedy is sold.
In all such cases it is requisite, in the first instance, to
arrest further change or waste, and then effect a restoration, if
that be possible. To effect this renovation we must, of course,
use such means as will really create new brain or seminal
substance. The same os we create new muscle in cases of
muscular weakness. That this can be done is undoubted, for
each portion of the origanisation assimulates those peculiar .
elements needed for its nutrition, and when we know what
those elements are, and whence they can be obtained, we can
supply them. It is not possible to nourish and renovate the
nervous and sexual systems by the same elements alone that
nourish and renovate the muscular system, thoncrh these are


accessary as adjuncts ; there is needed in addition certain
rare elements that are found only in the nervous and seminal
substances, and which can be supplied only by the special
remedies, like the Aphrodisiac.
For convenience, I have it so put up that it can be kept
uninjured for any length of time, in any climate, and under
any circumstances. It can also be taken without the incon-
venience of measuring, using liquids, or any other trouble-
some requirement, thus ensuring secrecy and facility of use,
let a man be situated however he may. A gentleman can
keep it in his vest pocket without any fear of detection from
smell, or appearance. It will go anywhere by post, with per-
fect safety, and in such a form that no one through whose
hands it passes would ever suspect its nature, or that it was
anything peculiar !
It is scarcely necessary for me to repeat that there is noth-
ing whatever in this preparation that can be in any way
hurtful under any circumstances.
It is not a mere stimulant, or Injurious Excitant,
acting only for the moment, but a true Nervine and Sexual
Tonic and Renovator, producing new Nervous and Sexual
material, when these have been wasted by excess, abuse, or
disease.
Several of the articles which compose the Aphrodisiac
Remedy, have been used from time immemorial, in a crude
form, and separately, but no scientific combination of the
whole was ever possible till now.
The celebrated Dream Drug of the East, the Indian
Hemp, is often used as an Aphrodisiac, and will sometimes
cause erotic dreams. This, however, is only occasional, and
such an effort is always followed by unusual debility, termin-
ating at last, if its use is continued, in complete sexual
impotence.
In the Harems of Turkey, a compound is used called
in Arabic, “ Love’s Assistant 1” It is composed of various
stimulating spices, with opium and Musk, and has some
power, when first used, but at last it eventually causes
general weakness and decay both of body and mind. The
fate Sultan of Turkey used this compound till he was nearly
an idiot; and at last died from sheer exhaustion.
In China they have a Pill somewhat similar to this, and
which causes almost identically the same results. Some
time ago this Chinese Remedy -was brought to France, and
sold in Paris under the name of Honneur de la Famille !
(Honor of the Family) this being its Chinese name, - the evil
results from its us«- however, soon caused it to be but little
called for.
In some parts of Arabia and Africa, an Aphrodisiac has also
been long employed, as we can see from allusions in old
Chronicles, and in various Poems. Even in the Hebrew


■Scriptures the Mandrake is spoken of as being so used. The
Hindoos have always been great lovers of Aphrodisiacs, and
they possess some powerful ones, which, however, they use
without knowledge, and consequently derive but little good
from them, and much harm. T
All these articles, after much trouble, time and expense, 1
have obtained and analysed, so as to know exactly what they
W6 The Aphrodisiac Remedy contains what is really good and
■ effective in all of them, without any of their hurtful qualities
The Common Aphrodisiacs are merely compounds of
Spanish flies, Opium, Strychnine, Arsenic, Phosphorus and
1 similar drugs ; most of them are rank poisons.
t Among other names used for Aphrodisiacs, by the lurks,
Arabians and Hindoos, we find the following : -Parent of
'ensure '—Delight of Paradise !—Family Multiplier!—Youth
. , longer '.—Hope of the Aged'.—Brain Strengthener l-Foun-
And 'of Power I — Strength Giver '.—and numerous others, all
ndicating the same powers. All of these various articles
therefore, imperfect though they are, have still gained a
.reputation, and are eagerly sought. How much more va uable,
therefore, must be a compound which combines the excellences
of all, without any hurtful qualities whatever'.
Although never advertised, and only known through the
reports of those who have been restored by its use, the
Aphrodisiac of Dr. Hollick has become known, and sought for
in all the principal cities of Europe! Many persons of
eminence have regularly obtained it, privately, and in more
than one instance the wishes and hopes of married people of
.high rank, have been fulfilled through its means.
Its fame has even reached Turkey, and in Constantinople
itself, the Aphrodisiac is rapidly supplanting the hurtful and
inefficient drugs formerly in use.
No public announcement is needed therefore to sell the
Aphrodisiac, but only to let those persons know they can now
have it who have so long been wishing for it in vain.
in most ordinary cases of Sexual Debility, One package of
the Aphrodisiac usually restores the virile power completely,
and in all cases enough to show them that entire restoration
is only a question of time. When the system is much run
down, however, and the decay has existed for a long period,
the remedy must be persisted in fora longer time, and several
packages may be needed. Old persons, or those worn down
<by excesses, should take it regularly to prevent farther decay—
and so should those who ovtr-indulge to ward off the con-
sequences of their indiscretion.
If no sufficient restoration follows a fair trial of the
Aphrodisiac Remedy it may be safely inferred that there ta
either a natural imperfection, or some Organic Disease, moat
there is loss of semen iu the urine t In all auch caaea


PRICE, ss. 6d.,
For wbich it will be sent FREE BY POST, to any address,
—OR —
poan Packages
sufficient to permanently cure almost any case, sent free from,
observation
for £l.
Sole Australian Agent—
. SIR ROBERT BEAR,
BOX 22, PARK STREET, POST OFFICE,.
S "Z" ID IST IB "ST.
224
the person should at once consult Dr. Hollick, for the purpose
of having a thorough examination, and a full treatment till the
difficulty is removed.
Females who are Childless, cold in temperament, Nervous,
and sexually feeble, are aa much benefited by the Remedy as
males, and many a solitary hearth has been blessed with
children through its use.
The Aphrodisiac Remedy is put up in such a manner that
it will go anywhere by Post like a letter, without any risk of
Inspection or Detection. It will also keep unhurt for any length
of time, in any climate and in any circumstances ! It may
be carried unobserved in the vest pocket, and requires no
liquids, nor any measuring, or apparatus of any kind when
taken; being in a solid form, divided into graduated doeee
and without smell or taste.


THE
WE 8 NATUR
A fall and explicit Explanation of all that can or ought to
be known of the Structure and Uses of
The Organs of Life and Generation
In Man and Woman.
INTENDED ESPECIALLY FOR THE
Married, or Those Intending to Marry,
And who conscientiously and honestly desire to inform themselves
upon the intent and nature of
CONJUGAL AJME) DUTIES.
IB'sr
DP. |W. LfIFfIVETTE BVlfl, ]K.D.
TO WHICH IS ADDED
A Complete Medical Treatise
Upon fill Diseases of the Genepative Opgans,
Whether resulting from Infection or Sexual Excesses and Abuse.
ILLUSTRATED WITH MORE THAN FIFTY ENGRAVINGS.
Fully depicting the Mysterious Process of Gestation, from the time
of Conception to the period of Delivery.
No such Complete Panorama of the Mysteries of Human Reprccluc
tion has ever before been given to the world.
SYDNEY:
THE MODERN MEDICAL PUBLISHING COMPANY,
16 PARK STREET, (NEAR TOWN HALL).


SYDNEY:
E. T. & J. RADCLTFEE, PRINTERS,
292 SUSSEX STREET.


THE BOOK OF NATURE.
CHAPTER I.
VEGETABLE REPRODUCTION.
From the simplest vegetable to the highest animal we find
life displaying its powers, forces and organisms in the most
wonderful and beautiful manner ; but there is one power in
all living things beyond all others wonderful—the power of
reproduction. All life on earth would soon perish if
plants and animals of every kind were not provided with the
means of producing similar organisations. A tree may live
thousands of years, but it perishes at last. There are
vegetables and animals that live but a few hours. The
individual dies, but the race survives, because the individual
is provided with wondrous power of producing other indi-
viduals to carry on the life of the race or species. The
function of reproduction is therefore of the highest import-
ance and dignity. It is the word of creation for ever going'
forward. The production of a plant or animal, its develop-
ment from a living germ, the gradual formation of all its
organs, and its whole life processes are very wonderful; but
the most wonderful thing any plant or animal can do is to
reproduce itself—to pass on its life in similar organisms,


so that its species may be continued for an indefinite period.
It is this grandest of the functions of life that we have now
to examine.
In the vegetable kingdom, where this phenomenon may
be most conveniently examined, there are several modes of
reproduction ; even the same plant may have two or three
distinct methods of propagating its kind. Let us look at
our lovely friend of the earliest spring-time, the crocus.
Each bulb sends up its flower, and each flower produces
germs and pollen. The germ is formed in the ovary or
female organ of the flower; the pollen is formed upon the
anther, the top of the stamen or male organ. The pollen,
a cell containing the masculine element, fertilises the germ-
cell, or feminine element, and in some way, incompre-
hensible to us, the union of the two elements results in the
formation of the living germ, which, under favorable
circumstances, develops into the perfect plant, which in
turn produces new flowers and seeds.
The flower of every plant, and its seed or fruit, is the
consummation of its life. On flowers nature has lavished
all her ingenuity of construction and adaption, beauty,
perfume and sweetness. In most plants the masculine and
feminine elements are in the same flower, stamens and pistils
growing almost in contact. In upright flowers the stamens
are longest, so that the pollen can fall upon the pistil; in
drooping flowers it is the reverse. The snowdrop at first
holds up its pure petals to the sun, but when the period
comes for the masculine and feminine elements to form the
living germs of new beings, it modestly hangs down its
head, and it is this change which makes that union possible.
“One analogy,” says Flint, “of the world of animal life
is still preserved, and the male-flowers as the stronger and
bolder sex, are drawn by the impulses of Nature to pay
court to the feebler and more delicate female. The male
stamina, with their gaily-painted hats, bow around the
female pistil as beaux around their belle. Each in turn is
permitted to come in contact with the fair, and as the
contact takes place the golden pollen is shaken upon the
the stamen retires to give place to the next that
offers the same hommage. The mystery of fructification is
accomplished, and the flower-cup is fecundated.”
“There are stamina which cannot reach half the height
of their beloved pistils. Nature then varies the arrange


ment, so as not to be defeated in her object. The Lilliputians
strive in vain to reach their Brobdignag Venus. As they
cannot come to her she condescendingly comes down to
them. It is in this way that the crown imperial and
harebell hang upon their stems, which position, so graceful
in the flower, is a foresight of Nature. «t> The pollen of the
stamens comes in contact with the stigmaof the pistil by
falling upon it. As soon as the mystery is accomplished
and the flower-cup fecundated, the stalk which sustains the
flower turns it up toward the sky. Its bower of love was
concealed, but it shows the cradle of its children.”
“ Wherever you see flowers gently inclining their bells
toward the turf, you may infer that the stamens within are
shorter than the pistil. There are plants, the habits of
whose loves are still more amusing. They are the wedded
dames, who, in compassion to their little husbands, slightly
bend their elastic persons, contemplate them for a moment,
and afterwards erect themselves, still bearing marks of their
yielding weakness. Such are the loves of the passion-
flower and the willow-herb.”
Many flowers are provided with organs which secrete
honey ; this honey is stored in deep vases, very deep some-
times, as in the Columbine Bees and other insects, and even
some birds, as the humming bird, attracted by the honey,
and seeking it in its deep cells, unconsciously aid in the
process of generation. The pollen adheres to their bodies
or wings, and is brought in contact with the stigma of the
same flower, or others of the same species, to which they
are made to adhere by a viscid secretion. All flowers do
not contain both male and female organs of generation.
They may be on different parts of the same plant, as in the
maize, or corn, where the pollen is produced on the very
top of the tall stalk, sometimes twenty feet high, while the
long silky pistils grow from the cob which holds the germs
in rows about the middle of the stalk. Sometimes the male
and female flowers are on different trees or plants, and
their propagation is entirely dependent upon insect or favor-
ing breezes.
When the pollen cell, containing the fecundating element
falls upon the stigma of a flower, adhering to its viscid
secretion, a very beautiful vital process commences. The
inner membrane of the pollen extends itself into a tube
which penetrates into the style which is sometimes two or


three inches in length, until it reaches
the germ in the ovary, where it pene-
trates or meets a correspond-
ing tube thrown out by it. The two
elements unite, the germ is fertilised
and grows into a seed, the egg of the
plant, in which is formed, and from
which is developed the new plant which
is to continue the species. The living
germ of the plant is very small, quite
microscopic in its dimensions. The seeds
of plants contain albuminous and oily
matter, destined to be the first food
of the young plant, and which also, in
such seeds as those of wheat, barley,
rice, peas, beans, &c., furnish important
stores of food for men and animals. If
we examine such seeds, we shall find
the real germ to be a mere speck, a
microscopic cell, which must, however, *
contain potentially the future plant or
SECTION OF PISTIL, WITH.
Pollen Grains, sending
tubes down to the ovary.
tree, and all it is capable of producing; must contain form,
character, color, odor, and the directive or formative
principle which governs its whole life and development.
And this character of the plant, observe, resides in the two
elements, male and female, which join to produce it, for by
bringing together these elements, gardeners are able to
produce all kinds of crosses, hybrids, and varieties.
The reproduction or continuation of the species of plants
by this process is called true generation ; but this is not the
only mode by which vegetable life is continued or extended.
The bulb of our crocus which sends up a stalk, leaves, and
flower also throws out from its side fibres which form new
bulbs, which the following season separate from the parent
bulb, and themselves produce bulbs and flowers.
Take now a tuberous plant—the potato. It has its pretty
flowers, and produces balls full of seeds which will produce
new plants and varieties; but at the same time there grow
out from the roots great tubers, and on these are buds which
will grow into perfect plants, producing in turn seeds and
tubers. The strawberry has also a double method of
propagation. It produces flowers and seeds, but it also
throws out long vines, which at intervals send down roots


on which grow plants, and so on until a whole field is
covered with them.
We imitate these processes of nature in multiplying plants
and trees—of one making many. Ladies cut slips of’
geraniums, roses, and other plants, placing them in pots of
moist sand or earth, when the covered buds send out roots,
and those exposed to the light expand into leaves. The
Chinese multiply fruit trees by moulding a ball of earth upon
a twig, keeping it moist, and making a section in the bark
below it. When roots have penetrated the earth they cut
it off and plant it. Each bud of a tree has its distinct life,
and in most cases can be transferred to another tree oi an
allied species and made to grow, producing, however, its own
peculiar flowers and fruit. Each bud is a germ ; the seed
germs are similar, but differ at least in this, that they some-
times produce, as in potatoes-and apples, new varieties. A
bud or graft gives us the same fruit as its parent tree. A
tree which grows from an apple seed may produce very
different fruit. For this reason, when fruit trees are grown
from seeds, gardeners bud or graft them, that is transfer to
them buds or twigs from trees producing a favourite variety,
and let the transferred buds grow to form the future
trees.
Low forms of vegetation, as the various kind of fungi
and ferns are produced from spores, which are germs or
rudimental buds rather than seeds. They are very small,
produced by myriads, as in the puff ball, and are so light as
to be blown about by the winds, and almost fill the atmo-
sphere. Wherever air can penetrate, it carries with it the
germs of vegetation as well as those of the lower forms of
animal life.
But it is in our lovely and odorous flowers that we have
the highest types of the generation of vegetable life; and
the favorite science of Botany largely consists of the study
of the organs and processess of vegetable reproduction, or
what the Elder Darwin, in his curious poem, calls the
Loves of the Plants, which present us with the most
delightful analogies to the higher procesess of reproduction
in animals and our own species. Botany is therefore a
charming introduction to all other branches of natural
history, and especially to that branch of human physiology
which we are now considering.


CHAPTER II.
ANIMAL REPRODUCTION.-THE ORIGIN OF LIFE.
Reproduction in animals is curiously analogus to the
same process in the vegetable kingdom. There are the
same varieties in the modes of multiplication and generation.
The process of generation in some of the lower animal
organisations is exactly like the throwing out of new bulbs
in plants. The polypus throw out buds which in a little
while grow mouths, fringed with cilia or tentacles, while
they are still holding by stalks, and drawing part of their
nourishment from their parents. When enough matured
to get their own living they drop off, swim away, and shift
for themselves. This is gemmation.
Fission is s common mode of propagation or multiplication
among the infusoria. An animalcule is seen to contract in
a ring around its centre; the fissure deepens, and it divides
into two distinct beings, which also divide, and so on—multi-
plying with suprising rapidity. It has been estimated that
one of these animalcules could produce by these successive
divisions in eight weeks a progeny of two hundred and sixty-
eight millions. This reproductive power is, however, almost
rivalled by some fishes and insects. The carp lays seven
hundred thousand eggs in a season, and lives two hundred
years. The possible progeny of a pair of these fishes is
almost beyond computation. The cod is said to produce
from four to nine millions of eggs. The female termite lays
sixty thousand eggs a day for a considerable period.
Some of the lower animals may be multiplied artificially
like vegetables. Thus, if some species of the polypus are
cut in pieces, each piece produces the missing parts, so as
to become a perfect animal, as cuttings of a geranium
produce geraniums.
But perhaps the most curious mode of multiplication
takes place in some sea-worms. They divide into sections
by constricting rings, and its section forms for itself head,
eyes, &c., at one extremity, and tail at the other, while
yet the sections are united ; but when all is ready each
section sets up its own independent life, and then produces
in its body germs of similar worms, by the more usual
process—just as some vegetables propagate by seeds, as well
as by bulbs or tubers.
These modes of multiplication—fission, gemmation, &c.,


;such as I have described are, however, not the rule in nature
but the exception, or variation—a ruder method of th<
•extension of life, which is confined to the lower forms ol
animal existence. As vegetables are generally produced
from seeds animals are generally produced from eggs.
It has long been a disputed question with the learned, as
to whether life can be produced, under certain circum-
stances from inanmate) substances, independent of egg oi
seed, without parental source. Numerous experiments
have been tried to solve this problem, and some have
seemed to determine the question affirmatively, but more
searching investigation has detected the fallacy of the
■experiments, and at present the majority of Physiologists
disbelieve the doctrine of spontaneous generation.
There is no good reason,,, so far as we now know, to
believe that there is any spontaneous generation of vege-
tables or animals—that is, that any vegetable or animal
ever of itself is formed from matter without a spore or
germ which has been produced by a similar organisation.
At some time, and in some way, every kind of living form
has its beginning ; but no one has seen such beginning.
“Creation is a mystery. Every living thing upon the
■earth has at some time, somewhere and somehow
been created ; but we do not know the when, the
where, or the how. Human science reveals to us some-
thing of the phenomena of nature—nothing of its causes or
oeginnings.
As in vegetables we find the beginning of new organisa-
tions in the formations by the generative organs of a plant,
which are in most cases portions of its flower, of a germ
-cell in the ovary or female organ, and of a pollen cell by
the anthor or male organ, which unite to form the living
germ, which develops into the perfect plant—so in all the
higher forms of animal life, in oysters, fishes, insects, birds,
beasts, and men, we have germs or eggs formed in the
ovaries of the female, which, at a certain stage of develop-
ment, are impregnated, or fecundated by union with a
similar germ, produced in a somewhat similar organ of the
male—the male and female elements uniting to produce the
perfect being. The unfertilised, unimpregnated, or un-
fecundated ovum, or egg, quickly perishes. The one to
which has been added the masculine element is from that
moment endowed with life, and, with favoring conditions,
•develops with a wonderful rapidity.


Fishes produce a vast number of eggs, as may be seen in
the hard roe of herring, which, when they have arrived
at a certain stage, are spawned—that is, expelled from the
body in places which the fish instinctively find for thar
purpose. Salmon come hundreds, perhaps thousands of
miles, through the deep ocean to lay their eggs in the
shallow fresh water streams in which they themselves
were hatched. The male herring and salmon produce, in
organs, not unlike the ovaries, myriads of sperm cells,
destined to fertilise the germ cells of the female. This is
the soft roe—a brain-like substance, chiefly composed of
these cells. The male fishes attend the females, and fill
the water where their eggs are laid with what seems a
milky fluid. The two elements come into contact, perhaps
by a mutual attraction, fecundation takes place, and, in
due time, swarms of young fishes are the result.
With insects and birds, the process is little varied.
The eggs are formed, as with the fishes, in the ovaries of
the females, but at a certain stage they are fecundated
before leaving the .body, by the male element being con-
veyed to them by a process similar to that which takes
place in flowers. The seminal fluid of the male corres-
ponding to the pollen of the plant, is conveyed to the germ
in the ovary by means specially adapted to that purpose.
After the egg has grown to its full size—in insects covered
with a tough membrane, and in birds with a hard shell—
it is placed in some proper nest, and hatched either by solar
heat or the warmth of one or both of the parents. Animals
so born are called oviparous—born from eggs. A few
fishes, as the shark and skate, lay fecundated eggs like
birds, with curiously formed horny shells, and cables for
mooring.
With the mammalia, the higher orders of animals, in-
cluding the human species, there is still another process..
The egg or germ is formed in the ovary of the female.
When fully formed it bursts from its containing membranes,,
with a certain degree of excitement of the generative system,,
and passes through tubes provided for that purpose into a
receptacle called the uterus, or womb. If here met by the
seminal fluid, or fertilising masculine element, fecundation
takes place, a perfect germ is produced, foetal life begins,
and the animal is, so to speak, hatched in the womb of its-
mother, nourished by her blood, and grows until it is ready


«0 come into the world and live its independent life.
Animals so produced are called viviparious, or born alive.
The young of the kangaroo, and other marsupials, are
born in a very immature condition, and carried in a kind
of bag formed upon the abdomen of the mother, within
which are the teats from which the little ones draw theii
nourishment.
The eggs of birds, from those of the humming-bird, like
peas, to the great eggs of the ostrich, which will furnish a
dinner for six men, contains not only the germ, which is very
minute, but its supply of food—the materials from which
its body, bones, feathers, &c., are formed, during the process
of incubation or hatching. The white of the egg, almost
pure albumen, is not essential to it, but useful as food.
The eggs of many animals are without it. The yolk, con-
sisting of albumen and oil, contains the matter first taken
into the organisation. The germinal spot, a point of matter,
is the real germ, and can only be seen under the microscope.
The eggs of viviparious animals are of extreme minuteness.
That of a dog is the 1-130th of an inch in diameter, includ-
ing yolk, germinal vesicle, and germinal spot. The human
ovum is still smaller, about 1-140th of an inch in diameter;
and in the circumference of that small diameter lies, what
a world of character and power I—lies all that shall
distinguish the highest example of human civilization and
culture, from the lowest savage—poet, philosopher, hero,
idiot, ruffian, lunatic—all the possibilities and potentalities
of humanity.
CHAPTER III.
THE ORGANS OF [?]ENERATION.
In the human race, as througnout the greater part of the
animal kingdom, generation is accomplished by fecunda-
tion, or the effect of the vivifying fluid provided by one
class of organs upon the germ contained in the seed or
ovum formed by another class, in the opposite sex. This
germ, when fecundated, is termed the embryo. The
process consists of impregnation in the male—conception
in the female.


FIG. 2.
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
1. The cerebrum; 2, cerbellum; 3, spinal
cord; 4, nerves of the face; 5, the bracial
plexus, or union of nerves; 6,7,8,9. ncrves
of the arm; 10. those that pass under the ribs;
11, lumbar plexus ; 12, sacral plexus; 13,14,
15, 16, nerves of the lower limbs.
Theorgans of generation
in the male are :—l. The;
testes and their envelopes,,
namely, the scrotum or cu-
taneous envelope : the dar--
tos, which corrugates or
ridges the scrotum ; and the
fibrous or vaginal tunics ;
we must also here include
the epidermis, above the
testes ; the vas deferens, or
excretory duct, and the
spermatic chord. 2. Yesi-
cuhe seminales, forming a
canal situated beneath the
bladder. 3. The prostate
gland, surrounding the
neck of the bladder and the
commencemnet of the ure-.
thra. 4. Cowper’s glands,
a pair situated below the
prostrate. 5. The ejacula-
tory ducts. 6. The penis,
which consists of the cor-
pus cavernosum, the ure-
thra, the corpus spongio-
sum, which terminates in
the glans penis; then there
are the vessels, nerves, and
a cutaneous investment,
which by its prolonga-
tion forms the prepuce.
The female organs are: 1. The vulva or pupendum,
the external parts, comprehending the labia pupendi, the
clitoris, situated at the middle and superior part of the
pupendum ; the nyph® or al® minores ; the urethra, which
terminates in the meatus urinarius, opening into the vagina,
which is occupied by the hymen, a semilunar fold or the
caruncul® myrtiformis, its lacerated remains, and the
entrance into the vagina, termed the os externum, so called
to distinguish it from the internum, or orfice of. The
uterus, whose appendages are : the ligamenta lata (the broad
ligaments), sometimes called al® vespertilonum, and the


„nd ligaments commencing immediately before and below
the Fallopian tubes, which extend to the ovaria.
The Perineum. —The space between the anus and the
external parts of the generative organs, so called from
being frequently moist. The operation of cutting for stone
in males is usually performed here.
FIG. 3
URINARY BLADDER showing its
muscular fibres 8. Left Ureter
9. Left portion of seminal vesicles
11, 11, Lateral lobes of the prostate
Gland. 14, Uretra tied with a cord.
The Bladder is the receptacle
for the urine, which it receives
by drops from the Ureters, the
conduits from the kidneys. In
shape the bladder is somewhat
like a pear; but it is much
modified by the quantity of its
contents and the relative con-
dition of the neighbouringparts.
Eor instance, when the bladder
is full, its upper part may be
distinguished as rising above
the Fubes, or that portion of
the lower part of the abdomen
that is covered with hair. The
bladder is composed of several
coats. There is a peculiar
membrane investing the im-
portant structures in the abdo-
men called the peritonceum.
The fundus and back part of
the bladder is covered by a portion of this peritonceum,
which serves in some measure to support the bladder in its
position.
The muscular coats of the bladder are very strong; they
consist of fibres running in three different directions. An
idea of their strength may be given, when it is stated that
the bladder is capable of containing per force, two or three
pints of urine, the whole of which can be ejected to the last
drop.
The ureters open very obliquely into the bladder, for the
twofold purpose of preventing a retrogression of the urine,
and its too rapid descent into the bladder. The bladder,,
as the urine accumulates in it, becomes sensibly excited to
contraction, and hence the discharge.
The Kidneys, which appear to form so insignificant an
item in the human body, are among the most important


structures in its economy. By some wonderful, yet
inexplicable process, the waste fluid of the body, except that
given off by perspiration and exhalation, passes through
them. All we know of the matter is, that the blood in its
circulation wends its way through especial arteries called
the Renal, and comes out through the ureters in the form
FIG. 4.
Section of a Kidney.
of urine, the rapidity of
which process, in some in-
stances,is mostastonishing.
Diseases of the kidneys
form a serious malady, and
often jeopardise the life of
man. The kidneys will be
perceived to be situated in
the upper part of the
loins.
The kidneys are usually
embedded in fat. The ex-
tei’ior coat of the kidney is
very vascular, and the inner
consists of tubes collected
into conical points that
open into the pelvis of the
kidney.
CHAPTER IV.
GERMINATION, FECUNDATION AND IMPREGNATION.
At a certain period in the life of a plant, in organs prepared
for that important function, are formed the germs of new
plants. The germ-producing organ, frond or flower, does its
work and dies. The tree lives on, but each individual bud
producing flower and seed or fruit perishes. This is the
law of vegetative generation. Such is also, to a great
-extent, the law of insect life.


FIG. 5.
RENAL GLANDS.
Or Malpigian bodies, from the
kidney of an owl, injected and very
largely magnified. These bodies, as
weil as the testes, offer fine examples
ot the extension of secreting surface
bv the convolution of tubes.
FIG. 6.
BACK VIEW OF THE BODY.
1,1, The Lungs; 2, the Stomach;
3,3, the Kidneys; 4,4, the Ureters;
5, the Bladder.
FIG. 7.
IDEAL VIEW OF THE COURSE OF
CIRCULATION.
A, Encloses the four chambers of
the heart; B, Veins bringing dark
blood to C, right auricle; D, right
ventricle; E, pulmonary artery; F.
Beginning of pulmonary vein, con-
veying the arterialised blood to G, left
auricle; H, left ventricle; I, arteries,
The arrows show the directions of the
current.


and female alike perish. In some cases the male insect
sacrifices his life in the very act of fecundation.
In the higher orders of animals, fishes, reptiles, birds and
mammals, the production of germs goes on year after year
in varying periods. The guinea pig begins to breed at two
months old, and the higher the type, the later is the period
of germ formation, until in man the period of puberty or
the beginning of the generative function, is at about fifteen
years, varying from twelve to eighteen; but the natural
powers are scarcely at their full strength and fitness until
some years later.
The power of reproduction as to numbers seems to be in
the inverse ratio as to development. The lowest forms of
life multiply with amazing rapidity ; some insects produce
myriads, fishes spawn eggs by millions; hens lay an egg a
day for months together, rabbits, cats, dogs breed every few
months, and have at each birth, a numerous progeny, while
the higher order of mammalia produce their young but once
a year, and have but one, or, in rare cases two at a birth.
When the human germ has been slowly formed in the ovary
and perfected up to the period when it bursts forth in its
first birth, fit for impregnation, it is nine months in arriving
at the development which fits it for birth and independent
existence. For twelve months more it draws its supply of
nutriment from the mother, and two years may beconsidered
the normal interval from birth to birth. It should never
be less with a proper regard to the health of the mother,
and the proper development of her children; and the
practice of shortening this period by hiring wet nurses is a
violation of nature which is avenged on parents and their
offspring. The mother is exhausted by too frequent child
bearing, and children are deprived of the love, the mag-
netism, the life of the mother, which comes to them from
her blood transformed into the most delicious food for
them, and the nervous and spiritual food which no money
can buy, and no one but the mother can give.
The human germ cell, or egg, is formed from the blood
in a gland-like organ, about an inch and a half long, oval
shaped, placed in the lower part of the abdomen, in the
groin, and situated on each side of the uterus, or womb
(Fig. 15). In each ovary, from the period of puberty, in a
healthy female, there is a constant formation and growth
of germs, or ova, which goes on for thirty or forty years.


'When the first perfect germs have ripened
one or more, they come to the surface of
the ovary, burst from their sacs, sometimes
with considerable force, attended by a
nervous excitement, a congestion of the
blood vessels of ovaries and womb, and,
when impregnation does not take place, the
freed germ passes into the mouth of the
Fallopian tube, through which it passes
into the uterus, from which it passes, with
the menstrual evacuation, a secretion from
the mucous surfaces of these organs, red-
dened more or less by some exudation
from the congested vessels, through the
mouth of the womb into the vagina. This
menstrual or monthly flow, marking the
production of germs and their expulsion
when not fecundated by the presence of the
masculine element, goes on monthly from
its commencement at the age of puberty,
FIG. 8.
TRANSVERSE SEC-
TION THROUGH
THE OVARY.-
From a case in the
fifth month of
pregnancy. A. B.
ovisacs. C. Ova-
rian ligament. D,
D, Tunica albugi-
nea. E. Stroma.
In the interior can
be seen two ora
corpora Intea.
normally at
fourteen to sixteen years of age, to the period of the cessa-
tion of the menses, or “ turn of life,” from forty-five to
sixty, when no more germs are formed, and the capacity for
child-bearing ceases.
to the ovaries or egg-forming organs of
the female, are two similar glandular bodies, called the
testes, in the male which produce the spermatic or seminal
fluid, corresponding to the pollen of plants, by which the
germs are fertilised, or fecundated ; by means of these
germ cells and sperm cells the masculine and feminine
elements are brought together so that they can unite in the
body and soul, the material and spiritual life of a new
being.
The testes, or testicles, show the importance of their
function by a wonderfully elaborate organisation, of which
some idea is given in Fig. 5 ; though a very imperfect one
in an ideal section intended to give an outline of the
structure. The oval body is composed of a vast number
of lobules, formed of very fine tubes closely folded, and
everywhere in contact with blood vessels and nerves. There
arc in each testicle about four hundred and fifty of these
lobules. The matter secreted from them passes through a
vast number of tubes, 1-170th of an inch in diameter, ending


in a convoluted tubular structure measuring twenty-one
feet in length, ending in a single tube, which carries the
masculine generative matter to the urethra, whence, in the
sexual congress, it is ejected into the vagina, enters the
mouth of the womb, and either there or in the Fallopian
tubes, meets and impregnates the germ coming from the
ovaries.
The seminal fluid is as complex and vital a substance as
FIG, 9.
Human SPERMATOZOA.
These are magnified
from nine hundred to one
thousand diameters A,
Spermatozoon presenting
the flat surface. B, One
viewed in profile. C,
Showing a circular spot
on the surface, which
some suppose to be a
sucker. D, Shows an
elongation from the head
like a proboscis. E, Gran-
ules, or cells, in which
other Zoosperms are pre
paring.
we should expect to have formed by so
remarkable an apparatus. Floating in a
liquid are minute cells, in which other
cells, or corpuscles, may be discovered,
and in these are formed, as shown in
Fig. 18, bundles of spermatozoa, curiously
shaped living cells, 1-GOO to 1-800 of a
line in length, each one of which is fur-
nished with a single cilium, or long
slender tail, which propels it with a con-
stant vibrative motion, as if it were a
living animalcule. This spermatozoon is
believed to be the true agent of fertiliza-
tion, corresponding to the pollen grain of
the flower. It has been discovered in the
womb, in the Fallopian tubes, and in
contact with the germ just leaving the
ovary. There can be little doubt that
the cells, furnished with long propellers,
as shown in Fig. 17, carry in them the
male principle which gives to the female
germ all that makes the child resemble
its father, all that it inherits from him of
bodily form, features, complexion, tem-
perament, constitution, mental power,,
and moral character—health, disease,
idiosyncrasy ; that which may make his happiness or misery
in this life and who can say how much also in the life to come?
/The germs of human, as of all life, are produced in
immense numbers. Even in childhood imperfect germs are
formed and discharged, and conception may take place
before menstruation begins. Idleness, luxury, the use of
rich, highly seasoned food, condiments, and stimulants, and
the excitement of the passions hasten puberty, and exagger-
ate and disorder the corresponding masculine function. r


The microscope does not reveal to us what takes place
in the act of impregnation or conception, or what change is
produced by the contact of the spermatozoon with the
ovum. The egg of the maiden hen contains the rudiments
of the chick, but it can never be hatched. The warmth
that brings life and development to the impregnated egg
only hastens the putrefaction of the unimpregnated. The
unimpregnated eggs of the frog quickly putrify ; but if the
-Me element be soon brought to them they expand into
liviag creatures. In this case the spermatozoa can be seen
Djcome embedded in the gelatinous covering of the eggs,
tuey pass through the membranes which cover them, and
are probably absorbed into the ovum.
The blood goes to the testes in long, slender, tortuous
arteries, presenting an extensive surface for the action of
nervous energy, and there is no doubt that the best blood
of the body is selected to' form the semen, and that it is
changed and perfected, first in these arteries and then in
the wonderfully fine and convoluted tubes of the testes.
The same arteries that supply blood to the testes in the
m de, furnish the circulation of the ovaries in the females;
and the same nervous centres furnish the nerve energy
and directing intelligence; but what makes the difference in
ac ion—forming germ cells in one sex and sperm cells in
the other—or what makes sex, must probably remain
among life’s inscrutable mysteries. “ Arrest of develop-
ment ” will not account for it, and if it did, what causes
arrest of development ? “ Male and female created He them.”
At the age of puberty remarkable changes take place in
both sexes. Boys and girls differ indeed from their
tenderest years. As a rule boys are more boisterous, girls
more gentle, while the girl chooses a doll for her plaything
T the boy prefers a drum, a sword, or whip. But at puberty
the sexual instincts become stronger, and there is in each a
more pronounced development of masculine or feminine
appearances and qualities. In the boy the voice deepens
in tone, and the face begins to be covered with a beard,
Where the testes have been removed, destroyed, or im-
perfectly developed, the voice remains treble, and the beard
light or wanting. There is an enlargement of the throat,
the “ Adam’s apple ” corresponding to the full development
of the masculine organs. On the other hand the girl
becomes at puberty more decidedly feminine, by ' the


FIG. 10
EVOLUTIONS OF ZOO-
SPERMS.
Objects in human semen
magnified one thousand
times. A, A large rounded
corpuscle. B, A globule of
evolution, which encloses
three roundish granular
bodies. C, A bundle of
seminal animalcules, as
they are grouped together
in the testicle.
enlargement of the pelvis, the broaden-
ing of the hips, and the development of
the mammary or milk-forming glands in
the bosom. There is no beard to mar
the delicacy and feminine beauty of
the face, but in both sexes alike, at
this period, hair appears upon the-
pubes. The most striking difference
however, is that already mentioned—
the occurrence of the monthly period!
marking the ripening and expulsion
of germs capable of becoming living,
men and women.
Woman differs from man in her en-
tire organisation—mental, emotional,,
physical. She is more rounded, grace-
ful, soft, sensitive, mobile. Her ner-
vous system is finer and more-
delicate ; she has quicker sensi-
bilities and finer powers of instinct
and intuition. Even the bony
skeleton of a woman can be dis-
fcinguished at a glance from that
of a man by its longer head and
broader pelvis, and generally by
its smaller hands and feet. Rieh-
eran has, perhaps, exaggerated in
saying that “ the reproduction of
the species is, in woman, the most
important object in life —almost
the only destination to which
nature has called her, and the
only duty she has to fulfil in
human society but Madame
CYST OF EVOLUTION.
This figure is a remarkable view,
of a seminal cyst, or cell, A, Con-
taining five smaller cells, in each
of which may be perceived [?]
nucleus, B, Two seminal gran-
ules; all highly magnified.
J ? - w
de Stael went nearly as far in saying, “Love is but an
episode in the life of man ; it is the whole history of the
life of women.” Byron has said almost in the same
words,
** Love is of man’s life a thing apart;
1 ’Tis woman’s whole existence.”
I think, however, that there are women who have brains
as well as ovaries ; and that even the faculties which make
women most charming as wives and most excellent as


mothers, may have a much broader scope than the produc-
tion, care, and education of their own offspring. Hundreds
of women who have never borne children have been more
than mothers to great multitudes. In the actual condition
of humanity there may be higher work for many women
in saving the children of others than in having children ol
their own.
CHAPTER V.
EMBRYOLOGY.
In all nature we find one singular, universal fact. All
animals, without exception, high or low, of whatever
ultimate complexity or simplicity of structure, originate
from eggs, and from eggs of the same character. Some
animals, as corals for instance, many hydroids, and other
low organisms, reproduce themselves
by budding or by division of the parent
But they also at some time or
other produce eggs, and thus bear their
testimony to the general law of nature
which applies to the whole animal king-
dom, without exception. Indeed, the
seed in plants has the same structure
as the so called ovarian egg in animals,
and thus we may speak of all organised
beings, vegetable or animal, as multiply-
ing by eggs. The ovarian egg is
FIG. 12.
AR OVUM.
A, Germinal spot. B, Ger-
minal vesicle. C, Yolk,
D, Zona pellucida. E,
discus proligorous. F,
adherent granules or
cells.
microscopic in many animals, but whatever its size it consists
of an outer bag filled with a semi-transparent fluid, which is
somewhat oily, and an inner bag also filled with a tran-
sparent fluid, which is chiefly albuminous. The difference
in the character of the two fluids gives greater transluence
to that which fills the inner sac. Within the inner bag
there is a spot or dot, sometimes several of them, more or
less distinct, In this condition, all eggs borne of whatever
living creature, are alike.


FIG. 13.
MAMMAL OVUM.
A view of the Ovum of a bitch
twenty-three days from the last
access of the male. The chorion
C, C, has already shot forth little
villi, which, however, are wanting
at either end. B, B, of the ovum
and also over the place where the
embryo is situated. This engra[?]
ing represents its object of the
natural size.
Ah eggs arise in what are
called ovaries. These are clusters
of cells forming bunches of a
somewhat glandular character in
appearance. Between these cells
the eggs are formed, and in such
a way as at first to be hardly
distinguished from the cells them-
selves. The same is true of sperm
cells, which arise in organs of the
same character as the ovary, and
are formed in a manner perfectly
similar to that of the formation
of the egg. So we have these
two spheres of growth which characterise sex in the animal
kingdom, arising in conditions so very similar that the
essence of the two is hardly to be determined by
observation.
FIG. 14
OVA IN THE OVARY.
A magnified view of two
eggs of a bird, as they art
found in the ovary. They
are scarcely perceptible to
the naked eye. A, Stroma,
or substance of the ovary,
composed of thick fibres. C,
Chorion, or external mem-
brane of the ovum, B. Yolk,
D, Germinal vesicle. E, Ger.
minal spot, which is the real
germ from which the embryo
is evolved.
In order to fully appreciate what eggs are, we must
remember that all organised bodies are composed of little
bags which are called cells, and which are formed and
multiplied in various ways.
Most of these cells are so small that they can only be
perceived by the aid of high magnifying powers. There
are, it is true, a few cell structures large enough to be seen
with the naked eye, as, for instance, the cell of common
elder pith, or the coarse cells of the orange. It is one of
the great problems of model n research to ascertain how the
different kinds of these cells are formed and what is their
mode of reproduction. Some naturalists assume that in
the animal substance secreted by a living body, such as
milk which is secreted by the mammary glands or similar


FIG. 15.
Ovary AND OVIDUCT FROM
A LAYING HEN.
A. Immature ovarian eggs.
B, Mature ovarian eggs. C,
Opening of oviduct which
receives the egg when it drops
from the ovary. D, Egg with
shell, in the lower part of
oviduct.
FIG. 16.
OVARIES, ETC., OF THE BEE.
O, O, OVARIES, T, T, T, Oviducts
E, E, E, Eggs in oviducts. G, Receptac-
ulum seminis.” N, J, Sting. S, Poison
bag.
substances secreted by olhir organs, certain particles
become centres of action, around which other particles
crowd ; and when a little collection of this kind, micros-
copically small, has been formed, an envelope arises around
it, and we have the utricile or cell. Others believe that
minute, imperceptible particles of animal substance swell
and enlarge and become hollow, so that a little bag is formed,
a cell envelope in short, which fills as it enlarges with a
fluid substance. There are those also, who assume that
the two modes of cell formation exist simultaneously in the
:same being.
When the ovarian egg has acquired its ultimate growth,
prior to the formation of the germ, the egg of the mammalia


presents a bag, the so-called zona pellucida, the
which are exceedingly transparent. This bag is filled with
a substance which is itself transparent, and yet which
appears, under a very high magnifying power, to be
granular, as if dotted with particles floating in the fluid,
In that outer bag is another diminutive bag containing
also a transparent fluid. This inner bag occupies ar
eccentric position with reference to the periphery of tm
FIG. 17
IDEAL SECTION OF A HEN’S EGG.
The egg of the fowl is the type of all ova and from its large size easy to study-
A, Blunt pole. B, Sharp pole. A, A, Shell. B, Space filled with air, to supply.
oxygen. C, Membrane of the shell, which at D, D, splits into two layers. E, E
Limits of the second and thicker albumen. F, Limits of the third and thickest
albumen, the white being in three layers. G, G. Chalaze, or ropes of twisted fibres
from the yolk, which hold it in its place, H, Yolk. I, Central cavity in the yolk,
from which a duct. K, leads to the cicatricula, or tread. L, Cumulous proligerous
or germinal cumulus. M. Germ or blastos. The egg is so formed that the yol[?]
floats high in the white and the germ is always uppermost.
outer bag, and in it are contained one or several dots.
The outer envelope is called the vitelline membrane,
because it corresponds exactly to the exceedingly thin skin
enclosing the yolk in the hen’s egg. The yoke is called'
vitellus, and hence the name. The bag contains the yolk,
and however transparent this fluid may be, retains the
name of yolk. The inner bag is called the germinative
vesicle. The dot or dots within the germinative vesicle
are ordinarily called the germinative dot or dots.
The dimensions of the mammalian egg are very small.
It comes just within the range of the power of the human
•ye. Place the ovary under the microscope and you will
find that it contains eggs of various dimensions in various
stages of growth. In some the amount of yolk is less than


in others; in some the germinative vesicle and the ger-
minative dot exist ; in others they are not yet formed ;
indeed, vesicles are found in the ovary which neither
germinative dot nor germinative vesicle exists, and which
are supposed to be eggs in process of formation.
If we pass now to the bird we find in the ovary eggs
which can in no way be distinguished from those observed
in the ovary of the mammal, except that we find in the
former a much larger number of them, and their outer
envelope is much thinner. Besides those very small ovarian
eggs, there are larger ones—eggs rising to dimensions so-
FIG 18.
EGG 36 HOURS AFTER INCUBATION.
considerable that they are not only visible to the naked eye
but may be handled with facility. A mature egg in the
ovary of the hen is about the dimension of a small walnut.
It has no shell, no white; but it is a buik of yolk enclosed
in a vitelline membrane, containing a germinative vesicle
with germinative dots. The amount of yolk is very great.
If an ovarian egg of the hen was enlarged so that the
germinative vesicle alone would appear as large as a whole
ovarian egg at the time of maturity, we should find that
the whole of the yolk consists either in little granules or in
little vesicles resembling each other so much as almost to
force us to tha conclusion that these vesicles are only
granules which have swollen and become hollow. By the
side of these smaller vesicles are others somewhat larger,
containing themselves a vesicle and granule; that is to say,
having the true character of ordinary cells. The whola


mass of the yolk consists of such granular vesicles and true
cells. The yolk is, in fact, an accumulation of cells in
various stages of growth. A large yolk, or the large
ovarian egg of a hen, with its contents, was itself at one
time so small as to escape the natural power of the human
eye. We may place a portion of the ovary of the hen under
the microscope and have at the same time in the field small
eggs which cannot be seen with the naked eye, and other
eggs perceptible in different degrees, and we find that the
FIG. 19.
EGG OPENED THREE DAYS AFTER INCUBATION
smallest are just like the eggs of mammalia, containing a
transparent fluid with granules floating in it, while others
contain cells already to be distinguished; and others are
full of cells so large as to make the whole mass opaque.
The peculiar color of the hen’s egg is owing to the yellowish
oil which pervades the whole substance. The study of the
hen’s egg in all its stages leaves no doubt that the cells—
at least those within the egg, are formed by the swelling
of the yolk particles, and their subsequent growth into
larger vesicles containing a fluid, in which the elements of
a perfect cell are finally matured.
FIG. 20.
THE UNIMPREGNATED EGG
after the disapearance of the germinal
disk and adherent granules.
FIG. 21.
THE HUMAN EGO during
segmentation into two
parts.


At this stage of the ovarian egg, that is, when it has
acquired the vitelline membrane, germinative vesicle and
germinative dot, and has also acquired certain dimensions-
differing in different animals, it is, or may be, fecundated.
FIG. 22.
THE HUMAN EGG undergoing seg
mentation into four parts.
FIG. 23.
Further subdivisions of the human
egg during segmentation, called the
mulberry stage.
This fecundation consists in the contact of sperm cells with
the yolk bag. What the influence of that contact is,
nobody has been able to trace. It is from that time that
the changes date which lead toward the formation of a new
being But the egg of the hen, when fecundated, has not
yet completed its growth. The hen’s egg, as we know it,
has a shell, and a delicate membrane lining the shell, and.
a layer of white albumen surrounding the yolk. All these
parts are formed after the egg has been fecundated. _
The egg, as we have seen, is, in its incipient condition,
only an organic granule arising between the structural cells
of the ovary. It grows there and acquires a remarkable
complication before it has completed its successive phases
as an egg. Not until it has reached the state as that of
the perfect egg does it receive the contact of the spermatic
cells from which dates the formation of a new being, either
male or female. This in itself is a strange thing—that a
mother produces, not necessarily a being like herself, but
quite as often beings so unlike herself in structure, as to be
endowed with all the peculiarities of the male sex.
FIG. 24.
The latter stage of
segmentation of the hu-
man egg.
There is one feature in the growth of
the egg of which I have as yet said
nothing. The yolk, that homogeneous
substance which fills the vitelline mem-
brane, in which swim the germinative
vesicle and germinative dot, must under-
go a very remarkable change before it
can give rise to the new individual. It
is self-kneading, broken by the process
of its own growth into a smaller or


larger number of distinct fragments. This breaking up of
the whole substance which stimulates disintegration ends
in a recementation; these fragments reunite to form the
mass out of which the new germ is to be developed. This
process is known as segmentation, and has been observed
in the eggs of all animals. It has been studied in mammalia,
in birds, in reptiles, in fishes, among articulates, among
FIG 25,
HUMAN OVUM.
A perfectly normal human ovmn
twenty one days after impregnation
enclosed in its decidua. Size of
nature.
FIG. 26.
HUMAN OVUM LAID OPEN,
The ovum, with the decidua laid
open; the embryo about two lines
long, closely surrounded by the
amnion, is seen through the division
of the chorion.
mollusks and radiates. This process may or may not be
initiated by fecundation. There are some animals in which
the first appearance of segmentation may precede fecun-
dation ; others in which it is always subsequent to
fecundation ; in no animal is the process known to be
completed without fecundation. Neither does it take place
in all animals in the same manner.
Let us take the highly magnified yolk of a mammalian
egg with the germinative dots already formed on the side.
The vitelline membrane surrounding such a yolk is rather
thicker than in a bird’s egg, and forms a sort of trans-
parent zone outside of the yolk. When the process of
-segmentation begins, the yolk shrinks slightly upon itself
and no longer fills the vitelline membrane completely.
Presently a slight indentation becomes visible on one side
of the yolk, and another corresponding to it on the opposite
side. This indentation grows deeper and deeper until it
vcuts the yolk through, and ends in its total division in two
FIG. 27.
CORPUSCLES OF THE BLOOD
The blood-corpuscles, as seen on
their flat surface and edge. Congeries
of blood corpsucles in columns. In
coagulating, the corpuscles apply
themselves to each other, so as to
resemble piles Of money. Below are
blood globules, or cells, containing
smaller cells, which are set free by
the dissolution of the containing
cell.


halves, the two halves remaining, however, in close contact.
"While this process goes on the germinative vesicle vanishes,
If, indeed, it has not disappeared before. In some animals
this vesicle is dissolved before the segmentation begins;
in others during the process. The division of the yolk in
halves being completed, the same change begins now in the
two halves. Indentations are seen on either side of each
half, and these indentations deepen till they meet and sever
the two masses of yolk ; and now, where we had one yolk
mass we have four distinct lumps side by side; they
become rounded in form, and look like four soft balls.
The original yolk being thus divided in four, the same
process goes on till the four are divided into eight, the eight
into 16, the 16 into 82, the 82 into 64, and so on.
Beyond this it is almost impossible to track them indi-
vidually ; it is difficult to bring the whole yolk into the
FIG. 28.
DISTRIBUTION OF CAPILLARY BLOOD VESSELS IN SKIN OF FINGER.
focus, so that each fragment can be counted, and if it is
pressed, however slightly, the whole mass then runs
together, so that no division whatever can be traced. Oc-
casionally, however, the self-division has been followed even
beyond sixty-four. By this time the yolk is transformed into
a body which has much the appearance of a mulberry, and
this condition of the yolk has been called the mulberry stage.
When it has become so far subdivided that every separate
particle, owing to its diminutive size, is difficult of micro-
scopic observation, even under very high power, each such
particle seems like a cell, and may indeed be considered as
a cell. This self-division of the yolk mass ends in an
accumulation of cells which differ from those of the
initiative yolk, and are the basis for the formation of the
new being; the material, in fact, out of which the new
being is to be built.


When conception, or the fertilization of the germ has-
been accomplished, a great change takes place in the
system of the female, in which arises a series of functions
totally unknown in the male. The ovary is quiescent.
No germs are developed and expelled during the nine
months of gestation; nor, normally, during the whole
period of nursing. The mammary glands become active,
and, in many cases, the breasts are filled with at an.
early period of pregnancy. Life flows to the bosom instead '
of the ovaries. As the ovarian action is suspended, there
is no occasion for the menstrual excitement and evacuation.
Its cessation is therefore the earliest, and in the healthy.
FIG. 29.
BAIN AND NERVE
Primitive fibres and ganglionic globules of human brain, after Purkinje. A,
ganglionic globules lying among varicose nerve tubes and blood vessels, in sub-
stance of optic thalamus a, globule more enlarged ; b, small vascular trunk. B, B,
globules with variously formed prolongations, from dark portion of crus cerebri.
female, the surest sign that conception has taken place.
And where there is health, and the entire absence of
amative excitement, as there always should be during
the whole period of gestation and lactation from the
beginning of pregnancy until the child is weaned the
menses are suspended. .
life has some remarkable peculiarities, which we
may well consider. The formation of germs in the
ovaries, their periodical development and expulsion, their


Impregnation or fecundation by spermatozoa formed in
corresponding male organs ; their extreme minuteness and
rapid developement into all the complexities of our wondrous
organisation, constitute a series of mysteries. But the
mode of festal existence is strangely different from that of
the infant from the moment it comes into the world. The
foetus cannot breathe. Its lungs are useless—no blood is
thrown into them except what is necessary for their
growth, and no air penetrates them, for the foetus swims
in a liquid. The foetal heart has an open communication
between the two auricles, which is closed at birth. The
blood of the infant gets its supply of oxygen from the
blood of the mpther by means of the placenta, or after-birth.
The lungs of the mother breathe for herself and her
offsi ring during pregnancy, so that pure air is then more
than ever needed. The Mood of the child r fed and
FIG. 30.
THE PLACENTA AND UMBILICAL CORD.
Showing the distribution of vessels on the
fœtal side of the placenta.
purified by that of the
'mother, passes from the
placenta through the
umbilical vein to its
liver, and thence into
the right auricle of the
heart, and from that
into the left auricle
through the foetal open-
ing between them, and
then to the left ventricile,
and is expelled into the
arteries which supply the
head and upper extremi-
ties with the purest
blood for their more
rapid development.
From the head and arms
the blood returns into the right auricle, from which it
passes to the right ventricle. In the adult it would now
pass into the lungs, but in the foetus it is carried by a
special artery, afterwards obliterated, into the descending
aorta, and sent partly to the lower extremities, and partly
to the placenta, to be purified by contact, through thin
membranes, with the blood of the mother.
Here we have a special machinery, an opening in the
heart which is closed at birth, lungs solid and useless,


arteries and veins most important in the foetus, but at
birth obliterated, and an organ expelled at birth after the
infant, which in its foetal life performs th* function
of both stomach and lungs,. 'furnishing the matter
of blood, and also the oxygen for its purification and
yivifioation.
There is a striking similarity of all
forms of embryo. A fish, a reptile, a
bird, a quadruped, a man are all
Vertebrates by tUeir plan of structure
and by their mode of develop-
ment, and yet they are entirely
distinct as members of different
classes of the vertebrate type. The
structural plan for all Vertebrates
consists of a central axis, with a
solid, mostly bony arch, above,
enclosing the nervous system, and
a similar arch below, enclosing the
organs of digestion, reproduction,
circulation and respiration. A
glance at their embryology will
show us that they are united by
their development as closely as by
their anatomy. Suppose we have
here the egg of a vertebrate, of any
vertebrate, a fish, a reptile, a bird,
or a mammal ; the result of the
segmentation is the formation of a
layer of more completely kneaded
yolk substance on one side of the
yolk. One end of this layer thickens
more than the other. Along the
middle, a slight depression is formed
not by a sinking of the centre, but
in consequence of the rising and
swelling of the sides which leads to
the formation of a kind of furrow.
It is, in fact, only the folding
upward of the upper margins ; and
this goes on till the margins meet
and enclose a cavity. This _ de-
pression in the longtitudinal axis of
FIG. 31.
EMBRYO OF THE DOG.
This represents the same
embryo as shown in the ovum
of Fig. 21, highly magnified,
seen from the abdominal
aspect. A. is the vertex, or
top of the head, B, B, are the
branchiæ, like the gills of
fishes, which all mammals
man included, at one stags
resemble. C, is the rudi-
ments! heart, appearing as a
contorted tube. D, D. Veins
of the germinal membrane,
F, F, Arteries of the same,
springing from the two aortas.
H, H, Germinal membrane.
The human embryo, at this
stage, is precisely similar.


the germ is the beginning of the arch within which the
nervous system is contained. Then the lower margins of
the germ layer fold downward in the same way till they also
meet and form the lower cavity in which the other systems
of organs are enclosed. Here a little fold occurs which is the
FIG. 32.
EMBRYO CHICKEN.
A magnified embryo of the chick, four lines long; time, middle of the third day;
B, C, D, represents the hemispheres of the brain; E, the cerebellum and medulla
oblongata; H, H, vertebral lamina; I, ventricle of the heart; M, M, arteries of the
blastoderma; O, O, boundaries of the abdomen: G, opening of the ear; F, the eye
formed first with a wide cleft. This also resembles, in all respects, the human
embryo, at the same stage of development, but at a much later period.
first sketching out of the eye ; here another fold, the first
indication of the ear ; here tranverse fissures are developed
which are to be the gills ; for gills exist in all vertebrates,
including man, in the embryonic state. As the develop-
ment goes on, the germ rises more and more above the
yolk, the connection becomes less and less, the yolk hangs
like a bag below the body, and either is slowly or more


rapidly absorbed into it, as the case may be, in different
vertebrates, and the little animal is finally freed from all
Fig. 48 shows a farther advanced
embryo, with an apparatus of nutri-
tion. called the alantois, with the
umbilical vessels, B, branching over it
C, the external ear. D, Cerrebullum.
E, Corpora quadrigemina. F, Hemi-
spheres. The eye is very large, and far
advanced; the mouth begins to take
the shape of a bill, and the legs and
wings are sprouting.
FIG. 33.
EMBRYO FOWL OF EIGHT DAYS.
connection with the parent. Compare a number of verte-
brates from different classes in different stages of growth,
and you will be astonished at their great resemblance.
Take them, for instance, at an early stage of embryonic
life, before the germ rises very high above the yolk. At
that time blood-vessels extend over the whole yolk, some
of which bring the blood to the heart, while others dis-
tribute it to all parts of the surface. At this point of the
FIG. 34.
Circulation of a FISH before
Hatching.
FIG. 35.
Circulation of CHICKEN at an early
stage of growth in the egg
development there are two great from which the
blood circulates symmetrically on either side of the body,
while both finally unite in a circular vessel. Whether we
take a turtle, a snake, a bird, or a mammal at this phase of


FIG. 36.
Circulation of Embryo of GUINEA PIG, on the
18th day of gestation.
FIG. 37.
Circulation of the SNAPPING TURTLE, at an
early state of growth in the egg.
development, the
difference in their
circulation is very
slight. Only very
careful and detailed
drawings, such as are
here reproduced from
the works of Rathke,
Tander, Bischoff, and
Agassiz, give it to
you.
The body of the
snake is hardly more
elongated than that
of the turtle; the I
form tapers into a
tail in both, but not
more in one than in
the other. A young
fish exhibits the same
traits of physiognomy
which we observe as
characteristic of the
embryo of the rep-
tiles, the birds, or the
mammalia. There
is, in fact, no more
difference between
these different em-
bryos than between
the young star fish,
the young jelly fish,!
and the young coral.
The Vertebrates, like
the Radiates, pass
through an unin-
terrupted series of
changes from the
first formation of
the germ to the
completion of its
growth, which are
throughout parallel


to one another. How, then,
does it come that the germ
of a turtle always produces a
turtle, the germ of a snake
always a snake, the germ of a,
dog always a dog, the germ of
a man always a human being,
if there be not something
superior to these physical
resemblances controlling all
growth throughout the civi-
lised world.
FIG. 38
Circulation of a SNAKE at an
early stage of growth in the egg
CHAPTER VI.
PREGNANCY-LABOR-PARTURITION.
Perhaps there is no more eventful period in the history
of woman than that in which she first becomes conscious-
that the existence of another being is dependent upon her
own, and that she carries about with her the first tiny
rudiments of an immortal soul.
The signs of pregnancy are various. Many females are
troubled with colic pains, creeping of the skin, shuddering*,
and fainting fits immediately on conception taking place.
Where such symptoms occur immediately after connection*,
they are a certain indication of impregnation.
A remarkable change takes place in the face in most
cases, varying in time from three days to three months.
The eyes are dull and heavy, and present a glassy ap-,
pearance —the nose pinched up, the skin becomes pal© and
livid, and the whole countenance appears as if five or ten
years advanced in life had been taken at a single step.
Another important and remarkable sign, and one
most to be relied on, is an increase of the size of the neck.
This often occurs at a very early period, and many females,
by keeping a careful daily measurement of the neck, can.
always tell when they are pregnant.


A suppression of the menstrual flow is another strong
presumptive sign. If is true a partial flow of the menseg
often occurs after pregnancy, from the lower part of the
womb, but when the flow is suddenly stopped without any
apparent cause, pregnancy is generally the predisposing
cause.
Soon after conception, the stomach becomes affected
with what is called morning sickness. On first awaking
the female feels as well as usual, but on rising from her bed
qualmishness begins, and, perhaps, while in the act of
dressing, retching and vomiting takes place.
This symptom may occur almost immediately after con-
ception ; but it most frequently commences for the first time
between two and three weeks after. Now and then it is
experienced only the last six weeks or two months of
pregnancy, when it is attended generally with much distress
and discomfort. It continues, more or less, during the
first half of pregnancy, and subsides about the time the
movements of the child begin to be felt.
Changes in the breast are generally considered as strong
signs of pregnancy. When two months of pregnancy have
been completed, an uneasy sensation of throbbing and
stretching fullness is experienced, accompanied with ting-
ling about the middle of the breasts, centreing in the
nipples. A sensible alteration in their appearance soon
follows—they grow larger and more firm. The nipple
becomes more prominent, and the circle around its base
altered in color and structure, constituting what is called
the areola ; and, as pregnancy advances, milk is secreted.
The period of gestation, at which these changes may
occur, varies much in different females. Sometimes, with
the exception of the secretion of the milk, they are recog-
nised very soon after conception ; in other instances,
particularly in females of a weakly and delicate constitu-
tion, they are hardly perceptible until pregnancy is far
advanced, or even drawing towards its termination.
The changes in the form and size of the breast may be
the result of causes unconnected with pregnancy. They
may enlarge in consequence of marriage, from the indi-
vidual becoming stout and fat, or from accidental suppres-
sion of the monthly flow.
The changes which take place in the nipple and around
its base, are of the utmost value as an evidence of pregnancy.


About the sixth or seventh week after conception haa
taken place, if the nipple be examined, it will be found
becoming turgid and prominent, and a circle forming
around its base, of a colour deeper in its shade than rose or
flesh colour, slightly tinged with a yellowish or brownish
hue, and here and there upon its surface will be seen little
prominent points from about ten to twenty in number.
In the progress of the next six or seven weeks these changes
are fully developed, the nipple becoming more prominent
and turgid than ever, the circle around it of larger dimen-
sions, the skin being soft, bedewed with a slight degree of
moisture, frequently staining the linen in contact with it;
the little prominences of larger size, and the color of the
whole much deepened.
Calculations of the duration of pregnancy, founded upon
what has been observed to occur after casual intercourse,
or perhaps a single act, in individuals who can have no
motive to tell us what is false, are likely to be correct.
The conclusion drawn from these is, that labour usually,
but not invariably, comes on about 280 days after con-
ception, a mature child being sometimes born before the
expiration of the forty weeks, and at other times not until
that time had been exceeded by several days. A case is
on record where the pregnancy existed 287 days. In this
case the labour did not take place until that period had
elapsed from the departure of the husband for the East
Indies, consequently the period might have been longer
than 287 days.
Childbirth is a natural process, and however complicated
and painful habits of disease have made it, yet the work must
be left to Nature. Any efforts to assist or hurry matters
will only end in harm. The only cases where interference
is justifiable is where her powers are exhausted, or some
malformation exists or malpresentation occurs. When
labor is about to commence, the womb descends into the
bottom of the belly, and the motions and weight of the
child will be felt much lower down than usual. If in a
natural position, the head will fall down to the mouth oi
the womb, and press upon it. This drives forward the
membranes which retain the water at the orfice, and al
the proper moment they break, and labor then commences.
Labor is caused by involuntary contractions of the uterus
and abdominal muscles. By their force the liquor amnii


flows out, the head of the foetus is engaged in the pelvis, it
goes through it, and soon passes out by the valve, the folds
of which disappear. These different phenomena take place
in succession, and continue a certain time; they are
accompanied with pains more or less severe, with swelling
and softening of the soft part of the pelvis and external
genital parts, and with an abundant mucous secretion in
the cavity of the vagina. All these circumstances, each in
its own way, favor the passage of the foetus.
It is proper here to remark that parturition is not
necessarily either painful or dangerous. It is well-known
that women in an uncivilised state suffer very little pain or
disablement in bringing forth children, generally neither
pregnancy nor labour interrupt the ordinary avocation of
the mother, except for an hour or two at the birth itself.
The suffering and debilitating'influences that often attend
child-birth now, is caused by our unnatural modes of
living, and non-attention to the laws of health. Numerous
well authenticated instances are known, where women,
who had previously suffered with severe labor in child-
birth, have, by attention to health and diet as here
indicated, been delivered of fine, healthy children with
comparative ease.
From the beginning of pregnancy, more than ordinary
care should be used in taking regular exercise in the open
air, being careful to avoid fatigue and over-exertion;
during the whole period of pregnancy every kind of
agitating exercise, such as running, jumping, jolting in a
carriage, dancing, lifting heavy weights, and plunging in
cold water, should be carefully avoided, as well as the
passions being kept under perfect control.
The diet must chiefly consist of fruit and farinaceous
food, as sago, tapioca, rice, &c. In proportion as a woman
subsists upon ailment which is free from earthly and boney
matter, will she avoid pain and danger in delivery; hence
the more ripe fruit, acid fruit in particular, and the less
of other kinds of food, but particularly of bread or pastry
of any kind, is consumed, the less will be the danger and
sufferings of child-birth. Nearly all kinds of fruit possess
two hundred times less ossifying principle than bread, or
anything else made of wheaten flour.
Honey, molasses, sugar, butter, oil, vinegar, &c., when
unadulterated, are entirely free from earthly matter. Com


mon salt, pepper, coffee, cocoa, spices, and many drugs afo-
much worse than wheaten flour, ih their hardening and:
bone-forming tendency, and should th' refore be avoided.
The drink should be tea or lemonade made with water, Soft
and clear, and where practicable, distilled.
No mother who has adopted this mode of living, but has
blessed the knowledge of it, ahd it has saved many a young
mother much needless terro^.
CHAPTER VII.
LOVE AND MARRIAGE.
The attraction of the sexes for each other, though based
upon the dual principle of generation which pervades the
living world, and which has its analogies in the attractive-
forces of matter, yet pervades the Whole being. is-
not merely the instinctive desire of physical union, which
has for its object the continuation of the species ; it belongs
to the mind as well as to the body; it warms, invigorates,,
and elevates every sentiment, every feeling, and its highest,,
purest, most diffusive form, unites us to God, and all
Creatures in Him.
All love is essentially the same, but modified according
to its objects, and by the character of the one who loves.
The love of children for their parents, of parents for
offspring, brotherly and sisterly love, the love of friendship,,
of charity, and the fervor of religious love, are modifications
of the same sentiment —the attraction that draws us to our
kindred, our kind—that binds together all races, and
humanity itself, resting on the Fatherhood of God, and
the brotherhood of man. It is but natural that this love
Should vary in degrees. Attractions are proportional ta
proximity. Family is nearer than country ;we prefer our
own nation to the rest of the race.
Each individual has also its own special attractions and
repulsions. There is love at first sight, and friendship at
first sight. We feel some persons pleasant to us ;to be


FIG 39.
Fig. 39 represents the microscopic elements
of the nervous structure. 1. Mode of termination
of white nerve-fibres in loops; three, of these
loops are simple, the fourth is convoluted. The
latter is found in situations where a high degree
of sensation exists. 2. A white nerve-fibre from
the brain, showing the varicose or knotty
appearance produced by traction of pressure
3. A white nerve-fibre enlarged to show its
structure, a tubular envelope and a contained
substance —neurilemma and neurine. 4. A
nerve-cell, showing its composition of a granu-
lar looking capsule and granular contents.
5. Its nucleus containing a nucleolus. 6. A
nerve-cell, from which several processes are
given off; it contains also a neucleated neucleus.
7. Nerve-granules.
FIG. 40.
ORIGIN OF THE MILK DUCTS.
FIG. 41.
ULTIMATE FOLLICLES OF THE
MAMMARY GLANDS.
A, A, The Secreting Cells.
B, B, The Nuclei.


near them is a delight. Generally such feelings are mutual
—like flows to like; or, as often, perhaps, differences fit
into each other. We seek sympathy with our own tastes
and habits or; we find in others what we lack. Thus the
weak rest upon the strong, the timid are fond of the
courageous, the reckless seek guidance of the prudent, and
so on.
The sentiment of love for the opposite sex—tender,
romantic, passionate, begins very early in life. Fathers
and daughters, mothers and sons, have a special fondness
for each other, as also have brothers and sisters; but the
boy soon comes to admire some one, generally older than
himself, who is not a relation. Very little girls find a hero
in some friend of an elder brother. Fondness for cousins
generally comes more from opportunity than natural
attraction, though a cousin may have very little appear-
ance of family relation. The law appears to be that free
choice seeks the diverse and distant. A stranger has
always a better chance with the young ladies of any district
than the young men with whom they have always been
acquainted. Savages seek their wives out of their own
tribe.
It is my belief that, naturally—l mean in a state of pure
and unperverted nature, but developed, cultivated and
refined by education—every man loves womanhood, itself,
and all women so far as they approximate to his ideal ;
and that, in the same way, every woman loves manhood,
and is attracted and charmed by all its gentle, noble and
heroic manifestations. By such a man, every woman he
meets is reverenced as a woman, accepted as a friend,
loved as a mother, sister, daughter, or it may be, cherished
in more tender relation, which should be at first, and may
always remain, pure and free from any sensual desire.
Such love may have many objects, each attracting the kind
and degree of affection which it is able to inspire. Such
love of men for women, and women for men, may be free,
and will be free, just in the degree in which it is freed from
the bondage of sensual passion. Such love has a direct
tendency to raise men above the control of their senses.
The more such love one has, and the more it is diffused,
■the less the liability to sink into the lower and disorderly
loves of the sensual life.
The idea that every attraction, every attachment, every


love between the sexes, must lead to marriage—that no
love can be tolerated but with that end in view, is a very
false and mischievous one. It deprives men and women of
the strength and happiness they might have in pure friend-
ships and pure loves, and it leads to a multitude of false
and bad marriages. Two persons are drawn together by
strong attractions and tender sentiments for each other,
who have no more right to be married than if they were
brother and sister, but who have the same right to love each
other. But their true sentiments for each other, and
consequent relation to each other, are not understood
by those around them, and perhaps not by themselves.
They are urged, by the misapprehension of others, by their
expectation, by ignorant gossip, by the prejudice of society
based upon low and sensual estimates of life, to marry *
they find often that they must either marry or lose the
happiness they have in each other’s society, and they make
the irrevocable mistake.
When it is understood that there are other loves than
that of marriage—when the special attraction that justifies
union for life, and the begetting of offspring, is discrimi-
nated from all other attractions that may bring two
souls into very near and tender relations to each other,
there will be more happiness in the world, and fewer
incomplete, imperfect, and, therefore more or less unhappy
marriages. Nothing can be more detestable than that
playing with fire, which goes by the name of flirtation ;
but there are men and women who have the happiness of
loving, and of being tenderly and devotedly loved, by
persons of the opposite sex—loved, purely, nobly, and
happily, without injury, and with great good. Where such
loves are accompanied by perfect trust in the goodness,
purity, truth and honor of the beloved, there can be no
jealousy—no desire for selfish absorption—no fear of
deprivation of any right. There is no reason why a
husband or a wife should limit the range of pure and
spiritual affections to near relatives. The man who can
love a sister or sisters are often loved, may love in the same
way, or as purely, any woman who might be his sister. As
men and women learn to purify their lives, the world will
grow more tolerant, and love will become more universal.
The tender and fervent exhortations to mutual love, to be
found in the Gospels and Epistles of the New Testament,.


are now almost without a meaning. But they had a
meaning to those to whom they were addressed and when
we are better Christians, and bring our lives to the purity
of Christian morality, they will have a meaning to us, and
we shall \earn that in a sense we have not dreamed of,
-God is Love.
In the human race all circumstances point to monogamy
as the law, or natural condition. Males and females are
born in almost exactly equal numbers. If there are two or
three per cent, more of males than females, the risks of
life with males soon make the number even. Therefore, as
a rule, no man can have more than one wife without
robbing his neighbour. Polygamy is therefore a manifest
injustice, and may become the most grievous of all
monopolies.
Children are the most helpless of all young creatures,
and require the care of parents for the longest period. The
-care of a husband for his wife, and of a father for his child,
is an evident necessity. The proper care and education of
a single child should extend over at least fifteen years, and
that of a family may reach to thirty years, or throughout
the greater part of an ordinary life. During all periods of
pregnancy, child bearing, nursing, and the education and
care of a family, every woman has a right to the sympathy,
sustaining love, and constant aid of her husband. No man
has the right to desert or leave helpless, or even dependent
upon others, except in extraordinary cases, the mother of
bis children. ,
Marriage, like celibacy, should be a matter of vocation.
The special object of marriage is to have children the
co-operating motive is that two persons, drawn to each
other by a mutual affection, may live helpfully and happily
together. A selfish marriage for its merely animal grati-
fications—a marriage in which strength, health, usefulness,
often life itself, are sacrificed to sensuality and lust—is a
-desecration of a holy institution, and somewhat worse in
its consequences than promiscuous profligacy, for the
♦consequences of that may not fall upon one s children and
posterity.
There are many persons who have no right to marry.
There should be a kind and amount of love that will
justify and sanctify such a relation. There should be a
juure motive, and a fixed intention of making the relation


-what it ought to be to husband, wife, and children. There
should be a reasonable assurance of the power to provide
for a family. There should be that amount of health—
that freedom from bodily and mental disease—that physical
and moral constitution which will give a reasonable
prospect of children whose lives will be a blessing to them-
selves and to society.
Where there is deformity of body or an unhappy pecu-
liarity of mind or temper liable to be inherited, people
-should not marry, or if they live together, should
resign the uses of marriage. People should conscientiously
refrain from propagating hereditary diseases. Persons
near of kin are wisely forbidden to marry, for there
is in such cases the liability of imperfect generation—the
-production of blind, deaf, idiotic or insane offspring.
Should marriage be for life ? As a rule, undoubtedly.
Every real, proper, true marriage must be. It takes a
lifetime for a husband and wife to make a home, and rear,
and educate and provide for a family of children. But
bow if people make mistakes and find that they are not
suitably married ? These are mistakes very difficult to
remedy. If a man, after deliberately making his choice of
a woman, ceases to love her, how can he honourably with-
draw from his relation to her, and enter upon another,
when she still loves him, and is ready to fulfil her part of
the contract ? Laws cannot very well provide for mistakes.
If the distaste for each other be mutual, and both parties
desire to separate, a separation, may of course, be per-
imitted, but it is a serious question whether two such
persons can go into the world and find new partners, with
justice to the rest. The law which permits of no divorce
certainly bears hard upon individual cases, but if it leads to
greater seriousness and care in forming such relations, it
may be, on the whole, the best thing for society that it
•should be strictly observed.
CHAPTER VIII.
WHEN TO MARRY —HOW TO SELECT A PARTNER ON
RIGHT PRINCIPLES.
The proper age to marry is a somewhat vexed question
but needlessly so, because that age varies much, according


to temperament and other circumstances relating to th&
individual. Although, after puberty, the sexual organs are
capable of reproduction, yet it by no means follows that
they should be used for that purpose. Their early activity
is intended for the perfection of body and mind, and not for
the continuation of the species. Very early marriages,
therefore, should be avoided, because the nervous force
expended in amative indulgence is imperatively required in
both sexes, for developing the physical and mental faculties.
The zoosperms produced by the male in the first years of
puberty are inferior in power, and less capable of producing
healthy offspring than those of maturer years. The early
germs, also, of the female are less fitted for fecundation
than those that appear later in life. Nature evidently
intending these early efforts to be used on the individuals
themselves, in building up their bodies, strengthening their
minds, and preparing them to reproduce their species in
maturer years. There is a serious day of reckoning for
early indulgence; for precocious persons—unless their
constitutions are as powerful as their desires—who give
way to their passions at their first exactions, barter their
youth for their enjoyment, and are old and weary of the
world at an age when people of more moderate habits are
only in the meridian of pleasure and existence.
Generally, the best age to marry, where the health is
perfect, is from twenty-one to twenty-five in the male, and
from eighteen to twenty-one in the female. As a general
rule, marriages earlier than this are injurious and detri-
mental to health. Men who marry too young, unless they
are of cold and phlegmatic constitutions, and thus moderate
in their conduct, become partially bald, dim of sight, and
lose all elasticity of limb in a few years, while women in
like position, rarely have any bloom on their cheek or fire
in their eye by the time they are twenty-five. And all
profound physiologists agree that from the same cause, the
mental faculties suffer in the same ratio.
A medium, however, is to be observed. It is not well to
defer till middle age the period of connubial intercourse,
for too tedious spintership is as much calculated to hasten
the decay of beauty, as too early a marriage. Hence, there
is rarely any freshness to be seen in a maiden of thirty;
while the matron of that age, if her life has been a happy
one, and her hymenial condition of not more than ten years’


standing, is scarcely in the hey-day of her charms. And
the same rule will apply with equal force to the other sex ;
for, after the first prime of life, bachelors decay and grow
old much faster than married men.
The rich are qualified for marriage before the poor. This
is owing to the superiority of their ailment; for very nutri-
tious food, and the constant use of wines coffee, &c., greatly
assist in developing the organs of reproduction; whereas
the food generally made use of among the peasantry of most
countries —as vegetables, corn, milk, &c.—retards their
growth. Owing to this difference of diet, the daughter of
a man of wealth, who keeps a good table, will be as adequate
to certain duties of married life at eighteen, as the daughter
of a humble peasant at twenty-one. Singular as it may
seem it is none the less true, that love novels, amorous con-
versations, playing parlor games of kisses, voluptuous
pictures, waltzing, and, in fact, all things having a tendency
to create desire, assist in promoting puberty, and preparing
young persons for early marriage. Those who reach this
estate, however, by artificial means, and much before the
natural period, will have to suffer for it in after-life.
The female who marries before the completion of her
womanhood —that is, before her puberty is established
—will cease to grow, and probably become pale and delicate;
the more especially if she becomes pregnant soon after
marriage. A person who is thus circumstanced, will also
be liable to abortions, and painful deliveries. Marriage,
unless under very peculiar circumstances, should not take
place until two or three years after the age of puberty.
Many instances could be cited of the injurious effects result-
ing from not observing this rule. The case of the son of
Napoleon I. is a notable instance, who, at the age of fifteen
or sixteen began his career of sexual indulgence, which
ended his life at the early age of twenty-one years. He
was an amiable, inoffensive, and studious youth—beloved
by his grandfather and the whole Austrian Court; and
though the son of the most energetic man that modern
!times has produced, yet, from his effeminate life, he
scarcely attracted the least public attention.
Let me, therefore, advise the male reader to keep his
desires in leading strings until he is at least twenty-one,
and the female not to enter within the pale of wedlock
|nntil she is past her eighteenth year; but after those


periods marriage is their proper sphere of action, and one in
which they must play a part, or suffer actual pain, as well
as the loss of one of the greatest of earthly pleasures.
Marriages are most happy, and most productive of
handsome and healthy offspring, when the husband and
wife differ, not only in mental conformation, but in bodily
construction. £ A melancholy man should mate himself with
a sprightly woman, and vice versa ; or otherwise they will
soon grow weary of the monotony of each other s com-
pany. By the same rule should the choleric and the
patient be united, and the ambitious and the humble ; for
the opposites of their natures not only produce pleasurable
excitement, but each keeps the other in a wholesome check.
In the size and form of the parties, the same principle holds
good. Tall women are not the ideals of beauty to tall men ;
and if they marry such, they will soon begin to imagine
greater perfections in other forms than in those of their own
wives. And this is well ordered by Nature, to prevent the
disagreeable results which are almost certain to grow out of
unions where the parties have a strong resemblance.
For instance ; tall parents will probably have children
taller than either, and mental imbecility is the usual
attendant of extreme size. The union of persons prone to
corpulency, of dwarfs, &c., would have parallel results; and
so, likewise, of weakly or attenuated couples. The tall should
marry the short —the corpulent the lean —the choleric the
gentle—and so on ; and the tendency to extremes in the
parents will be corrected in the offspring. ,
Apart from these considerations, there are reasons why
persons of the same disposition should not be united in
wedlock/# An amiable wife to a choleric man, is like oil
to troubled waters ; an ill-tempered one will make his life
a misery and his home a hell. The man of studious habits
should marry a woman of sense and spirit rather than of
erudition, or the union will increase the monotony of his
existence, which it would be well for his health and spirits
to correct by a little conjugal excitement; and the man of
gloomy temperament will find the greatest relief from the
dark forebodings of his mind in the society of a gentle, but
lively and smiling partner. ... •,
However, in some particulars the dispositions and con-
stitutions of married people must assimilate, or they will
have but few enjoyments in common. The man of full


"habits and warm nature had better remain single than unite
his destinies with a woman whose heart repulses the soft
advancements of love ; and the sanguine female, in whose
soul love is the dominant principle, should avoid marriage
with a very phlegmatic person, or her caresses, instead of
being returned in kind, will rather excite feelings of dis-
gust. Thus the discriminations to be made in the choice
•of a partner are extremely nice.
Nature generally assists Art in the choice of partners.
We instinctively seek in the object of our desires the
qualities which we do not possess ourselves. This is a
most desirable arrangement of Providence, as it establishes
an equilibrium, and prevents people from tending to ex-
tremes ; for it is known that unions of dwarfs are fruitful
of dwarfs; that giants proceed from the embrace of giants;
and that the offspring of parents alike irritable, alike
passive, alike bashful, &c., inherit the prominent qualities
of both to such a degree as to seriously interfere with their
prospects in the world.
It has another advantage. Through its means “ every
•eye forms its own beauty; ” hence, what one person rejects
is the beau ideal of another’s conceptions; and thus we
are all provided for.
In fine, with man as with animals, the best way to
•improve the breed is to cross it—for the intermarriage of
like with like, and relative with relative, not only causes
man to degenerate, but if the system became universal,
would in time bring the human race to a termination
altogether.
A male or female with a very low forehead should care-
fully avoid marriage with a person of like conformation, or
their offspring will, in all probability, be weak-minded, or
■victims to partial idiocy.
The system of crossing is so perfect, that marriages be-
tween persons, natives of different countries, are likely to be
pleasant and fruitful. Speaking on this subject an English
writer says:—“The Persians have been so improved by
introducing foreigners to breed from, that they have
completely succeeded in washing out the stain of their
Mongolian origin.’ And the same author adds to the effect,
that in in those parts of Persia where there is no foreign inter-
course, the inhabitants are sickly and stunted; while, in those
that are frequented by strangers, they are large and healthy.


To make what is called a “handsome couple,” the female
should be about three inches less than the male ; and the
parties should be proportionately developed throughout
their system.
“ A well-formed woman,” says a modern physiologist,
“ should have her head, shoulders and chest small and
compact; arms and limbs relatively short; her haunches
apart; her hips elevated ; her abdomen large, and her thighs
voluminous. Hence, she should taper from the centre up
and down. Whereas, in a well-formed man the shoulders
are more prominent than the hips. Great hollowness in
the back, the pressing of the thighs against each other in
walking, and the elevation of one hip above another, are
indications of the malformation of the pelvis.”
From the same writer I take the following, which is
applicable here. It is very correct in its estimates of
beauty in both sexes :
“ The length of the neck should be proportionately less
in the male than in the female, because the dependahcg)of
the mental system on the vital one is naturally connected
with the shorter courses of the vessels of the neck.
The neck should form a gradual transition between the
body and head, its fullness concealing all prominences of
the throat.
The shoulders should slope from the lower part of the
neck, because the reverse shows that the upper part of the
chest owes its width to the bones and muscles of the
shoulders.
The upper part of the chest should be relatively short
and wide, independent of the size of the shoulders, for this
shows the vital organs which it contains are sufficiently
developed.
The waist should taper little farther than the middle of
the trunk, and be marked, especially in the back and loins*
by the approximation of the hips.
The waist should be narrower than the upper part of the
trunk and its muscles, because the reverse indicates the
expansion of the stomach, liver, and great intestines,
resulting from their excessive use.
The back of woman should be more hollow than that of)
man ; for otherwise the pelvis is not of sufficient depth for 1
parturition.
Woman should have loins more extended than man, ati


the expense of the superior and inferior parts, for this
conformation is essential to gestation.
The abdomen should be larger in woman than in man,
for the same reason.
Over all these parts the cellular tissue and the plumpness
connected with it should obliterate all distinct projection
of muscles.
The surface of the whole female form should be char-
acterized by the gradual and easy transition between the
parts.
The moderate plumpness already described should bestow
on the organs of the woman great suppleness.
Plumpness is essential to beauty, especially in mothers,
because in them the abdomen necessarily expands, and
would afterwards collapse and become wrinkled.
An excess of plumpness, however, is to be guarded
against. Young women who are very fat are cold, and
prone to barrenness.
In no case should plumpness be so predominant as to
destroy the distinctness of parts.
A male and female formed on the above models would
be well matched, and have fine children.”
CHAPTER IX.
A SPECIAL CHAPTER TO YOUNG MEN UPON A SPECIAL SUBJECT.
I desire, young men, to enlist your earnest attention in
what I now say. Upon its proper consideration will determine
dn a great measure the character of your future career.
You have now arrived at that age when you have in a
large degree to act on your own responsibility, and take
your place as a worker in the world’s progress. * Your
childhood being passed away, your parents friends and
society now look upon you and expect you to assume your
allotted portion of work as a means of securing a livelihood.
No one who has health has any right to existence without
doing work of some kind. To help you to fill your sphere
happily, successfully and worthily, has been my object in
■writing this chapter. No young man who has evinced a


desire for the companionship of prostitutes has ever suc-
ceeded in the end, no matter what advantages he may have
had in the way of friends, fortune or talents.
I take it for granted you profess Christianity, and believe
in a heaven and a hell, or a future state of rewards and
punishments, according to the deeds done in the body.
To the professional profligate, who acknowledges no law,.,
human or divine, Ido not address myself. I leave him in
the hands of the living God, who will surely call him to
account when he least expects it.
You find yourself in the enjoyment of life, health and
strength, inhabiting a beautiful world, and surrounded by
abundant means of delight and happiness ; and you know,
not only that you did not give yourself this life, but that
you are utterly powerless to prolong it even for an instant
in fact, that you are momentarily dependent for life and all
its blessings on its Divine Giver. This consideration need
not in the least prevent you from the unrestrained pursuit
of any innocent pleasure; but it should lead you to be most
careful to abstain from any of an opposite character.
When a mere boy you preferred the companionship of
boys, and probably scorned or were ashamed to play with
girls. Now, on the contrary, you feel yourself powerfully
attracted towards young women ; and find yourself much
happier in their company than in that of young men.
Whence, think you, comes this remarkable change ? Is it
not from Him who is the only Source of life and love, and
who, in His wisdom and mercy has made the two sexes,
and * made them for each other ? And what could be his
motive in this but the desire to promote the eternal happi-
ness of His creatures. It is, too, by this wise and
beneficient provision that He secures the perpetuation of
the human race in this world, and a continual addition
to the host of good men made perfect in His happy kingdom
above.
This new feeling you may take as a notice from God that
the time is approaching when it will behoove you to look
about for a maiden whom you can love with a pure affection
and whom you believe you can make happy as your wife.
Attend to the voice of God thus addressed to you; or,,
take the consequences.
God, as we see, has not made us angels at once, but has
placed us in this world of probation, where, associated with.


oir fellows of various and conflicting dispositions and
interests, we may form our character, and be gradually
prepared for our eternal home. To assist us in this
preparation, and to guide us in our course of action, we
often need the counsels of a judicious and kind friend, and
in this case one of our own sex may be, and often is highly
valuable. But at times there are peculiar circumstances
when one of the other sex—a better half, to whom we can
without reserve, unbosom ourselves —is beyond all com-
parison preferable. To each sex God has given qualities
suited to meet the wants, as well as to enhance the joys, of
the other. _
Every right minded young man, on attaining a suitable
age, desires to become a husband and a father, and the
prospect cheers him in his toil, and nerves his arm to
greater and more persistent labor than he would be willing
to undertake for himself alone. He is looking forward to
provide for others far dearer to him than himself.
Now, as God knows all things, He knows what pairs are
fitted for each other ; indeed, we cannot doubt that He
provides them. But the world is in a fallen state —I think
you will cordially agree with me here —and consequently it
is often difficult, or almost impossible for any of us to know
who are the right parties to come together.
Suppose, however, by some extraordinary means, you
should happen to know what maiden would become your
wife, what would be your thoughts and feelings if witliout
marriage, she were previously, for a time however short, to
live with another man ? Would you not think her defiled
and unworthy of you ? Do not most men take the same
view ? How then, think you, can any accountable being
be willing to defile a woman that is to be the wife of
another ?
If you are right-minded you will, in the first place, seek
for purity in your bride; and if you are honest and worthy
of a wife, you will take especial care not to be her inferior
in that respect. \-
The Almighty Creator, in His love and mercy towards
FTia creatures, permits them to co-operate with Him in
Continuing Hia creation; and hence flow all the endearing
affections and relationships of home and family.
The lawful love of man for woman, and of woman for
man, is the best and holiest affection of which our nature


is susceptible ; it is also the strongest and most enduring,
and, as it proceeds from God Himself, nothing can be more
certain than that the orderly compliance with its dictates
secures health and happiness here and hereafter ; while,
on the other hand, the abuse of this love as certainly
entails the loss of all self-respect, and unless repented of,
eternal woe.
A man that has been guilty of fornication may after-
wards desire to contract marriage, and with that view may
pay his addresses to a respectable modest young woman ;
but can he —knowing as he must his own character —do so
without a feeling of inferiority, shame and remorse?
Assuming that he has seen and repented of his wicked
folly, he ought, before taking such a step, to perform a
mental quarantine, say of not less than six months ; in
other words, he ought for a considerable time, to abstain
not only from lascivious acts and practices, but also from
encouraging unchaste thoughts, so as to have a well-
grounded assurance that he has effectually abandoned his
vicious practices, and is determined for the future to
pursue a virtuous course, such as may become a Christian
husband and father.
Supposing you have a sister whom you tenderly love,
and some man—perhaps a friend of yours—should, by
taking advantage of her unsuspecting credulity, succeed in
seducing her, you would doubtless consider him an un-
principled villain, and deserving of the most condign
punishment. If, too, as is often the case, she should in
consequence, although unmarried, become a mother, you
know the disgrace into which she would fall, especially in
the eyes of her own sex. Parents, in such cases, not
unfrequently turn their backs on the child they had ten-
derly reared, and from whose honorable marriage they had
expected a large addition to their own happiness. But
suppose the victim, instead of being your sister, were only
an acquaintance, or even a stranger, would not your
detestation of the villainy be quite as real, perhaps not so
intense ?
In all such cases —and alas 1 they are far too numerous
—the evil is one of the greatest that can befall a human
being; and, although the men commonly go scathless in
the eyes of the world, are they not in the eyes of God—
who alone judges rightly—as truly and lamentably fallen
as the women ?


In the three commandments, forbidding murder, adultery,
and theft, I remark that adultery is placed between the
other two, and from this 1 infer that the crime of an ad*
ulterer lies somewhat between that of the murderer and a thief.
For does not adultery—to which fornication is the natural
stepping stone—partake of the nature of both murder and
£hefl l To deprive the woman of her chastity is robbery of the
basest description ; and adultery injures or destroys the
soul as certainly as poison does the body. Tome it appears
that the phrase, a Christian murderer, a Christian adulterer,
a Christian thief, or a Christian drunkard, is a contradiction
in terms ; and that so long as such a character attaches to
any one he is unchristianized, self-excommunicated, and
utterly disqualified for heaven.
Let me here, however add that I firmly believe there is
each a thing as genuine repentance; and, therefore, that
any one who has committed a crime, however heinous,
may repent, and so become fitted for admission to the pure
society in Heaven. But I know full well that real repent-
ance is both difficult and rare; and therefore how extremely
dangerous it is for any one to enter on a vicious course.
It is often easy enough to evade man’s law ; indeed not
a few of them are more honoured in the breach than in the
observance. Being in their very nature imperfect, they are
liable to and admit of alteration and improvement. God’s
laws, however, are the reverse of all this. They are perfect
and unalterable in their nature, all are intended and
calculated to promote our good, are certain in their effects,
and eternal in their operation, like Him who gave them;
and, happily, there is no escape from them. This import*
ant fact is forgotten or neglected whenever we knowingly
give way to any vicious propensity. As we sow we are
certain to reap.
In my view, it is according to God’s law that a man
should attach himself to one woman in that most intimate
relation, Marriage, and one woman to one man, ever being
careful not to do anything that would divert the affections
of any one from their proper object; for to each our God
has given a right to one, and only one. It is our duty,
jealousy to guard our own right i and if our practice con-
form to our Christian profession, we shall be as careful, to
the utmost of our power, not to infringe the rights of others,
especially on this most tender point. Whoever, then


commits fornication or adultery, trespassess on the domein
of another, and so offends God’s law, and must inevitably
take the consequences ; and, recollect the punishment that
naturally follows any wicked act is ever in exact proportion
to its atrocity. .
Whatever some may think or say, do not you give heed
to the notion that “ A reformed rake makes the best
husband.” Many a youth may have fancied that he might,
with little or no danger, have just a taste of intoxicating
liquor, or of fornication, and give it up after a time ;
forgetting that practice makes perfect—as well in a bad
cause as a good one —and that a habit once acquired is-
very rarely got rid of ; witness the number of confirmed
drunkards, and permanently diseased and decayed libertines,
sunk to the lowest depths of degradation. How is it I
wonder, that we do not hear it said, “ A reformed harlot
makes the best wife ?” Reform is surely as possible for
women as for men. I hope and believe that many harlots,
do repent and reform ; but I fear a very great many more
do not; for it is well known that those who have once fallen
into a vicious practice, whatever it may be, are far more in
danger by repeating it than those who have never entered
am well aware that young men are liable to be tempted
to stray from the path of duty in a great variety of ways,
some of them most insiduous and dangerous. Many have
large sums of money passing through their hands, or large
stocks of valuable goods, some of which they might easily
take with but little chance of detection ; yet they safely
pass through the trying ordeal. Sometimes they will be
invited by their youthful acquaintance, of either sex, to
partake of pleasures which their conscience tells them are
anything but innocent. In all such cases, let them as
zealously guard their own chastity as they habitually do
their employer’s property ; and they will at the same time
promote their own welfare, and do something towards
bettering the condition of the world.
A casual visitor to our casinos, music-halls, and other
places where loose girls and fast young men congregate,
might fancy there was no harm going on —that all was
innocent amusement; but, could he follow a portion of the
company when the closing time arrives, he would have
great reason to change his opinion. Some of the less


cautious, freely, soon find their way to
the cells of the pdffHestation; but the greater number
indulge their lustful propensities in dens of infamy where
they are pretty safe from interference.
Indulgence in fornication inevitably entails no little-
expense —often much more than would support a family m
comfort and respectability, and whence, think you, are the-
funds supplied ? Doubtless from some channel that should
have a different and a better destination; and, when
ordinary sources fail, an employed tUlorcash-boxorhia.
cheque book is not unfrequently resorted to. Detection
Lay not immediately follow, and the downward
nursued till, from the magnitude of the robbery, or perhaps
some trifling circumstance, it can no longer be concealed,
and at one blow, a felon’s fate puts an end to the dissipation
and forever blasts the prospects of the infatuated youth.
Like other vices, fornication is progressive m nature,
and has the most lamentable consequences. As petty theft
is a stepping stone to burglary, and indulgence in drink to
and delirium tremens, so fornication,
when once entered on, may lead to adultery, and that may
provoke homicide which, under the circumstances, would be
deemed justifiable, as a jury would assert by their verdict ,
or it may lead to divorce, and bring disgrace and wretched-
ness to a number of innocent people and children.
One of the saddest results of fornication is the immense
number of illegitimate children that are brought into the
world, and who have not that parental care which they so
much need, and to which they are so just!
How often young women are charged with the murder
of their infants; and, although, it is almost certain they
are guilty of that crime, they are convicted only of
ini the birth. Who can tell the mental anguish they must
have endured ere they could make up their minds to destroy
their babes? it is qmle
several of tiejJy felt seif-convicted of
very prouau y, > similar though undiscovered,
having P«taf.W » wiU say that the fathers of
tho“e little innocents are less guilty than the wretched and
diß |u C vlcerca«ylb e ir punishment with them, and this,
too with unerring certainty, although it does not always.


follow them swiftly. To this, which is one of God’s laws,
fornicationis no exception. A young man may, perchance,
practice it for some time with apparent impunity; or he
may, on the other hand—unhappily, as he will doubtless
consider it—at once contract a disease so loathsome that
he dares not avow it, but strives to conceal it; and so
virulent, that it may either carry him to an early grave,
or after the doctors have done the best for him, leave him
debilitated for life, a burden to himself and others. Unlike
other diseases, this is deemed unfit to be spoken of in
decent society; indeed it is never alluded to, and is there-
fore more likely to be neglected till it has so thoroughly
got hold of the system that recovery is hopeless. The
sinning women, too, are equally subject to this horrible
curse. Whole wards in our hospitals and lunatic asylums
are filled with its victims. Such, however, is but the
natural punishment which a merciful God permits to follow
a violation or abuse of one of His most beneficient laws ;
by this means plainly showing us the grievous nature of
the crime. If the terrible character, and the inevitable
certainty of this natural consequence of the act were known
in time, it ought to be sufficient to deter any young person
from vicious courses. Forewarned they would be fore-
armed. j
In order to be convinced of the direful evils resulting
from this vice, we need only look at the swarms of prosti-
tutes that infest all our large centres of population; and,
truth to tell, in proportion to their size, our villages and
quiet hamlets are no less immoral. Most of these un-
fortunates, and their male associates too, pass much of
their time in riotous enjoyment, which they mistakenly
fancy to be happiness; but can any mistake be more
complete, or more fatal in its consequences ? They are
placed in this world, endowed with faculties which will
enable them to promote the well-being of those about them,
and by that means at the same time to promote their own;
Instead of which they neglect the opportunities God affords
them for the right and beneficial enployment of their
talents, and insanely pervert them to the destruction
of their health, their wealth, and their prospects, both in
this world and the next. Who that has human feelings
can look at this state of things, and not be led to ask
himself, “ How are the people that live in this way ever to


get to heaven ? ” or, might we not rather say, “ How are
they to he kept out of hell 1 ” and, recollect, even the vilest
of these were once innocent children ! Moreover,
however humiliating it may be to admit the fact, as surely
as God is our common Father, so surely are they our
brethren and sisters ! Can, then, anything be more self-
evident than that it is both the interest and the duty of
every one of us to do aH in our power to prevent the young
from swerving from the path of virtue ?
The evil effects of this vicious and debasing practice do
not obtrude themselves so much on public potice in the
case of men as of women ; but, without staying to inquire
which of the two are the greatest sufferers, it is notorious
that it is a dreadful scourge in both the army and navy,
many thousands of men always being in the hospital from
the ravages it makes amongihem, a large portion of whom
never are able to return to their duty ; so large, indeed, is
the number of victims as greatly to diminish the efficiency
of our forces, and at the same time to inflict a heavy and
wasteful expenditure on the country. This state of things,
be it observed, implies a corresponding number of abandoned
and infected women.
When a young man, instead of retiring at a proper time
to his own chamber, spends his evening in revelry, and
then shares the bed of a harlot, although he may manage
to be at his post in the morning, and his daily associates be
none the wiser, he knows that he has been guilty of conduct
which is truly disgraceful, and of which he will be heartily
ashamed—that is, provided that he has not lost all sense of
right and wrong. He has, in fact, degraded himself to the
level of his paramour, for whom he, too, cannot have an
atom of respect; and without respect there cannot be any
love that is worthy of the name.
But, besides the injury the fornicator does to himself,
that which he inflicts on the woman is not to be overlooked
or forgotten. If she were a maiden whom he seduced, the
injury is little, if any, less than that of taking her life. If
she had previously fallen, he helps to confirm her in her
vicious course, and renders her reformation and consequent
return to respectable society, and also her ultimate salvation,
much more difficult and far less probable.
And, if he look to his own case, what is it ? The
longer he follows a vicious course, the more it becomes a.


confirmed habit; and it would be as reasonable to expect
that half a life spent in the study of languages only should
qualify a man for a surgeon or an engineer, as that a life
of unchastity should qualify him for heaven, into which
nothing impure can enter.
It is a well-established fact, which cannot be too generally /
known, that parents transmit to their children propensities
to good or evil, especially the latter; and they in their turn
transmit them to their posterity. It is, then, highly
probable, and often happens, that when parents have
indulged in certain vicious practices, whatever they may
be, their children will be strongly inclined to the same.
'The children, for instance, of a drunkard, a miser, a tyrant,
Ac., will be very likely to resemble their parents; and this
holds true no less with a sensualist. Moreover, physical
diseases, especially that which has been alluded to, are
often transmitted to innocent offspring, even after the
parents have believed themselves thoroughly cured. Many
may, in this way, trace the origin of their diseases as well
as of their vices to their ancestors.
These considerations cannot be too strongly impressed on
the attention of the young who are beginning life. It is
only of healthy parents that healthy children are born. If
young people had a right estimate of the responsibility they
were about to undertake when they marry, they would
shrink with horror from the danger of contamination, and
of permanent injury to their health, should they yield to
unchaste practices. No action of our lives but carries with
it important—ay, eternal—consequences; and therefore the
evil effects resulting from fornication may be felt by
generation's yet unborn.
Many will, perhaps, say that fornication always existed
and always will. I demur to both propositions, and
maintain, on the contrary, that it did not exist at the
beginning ; for then God saw that all was good ; and if
God gives to one man the power to reform, repent and be
regenerated^which no one will deny—He will doubtless
give it to anyone, and to all who ask for it; for He is love,
and He loves every one of His creatures infinitely. We
may, therefore, confidently look forward to the gradual
decrease and ultimate extinction of this grievous curse of
our race.
If you, my young friend, have already fallen into this


sin, rely upon it you may shake it off entirely, provided you
are sufficiently courageous, and look for strength to the
only Fountain of all strength. As there is joy in heaven
over one sinner that repenteth, so there is every encourage-
ment for us to fight the good fight; for, although those
who are against us are many and powerful, those who are
on our side are both numerous and more powerful.
Many well-intentioned people would like to keep the
young ignorant of these sad-and repulsive matters; so
would I, if it were possible ; but it is not; and I will not,
therefore, pretend that I think you ignorant. Ignorance,
be it remembered, is neither innocence nor security; and,
on the other hand, knowledge does not involve either
danger or guilt, but quite the contrary. I would then
much rather help you to see this rampant vice in all its
hideous deformity than attempt to conceal it from your
notice.
“ A little learning,” it has been well said, “is a dangerous
thingand, in like manner, a little knowledge respecting
the relation between the sexes—especially when that
knowledge has been acquired in a disorderly way—will be
found to be highly dangerous; since the more valuable
anything is, it is, on that very account, the more liable to
be greatly abused; and it is not too much to say that the
evils and miseries resulting from the inordinate love of
money or of wine—howsoever enormous and deplorable they
may be—bear no comparison to those inflicted on humanity
by the abuse of that intense love for the other sex which
<God has implanted in every human breast for the wisest,
the most beneficient, and the holiest of purposes. It seems
to me then to be one of the most important duties of
parents to give their children clear and definite notions on
these matters much earlier than is usual. Too often the
young get their minds poisoned with unchaste ideas, by
ignorant or ill-disposed servants, schoolfellows, and others,
long before the parents think the time has arrived when it
will be prudent to initiate them into such subjects.
Rely upon it, fornication in its natural consequences, is
intimately connected with misery and hell, to which, indeed,
it directly, leads; while on the contrary, marriage as
naturally and directly tends to happiness and heaven.
Hence it behoves those parents who would wish to prevent
their children from practising this sin to do their utmost to


put them into a position, as early as may be, to enter upott
matrimony. If they do not, and their children fall into
temptation, a heavy responsibility lies at their door. By
waiting in the hope of securing the respectability so much
sought ofter, there is great danger of their falling into
deadly .Sin.”
Perhaps you-will say, “ Marriage is all very well for those
who can marry, but you cannot.” I ask, Why not ?
“ Because, in truth you cannot afford it; at least your friends
say so.” Now, although I have a strong objection to young
persons marrying before either their minds or their bodies
are fully developed, still I do advocate early marriages ;
and I feel certain that not one tenth part so much mischief
arises from them as from entering on a course of harlotry
from which, alas I too many never emerge.
Dr. James Hodson makes the following strong and
pertinent remarks:—“Nothing can possibly prove so
certain a preservative from vicious habits and the conse-
quent diseases as early and honourable marriage , formed
upon a real and sincere affection. The arguments of
prudencQ and youth, generally made use of against early
marriages, are fallacious delusions invented by the grand
enemy of mankind ; for Nature, both within and without*
tell them they are not too young; and all the miseries that
ever occurred from an early and proper marriage are not
in comparison to the ten-thousandth part of those evils
which a vicious course of life, from fourteen to twenty-one,,
entails upon mankind 1 In the one instance, a few difficulties
in life only are the greatest consequence, which love and
mutual affection generally overcome; but in the other
• . . It is the command of Heaven to marry, increase
multiply; it is the suggestion of hell to forbid
marriage, and to stir up unnatural affections in young
people.”
Burns—who well knew what was right—in his “ Epistle
to a Young Friend,” says :
The sacred lowe of weel-placed love,
Luxuriantly indulge it;
But never tempt th’ illicit rove,
Tho’ naething should divulge it.
1 waive the zuateum of the sin ;
The hazard of concealing;
But oh! It hardens a’ within,
And petrifies the feeling.


Your friends, and you too very probably, would wish
you to settle respectably—in something like the style to
which you have been accustomed at home ; and therefore,
forsooth, you are to wait, no one knows how long. But
if you look back only a generation or two, you will very
probably find that some of your ancestors began life in a
very humble fashion. Now it is by no means certain that
they were less happy than then when they .afterwards
occupied a much higher position ; and I maintain that
happiness is what is most desirable, also that it is inseparable
from virtue, and that it is not nearly so difficult of
attainment as many imagine.
“ Death is the gate of life.” When, therefore we leave
this world our more real life then first begins. And,
without doubt, it is for this end that we are placed here, ia
a preparatory state, where we have ample opportunity (i
acquiring heavenly habits. Now, mark and see for yourse f
among your acquaintance whether it is not the most orderlj’,
married people, with families—those who are in the
habitual endeavor to fulfil God’s holy laws —that are in
the enjoyment of the greatest amount of real happiness. I
by no means assert that they are so riotously joyous as the
dissolute. The joys of the latter are merely transient, and
soon give place to sorrow and remorse, or lead them on to
ruin ; while the joys of the former, partaking of the nature
of Him from whom they spring, will doubtless go on
increasing to eternity.
But I must come to a pause ; the few pages to which I
have limited myself will not permit me to do anything like
full justice to my subject. I trust, however, that I have
said enough to put some young persons who may be led to
read these remarks so far on their guard as to prevent them
from entering on a path which to all is dangerous, to very
many fatal. In reference to all the numerous phases of
this evil it may, with the greatest emphasis, be declared
that “ Prevention is better than cure.”
CHAPTER X.
A SPECIAL CHAPTER FOR YOUNG WOMEN.
Advice upcu this subject is very much needed. lam


assured that it is a subject not often talked of in families—
at least as it ought to be; nor is it much alluded to in the
pulpit; and the result is that young people commonly get
their notions about it from those only a little older than
themselves, and who, therefore, know but little more than
they do ; or from those who form their opinions from the
abuse they see of it, and so hold degrading and unworthy
ideas respecting it. Sometimes all that is known about it
amounts to this—that it is a delightful thing to be married.
It is quite true that it often is, and always ought to be,
delightful; still you know, it is frequently quite the
reverse. You cannot then be too cautious in the matter.
Nothing can be more orderly, right, proper and holy than
marriage. It is not, however, quite so simple an affair as
you may fancy. Every good thing—and this is one of the
best—requires some effort to obtain it ; and unless yon
take the right course you must not expect to succeed.
You may often see a young woman who, from not
entertaining correct views on the point, is certainly taking
ii wrong course ; her endeavors being rather to make what
die considers a good match, then, by acquiring kind and
orderly habits, to qualify herself to become worthy of a
worthy husband.
That the best things are liable to the greatest abuses is
notorious ; and from the lamentable fact that marriage is
often abused, we may fairly infer its pre-eminent worth.
In truth there is nothing more valuable. It is then highly
injurious to entertain low notions respecting it; and men
who indulge in loose conversation on the subject are likely,
at the same time to think meanly of women. Beware of
them; and if you hear them expressing such opinions in
your presence, withdraw from them at once as unworthy of
your company. Never fear but they will respect you the
more for the rebuke.
Of course, you are looking forward to settle happily, and
will do your best for that purpose. On this let me remark
that all happiness—that is, all that is genuine, and therefore
worthy of the name—comes from connection with the One
great source of all good; and He has freely and fully
provided all the means necessary for our being happy,
both here and hereafter. He has placed each of us
where it is best for us to be, and in the circumstances
that are best for us at the time ; and this applies to you


and to me now. How much soever appearances may be to
the contrary, He cares as much for each of us as if we were
the sole object of His care. It is only by doing our duty
in humble dependence on His assistance, which he never
withholds, that we can be happy. It behooves you then to
consider well what is your duty, in order that you may do
it, and may enjoy the blessings He is so ready to bestow.
1 hope you have been a loving and dutiful daughter, an
affectionate sister and a faithful friend ; then you may have
good ground of hope for the future.
When a prospect of marriage occurs, you cannot do
better than consult your mother, aunt, or other discreet
relative that has your welfare at heart, from whom you
may reasonably expect the best and most disinterested
advice ; and this it will be well for you to be guided by.
Women of mature years can judge far better than you
whether a man is likely to make a good husband. You
should likewise quietly and cautiously make your own
observations among your married acquaintance, especially
where you believe there is a comfortable and happy home.
You will doubtless find that, to a very great extent this
happy home depends on the wife’s management and
economy. Very often it happens that where two husbands
have the same income, with the same number of children,
there will be comfort in the one home and discomfort in
the other. Now there must be a reason for this ; and you
should endeavor to find it out, and profit by the lesson.
It is said, “ Cleanliness is next to godliness ; ” and truly
the value of cleanliness cannot be overrated. In point of
time it should go before godliness : for where there is not
cleanliness there can be hardly godliness ; and the health
of body and mind are greatly dependent on these two.
Moreover, where can there be complete happiness without
health ?
One of the most prolific sources of matrimonial difficulties
is the lack of knowledge on the part of wives of the duties
of housekeeping. In these days there are a hundred
young ladies who can drum on a piano to one who can
make a good loaf of bread. Yet a hungry husband cares
more for a good dinner than he does —as long as his
appetite is unappeased—to listen to the music of the spheres.
Heavy bread has made many heavy hearts, given to
■dyspepsia—horrid dyspepsia—and its herd of accompanying


torments. Girls who desire that their husbands should be
amiable and kind, should learn to make good bread.
When a young man is courting he can live well at home ;
or, if he has to go a distance to pay his addresses, he
usually obtains good meals at a hotel or an eating house ;
but when he is married and gets to housekeeping, his wife
assumes the functions of his mother or his landlord, and
it is fortunate for her if she has been educated so as to
know what a good table is. Those who are entirely
dependent upon hired cooks make a very poor show at
housekeeping. The stomach performs a very important
part in the economy of humanity, and wives who are
forgetful of this fact commit a serious mistake.
You know full well that most young men—and most
young women, too, are desirous of marrying and having a
family ; but they do not sufficiently consider that it is God
who gives them this desire, and that for the wisest of
purposes ; not only that this world may be peopled, but
also that its inhabitants may be prepared for heaven.
Nothing is more certain than that marriage affords the
fairest opportunities for preparing for a better w 7 orld. In
it we have others dearer than ourselves to think about and
provide for ; and in doing so we have often to practice
that very useful virtue—self-denial. Let me here impress
upon you most deeply that it is only by making others
happy that we can become happy ourselves. The angels,
we may be assured, are happy, because they are always
actively good ; and for a similar reason it is that God
Himself is infinitively happy. If you try to secure your
own happiness by any other means than a faithful discharge
of your duty to God and your neighbor, you will certainly
and deservedly fail.
I dare say that you find young men are fond ot your
company, and of paying you every polite attention, and you,
as a right-minded woman, are well pleased to be so treated.
It is due to you as a woman. Now each of them is or
ought to be—looking out for a wife; and it is well that
you should know this. It is, too, more important than you
perhaps are aware that you should be carelully making
your own observations, so that when the time arrives for
one of them to ask you to become his wife, you may not be
taken by surprise, you may know how to act on the
occasion,^


Let me here caution you against a failing that is common
among young women ; I mean that of making themselves
too cheap. They feel flattered by the attentions paid to
them, and are not sufficiently aware that many young men
are fond of indulging in flattery ; and such, if they find a
young woman weak enough to be pleased with it, will
perhaps play upon her feelings and gain her affections,
Without having any honorable intentions towards her.
As a protection against such, I recommend you to have
a proper respect for yourself, and to consider with what
object or purpose you receive their attentions. If you
respond without an object you may be doing them wrong:
if you accept them when they have no right intentions, you
allow them to wrong you. For this purpose consider well
what you are—a human being intended for an eternity of
bliss. God has made you a woman ; and, believe me as
there is no fairer so there is no nobler creature than woman.
She is formed to be her husband’s help-mate and mother
of his children ; and the all-important work of training
these for heaven depends mainly upon her. Great, then,
is her responsibility; but God has given her the
requisite love and power to do her duty with satisfaction
and delight. He has placed you in this beautiful world
that by doing your duty as a daughter, sister, wife, mother,
and friend, you may become fitted to enter His heavenly
kingdom.
During your courtship let me entreat you to be very
•careful and circumspect. There is no period in life that
•can compare with this delightful season. It is, or should
be, full of sunshine and sparkling with the poetry of life ;
but alas ! to many it is the opposite. A want of judgment
—a momentary indiscretion, has not only blotted out this
spring-time of life, but has marred, darkened and
blighted the w r hole of the after life time.
No maiden can, under any circumstance, place her
■character in the hands of any man before marriage. No
matter how sincere the love, how ardent the protestations,
how earnest or plausible the pleadings, you must not, you
cannot surrender your honor. You must preserve jour
prudence and virtue, it is only by the possession of these
that you can keep the love and respect of your lover. Be
firm, be circumspect, a rash word, or a false step may
extinguish forever all your bright hopes and prospective


joys. Even should your lover redeem his promises and
take you to be his wife, this indiscretion or crime will
surely hang over you like a curse, creating discord, trouble
and sorrow, the greatest portion of which will fall to your
share.
You must know that young men, however amiable,
worthy or honorable they may be, may in a moment of
intense excitement, commit a sin, that in their calmer
moments they would not be guilty of for worlds.
But under all circumstances, you will be looked upon to
resist any advances and maintain your purity and virtue.
No matter how high the tide of passion may run in
ungarded moments and set in against heaven and against
society, the terrible and painful ebb will surely follow and
leave you stranded forever on the bleak and barren shore
of your earthly existence.
There is no state of life more honorable, useful and
happy, than that of a wife and mother. There must and
ever will be inequalities of station, but happiness is equally
attainable in them all. To be happy, however, you must
be good; of course Ido not mean absolutely good ; for
“ there is none good but Onebut I mean that you should
be relatively good, and should aim at becoming better and
more innocent as you advance in life. Now you cannot
respect yourself unless you know that you are worthy of
respect; and if you do not respect yourself, you cannot
expect that anybody else will; and in such case you will
not be worthy of the love of any good man, and none such
will be likely to pay court to you. If, however, you take
the right means, in which I include prayer for divine
guidance, you will have the respect and friendship of all
acquaintance; and then in God’s own time, and let me add,
without your seeking it, the man whom you can make
happy, and who can make you happy, will present himself
and propose to make you his wife, if it be God s will that
you should become one.
Here are two very important points for your considera-
tion ; first, that it should be your constant endeavor to
make your husband happy ; and, second, that before you
consent to marry him, you should ascertain that he has
those qualifications that will secure your happiness. It
most nearly concerns yourself that you do your duty to
God and your neighbor at all times, so that it becomes


your habit; and you will find it much easier, and safer
too, to do it every day rather than only on particular
occasions; for this would require a special effort, and for
the time, perhaps, put you into a state of excitement, which,
in all probability, would be succeeded by a depression of
spirits. What you would rather aim at is a uniformly
cheerful state of mind, resulting from a conscious and con-
fident dependence on Providence. If your husband knows
from experience that such is your character, he cannot fail,
provided he be worthy of you, to be content and happy.
It is the nature of young women to be affectionate, and
it is pleasant and usual for them to have several dear
friends enjoying more or less of their confidence. Among
these may be included some of their male acquaintances.
Now, while they may esteem each of these as they would a
dear cousin, they should know and act upon the knowledge,
that it is only to one they can give their unlimited confi-
dence and undivided affection as a wife. It is the height
of cruelty and wickedness for either a man or a woman to
trifle with another’s affection. Such base conduct has cost
many a young woman her health and peace, even her life,
and cannot, therefore, be too much deprecated and avoided.
Let me then advise you to be very cautious before you
allow a young man to pay such marked attention as may
lead to marriage. It is not, you know, to terminate in seven
years, like an apprenticeship or a commercial partnership,
but it is an engagement for the parties. I want you then
to profit by the experience of others, too many of whom
enter into marriage from light and low considerations ; and
not to settle in life till you, and also your friends, see that
there is a reasonable prospect of your securing happiness,
as well as comfort and a respectable position.
When a young woman has property, or expects it, or is
possessed of superior personal attractions, she should be
especially prudent in her conduct towards the numerous
admirers which such qualifications usually attract. No
woman should allow herself to accep't the attentions of any
man who does not possess those sterling qualities which
will command her respect, or whose loye is directed to her
fortune or beauty rather than herself. On such a one she
can place no reliance; for should illness or misfortune
overtake her, she may find herself deprived of that love
which she had valued as the great treasure of her life.


Possessed of this, she feels that earthly riches are but ol
secondary importance, and that the want of them can never
make her poor.
Moreover, a worthier man than any of her interested
suitors may have a sincere respect and affection for her, but
be kept in the background by the over-zealous attention of
his rivals. Still if she has sufficent self-command to
patiently and calmly investigate their general private
character, she may find reason to decline their suit, and
may discover that the more modest and retiring youth is
the one that is deserving of her love.
While on this subject let me caution you against the
foolish affectation which some girls practise in order to
attract the attention of young men. In their company be
natural in your manners, open and friendly, and ready to
converse on general subjects ; not appearing to expect that
every one who pays you the ordinary courtesies of society
is going to fall in love with you This mode of behavior,
which is more common with those who are vain of their
beauty than with others, frequently leads to such young
women being more neglected than their less pretending
sisters ; for prudent young men, who are impressed with
the necessity of a right decision in the all important step
of marriage, instinctively shrink from those who seem
unwilling to give them a fair opportunity of judging whether
their hearts and minds are as attractive as their persons.
You may innocently admire many a young man for the
noble qualities God has bestowed upon him, without at all
entertaining the idea either that he would make you happy
as his wife, or him as your husband. Thank God, we are
constituted of such different temperaments that all may
find suitable partners without clashing with others tastes,
if they will only be content to watch and wait.
It is the part of a young man to watch, to be actively
desirous of meeting with a suitable partner. In doing this
his first consideration should be too seek for such a one as
he can make happy ; not to look primarily for beauty,
fortune, wit, or accomplishments —things all very good in
themselves, but by no means constituting the essentials of
happiness. If he is influenced by pure and simple motives,
he will not find, or expect to find, more than one that can
satisfy his desire; and he will not be in much danger of
exciting the envy or the rivalry of his companions.


On the other hand, it is becoming in a young woman to
■wait patiently, till, from the assiduous and respectful
attentions of a young man, she can have no doubt that he
is in earnest; when, and not before, she may freely give
him her company, and with every expectation of a happy
result. Be assured that no sensible young man is ever
attracted by a young woman whom he sees on the look out
for a lover ; he is more likely to think meanly of her, and
to avoid her society.
It may, however, happen that a young man makes the
offer before the young women knows enough of him for it
to be right for her to accept it, and before he on his part
ought to take the step. In such case it would be well for
her, even supposing she is inclined to like him, to tell him
that he has taken her by surprise, and that she cannot
think of entering on so important a subject without con-
sulting her friends, to whom she accordingly refers him.
It would then become her duty to intimate to him that,
although his attentions are agreeable to them, he must
wait a while, till from further acquaintance, they are
enabled to judge whether it will conduce to the mutual
happiness of their daughter and himself for her to accept
the offer he has so kindly made.
But it is not only young men who are apt to be hasty in
these matters; it is, as well known, not uncommon for
parents, especially mothers, very soon after a young man
has begun to pay attention to their daughter, to give him
to understand that they wish to know his intentions in
reference to her. By such proceedings a young man may
be taken aback, and either hurry into a match which turns
•out unhappily, or be led to withdraw from a union which
might have resulted in the happiness of all the parties
concerned.
That your parents should wish you to be married, is only
natural, especially if their own marriage has been a happy
one. It will be gratifying to them to see a worthy young
man paying attention to you, and, most probably, they will
let things take their own course. Marriage is too im-
portant a matter to admit of being hastened.
There are, I am aware, unwise parents, who, from
various motives, will throw obstacles in the way of young
people who are desirous of coming together. Some are so
selfish as to be unwilling to part with their daughter, pre


ferring their own happiness to hers. Others are so silly as-
to think no ordinary man good enough for her, and there-
fore, if they had their own way, would leave her to become
an old maid. Fortunately, such short-sighted people are-
not unfrequently outwitted.
If your parents are—as I hope they are —reasonable in
their views and expectations, one of the chief concerns of
their life will be the promotion of your happiness; and it
behoves you to pay the utmost deference to their opinion ;.
and should they, from circumstances they become aware of
deem it advisable that you should either postpone or even
break off an engagement, they will, doubtless, give you
such weighty reasons as will justify you in acting on their
advice. Where, however, as sometimes happens, they
unwisely refuse their consent to their child’s marriage, at a
time when she well knows, from her own feelings, and also
from the sanction she receives from the opinion of trust-
worthy and judicious friends, that she would be making a
real sacrifice were she to comply with their wishes—if, I
say, under such circumstances, she acts disobediently and
marries the man she loves, more blame attaches to the-
parents than to herself; and the sooner they forgive her
the better.
It is very common for young men when going into the
company of young women, together with their best
dress to put on their best behavior; in fact, to assume a
character which is not their natural one, but far superior
to it. Some hold the opinion that “ All’s fair in love and
war.” To me it appears there cannot be greater folly and
wickedness than for young people who are thinking of
marrying to attempt to deceive each other. What is the
good of it ? A very short period of married life will entirely
dispel the illusion. I suppose people of the world may
think it fair to overreach one another in their dealings,,
saying, “ Everyone for himself.” They have no intention
of seeking to promote the other’s happiness ; present gain
is all they want. But a married pair to be happy, must
respect and esteem, as well as love each other ; and this
cannot be attained, except by the constant endeavor to he
as well as to appear true and good.
That young men should behave well in the presence of
women is only natural and right. None but a fool would
do otherwise. But you, long before thinking of marrying*


should take all fair means to learn what are the general
conduct and habit of your male acquaintance, in their
family circle and with their daily connections. Are they
good-humoured and kind—able to bear the troubles they
meet with ? Are they industrious, frugal, temperate, re-
ligious, chaste ? Have they had the prudence to insure
against sickness and death 1 or, on the other hand, are they
addicted to drinking, smoking, betting, keeping late hours,,
frequenting casinos, &c. Your mother and other prudent
friends will assist you to find this out. Those who do not
come up to the proper standard, however agreeable they
may be as acquaintance, certainly cannot make good
husbands. In company of such, it behoves you to be well
on your guard, and accept no attention from them.
Should you marry such a one, you would be sure to be
miserable.
While, however, it is quite right that you should be
careful about the character of the young man who is
paying court to you, it is of far more importance to you
that you should be careful about your own, and this
whether you marry or not. Indeed, a chief object in our
being placed in this world is that you may acquire good
habits, and so be fitted to associate with “the just made
perfect in heaven.”
Be very guarded in your actions and demeanor. Culti-
vate purity of heart and thought. No woman is fit to
become a wife who is not perfectly modest in word, deed
and thought. No young man who is worth having would
ever entertain the thought for a moment of taking the girl
for a wife who is habitually careless in her conversation,
and displays a levity in her manners. Young men may
like your free and hearty girls to laugh and talk with, but
as to taking one for a wife, let me assure you they would
not tolerate the idea for a moment.
You may at times be unavoidably compelled to hear a
vulgar word spoken, or an indelicate allusion made; in
every instance maintain a rigid insensibility. It is not
enough that you cast down your eyes or turn your head ;
you must act as if you did not hear it; appear as if you
did not comprehend it. You ought to receive no more
impression from remarks or illusions of this character than
a block of wood. Unless you maintain this standing, and
preserve this high-toned purity of manner, you will be


greatly depreciated in the opinion of all men whose opinion
is worth having, and you deprive yourself of much influence
and respect which it is your privilege to possess and exert.
Courtship after all, is a momentous matter. After taking
all the counsel that may be offered, you must at last, in a
great measure rely on your own judgment. Within a few
short months you have to decide from what you can see of
a man, whether you will have him in preference to
your parents, friends, and all others that you know, to be a
life companion. What can you do ? How shall you
judge? How arrive at a correct conclusion? My dear
young girl, there is only One who can assist you. He in
His mercy to your helplessness and weakness has given
to every virtuous and pure-minded woman a wonderful
mysterious and subtle instinct; a peculiar faculty that
cannot be analysed by reason, a faculty that men do not
possess, and one in which they do not generally believe.
At this all-important period, this eventful crisis in your
life, this womanly instinct guides and saves you. You can
feel in a moment the presence or influence of a base, sensual
and unworthy nature. An electric-like thrill animates you,
and you are naturally repulsed from him. When your
suitor is a man of incongrous temper, ungenial habits, and
of a morose and unsympathetic disposition, this same
precious, divine instinct acts, and the man feels, though he
cannot tell why, that all his arts and aspirations are in
vain ; it will seldom be necessary for you to tell him ver-
bally of his failure ; but should such a one blindly insist
upon intruding his intentions, do not hesitate to tell him
kindly but firmly your decision. Should your suitor be
one who is worthy, who will make you happy, this same
blessed instinct will whisper in your soul the happy news.
From the first interview there is frequently thrown
the maiden, a peculiar undefined spell; she will feel
differently in his presence, and watch him with other eyes
than she has for the rest of men, and in due time when he
shall ask her to decide upon the question which shall
seal the temporal and eternal destiny of two human souls,
she will gladly respond, giving in loving trustfulness that
which is the most precious, the most enviable thing on
earth—a maiden’s heart, a woman’s love.
Many persons of both sexes, however amiable and pure
their minds may be, should conscientiously abstain from


marriage. This applies to all who have a tendency to
consumption, scrofula, insanity or any other of those
diseases which are so frequently transmitted to offspring.
This very important matter is not sufficiently known, and
therefore is not attended to as it ought to be ■, hence the
great amount of sickness, and early death among children.
The tendency to inherit qualities is very evident in the
case of drunkards, whose children are often inclined to
practice the vice of their parents. The children of the
blind and of the deaf and dumb are also liable to be afflicted
as their parents were. These facts go far to show that it
is literally true that the sins of the fathers are visited upon
the children. It is, however, gratifying to know—and
there are many well-attested cases to prove it—that,,
whereas the children born to a man while he was addicted
to drunkenness were similarly addicted to that vice, those
born after he gave up his vicibus indulgence, and by that
means improved his bodily health, were free from the evil
tendency.
One strong reason why near relations should not inter-
marry is that, as the same general tendencies prevail in
families, when the parents are nearly related, they are very
likely to have the same evil tendency, whatever that may
be; and, therefore, there is a great probability that their
children will also have the same, but more strongly developed
and, consequently, the difficulty of their overcoming it
will be much increased.
How plainly then is it the duty of those about to marry,
as well as of those who are married, to strive to their
utmost, with God’s help, to overcome disorderly habits of
every kind; for, be assured, it is only by such means they
can hope to be blessed with good and healthy children,
and thereby contribute to their own happiness, and at the
same time to the improvement of the race as subjects both
of this world and of heaven.
As it is by no means certain that you will marry, and
the time may come when it will no longer be convenient to
your parents to support you, it will be good for you, keep-
ing these contingencies in mind, to qualify yourself to earn
your own maintenance by some honest industry. You will
then have a right feeling of independence, and not be
tempted to marry, as too many young women do, not from
the true principal of sincere affection, but mainly for a


living. They may thus obtain a competency, and jog on
comfortably, but they have no right to expect that genuine
happiness which I recommend you to aim at. When, too,
you see so many left widows, with small families, and, as
we say, totally unprovided for, you will become sensible of
the soundness of the advice lam offering you. As the
Lord’s tender mercies are over all His works, it is evident
from what is occuring around us, that trouble and
adversity are better suited to the state of some people, to
prepare them for their eternal destination, than an amount
of prosperity would be. The poor are no less His children
than the rich, and he cares equally, that is infinitely, for
-them all. It is certainly wise, then to be prepared to meet
adversity, should he suffer it to come upon you.
Again, suppose you should not have any suitable offer of
marriage, such as you would feel it your duty to accept, you
are not on that account to be disheartened, and fancy your-
self overlooked by Providence. Single life is evidently the
best for some persons; they escape many troubles which
perhaps they would find it very hard to bear. There are
many ways in which single people can lead a useful life, and be
as happy as the day is long. ** No one that is actively useful
can be unhappy. What do you see around you ? Many I
admit, who are not so happy as we should like them to be ;
but, in most cases, if we could fully investigate the matter,
it would perhaps be found to have arisen from their think-
ing too much about themselves and not enough for others.
But on the other hand, it not unfrequently happens, when
a woman is left, and sees that the support and welfare of
herself and her children depends on her own exertions she
is enabled so successfully to put forth her energies, and
to employ her talents which, till she needed them, she
hardly knew* she possessed, as to surprise both herself and
the most sanguine of her friends.
Now, it must be confessed that we are fallen creatures,
and therefore prone to evil. We are consequently always
in danger of going wrong and forming bad habits ; but our
heavenly Father watches over us at all times, and gives us
power “to refuse the evil and choose the good.” We are
I know full"" well, too much inclined to yield to evil
influences ; still, as we always have divine aid if we implore
it I am not sure that on the whole, it is not as easy to
acquire good habits as bad ones. This much is certain f


-that which we acquire—good or bad —they are likely to
remain thus, and are not easily got rid of.
Among the subjects deserving attention, as affecting our
happiness, is one on which perhaps I am not entitled to
say much. I refer to dress. Now, I hold it to be my duty
for people to dress well, that is, according to their position,
means and age; and this not so much for their own sakes
as for the sake of giving pleasure to others. It is, I admit,
difficult to determine how much of one’s income should be
devoted to dress, but I think few will deny that at present
dress occupies too much time, attention, and money. For
my own part, I confess I am most affected by female dress,
and although certainly I like to see women well dressed,
and would rather see them a little too fine than slovenly, I
am often pained at witnessing the extravagance and, to me,
ridiculous taste exhibited. Whenever I see a handsome
and expensive dress trailing in the dirt, I regard it as
• culpable waste and in bad taste, and when I see it accident-
ally trodden on lam not sorry. lam inclined to believe that
many women can hardly find time or opportunity to
perform any useful duty ; they have quite as much as they,
poor things, can do to take care of their dress. I also
believe —and this the serious point of the matter—that
many a young man is deterred from soliciting a maiden
in marriage, by knowing that his means would not enab e
him to let her dress as he is accustomed to see her ; and
this is doubtless one of the many reasons why so many o
both sexes remain unmarried. I hold, too, that whatever
forms an obstacle to marriage has a tendency at the same
time to obstruct the entrance to heaven.
I will now allude to some of the duties which involve
upon you as a wife ; and recollect that it is on the faithful
discharge, pf these duties that your happiness, here and
hereafter*, mainly depends. All labor is honorable, and
you know who it is that says, “My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work.”' Being married, you must make
your husband feel, “ there is no place like home.’ His
business will probably take him from home most of the
- day ; and it should be your care —as I doubt not it will be
your delight—to see to” his comfort, both before he starts,
and when he returns. It may sometimes happen, in his
fio-hting the battle of life, that he has to encounter much
ffhat is unpleasant, and he may return home depressed.


Ycuu will then have to cheer him ; and be assured, no one
<uan do it so effectually, so pleasantly, aye, and so easily as
yourself.
It is not to sweep the house and make the bed, and darn
the socks, and cook the meals, chiefly that a man wants a
wife. If this is all he needs, hired help can do it cheaper
than a wife. If this is all, when a young man calls to see
a young lady, send him into the pantry to taste the bread
and cake she has made. Send him to inspect the needle-
work and bed-making, or put a broom into her hands and
send him to witness its use. Such things are important
and the wise young man will quietly look after them. But
what a true man most wants of a true wife is her com-
panionship, sympathy, courage and love. The way of life
has many dreary places in it, and a man needs a companion
go with him. A man is sometimes overtaken with
misfortune ; he meets with failure and defeat, trials and
temptations beset him, and he needs one to stand by and
sympathise. He has some stern battles to fight with
poverty, with enemies and with sin, and he needs a woman
that, while he puts his arm around her and feels that he
has something to fight for, will help him to fight; that
will put her lips to his ear and whisper words of counsel,
and her hands to his heart and impart new inspirations.
All through life—through storm and through sunshine,
conflict and victory, and through adverse and favoring
winds man needs a woman’s love. The heart yearns for
it. A sister’s or a mother’s love will hardly supply the
need. Yet many seek for nothing further than success in
housework. Justly enough, half of these get nothing
more ; the other half, surprised beyond measure, have got
more than they sought. Their wives surprise them by
bringing a nobler idea of marriage, and disclosing a treasury
of courage, sympathy and love.
And I would here caution you against giving way to
little misunderstandings in early married life. Sometimes
trifling matters for want of some forbearance or concession
on one side or the other, perhaps on both sides, accumulate
into serious results. .. These differences might be avoided by
married partners studying each other’s peculiarities of
character, with the aim of mutually correcting, in a kindly
spirit, any wrong tendency or temper which may some-
times jihow itself. Should you find you have inadvertently


given pain or uneasiness to your husband, do not rest until
you have ascertained the cause of his disquiet, and succeed
in allaying the unhappy feeling. The earnest desire to
please each other should by no means terminate on the
wedding day, but as studiously continued through married
life. Each should always endeavour to think the best of
the other, and instantly reject every thought that might
tend to weaken the bond of mutual preference and perfect
trust.
If he be wise, he will leave the housekeeping entirely to
you ; his time and attention can be better employed else-
where. To enable you to do this wisely, you should, long
before you marry, become familiar with the quality and
prices of articles of consumption, and where they can be
best obtained. Every wife should be able to cook well whether
she has to do it herself or not Health and good humor
greatly depend upon the foods being of good quality, well
cooked, and nicely served up. She should also be able, if
needful, to make and mend her own children’s clothes.
Too much importance cannot be attached to cleanliness.
Men may be careless as to their own personal appearance,
and may, from the nature of their business, be negligent in
their dress, but they dislike to see any disregard in the
dress and appearance of their wives. Nothing so
depresses a man and makes him dislike and neglect his
home as to have a wife who is slovenly in her dress and
unclean in her habits. Beauty of face and form will not
compensate for these defects. The charm of purity and
cleanliness never ends but with life itself. These are
matters that do not involve any great labor or expense.
The use of the bath, and the simplest fabrics, shaped by
your own supple fingers, will be all that is necessary.
These attractions will act like a magnet upon your husband.
Never fear that there will be any influence strong enough
to take him from your side.
An experience of many years observation has convinced
me that where a pure, industrious and cheerful wife meets
her husband with a bright smile on the threshhold of her
dwelling, that man will never leave her home for any other
place.
As all people are liable to illness, every young woman
should aim at being an efficient nurse. In case of illness,
it is now generally admitted that good nursing is of more


value than medicine. To a sick husband, a little gruel, or
other trifle prepared and given by a wife’s own hand, will
confer much more benefit than if prepared and given by
another. Should it happen to you to fall ill, you may
expect your husband will do his best; but you must not be
surprised if he is not your equal in that department.
Nursing is one of the many useful things which women
can do better than men. A practical knowledge of nursing
will enable you to be useful beyond your own family, and
will enhance your value as a neighbor.
You have often, I trust, experienced the pleasure of
serving others from disinterested motives, and found that
the pleasure has been deeper and purer when you have
engaged in doing good to those who could not make you
any return. This you have found to be the case whenever
you have had charge of a baby—one of those little ones of
whom the Lord says : “ Their angels do always behold the
face of my Father who is in Heaven.” You have perhaps
been surprised to find how easy it was to perform such a
duty ; and let me assure you that you may always expect
to find it easy to perform your duty in that state of life to
which it shall please God to call you. He never requires
anything from any of His creatures beyond what He gives
them power to do. He is no hard task-master. You have
only to look to Him, and do your best, and then you may
safely leave the result in His hands. Our Lord you know
says, ** My yoke is easy, and my burden light ”
Of all God’s creatures, I know no happier one than a
young mother, with a good husband and a healthy baby,
I say a healthy baby, for that implies healthy parents,
especially a healthy mother. She may justly feel proud
that God has entrusted a young immortal to her care, and
should at all times bear in mind that it is His gift. While
it is on all hands considered honorable to hold a com-
mission from the President and to fill a high office,
contributing to the welfare of many people, a mother may
feel her office, at least as honourable, seeing she has
entrusted to her the rearing and training of an immortal
being and that,. she holds her commission direct from the
King of kings. ' For, recollect, it is only by God’s blessing
that she becomes a mother, for such is the present state of
society that many very worthy married people have not
the privilege of offspring, although they are intensely fond


children, and seem to have no other earthly want. They
nay nevertheless be very useful and therefore, happy in
a diffierent sphere, by the adoption of nephews and nieces,
or in some similiar way.
At the birth of her first child, there is opened in the
mother’s heart a new well of love, such as she had not
known before, and although she may fancy that is all
spent upon her babe, it is not so, for she loves her God,
her husband, and everybody else better than ever. The
lather too is similiary afiected, he also has a warmer love
for his wife and for all his connections.
A similar idea is well expressed by Mohler, a German
writer, who says :—“ The power of selfishness, which ia
inwoven with our whole being, is altogether broken by
marriage ; and, by degrees, love, becoming more and more
pure, takes its place. When a man marries, he gives
himself up entirely to another being; in this affair of life
he first goes out of himself, and inflicts the first deadly
wound on his egotism. By every child with which his
marriage is blessed, Nature renews the same attack on his
self-hood ; causes him to live less for himself, and more—
even without being distinctly conscious of it—for others ;
his heart expands in proportion as the claimants upon it
increase; and, bursting the bonds of its former narrow
exclusiveness, it eventually extends its sympathies to all
around.”
Whenever a mother is supplying her baby with the food
which God has so wisely provided for it, or is ministering
to any other of its numerous and increasing wants, she
may feel that everything she does for it is pleasing to her
heavenly Father, and has its immediate reward in the
delight she experiences in the act.
I can fancy that, when a mother has washed her baby,
and before she dresses it, has a good romp with it, smother-
ing it with kisses, calling it all the beauties and darlings
and pets and jewels she can think of, and talking any
amount of nonsense at the top of her voice—the baby all
the while cooing, chirping, or even screaming with delight;
at such a time, I say, I can easily fancy that the angels are
looking on approvingly and enjoying the scene. And why
not? “Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.”
From the time that an infant first becomes conscious of
its wants, and long afterwards, it looks to its mother to


supply them all, fully believing her able to do it. She is,,
in fact, in place of God to it; and it would be well for
many of us if we trusted in our heavenly Father as simply
and as fully as the infant does its earthly mother.
Those who know no better, when they see a mother-
patiently watching her sleeping babe, might wonder that
she does not feel the want of company. She has, however,
company that they know not of, and of which even she
herself may not be conscious. If only our eyes were open,
we might see that she is not the only one that is so
engaged—that angels are also occupied in watching the
babe and in supporting her. I entirely agree with Dr.
Watts, where, in his “ Cradle Hymn,” he makes the mother
say :
Hush ! my babe, lie still and slumber.
Holy angels guard thy bed !
You probably know the beautiful Irish superstition that}
when a baby smiles in its sleep, the angels are whispering
to it.
Before I became a father, I took little or no interest in
babies; I rather thought them troublesome things. But
the arrival of one of my own wrought a great change in
me. It enlarged at once my views and my heart, and I had
higher and stronger motives to exertion. My interest in
them had not begun to weaken; and I have no reason
to think it ever will.
Girls are differently constituted from boys. God makes
the intellect predominate in males, and affection in females.
Accordingly, a little girl early shows a love for a doll,
regarding it quite as her baby, and never taking into
account that it is not alive. She has many of a mother’s
cares and anxieties, as well as pleasures about it, indeed,
as many as she is then capable of. It is a constant source
of amusement and employment to her. In all this we may
plainly see the hand of Providence; it forms a suitable
introduction to some of the interesting and important
duties which will devolve on her if it should be His good
pleasure for her to become a mother
The other day I met a group of four or five little girls,
the principal one, some nine years old, very carefully
carrying a baby. On my saying to her, “ You seem
almost as pleased as if it were your own baby,” she gave
me an innocent smile, and said rather proudly, I


thought—“ It is my own, please, sir.” I took it she was
the sister, and not a hired nurse.”
You will, I dare say, readily see the object I now have
in view. It is that I wish to impress on you how desirable
it is that you should take every opportunity of becoming
acquainted with the habits and want of babies, and the
best way of managing them. The more you have to do
with them the more you will like the labor, and the easier
and more delightful it will become. It is fair that, before
you have children of your own, you should get your know-
ledge as to the management of them, by experience with
other people’s. T take it for granted you will at all times
do your best for them. You will then have but little
cause to fear accident; and if accident should happen —as
with all your care it sometimes will —you will have more
■confidence in your powers, and will be more likely to do
what is best at that moment, than if you were unused to
children. Much of the disease and early death that
happens among children arises from the ignorance of the
mothers ; who, however, are much more to be pitied than
blamed in the matter. They had never been properly
taught their duties towards their future offspring.
It will be very advantageous to you to procure a copy of
a valuable work, called “ Medical Common Sense.”*
It contains a vast amount of valuable information re-
specting health, disease, and other kindred subjects, written
in so plain a style that simple people cannot fail to under-
stand it. The volume I consider so suitable to young
women about to marry, that parents should not hesitate to
nlace it in their hands. I would especially mention the
chapters entitled “ Women and their Diseases,” “ Children
and their Care,” “ Accidents and Emergencies,” and the
chapter to the youth of both sexes.
These portions of the work alone are worth tenfold more
than the price asked for the whole work. lam certain
they are calculated to save the lives of many children and
not a few mothers.
Few mothers are, perhaps sufficiently aware of the great
influence which their manners, habits and conversation
* Medical Common Sense and Complete Medical Advisee, contain-
ing every known fact that can promote health, cure disease, or prolong
life, Price, post free, 7s. 6c1., from Sib Robert Rear, Cheap Book
Depot, 16 Park Street, Sydney.


have upon the tender minds of their children even from.,
birth. The child should grow up with a feeling of rever-
ence for its parents, which can only be the case when
wisdom as well as affection is exercised in its bringing up.
Hence the necessity of the mother’s fitting herself both
intellectually and morally , for her sacred office, that the
child may become accustomed to yield perfect obedience to
her wishes from a principle of love, and may acquire as it
advances in life, the habit of yielding a like obedience to
that which is right.
As you well know that you are not perfect yourself, you
must be prepared to find that your husband has also his
imperfections ; and it is no unimportant part of your duty
to help him to get rid of them. Indeed it is one of the
highest uses of marriage for each partner to assist the
other on the journey to the heavenly Canaan. But, before
you attempt to point out a fault in him, consider how you
had best proceed, so as to attain your object; for, unless
you adopt a judicious mode, and an affectionate as well as
an earnest manner, you may do as much harm as good.
You must also carefully watch your opportunity ; for what
would be favorably received at one time, and under certain
circumstances, might, under other circumstances, give
offence, and altogether fail of the good effect intended and
hoped for. You do not know how powerful you may be
for good to your husband. There is much truth in the
saying, “ A man is what a woman makes him.”
Respecting the good influence of virtuous love, Tennyson
says :
“ For indeedlknow
Of no more subtle master under heaven
Than is the maiden passion for a maid,
Not only to keep down the base in man,
But teach him thought and amiable words.
And courtliness, and the desire of fame,
And love of truth, and all that makes a man.”
Previous to your marriage, it will be expedient for you
not to give your lover that full and unlimited confidence
which it will be your duty—and your inclination, too—tc
give him when he becomes your husband. I refer chiefly
to family and other private matters, not to anything he
ought to know to enable him to judge of your character
and position. Many unhappy marriages have been brought
about through the young woman’s.letting it be known that


she has “great expectations.” A worthless fellow, may,
in consequence, have succeeded in winning her hand.
There is another point to which 1 must just allude
before concluding this address. It is doubtless the order
of Providence for marriages to take place, when possible,
on our arriving at years of maturity. But I would guard
you against the evil results of too early marriages, before
either body or mind is perfectly matured. We scarcely
need consult either medical or moral science to satisfy our-
selves on this by no means trifling point. We may find in
society too many sad instances of such immature and
indiscreet unions. The minds of young persons should be
expanded by a certain amount of experience in the world
before entering upon engagements involving so many
momentous duties.
In your daily walks abroad, if you examine the
countenances of those you meet, you will doubtless be led
to conclude that there is a great deal of disease and misery
in the world; but, judging from my own observation, I
think you will find that the greater number of persons
exhibit signs of health and happiness. Much of the disease
and misery with which the world is afflicted, is the direct
result of the misconduct of the individuals themselves;
but no little of it is attributable to their parents, who have
neglected or violated God’s laws of health, their miscon-
duct thus affecting their descendants “ to the third and
fourth generation.” I cannot, therefore, too much impress
upon you the importance of your honestly trying to find
out any bad habits to which you are inclined with a view
to getting rid of them, one by one, and supplying their
place by good habits. By pursuing this course, you will
not only do much for your own happiness, but also for
that of your children, if God should bless you with a
family. Children, you know, are often striking likenesses
of their parents, and in their minds and habits, they
likewise often resemble them. You should strive then to
be good, not from mere self-love, and that you may get to
heaven, but because your duty to others requires it.
Earl Granville, when laying the foundation stone of the
Alexandria Orphanage, in England, thus expressed himself
in reference to the great value of children :—“ Few will
deny that a child is ‘ an inestimable loan/ as it has been
called, or refuse to acknowledge, with one of our greatest


poets, that * the world would be somewhat a melancholy
one if there were no children to gladden it.' Children
more than any other earthly thing, equalise the condition
of society—to rich and poor they bring an interest, a
pleasure, and an elevation, which nothing else that is
earthly does.”
Now young people, before they think of engaging them-
selves, should clearly know each other’s peculiar views of
religion; because if they differ seriously on this point,
there is danger of its interfering with that full confidence
which is so essential to happiness.
CHAPTER XI.
SEXUAL INTERCOURSE —ITS LAWS AND CONDITIONS- ITS USE
AND ABUSE.
There is an increasing and alarming prevalence of
nervous ailments, and complicated disorders, that could be
traced to have their sole origin from this source. Hypo-
chondria, in its various phases, results from the premature
and unnatural waste of the seminal fluid. There speedily
ensues a lack of natural heat, a deficiency of vital power,
and consequently indigestion, melancholy, languor, and
dejection ensue, the victim becomes enervated and spirit-
less, loses the very attributes of man and premature old
age soon follows.
It is a prevalent error that it is necessary for the semen
to be ejected at certain times from the body —that its
retention is incompatible with sound health and vigor of
body and mind. This is a very fallacious idea. The
seminal fluid is too precious, Nature bestows too much
care in its elaboration for it to be wasted in this unproduc-
tive manner. It is intended, when not used for the purpose
of procreation, to be re-absorbed again into the system,
giving vigor of body, strength and elasticity to the mind,
making the individual strong, active and self-reliant.
When kept as Nature intended, it is a perpetual fountain
of life and energy—a vital force which acts in every
direction—a motive power which infuses manhood into
every organ of the brain and every fibre of the bodv.


The law of sexual morality for childhood is one of utter
negation of sex. Every child should be kept pure and free
from amative excitement, and the least amative indulgence,
which is unnatural and doubly hurtful. No language is
strong enough to express the evils of amative excitement
and unnatural indulgence before the age of puberty ; and
the dangers are so great that 1 see no way so safe as
thorough instruction regarding them at the earliest age.
A child may be taught, simply as a matter of science, as
-one learns botany, all that is needful to know, and such
knowledge may protect it from the most terrible evils.
The law for childhood is perfect purity, which cannot be
too carefully guarded and protected by parents, teachers,
■and all caretakers. The law for youth is perfect continence
a pure vestalate alike in both sexes. No indulgence is
required by one more than the other —for both Nature has
made the same provision. The natures of both are alike,
and any—the least—excercise of the amative function is an
injury to one as to the other. Men expect that women
shall come to them in marriage chaste and pure from the
least defilement. Women have a right to expect the same
of their husbands. Here the sexes are upon a perfect
•equality.
On this subject, Dr. Carpenter, in his physiological works,
has written like a man of true science, and therefore of
true morality. He lays it down as an axiom that the
development of the individual , and the reproduction of the
species stand in an inverse ratio to each other. _ He says :
“ The augmented development of the generative organs at
puberty can only be rightly regarded as preparatory to the
exercise of the organs. The development of the individual
must be completed before the procreative power can properly
be exercised for the continuance of the race.” And in the
following extract from his “ Principles of Human Physi-
ology,” he confirms my statement respecting the unscientific
and libertine advice of too many physicians : —The author
would say to those of his younger readers, who urge the
wants of nature as an excuse for the illicit gratification of
the sexual passions. Try the effects of close
application to some of those ennobling pursuits to which
your profession introduces you, in combination with vigorous
bodily exercise before you assert that appetite is unrestrain-
able, and act upon that assertion.’ Nothing tends so much


to increase the desire as the continual direction of the*
mind toward the objects of its gratification, while nothing
so effectually represses it as a determined exercise of the
mental faculties upon other objects, and the expenditure of
nervous energy in other channels. Some works which
have issued from the medical press contain much that is.
calculated to excite, rather than to repress, the propensity;
and the advice sometimes given by practitioners to their
patients is immoral, as well as unscientific.”
Every man and every woman, living simply, purely and
temperately—respecting the laws of health in regard to air,
food, dress, exercise, and habits of life, not only can live in
the continence of a pure virgin life when single, and in the
chastity which should be observed by all married partners-
—but be stronger, happier, every way better by so living.
Chastity is the conservation of life and the consecration
of its forces to the highest use. Sensuality is the waste of
life and the degradation of its forces to pleasure divorced
from use. Chastity is life—sensuality is death.
From the age of puberty to marriage the law is the same
for both sexes. Full employment of mind and body,
temperance, purity, and perfect chastity in thought, word,,
and deed. The law is one of perfect equality. There is
no license for the male which is not equally the right of the
female, There is no physiological ground for any indulgence
in one case more than in the other. No man has any more
right to require or expect purity in the woman who is to be
his wife, than the woman has to require and expect purity
in her husband. It is a simple matter of justice and right.
No man can enter upon an amative relation with a woman
except in marriage, without manifest injustice to his future
wife, unless he allow her the same liberty ; and also without
a great wrong to the woman, and to her possible husband-
It is contended that the sins of men against chastity are
more venial than those of women, because of the liability
of women to have children. But men are also liable to be
the fathers of children; and they are deeply wronged by
the absence of paternal care. The child has its rights, and
every child has the right to be born in honest, respectable
wedlock, of parents able to give it a sound constitution and
the nurture and education it requires. The child who lacks
these conditions is grievously wronged by both father and
mother.


The law of marriage is, that a mature man and woman,,
with sound health, pure lives, and a reasonable prospect of
comfortably educating a family, when drawn to each other
by the attraction of mutual love, should chastely and tem-
perately unite for offspring. The sexual relation has this,
chief and controlling purpose. The law of nature is inter-
course for reproduction. Under the Christian law, marriage
is the symbol of the union of Christ with the Church; husband
and wife are one in the Lord; they are to live in marriage
chastity, not in lust and uncleanness ; and there cannot be-
a more hideous violation of Christian morals than for a
husband to wreck his sensuality upon a feeble wife against
her wishes, and when she has no desire for offspring, and
no power to give them the healthy constitutions and
maternal care which is their right.
The law of Christian morality is very clear. It is
sexual union first and chiefly for its principal object. It.
is for the husband to refrain from it whenever it is not de-
sired ; whenever it would be hurtful to either; whenever
it would be a waste of life ; whenever it would injure mother
and child, as during pregnancy and lactation. A man who
truly loves a woman, must respect and reverence her, and
cannot make her the victim of his inordinate and unbridled
selfish and sensual nature. He will be ever, from the
first moment of joyful possession, to the last of his life,
tender, delicate, considerate, deferent, yielding to the
slightest wishes in the domain of love, and never encroach-
ing, never trespassing upon, never victimizing the wife of
his bosom, and the mother of his babes. We have romance
before marriage—we want more chivalry in marriage.
This is not the world’s morality—yet it seems to me the
world must respect it. This high and pure Christian
morality is not always enforced by Christian ministers,,
some of whom yield too much to human sensuality and
depravity, instead of maintaining the higher law of Christian
purity—which is but nature restored or freed from its.
stains of sin. The world requires that unmarried woman,
should be chaste, while it gives almost unbridled license to
men. A girl detected in amours is disgraced and often
made an outcast. In young men such irregularities are
freely tolerated. They are a “little wild;” they “ sow their
wild oats but open profligacy, the seduction of innocence,
the ruin of poor girls, adultery, harlotry and its diseases


do not hinder men from marrying nor from requiring that
those they marry should have spotless reputations. It is
not for a moment permitted that women in these matters
should behave like men; and a pure girl is given to the
arms of a wasted debauchee, and her babes are perhaps
born dead or suffer through life with syphilitic diseases, while
she endures a long martyrdom from disordered, diseased,
and unrestrained sensuality. For the unmarried, young
men, soldiers, sailors, and all who do not choose to bear
the burdens of a family,society has its armies of prostitutes—
women like others, and more than others, or in less
reputable fashion, the victims of the unbridled lusts of
man These are everywhere tolerated as “necessary
evils,” and, in some places, protected or regulated, and
from economical or philanthropic considerations or both
combined efforts are made to free them from the contagious
diseases, which for some centuries have been a curse
attending this form of the violation of the laws of Nature—
one of the consequences of lust, which is the divorce of the
sexual instinct from its natural use and purpose.
The Christian law of marriage, as set down in the Holy
Scriptures, and defined by the best writers on moral
theology, is in harmony with nature —in consonance
with the higher nature of man. “ God hath set the earth
in families.” Adultery is a sin, because it disorders the divine
arrangement. Selfish lust is a sin, because it mars it.
Fornication is a sin, because it prevents pure marriages.
Prostitution is a sin, because it is a sacrifice of women, who
might be wives and mothers, to the selfish lusts of men.
All useless indulgence is a waste of life, and a kind of
suicide. In a pure marriage union men and women unite
themselves with God in acts of creative power.
The progress of humanity depends upon individual
development and the conditions of generation and gestation.
With culture and a harmonized development we acquire a
higher and more integral life. When two parents are in
their highest condition, and in a true union with each other,
the child combines the best qualities of both parents.
When parents are not in the unity of a mutual love, the
child may be inferior to either parent. The intensity of
mutual love tends to the reproduction of the best faculties
of both parents in the child. When men or women are


exhausted or diseased the race deteriorates. Health is
therefore one of the conditions of progress.
“It is all very fine,” I shall be told, “ to talk of purity
and chastity ; but we must take men as they are. How
are you going to make men pure and chaste, and respectful
of the purity of women? “How can you get men with,
strong amative propensities to live like anchorites ?”
How can you get men to do any right thing or refrain
from any wrong thing ? There are three motives —fear of
punishment, hope of reward, and sense of right, or the
principle of duty. The first of these is the lowest, but
often the most effectual; the second is higher, and appeals
to hope and the love of happiness ; the third, the highest
of all motives, pure and unselfish as the love of truth, as
in mathematics, acts on noble minds with great power.
Men of real conscientiousness love the right for its own
sake. They are just from love of justice—pure from a
sense and love of purity. They love good and God as the
source of all good ; and do right, not from fear or hope, but
from pure love.
We must appeal to all motives. Men refrain from theft
and other dishonest conduct from the dread of disgrace
and punishment; because they see that “ honesty is the
best policy,” and from a sense of justice and regards to the
rights of property, or a sense of honor which makes a
mean action impossible. By similar motives great numbers
are restrained from drunkenness and other vices. Children
are to be restrained from impurity by the fear of the terrible
consequences of unnatural indulgence in causing disease and
pain, by the hope of pure, healthy, and happy life of love
in manhood and womanhood, and by a sense of the beauty
and holiness of chastity, and the sacredness of the functions
by which the race is re-created and preserved. The
religious feeling that our bodies are to be kept pure, healthy,,
and holy in every way as “ the temples of the Holy Ghost,”
cannot be too early instilled into the infant mind, which is
open to the highest sentiments of veneration, devotion,
and heroic religion, In youth there are the same motives.
Indulgence in solitary vice is self-destructive of all that
youth most values—a profanation of his own body
Seduction is a desecration of what he should hold in the
most tender reverence. To the young man womanhood
should be sacred, and every woman, mother, sister, the


beloved of the present or the future, should never be
wronged by one thought of impurity. In this matter
unstinct goes with light. The inward voice supports the
outer law of morality. Before men can become bad, their
instinctive modesty must be broken down. Unless very
badly born, with disordered amativeness hereditary from a
■diseased and lustful parentage, they must be perverted and
corrupted before they can act immodestly and impurely.
Women are protected by a strong public sentiment
around them. They have the dread of disgrace. For
them to yield to their own affectionate desires, or the
solicitations of a lover, is a fall, is ruin. They have the
hope of a loving husband, a happy home, and the respect
of society. And in woman passion has commonly less
force, and the sentiment of modesty and purity more
power. Women are weak in yielding to solicitations,
giving everything for love; but we see how protective of
female virtue are these motives to vast numbers.
Men can perfectly restrain the sensual part of their
natures whenever and wherever they have a strong motive
■to do so. A child would be simply mad who was not
controlled by the presence of father, mother, and persons
he respected or feared. Young men have no difficulty
when they are in company of pure women. They are in
no trouble where their li/fes are full of mental and
muscular activity, and particularly if their habits of eating
simply and temperately, of refraining from heating and
-exciting stimulants, and sleeping in cool beds and fresh air
are such as health requires. There needs but the strong
will to live purely in any one, and at any age—the will that
comes from the higher motives of conscience and religion,
or all motives combined. A strong sense of what is just
and right controls even the motions of our bodies and
actions which seem to be involuntary. A man who has a
vivid sense of the right and duty of refraining from sensu-
ality, and preserving his own purity of mind and body, and
the chastity of all women, will do so even in his dreams.
When the will is right, all things are soon brought into its
subjection. The mind controls the organisation, and the
life forces are directed into other channels A strong man’s
full of life and love, can safely hold a virgin in his arms,
and respect her virginity, if he have but the motives and
the will to do so. If she be pure in his eyes, how can he


profane her ? It is not that men have not the power of
self-restraint, the power to do right—it is that they lack
the motive. They have lost the sense of right; they are
even impelled to do wrong by the pressure of opinion
around them. Boys and young men are driven into
libertinage by the ridicule of their companions. Vice is
considered manly. They seek sensuality in an evil
emulation, as they learn to smoke, or game, or drink.
And, later on, vanity has often more to do with excess
than the force of lust. Young men seduce girls that
they may boast of it. They keep mistresses because it is
"the fashion. They exhaust themselves, because they wish
to give a high idea of their manly prowess. Even in
-marriage women are injured, and have their health
destroyed, yielding weakly, or from a false sense of duty,
to a husband whose own motive is the desire to acquit
himself manfully in what he considers his marital duties.
Men and women are, in thousands of cases, wretched
-victims to what they imagine to be the wants or expecta-
tions of each other. A man, ignorant of the nature of
woman, and the laws of the generative function, goes on in
a process of miserable exhaustion to please his wife ; she
submits sometimes in pain, often in disgust, weariness, and
weakness, to what she dare not from love or fear refuse.
Men have to know what is right, and to will to be right.
This will is omnipotent. God helps those who have the
will, who have even the desire to do right.
If the presence of those we fear or reverence, respect or
love, restrain us from sin and stimulate us to right action,
faith in the existence and presence of God, and angels, and
the spirits of the departed, must have a more powerful and
pervading influence. No one who really believes in the
existence of a Supreme Being; no one who is strongly
impressed with the reality of a Spiritual life, can go on
doing what he knows to be wrong. A religious faith is
therefore the most powerful of all restraints from evil, and
incitements to good.


CHAPTER XII.
THE PARENTS' INFLUENCE IN DETERMINING THE PHYSICAL AND
MORAL STATUS OF HIS CHILDREN.
How universal is the desire to get married—it is the
great end and aim of life. There may be no change, in
every possible point of view, so necessary to be previously
well considered as matrimony; but yet how paramount to
all others in man’s history is the incentive which leads us
on. It is indeed a most fertile theme, and volumes have
been dedicated to this subject alone. Our consideration
herein of the question relates less to its obligations than its
expediency, inasmuch as the main property of these
remarks applies more to the issue than the individuals
immediately concerned.
In thus premising that our reference is to the future and
not to the past, it is useless repining at what we have
made ourselves, except it be to let those who succeed us
know the anguish we suffer for our own misdeeds, and by
our representations induce them to avoid the hidden rocks
on which we have foundered.
In advocating the guardianship of health, the father is
held responsible for his child, not only for what he has
made him, but also for what he may make of him. In this
large world, however, three-fourths have to shift for them-
selves—this address, therefore, is expressly dedicated to-
such, in order that they may see what is due from themselves,
and how to repair the neglect these pages may find them
suffering from.
In tracing the sick or delicate health of a child, or a
growing lad, or a young man, to parental origin, supposing
the father or mother to be made sensible that such is the
case—that to themselves alone, or chiefly, have they to
attribute their child’s affliction, how painful must be their
reflections ! A parent’s love for a child is the more active
and fervent in proportion to such disadvantages, and
therefore the more to be deplored is the calamity. A
mother’s grief and a father’s regret—what can be more
poignant, on witnessing their sinking or expiring offspring,
especially when they know that, on giving it life, they
conveyed to it the seeds of its premature dissolution? With
such a fact constantly before us, how it behooves those
anticipating unions to ponder before they perpetuate their


own misery, if not for their own sakes and sufferings, at
least in mercy to those who are to issue from their loins.
What else can be expected from a couple where the com-
bined health of the two is not equal to the ordinary health
of one perfect individual ? And how rarely do we really
find, especially in all interesting matches, but that the
bride or bridegroom is in what is termed “ delicate health,”
Hence, oftentimes, the popular notion, that a pale-faced
woman, or a “lovesick looking” young man, have only to
marry to get well, instead of getting well first and marrying
afterwards. A certain class of individuals are ever ready to
ridicule this train of reasoning; but if they unhappily
disregard its application, they will be sure to find out, when
too late, the truth to fall at their own doors. Hence, if
there be any truth in the statement, that children inherit
the constitutions as well as the features and minds of their
parents, the imperative and urgent necessity of young
persons contemplating marriage, to look before they leap,
not only at the trousseau or the wife’s dowry, or the
husband’s estate and means, but at the stability of each
other’s health. It is true, marriage is oftentimes a remedy
for certain ills, but only those ills begotten by a disregard
of natures ordinances ; for it is as much a law at a certain
age that parties should marry, as that fishes should swim
or birds should fly; but then marriage is only timely, when
consistently carried out with regard to age and condition.
It is monstrous when particular deformities, or fatal, through
lingering sickness, exist at an expousal.
We have talked of the children inheriting disease and
delicate health from their parents ; the following facts are
striking corroborations of how much, and principally in
that way, children take after their fathers and mothers;
how not only health, form and feature, but intellect and
genius, or imbecility and viciousness may be propagated.
The fact has been long observed and known, but only
recently practically elucidated, and that most satisfactorily,
by Mr. Alexander Walker. This gentleman has written
extensively on matters connected with the subject, but the
book whence his views are taken, is entitled “ Inter-
marriage. * That portion under immediate notice relates
to the resemblance of progeny to parents.
The idea that it is possible, by appropriate marriages to
secure a certain standard of beauty, statue and form.


unfortunately does not secure that notice it is worthy of
because people rarely think of the possibility until court-
ship has commenced; but the evidence presently to be
offered must convince the most sceptical and selfish that it
is of most certain accomplishment, and furthermore, that
so attractive are the results, that the reflective will take
care not to surrender their affections merely to love at
sight, while it is quite possible to command that powerful
feeling when well, equally as when ill-directed.
All parents, writes Mr. Walker, communicate distinct
points of resemblance to their children, and the part which
each parent takes is modified by the similarity or dissimi-
larity betwixt the father and mother ; for instance, in
unions between persons of the same variety, such as where
a similarity in complexion, form, make and temperament,
exists, certainfixed resem es ensue in the issue thereof.
Again, when persons of different complexions and different
temperaments marry, the issue partake of different points
of resemblance. Lastly, when persons of the same family
(breeding in and in , as it is termed) marry, the issue
assume new features; he therefore divides his investiga-
tions of resemblances betwixt parents and children into
three varieties, which are as follows :
Firstly. —When persons of the same variety marry, but
of different families.
Secondly. —When persons of opposite variety marry,
also of different families.
Thirdly. —Where persons of the same family intermarry.
In the first arrangement, where persons of the same
variety marry, one parent communicates the Anterior series
of resemblances, and the other the Posterior; but either
parent may impart either series.
The Anterior series consists of the Forehead, and bony
parts of the face, as
The Orbits.
Cheek Bones,
Jaws,
Chin and Teeth,
as well as the shape of the organs of sense, and the tone of
the voice, and likewise the whole of the internal nutritive
system which signifies the contents of the trunk, such as
the lungs, heart, and digestive organs, as well as the form
cf the trunk.
The Posterior series consists of the Back-head , the fewmore
moveable parts of the face and the locomotive system, as


The external Ear,
Under Lip,
Lower part of the Nose,
Eyebrows,
and the external forms of the body in so far as they depend
on the muscles, as well as the form of the limbs, even to
th e fingers, toes, nails, dc.
Mr. Walker assigns reasons why certain organisations
should go together, namely, from their connections, such
as, for instance, he says, that portion of the brain which
regulates the senses, corresponds with them, and conse-
quently influences their organisation internal and external,
and, in like manner, that portion influencing the motive
power, namely the back-head, influences the form of the
limbs, and hence the resemblance to that parent in those
particulars which imparts either series.
Various corroborations are found in Mr, Walker’s book
to prove this assertion. It has been observed that in a
‘female with a short and round face, chubby cheeks, and a
full forehead, but “ contracted and fine in the nose and
mouth,” the trunk will be found large and capacious, and
the limbs tapering ; whilst, on the contrary, women with
slender oval faces and aquiline noses have spare and slender
bodies.
With a view of determining the truth of the statement
of either parent giving a particular series of resemblances
of themselves to their offspring, Mr. Walker recommends
the various parts of the head and face of a child, as
detailed in the subjoined columns, to be examined, and
those points not possessed by the child as resembling
either father or mother to be crossed out, and those
resembling to remain, when it will at once be seen which
parent the child takes after, and from which the anterior
or posterior series is derived.
NAMES OR INITIALS OF CHILD.
Parts Resembling the
Mother.
Forehead.
Upper middle part of Head.
Bony parts of Face.
Teeth.
Digestive System.
Form of Eyes. Eyebrows.
'.Middle of Nose. Point of Nose.
Upper Lip. Under Lip.
Parts Resembling the
Father.
Forehead.
Upper middle part of Head.
Bony part of Face.
Teeth.
Digestive System.
Form of Eyes. Eyebrows.
Middle o f Nose, Point o f Nose.
Upper Lip. Under Lip.


Ears. Back-head.
Upper middle part of Head,
over the Ears, and towards
the Temples.
Frontal Protuberances.
Chest. Limbs.
Fingers, Toes, Nails.
Ears. Back-head.
Upper middle part of Head,,
over the Ears and towards-
the Temples.
Frontal Protuberances.
Chest. Limbs.
Fingers, Toes, Nails.
Those parts printed in italics are variable, by the
cerebral (back part of brain so called) influencing the
muscles more or less connected with them.
In examining resemblances, the front face of a child
may resemble one parent, but the profile will resemble the
0t The front view best displays the observing faculties; the
profile view the active ones.
“The parent who gives the locomotive system does not
give the carriage and the manner of walking. These are
always given by the other parent, who gives the organ of
sense.” Therefore the child with the limbs in resemblance
of the mother walks like the father, and vice versa, as the-
eye directs the walking, and gives the character to it.
Witness the step of the countryman, or the man of fashion..
“ The transmission of the mind is derived in equal and
distinct portions from both parents, when parents are of
the same variety, and the temper and disposition in like
manner j but one gives the whole of the nutritive, and the
other the whole of the locomotive organs.” _
The child who resembles the anterior series of the one
parent is also characterized by a corresponding similarity
in the functions of taste, smell, sight, &c., and also the
observing, imitating, acquiring, and other faculties. The
hack-head, or posterior series, imparts the passions and
appetites.
“ Whatever increases the ardor of passion invigorates
the progeny ” —this shows the indispensability of health in
parties marrying. The condition of health, the occupation,
the state of mind, whether happy or saddened, at the
period of matrimony, all have an influence on the offspring.
In the excitement present, whether it be intellectual or
sensual, whether it be the gentle emotion of pure affection
or the burning passion of mere desire, how necessarily
must the consequences fall upon the issue thereof.
How important, then, is it to select the most fitting
period of life, when the intellect is ripest, when the health


is most perfect, and when circumstances combine to diffuse
the greatest amount of happiness to bride and bridegroom;
how important is it to select that period for marriage, and
how equally important after what has been stated, that the
mind and health of one parent, and the appetites, passions
■and figure of the other, are perpetuated in the offspring,
that the selection should be a judicious one, and made
only with reflection and forethought ?
We now come to speak of the second variety, called in
agricultural phraseology, “ The Law of Crossing,” which
is where parties marry who are of different temperament
and characters. In the former instance, it was- stated,
that where the father and mother were of the same variety,
either parent might communicate the resemblances which
went together, namely, mind and health — or the forehead
and digestive organs, &c, and the hack-head, or will or
•appetites and form of limbs, &C.
Now where parties of different breeds marry, supposing
them to be of equal age, vigor, &c., the male gives the
hack-head, and locomotive organs , and the female gives the
face and nutritive organs.
Hence, in “ cross” alliances, the intellect of the mother,
and the animal power of the father, descend usually to the
•offspring, except in especial cases, which are explicable
on the principle, that power imparts power, and
debility, debility.
The inference from this statement is, that in healthy
alliances with persons of different variety, the father gives
the energy and the mother the intellect.
This is as it should be, and as such a union always
commands the like results (which marriage among the
same variety do not for there either parent, be it remem-
bered, may give either mind or strength), it follows that
cross-breds secure a more vigorous and healthy progeny,
and hence are to be preferred. There are sundry modifica-
tions observable, even in the resemblances thus given; but
they do not upset the positive law, that the father (the
amount of health being equal) gives the character of the
frame, and the mother the organs of sense.
The last variety is where the parents are both of the
same family where the propagation is termed “ breeding in
-and in.”
“ The third Law operates where both parents are not only


Of the same variety , but of the sam* family in
sense and where the female gives always the hack-head and
locomotive organs, and the male the face and nutritive
precisely the reverse of what takes place in the crossing.
P Agriculturists, sportsmen, cattle breeders, and all persons-
concerned in the rearing of animals, are well aware that in
these kinds of unions the race degenerates ; and our own
species are not exempt from the same law. Every person
can attest the fact, by observing among his frien^' vhei ®
such unions are preserved, as cousins intermarrying, and
other Zr relations, the evident falling off in the issue, if
appendage as to these curious facts, Mr Walker
considers that the sex of the child is more usually deter-
mined by that parent imparting the vital system, subiec
some exceptions. The prolific power of either sex depends
nYinTl fllPir rGlfttlVG of IlOQiltill* ii •
P Thus then, we observe the children take after their
parents’ in equal proportions. A child will resemble its
father in the hack part of the head, and in that portion of
the frame influenced by it, as the form and stature
whereas it will take after its mother in the front part of the
head and the vital system, or in other words, the health
and existence. Of course these resemblances are modified
by the relationship, as stated, existing betwixt the mother
nnd father whether they be of the same variety, or of the
same family, or of entirely different characteristics. The
marriages between parties of the same variety do not
produce such decisive results as among those °f opposite
variety; and those among the same family are the least
prolific and healthy of the range. . .
Now it must be remembered that the parents giving the
intellect and existence, or the energy and form, convey to
their offspring the peculiarities of their own organisation.
The power of reproducing the species accompanies e
vital system, and only in proportion to the perfection of
the latter is the perfection of the former , hence,
parent, in infirm health, with peculiar nervous or other
deranements, happen to perpetuate m his own child the
S series —namely, intellect and the nutritive system
what can be expected in the ensuing generation, shou d
that child survive, or in his turn marry or ecom
parent? The same result would follow, and tne ae


generacy at last would end in the cessation of further
extension, and the race of such would become extinct. To
those who perfectly understand these remarks and their
application, many circumstances connected with their own
health become immediately explicable, which before were
matters of wonderment, how such and such could be. The
inference shows how dependent the negative system of man
is upon the general health, and how much that rests upon
ancestral origin.
CHAPTER XIII.
DOMESTIC INFELICITY —ITS CAUSE AND ITS CURE.
Matrimony is a condition congenial with our nature. It
is a main incident in human happiness. Even the birds
pair, and what a reproof that should be to all obstinate
bachelors and old maids. Apart from the feelings which
generate love, and which make men go through fire and
water to obtain the object of their affection, and which
urge women to leave happy and wealthy homes to realize
their sympathy and devotion, there is a great feeling in the
circumstance of the mere communion—in the social friend-
ship betwixt man and wife, which can exist nowhere else
in a like degree ; apart from the ties of offspring that may
bless a union, the fact of the worldly partnership, and the
necessary mutual confidence existing in all matters of
domestic and political economy, cement and compact, and
render marriage the fastest attachment in the world.
Hence the delightful position, above all price, of a pair
well and suitably allied to each other in marriage. Much
is necessary to be known with a view to discriminate
between evil and good; to foretell happiness and misery.
How different are men’s feelings upon the subject at twenty
and thirty. There is no trial beforehand of character and
disposition. Marriage is a hit or miss ; the shot when
once fired cannot be recalled. Courtship is a very artificial
criterion ; the fa?e is lightened up with its best smiles and
wears its cleanest aspect— every flaw is concealed—ndt a


stray curl is suffered to hang out of place—the voice
assumes its most melodious tones—the very gait is graceful
—the picture is handsomely framed—and the conquest is
complete. Both sexes adopt the like manoeuvre, and both
frequently disappoint each other.
“ Men are April when they woo —December when they
wed. Maids are May when they are maids, but the sky
changes when they are wives.”
Young people usually pride themselves upon being the
best judges of what and who is most suitable. Courtship
is an affair that advice is seldom sought in, and, should it
be tendered, is rarely acceptable; it is hard to counsel
upon, but the prudent will at least reflect, lest they be too
precipitate, and should not disregard the counsel that
persons authorised may tender. It is somewhat curious
that all imaginative writers, such as romance manu-
facturers and novel concocters, represent fathers as
obdurate and hard-hearted, and mothers as inimical
generally to their children’s choice. The notion is a false
one and ill-timed ; for who can feel such interest, such
dear solicitude for their children’s prosperity, and happiness
as the authors of that being ?
What a void in an old man’s heart is a disobedient and
ungrateful child! How hard it is to regulate these
matters 1 Young folks do not for a moment recollect that
their parents may have been lovers, and must have acquired
some experience worth detailing. Certainly an immensity
depends on a good example being set at home—care in ex-
cluding unsuitable acquaintances for our children, and
caution and yet an interest in introducing others.
But the subject I have entered upon is where the noose
is tied, whence there is no escape—whence all hope of a
change, except that brought about by mutual or principal
forbearance, is absent; I allude to domestic infelicity. Of
course, there are a thousand and possible more provocatives
to family jars and dissensions that render a married life a
most formidable, and continuous warfare.
What is the principal and provoking cause to marital
infelicity—to perpetualsquabbles—to family discomfort—to
neglect of home —led us add, to ruin, desolation and beggary.
We shall not be far wrong in attributing the majority to
two especial common and prevalent vices, namely, drunk-
enness and irascibility of temper. In dividing them, in


justice we must lay the blame of the former principally to the
husband, the latter to the wife. Of course the tables are
sometimes turned, and there are exceptions to both con-
ditions. To these two evils I purpose confining my remarks
and suggestions for their alterations, if not for their
A man may take to drinking through want of comfort
at home, and a woman may acquire a bad temper through
a husband’s neglect; it is impossible to go into the very
many inquiries of the why, and how, and what is the cause,
else we must canvass over personal dislikes, jealousies,
opposing habits, physical inaptitudes, disparity of ages,
family interpositions, &c. We come to this fact; hundreds
and hundreds of men are drunkards, and thousands of
women are plagued with terrible irascible dispositions.
What is the remedy ?
The companion to a drunken mate is the worst off,
'because the drunkard soon falls into that state of health
that the stimulus comes to be his only support, and his
physical condition is a hell to him without his soul-
spoiling antidote ; reason and reflection are of little use to
a depraved habit. The consequences are the more likely
to bring him to his senses, and these consequences are
general bodily suffering, extreme ill-health, and loss of
business. It is well, where friends and relations will
interpose and express their indignation and show their dis-
pleasure, and perhaps well-expressed contempt may create
a thought at least towards reformation. Coercion, if the
■nearest of kin might use it, would no doubt have great
influence. Drunkenness had best be punished by positive
imprisonment, and why not ? Offences less injurious to
public morals are, and what is the object, but to prevent
their repetition? Thanks, however, to the spirit of the
age, inebriation is on the decline. It exists chiefly among
the very ignorant and the badly brought up.
Now let us view the consequences of the irascibility of
temper. , I need not picture the dreariness or the constant
confusion of a home beset with continued quarrels. That
such things are, every day tells of them. If we read them
not in the public journals, we learn of them through the
travel of small talk—through scandal and other channels,
and many of us know more or less from nearer sources the
truth of such a report.


In irascibility of temper, there are two things to be con-
sidered—by no means to aggravate it, and by all means
to try and subdue it. In whomsoever the faults rests, the
other should not fan the flame. Suppose we throw the
blame on the weaker of the two sexes; the only alternative
is to treat it with forbearance. A despairing man will
dole out his lamentations to the effect that he is the most
wretched of all living creatures—that he has no peace—
that the maxim so often broached is reversed, and whatever-
is wrong—“ that his wife has the most turbulent, restless,
dissatisfied, worst temper in the world”—that she either
sulks or raves—that no cat and dog were ever such bitter
antagonists as his spouse and himself; his very detail,
provokes a smile, but alas, it is too true, and his position
is indeed a most miserable one. An indignant man wilt
exclaim— he would not put up with it; he would soon show
who was master. Such a feeling, such a disposition, and
such a mode of proceeding is rarely successful. In the-
struggle for mastership hard words lead to fisticuffs, tearing
of caps, and abusive language—language bad to use, and
worse to utter before children. As well attempt to quench
fire with oil, or carry water in a sieve, as to subdue the
temper of a wilful woman by hard means, such as by her
own weapon—an unruly tongue. Irascibility is temporary
insanity And a woman when thus wild and ungovern-
able is unquestionably mad. And how altered now is the-
treatment of the insane; straitjackets, belts, ironbands, hand-
cuffs, and wooden stocks, are supplanted by mild physical re-
straint, gentle persuasion, and every possible show of kind-
ness. It will do the heart good to learn that humanity andi
benevolence and generous forbearance, with coaxing and soli-
citation firmly exercised, have entirely superseded the lash,
the throat, and (one can happily add) the torture of by-gone
times. Have a wife and rule a wife” makes a good
comedy where the parts are set down, but the acting is not
modelled in nature No wife should take advantage of this
advice and refer to these hints to husbands as sanctioning
her viciousness of disposition, for the remarks may apply
to herself, and be as practically in request by her companion ;
but the benedict may rely upon it that forbearance is the
best shield of defence ; the attacks rebound from it. An
angry and contentious woman will have the last word, and'
so long as the husband provokes the argument, so long:


will it be kept up. Never mind the sharp hits of a
malice; so long as you know that you do not deserve
them, you can afford to bear them, and if you know you,
merit them you had best be silent. If you know such and
such a theme is a tender point, never broach it. If you
are well aware that keeping the dinner waiting, staying-
out past your time, introducing smoking in your parlor,,
having noisy friends who provoke you to stay up late,,
giving bachelor parties, offend and bring upon you all the-
domestic uneasiness possible, all 1 can say is, you are very
foolish to do these things, and after all you can easily-
abandon such practices without much detriment to your-
self. If your mind be the stronger of the two, and you
value peace and quietness at home, cultivate pursuits more-
pleasing to your wife, and you will most likely ensure your
object; this kind of forbearance will be certain to succeed
in the long run Husbands cannot expect to have every-
thing their own way , they must give and take ; they majr
talk of their supremacy, their being the prop of the house,
the support of the family—and they will live to be asked
by the wife, who else should be ? So it goes for nothing,
and the man had best hold his tongue.
No, my friend, if you are melancholy, and hypochon-
driacal and yet disputatious man. and have a disputatious
spitfire of a wife, 1 do not envy you your position ; but of this
I am sure, and 1 have seen agreat deal of it, although Ido not
confess to be a party in the drama, that kindness, concession
and quiet reasoning and. if that won’t do, generous forbear-
ance is the only loophole of escape you have. If, madam
—supposing my reader a lady—the remarks apply to
yourself, as the self willed or the abused, pray interpret
good-naturedly my suggestions iam an advocate for a
woman’s rights, and I contend that a husband should be
respected. I abhor oppression and cruelty, and would
recommend no one tamely to submit to be trampled upon,
but 1 know the virtue of concession, and the value of
mutual forgiveness. Most irascible people are otherwise
amiable and benevolent.
In Montgomery's •* Law of Kindness" is given an anecdote
of an irascible man denying himself to a Quaker, whom he
at the same time abused by the epithet of “ rascal,” bidding-
him begone. The Quaker mildly replied. “ Well, my friend,
may God put thee in a better mind.” The angry man was;


subdued by the kindness of the reply, and, after a careful
consideration, became convinced he was wrong He sent for
the Quaker, and after making a humble apology, he said,
“ How were you able to bear my abuse with so much
patience ? " “ Friend," replied the Quaker, *• 1 will tell thee.
J was naturally as violent and hot as thou art ; but 1 knew
that to indulge my temper was sinful, and also very foolish.
1 obsei red that men in a passion always spoke very loud, and
I thought if I could control my voice I should keep down my
passion. 1 therefore made it a rule never to let it rise above a
certain key ; and, by careful observance of this rule, 1 have
with the blessing of God, entirely mastered mg natural temper.
We may depend upon it, kindness is the best rod. The
Christian motto is—
“ Overcome evil with good.”
If properly carried out, it is a key which opens the hearts
of all around us, giving us a place in their affections. It
will disarm anger of its power, hatred of its sting, enmity
of its opposition, and sarcasm of its malice ; it will make
the communion of husband and wife more tender; it will
secure the obedience of children ; it will make the ties of
friendship strong ; it will turn enmity into benevolent
feeling; it will minister to the widow and the orphan in
the pitiless storms of winter ; and it will look to the comfort
of the dumb beasts who serve us, saving them from cruelty,
and ensuring them good treatment. All this it will do if
practiced ; and if not the nearest road it is the easiest way
to be happy.
Lastly, if forbearance, if kindness, if, indeed, continued
submission secure you not tranquility, resort at once to
separation. If you cannot effect it by mutual consent, call
in the aid of your nearest friends, and carry it out
peremptorily. Let thue be no truce; when once you resolve
upon it, do it. A miserable home is bad for the wife,
shocking for the family, and deplorable for the husband.
By separation, surely, all the contention and sparring and
jarring is at an end, and then our several philosophy must
be to rest content; for, terrible as the isolation to a domestic
party may be, it is much better than to be in perpetual
war.
Thus far I have principally contended for the wife ; thus
.far I have advised the husband to forego his authority and


privileges ; thus far I have contended for submission from
the stronger to the weaker vessel, so that the lady cannot
object to receive a parting word of advice to herself. Let
every wife whose husband loves other places than,
his own home, or rather what should be his home, examine-
how far she imitates Peggy or Jenny. Jenny is alb
scepticism, and scarcely believes men can be honest; she
doubts their fidelity, distrusts their steadiness of purpose.,
and anticipates nothing but beggary and want.
“ 0, heaven ! were man
But constant, he were perfect; that one error
Fills him with faults."
Such she believed awaited her choice, and thus
bids: —
“ Dear Meg, be wise, and live a single life,
Troth, Its naemows to be a married wife,"
Peggy draws a livelier picture of the married state. She
believes a husband may be won to constancy ; she thinks,
if he errs,
“ It's ten to ane the wives are maist to blame.’'
She places great faith in
A bleezing ingle and a clean hearth stane
And, last of all, she exclaims, inclusive of her best effort;
to attract and please—
“ Oood humor and white begonets shall be
Guards to my face to keep his love for me:'
And doubtlessly these are sinister contrivances to win a
man’s heart. The idea at once brings to the mind the
delights of our “ ain fireside,”
“Blest winter nights I when, as the genial fire
Cheers the wide hall, our cordial family
With soft domestic arts the hours beguile."
The disposition would impel me, in the pleasing thoughts*
of such a scene, to disbelieve a woman wanting in her
contribution to so much comfort; but we gather knowledge
as we move along, and facts are too numerous to leave a
doubt about it. Katherine (the subdued wife of Pertruchio)
thus breathes her recantation, and advises one of her own
sex in the following strain. It expresses all that can be
said on such an occasion, and husbands might club together
to have a series of cards printed with the admonition
thereon, for presentation to unruly wives :


THE WIFE’S DUTY TO HEE HUSBAND.
“ Fie, fie ! unknit that threatening unkind brow ;
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor;
It blots thy beauty, as frosts bites the meads;
Confounds thy fame, as whirlwinds shake fair buds;
And in no sense is week or amiable.
A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty:
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will design to sip, or touch one drop of it.
The husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for the#
And for thy maintenance, commits his body
To painful labor both by sea and land;
To watch the night in storm, the day in cold,
While thou liest warm at home, secure and safe,
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks, and true obedience—
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince,
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she’s forward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul, contending rebel.
And graceless traitor to her loving lord ?
I am ashamed that women are so simple
To offer war w here they should kneel for peace !
Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway,
Where they are bound to serve, love and obey.”
CHAPTER XIV.
VENEREAL OR SEXUAL DISEASES.
Of the multitude of diseases which the human frame is
liable to, none cause so much misery, moral and physical
-as those called venereal. Many a thoughtless youth in
a moment of temptation given way to his passions tind
thus-'filled his system with corruption, which may never
leaveTiim to the end of his life, or what is far worse, he has
poisoned the fountain of his life, he will leave it as a herit-
age of misery to his offspring or will taint the blood of the
partner of bis bosom, making her the innocent partaker of
his disease. How many such are there in every locality


•dragging out a wretched existence, a misery to themselves
and an eyesore to society. They are left, as it were, by the
Almighty to warn others against vicious practices and
.point the moral of the preacher against vice and im-
morality.
GONORRHOEA OR CLAP.
This is an inflammation of the mucous membrane of the
-sexual organs, accompanied by a discharge, the result of
impure connection
The symptoms of clap are as follows; shortly after the
infection has been communicated, usually from three to
■eight days, a sensation of heat and uneasiness is ex-
perienced in the end of the penis, accompanied generally
with a little redness and difficulty in passing water, in a
-day or two the discharge of matter increases, and becomes
thinner and of a greenish or yellowish color, sometimes
tinged with blood.
The head of the penis is red and inflamed, and the urine
occasions a scalding pain. When the inflammation extends
to the bladder, there is a distressing desire to pass water,
with a constant uneasiness about the testicles, and between
the legs. When the inflammation is high it produces what
is called chordee, in which the penis is in a state of
•erection, and is curved downward with great pain ; this
occurs generally when the patient is warm in bed.
From the inflammation, phimosis may ensue, in which
the foreskin is hard and swollen so that it cannot be drawn
back , or, when the swelling takes place behind the head
it cannot be drawn forward and is called paraphimosis.
The glands of the groin sometimes swell and inflame, as
well as the testicles.
Gleet is the result of gonorrhoea, and proceeds into the
form, after active inflammation has subsided. It
is sometimes very obstinate. Another result of gonorrhoea
is stricture, which is a partial closing up of the urethra, or
passage leading from the bladder ; this may be known by
the stream of water becoming flattened or twisted, like a
gimlet, or forked.
Stricture causes much pain and inconvenience, and
•often, if not promptly cured, troubles the sufferer at
various times during his whole life.


If the discharge be suffered to remain on the glans of the-
penis, or on the outside of the foreskin, excoriations, chaps
and warts spring up speedily and plentifully, and protrude
before the prepuce, or sometimes become adherent to it;
therefore shows how necessary cleanliness is in these-
disagreeable complaints, to escape the vexations alluded to.
The earliest symptoms should always be attended to, and;
where there is the least suspicion that the disease has been
contracted (and all indulgence outside of wedlock is fraught
with the greatest danger and risk), prompt and energetic-
action must be taken.
It is of the first importance to nip, if possible, the-
disease in its bud ; and that this can be done frequently
and successfully, the adoption of the following method will-
prove.
TREATMENT.
Immediately on the advent of the first symptoms, or as-
foon as there is reason to believe that the party must have
•eceived the infection, throw up an injection of the nitrate
of silver, Take of nitrate of silver, 1 scruple ; distilled
water, 1 ounce, mix, and strain through blotting paper.
Pour a small quantity of the solution into a wine-glass;;
procure a small glass syringe, fill the same with the
preparation ; carefully insert the point of the syringe into
the urethra, and allowing the penis to rest loosely, press
the piston of the syringe, and inject the contents. Hold
the syringe still for half a minute, to retain the solution in
the urethra, and then suffer it to escape. There is generally
some difficulty to a patient’s applying an injection for the
first time, and there is usually an apprehension lest he
force the injection into the bladder—there is little fear of
that occurring, first owing to the general awkwardness, and
secondly, to the natural resistance which the introduction
of a stimulating fluid to a sensitive and resistive passage-
meets with. If the least pain or sense of distention ensue,
the best plan is to withdraw the syringe, supposing half of
the injection only to have been thrown up, and suffer the
injected fluid to return, and then to apply the remainder.
The disease being rarely seated beyond a couple of inches
at the onset, there is no need of the injection higher
up, but the use of the injections generally, as it is
just possible that an injection might enter the bladder


>
and it might not be advisable that it should go
there, the pressure of the finger against the Perineum ,
during the operation, will prevent any fluid passing
that spot. The introduction of a syringe, if care-
fully resorted to, seldom gives any pain—the orifice of the
urethra, is of course tender, and no violence should be used,
and it is as well to dip, previously, the point of the syringe in
a little sweet oil. On the withdrawal of the syringe and
escape of the injection, a slight burning sensation is
experienced, which soon subsides, and no further incon-
venience is occasioned, until called upon to urinate, when
a smart scalding is felt, and the last few drops of the urine
may bring a spot or two of blood. Succeeding to or before
the act of micturition, if it be long deferred, there occurs
a rather copious yellow discharge, which is given off from
the membrane of the urinary -passage, in consequence of
the injection, and is not to be considered as Gonorrhoeal
matter. This may be continued more or less for some
hours, but it generally subsides into a thin watery secretion.
The pain in passing water goes off, and by night time
or the following morning the effects of the injection have
subsided. If the operation of the injection be ineffectual,
the Gonorrhoeal discharge will, in all probability, rapidly
succeed, and with it the usual sensations of scalding and
pain. It may happen to the contrary—the Gonorrhoeal
symptoms may not have advanced, and there may still
remain the red and tender orifice with a slight weeping.
It is then prudent to repeat the injection, which will be
accompanied by the like result as before, but possibly less
acute. Supposing the symptoms of Clap not to advance
and yet not wholly to subside, the operation may be
repeated once more. If, despite this third trial, much
irritation ensue, with great heat on urinating, or itching
after it, and it be attended with pain about the perineum,
groin, or loins, or testicles, or no amendment be percept-
ible, the injection had better not be repeated, and the next
and best step is immediately to relieve the bowels by a full
dose (1 ounce) of castor oil, and to follow the action of the
medicine by immersion in a warm bath, availing also of
frequent local hot fomentations, and then to treat the
disease in the ordinary way.
If, happilly, as it very frequently does, the injection
annihilate the complaint—a warm bath or two—a day or
H


two’s quiet, with temperate living (local support, by means
of a suspensory bandage), and the avoidance of all stimuli,
will find the patient perfectly convalescent.
If this treatment does not stop the disease, recourse
must be had to other means to be used promptly.
A warm bath should be taken every second or third day.
A suspensory bandage should be worn, the bowels kept
open with castor oil and the rest of the body and mind strictly
enjoined.
The common drink should be of the mildest diluents.
Barley water and flax seed tea are the best drinks. Gruel
is the next best repast; it will do for the evening, and
makes an excellent supper. Indeed, in very severe
instances, gruel is the only nourishment that should be
taken for several days.
Drinks should be of the simplest kind, such as will pass
the more readily through the kidneys, and produce the
mildest urine; hence, next to water, we have milk
and water, weak tea, barley water, flax seed tea, gum
water or gum arabio (the best quality) may be suffered to
dissolve in the mouth, not exceeding an ounce or two in
the day, for it is not very digestible, but with the common
drinks swallowed from time to time, it unites, and possibly
renders the urine less acid. The various light soups are
permissible, such as vermiceli, macaroni, tapioca, and
gruel broth. Sweets, pastries, solid dumplings, plum-
puddings, cakes and all those sorts of things are bad. The
bread should be taken toasted and eaten cold \ or it may be
sopped in warm tea, or warm milk. Porridge is not ob-
jectionable. The best bread also, is the unfermented ; and
then, again, the “ brown ” is preferable to the “ white.”
It helps to keep the bowels open, acts favorably on the
kidneys, and at the same time, is very nourishing and
palatable. Eusks, brown bread, biscuits, and all the light
farinaceous preparations are good. All salted meats,
savory dishes, little surprises of delicacies, and “tit
bits ” must be avoided. The next and best help is bodily
test.
If a man could lay up for a week, it would nearly cure
him. That, ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, is
Impossible.


SCALDING.
Keep the bowels open with castor oil, and take tha
“following sedative mixture'
MUCILAGINOUS AND SEDATIVE MIXTURE.
Take of Bicarbonate of Potass, 1 drachm ; Mucilage of Acacia7"3
Dunces; Spirit of Sweet Nitre, 2 drachms ; Tinture of Henbane 3
drachms ; Syrup of Tolu, 3 drachms ; Distilled water, 4 ounces.
Mix—Take three table-spoonfuls three times daily, morning, noon
andjnight
Purgation always relieves the scalding. Bathing the
penis in warm water, as warm as it can well be borne, will
ease the smarting in passing urine; and if that fail, cold
water may be found more effectual. Throwing up, just
before urinating, a syringeful of a sedative injection, will
help to allay the pain.
SEDATIVE INJECTION TO ALLAY THE SCALDING AND TAIN.
Take of Extract of Belladonna,lo grains; Plain or Rosa-water, 12
ounces.
Mix—Throw up a syringeful frequently in the day.
SURFACIAL DISCHARGE, AND ULCERATION
ONLY OF THE GLANS, PREPUCE, ftc.,
When the discharge is traceable only to the Gians or
Prepuce, and is or is not accompanied by cuticular ex-
coriation, the application of a solution of the Nitrate of
Silver will, in one or two “ brushings,” put a stop to the
secretions, and the “ abrasive ” invasion.
SOLUTION OP NITRATE OF SILVER.
Take of Nitrate of Silver, $ drachm; Distilled Water, 1 ounce.
Mix and strain through blotting paper—To be used with the feather
•end of a pen.
SOLUTION OP SULPHATE OP ZINC.
Take of Sulphate of Zinc, 1 scruple ; Pure water, 1 pint. Mix—
throw up between the nut and foreskin a syringeful of this applica-
two or three times daily.
To return to the treatment of the discharge. As soon,
however, as the scalding is on the wane, then may ba
taken the various preparations of Copaiba, Cubebs, and


other particular remedies, which now, for the benefit of thfr
patient, a series of prescriptions are offered, the headings
of which will guide to their selection :
THE ORDINARY CAPSULES OF COPAIBA,
Three may be taken three times daily—to be swallowed as boluses ;
some people cannot take pills, but by merely half filling the mouth
with water, and then throwing in what is to be swallowed, one “ gulp”
will take the whole down. This form of Copaiba spares the palate
from the nauseous flavor of the medicine.
CUBBBS,
Cubebs have been held as, and oftimes they are, useful in Gonor-
rhcea. From two to three drachms of the Powder of Cubebs may be-
taken three times daily in water, observing the adjuncts of occasional
purgatives, bland drinks, baths, and rest. If however, Cubebs do not
produce a marked good in three or four days, it is useless continuing
them.
Cubebs and Copaiba are both stimulants and diuretics, and, as far
as we know, act on the mucous membranes ; but if carried beyond a
certain effect, they irritate the kidneys, and produce considerable-
derangment. The following are severally good formulae :
COPAIBIC AND CUBEBIC MIXTURE.
Take of Balsam Copaiba, 1 ounce ; Mucilage of Acacia, 3 ounces
Powder of Cubebs, £ ounce; Spirits of Sweet Nitre, 2 drachms
Paregoric, 2 drachms ; Simple Syrup, £ ounce; Peppermint water
sufficient to form a half-pint mixture Take two table-spoonfuls
twice or thrice daily.
COMPOUND COPAIBIC MIXTURE.
Take of Honey, 1 ounce ; Balsam Copaiba, 1 ounce; Powder of
Acacia, 1 ounce ; Liquor of Potass, 1 drachm; Mix, and add a little-
water gradually. Then, take of Tincture of Buchu, 1 ounce;
Tincture of Cubebs, 1 ounce ; Tincture of Opium, 30 drops. Pepper-
mint or Cinnamon water sufficient to form a half-pint mixture. Take
one or two table-spoonfuls in a little water two or three times daily.
These are two excellent mixtures.
THE BALSAM COPAIBA
May be taken in doses of a tea-spoonful simply floated on water, or
may be taken in half a glass of sherry. It may be made with
magnesia into pills, and then ten to thirty swallowed in the uaj
PREPARATION OF COPAIBA.
Copaibas is often prepared in the form of tincture and various other
solutions (in an alkaline form among the rest), all of which are
severally good ; it is at best a nauseous preparation, and if it disagree,
is apt to throw out over the body a species of nettle-rash, that is very
irritable,<sand often alarming to a patient, who considers it to be a
fearful advance of the disease —a suspension of the medicine, a dose
of physic, and a warm bath or two, will completely put a stop to it.
The copaiba must be recurred to very cautiously, or suspended
entirely in case of a relapse.


TAIN AND DIFFICULTY IN PASSING URINE,
WITH IRRITABILITY OF THE BLADDER,
&c., AND FREQUENT DESIRE TO URINATE.
These are the natural consequences of extended inflam-
mation. They often occur from other causes than Clap ;
but with it they are rarely entirely absent.
These maladies are often aggravated as the discharge
diminishes, or rather the severer they are the discharge
becomes more or less suspended, Nature seldom allowing
two diseases to proceed with equal virulence at the same
time. The remediatory measures are principally sedatives,
demucelents, baths, and rest. When a hardness or a
tumor of the perineum is present, leeches, warm fomenta-
tions, bran, and other poultices are indispensable. Cupping
is an expeditious and cleanly mode of relief in the earlier
stages of severe pain thereabout.
IN PAINFUL MICTURITION AND FREQUENT DESIRE TO URINATE.
Take of Camphor Julep 8 ounces, Laudanum 30 drops. Mix.—
Take three table-spoonfuls three times daily.
DEMUCELENT DRINK TO FACILITATE THE FLOW OF URINE.
Take of Barley-water 2 pints; Nitrate of Potass, 2 scruples;
White Sugar, two or three lumps. Mix.—Take a wine-glassful three
or four times daily.
If the case resist the means recommended, and symptoms
increase, medical aid must be called in.
INFLAMMATION OF THE BLADDER-PROS-
TATE GLAND-DISORDERED URINE-
This is so far beyond the control of a non-medical invalid,
that it is scarely prudent to allude to it; but the symp-
toms may be told to urge the employment of the pro-
fessional man.
Inflammation of the* mucous lining of the bladder is
marked by the whey-looking appearance of the urine—pain
in urinating; frequent desire to empty the bladder ; pain
about the situation of it, and considerable fever. The
Prostate Gland and neck of the bladder become involved
frequently in the disturbance, and present similar accom-
paniments, with the addition of great suffering in the


perineum and rectum, a most pressing desire to void water*,
and yet inability to eject more than a drop or two at a time.
Leeches, bleeding, and general active treatment are in
Immediate requisition in such cases.
CHORDEE.
This is a most painful affection, and is only presenfr
when the penis is distended or erect. When the bleeding
occurs, which it frequently does, it arises from some little
vessel in the urinary passage giving way. The speediest
way of deriving relief is by immersing the penis in cold
water —or wrapping linen rags, dipped in the same, around
the verile member. The pain is so intense, and the erec-
tion so constant when warm in bed, and the parts so
very irritable, that the patient cannot sleep, and therefore
it is advisable to administer a sleeping draught, and also to
dip some lint in the embrocation and apply it to the under
surface of the penis, going to bed with it on.
SLEEPING DRAUGHT.
Take of Solution of Acetate of Ammonia J ounce; Camphor J ulep, 1
ounce; Spirits of Sweet Nitre, £ drachm; Tincture of Henbane, 1
drachm- Mix.—To form a draught to be taken at bed time.
THE EMBROCATION. —POISON.
Take of Opodeldoc J ounce; Laudanum \ ounce Mix —Label
it poison and use it as advised—taking care it be not swallowed
by mistake for the draught.
In obstinate cases of Chordee, leeches applied over the
part will do good. The warm bath before going to bed
will sometimes keep off the local excitement, and thereby
allow sleep.
A pill composed of Camphor, 5 grains, and Belladonna, \ grain,
taken at bedtime, is highly beneficial.
Chordee will continue some time, and very much harass
the individual, inducing frequent nocturnal emissions.
Patience and persistence in the means suggested are the
best antidotes.
SWELLING OF PREPUCE-PHYMOSIS.
A mere temporary enlargement is of no moment, although
it shall attain treble or four times its ordinary bulk In
this instance, the Prepuce assumes a dropsical appearance,-


like a thin bladder filled with water, and ig occasioned by
what medical men call extravasated serum being deposited
in the reticular membrane.
The treatment consists in the constant application of
-cold water, by means of lint moistened therewith and
applied thereon —taking care to keep the penis well
supported rather than pendant. Syringing between the
Prepvxe and Gians with luke-warm water, milk and water,
will help to subdue the inflammation. The swelling mostly
subsides after a little while ; where ulcerations exist on the
glans, or warts, and are progressing, and fear is entertained
lest a permanent adhesion between the foreskin and nut
shall take place, then division, as the lesser of the two evils,
is necessary.
BUBO.
Buboes occur in Gonorrhoea especially when there is
any external irritation or excoriation around the glans.
They consist of a slight swelling of the glans in the groin,
but they really lead to abscesses, and consequently they
are termed Sympathetic—they subside usually with the
provoking cause. Warm fomentations, warm baths, and
mild opening medicine are all that are required.
SWELLED TESTICLES.
Diseases of the testicles are so fraught with after-mischief,
that the most prompt and skilful attention should be
sought after. Immediately on discovery of a swelled
testicle, the first step should be to procure a suspendor
it gives instantaneous relief. The warm bath is also in-
valuable and indispensable, and may be resorted to daily.
The next and speediest way of relieving swelled testicle
is by bleeding from the arm or cupping in the loins,
observing the strictest rest and abstinence. Some
physicians advise emetics —all recommend purgatives ; and
saline aperients are most effectual. If bleeding and
cupping be dispensed wdth, leeches can scarcely be with-
held—but it is useless to apply them except in large
numbers. Frequent warm fomentations give great relief.
The diet must be spare during this process, avoiding all
wines, beer, and spirits. Let the patient secure as much
bed-rest as possible. Let him also ride rather than walk


when he can, and sit rather than stand. About the second
or third day, when the inflammation shall have reached
its height, still observing the same precautions, use the
Absorbent mixture and keep up the secretion of the bowels.
The testicles, or rather the scrotum, may be smeared or
washed over, by means of a camel-hair-brush, with the
Tincture of lodine (procure an ounce in a stopper vial);
the operation will occasion some smarting, but it is only
of a very short duration. The application must be repeated
night and morning until the skin expoliates or becomes
too painful to be borne. As soon as the surface admits of
its re-application, it must be renewed until the swelling
disappears.
ABSORBENT MIXTURE.
Take of lodide of Potass, £ drachm; Distilled water, 7J ounces ;
Tincture of Henbane, 2 drachms ; Simple Syrup, 2 drachms, mix.—
Take three tablespoonfuls three times daily. Each fresh bottle
of mixture may have 10 grains extra of the lodide of Potass.
GLEET.
Gonorrhoea proceeds from sexual intercourse and its
affections ; but it may arise from a variety of other causes,
drinking, sexual excess, whether with females or from
masturbation, accident or ill-health ; Gleet is a subdued
inflammation of the same land, possessing more or less all the
properties of the former, although not so determinately
infectious. Is Gleet curable ? Unquestionably it is, but
by no specific Balsam, Elixir, or especial Simple. It must
be treated with reference to the existing symptoms. It
has to be repeated and told that the drainage is kept up
by local irritation, by a loss of tone in the secreting
vessels, by such a thing as sympathy with some neighboring
or remote infirmity. This local irritation may be removed
by local application. There is a time when the mildest
injections are promptly successful, whilst at others a cure
only awaits the use of very active ones.
The patient may make his selection of the annexed
formulae: —
CAUSTIC INJECTION.
Nitrate of Silver, 4 grains ; Water 1 ounce. Mix.
SULPHATE OF ZINC AND TANNIN INJECTION.
buipnate of Zinc, 8 grains ; Tannin, 1 scruple ; Water 5 ounces.
Mix.


CHLORIDE OF ZINC INJECTION.
Chloride of Zinc, 6 grains; soft water 2 ounces. Mix. This is
"very servicable in obstinate cases.
TONIC DROPS.
Take of Tincture of Sesquichloride of Iron, £ ounce, Disulphate ol
Iron, 30 grains; Tincture of Cantharides, 1 drachm ; Distilled Water,
3 ounces; Simple Syrup, £ ounce. Mix, Take a teaspoonful twice
- daily in a little water.
TURPENTINE PILLS.
Pill made of Canada Turpentine, rolled up with liquorice powder.
Two, three, or four, may be taken twice daily.
TONIC PILLS.
This is a very nice pill. Take of Sulphate of Iron, Composition
Kino Powder, Venice Turpentine, Extract of Gentian, each £ drachm.
Mix, and divide into 24 pills. Take one, two, three, or four times,
-iaily.
APERIENT PILLS.
During the persistence of Tonic and stimulating medicines, the
bowels may be kept open by any mild laxative. The following pill
or pills will do.
Take of Compound Rhubarb Pills, 5 grains each— l or 2 for a
dose.
CHANGING THE REMEDIES.
Upon the principles of “ trying something else ” is often
advantageous; for it is useless repeating what has been
found unsuccessful; and it is folly to throw up our en-
deavors, particularly when it is shown the disease rarely
cures itself.
If the Gleet proceed from disordered or acid urine, the
attention must be directed to that secretion. The drinks
and diet, as in the earlier stages of Gonorrhoea, must be
adhered to. The warm bath and rest must come in for a
.share of the treatment. Where there is reason to believe
that general debility prevails, that the bodily health is en-
feebled, that the patient has become hypochondriacal, it is
most admirable to try a change of air and scene.
STRICTURE OF THE URETHRA.
Of all diseases of the genito-urinary system, stricture
must be allowed to be the most terrible. It is the most
difficult to cure; but it involves when neglected, more
aerious disturbances—disturbances which frequently
terminate only with loss of life. Stricture is a disease


unfortunately of extensive prevalence ; and in nine case&
>ut of ten is, the sequence of local irritation, consequent
generally upon Gonorrhoea or Gleet. The first indications
are the lengthened time required in urinating, the act i&
not performed so cleanly as it should be; the stream differs
in its flow, seldom comes out full and free, but generally
splits into three or four fountain-like spirits.
At other times, it twists into a spiral form, and then
suddenly splits into two or more streams, whilst at the
same moment the urine drops over the person or clothes*
unless great care be observed.
In advanced cases, the urethra becomes so narrow, and
the bladder so loses its power to expel the urine forward,
that it then falls upon the shoes or trousers or between,
them.
In the next attack which is very difficult to avert, the*
patient finds that he cannot complete the act of making
water without several interruptions, and each attended
with a painful desire, resembling that induced by too long:
retention of that fluid.
With respect to the change consequent upon permanent
FIG. 42.
stricture, dissection enables us in some degree to-
arrive at the truth. Excrescences and tubercles
have been found growing from the wall of the
urethra; but in the majority of instances, the only
perceptible change is a thickening of the canal
here and there of indefinite length ; but whether
it be occasioned by the exudation of coagulate
lymph, or whether it be the adhesion of ulcer-
ated surfaces, which I contend are more or less
present in Gleet, is not so easy to determine; at
all events it is undoubtedly the result of inflammation of
the urethra.
Spasmodic Stricture is generally seated at the neck of
the bladder, and may occur to persons in good health from
exposure to wet or cold \ from some digestive derangement*
from long retention of urine, particularly while walking,
owing to the absence of public urinals; or to violent horse
exercise; but more frequently does it happen to those
young men who, when suffering from Gleet or Gonorrhoea,
imperfectly or perfectly cured, commit excesses in diet or
drink. Stricture may also be caused by injuries, by
falling, blows, wounds, and also by masturbation.


The following diagrams are further explanatory of
stricture in its amplified forms:—
The dark marginal lines denote the calibre of the urethra,
and the thin inner lines the actual diameter of the
obstructed passage. Fig. 43 shows the stricture to be on
the upper part of the urethra. Fig. 44 shows the lower
part. Fig. 45 exhibits a stricture of some length, and a
somewhat contracted state of the whole canal. Fig. 46'
denotes a very common form of stricture, which resembles
a bag tied in the middle ; it is the least difficult to cure of
any, because it signifies that the seat of irritation is limited,
but these cases are generally precursory to severer forms, if
not promptly attended to. Fig. 47 represents a stricture
of considerable length, and of course very difficult of
removal.
The clumsy introduction of a bougie, or in other
instances, the unjustifiable introduction of one, is likely to,
and very frequently does, lacerate the delicate and irritable
membrane, and makes a false passage. Fig. 48 exhibits
an instance in 1 and 2 ; the upper numerical shows a
false passage made by a bougie, and an obliteration of the
ordinary passage of the urethra, the result of inflammation,
constituting an impassable stricture ; the lower figure
exhibits a false opening made, in the first instance, by a
fruitless effort at passing an instrument, when inflam-
mation completed the process. No urine escaped from it,.


r of course, because communication was cut off from the
bladder by the impassable stricture, the outlet for a
discharge of that fluid being through a sinuous opening
marked 2; 8 denoting the closed end of the urethra. Fig.
•49 exhibits a stricture, where the posture part was
by the constant pressure of the urine to escape
through the narrowed part of the urethra; ulceration
ensued, and a fistulous opening was the consequence; the
•stricture was seated high up, and the fistulous canal was
several inches long, terminating in the upper and posterior
part of the thigh ; the urine used to dribble through it as
well as through the urethra. In Fig. 50 is presented an
illustration of extensive ulceration producing two fistulous
•openings; the state of the urethra was only discovered
after death. Fig. 61 portrays irregular and extensive
ulceration. Fig 52 shows an impervious urethra, and a
fistulous opening, through which the urine flowed.
TREATMENT,
Stricture if early attended to, is a disease easily
remediable; if neglected, its horrors accumulate, and
sufferings the most acute, close the scene. Such, however
is the progress of science, that it is almost possible to cure
4)he most inveterate case—at all events, to relieve it; but
that is no reason why the initiatory notices should be dis-
regarded. Stricture is of two kinds, spasmodic and
permanent. The treatment of the first is chiefly medical,
the treatment of the latter chiefly mechanical. The
principle agents I rely upon, in the cure of the former,
are the warm bath, rest, sedatives, and certain dietetic
restrictions : for the removal of the latter I place unbounded
confidence in practice of dilatation
One of the most powerful adjuncts in the treatment of
all affections of the urethra, bladder, prostate gland,
kidneys and other strictures, pertaining to the urinary and
generative system, is the warm bath.
The only mode of ascertaining the precise condition of
the urethra is by an examination of it, and should not be
delayed a moment after suspicion is entertained of the
impending evil.
The cure of dilatation is as follows :—The seat of the
stricture being ascertained, a bougie, somewhat larger than
the calibre of the uninary current, warmed and dipped in


an oleaginous mixture, combined with some sedative or
stimulant, according to circumstances, is to be passed to.
the stricture, and the gentlest pressure employed for the
space of five, ten or twelve minutes, according to the
irritation it produces, removing it as soon as any uneasiness
is felt.
The bougie is to be pressed softly but steadily against
the obstruction, now and then withholding for a minute the.
bearing, so as to allow a respite to the stretched membrane
the renewing by what is better done than expressed, an
“ insinuating ” pressure for the space of time advised above.
The patient should not be dispirited even if the bougie do.
not perforate the stricture at the first trial ; it would
doubtless do so if longer time were employed, but is rarely
advisable, except in cases where the urine can scarcely
escape, or much expedition be requisite. Should the
operation even be unsuccessful in the first attempt, the
patient will find his ability to micturate much greater than,
before the introduction. A great advantage of the cure by
dilatation, independently of its safety and efficacy, is the
insignificant pain it occasions, the sensation produced
being only like a pressing desire to make water, which,
immediately subsides on withdrawing the bougie.
An entrance having been gained, a bougie of a larger
size is selected on the next occasion, and the same process
repeated. It is seldom advisable to repeat the operation,
oftencr than once in two days, except in cases of great
FIG. 53.
THE INGENDAL GLANDS
and the absorbents showing
their communication and
Nature.
urgency, and when the urethra is
irritable, only every three or four-
days.
By continuing in this manner,,
the stricture gradually yields, and
a bougie, as large as the orifice
will permit to enter will at last
proceed through the whole passage
without meeting with any obstacle.
The operation should not be wholly
laid aside, but continued until the
disposition for contraction is en-
tirely removed, and the patient
should occasionally examine his
urethra every month or two, lest
he encounter a relapse.


SYPHILIS.
Syphilis is another and more violent form of tht
"venereal disease than Gonorrhoea. It is characterised by
the appearance of a pimple surrounded by a slight inflam-
mation and the formation of an ulcer or chancre. The
ulcer generally appears in from five to fourteen days after
exposure.
Chancres are of different varieties, and may be very
destructive to the organ, and there is generally a bubo or
swelling in the groin, which appears a few days after the
ulcer; this swelling may continue until matter forms,
when it may break, or require to be opened.
When syphilis affects the constitution it is known as
secondary and tertiary; it then shows itself in the forms
of eruptions, sore throat, and ulcers in different parts of the
body.
The eruption generally appears on the forehead, back,
legs and arms, copper colored, attended with a slight
itching; the pustule is sometimes filled with a pale fluid,
When the mouth and throat are affected, the parts become
swollen and sore, or red and covered with a white mem-
brane, or there may be a pale yellow ulcer of the throat or
tonsils, or a dark, livid, and sloughing ulcer, which may
extend to the various parts about the throat and nose,
'destroying the bones of the face.
TREATMENT.
As soon as the ulcer appears on
ihe penis, it should immediately be
touched with caustic. The caustics
which may be used are Nitrate of
Silver, Nitric Acid, Caustic Potassa,
Chloride of Zinc. The Nitrate of
Silver is the most used, and the
pimple should be thoroughly burned.
After the sore has been cauterized,
a piece of lint dipped in a solution
of opium, in the proportion of one
drachm of opium to four ounces of
water should be laid upon it, and
the penis enveloped in a piece of
muslin and covered with oiled silk.
FIG. 54.
Ulceration of the throat
or palate by the venereal
virus.


The following solution may be used instead of the
■Opium:—
Sulphate of Copper, 1 grain ; Water, 1 ounce. This should be
frequently, and the parts washed twice a day with castile soap
water.
The following may be taken internally :
Protiodide of Mercury, 12 grains; Conserve of Roses, 1 scruple.
-Divide into twelve or twenty-four pills, and take one twice a day.
The following may be used with advantage in some
cases :
Blue Pill, i drachm ; Extract of Henbane, 1 scruple. Make into
’ten pills. Dose, one pill at night.
Or this :
Corrosive Sublimate, 4 grains'; Extract of Opium, 5 grains. Mix
and make into twenty pills. Dose, one pill night and morning.
These preparations of Mercury should not be used more
than five days in succession, as there is danger of pro-
ducing salivation. If salivation is produced, use the follow-
ing:
Chlorinated Soda, 1 ounce ; Water, 2 ounces. Mix.—The mouth
should be rinsed out with this several times a day, being careful not
to swallow any of it.
Eicord recommends Iron to be given in the proportion of
■one part of the Potassio-Tartrate of Iron, to six parts of
water. Two teaspoonfuls given three times a day. The
same preparation should be applied to the sore. The bubo,
or swelling in the groin should be treated with compression.
If, however, matter forms, the sore should be opened and
poulticed. In case of an eruption on the skin, or when
the disease shows itself in the throat or other part of the
body, the lodide of Potassium may be given as follows :
Compound Infusion of Sarsparilla, 1 pint; lodide of Potassium,
ounce. Mix.—Dose, a teaspoonful after every meal.
The preparation called Donovan’s Solution may be giver,
internally, in doses of from three to five drops.
The diet should be strictly regular, the patient not being
-allowed to eat any stimulating food, or drink liquors.


CHAPTER XV.
SELF-ABUSE —NOCTURNAL EMISSIONS —IMPOTENCE—STERILITY.
Few are aware of the extent to which self-pollution is:
practiced by the young of both sexes in civilized society,
and none but those whose position or professional confi-
dence brings them into advisory and intimate relations with
the victims of unnatural indulgences or venereal excesses
can have an adequate conception of the evils resulting
therefrom. None but the medical man can trace the-
deplorable consequences to feeble, malformed, puny, and
imperfectly organised offspring, and no one but the physi-
ologist can clearly see all the external marks of exhausted
vitality and premature decay stamped indelibly on thousands,
of our young men and maidens otherwise in the bloom of
youth, health and beauty.
We might fill a volume with instances of the effects of
this baneful habit, and a mere enumeration of the diseases
directly or indirectly induced by these practices would
occupy a far larger space than can be allowed. We shall
therefore, simply show the direct effects of the habit, and
give plain and specific directions for the cure.
The abuse of amativeness rapidly exhausts the nervous
power, the generative function, and takes strength from the
organic and animal powers. If it fail all fail. The
stomach cannot digest for want of the nervous energy spent
in oft repeated and fruitless orgasms. Nutrition cannot be
carried on in the capillary systems. The waste matter,
which should be carried off by the secreting and excreting
organs, is retained to poison the fountains of life. The
skin becomes dry and withered, the eye dull, the mind
weak and disordered, all noble passions lose their force, the
whole system is in discord and disorder, and ready to
become a prey to disease. Then comes epilepsy, spinal
disease, dropsy, or some form of consumption.
The genital organs are, as it were, woven into the same
grand web of organic life with the stomach, heart, lungs,
etc., by being largely supplied with the same class of nerves
on which the organs of nutrition depend for their functional
power ; but the genital organs are also supplied with nerves
of animal life, or those which are connected with the brain
and spinal marrow. Hence the influences of the brain,
may act directly on the genital organs; and of these latter


on the brains Lascivious thoughts and imaginations will
excite and stimulate the genital organs, cause an increased
quantity of blood to flow into them, and augment their
secretions and peculiar sensibilities ; and on the other hand,
the excited state of the genital organs, either from the
stimulations of semen or from diseased action in the system*
will throw its influence upon the brain, and force lascivious
thoughts and imaginations upon the mind.
It is supposed by many that the mischief of this practice
is from loss of semen. The loss of this secretion is certainly;
exhausting but is far from being the greater evil. Boys'
secrete no semen before puberty, the girls never secrete any,;
The real source of mischief is the nervous orgasm—that
vivid, ecstatic, and, in its natural exercise, most delightful
of sensuous enjoyments. The orgasm is almost a spasm,
when prematurely excited, and though then imperfect it
gives a shock to the whole system, and when often repeated
the nervous power is completely exhausted. All the vitality,
of the body goes to supply the immature and exhausted
amative organism, the brain and body.
The following are given by reputable medical writers as
some of the effects of this baneful habit.
Loss of memory and mental power ; entire concentration
of imagination on one feeling or act; a besotted, embarr-
assed, melancholy, and stupid look ; loss of presence of
mind; incapability of bearing the gaze of any one; tremors
and apprehensions of future misery ; morbid appetite;
indigestion, and the whole train of dyspeptic symptoms;
constipation ; fcetid breath, &c.; pale, sallow, cadaverous,
or greasy-looking skin; eruptions over the face; hollowness,
and lack of lustre in the eyes, with a dark circle around
them ; feebleness of the whole body; indisposition to make
any exertion; weakness, weariness, and dull pain in the
small of the back ; creeping sensation in the spine ; finally
there comes insanity or idiocy, or atrophy and death by
consumption.
Self-pollution is the most certain, though not always the
most immediate and direct avenue to destruction. It
constitutes a lingering species of motality, and if it were
possible to study and invent refinement in cruelty, surely
that would most clearly deserve the designation, which a
man points deliberately against himself—against not merely
his temporal but external welfare ; not by sudden wrench


to tear himself away from the amenities wife, children,
and home, but with his own hand imj.-.oeptibly to infuse
a deadly poison, slowly to rankle in the cup of life and
embitter each passing day ; to shroud in gloom the darken-
ing future, and invite the king of terrors prematurely to do
his office.
A youth endowed by Nature with talent and genius
becomes dull or totally stupid ; the mind loses all relish for
virtuous or exhalted ideas , the consciousness of the purity
and essential holiness of the Creator, operates as a bar
against any approach to him, or the appropriation of any
of those consolations under suffering which religion is
destined to afford.
All his fire and spirit are deadened by this detestable vice;
he is like a faded rose, a tree blasted in its bloom, a
wandering skeleton , nothing remains but debility, langour,
livid paleness, a withered body, and a degraded soul. The
whole life of such a man is a continued succession of secret
reproach, painful sensations arising from the consciousness
of having been the fabricator of his own distress, irresolution,
disgust of life, and not unfrequently self-murder. Nay,
what in effect is this but the consummation of slow self-
destruction ? Could we but lift the veil of the grave, how
should we startle at the long train of the victims of
sensualism ?
The first step to be taken for the cure of these sad effects
is at once and forever abandon the filthy habit. There
must be no indecision here, no temporising—it must be
broken off at once, and then by attention to a strict hygienic
regimen a cure will be effected,
The only power on earth by which the diseased and
disordered body can possibly regain health is by Nature’s
own renovating process, which sometimes seems to work
slow.f3p.nd for a long time to make no progress, If the
system is very much reduced and the patient afflicted with
involuntary nocturnal emissions, and distressed with pains,
and impaired senses, and enfeebled mind, and cheerless
melancholy, tending to despair and madness, he must
remember the general and special sympathies and reci-
procities which exist between the genital organ and the
alimentary canal and the brain ; and remember, too, that
in this morbid and exceedingly excitable and irritable
condition of the system, things which may seem too trifling


■to deserve notice may, nevertheless, be sufficient to keep up
the disorders of the body, and therefore it is hardly possible
to be too cautious, while in this condition, in regard to
verything which concerns regimen and conduct. Every
irritation, every undue excitement of the brain, stomach
and intestines, is calculated to continue the involuntary
emissions ; while the latter, in turn, keep up and increase
the morbid irritability of those organs. Improper quantities
of the best aliment in nature will produce the same effect;
and so also will the presence of food in the stomach,
duodenum, &c., at improper times. An over fullness, or
late supper, will almost invariably cause this evil in those
who are liable to such an affliction; and while those
emissions continue, it is impossible for the system to
recover strength and health. Costiveness of the bowels is
also sure to keep up the nightly discharges; and if
recourse be had to medicine, for the purpose of keeping the
bowels open, it is sure to perpetuate the mischief, by irri-
tating and debilitating still more the tissues of the
alimentary canal, and. through them, the whole system.
The food, therefore, must be of such a character as will
pass through the stomach and intestines with the least
irritation and oppression, while it at the same time affords
sufficient nourishment, and causes a free and healthy action
of the bowels. Farinaceous food, properly prepared, is
incomparably the best aliment, and good bread, made of
coarsely ground, unbolted wheat, rye, or Indian corn is
also admitted to be one of the very best articles of diet that
can be used.
When the nightly emissions are frequent, and the system
very much irritated, the patient should confine himself to a>
few articles of diet, and eat but little, carefully avoiding
full and late suppers. No animal food should be used at
all, and no other drink but pure water should be ever
drank.
Many young men, by observing these rules, have been
entirely relieved from emissions, but on drinking a single
glass of wine, brandy and water, or malt liquors, or a cup
of coffee, or eating a full meal, it would cause the emissions
to come on again the succeeding night. The patient
cannot be too careful to observe, a strict, undeviating
regimen, and to scrupulously avoid spirits, wine, malt,
liquors, and every kind of alcoholic drink, even in the


smallest quantity ; and opium, tobacco, coffee, tea, and all
other narcotics ; and pepper, ginger, mustard, horse-radish,
peppermint, and, in short, every kind of stimulating and
Sheafing substance.
If the patient requires something more warming and
stimulating than farinaceous food and water, to increase the
tone and action of the organs, and enable them to perform
their functions satisfactorily, he should not use stimulants,
which, while they increase the action, necessarily de-
teriorate the functional results, and impair the vital
properties of the tissues on which they act, especially when
there are natural, healthy and invigorating means of
increasing the tone and action of his organs, and general
vigor of his system, by active exercise. Let him exhilarate
himself by free and copious draughts of the pure air of
Heaven. Let him go to the gymnasium, and with moderate
beginning, and moderate increase of effort, let him swing
upon and climb the poles, the ropes and ladders, and vault
upon the wooden horse and practice all the other feats of
that admirable institution ; or let him walk and run and
jump, or labor on the farm; and avoid sedentary habits,,
and all anxieties and excitement of the mind; and most
strictly shun all dalliance with females, and all lewd books,
and obscene conversation and lascivious images and
thoughts. Let him sleep on a hard bed, and rise early in
the morning and take a shower bath of cold water, or
plunge into cold water, or sponge his body all over with it;
and, in either case rub himself off briskly and freely with a
good stiff flesh-brush ; and then exercise vigorously in the
open air, or in the gymnasium, for an hour before break-
fast. Let him exercise as much as he can through the
day; let him take an early, light supper, and take a good
deal of active exercise before going to bed ; and if his
nocturnal emissions still continue, let him, just before
getting into bed, repeat his shower or sponge or sitz bath,
and follow it freely with the coarse towel.
Let him perseveringly observe this regimen, without the
slightest deviation in a single instance, and let him
increase his exercise with his increasing strength—avoiding
constantly an excess of aliment, and after awhile his
nocturnal emissions and other disorders will disappear and
his strength and general vigor will increase and he will
become cheerful and sprightly, and feel as if new life and


new hopes were dawning on him ; and when he is fully
established in these improvements, he may gradually relax
the rigor of his diet, and take a great variety of simple
vegetables and fruits; but still he had better never go
beyond the vegetable kingdom and pure water for his
aliment.
By these means—if by any short of miraculous power—
and by these alone can the unhappy sufferer hope to be
restored to comfortable and permanent health and enjoy-
ment. The progress will be slow, but incomparably the
safest and surest; and health restored in this way will put
his body in a condition which will, in the greatest degree,
secure it from future prostration and suffering, and from
transmitting the evils of his former errors to an innocent
and helpless progeny.
SEMINAL' EMISSIONS.
There are few diseases whose victims are in a more
pitiable condition than those who suffer from seminal
losses. Very many cases have come under our observation,
and the following advice, when faithfully followed, has
been attended with benefit.
The general trouble—loss of semen, and consequent
exhaustion—takes place under several different circum-
stances. In some cases the seminal loss is attended by a
voluptuous dream. Such dreams occur to passionate
persons of both sexes. Where this action occurs but
seldom, and in consequence of the accumulation of vital
power in this part of the organism, it cannot be a source
of any great mischief, though a poor substitute for the
natural gratification of amative desire, but in men, in
'Certain states of the system, there comes on an excessive
excitability or irritability of the organs, which makes
these dreams occur with exhausting frequency The
semen is continually voided with a ruinous expenditure of
nervous power The seminal vesicles are irritated by the
presence of the smallest quantity of the fluid ; the nervous
action is excited, and the exhaustion follows. It is difficult
for any well man to conceive of the weak, hopeless,
miserable, despairing condition of the victim to this disease.
He feels coming upon him all the consequences of mastur-
bation, without having the power to prevent them. The


habit is not within his volition. The nervous organism
performing for itself what the voluntary muscles perform
for the victims of solitary vice. Hundreds of young men are
driven to suicide by this disease—hundreds more drown the
sense of suffering by the excesses of dissipation. All hope
of genial life is destroyed. There is no love, no marriage,
no children, no ambition—for all power of body and mind is
wasted. In some cases the action seems confined to the
spinal centre —the cerebellum no longer acts. The semen
is voided unconsciously. Sometimes, in extreme cases, it
oozes away without erection, or the slightest sensation of
pleasure, even passing off with the urine.
Masturbation is the cause of this terrible disease, in nine
cases out of ten. When the victim of this diseased
habit would stop, he finds that a fiend has taken the place
of his volition, a fiend he has raised, but cannot quell.
Continence is sometimes supposed to be a cause. Such
cases, however, are extremely doubtful. All diseasing and
debilitating influence may co-operate in causing this con-
dition. Exhaustion, even by natural means, especially in
promiscuous or unloving unions, may bring on the irrit-
ability or weakness. Married men have it occasionally as
well as single. There is no more potent cause than
tobacco ; and the whole class of nervous stimulants favor
this action. It is only a particular direction of what we
call nervousness.
The weakness may also result from worms in the
rectum. It may be known by an itching near the base of
the penis. These may readily be removed by injections of
warm water. As much water should fce thrown up as the
rectum will hold, and this must be allowed to descend
suddenly, when it will wash out whatever worms may be
within reach of the water.
In regard to the cure, there are but two or three directions
to be given, besides those already given for the cure of mas-
turbationi Let the patient, in all respects, place himself
in the conditions of health. Let him regulate his food by
his digestion, carefully evacuate his bowls every night,,
sleep cool, and before going to bed take a sitz bath,
beginning at a temperature of ninety degrees. Day after
day cool gradually at the rate of one degree a day. In
this way you will moderate the action of the parts, and
allay irritability. Cold water may be applied night and.


morning to the cerebellum. In the morning take a full
bath of cold water, and a thorough rubbing. As the cure
progresses, the patient will have his sitz bath colder, and
may apply other means of invigoration, as dashing cold
water upon the genitals, the rising douche, &c., use also
the following tonic :
Rose Water, 6 ounces ; Syrup of Orange Peel, 1 ounce ; Muriated
Tincture of Iron, 1 ounce. Mix.—Dose, one teaspoonful in a wine
glass of water, after each meal.
Several appliances are sold for the purpose of stopping
these emissions; they are generally a ring modified more
or less, that is placed on the penis when in a quiet state, so
that its erection and enlargement cannot take place with-
out awakening the patient from the pressure of the ring.
These contrivances are to be avoided. They cannot do
good, and may cause much injury to the urethra and
seminal ducts.
By persistently following this treatment, a cure is
certain. In most cases no medicines of any kind are
required and the cure is in the patients own hands.
Strict attention to the laws of health, morally and
physically, is all that is necessary to effect a complete and
permanent cure. Sufferers from this infirmity are
generally too anxious about symptoms, they are continually
watching and fretting about the urine, urinary pains, &c.,
and excited and nervous imagination magnifying ordinary
trifles into serious and alarming indications. The best
plan is to pay no attention to these matters whatever. If
any symptom is very alarming, application to the family
physician or any respectable practitioner would set matters
right. Marriage has been recommended as a cure for
seminal weakness, but it more frequently aggravates and
increases the disease. Before marriage relation is entered
into, the health should be fully restored.
IMPOTENCE AND STERILITY.
Impotence is an absolute cause of sterility, because it
prevents the conditions necessary to fecundation from
taking place; but although the act of coitus may be
accomplished, it does not follow that the person should
always be able to perpetuate his species. _ Stricture of the
urethra may prevent the discharge of seminal fluid ; or the
fluid may be directed towards the bladder or the paneties


of the urethra, by deviation of the orifices of the ejaculatory
ducts. The secretion may be altered in its nature, it may
only contain imperfect spermatozoa, &c. A man may
therefore, be unfruitful without being impotent.
Masturbation leads directly to impotence in men and
women, and often to sterility in the former. Barrenness
in women is not as in men. the result of impotence. The
organs, external and internal, may lose their sensibility
of pleasure and still the ovaries may form their germs
and the uterus may nourish them. Barrenness in women
may proceed Irora falling or other displacement of the
womb; from the closing of its mouth; from leucorrhoea or
whites, or other diseased discharges, which may arrest
and destroy the zoosperms ; or it may be caused by inflam-
mation, or excessive irritability of the uterus, by which the
Binbryos are thrown off in a series of early abortions, and
he same result may be produced by the frequent excite-
nent of amativeness.
The cure of sterility in men in those rare cases in which
it exists without impotence, must come with health. Use
the same treatment as for masturbation.
The cure of impotence must be a course of gradual in-
vigoration. Put the patient into the beat of possible
healthy conditions and the cure will come.
In addition to these means, the following may be taken:
Hexham, Tincture of Cinchona, 4 ounces ; Dilated Phosphoric
Acid, Jounce; Tincture of Nux Vomica, 2drachms. Mix.—Dose, 1
teaspoonful every 3 hours.
The impotence of women requires corresponding treat-
ment, with bathing, the sitz-bath, the wet bandage and
the vagina syringe. Take also the following pills :
Citrate of Iron, 1 drachm ; Sulphate of Quinine. 1 scruple , Extract
of Nux Vomica, 8 grains. Mix.—Make Into 32 pills. Dose. 1 pill
three times a day.
But when barrenness comes from excessive action, it
must be treated like nymphomania.
Nymphomania in women, and Satyriasis in men, are the
names given to inflamed and excited conditions of the
generative function The seats of this disease are in the
cerebellum, extending to the whole brain and involving
every feeling; the lower part of the spinal oord. exciting
continual erections and automatic and spasmodic action ;
and the generative organs.


Its causes are masturbation; exciting diet; an indolent,
sensual and voluptuous life ; and continence, or forced
abstinence from the enjoyments of love.
The symptoms of this disease are an excessive and per-
petual desire for sexual intercourse, a mind filled with
lascivious ideas, and excited to frenzy by every voluptuous
'image. There is no longer any discrimination of beauty,
fitness or attraction to the diseased man, every female, and
-even a female animal is an object of desire. Under its in-
fluence men have committed rapes on little children and
-aged women, and committed other vile abominations.
When women or girls are affected with nymphomania,
’there are similar and even more striking manifestations.
When the disease is brought on by masturbation, the
liabit must, of course, be at once broken off and some active
be engaged in to engage and absorb the whole
energies of body and mind.
A spare and entirely unstimulating diet, the sitz-bath,
the cold douche, or ice water to the cerebellum, are plainly
indicated. The vagina syringe helps to overcome the in-
flammation of the womb, and the wet bandage, often
renewed, showed be worn around the loins of women, and
should cover the genital organs of men. The treatment is,
in fact, very similar to that for masturbation, or inflamma-
tion of any other part of the system.
CHAPTER XVI.
DISEASES PECULIAR TO WOMEN.
DELAYED AND OBSTRUCTED
MENSTRUATION.
When the menses do not appear at the time when they
may naturally be expected, we call it delayed or obstructed
menstruation. It is, however, of great importance to know
whether a girl is sufficiently developed to make it necessary
for the menses to appear, although she may have reached
the proper age. As long as the girl has not increased
physically, if she has not become wider across the hips,
if her breasts has not become enlarged, and if she ex


perience none of the changes incident to this period, art
effort to force nature is positively injurious. In this case
a general treatment will be called for. She should be
required to exercise freely in the open air, retire early to
bed, and rise at an early hour in the morning. She should,
not be allowed to be closely confined at school if attending.
Her diet should be generous, but free from all rich food,.
which will disorder the stomach. If, however, she is fully
developed, and she suffers from time to time from con-
gestion of the head, breast or abdomen, it will be necessary
to interfere The following are the symptoms which will
generally be found in these cases: Headache, weight, full-
ness, and throbbing in the centre of the cranium, and in
the back part of the head ; pains in the back of the Joins ;
cold feet and hands, becoming sometimes very hot ; skin
harsh and dry ; slow pulse, and not unfrequently attended
with epilepsy.
TREATMENT.
It is well for the patient, a few days before the period,
to take a warm hip or foot bath twice a day, and at nighty
when retiring to bed, apply cloths wet in warm water to
the lower part of the abdomen.
The bowels should be kept open by some mild cathartic,,
as castor oil, or a pill of Aloes. If there is pain and full-
ness of the head during the discharge, or before it, use the
following:
Tincture of Aconite Leaves, 2 drachms ; Tincture of Belladonna, 1
drachm; Tincture of Cantharides, 1 drachm ; Morphia, 3 grains ;
Simple Syrup, 4 ounces. Dose —one teaspoonful three times a day.
If the pain is severe it may be taken every two hours.
Between the periods, if the system is weak, the following
may be taken :
Precip. Carbonate of Iron, 5 drachms; Extract Conium, 2 drachms ;
Balsam Peru, 1 drachm ;Alcohol, 4ounces; Oil Wintergreen,2o drops;
Simple Syrup, 8 ounces. Dose—Two teaspoonfuls three times a day.
Shake the mixture before using.
CHLOROSIS OR GREEN SICKNESS-
This disease generally occurs in young unmarried females
who are weak and delicate. It manifests itself about the
age of puberty, and is accompanied by feeble appetite, and
digestion. There is no menstrual discharge, or else it is-
very slight.


It is caused by unnutritious food, residence in damp and
dl-ventilated apartments. It may be hereditary, all the
females of the family being liable to the same disease.
Those who drink largely of tea. coffee, diluted acids, bad
wines, and indulge in tight lacing, are predisposed to this
disease. Among the exciting causes may be mentioned
disturbing emotions, unrequited love, home sickness,,
depression of spirits, &c.
If we take into consideration the fact that the cause of the
disease is impoverishment of the blood, the treatment will
not be difficult. Exercise freely in the open air ; protect
the body from chilliness by warm clothing, and plenty of it.
The patient should sleep on a mattress, in a well ventilated
room. The diet should be nourishing, without being
stimulating. It is important that the habits should be
regular, and the mind kept cheerful by society and innocent
amusements. Before the medical treatment is commenced,
the exciting causes of the disease must be removed. A.
complete change must be made in the existence of the
patient. If she is confined closely at school, she must be
removed; if she is inclined to confine herself to the house,
send her to the country. Picture to her the danger she is.
in by the continuance of such a life; give her plenty of
out-door exercise. The mental and moral causes are the-
most difficult to remove, but a change of scenery and new
friends will do much towards it. For those who are shut
up in factories, or who work all day in a stooping position,,
a change of employment must be made. A bath of tepid,'
water in the morning followed by a brisk rubbing will be
beneficial, also the frequent use of the sitting bath, and
the sponge bath in the evening. Active exercise should
precede and follow all baths. During menstruation all
applications of water shouid be omitted.
The following recipes are recommended by Dr. Pancoast,
of Philadelphia. They are to be taken on alternate days
that is, take No. lon one day. No. 2 the next day, and so
on:
No. I.—Precip. Carbonate of Iron, 5 drachms; Extract of Conium,
2 drachms ; Balsam Peru, I drachm ; Oil Cinnamon, 20 drops ; Simple
Syrup, 8 ouhces; Pulverised Gum arabic, 2 drachms. Mix.—-dose,,
two teaspoonfuls three times a day, every other day after meals.
Shake before using.
No. 2, —Tincture of llux Vomica, 1 drachm; Syfnp lodide of Iron,,


-1 ounce; Simple Syrup, 4 ounces. Mix.—Dose, one teaspoonful
3-iree times a day, every other day, in water after meals.
Another treatment is as follows:
Clear the bowels with the following mixture
Sulphate of Magnesia, 1 ounce : Nitrate of Potash, 10 grains
'Extract of Liquorice, 1 scruple ; Compound Infusion r t Senna, 5£
■ounces; Tincture of Jalap, 3 drachms ; Spirit of Sal Volatile, 1 drachm
Mix.—Dose two or three tablespoonfuls at a time, at intervals of two
•hours, until the effect is produced.
This is to be followed by Sulphate of Iron, 5 grains ; Extract of
<r?utian, 10 grains. Make into three pills, take a pill twice a day
•with the Compound Aloes or Rhubarb pill every night.
PROFUSE MENSTRUATION-
MENORRHAGIA.
By Menorrhagia we understand an immoderate flow of
the menses. There is no fixed amount of blood which if
lost at the menstrual period, but it varies in different
women. It will average, however, from four to eight
ounces. The quantity discharged may be estimated by the
number of napkins used. Each napkin will contain about
half an ounce, or one tablespoonful, so that eight napkins
would contain four ounces ; twenty, ten ounces etc. In
some females the discharge may be excessive without
impairment of the general health.
Some females are predisposed to uterine hemorrhages,
"from a relaxed, or flabby state of texture of the uterus.
Frequent child-bearing, abortion, high-living, too pro*
longed and frequent suckling, may induce flooding.
Among the exciting causes we may mention over exertion,
dancing, falls, lifting heavy weights, cold and mental
excitements.
TREATMENT.
The patient must lie down on a hard bed, and abstain
;from all stimulating food and drinks. The room should be
cool, and she should be lightly covered with bed clothes.
Soak the feet in warm water, and if the flowing is excessive,
apply cloths, wrung out in vinegar and water, to the lower
bowels. The hips must be elevated higher than the head.
Only in extreme cases should plugging be resorted to.
This may be done by pieces of linen, about four inches,


thrust into the vagina, until it is full, and a bandage
applied between the legs. Cold hip baths, and vaginal
injections of cold water will be beneficial when ther
haemorrhage is slight.
Use also the following ;
Diluted Sulphuric Acid, 2 drachms; Syrup of orange peel, 2 ounces*
Cinnamon Water, 1 ounce. Mix.—Dose, a teaspoonful in a winer
glass of water, two or three times a day.
If there is much pain administer the following every
two or three hours :
Morphia, J grain ; Cayenne, 4 grains; Resin, 4 grains. Mix.—
Give in Blackberry Syrup.
PAINFUL MENSTRUATION-MENSTRUAL
COLIC—DYSMENORRHEA.
The word dysmenorrhcea means a difficult monthly flow,
and is always preceded by severe pains in the back and
lower part of the abdomen. It is caused by taking cold
during the period; fright, violent mental emotions
obstinate constipation; sedentary occupation; smallness
of the mouth and neck of the womb. Females subject to
this trouble are generally relieved by marriage. The
symptoms are severe bearing down pains in tbs region of
the uterus, like labor pains ; restlessness, coldness, flashes
of heat, with headache; aching in the small of the back,
lower part of the abdomen and thighs. The discharge is
scanty, and contains shreds of fibre and clotted blood.
TREATMENT.
The patient should immediately go to bed and cover up
warmly. Stimulating food and drinks should be avoided.
Use a warm foot bath and sitting bath, with hot poultices
of hops or cloths, wet in hot water, applied to the
abdomen.
In the interval of the menses take active exercise with
a tepid hip bath three nights in the week, injecting some
of the water high up into the vagina. Keep the bowels
open with a pill of Aloes and Myrrh, and take a small
teaspoonful of the volatile Tincture of Guacium, three-


times a day in water. On the approach of the period,
take the following, at night:
Calomal, 3 grains; Opium, 1 grain. In the morning, a dose of
Liastor Oil, and, on the appearance of the menses, the Dover’s Powder,
and mixture, as before. Repeat this treatment in each interval, until
permanently relieved.
The following is recommended by Prof. Meigs, to be
taken a few days before the period :
Acetous Tincture of Colchicum, 3 drachms; Magnesia, 1 drachm ;
Sulphate of Magnesia, 3 drachms. Distilled Mint or Cinnamon Water,
4 ounces. Mix.—Dose, a small wineglassful every two or three hours
until it operates. This should be preceded the night before by a
small dose of blue pill.
SUPPRESSION OF THE MENSES ( Amenorrhea ).
By suppression is meant a disappearance of the menses,
after they have become established, and may be either
acute or chronic. It is caused by cold caught during the
flow, by exposure to night air, or by wetting the feet, fear,
shocks, violent mental emotions, anxiety, fevers, and other
acute diseases. Chronic suppression may either be a conse-
quence of the acute, or caused by delicate health ; also from
diseases of the ovaries, or womb. It may also be occasioned
by an imperforate hymen, in which case it must be cut open
by a physician.
When the suppression is caused by some diseasnin the
system, that disease must be cured before the *menses will
return. For sudden suppression use the warm sitting
bath or foot bath. Apply cloths wet in warm water to the
lower part of the abdomen, and drink freely of warm water.
If the suppression is chronic, and the patient is delicate, in
the interval between the menses use the shower or the full
hath of cold or tepid water, rubbing the body briskly with
a coarse towel, especially around the abdomen, loins, and
genital organs.
As soon as the discharge has ceased, a warm hip bath
will generally bring it on. If there is much inflammation
of the uterus, give the following :
Tincture Aconite leaves, 2 drachms; Sweet Spirits of Nitre, 1 ounce;
Simple Syrup. 3 ounces. Dose—One teaspoonful every two or three
hours.
If the discharge cannot be brought on, wait until the
next period. A few days before the term, the bowels


should be freely opened, and kept open until the period for
the discharge has arrived. The pill of Aloes and Iron of
the United States Dispensatory, is one of the best that can
be given. Give from one to three pills daily. If there is
no evident reason for the discharge not appearing, such as
pregnancy, inflammation of the neck of the womb, and the
woman is suffering from the suppression, use the following:
Caulophyllin, 1 drachm; Extract Aconite, 8 grains; Aloes, 10 grains;
Sulphate of Iron, 10 grains. Make into forty pills. Dose—two or
three pills, taken night and morning.
The remedies should always be taken a few days before
the period arrives for the menses. If chronic suppression
'is the result of any acute disease, the health must first be
re-established, otherwise, it would be wrong to force the
menses. When this has been done, immediately before the
return of the period, a warm hip bath should be taken
«very night for six nights, and one of the following pills
taken three times a day :
Fresh powdered Ergot of Rye, 50 grains ; Barbadoes Aloes, 12
grains ; Essential Oil of Juniper, 12 drops. Make into twelve pills
with syrup or mucilage, washing down each pill with a cupful of
Pennyroyal tea.
CESSATION OF THE MENSES-CHANGE OF
LIFE.
By the phrase “change of life,” or the critical period,
we understand the final cessation, or stoppage of the
menses. It usually takes place between the age of forty
and fifty, although in some cases it may occur as early as
thirty, and in others, not until sixty; however, we can
expect the change about the forty-fifth year.
The symptoms will vary according to the constitution ot
the woman; in some the change occurs by the discharge
gradually diminishing in quantity, in others by the inter-
vals betweeen the periods being lengthened. The woman
may pass this period without having any more unpleasant
symptoms than an occasional rush of blood to the head, or
a headache. Others, however, may have very severe
symptoms arise, which will require the care of an intelli-
gent physician. These disagreeable sensations should
receive a careful consideration, and not be hushed up with
the reply, that these complaints arise from the “ change of


life,” and will vanish whenever that change takes place*.
The foundation of serious trouble may be laid, which will
make the remainder of her existence a burden, and cub
short a life which might have been conducted to a green
old age. While this change is in progress, in probably the
majority of cases, there is more or less disturbance of the
health. It is sometimes quite impossible to say exactly
what is the trouble with the patient, except that she is out
of health. The following are some of the symptoms
which may arise:—Headache, dizziness, biliousness, sour-
stomach, indigestion, diarrhoea, costiveness, piles, itching*
of the private parts; cramps and colic in the bowels;
palpitation of the heart, swelling of the limbs and
abdomen; pains in the back and loins; paleness and-
general weakness.
TREATMENT.
Eat and drink moderately; sleep in airy, well ventilated
rooms ; avoid stimulants; exercise daily in the open air*
either by walking or riding ; avoid violent emotions; shun,
exposure to wet, stormy weather, wet feet, &c.
Keep the bowels regulated with the following :
Mercurial Pill, 1 grain; Ipecac Powder, £ grain; Compound
Rhubarb Pill, 3 grains. Mix. —for a pill to be taken every night.
Or one ounce of Hicra Picra, or powdered Aloes with
Castella, mixed in a pint of gin, which should stand for
four or five days, after, which a tablespoonful in a glass of
vater may be taken every morning, or second morning, as
the case may be.
If the patient is large and fleshy, of full habit, the
following is recommended:
Sulphate of Magnesia, 1J ounce; Compound Infusion of Roses,s
ounces ; Cinnamon Water, 1 ounce. Mix.—Dose, two tablespoonfuls
once a day.
If there are nervous symptoms prominent, give :
Valerianate of Zinc, 8 grains; Tincture of Valerian, 2 drachmsf
Orange Flower Water, 3J ounces; Syrup of Red Poppies, 2 drachms.
Mix.—Dose, a tablespoonful every six hours.


FALLING OF THE WOMB -(Prolapsus Uteri).
Falling of the womb is simply a sinking down of the
organ, and may be so slight as not to be noticed, or so
great that the organ will protrude between the legs through
the external opening. It is not a disease of the womb
itself; but some of its supports.
So long as the vagina retains its natural size, and the
ligaments are but two and a half inches long, the organ
will not be displaced. Whatever tends to relax and
weaken the system, may cause the complaint. The
muscles of the abdomen, which support the intestines, being
weakened from any cause, will allow the intestinss to press
down upon the womb and its ligaments, and in consequence
of this constant pressure, they give way. Another cause
is too early exercise after child-bearing. Flooding, and
leucorrhcea or whites, if allowed to continue for a long time
will produce it. In delicate females, continued running up
and down stairs, also tight lacing, dancing, leaping and
running, particularly during the period of menstruation,
when the womb has increased in weight by the blood con-
tained in it. The use of medicines to loosen the bowels,
which is very common among many, is still another cause
of the disorder.
Most females who are troubled with falling of the womb,
think that it is necessary to a cure that they should wear
some kind of a support to the abdomen. These supporters,
however, do a vast amount of harm, for by being worn
tightly around the abdomen, they increase the pressure on
the bowels, thus forcing down, more and more, the womb
and its appendages. All that is necessary is to raise up
the womb to its natural position, and use an instrument
that will keep it in place. This instrument is called a
pessary.* This pessary is a ring, or hollow, cup-shaped
globe, made of gold, silver, ivory, wood or gutta-percha,
and is placed in the vagina, or birth-place, thus supporting
the womb. The cold hip bath should be used once a day,
at the same time injecting cold water into the vagina, with
a syringe. Lie down as much as possible, and avoid
becoming fatigued. Apply cold bandages to the abdomen
on going to bed.
* For full description of Pessary write to (enclosing stamp for reply)
Sir Robert Bear, 16 Park Street, Sydney.


If the womb has descended to the external orifice, it is
often necessary to restore it to its natural position by press-
ing it upward and backward by a finger or two pressed into
the vagina. If the process be accompanied with pain, the
vagina should be well washed by injections of thick flax-
seed or slippery elm bark tea for a day or two before the
astringent washes are used.
Avoid tight corsets and heavy skirts, suspend the under
garments from the shoulders and not from the waist,
as is usually done. Use plain vegetable diet and avoid tea,
coffee, spirituous drinks and all sensual indulgences. Allow
the clothes to be loose. These things must be attended to
closely. The diet should be plain and nourishing, but not
stimulating.
Use an injection of an infusion of White Oak Bark,
Geranium, ora solution of Alum, in the proportion of one
ounce to the pint of water. If there is inflammation of the
womb, this must be subdued before using the pessary.
Give Tincture of Aconite, compound powder of Ipecac and
Opium, with injections of an infusion of Hops and Lobelia,
or an infusion of Belladonna.
If there is heat and difficulty in passing water, drink an
infusion of Marsh mallow and spearmint. If the patient is
weak, give the following tonic :
Sulphate Quinine, 25 grains; Citrate of Iron (soluble), 35 grains.
Make into twenty-four powders. Take a powder three times a day
after each meal in sweet wine.
LEUCOEEHCEA—WHITES—FLUOR ALBUS.
The word leucorrhoea is derived from two Greek words,
and means literally a “ white discharge,” It is also known
as “Fluor Albus,” “Whites,” and “Female Weakness,”
and consists of a “light colorless discharge from the
genital organs, varying in hue from a whitish or colorless,
to a yellowish, light green, or to a slightly red or brownish,
varying in consistency from a thin watery, to a thick
tenacious, ropy substance; and in quantity from a slight
increase in the healthy secretion, to several ounces in the
twenty-four hours.” This discharge generally occurs
between the age of fifteen and forty-five, seldom during
infancy or old age. When it occurs in young female


children, it will not unfrequently be produced by the
presence of pin worms in the vagina, which make their way
there from, the rectum. There will be intense itching of
the parts, and the worms can be removed with a small
piece of cloth, after separating the lips.
This disease may be either acute or chronic. The acute
form generally results from taking cold, and is simply a
catarrhal inflammation of the mucous membrane lining
the vagina. The chronic form is but a continuation of the
acute, and is generally caused by the acute stage having
been neglected or improperly treated. Ulceration of the
neck of the womb sometimes results. There are two forms
of leucorrhoea : —vaginal leucorrhoea, when the discharge
comes from the walls of the vagina ; the cervical leucorrhoea
when the discharge proceeds from the neck of the womb.
Causes. —Taking cold from sitting on the ground, or
exposure of the neck and shoulders ; over sexual excite-
ment, and sexual intercourse ; tight lacing; piles ; mis-
carriages and abortions ; displacements of the womb;
purgatives ; improper articles of diet; warm injections, or
injections of any kind; late hours, etc. It may also be
hereditary.
The treatment, to be successful, requires that the patient
should first be placed in a favorable condition. Anything
which tends to excite the disease must be avoided, as dis-
sipations, late suppers, etc. The, diet must be plain and
nourishing, without being stimulating, and be taken
regularly. Exercise, short of fatigue, will be beneficial.
The clothing should be warm, and worn loosely, especially
about the waist. Water is of great importance in the
treatment of this trouble. The sitting bath may be used
every day, and injections of cold or tepid water should
be used, three or four times a day, according to the severity
of the discharge.
An injection of weak, green tea will be found good in
some mild cases, as also sweet cider, a weak solution of
alum.
One of the best tonics is the Muriated Tincture of Iron,
of which take twenty or twenty-five drops, in half a
tumbler of water, three or four times a day. An excellent
injection is made by taking three drachms of Tannic acid,
and an ounce of alum, dissolving in a quart of water, and
inject one-third, three times a day. The bowels should be


kept open by Rochelle or Epsom Salts or Seidlitz Powder.
Where there is debility of the organs, or when the disease
has been brought on by exposure to cold, pregnancy, abor-
tions, etc., the following will be found very successful-
Tincture of Aloes, 2 ounces ; Muriated Tincture of Iron, 4 drachms.
Mix—Dose, thirty-five drops in water, three times a day.
At the same time use the following injection :
Sulphate of Zinc (white vitriol), 2 drachms; Sugar of Lead, 2
drachms. Mix in one quart of water, and use one-fourth for each,
injection.


FIG 55.
UTERUS NEARLY FILLED WITH THE OVUM.
1. Cervix Uteri, now closed by a gelatinous mass. 2. The Right
Fallopian Tube. 3. A process passing into the Right Fallopian
Tube. 4. Cavity of the Uterus 5. Points of Reflection of the
Decidua Recidua Reflexas Decidua Scrotina. 7. Allantois. 8.
Umbilical Vesicle with its Pedicle in the Umbilical Cord. 9.
Amnium. 10. Chorion ; between the space for the Albumen.


PRACTICAL AND RELIABLE
FAMILY DOCTOR.
READY REMEDIES FOR COMMON COMPLAINTS.
Abscess. —A collection of matter produced by inflam-
mation. Treatment. —Take a slightly cooling and gentle
aperient. If the abscess goes on regularly, leave it un-
disturbed, until its pointed shape and the thinness of the
skin shows its fitness for lancing. Do not squeeze it.
Foment the part with hot flannel, and apply a poultice of
linseed meal mixed with milk and water, or bread mixed
with oil. In parts where the poultice is difficult to retain,
it must be put into a bag made of muslin or lena, with a
tape attached to each corner of the bag to fasten it on and
retain it to its place. The poultice should be renewed
every six or eight hours, and continued for some days.
After discharging pretty freely, a slip of lint should be
inserted by a probe, and renewed once or twice a day.
according to the nature of the discharge. After this the
part should be supported by a bandage, or slips of adhesive
or soap plaster to facilitate contraction ; and the aperture
should be left open to favor the discharge. When healed,
tonic medicine, and change of air should be resorted to,
During the continuance of the abscess, the patient should
live on food which is plain and nutritious, without being
stimulating, avoiding at the same time wine, spirits and
beer.
Acidity of the Stomach.—A common symptom of
weak or disordered digestion. Treatment. —Small doses of
carbonate of soda, or ammonia, or sal-volatile in water
three or four times a day, with some tonic-bitter added.
Diet light and nutritious; take as much out-of-door
exercise as possible, and keep the bowels regular by the use.
of some mild aperient.


Ague- —Chills and Fever. A species of fever, which
comes only at stated intervals. Treatment. —In the cold
stage, give warm diluted drinks, as barley-water, weak tea,
or weak wine and water. Apply external warmth by
means of extra clothing, hot bottles to the feet, mustard
foot baths, bags of heated bran, baked salt, etc. In this
stage an opiate is often beneficial; give twenty-five to fifty
drops of laudanum, with an equal quantity of ether, in a
glass ot water. During the hot stage an opposite mode of
treatment must be adopted. Sponge the surface with tepid
or cold water, give cold diluted or iced drinks, and admin-
ister a full dose of laudanum. When the hot stage has
subsided into the sweating stage, the action of the skin
should be encouraged by tepid drinks ; and if the system
is much exhausted, weak spirit and water in small quantities
may be occasionally ventured on. During intermissions,
administer active aperients, as five grains calomel, with
three grains of compound extract of colocynth ; followed
by a mild purgative. Give bark to an extent as great as
the stomach will bear, and combine with it wine and
aromatics, accompanied by a generous, but light diet, and
moderate exercise. Treatment, —Quinine is a very power-
ful agent in ague; two or three grains of this medicine
administered twice and thrice daily, with such nourishing
diet as the patient can take, will, in ordinary cases, put a
speedy end to the disease. Treatment. —In cases of long
standing, which resist the usual modes of treatment, the
following remedy may be had recourse to : —lodide of
potassium, one and a half drachms; peppermint water,
twelve ounces ; take two tablespoonfuls every four hours.
One or two grains of sulphate of quinine may be added to
each dose. Treatment. —Agues are liable to return, and
persons subject to the complaint are always made aware of
its approach. In such cases, the fit may be rendered
milder by taking one scruple of ipecacuhana in an ounce of
water as an emetic, an hour previously. Sick persons
should also take occasional doses of sulphate of quinine
twice a day for three or four weeks; in spring and autumn
especially, night air must be avoided, and the early morn-
ing aix not attempted, until some warm fluid or food has
been introduced into the stomach.
Apoplexy- —A sudden suspension of the mental and
physical powers. Treatment. —Remove the patient into a


cool, well-ventilated room; place him in a reclining or
sitting posture, with the head and shoulders slightly
raised. Loosen all the tight parts of the sufferer’s dress,
especially anything pressing around the neck. Pour cold
water over the head, and keep it cool by means of powdered
ice in a bladder. Apply mustard plasters to the soles of
the feet and the calves of the legs. If the patient be of a
full habit, a dozen leeches may be applied behind the ears
and on the temples. If food had been taken recently, an
emetic of mustard and water may be given; and in order
to promote the action of the bowels, a drop of croton oil
should be placed on the tongue, and repeated every two
hours, till the end is accomplished. In persons of spare
habit, a small quantity of stimulant, as wine or brandy, or
a teaspoonful of sal-volatile in water, may be given every
twenty minutes or half-hour. Bleeding should only be
resorted to in the last extremity, where there is great
danger and the arrival of the medical man is delayed.
Persons of an apoplectic temperament should live moder-
ately, eat plain and unstimulating food, and avoid wine,
spirits, beer, etc. Exercise and fresh air are also of the
highest importance.
Appetite, Defective- —The loss of appetite may arise
from a variety of causes, as the excessive use of wines and
spirits, the partaking immoderately of warm fluids, seden-
tary occupation, over-anxiety, excess of mental labor, impure
air, etc. Treatment,— Regulation of diet and change of
air will be frequently found more beneficial than medicine.
But to restore the tone of the stomach, which is the chief
aim, the following decoction may be taken : —Peruvian
bark, six drachms ; cascarilla bark, two drachms. Bruise
them in a mortar, and boil them in a pint and a half of
water for a few minutes ; strain off the liquor while hot,
then add tincture of bark, two ounces; diluted nitric acid,
one and a half drachms. Four tablespoonfuls to be taken
thrice daily. Bitter tonics are also advantageous.
Rhubarb chewed an hour before dinner-time is also advan-
tageous. One or two four-grain compound aloe pills may
be taken at noon with beneficial effect.
Asthma. — An affection of the respiratory organs, which
betrays itself in labored and anxious breathing, accom


-panied by a sense of suffocation and constriction of the
chest. Treatment. —Place the patient in anfc upright
position, and loosen the dress, to accelerate the freedom of
the action of the chest. Let him inhale decoction of
stramonium, ether, or hops from the spout of a teapot.
Rigid abstinence will often render the most asthmatic
person comparatively free from attack. The bowels must
be kept active, and the simplest diet lt is also of
importance that asthmatic subjects reside in high situations,
and also that they occupy the upper rooms of a house.
Another Treatment.— Soak blotting paper in a strong
solution of saltpetre; dry it; take a piece about the size of
the palm of the hand, and on going to bed, light it, and lay
it upon the dressing-table in the bedroom. By doing so »
persons however badly affected with asthma will be able to
sleep almost as well as when in health.
Back Pains in. —Pains in the back are of many kinds,
and may result from a variety of causes. Treatment. If
weakness be the cause, cold bathing, the shower bath, and
squeezing a sponge repeatedly down the back, together with
vigorous rubbing with a rough towel, be found
efficacious. Rest, in a recumbent or semi-recumbent
position, will also alleviate the pain and contribute to its
removal. See Kidneys, Lumbago, Spinal Weakness, etc.
Baldness —This is caused by the disorganisation of the
root or bulb of the hair, and may proceed from age, general
derangement of the functions, or local disease. When
baldness proceeds from age, the hair can never be restored ;
but when arising from other causes, it may be. Treatment
Mix well together liquor of ammonia, one ounce ; cam-
phorated alcohol, one and a half drachms \ bay salt, half
ounce; water, one pint; with this mixture bathe the head
three times a day. Afterwards, rub well into the scalp a
pomatum made of fresh hog’s lard three and a quarter
ounces, and grated camphor, one ounce. The action of the
sedative water restores the capillary circulation
forms the bulb of the hair, and imparts new life to the
organ. «*-The pomatum assists and favors the growth.
Another Treatment. —Castor oil, one and a half ounces j
tincture of cantharides, half an ounce ; mix well together,
and rub the bald part with it night and morning.


Biliousness. —There is scarcely a person that is not
subject more or less to this complaint. It arises from a
disordered state of the liver, and is most frequently brought
about by over-indulgence in eating and drinking, or by
partaking of unwholesome food. An excess of fat or oily
matter, rich soups and gravies, pork, and highly seasoned
meats, pastry, and a variety of other articles of food too
numerous to mention, are apt to generate a redundancy of
bile. A little experience soon teaches a person “ what to
eat, drink, and avoid,” and if he oversteps the bounds of
discretion, he must, of course, expect to pay the penalty-
But biliousness may be induced by other causes than excess
in diet. A want of sufficient exercise is one of them,
impure air is another, and inattention to the skin is a third..
In order to ward off this excess of bile, every person ought
to take two or three hours’ active exercise in the open air
daily. In addition to this, he should either bathe in cold
or tepid water every morning, or sponge the whole surface
of the body, rubbing the skin afterwards with a rough
towel until a comfortable warmth and healthy glow are
produced. Some persons are so predisposed to biliousness,
that, despite every care and precaution, they are unable to
keep free from this complaint and they are compelled to
have frequent recourse to medicine to keep the liver in
working order. Treatment. —Compound extract of colocynth-
four scruples ; scammony, one scruple; extract of rhubarb,
twelve grains; soap, six grains; oil of cinnamon, four
drops ; mix and divide into twenty-four pills. Take two
at bedtime, and repeat as required.
Bladder, Irritation of. — Treatment —Inordinary cases
this may be relieved by warm fomentations applied to the
affected part, or by warm bathing. It is also well to avoid
undue exertion, to rest in a recumbent position as much as
possible, to keep the bowels well open, and to abstain from.
eating and drinking such things as are of a heating and
stimulating nature. When the complaint assumes a more
severe form, medical advice should be sought without
delay.
Blear Eye. —A term given to an inflammatory appear
ance of the eyelids and the corners of the eye itself
Treatment.—This minor complaint is often very obstinate.


arising, as it does, from some hereditary taint, and'
resolving itself into a constitutional defect. When resulting
from age, cold, or temporary weakness, adopt the following :
Mix five grains of sulphate of zinc in two tablespoonfuls of
water; wet the eye from time to time with a piece of linen
rag or lint dipped in this liquid.
Bleeding at the Nose-—This is common with young
persons, and with such as are of full habit of body.
Generally speaking, it may be regarded as an effort by
which Nature seeks to relieve the overcharged system, and
when it does not occur too frequently, or last too long, it is
as well to allow the bleeding to go on unchecked. With
weak or aged persons, however, it cannot be stopped too-
soon. Treatment. — The sudden application of cold by
driving the blood from the surface, effects a stoppage in
ordinary cases. Putting a door-key down the back, bathing
the face and head with cold water or vinegar and water.,
exposing the body to the cool air, and drinking iced
lemonade, are among these expedients If the bleeding is
difficult to check, place the person in an upright position,
put a moderate pinch of powdered alum into two table-
spoonfuls of water, and with a syringe inject this up the-
nostri’
Bleeding from Wounds-—lf is of importance to know
how to proceed to stop the bleeding of a wound, as many
serious and severe cases have occurred through the attend-
ant or bystander not possessing the presence of mind or
tact necessary in such an emergency. Treatment.— When
a wound is situated in the limbs, and is succeeded by
copious and protracted bleeding, the main thing is to pre-
vent the whole current of blood passing through the limb.
If from the upper part of the arm, the thumb should be
pressed firmly into that part of the neck behind the colla.-
bone ; this will intercept the flow of blood through the-
principal artery of the arm as it issues from the chest.
The thumb, however, is apt to become tired and relax its
pressure, and nothing can answer the purpose better than
the handle of a door-key wrapped in three or four folds of
linen, which can be held in its position for an indefinite
length 'of time. If the wound be high up on the leg or
thigh, the thumb should be pressed immediately below the


cavity of the groin, the patient, meanwhile, lying on his
back. This will have the effect of arresting the flow of
blood from the great artery which supplies the limbs.
When the wound is situated below the middle of the upper
arm, or below the middle of the thigh, a large and strong
handkerchief should be bound once or twice around the
■limb; a piece of stick, such as a large skewer, or a small
ruler, should then be introduced between the bandage and
the skin, and twisted so that it screws the handkerchief
tight until the flow of blood ceases. When the bleeding
-stops, the screwing should then cease, otherwise the parts
will be bruised and injured. If the wounded part be on a
bone, the bleeding can be arrested by firmly pressing the
finger on the bone, or by a cork, or a hard pad. It must
oe understood that these proceedings are to be adopted
only until such time as proper assistance arrives. In
every instance a surgeon ought to be sent for instantly.
Blistered Skin* —The hands and feet are most liable to
become blistered; the hands from unaccustomed manual
employment, and the feet from excessive walking. Treat-
ment. — When the blister is greatly puffed up, prick it with
.•a needle so that the watery matter may discharge itself.
Afterwards bathe the part with warm water. When a
long walk is about to be taken, especially in hot weather,
it is a good plan to rub the feet with sweet oil, which will
generally prevent blisters forming.
Blood. Spitting of. —A discharge of blood, often of a
frothy appearance, brought up with coughing, and preceded
by a saltish taste in the mouth, difficulty of breathing, and
a sense of weight and pain at the chest. Treatment. —
Avoidance of exertion, heat and mental disturbance. The
patient should be placed in a half-sitting posture. Cool
air must be freely admitted, and if necessary, the head and
body sprinkled with water. All stimulating food and drink
must be discarded, and cold acidulated beverages should be
given to drink. If this treatment does not arrest the
spitting, give a little alum in water, and keep the bowels
open with castor oil or a dose of Epsom salts. When the
spitting has ceased, every means should be adopted to
prevent a return, and this is most effectually accomplished
by the patient taking gentle carriage exercise, keeping


himself quiet, and taking occasional doses of Peruvian
bark.
Blotches- —Under this head are comprised those un-
sightly pustules and pimples which appear on the face
and other parts of the body. Treatment.— As blotches
arise chiefly from a disordered state of the stomach and
impurity of the blood, it is of the first consequence that
these important agents of the system should be properly
cared for. Blotches often arise from the eating of improper
food, the drinking of ardent spirits, indulgence in wine, etc.
sometimes from a disordered digestion, and sometimes
from the want of exercise and pure air, and inattention to
the skin. Where there is a tendency to this complaint,,
persons cannot be too particular as regards diet and
regimen. The food they take should be simple, and yet
nourishing; alcoholic drinks and malt liquors should
for a time foregone ; fat meats, rich soups, and pastry
should be especially avoided. Meanwhile active exercise
should be taken daily, until a profuse perspiration is
induced; then the whole surface of the body and the face
should be thoroughly rubbed with a towel. In addition to
this a tepid bath should be taken every morning, and the
skin submitted to a vigorous application of the flesh-brush.
As occasion requires, a mild aperient, together with a
saline draught, should be taken. Thus the system will be
attended to internally and externally, and by persevering
in this course the skin will be ultimately brought to a
healthy state. In the spring and autumn seasons, owing
to the changes which the blood undergoes, blotches are apt
to form on the faces of persons who are otherwise ordinarily
healthy. A very simple remedy is a dessert-spoonful of
milk of sulphur, taken in a little milk, every morning,
until the blotches disappear. Another remedy, equally
simple, is to boil a handful of mint leaves in a pint of
water, and take a wine-glassful of the decoction twice
daily. After what has been said, we need scarcely state
that to endeavour to drive away blotches by mere external
and local application is always hurtful, and generally
ineffectual; at least, the impurities are forced into the
system, to re-appear at some future time in a more
aggravated form.
Breath, Offensive. —The odor of the breath is a pretty
correct index of the state of the body. When tainted, it is


mot so uncommonly from decayed teeth, or from a morbid
secretion of the tonsils; but more frequently, in children
especially, it is indicative of disordered stomach and loaded
bowels. Treatment.— Rinse the mouth out two or three
times a day with a weak solution of soda or chloride of
lime. Or. —Take half a tumblerful of camomile tea on
rising every morning.
Bronchitis. —Inflammation of the bronchi, or tubes
which convey the air to the lungs. Acute Bronchitis.—
This makes itself known by great tightness of the chest,
difficulty of breathing, and considerable pain. Treatment.
—Hot bran poultices, mustard plasters, or blisters, should
be applied to the chest, throat, and between the shoulders.
An emetic should be given and repeated at the end of
twenty-four hours, if the symptoms have not decreased in
severity. After a while there should be administered two
grains each of calomel and James’s powder every six hours.
The patient should be kept in bed, and the temperature
of his chamber be carefully equalised. The diet should!
be light.
Chronic Bronchitis. —This form of disease generally!
makes its appearance towards the end of autumn, and is'
seldom got rid of until the end of spring. As feebleness!
commonly prevails in chronic bronchitis, the diet should!
be nutritious, and early and regular hours observed ;j
mustard plasters, and occasionally blisters, should be!
applied to the chest and between the shoulders. Warm}
stimulating expectorants should be given, namely, solution;
of acetate of ammonia, two ounces; carbonate of ammonia,
half a drachm; sweet spirits of nitre, three drachms;
water, four ounces; two tablespoonfuls to the dose, as
occasion requires. To assist the expectoration, and relieve
the difficulty of breathing, the steam of warm water may
be inhaled. The vapor of spirits of turpentine may be
diffused about the apartment by putting a tablespoonful in
a teacupful of hot water poured in a flat dish. The use of
a respirator during the winter months is a valuable means
of warding off the attacks of the disease.
Burns- —When these are of a serious character, a
surgeon should at once be sent for ; meanwhile, it is im-
portant to preserve as much as possible the underneath


skin. Treatment. —The best application is flour dusted on
'the injured part with a common kitchen dredger ; and as
the blisters rise, let the water be carefully drawn off, and
flour again applied. Or.— Apply cotton wool to the part
immediately after the accident, and allow it to remain
until the pain has entirely ceased, or until the wool drops
off with the scarf-skin.
Chapped Hands.—This troublesome complaint arises
generally from not wiping the hands perfectly dry after
washing them. Treatment.— Borax, two scruples; glycer-
ine, half-ounce; water, seven and a half ounces; mix, and
apply as a lotion twice a day.
Child Crowing. —A complaint which generally accom-
panies teething, and which manifests itself by a crowing
noise, attended often with a' sudden difficulty of breathing
approaching suffocation. Treatment. —If connected with
teething, the gums should be freely lanced. Cold water
should be sprinkled or dashed in the face. If the feet and
hands be much convulsed, the child should be placed in a
hot bath. During the recurrence of the paroxysms one
or two drops of choleric ether may be given every four
hours. At the same time the following mixture should be
given, with or without the rhubarb, according to the state
of the bowels; carbonate of magnesia, ten grains; car-
bonate of soda, fifteen grains ; powdered rhubarb, ten
grains; sugar, one drachm; dill-water, two ounces; a
teaspoonful once or twice a day. Beyond this, pure air,
• exercise, and careful feeding alone are necessary.
Chilblains. — A species of inflammation which arises
from exposure to a severe degree of cold. For Unbroken
Chilblains use: Solution of acetate of lead and cam-
phorated spirits, of each equal parts ; mix, and apply twice
a day with hair pencil.
Broken Chilblains— Apply a bread and water or
linseed meal poultice, for three or four days in succession,
and afterwards dress the sore surface with resin ointment
thinly Spread on lint, or with an ointment made of equal
parts of the ointment of nitrate of mercury and white
cerate, applied in the same manner.
Cholera. —The first and common form of this disease


depends on an excessive secretion of vitiated bile, which,
gives rise to violent bilious vomiting and purging, often
attended with considerable griping pain and cramp in
the limbs. Treatment. —Tincture of Opium, tincture of
camphor, and spirits of turpentine, of each three drachms ;
oil of peppermint, thirty drops; mix. Dose, one teaspoon-
ful in brandy and water, for the mild form of cholera; and
one tablespoonful for the more virulent. This proved one
of the most effective and popular remedies during the ter-
rible visitation of this disease in the year 1849. Another .
Treatment. Chalk mixture, one ounce ; aromatic con-
fection, ten to fifteen grains ; tincture of opium, five to
fifteen drops. To be taken every three or four hours until
looseness ceases. A Preventive.— Bicarbonate of soda, one
scruple; ginger, eight grains; in a glass of water after
breakfast and supper.
Cold in the Head. — A complaint arising from inflam-
mation of the lining membrane of the nostrils. Treatment
for a slight Cold.— On going to bed take a basin of warm
gruel, arrowroot, barley water or any other warm drink,
and bathe the feet in hot water for at least twenty minutes.
Treatment for a severe Cold.— The patient should remain
in a room as nearly as possible of uniform temperature, bathe
the feet in water as hot as it can be borne, with some
mustard added to it, and take one of the following soporific
draughts at bedtime : Sweet spirits of nitre, one drachm;
paregoric elixir, one drachm; spirits of mindererus, two*
drachms ; camphor mixture, one ounce ; mix. Or, Dover’s
powder, fifteen grains; spirit of mindererus, half an ounce;
cinnamon water, two ounces ; mix.
Cold on the Chest. —For this complaint the same
remedies are to be applied as for cold in the head, with the
addition of mustard plasters to the chest.
Cold Feet. —This derangement is attributable to defec-
tive circulation of the blood. Coldness of the feet mostly
comes on at night, and will often prevent a person sleeping
long after he has got into bed. Treatment.— Half an hour
before bedtime walk up and down the room briskly, or run
up and down stairs. Rub the feet with the hand or a flesh-
brush. * Dip them into hot water, without suffering them
to remain in any length of time. Drink some warm.


beverage just before going to bed. In winter-time, wear
boots instead of slippers in the house. Do not sit long
together, but every now and then get up and walk about.
These, and many other simple expediments, may be adopted
to prevent this unpleasant sensation.
Colic- —This disease depends on spasmodic and irregular
contraction of the muscular structure of the bowels. It is
indicated by griping pains in the bowels, chiefly about the
naval, and often accompanied with a painful distention of
the whole of the lower region of the bowels, with vomiting
and costiveness. Treatment. —Apply warmth to the feet in
all cases. Put a strong mustard plaster over the whole of the
stomach, and foment with poppyheads and camomiles. Or.
—Give a teaspoonful of antimonial wine every quarter of
an hour in warm water, till the stomach is thoroughly
relieved of its contents ; four hours afterwards administer
an ounce of castor oil. Painters' Colic is characterized by
obstinate costiveness, and vomiting of acrid bile; the pain
comes on in paroxysms. The spasms gradually become
more violent, and if not frequently alleviated, the bowels
become perfectly intractible.- Treatment —Give immediately
from thirty fo forty drops of laudanum, and apply a hot
bath , afterwards give the following mixture; take of
sulphate of magnesia, one ounce; powdered alum, two
drachms ; tincture of opium, half a drachm , water, six
ounces ; one-fourth every four hours.
Consumption. —A disease resulting from a scrofulous
state of the constitution, which especially determines to the
lungs. It would be folly to attempt to give remedies for a
complaint so difficult of treatment; and we will therefore
content ourselves with a few brief and general observations.
Medicines of all kinds have in turn been vaunted as specific
remedies for consumption; acids, alkalies, turpentines,
vegetable and mineral tonics, various sedatives and
narcotics, cod-liver oil, etc. Under suitable circumstances
any of these medicines may be available, but attention to
air, exercise, diet and general regimen, will often do more
towards improving the system than all the medicines that
can be administered. We may venture to assert that con-
sumption is cureable in its early stages, and in its more
advanced s.ates it may be alleviated and arrested. Much


may be done at the outset of the disease by careful exami
nation as to its cause and origin ; and as it is decidedly a
disease of debility, the grand aim should be to discover the
means by which the constitution may be strengthened and
improved.
Constipation- —Another form of costiveness, generally
resolving itself into an habitual state of the system,
Treatment, —Regulate the bowels carefully, if possible,
without the aid of medicine, by soliciting their action daily,
and taking mixed diet. Where the bowels are weak, un-
easy, torpid, and where there is a general sense of coldness,
and some aperient is absolutely required, have recourse to
the following :—Tincture of rhubarb and tincture of senna,
of each two drachms ; potash water or sal-volatile half a
drachm ; mix in a wineglassful of camomile tea, and take
it every day at noon or an hour before dinner, gradually
reducing the dose, or leaving it off by degrees. See Costive-
NESS.
Convulsions are of various kinds, partial or general,
most commonly displayed in children by the muscles of the
globe of the eye throwing the ball into involuntary distor-
tions, the face, neck, and jaws are similarly affected ; the
legs drawn stiffly up, and on a sudden violently thrust
down again, the arms act without control, or remain stiff
and motionless. It is a complaint incidental to teething.
Treatment. —Put the child into a warm bath from ten to
fifteen minutes ; and administer to a child from six months
to a year and a half old, five drops of antimonial wine in a
teaepnonful of water, repeating the dose every two and a
half hours till the child falls asleep, when it awakens, give
Dne grain of calomel and one of loaf sugar, and at the
expiration of four hours a teaspoonful of castor oil. If the
ige be from two to five years, increase the dose propor-
tionally.
Corns. —A thickened state of the scarf-skin, caused by
pressure or friction. The part of the skin acted upon
becomes hard, and presses upon the sensible skin within,
which, endeavouring to relieve itself, produces an-addi-
iional quantity ot scarf-skin. Treatment. —Soak the feet in
warm water pare the top of the corn, and apply one of the
ollowing solvents: 1. Lunar caustic; moisten the corn


and rub it with the caustic. 2. Nitric acid, applied with a
rod or stick. 3. Strong solution of sub-carbonate of
potash. The corn is gradually eaten away and disappears.
As corns are the result of friction, they may be prevented
or driven away at an early stage by anointing them every
night and morning with sweet oil, on the same principle
that lubrication is applied to axle-trees, etc., to prevent
friction injuring them.
Costiveness- —An undue retention of the contents of the
stomach, in which they are unusually hard, and expelled
with difficulty and sometimes with pain. Treatment —
Adopt a diet free from all astringents, taking care especially
that there is no alum in the bread, and using a coarser
kind. Let the food consist of a due admixture of meat and
■vegetables for dinner ; the beverage water, light malt
liquor, or occasionally spruco beer; for those who drink
wine, white wine in preference to port. For breakfast,
stale bread, or dry toast, with a moderate quantity of
butter ; honey, fish, or bacon ; cocoa, perhaps, is peferable
to tea or coffee; and porridge made with Scotch oatmeal
probably better still. Regular exercise, either by walking
-or on horseback, should be taken. Roasted or boiled
apples, pears, stewed prunes, raisins, gruel, with currants,
broths, with spinach, leaks, and other soft pot herbs, are
-excellent laxatives. If the above mode of living fail to
relax the bowels, inject warm water by means of an enema.
If there be an objection to the use of the foregoing, take of
castor oil four parts, and of tincture of jalap, aloes, or
rhubarb, one part; mix and diligently rub over the region
of the stomach every morning before rising; it should be
done under the bed-clothes, lest the unpleasant odor
should sicken the stomach.
Cough. —This common complaint results from the
irritation of the air passages, which may originate in various
causes. The most common cough is that arising from a
cold. Treatment —Observe light diet, take a dose of salts
and senna in the morning ; at night put the feet and legs
into warm water, and immediately after drying get into
bed, drink a pint of hot whey, with three grains of nitre in
>t. Cover up warmer than usual, in order to encourage
perspiration, and dry the skin thoroughly before rising.
Dr take syrup of poppies, syrup of squills, and paregoric


equal parts ; mix.—Dose, a tablespoonful when the cough
is troublesome.
Cramp- —An affection usually caused by exposure to
cold and damp. Treatment. —Foment the part affected
with warm water, with a little mustard mixed in it; drink
nothing cold, and take a little brandy and water ; put the
feet in warm water, and endeavour to produce a perspira-
tion ; take two or three times a day a dose of Peruvian
bark in a little wine, or a little ginger and water. For
severe cases ; Take of strong liniment of ammonia, one and
a half ounces ; oil of turpentine, one ounce; spirits of
camphor, one ounce ; hard soap, four drachms ; mix the
whole well together, and apply it to the part on flannels
heated and moistened. For cramp in the stomach : Drink
copious draughts of hot water, brandy and water, ether,,
or laudanum ; apply hot flannels moistened with compound
camphor liniment and turpentine ; bathe the feet in warm
water, or apply mustard poultices to them. When the
cause of cramp is constitutional, the best preventatives are
warm tonics, such as the essence of ginger and camomile,,
Jamaica ginger in powder, etc., avoiding fermented liquor
and green vegetables, particularly for supper, and wearing
flannel next the skin.
Croup. —An inflammation of the air-passages, peculiar
to children. It commences by producing a difficulty of
breathing, and the breath passes with a harsh rasping
noise, which can be heard from one room to another.
Those who have had one attack are subject to others, and
it is very apt to run in families. It is very rapid in its
course, and has been known to terminate fatally within an
hour or two from the first attack. A most important
point, therefore, is to adopt remedial measures with
promptitude and energy. Treatment. —Immediately the
sound previously described is recognised, give from half
to a whole teaspoonful of antimonial wine every quarter of
an hour, until the stomach be freely relieved by vomiting.
Afterwards give four grains of calomel in honey, putting it
on the tongue by little and little with the tip of the finger,
especially if the swallowing be rendered difficult. Put four
leeches on each side of the prominent part of the throat,
and rub the breast with a few drops of croton oil. If the
disease gain ground, put the child into a bath as warm as~


it can bear, to which a half pound of mustard has been
added ; keep the child in the hath for twenty minutes,
unless it be on the point of fainting. When removed from
the bath, apply to the thighs, legs, or feet mustard poul-
tices, made of equal parte of mustard and hot linseed meal;
suffer them to remain on for a quarter ot an hour,' and let
the application be repeated at half-hour intervals six or
eight times. Should this treatment afford relief, and the
breathing become a little easier, the calomel and antimo-
nial will begin to clear the intestines, and an amendment
may be looked for. The best now to be done is to rub the
throat with croton oil (avoid the leech bites), which will
bring out a plentiful crop of small pimples ; and give ten
drops of antimonial wine with eight drops of tincture of
henbane every three hours. If a visible improvement
should take place by the fourth night, give two grains of
calomel and four grains of powdered scammony, succeeded
on the following morning by a black draught, formed of
twenty grains of manna, two drachms of Epsom salts, and
one ounce of infusion of senna. When the child has
recovered, give it every other morning for a month four
grains calcined magnesia, twenty drops tincture of ginger
and camomile, and one drachm Epsom salts, in one ounce
of the infusion of cascarilla. Ever after let the child wear
flannel next the skin.
Deafness. — The most frequent cause of this disorder is
cold, causing a lodgment of hardened wax in the outer
passage of the ear. Treatment. —Drop into the ear every
night a small portion of salad oil, and syringe the ear daily
with water till the wax is detached and washed out; then
apply a little wool or cotton, moistened with the following
liniment : Camphorated oil, half an ounce ; soap liniment,
half drachm ; mix. Continue this for some weeks.
Debility is a falling off from the usual power of the
individual to perform those exertions in which he has been
habitually engaged. Treatment. —Nourishing food, change
of air, careful regulation of diet, cold shower
the following forms of medicine : —Sulphate of magnesia,
four ounces ; sulphate of iron, eight grains ; sulphate of
quinine, ten grains ; diluted sulphuric acid, one drachm;
infusion of gentian root, eight ounces ; two tablespoonfuls
twice or thrice a day. Or—Compound tincture of bark,


one ounce; carbonate of ammonia, two scruples; water,,
eight ounces ; two tablespoonfuls three times a day.
Depression of Spirits—This distressing state may
depend on excessive exhaustion of nervous power, from
anxiety, disappointment, or undue mental exertion. It
may also originate in bilous affection or derangement of
the general health, and these little causes often enter into
combination with those first mentioned. Treatment. —
The first thing is to turn the attention and thoughts from
those objects and channels which have proved prejudicial
then endeavor to brace up the the nerves, and gain tone for
the general system by exercise on horseback or on foot, by
regulated diet, and by early hours. Indolence and luxuri
ous living should be avoided, active employment resorted
to, and the mind engaged in some pursuit which will afford
interest as well as employment. With regard to medical
treatment, the state of the bowels must be attended to,
which in these cases are often torpid and inactive. To
remedy this, the following should be taken ;—Extract of
aloes, thirty grains ; Castile soap, twenty grains; oil of
cloves, three drops; mix, divide into twelve pills, and take
one or two for a dose, according to the circumstances ; or,
powdered aloes and powdered gum-guaicum, of each forty
grains; extract of henbane, half drachm; mix, and divide
into thirty pills, two to be taken when required. The diet
should be nutritous and somewhat generous ; meat may be
eaten twice a day, and a moderate amount of stimulating
fluids taken. Tea and coffee in excess should be avoided.-
Diarrhoea. —A disease which consists of frequent and
copious discharge of feculent matter from the intestines,
accompanied with griping and vomiting, but without in-
flammation. Treatment . —When diarrhoea proceeds from
over-eating, from irritating or unwholesome food, or from
constipation of the bowels, it is then an effort of nature to
expel the offending matter, and ought not, therefore, to be
checked abruptly by astringent remedies, which, though of
great service when judiciously used, are often given indis-
criminately in all cases of this disorder, which they fre-
quently aggravate, or bring on others of a more serious
character. When the disorder arises simply from an effort
of nature, as described, take the following :—Rhubarb in
powder, 15 grains ; Henry’s magnesia, one scruple; cinna


mon water one and a half ounces ; compound tincture of
lavender, half a drachm ; mix, and take at cnce. When
the complaint is obstinate and severe, chalk mixture, six
ounces, aromatic confection, one drachm; tincture of
cinnamon, two drachms ; laudanum, forty drops; mix ;
two tablespoonfuls to be taken after every liquid evacuation.
If the foregoing should fail, take tincture of catechu, three-
quarters of an ounce ; aromatic confection, one drachm ;
chalk mixture, six ounces ; laudanum, forty drops : syrup
of ginger, half an ounce ; mix ; one or two tablespoonfuls
to be taken after every loose evacuation. For children.—
In children from one year to five years old. if diarrhoea be
not habitual, but merely accidental, the best treatment is,
from half to a tablespoonful of antimonial wine every
quarter of an hour till the stomach has been thoroughly
relieved; and at bedtime,, from two to four grains of
powdered mercury with chalk, succeeded on the following
morning by a draught made of five grains of calcined mag-
nesia and twenty grains of manna, in one ounce of pepper-
mint water.
Dropsy- —An unnatural formation of fluid beneath the
skin, or in some cavities of the body. The treatment will
vary according to the situation and action of the effusion,
and with the organ which is implicated. The causes are
often too obscure, and the proper and efficient remedies too
active to be entrusted to non-medical hands, particularly as
it can rarely be an emergency. Whatever form dropsy
assumes, the case should at once be put under medical
superintendence. As temporary palliative measures, the
bowels should be kept either simply open or actively purged,
according as the patient is of weak or strong habit of body ;
and the effusion of water by drinking of such medicines and
liquors as increase the action of the kidneys, as broom,
dandelion, parsley, gin.
Dysentery. —An inflammatory disease of the large
intestines. It occurs in the summer and autumn, and is
most common in warm countries. The common causes of
it are unwholesome diet, excessive fatigue, and exposure to
the night air. Treatment. —In mild cases two or three
doses of castor oil, half an ounce to one ounce, Epsom salts,
half an ounce, accompanied by, and followed up with pills


or powders of ipecacuhana, calomel, and opium, of eachom
grain, at intervals of two or four hours, will usually b(
found a satisfactory mode of treatment. Warm baths oi
hot fomentations to the stomach are useful adjuncts, as art
also small injections of a teacupful of thin starch, with
twenty or thirty drops of laudanum, thrown up into tht
bowels at intervals of a few hours; any tendency to consti-
pation must be obviated by the taking of Epsom salts oi
castor oil. A light farinaceous diet should be observed
A recumbent position while the disease is active is desirable
The after debility is best treated with such bitters as
cascarilla and columba bark.
Epilepsy. —This disease arises from disorder of the brain
and spinal cord, the affection either originating directly in
them, or through them, in consequence of irritation in some
portion of the body. When the fit comes on, the patient
drops suddenly, and utters a piercing shriek; this is
followed by a fit, which lasts a few minutes, and is succeeded
by a torpor of some hours duration. Treatment.— As
epileptic subjects are apt to do themselves injury during
the continuance of the fit, this must be specially guarded
against, and may best be done by wrapping a large blanket
or rug round the patient; while to prevent the tongue
being bitten, a piece of india-rubber or wood should be
placed between the teeth, or the mouth may jbe filled with
common salt. Lay the patient on a bed with the head
slightly raised, loosen the neckcloth and the clothes about
the neck and chest. If the head be hot, pour cold water
upon it, and if the feet are cold, immerse them in a foot bath
of hot water and mustard, as soon as the violence of the fit
is passed. An emetic should then be given if the stomach
is gorged, and the patient should then be suffered to remain
tranquil until he recovers.
Eruptions of the Skin—Under this head may be
included all rashes not especially treated of in this little
work. Treatment. —As the main source of eruptions are
derangements of the constitution and stomach, it must be
borne in mind that local applications restoring the healthy
action of the skin, such as daily warm and cold sponging,
warm baths, vapor baths, and well-regulatedexercise should
be adopted, together with the following : Take of blue pill.


twenty grains; camphor, six grains ; tartarised antimony,
cne grain ; mix. and divide into sixteen piils, one or two
to be taken every night for three or four nights succes-
sively ; to be stopped for a like period, and then renewed.
If the bowels do not act gently under the influence of
these, a teaspoonful of Epsom salts and carbonate of
magnesia, mixed in equal proportion, may be taken each
following morning.
Exhaustion- —The diminished power either of the body
generally, or of one or more of its organs, to continue its
natural active operations, until it has been recruited by a
period of repose. As this derangement is commonly
induced by excess of labor or continued exertion, in these
cases the stomach is not receiving its full supply of nervous
stimulation, and therefore its work must be made as light
as possible, consistent with conveying good nourishment
into the system ; small quantities of food should be taken
at a time, and more frequently repeated. In the majority
of instances, the most efficient nourishment will be strong
concentrated animal soup, either alone or with bread , and
next in utility will be coffee or cocoa, along with bread or
biscuit, or with the yolk of an egg beaten in them The
use of wines and spirits should be avoided as long as possible.
But if extreme exhaustion exist, these latter will be found
excellent agents for restoring the vital powers A warm
bath is also very grateful and efficacious in cases of exhaus-
tion. Occasional doses of the following will stand in good
stead ; peppermint water, one and a half ounces; sal-volatile,
half a drachm ; sweet spirits of nitre, twelve drops; com-
pound spirit of lavender, one drachm ; syrup of cloves,
half an ounce; mix. Dose, two tablespoonfuls. Ob
camphor julep, one drachm ; Hoffman’s ether, two drachms ;
compound tincture of cardamons, half an ounce ; spirit of
aniseed, six drachms; oil of carraway, ten drachms;
syrup of ginger, two drachms; peppermint water, five and
a half ounces ; mix. Dose, two tablespoonfuls.
Eyes, Weakness of. —Sulphate of copper, fifteen
grains; camphor, four grains; boiling water, four
ounces ; mix ; strain, when cold, make up tc four pints
with water ; bathe the eye night and morning with a
.portion of the mixture.


-4
Face-Ache. —Dip a sponge, or piece of flannel, into
boiling water, and apply it as hot as can be borne over the
site of the pain. Or—Soak a piece of lint in chloroform,,
and apply it over the affected part. —Rub in laudanum.
Fainting. —During the fit the nostrils must be stimu-
lated by smelling salts, and cold water sprinkled over the
face and chest, and free air allowed. If the fainting be-
from loss of blood, the patient should be placed on his
back, without any elevation of the head ; and when the
patient can swallow, a little warm wine should be placed
in his mouth Or—Let the patient smell vinegar, and at
the same time bathe his temples, forehead, and wrists
with vinegar mixed with an equal quantity of warm water ;
and if he can swallow, pour into his mouth two or three
spoonfuls of vinegar mixed with four or five times as much
warm water.
Freckles- —These are of two kinds : Summer freckles, re-
sulting from the action of the sun and heat during the
summer season, and Cold freckles, which occur at all times
of the year, and are chiefly confined to persons of fair
complexion. Treatment. —Borax, fifteen grains , lemon-
juice, one ounce; sugar candy half a drachm , mix the
powders with the juice, and let them stand in a bottle,
shaking them occasionally until they are dissolved. Or
take —Muriate of ammonia, one drachm , spring water,
one pint, lavender water, two drachms. Apply with a
sponge two or three times a day.
Frost Bite —Lengthened exposure to the cold is apt to
render parts of the body numb and inanimate. The fingers,
toes, lips, nose, and ears are especially liable to be affected.
Treatment. —To restore the natural warmth of the part
gradually must be the main object, and on no account must,
a considerable degree of heat be applied suddenly, as it
would either kill the part outright, or cause violent inflam-
mation to result. Friction with snow or cold water merely
should be used, until the circulation is somewhat restored,
and then equal parts of brandy or some other spirit mixed l
with cold water may be applied, until the restoration is
completed. Frost-bites are apt to leave troublesome sores,
which are c ifficult to heal. The red precipitate ointment ie


the best application ; and if much inflamed, they should be
poulticed.
Gravel. —A disease depending on the formation of stony
matter in the kidney. Treatment —The general treatment
should consist in a hot bath and warm fomentations; a dose-
of castor oil should be administered, and when the bowels
have acted, if there be much pain, the following may be
given : Solution of acetate of morphine, one drachm ; spirit
of hydrochloric ether, two drachms ; syrup of roses, half arr
ounce; camphor mixture, four ounces; dose, one-fourth
part, to be taken at bedtime. Linseed tea or barley water-
should be drunk freely.
Hair, Weakness of-— The falling of the hair is gener-
ally a sign of debility of constitution. Treatment. —The-
removal of the bodily weakness, and the general bracing up-
of the system, is the first step to take. Frequent cutting
and frequent brushing and washing, are the next methods.
In addition to this, there may be applied, every morning
and evening, a portion of the following lotion : Eau-de-
cologne, two ounces ; tincture of cantharides, two drachms
oil of rosemary, ten drops; oil of lavender, ten drops
mix. Ok.—Clean the hair with rum every night on a soft
brush, then comb it very gently, and pour cold water on
the head every morning, after which thoroughly dry it. A
drop or two of sweet oil twice a week should also be used.
Hairs, Grey- —The sedentary, the studious, the debili-
tated, and the sickly, are, with very few exceptions, those
who are earliest visited with grey hairs. All whose employ-
ment renders much sitting necessary, and little or nc
exercise possible, are most liable to carry grey hairs
Treatment. —Mix thoroughly a small quantity of sub-nitrate
of bismuth with any common pomatum, and brush a small
portion of it into the hair daily.
Headache- —This painful malady, whether it be bilious
nervous, inflammatory, or plethoric, owes its origin gener
ally to one cause, namely constipation. The readiest anc
most certain means of cure, therefore, is to restore regu
larity in the functions of the bowels. Treatment —Let th<
food be light, and at dinner especially moderate; drink
only a little weak brandy and water, take gentle exercise


retire to rest at a certain hour every night. Takf of the
mass of blue pill one drachm, and divide it into twelve
pills, one or two for a dose every second night. In the
morning, before breakfast, take of Epsom salts a quarter ol
an ounce ; sub-carbonate of potash, one scruple ; dissolve
them in a wineglassful of cold water, with a little loaf
sugar. Put the mixture into a large glass, and add a
tablespoonful of lemon-juice Drink it while it is frothing
up. Persist in the treatment for a fortnight, when the
pills may be given at more distant intervals ; and at the
end of another fortnight they may be discontinued alto-
gether. The morning draught may be continued for a few
mornings, by which time the bowels will have, in all proba-
bility, recovered their natural action. If the headache be
not removed by the foregoing treatment, the following
should be adopted; Commence by taking of jalap thirty
grains, calomel, five grains, divided into two powders,
one of the powders to be taken two hours before the other.
When this purgative has operated well, bathe the legs in
warm water ; then take three grains of antimonial powder,
and lie down in bed with the head elevated. Put two
small blisters either on the side near the temples or behind
the ears, according to the situation of the pain. A light
diet should at the same time be observed. The diet should
be as follows : For breakfast, an egg, one slice of bread and
butter, and one cup of tea; for dinner, a mutton chop, or
an equal quantity of roast meat, with a thick slice of bread ;
for tea, a cupful of tea and a little dry toast; for supper, a
little bread and butter, with wine and water. Eat neither
veal, pork, bacon, pastry, pudding, fruit, nor vegetables.
Drink nothing at dinner; but one hour afterwards half a
tumblerful of barley water. Take four hours’ exercise in
the open air daily, and regulate the bowels with the
following mixture ; Epsom salts, two drachms ; sulphate of
iron, four grains ; Battley’s liquid dandelion, half an
ounce ; diluted sulphuric acid, forty-eight drops ; water,
five and a half ounces; mix, and take three tablespoonfuls
twice a day. The pursuance of this simple plan will in
most cases remove and prevent headache.
Heart Palpitation of-—Palpitation of the heart may
arise from a variety of causes, such as sudden fear, excite-
ment, flatulence, running, stimulants, etc. When it is


habitual, or lasts for any time, it generally depends upon a.’
disordered stomach ; in any case the complaint need not
give rise to aggravated fears, for when organic disease ol
the heart exists, it is a singular fact that the patient is un-
conscious of any unusual action; whereas any person-
putting his hand upon the chest can detect distinctly the
irregular throbs. The palpitation of the heart is most
common with persons of nervous temperament and weakly
constitutions, for their delicate frames are more susceptible
to the action going on within. Treatment. —The aim in
this case should be to brace up and invigorate the
generous diet, exercise, employment—mentally and bodily
—and a course of tonics. This system, if persevered in,
will speedily conquer the derangement. Treatment.—
Sometimes palpitation of the heart exists with persons of
full habit of body ; and in such cases the diet should be
lowered, the ordinary amount of exercise increased, and
gentle purgatives of a w r ann and soothing nature resorted
to.
Heartburn- —What is commonly called heartburn is not
a disease of the heart, but an uneasy sensation of heat or
acrimony about the pit of the stomach, accompanied, some-
times, by a rising in the throat like water. Treatment.—
One teaspoonful of the spirit of nitrous ether, in a glass of
water or cup of tea. Ou.—A large teaspoonful of magnesia
taken in a cup of tea, or a glass of mint water.
Hoarseness* — A sudden fit of hoarseness may come on
through some temporary derangement of the air tubes or
through exhaustion from protracted speaking, singing, etc.
Put into a teapot one part of pyroligneous acid to six parts
of boiling water, introduce the spout of the teapot into the
mouth, and inhale the vapor. Or.—Mix one teaspoonful of
sweet spirit of nitre in a wineglassful of water. Take this
two or three times a day.
Hysterics*—This complaint is confined chiefly to
females. Treatment.— A fit of hysterics is generally the
result of some natural and immediate cause, and until this
is discovered and removed, the patient will always be sub-
ject to these fits. When a person is seized with the fit the
dress should be loosened, fresh air admitted, cold water
dashed in the face, and salts, or singed feathers, applied to


the nostrils. If the consciousness does not then return, a
draught of sal-volatile and water should be given, and if
the patient be still insensible, the temples, and the nape of
the neck should be rubbed with brandy. When hysterics
-can be traced to impaired natural action, equal proportions
of pennyroyal and wormwood should be steeped in boiling
water, and suffered to simmer by the fire until the virtue of
the herbs is extracted. It should then be allowed to cool
and half a pint be taken twice or thrice a day, succeeded
on each occasion by a compound assafoetida pill, until the
desired relief is afforded.
Indigestion- —This is one of the most common ailments
to whicn mankind are subject, there being few individuals
who have not experienced it oftener than once in their lives.
Accidental fits of indigestion are of frequent occurrence, and
arise, for the most part, from overloading the stomach with
food, and indulging too freely in wine, spirits, or other
intoxicating liquors. Confirmed or chronic indigestion may
depend on debility or want of tone of the stomach, or it
may be caused by the lining or the mucous membrane of
this organ being in a state of irritation or chronic inflam-
mation. One of the most frequent causes of indigestion is
not masticating the food we eat properly, by which such
food is bolted instead of being reduced to a natural pulp
thereby presenting to the digestive organs a hardened mass
which it has the greatest difficulty to operate upon. An-
other cause is the habitual inattention to diet, both as
regards the quality and quantity of food, irregularity in the
times of eating, drinking large quantities of warm relaxing
fluids, and using malt liquors too freely. A third cause is
insufficient exercise; a fourth cause, impure air; and
besides these, there are numberless other causes which in a
greater or less degree exercise their baneful influence upon
this vital and ail-important function of our natures. Be-
fore we proceed to give the remedies applicable to this
disorder, we will lay before our readers what is of equal
consequence, both as regards prevention and cure, namely ;
Treatment. — Rise early ; sponge the body freely with cold
water ; breakfast without taking previous exercise, except a
saunter in the garden. At breakfast, drink no more than
half a pint of tea, neither too strong nor too weak, and
black tea in preference to any other. Eat a slice or two of


stale bread, together with a thin rasher of streaky bacon.
After a short rest, exercise should then be taken for two
Jhours and upwards. The dinner hour should not be later
than four or five hours after breakfast, and the best time in
-the day for this meal is lor 2 o’clock. The food should
be plain, without sauces. Roast mutton is the best of
all meats, both as regards nourishing properties and the
•ease with which it can be digested. For drink, toast and
water, and tea, weak, are preferable. After dinner, rest
and quiet for an hour are desirable. About three or four
hours after dinner, a cup of tea with a biscuit. Supper at
3 on light food, with a draught ot ale or wine and water.
To bed between 10 and 11 o’clock. This mode of
living will generally render a person exempt from habitual
indigestion ; nevertheless, in spite of these precautions,
occasional attacks of this derangement will make them-
selves felt. Treatment. — Bay berries, six drachms ;
grains of paradise, two drachms ; socotrine aloes, and
filings of iron, of each two scruples ; oil of turpentine, two
drachms; simple syrup, sufficient for an electuary; take a
piece the size of a nutmeg night and morning.
Influenza* —There is perhaps scarcely any complaint
which attacks a person so suddenly, and at the same time
so severely, as influenza. It generally comes on by an
intense feeling of pain at the top of the head, accompanied
with alternate sensations of heat and cold, cough, violent
sneezing, running at the nostrils, eyes, etc. Treatment.
—The patient should remain in a warm room, or keep
his bed if very poorly; hot bricks or hot water bottles
should be applied to the feet, and mustard poultices to the
chest. The bowels should be kept gently open, and weak
wine-whey should be given, each pint having mixed with it
a grain of tartar emetic and a drachm of nitrate of potash ;
a wineglassfui of this every four hours. Meanwhile the diet
should be light and yet nutritious; a little mutton broth
for dinner, with sago or arrowroot, and a small quantity ol
wine at other times. As the feverishness which attends
this complaint abates, a tonic should be administered as
follows : Infusion of gentian, one ounce; carbonate ol
grains. Take three times a day.
Jaundice. —a disease arising from obstruction to the
nassaee of the bile into the intestines, from disorders of th


liver. Treatment. —The diet should be cool, light, and'
diluting, consisting chiefly of ripe fruit and mild vegetables ;
the drink, barley water or linseed tea, sweetened with
liquorice, the bowels must be kept gently open. When
the disease has abated, constant doses of Peruvian bark
should be given, with good port wine; plenty of exercise
taken, and a mustard poultice occasionally placed over
the liver.
Lumbago —A rheumatic affection of the muscles of the
loins. It is indicated by stiffness and pain, and the pain,
is aggravated by stooping, sitting or rising to the upright
posture. It is most generally caused by exposure to wet
or cold. Treatment.— Nothing affords greater relief
than hot moist applications to the back, continued from
twelve to twenty-four hours at a time, and followed by the
rubbing well into the back and loins of soap liniment, com-
bined with one-sixth part of turpentine. Take also at bed-
time ten grains of Dover’s powder, with two grains of
calomel, and on the following morning half an ounce of
castor oil. Take also twice a day ten grains of carbonate-
of potass, with one teaspoonful of sweet nitre, in a wdne-
glassful of water.
Mouth (Sore). —Take of honey two tablespoonfuls
borax, powdered, half a drachm ; mix well together, and
take a teaspoonful twice a day. The mixture should be
placed in the mouth, little by little, touching the various
ulcers that are visible, or can be got at.
Mumps —These are swellings of the glands under the
jaw, the ear, and down the neck. They render the act of
swallowing difficult, and are attended with a slight degree
of feverishness, foul tongue, and headache. Treatment. —
Apply warm fomentations to the swelling, and immediately
afterwards wrap round with flannel to prevent cold chilling.
Sprinkle on the flannel compound liniment of turpentine..
Let the diet be light, chiefly farinaceous, and keep the
bowels regular by employing mild aperients. After the
fourth day take one grain ot quinine, in fifteen drops ol
diluted vitriolic acid, in a wineglassful of water, three times
a day for a fortnight. Should the swellings suddenly dis-
appear, and thereby aggravate the symptoms of fever, the
following liniment must be applied : Camphorated spirits,.


one ounce; solution of sub-carbonate of ammonia, two
drachms ; tincture of cantharides, half drachm; mix and
rub it until the swellings re-appear. Take also internally,
nitrate of potass, one drachm ; tartarised antimony, one
and a half grain. Mix and divide into six powders, one of
which is to be taken every four hours. Caution. —This
disease is contagious either by the atmosphere or personal
contact.
Nausea- —A sensation of sickness, with an inclination
to vomit. Although the feeling of nausea itself is referred
to the stomach, and may be due to causes connected with
that organ simply, it also frequently originates in disorder
in other and distant parts of the body. Treatment. —
Clear the stomach by an emetic of ipecacuhana, and after-
wards the bowels by two or three grains of calomel at night
followed by a black draught in the morning; also take
hydrocyanic acid, in doses of from one to three drops, with
five grains of bicarbonate of soda, every two, three or four
hours, in a glass of water. If the foregoing should fail,
two or three leeches may be applied to the pit of the
stomach, and one grain of calomel, with three grains of
chalk or magnesia, laid on the tongue in powder, and
swallowed gradually every four or six hours. So long as
the stomach is in a state of irritation, only small quantities
of food should be introduced into it at one time, as a tea-
spoonful of milk or beef tea every hour.
Nail, Ingrowing . —lt often happens that a tight or ill-
made shoe, by continual pressure on one part of the nail,
forces it into the flesh, and then causes great pain and in-
convenience. Treatment, fob the toe. — First procure an
easier shoe, which will allow the nail to take its natural
course : then take a piece of glass, and with it scrape the
whole length of the middle of the nail persistently, and yet
with a delicate hand. By this means, the centre of the
nail will eventually be rendered thin, that it may be
readily bent, and in this flexible condition it gives way to
the upward pressure of the skin on its outward edges,
•eadily bends, and offers no further resistance. The cause
Df irritation being withdrawn, the tenderness soon heals,
and the proud flesh drops down. Observe. —An ingrowing
nail may be caused by an improper mode of cutting it.
Nails should never be dipped at the corners, but cut straight
L


across the top, if anything, slightly scooped in the middle.
This leaves a sufficient amount of resistance at the corners:
for wear what shoes we may, there must always be a certain
degree pressure on the nail, which should be provided
for. Treatment for the finger.— Wrap the, affected
finger in a compress, moistened with a lotion made as
follows: Liquor of ammonia, one ounce ; camphorated
alcohol, one drachm ; bay salt, quarter of an ounce; water
three quarters of a pint; mix, and shake well together.
After ten minutes, remove this and replace by a compress
annointed with camphor pomatum, and kept in place till
next dressing by an indiarubber finger stall drawn over it.
Then dissolve one and a quarter ounces of camphor in a
gill of brandy, wet a narrow band with this solution, place
it round the root of the nail and let it remain there until the
next dressing. Observe. —The finger nails should be cut
of an oval shape, corresponding with the form of the finger;
they should not be allowed to grow too long, as they there-
by are rendered more liable to accident, neither should
they be too short, as they thus deprive the ends of the
fingers of their protection and support. When the nails
are naturaHy ragged or ill-formed, they should be gently
scraped, afterwards rubbed with lemon, then rinsed with
water, and well dried with a towel. If the nails grow
' more to one side than the other, they should be cut in such
a manner as to make the points come as near as possible
to the centre of the end of the finger.
Nervousness. —This unhealthy state of system depends
upon general debility. It is often inherited from birth,
and as often brought on by excess of sedentary occupation,
overstrained employment of the brain, mental emotion,
dissipation and excess. The nerves consist of a structure of
fibres or cords passing through the entire body, branching
olf from, and having a connection with each other, and
finally centres on the brain. They are the organs of feeling
and sensation of every kind ; and through them the mind
operates upon the body. It is obvious, therefore, that
what is termed the “ nervous system” has an important
part in the bodily functions ; and upon them,
much of health, but of happiness, depends. Treatment.—
The cure of nervous complaints lies rather in moral than
in medical treatment. For although much good may be


effected by tonics, such as bark, quinine, etc., there is far
more benefit to be derived from attention to diet and
regimen. In such cases, solid food should preponderate
over liquid, and the indulgence in warm and relaxing fluids
should be especially avoided; plain and nourishing meat,
as beef or mutton, a steak or chop, together with half a
pint of bitter ale or stout, forming the best dinner. Cocoa
is preferable to tea; vegetables should be but sparingly
eaten. Sedentary pursuits should be cast aside as much as
possible, but where they are compulsory, every spare
moment should be devoted to out-door employment, and
■brisk exercise. Early bedtime and early rising will prove
beneficial, and the use of the cold shower bath is excellent.
Gymnastic exercises, fencing, horse-riding, rowing, dancing,
and other pursuits which call forth the energies, serve also
to brace and invigorate the nervous system. It will also be
as well to mingle with society; frequent public assemblies
and amusements, and thus dispel that morbid desire for
seclusion and quietude which, if indulged in to excess,
renders a person unfitted for intercourse with mankind,
and materially interferes with advancement in life. Above
all, nervous patients should avoid seeking the advice of
those empirics whose advertisements crowd the columns of
our newspapers, whose nostrums are worthless, and who
only lay traps for patients in order to pander to their fears
and to prey upon their weakness. If the patient does not
derive the expected benefit by following out the course indi-
cated above, he should place himself under a respectable
medical man, who has a reputation to sustain, and a
■character to lose.
Neuralgia- —a painful affection of the nerves, situated
■chiefly in the face and head; it is also called Tic
Douloureux. This disease usually makes itself felt in a
series of sharp darting pains, coming on suddenly and as
suddenly going away. It may result from a variety of
causes, chiefly among which is exposure to damp and cold.
Treatment. —Take, in the first instance, a mild aperient,
to be followed for the next twenty-four hours with a two-
grain pill of quinine every four hours ; on the second day,
fifteen grains of iron in a wineglassful of
water; also every four hours, should the pain continue,
-apply a bran poultice, sprinkled with turpentine, to the


affected part, and at bedtime, in order to procure sleep and
lull the pain, twenty-four drops of laudanum may be taken,.
If the attack is not mitigated in its severity, the following
treatment must be adopted: Take of Dover’s powder
twenty grains; carbonate of ammonia, twelve grains
camphor water, three ounces; spirit of ether, half a
drachm ; mix, and take two tablespoonfuls three times a.
day ; also take of quinine, six grains; carbonate of soda,
twelve grains ; carbonate of iron, one drachm ; mix, and
divide into three powders, one to be taken an hour after
each dose of the foregoing mixture. Caution. —Persons
liable to this distressing malady should be careful not to
expose themselves to draughts, or wet, or damp. They
should also make choice of a high situation, and gravelly
soil to reside in.
Nightmare. —The common causes of nightmare are
indigestion and the use of narcotic and intoxicating
substances. Treatment. —Take of carbonate of soda, ten
grains; compound tincture of cardamons, three drachms ;
simple syrup, one drachm ; peppermint water, one ounce
mix for a draught, to be taken at bedtime. Caution.—
Persons subject to this visitation ought carefully to shun
all kinds of food likely to prove flatulent or of difficult
digestion. Hot and heavy suppers are particularly in-
jurious, as are acids. Excess of sedentary employment
should also be avoided.
Paralysis, or Palsy- —This disease consists of the loss
of diminution of sense or motion, or of both, in one or
more parts of the body. The symptoms which precede an.
attack of paralysis are numberless, and a pricking sensation
throughout the whole limb. Treatment. —The diet where
debility exists must be warm and invigorating, seasoned
with spicy and aromatic condiments, as mustard, horse-
radish, etc. The drink may be generous wine, or good
home-brewed ale. Friction with a flesh brush, or the warm
hand, is extremely proper, especially on the parts affected..
Blisters may likewise be applied with When
this cannot be done, rub in the liniment of ammonia. One
of the best external applications is electricity. The shocks
should be directed to the parts affected, and repeated daily
for several weeks. Cephalic snuff, or anything that makes
the patient sneeze, is useful. If the tongue be affected, the.


‘[patient may gargle his mouth frequently with brandy and
mustard, or he may retain a lump of sugar in his mouth,
[moistened with compound spirits of lavender. The wild
[valerian root is an excellent medicine in this disease. It
may either be taken in an infusion with sage leaves, or half
Sr drachm of it in powder in a glass of wine, three or four
imes a day. If the patient cannot use the valerian, he
|may take the following: Compound spirits of ammonia,
half ounce; compound spirits of lavender, half ounce ;
tincture of castor, half ounc»; mix, and take forty or fifty
(drops in a glass of wine three or four times a day. A table-
ppoonful of mustard seed, taken frequently, is a very good
medicine. The patient ought also to chew ginger, cin-
namon bark, or other warm spices. He may take, every
[four or six hours, three or four tablespoonfuls of the
paixture : Prepared ammonia, two scruples ; compound
(tincture of cardamons, one ounce ; syrup of orange peel,
bne ounce ; pennyroyal water, eleven ounces ; mi*. When
|fche attack is accompanied with faintness, and only partial
loss of consciousness, a teaspoonful of sal-volatile in a liUie
(water will be as suitable a remedy as any other, and may
fee repeated once or twice in the course of the first hour or
jtwo. In all cases of paralysis, however, the great essential
Is the most perfect quietude ; this and time will prove the
best restoratives. As the healthy state returns, exertion
of any kind must be very gradually and slowly resumed.
•|As this disease imperatively calls for the assistance of a
(doctor, we have merely alluded to it in general terms,
without attempting to point out specific remedies.
Piles- —These consist of small tumours, situated on the
extremity of the great gut, called the rectum. The piles
are usually accompanied by a sense of weight in the back,
loins, and bottom of the belly, together with pain in the
head, sickness at the stomach, and flatulence in the bowels.
If the tumor break, a quantity of blood is voided, and
considerable relief from pain is obtained, but if they con-
tinue unbroken, the patient experiences great pain. Tbeat-
Ment. —Take of lenitive electuary one ounce; flour of
Sulphur,"one ounce; jalap, in powder, one drachm ; balsam
of copaiba, Half ounce ; ginger, in powder, half drachm ;
cream of tartar, half ounce; syrup of ginger, a sufficient
quantity to form the whole into an electuary \ mix. Take


a teaspoonful every three hours until the bowels are freely-
opened, at the same time make use of the following lotion ::
Goulard water, six ounces; laudanum, one ounce ; mix,
and apply to the parts repeatedly. When the piles are
very painful and swollen, but discharge nothing, the
patient should sit over the steam of hot water. He may
also apply a linen cloth, dipped in warm spirits of wine, to
the upper part, or make use of bread and milk poultices.
Pimples. —These depend upon some derangement of
the digestive and other internal organs. Treatment. —
Take of tincture of cardamons one drachm ; ipecacuhana
wine, fifteen drops; flour of sulphur, as much as will lie
on a J dollar ; mix the whole with a glass of ginger or elder
wine, and take at bedtime ; repeat it every second or third
night, and, at the same time, pay attention to the bowels.
Poisons, to Counteract the Effect of-—There am
four kinds of poisons : Mineral, animal, vegetable, and
serial. The mineral poisons corrode the flesh, and produce
inflammation. The vegetable generally stupefy, and leave
no marks of inflammation. The animal generally affect the
whole body ; and the serial the respiratory organs. Mineral.
Poisons. — Treatment —First empty the stomach by giving
the following emetic; Sulphate of zinc, twenty grains;
powdered ipecacuhana, ten grains; mixed in milk. When-
this has operated, give plenty of barley water, milk, a
solution of gum-arabic, broth, or olive oil, mix wood ashes,
with boiling water; allow them to settle, and give the
lees ; or powdered charcoal may be given. For arsenic,
lime-water, chalk, and magnesia are recommended. For
nitrate of silver, common salt, a tablespoonful in a quart
of water, half a pint for a dose. Animal Poisons. —The
parts bitten by a venomous animal should, if possible, be
immediately cut out, then immersed in warm water; after
which some caustic application—such as nitrate of silver
—should be made to the entire surface of the wounded
part. Brandy, ammonia, and other stimulants, with
opiates, should be given. In bites from snakes, the use
of ligatures above the bitten part should on no account be
neglected. Vegetable Poisons.—Treatment — The chief
of these poisons are opium, hemlock, digitalis, belladonna,
laurel, and various kinds of fungi. In every case give an
emetic immediately. Sometimes the stomach is so torpid


that vomiting cannot be produced. In such cases, dashing
cold water over the head will frequently rouse the patient
and bring on vomiting. In all cases where laudanum or
opium has been taki .j, the patient must be kept constantly
roused, and made to walk about betwe n men, or
driven with speed over very rough roads in a cart ; on no
account must he be allowed to fall asleep. Oxalic acid is
often taken in mistake for salts; it acts with learful
rapidity, and the remedies must be immediate to prove
effectual. The chief antidotes are magnesia, chalk, or
mortar, or plaster taken from a wall, mixed thick in cold
water, and swallowed copiously. After giving any of these
antidotes, twenty-four grains of sulphate of zinc may be
taken. Poisons. —The fumes of metals generally
produce these. The fumes of charcoal and coke are also
poisonous. Immediately on discovering a person who has
been suffocated by these fumes, take him into the open air
and undress him, so that the air may get to every part of
the body ; place him in a leaning posture on a chair;
after a little time, cover him with flannel, sprinkle the face
with vinegar and water, the stomach with cold water, and
place the legs in a cold bath. After some time, well rub
the body, apply sal-volatile to the nostrils ; put him in a
warm bed, and keep him quiet. When he is able to
swallow, give him a little vinegar and water.
Rheumatism- —The characteristics of rheumatism are
fever, pain about the parts following the track of the
muscles, attacking the knees and larger joints in preference
to those of the feet and hands, increas°d by external heat.
The disease is distinguished into the chronic (long standing)
and acute (recent), the former having pain only present,
without fever or inflammation; the latter having fever and
inflammation in a high degree.— Chronic Rheumatism.
Treatment. —Every symptom of this form of rheumatism
proves to be a disease of debility, consequently the mode of
treatment .must be founded upon this idea. Hence,
stimulants of almost all kinds, prove serviceable, together
with tonics, warm bathing, etc. Let the patient be clothed
in flannel next the skin, and take an aperient pill every
night and morning; also take thirty drops of the wine of
the seeds of colchicum in camphor julep three times a
lay.


Ringworm- —This disease is distinct from Soam>-hkai>J
which however, it somewhat resembles. It may attack
any portion of the surface of the body singly or in numer-
ous spots It consists of a number of small watery pimples,
arranged in the form of a circle, the surrounding surface
being partially inflamed. Treatment. —Take a little cool-
ing medicine, and apply a lotion composed of carbonate oi
potass, two drachms; rose water eight ounces ; mix.
Scald-Head- —This consists in a peculiar pimply
eruption, followed by the formation of mattei ; the skin
breaks, and the matter communicates itself to the ad-
jacent parts until the whole head becomes affected. The
disease usually attacks children, especially those of a
scrofulous or weak constitution. It is highly contagious.
Treatment. —Carefully remove the hair, and apply to thf
affected parts night and morning the milder kind of the
nitrate of mercury ointment; give an occasional dose 01
calcined magnesia, from four to eight grains, about three
times a week. Pay strict attention to the child’s diei
which should be mild, and chiefly farinaceous, and on nc
account should salted meats or stimulating food be eaten.
Scalds. — In this accident the principle to act upon is,
to keep up the head of the part at first, and bring it down
gradually to the ordinary temperature. The first, and
most important object, is to protect the surface from the
action of the air. For this purpose, flour, cotton, wool, oi
wadding, are the readiest means. Treatment.— Flowers
of zinc, calomine powder, and lycopodium, of each one
ounce ; powdered myrrh, and sugar of lead, of each half a
drachm; lard, one-and-a-half-ounce; mix, and apply from
time to time. Or Take. —Lime water, one part; linseed
oil, two parts ; shake well together, and apply by lint or
linen soaked in it. Observe. —ln all cases of scalds, ii
fever should ensue, gentle laxative medicine ought to be
taken. The best are castor oil and Epsom salts.
Scarlet Fever. —It is our intention to notice only the
milder form of this disease for when it is severe and
malignant it demands the most skilful and judicious tre ■ -
ment on the part of a properly qualified medical man.
Mild scarlet fever is distinguished by a rash, which appears
in innumerable spots about the face and neck, and on the


following day they are seen all over the surface of tht
body. On the third day, the face, neck, and breast appeal
redder than usual. About the fourth day, the eruption ia
it its height; and on the fifth it begins to decline.
Treatment. —Keep the patient in a cool, well-ventilated
Toom, sponge the surface of the body three or four times a
day with tepid vinegar and water, give at first a rhubarb
draught, with one drachm of neutral tartrate of potash;
keep the bowels open with castor oil, given in the morning,
and one-tenth of a grain of extract of belladonna, every
four or six hours, in a little water. If the head be hot,
apply to it rags dipped in cold vinegar and water. The
diet should consist of bread and milk; weak beef tea, or
mutton broth, with bread, when it can be swallowed. To
allay the thirst, a teaspoonful of raspberry vinegar in s
small teacupful of water.
Scrofula. —This is the name rather of a constitutional
tendency than of a specific complaint. It is the result oi
a delicate constitution, and is most commonly inherited
from sickly or diseased parents. The following are some
of the signs of scrofula. In the form of the body there is
usually observable a want of muscular development; there
is also a general paleness and coldness of the surface oi
the body, which is owing to feeble circulation. In children,
the glands, those of the neck, chest, and belly, are tht
most usual seat of scrofulous disease. In adults, the lungg
most generally suffer. Treatment. —The body should b€
regularly submitted to cold or tepid bathing, in order tc
promote the healthy functions of the skin. The diet must
be carefully regulated, consisting chiefly of animal food
taken at certain intervals; an occasional glass of good beei
or wine may be allowed. For children a very nourishing
food may be prepared by boiling a small bag filled with
suet in cow’s milk. It bears a strong resemblance tc
goat’s milk, but has the advantage of being more astrin
gent. A pure, dry, and temperate atmosphere is the besi
to live in, and during the summer months and the earl]
autumn much advantage may be derived from sea air
combined with sea bathing. All persons of scrofuloui
tendency should wear flannel continuously next their skin
it being the best protector of the body from the bad in
fluence of our variable climate. A great variety of drug


have been employed in the treatment of scrofula, but they
are all of secondary importance in comparison with the
means above recommended. Take iodine, one *grain
iodide of potash, two grains ; distilled water, eight ounces :
mix. To a child under seven years of age a dessert-spoon-
ful of this mixture is to be given three times a day, in half:
a teacupful of water, sweetened with a little sugar. The
dose to be gradually increased to two tablespoonfuls and
the remedy is to be continued, if no unfavorable symptoms
occur, for a period of four or five weeks; its use is
then to be suspended, and gentle laxatives are to be ad-
ministered. After an interval of a fortnight the mixture
is to be again administered, commencing with a dessert-
spoonful, and gradually augmenting the dose as before-
At the expiration of a month the remedy is again to be dis-
continued, and again renewed. In this manner the means
of cure may be employed with perfect safety, and con-
tinued until the desired end is accomplished.
Scurf. —This is a natural formation, produced on every
part of the body where hair is found, and chiefly in the
hair of the head. It is also known by the name of dan-
druff. Treatment. —Beat up the yolk of an egg with a
pint of clean rain water. Apply it warm, and afterwards
wash the head with warm water.
Scurvy* —A disease depending on deterioration of the
blood, and generally the result of inappropriate nourish-
ment. It commences with langour and signs of general
debility, and great depression of spirits; the gums become
swollen and spongy, red or purple-looking, project over the
teeth, and bleed easily. The lower extremities become at
first stiff, then swollen and hard. Treatment. —As the
deprivation of fresh vegetables and milk is frequently the
cause of this complaint, so, a return to these will overcome
the disease ; and this of itself, is oftentimes a remedy.
Side, Pains in. —Pains in the side may arise from a
rheumatic affection, or from derangement of the stomach-
Treatment. —Regulate the state of the bowels by mild
aperients, and if the system seems impoverished, and there
has been much debility of the digestive organs, take twenty
grains of the sesquioxide of iron twice or thrice a day-
Employ the warm bath frequently, and apply to the part


affected a muslin bag filled with hops and well soaked in
hot water; also rub in every fourth hour the following :
Tincture of aconite, half an ounce ; soap liniment, one and
a half ounces; mix. If the pains be situated high up in
the region of the chest, they may be occasioned by inflam-
matory affection of the lungs, but in this case will be
accompanied with more or less fever, and other symptoms
indicative of the disorder. Pain on the right side, lower
down, may be owing to an affection of the liver; on the
left side, to an affection on the left side; it, however,
often occurs as a sympathetic affection, sometimes of the*
heart or lungs, in either sex. It is common with females at
times of functional disorder. Obstinate and increasing
pain of the side, which will not go away with the treatment
above indicated, must on no account be neglected. There
is evidently something radically wrong in the system, and
the advice of a medical man should be taken.
Sight, Dimness of—T-'nis may arise from effusion on
the external coat of the eye, or from disease of the retina —
that internal lining, coating of the eye, which receives the
impression of external objects; but frequently a dimness of
sight arises from a partial derangement of the retina,
owing to a bad state of the digestive organs ; for, as the
retina is an expansion of the optic nerve, and as the optic
nerve has its source from that part of the brain where the
nerves of the stomach arise, it is natural to think that
when the stomach is deranged a partial effect must be evident
on the eyes. Treatment. —When a person feels dimness
of sight, which, upon examination, he finds does not arise
from external derangements of the coats of the eye, he
should direct his attention to the treatment of the stomach.
An emetic ahould be first taken, commencing on the day
following with small doses of tincture of rhubarb, and con-
tinuing the dose daily; take also every morning a tea-
spoonful of acidulated decoction of bark, and every seventh,
or eight day a five-grain blue pill. The shower bath,
good diet, change of air, and sea bathing, are all excellent
remedial measures. Bathe the eye with cold water, and.
use the following lotion : Sulphate of zinc, one grain ;
elder flower water, one ounce ; mix. When the eyes are
watery and irritable, great benefit will be derived from
laudanum, or sedative solution of opium, painted several


COMPLETE MIDWIFERY.-
Full Edition, Colored Plates, and Information as
wanted. Price 4s. post free.
SILENT FRIEND. By Dr. Lamartine. A private
book, illustrated. Valuable Recipes. Cure your own
Complaint. Of special value to young men. Is. 6d.
Post Free,
MODERN ETIQUETTE. —Parties, Courtship, Love,
Dress, Visiting, Introductions, Weddings, etc. Is, 6d.
HOW TO MESMERISE,—Thought-Reading, Mesmeric
Entertainments, etc. Is 6d.
./ AMATIYENESS j Or, EVILS AND REMEDIES OF
* EXCESSIVE AND PERVERTED SENSUALITY.
Including Warning and Advice to the Married and
Single. By 0. S. Fowler. Price 6d.; by post, Bd.
LOVE AND PARENTAGE; Applied to the Improve-
ment of Offspring. Including important directions
and suggestions to Lovers and the Married. By
0. S. Fowler. Price, 6d ;by post, Bd.
MATRIMONY; Or, PHRENOLOGY & PHYSIOLOGY
Applied to the Selection of Congenial Companions
for Life. Including Directions to the Married for
Living Together Affectionately and Happily. By 0.
S. Fowler. Price, 6d ;by post, Bd.
PHYSIOGNOMY; Or, How to Read the Character of
Both Sexes at a Glance; wherein is Shown the
Sure Way of Choosing Wives, Husbands, etc. By
Dr. Jepson. Price, Is ;by post, Is. 3d.
OLD EYES MADE NEW. By Dr. Foote. Price, Is.
by post, Is. 3d.
SPERMATORRHCEA, AND HOW TO CURE IT. By
Dr. Foote. Price, Is; by post, Is. 3d.
Do Not Fail to Read “ THE CAT LET OUT OF THE
BAG.” Price, Is ;by post, Is. 2d.
For Complete Editions, write to
—SIR ROBERT BEAR,—
Box 22, Park Street, Post Office.


times over the lids and around the eye at night, and allowed
to dry on, and washed off in the morning.
Sleep, Want of- —The want of sleep, so distressing in
itself, and so wearing to the system, may arise from a,
variety of causes ; pain of the body and anxiety of mind
are chief among these. But a person may be kept awake
from some simple causes, as over-fatigue, want of out-door
exercise, or overloaded stomach, cold feet, etc. Again
sleeplessness may exist without assignable reasons..
Treatment. —Adopt an easy recumbent position, inclining
the head towards the chest, shut the eyes and take several
deep inspirations with the mouth closed. Another. —Tie
a decanter-stopper with a bright metallic top, a pencil case
or any other bright object, on the forehead, in such a
position that the eyes must be distorted or strained in
order to see it. By resolutely gazing in this way for a
short time, without winking, with the mind fully absorbed
in the effort, the muscles of the eyes gradually relax, and
the person falls asleep. Another.— Just before lying down,.,
drink a tumblerful of cold spring water with a few grains
of carbonate of potash in it. Another. —Having placed
the body in a comfortable position, commence rolling the
eye-balls backwards and forwards, and upwards and down-
wards ; continue this until sleep comes on, which is
generally in three or four minutes. Another. —Count
slowly, and with the eyes shut, from 1 to 1000, or any
other number necessary ; in the midst of the counting the
person will in all probability fall asleep. Another.—Take-
a warm bath just before going to bed. A warm footbath
will sometimes answer the purpose. Another. —Rub the
body well with a rough towel or a flesh brush for a quarter
of an hour, and go to bed immediately. Another. — -Take
a walk in the garden or up and down the room, until the
whole body feels in a warm glow then go to bed im-
mediately. Another. —Cut a Spanish onion into shreds,,
place it in a basin, and pour boiling vinegar over it; after
letting it steep for a short time, eat it either alone or with
the ordinary supper food. This mode of treating the onion,
deprives it in a great measure of its unpleasant taste and
smell, while its sleep-inducing properties are but little
impaired. Another. —Take twenty grains of carbonate of
soda the last thing on going to bed. Another. —Camphor,.


LADIES’ OWN TREATMENT.
The Ladies’
Own Pill,
For the Requirements of Females.
BARMLESS. HEALTHFUL, AN INFALLIBLY RELIABLE.
The rapidity with which this Remedy has gained favor throughout
,England and America for the last half century, and its Enormous
Sale, fully establishes its merit as a Friend, who seldom deceives
by failing to produce the desired effect.
Willspeedly remove all irregularities incidental to females (whether
chronic or otherwise).
Are THE ONLY PILLS of their kind that have earned such high
reputation amongst the Profession and Ladies of all classes where-
-ever introduced ; performing their work silently hut surely.
The ingredients of these Pills are most highly recommended by
4he following eminent physicians :
W. S. Playfair, M.D., F.K.C.P., King’s College, London.
F. Barnes, M.D, Physician to General Lying-in Hospital,
London.
Id. Costes, M.D., Hospital St. Andre, Bordeaux, France.
W. Lexshman, M.D., Professor of Midwifery, Glasgow University.
R. Bahthalow, A.M., M.D., L.L.D., Professor of Medicine and
general Therapeutics.
T. Watson, M.D., Lecturer on the principles and practice of
Medicine, King’s College London.
R. Fabquhakson, M.D., Lecturer on Materia Medica at St.
Mary’s Hospital
Used by the leading qualified Midwives on the Continent, and
•pronounced by them to be the most reliable remedy in restoring
nature to its pr oper functions (the neglect of which lays the ground-
work of so much destruction to the female constitution).
tS" They contain NO POISON or VIOLENT DRUGS, and may
be taken with the utmost safety in the prescribed doses without dis-
comfort or injury to the general health, and in no way interfering
with household duties.
In occasional doses they will be found most beneficial in relieving
Head ache, Langour, Depression of Spirit and General Debility.
Special instructions which cannot be given here will be found
-enclosed in each box.
Numerous testimonials have been received from all parts, but
-delicacy precludes their publication.
As many attempts have been made in these colonies to imitate
these World-Famed Pills, it is deemed necessary to Caution the Public
against fraud. Order the Ladies’ Own Pill from
SIR 808 I lIT 1 EAR, Box 22, Park-street Post Office, Sydney.
Price 4s. Wrapped and sent free from observation to any address.


-twenty-five grains; rectified spirit, five drops ; rub the
camphor and the spirit well together in a mortar, then
add powdered gum arabic, four drachms; syrup of lemon,
half an ounce : peppermint, seven ounces ; mix, and take
three tablespoonfuls at bedtime. Another —Get out of
■bed, turn down the bed-clothes, and walk up and down the
room for a few minutes, and then return to bed. Another
—Take a teaspoonful of paregoric elixir in a wineglassful
■of water just before lying down. Caution— The habit
of procuring sleep by indulgence in opium is exceedingly
hurtful, for opium is injurious to the stomach, and loses
its effect unless the dose be increased from night to night,
which renders it still more injurious.
Sore Throat- —This disease is most prevalent during
the spring and autumn of'the year, particularly among
young people. It is usually the effect of cold caught after
dancing, or by wet feet. Treatment.— When the throat
is threatened, gargle it with diluted spirit of hartshorn, not
so strong as to burn the mouth ; rub in also, under the
jaw, below the chin, the volatile liniment. Take meanwhile
a saline purgative. Or—On the first appearance of diffi-
culty in swallowing take of senna tea a cupful, and dissolve
in it three drachms of Epsom salts. Bathe the legs and
feet in warm water, and go to bed with three or four folds
of flannel about the neck; take of spirits of minderus, one
ounce; antimonial wine, thirty drops; water, three ounces;
syrup of squills, one drachm; mix, and take a tablespoon-
ful every hour until perspiration is freely induced.
Spasms. —Persons subject to confined bowels, if they
have eaten anything which disagrees with them, are liable
to this complaint. Treatment. —Take two teaspoonfuls of
antimonial wine every quarter of an hour till the stomach
is thoroughly relieved. Two hours afterwards, take one
drachm of sal-volatile, with one ounce of castor oil.
Stomach-Ache. —A complaint which usually arises from
taking unwholesome or indigestible food. Treatment. —
Take of magnesia one drachm ; rhubarb, half a drachm ;
powdered ginger, ten grains ; divide into three powders ;
take one of these instantly, mixed in a little water, until
quite smooth. Another. —For Babies. Mix twenty grains
of carbonate of magnesia in one ounce of dill-water, to


PELTZER’S
Dancing without a MftStGF
AJSITD
BALL-ROOM MANUAL.
COMPLETE SELF-INSTRUCTOR IN THE ART OF DINGING-
AND
COMPLETE GUIDE TO ALL THAT PERTAINS
TO THE ORGANIZING, MANAGEMENT,
DRESS, ETIQUETTE, AND TOILET
OF THE BALL-ROOM.
Dancing as an elegant accomplishment has ever stood prominentj.
because no other art or exercise can give the individual that grace-
ful demeanour and easy deportment so essential to a correct appear-
appearance in cultured society. As it is not always convenient to.
have recourse to a teacher of dancing, this work aims to supply the
deficiency. In this it has been very successful. By a series of
practical and lucid instructions, the art of dancing is so simplified,
that anyone can become proficient in the art
WITHOUT THE AID OF A MASTER.
In addition to specific, detailed instructions as to HOW TO
DANCE, it gives some very valuable information pertaining to
Dancing, Balls and Festivals.
ALL THE POPULAR DANCES are given, and the whole is illus-
trated by numerous cuts and diagrams, making the art so simple
that the most ignorant can become expert in it.
This book is well printed on good paper, with beautifully illus-
trated cover in colors.
Ask for PELTZER’S “ DANCINGjWITHOUT A MASTER.” on
sale at all Booksellers, Price Is., or sent Post Free to any address
for Is. 3d., from SIR ROBERT BEAR, Box 22, Park-street Post
Office, Sydney,


which add ten drops of sal-volatile, give a teaspoonful when
the child appears to be in pain. Another. —For children.
Give to the child from a half to a teaspoonful of antimonial
wine in half a wineglassful of warm water, and repeated
every quarter of an hour, until the stomach is thoroughly
relieved by vomiting. When this has been effected, give a
dose of simple aperient medicine at bedtime, succeeded by
a senna draught containing tincture of ginger.
Sunburns- — A discoloration of the skin caused by expo-
sure to the sun. Treatment. —Sweet cream, one ounce;
new milk, eight ounces ; juice of lemon, one ounce ; alum,
one ounce ; sugar, one drachm. Boil and skim, and when
the liquor is cool, apply as a lotion to the face. Or take :
Borax, fifteen grains; lemon juice one ounce; sugar
candy, half a drachm; mix the powders with the juice,
and let them stand in a bottle* shaking them occasi mally
until they are dissolved.
Swooning. —Persons of weak nerves or delicate consti-
tutions are liable to fits of swooning. The general causes
are sudden transition from cold to heat, breathing air de-
prived of its proper elasticity, great fatigue, loss of blood,
long fasting, fear, grief and other violent passions or affec-
tions of the mind. Treatment. —When anyone falls into
a swoon, remove him immediately to a cooler apartment,
apply ligatures above his knees and elbows, and sprinkle
his hands and face with vinegar or cold water. He should
likewise be made to smell the vinegar, and should have a
spoonful or two of water, if he can swallow, with about a
third part of vinegar mixed with it, poured into his mouth.
If these should not remove the complaint, bleeding must be
resorted to. — When a person swoons from being exposed to
vitiated air , as that of a theatre , ball-room , etc., he ought
immediately to be carried into the open air; his temples
should be rubbed with strong vinegar or brandy, and sal-
volatile held to his nostrils. He should be laid upon his
back with his head low, and have a little wine or some
other cordial poured into his mouth as soon as he is able
to swallow it. If the person has been subject to hysterical
fits, burnt feathers should be applied to the nostrils.
Observe. —Persons who are subject to swooning in public
assemblies should place themselves near a door or
window.
M


manual oipiHi
flnd the Diseases oi IXXo men
Duping Pregnancy and Child^SiPth.
:o:
Bv DR. HOLLICK, M. D.
A complete practical treatise upon the Art of Delivery and upon
all the accidents and diseases that may occur during these periods.
This work is especially intended for the instruction of Females
themselves, and any one of ordinary intelligence, upon reading it
carefully through, will be able to render the requisite assistance
in cases of emergency. The description of all the various Positions
and Presentations is on an entirely new plan, and is made both
simp!s and intelligible. The management of new-born infants is
also (;iven in full, and the use of Ether and Chloroform during
delivery is also discussed.
This work contains over sixty Engravings, besides Colored
Plates showing the various periods, and how to ascertain them,
the different positions, the progress of delivery, &c.
Note. —Numbers of incomplete copies of this work are being
jflered for sale.
Ask for New Revised Australian Edition.
Superior Cloth Binding, Gilt, Price 55.,
# •
—FROM —
SIR ROBERT BEAR,
BOX 22, PAEK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.
Send P,O. Order or Postal Note. Postage Stamps not taken in
Payment.


Teeth. Decayed. —As soon as pain is felt in a tooth,
however sound and beautiful it may appear outwardly, if
is a certain sign of decay approaching, and unless preser-
vative means are instantly employed, the tooth will be lost.
Treatment. —Bathe the feet in warm water, by means of
which not only the tooth affected, but the rest will be pre-
served. The bathing must be continued until the pain is
gone. Observe. —When the operation of stuffing the
tooth is to be employed, it should be done when the tooth-
ache does not exist, otherwise it will give great uneasiness.
Caution. —To prevent decay of the teeth, or to subdue it,
avoid sweets, acids, hot or cold drinks, ices, etc. Do not
pick the teeth with a pin, nor suffer food to lodge in or
"between them. To prevent this latter, the mouth should
be rinsed with warm water after every meal.
Tongue, Sore. —The tongue is liable to become sore or
ulcerated, most commonly, along the edges ; and there are
frequently seen small pimples and cracks. Treatment. —
Take mild and cooling aperients, particularly calcined
magnesia, either alone or in a seidlitz powder. Let the
drink consist chiefly of soda water, and the diet be light
and cooling. Touch the sores with burnt alum, and wash
the mouth frequently with borax and honey dissolved in
water, or solution of chlormated soda and water, so weak
as not to produce much smarting.
Toothache. —This well-known and very distressing pain
may proceed from a variety of causes—from sitting in
draughts, inattention to the covering of the feet or the
head ; food or drink either too hot or too cold, and lastly,
from the presence of decay in the tooth itself. For a com-
plaint so common there are, of course, innumerable
remedies, and from those we select such as we believe to be
the most efficacious. Treatment.— Apply stick-caustic to
the part when the pain proceeds. Another. —Take of
tincture of opium, and rectified spirit of wine, of each three
ounces; camphor, six drachms ; opium powdered, one and
a half drachms; pellitory of Spain, half an ounce:
macerate for eight days. Dip a small piece of lint into this
tincture, and place it in the cavity' of the tooth.
Another. —Apply oil of cloves on cotton wool. Another. —
Moisten a piece of lint with a strong spirituous solution of
creosote, and closely ram it into the cavity of the tooth.


THE
DBSES OF WO|lN
THEIR CAUSES HJU) CURE
FRP EXPlifll^ED.
By DE. HOLLICK, M. D>
With Practical Hints for their prevention and for the
preservation of Female health, intended fob every female’s own
private use I Illustrated with Colored Plates, and with numerous
Engravings.
If all Females possessed this book in time there would be
incalculably less suffering and disease amongst them than is now
seen. Everything relating to female health is treated upon, Jrom
infancy to old age, and the most valuable recipes are given, together
with practical directions in the plainest manner. There is nc
known disease to which females are subject but what is here
explained, and so that all can understand.
DE. HOLLICK has received piles of letters thanking him for
writing this book, and has been complimented for it by many of
his public audiences of ladies.
No female should be without it especially if Married,
Ask for the New Revised Australian Edition,
Superior Cloth Binding, Gilt, Price 55.,
—FROM
SIR ROBERT BEAR,
BOX 22, PARK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.
Send P.O, Order or Postal Note. Postage Stamps not taken in
Payment.


Another.— Alum, in powder, two drachms ; spirit of nitre,
seven drachms ; mix, and apply to the tooth. Observe.—
If neither of the above remedies avail, the tooth must be
extracted ; if suffered to remain, the teeth on either side
will become affected. Preventive.— Those who are sub-
ject to toothache ought to be particular in keeping the
teeth clean by the frequent use of a soft brush and water.
The tooth powders most suitable are flowers of sulphur and
■charcoal powder ; the former may be used every day, the
latter twice a week. The best common charcoal powder
should be employed, not the prepared charcoal, which is
too often a compound of hurtful ingredients. When the
gums are loose or spongy, the teeth should be cleaned
three or four times a week with a powder, composed of
equal parts of Peruvian bark, powder of catechu, and
Armenian bole.
Varicose Veins. —A varicose condition of the veins
chiefly affecting thelegs, ankles,etc. The complaint consists
essentially in the veins becoming elongated in such a
manner that they assume a knotted appearance, while they
are at the same time enlarged. The most frequent causes
of varicose veins are those which impede the upward flow
of the blood through the large veins of the abdomen ;
habitual costiveness, the wearing of a truss, or the tying of
garters too tightly, will induce this disease, and it especially
attacks women while bearing children. Treatment.—
When the veins or the adj acent parts become inflamed and
painful, leeches should be employed, and vinegar and water,
Ooulard water, or other cold lotion, constantly applied to
the parts, or if cold applications do no good, the parts
should be bathed with a warm decoction of poppyheads, or
warm water with laudanum. The bowels should be freely
opened, by means of calomel and jalap, followed by seidlitz
powders, or any other cooling saline purgative. Low diet,
quietude, and the recumbent position, are all essential to
faster recovery. But, perhaps the best means of cure is
the wearing of an elastic stocking, which supports the veins
and tends to remove the sense of weight and'Uneasiness,
which characterizes this complaint. Some persons cannot
however, wear an elastic stocking of any kind; for such
sases, an elastic tape fixed to the foot by a stirrup, and
wound spirally round the limb, may be successful


Ask for Tricks with Cards by Dr “Carver.
m
m
Hi
Ask your Bookseller for Dr. Carver's Card Tricks-
BY DB. CARVER.
An entirely new work, containing all the tricks and deceptions with Cards ever
invented, including the latest tricks of the most celebrated Conjurers, Magi-
cians, and Prestidigators, popularly explained, simplified, and adapted for
home amusement, and social entertainments. They are so elucidated that any
one with a little practice can perform the most difficult Tricks to his own
satisfaction and to the wonder and admiration of his friends. There is also a
complete exposure of all the Card Tricks made use of by Professional Card
Players, Blacklegs and Gamblers. It also contains the Art of Fortune
Telling by Card, Illustrated by many Engravings.
On Sale at all Booksellees, Peice Is., oe sent Post Feee to any address
foe Is. 3d. feom Sie Robert Bear, Box 22 Paek-steeet P. 0., Sydney.


employed. Spaces of about three inches being left between
the spirals, each time the band crosses the vein it acts like
a valve.
Voice, Loss of- —Public speakers, singers, actors, etc.,
are subject to loss of voice, amounting, in some instances,
to extinction. Treatment. —Smoke camphor cigarettes,
made as follows : Select a sound and regular stalk of wheat
straw, cut it evenly about an inch below and two or three
inches above a knot, perforate the knot upwards with a
stocking needle, and push down upon it, through the
larger end of the stalk with a knitting needle,-a small
square of tissue paper. This paper covering the upper
surface of the perforated knot forms a kind of a medium
between it and the air. The long end of the straw is then
filled with some small pieces of camphon, loosely packed,
and kept in place with a little plug of tissue paper. Close
the lips firmly round the cigarettes, and draw as you would
in smoking a pipe or cigar, but of course without the appli-
cation of fire. The camphor thus inhaled finds its way
direct to the respiratory organs, and affords considerable
and speedy relief. A properly made cigarette will last a
week; the camphor is to be renewed every night. The
cigarette must be held between the lips alone, not by the
teeth. Another. —Where loss of voice results from the
abuse of mercurial preparations, take of sarsaparilla-root a
handful; water, one quart; boil for twenty minutes, and
after taking the decoction off the fire add fifteen grains of
iodide of potassium; dose, a wineglassful twice a day
Also, gargle the throat occasionally with salt water.
Vomiting- —This may arise from various causes, as
excess in eating and drinking, foulness of the stomach, the
acrimony of ailments, sudden stoppage of wounds, weak-
ness of the stomach, etc. Treatment. —When vomiting
proceeds from foul stomach or indigestion, it is not to be
considered as a disease, but as the cure of a disease. It
ought, therefore to be promoted by drinking lukewarm
water o; thin gruel. If this does not put a stop to the
vomiting, a dose of ipecacuhana may be taken, and worked
off with weak camomile tea. Another. —lf vomiting pro-
ceed from weakness of the stomach, bitters will be of
service. Peruvian bark infused in wine or brandy, with as


BOOK OF F4TI I
MAHOMET’S
FORTUNE TELLER
AKD
DREAM BOOK.
OR, THE FUTURE UNFOLDED-
Containing plain, correct and certain rules for foretelling what la
going to happen. A COMPLETE ORACLE OF DESTINT.
In this Book you have all that was ever made known by the Ancient
Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians. Greeks, Chinese and Hindoos relating to the
occult sciences. Much has been procured from overlooked sources, and trans-
cribed from the original hieroglyphics. The substance, also, of all that has
been brought to light by the researches and investigations of modern Astrologers
and Professors is here l&id before the reader in a plain and intelligent manner.
This Book contains the celebrated Grecian Oracle of Destiny.—The Renowned
Egyptian Fortune Telling Tablets.—The Great Hindoo Trial of Destiny.—
Palmistry, the art of telling fortunes by the lines of the hand. —Fifty-two Grecian
observations on moles.—How to make the Dumb Cake.—The Birth of Children,
and the foretelling of other events by the moon’s age and the days of the week.—
To know if your love of a person will be mutual.—Charms, Spells, and Incan-
tations. —To procure Dreams, Tokens, and other Insights into Futurity—Fast
of St, Agnes.—The Nine Keys.—Magic Rose.—Cupid’s Nosegay,—The Ring
and the Olive Branch. —Love’s cordial.—The Witch’s Chain.—Love Letters.—
Strange bed, —To see a Future Husband. —To know what Fortune your Future
Husband will have. —The Lover’s Charm. —Hymenial Charm.—For a Girl to
ascertain if she will soon marry.—Physiognomy; the art of discovering a
person's disposition by their features.—How to tell a Person’s Character by
means of Cabalistic Calculations. —Fortune-telling by means of a Tea or Coffee
Cup—How to Read your Fortune by tl e White of an Egg.—To choose a
Husband bv the Hair.—Lucky Days.—Fortune-telling by dice.
FORTUNE TELLING BY CARDS.
Dreams aud cueir, interpretation. — A complete dictionary of dreams.
This Book will acquaint you truthfully about
What your portion in life will be.
What you will be successful in.
What you are adapted for.
What your absent wife is doing.
What your absent husband is oc-
cupied with.
What your future partner will be.
What your destiny is.
Whether your intended is true to
you.
Whether you will be childless.
Whether you will die an old maid.
Whether you will have money left
you.
Whether your marriage will be
happy.
Whether yon will be successful in
your love affairs.
Whether you will be a widow.
W hether you will get a divorce.
Whether you will be disappointed
in money matters.
The book is, in fact, a perfect Oracle of Fate, and may be consulted witk
■wrtaintv neon all matters that relate to your present or future prospects-
On Sale at all Booksellers, Price Is., or sent Post Free to any
address for Is 3d., from Sir Robert Bear, Box 22, Park-street P. 0.,
Sydney.


■much rhubarb as will open the body gently, is an excellent
remedy in this case. The diluted acid of vitriol is also a
good medicine, and may be taken in the dose of fifteen or
twenty drops twice or thrice a day in a glass of wine or
water. It has been said that habitual vomitings are
alleviated by making oysters a principal part of diet.
Another. —A vomiting which proceeds from acidity of the
stomach is relieved by alkaline purges. The best medicine
is magnesia, a teaspoonful of which may be taken in a
cupful of tea or a little milk, three or four times a day or
oftener, if necessary to keep the body open. Another. —
When vomiting proceeds from violent passions or affections
of the mind, all evacuants must be carefully avoided. The
patient in this case ought to be kept perfectly easy and
quiet, to have the mind soothed, and to take some gentle
cordial, as negus or a little brandy and water, to which a
few drops of laudanum may be occasionally added.
Another.— When vomiting proceeds from spasmodic affec-
tions of the stomach, the application of a warm plaster to
the pit of the stomach will afford relief. Any aromatic
medicines may likewise be taken inwardly, as cinnamon or
mint tea, wine with spices boiled in it, etc. The region of
the stomach may be rubbed with ether, or if that cannot be
had, with strong brandy or other spirit. The belly should
be fomented with warm water, or the patient immersed up
to the breast in a warn. bath. Observe. —Saline draughts,
taken in the act of effervescene, are of singular use in
stopping a vomit, from whatever cause it may proceed.
These draughts may be prepared by dissolving one drachm
of the salt of tarter in one and a half ounces of fresh lemon
juice, and - adding to it one ounce of peppermint water, the
same quantity of simple cinnamon water, and a little white
sugar. This draught must be swallowed before the
effervescence is quite over, and may be repeated every two
hours or oftener, if the vomiting is violent. As the least
motion will bring on vomiting again, even after it has
stopped, the patient ought to avoid all manner of action.
Wasting- —The rapid or gradual reduction of the size of
the whole,body, or of parts thereof, frequently comes on
without any evident cause. It is seldom accompanied by
pain, difficulty of breathing, cough, or fever, but is usually
attended with loss of appetite and impaired digestion


PLOTS H
By EDWARD B. FOOTE, M. D.
The Book Consists of Nearly 1000 Pages, with Two Hundred
Illustrations, and treats fully of the Most Important
Diseases of the Human System.
The following subjects are fully illustrated and described :
The causes of disease —Violating the moral nature—The food
we eat—The liquids we drink—Clothes we wear—Bad habits of
children and youth—Habits of manhood and womanhood—
Unhappy Marriages—lmpure vaccination—Adulterated medicines
—Brutality and Inhumanity—Wealth—Failures in Business—
Excessive study—How to have healthy babies—How to preserve
the health of children —Dietics for old and young—The physio-
logical instruction of children —Mental and physical recreation—
Sleep—Cleanliness —Pure air—Sunshine —A good temper —Vege-
table medicines —Animal magnetism—Water—Medicated Inhala-
tion—Female doctors—Rapacious doctors—Chronic catarrh of the
head Chronic bronchitis Asthma Consumption Chronic
diarrhoea—Piles —Diseases of the bowels —Bilious headache—
Nervous headache—Neuralgia—Rheumatism—Affections of the
eyes and ears—Diseases of the kidneys and bladder—Private
words for women —Private words for men—Paralysis—Cancer—
History of monogamy—History of pologamy—Defects of marriage
systems —The causes and cure of sexual immorality—Adaptation
in marriage—lntermarriage of relatives—Early marriage. Essays
for young and old, bearing on happiness in marriage, etc., etc.
The book is invaluable as a guide through the perils of life to
man, woman, and youth in all stages of society.
N.B. —This is a new edition and contains all fhe illustrations
that were forbidden to be published by the U.S. Government.
PRIDE, POST FREE, 7s, Bd
FROM
Sir ROBERT BEAR.
BOX 22, PARK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.
Send P.O. Order or Postal Note. Postage Stamps not taken in
Payment.
e m


depression of spirits, and general langour. Treatment.—
This disease is very difficult of cure, and for its treatment
we must endeavor to find out the cause, and, if possible,
remove it. If occasioned by worms, these must be des-
troyed by appropriate medicines; if by excess of any kind,
this must be discontinued; if from a scrofulous disposition,,
tonic medicines must be resorted to; and in like manner
the treatment will be the same with that of every other
disease which it may either accompany or of which it may
be the effect. The diet should be nutritious, generous, and
such as is easy of digestion; milk, calves-feet jelly, together
wkh a moderate proportion of beer and wine, and when
the stomach is very feeble, spirits; regular walking exer-
cise should be taken in the open air. The surface of the
body should be well rubbed, and change of scene and sea
bathing may be resorted to. Of medicines, cod liver oil is
likely to prove the most effectual. Observe. —lt often
occurs, more particularly in children, that wasting takes
place without derangement of any other process than that
of nutrition. In these cases a teaspoonful of cod liver oil
two or three times a day may often be followed by very
decided and permanent benefit.
Watery Eye. —If we look closely at the inner corner of
the eyelid, we may perceive 3 little point at each which is
the opening of a duct that runs into the nose. These
openings convey the tears from the eye ; every time the eye
is shut in winking, the fluid is forced into those pipes.
Now, when either or both become so thickened as to be
stopped up, the tears of necessity fall over the cheek, and
this is called watery eye. Treatment. —As the cause of
the disease is most commonly inflammation, it may be
relieved in its early stages by a plan directed towards the
lessening of that inflammation, and the best is as follows:
Free the bowels well with salts; repeat this in three days
afterwards, and apply the following eye water: take of
common water, two ounces ; sulphate of zinc, four grains ‘ r
laudanum, half a drachm ; mix, and apply frequently.
Cold must be strictly avoided. Observe. — If the complaint
be not removed by the adoption of this treatment, surgical
assistance must be obtained immediately, for if the disease
be allowed to proceed unchecked, the consequence will be a
far more serious and troublesome affection.


MADAM REGARD’S
SECRETS «f BEAUTY
Revealed;
OR, THE
Whole Art of Attaining Bodily
Vigor, Physical Development,
Beauty of Feature and
Symmetry of Form,
WITH THE SCIENCE OF
DRESSING WITH TASTE,
ELEGANCE AND ECONOMY.
ASK FOR MADAM RENARD’S WORK.
IIIIIIIIHUIIIIMIMIHMIHHHHIfHttMIMHIHHHDHMIWHHHHIIRHHWIHMWIHIHIII
On Sale at all Booksellers, Price Is., or sent Post Free
?to any address for Is. 3d., from
SIR ROBERT BEAR,
BOX 22, PARK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.
Send P.O, Order or Postal Note. Postage Stamps not taken
in Payment.


Worms- —The worms which infest the human body are
of three kinds : the thread or maw-worm, half an incn long,,
terminating at its tail in a fine point; the lumbricord worm,
lor long round worm, when full grown, a foot in length,,
with triangular mouth ; and the tape worm, body flat and
iointed, or body round, jointed, having a mouth at each
joint. Although adults are subject to this complaint, it is
most common with children. The signs are foetid breath,
grinding of the teeth during sleep, picking the nose, pale-
ness of the face, acid eructions, swelling of a portion of the
belly, which is there hard and tender, gripings, variable
appetite, great irritability and itching of the lower parts of
the body ; short, dry cough; emaciation, slow fever, increas-
ing towards night; irregular pulse, and liability to convul-
sions. Treatment. — A dose of castor oil, exercise in the
open air, wholesome diet, and a strict prohibition of
uncooked food and raw and green vegetables ; salt to be
taken with all the food eaten. Or take. — Filings of tin,
cassia confection, of each half an ounce; syrup sufficient;
mix. Take of the electuary a piece of the size of a nutmeg
twice a day; after this has been continued for two or three
days, take of submuriate of mercury three grains, powdered
rhubarb ten grains ; mix, and take on the fourth morning
after the preceding. Observe.— The reason why children
are more infested with worms than adults are arises in a
great measure from an indulgence in sweetmeats, sugar,
stc., and from the partial or total neglect of salt. This
matter shouH be scrupulously attended to, at the same
time endeavoring to invigorate the system generally by
wholesome and nutritious food. These measures are of
themselves frequently sufficient to procure for a child an
immunity from this distressing and debilitating complaint.
Ulcers- —These generally proceed from some external
injury, such as a wound or a bruise ; or they arise in con-
sequence of inflammation or some other disease. There are
several sorts, as healthy, irritable, indolent, inflamed,
sloughing or gangrenous, and sinuous. They may be
caused by wounds, injuries, bruises, inflammations, abscesses,
or the suppression of some accustomed evacuations. Symp-
toms. —A running sore, with acrid humors; hardness
of the edges round the sore, and difficulty of healing.
Treatment. —ln the healthy, which secrete good matter,
md look to be healing, though but slowly, poultice with


TMJS
MABEIAGE GUIDE:
OR, NATURAE HISTORY OF
GENERATION.
BY F. HOLLICK, M.D.
New Revised Edition, much improved and enlarged.
Price, ss. Post freei wrapped free from observation.
A private Instructor to Married People, and those about to marry ,
both male and female, in everything relating to the Anatomy and
Physiology of the Generative system in both sexes, and the process
of Reproduction, including a full description of everything that is
now known respecting the production of offspring, the cause of the
difference in sex, Parental influence, Natural adaptation, Philosophy
<of Marriage, &c., &c.
This is beyond all comparison the most valuable work on
Physiology ever published. There is nothing whatever that married
people can either require or wish to know but what is fully explained.
All the new discoveries, many of them never before made public, are
given in full, especially those relating to conception and sterility.
No married person of either sex should be without this book. It
is utterly unlike any other ever published, and the matter it contains
can be found nowhere else. It contains numerous
ENGRAVINGS & COLORED PLATES
designed especially for this work, and showing many of the New Dis-
coveries, as well as Anatomical details and Physiological processes.
Ask for New Revised Australian Edition.
Superior Cloth Binding, Gilt, Price 155.,
—Order from —
SIR, ROBERT BE.A.R,
ROX 22, PARK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.


white bread or linseed poultice, a day or two; then dress
with the following ;—Olive oil, 16 ounces ; yellow wax, 1
pound ; yellow resin, 1 pound ; Bergundy pitch, 1 pound;
Venice . turpentine, 3 ounces; melt the wax,
and pitch together with the oil over a slow fire. When
mixed, take off the tire and put in the turpentine ; and stir
well, and strain whilst hot through a coarse cloth. In the
Irritable, which are very sore and spread, use the same
fomentation as prescribed for rupture; take a cooling pur-
gative, and use the following wash : —Nitric, or muriatic
acid, 50 drops; water, 1 quart. Mix, and wash the sore
with this two or three times a day, and poultice a day or
two with linseed whilst using it. Then dress with the
following salve ;—Venice turpentine, 1 ounce ; frankincense,
1 ounce; beeswax, 1 ounce; linseed oil, 1 ounce; black
resin, 1 ounce ; and black pitch, 2 ounces. Melt together;
when cold enough, add fresh butter (without salt) or lard,
sufficient to make it soft enough to dress with ; apply twice
a day. When it begins to look healthy, dress with the
vellow wax ointment, as before recommended. The Indolent
ulcers are often on the legs, and require a similar treatment
as the above. Persons suffering from bad and ulcerated
legs will find advantage in wearing elastic stockings.
Sudden Accidents and Injuries.— -These generally
take place in travelling. The first thing is to remove any
pressure on the body, and allow the air to come freely tc
the iniured portion. If violent bleeding be perceived from
FIG 56.
of a bright scarlet, tie a bandage
the tightness may be increased by
and twisting it round, as in Fig. ■
FIG 57.
any part endeavor to
so rest it, by placing on
it a pad of folded linen
and a bandage (see Fig.
56). Should it be a
limb, and the blood be
\ tightly above the part;
inserting a piece of stick,
57. Should no medical
man be obtainable, the
bleeding must be stopped
by using a little hook
called a tenaculum, the
nearest approach to
which is a shoemaker’s
sewing awl. This is put


THE. IJVIH^yVtU
Vertical & Reverse-Current Syringe
0
The Improved Appliance is a powerful Enema of Higginson’s
pattern, fitted with a new Vertical and Reverse-Current Vaginal
Tube, producing a continual current treble the power of the
ordinary tubes used for this purpose, thoroughly cleansing the
parts it is applied to. It is to be used with injection of suffi-
cient power to destroy the active properties of the fluid without
injury to the person, and if the instructions are followed it can.
be used with success and safety.
Complete in Box, with Directions for Use.
CDalthus Sheaths.
FIRST Q.TTAT.TT-V
Malthus’s Contraceptive Specialities.
EXAMINED AND WARRANTED RELIABLE.
IMPORTANT !
These Specialities are worthy of special notice, and deserve
a trial by every husband (for whose use they are intended), as
they are the most simple and perfect appliance in use, and will
not fail ; the improvement in them over others of the same
class being a process of double vulcanising (tempering) during
manufacture, every care being taken to make them thoroughly
reliable, as they are warranted to be.
Boxes of one dozen (made in three sizes. No. 1,2, 3—small,
medium, and large).
All the Latest Preventives on
Sale.
Send for (enclosing stamped envelope for reply) descriptive
illustrated list of new preventives, with testimonials, to
SIR ROBERT BEAR,
BOX 22, PARK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY


into the wound, and the vessel from which the blood flows
hooked and drawn forward; a piece of silk is then tied round
the vessel, and if the blood ceases to flow, the wound is
drawn together, and bound over with plaster. If blood is
still ejected from the wound, there must be other arteries
injured, which must be treated in the same manner before
the wound be closed. Often pressure, long continued with
the finger, will stop the bleeding, as in Fig. 58. .If no
wound be perceptible, and the lips and face pale, the'hands
FIG. 58.
and feet cold, lay the person
out flat, apply warmth to the
body, and administer a little
brandy and water every few
minutes, and afterwards beef
tea, for if the person has only
fainted he will speedily re-
cover, but if the injury be
greater, the remedies must be
persevered in for hours, and
every attention rendered.
Should the effects proceed from a blow, that is, the person
be stunned, then raise the head, apply warmth to the feet,
and some pungent smelling salts to the nose. If the flesh
be cut, bathe with a sponge and cold water until all the
dirt be cleared away and the bleeding stopped ; then bring
the edges of the wound carefully together, and keep them
so by strips of sticking plaster (see Fig. 59). On the
extremities, a piece of linen may be laid over the wound,
and then bandaged. But should the wound be extensive,
take a needle threaded with silk, dip it in oil, and enter the
skin about one-eighth of an inch deep, tie each stitch with
FIG. 59.
FIG. 60.
a knot (see Fig 60), and about thirty hours afterwards cut
the silk, and draw out the thread. If the part has a
throbbing sensation, bathe it with cold water. In cases
N


THE
BALE GENERATIVE ORGANS
In Health and Disease.
FROM INFANCY TO OLD AGE.
By F. JHObLieK, M.D.
A complete practical treatise on the Anatomy and Physiology
of the Male Generative System, with a full description of the
causes and cures of all the diseases and derangement* to
which it is liable.
Adapted for Every Man’s Own Private Use!
A treatise on those derangements and difficulties of all kind*
to which eveby man is more or less liable, and from which
in fact but few entirely escape.
All the causes which lead to decay of the Generative System
are fully explained, and the means pointed out by which its
powers may be preserved to extreme old age ! More especially
is explained that unseen and usually unknown form of decay
from which thousands become diseased, insane, and die
without ever suspecting what has destroyed them, and which
every man should understand for himself. All the recipes are
given io English, and the treatment is made so plain
all can practice it.
This work is also Illustrated, both with
Colored Plates and Engravings.
and an Introductory Chapter gives an epitome of all the new
discoveries respecting the Female System and Generation. No
other work at all like this was ever published. Noman should
be without it, young or old
Ask for the new Revised Australian Edition.
SUPERIOR CLOTH BINDING, GILT, PRICE sa.
order from
-
SIR ROBERT BEAR,
BOX 22, BARK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.


where the flesh is torn, bring the parts gently together, and
lightly strap them with sticking-plaster. If a part be
bruised, let it remain as much at rest as possible; but, if
severe, get the person to bed, and apply a cloth dipped in
cold water every few minutes. Should the part bleed, the
vessel can be tied as before directed. Many persons feel
themselves shaken without any positive injury; but we
would advise, in this case, that at least an hour’s rest be
taken on a couch or bed.
Cuts- —For small and simple cuts, use the following
Treatment.— Tie it up at once with a piece of linen rag;
this is usually sufficient to stay the bleeding. The small
quantity of blood which may exude quickly dries up thei
wound, and forms a sort of glue which effectually excludes'
the air. As no better dressing ctin be used, it may be left
on till the cut is well. If the bleeding should be excessive,
it should be checked by the use of cold water or astringents,
such as turpentine or Friar’s balsam, and the edges of the
cut surface brought firmly into contact by strips of sticking
plaster, and, if necessary, bandaged.
Cuts from the Flesh- —If a piece of flesh be cut out,
wash it, and the part from which it was cut, without a
moment’s loss of time, replace it exactly in its proper place,
and keep it there with a piece of sticking plaster. If the
piece cannot be replaced, bathe the part with cold water
until the bleeding stops, and place over it a piece of soft
linen, as directed in Fig. 56.
Stabs. —The danger of such accidents is, that there may
be some important deeply-seated part injured. They are
treated as common wounds ; the bleeding stopped by cold
water and a sponge, then the edges brought together with
strapping, and bound up. If inflammation set in, foment
with water for a day or two, then with warm water,
and apply poultices. At times, when apparently healing,
there will be a painful sensation ; and matter formed below
will force its way out; this may happen more than once
The patient should be kept quiet in bed for several day*
E. T. & J. Kadclirfe, Printers, 292 Sussex-street, Sydney.


MARRIAGE,
As It Was, As It Is, and As It Should Be.
BY
7 ANNIE BKSANT.
With a Sketch of the Life of Mrs. Besant.
Cheap Edition, Is.; Posted, Is. 2d*
The “Law of Population” and “ Marriage” should be read by
every man and woman in the world.
“ Men and women must know conjugal, before they can know true paternal
love; each must see in the child the features of the beloved ere the circle of
love can be complete. Husband and wife bound in the closest, most durable
and yet most eager union, children springing as flowers from the dual stem
of love, home where the creators train the lives they have given—such will
be the marriage of the future. The loathsome details of the Divorce Court
will no longer pollute our papers; the public will no longer be called in to
gloat over tne ruins of desecrated love ; society will be purified from sexual
vice; men and women will rise to the full royalty of their humanity ; and hand*
in hand, tread life's pathway, trustful instead of suspicious, free, instead
of enslaved, bound by love instead of by law.”— Extract.
The Latest Work on the Population Question.
READ THE
“WIFE’S HANDBOOK.”
RADICAL REMEDY
—IN —
SOCIAL SCIELTCE ;
—OR, —
BORNING FEWER BABIES,
Through Regulating Reproduction by Controlling Conception,
with Hints on other Matters of Importance necessary to
be known by MarriedlWomen.
BY H. A. ALLBUTT, M.R.C.P.E., L.S.A.
PRICE, Is.; POSTED, Is. 2d.
No Married Woman should be without this Useful Book, m
It is the Best Value ever published.
SIR ROBERT BEAR,
BOX 22, PARK STREET POST OFFICE, SYDNEY.
Send Postal Note. Postage Stamps not taken in Payment.
