



’
■ ■
;
• - - . ; ■ ■
■ "'.-■■■■ ;
■ •" ■■ ..1 < V ’
■
'*'YSk'Tt *,>i 1 's ":■■* ( .*& c*-J
- . \* . -i
■
■ V ■'••■■:, ■■_ : ' ’ - 7 , /]
: • • ‘
.
■
W \
,,, \)l
■ ,-yy- ; j
'
I


THE HERITAGE
Lo! the elders hear the sweet
Voice, and know the wondrous song;
And their ancient pulses beat
To a tune forgotten long;
And -they talk in whispers low.
With a smile and with a sigh.
Of the years of long ago,
And the valiant days gone by.
—Victor Daley.


Written in collaboration by
PRANK ANSTEY and JOHN CURTIN
to epitomise the history
of a Movement
which has made Australia a land
of hope and opportunity.


THE LABOR MOVEMENT in
its world-wide sweep is the
greatest reformative and pro-
gressive agency in history. It has
broadened the constitutions, liberal-
ised the laws, modified the power
of oppressors, and ameliorated the
conditions of life. Its influence has
permeated all the institutions of our
time.


Authorised by Alex, McCallum, Campaign Director,
Trades Hall, Perth.
"Westrallan Worker," 38-40-42-44 Stirling St., Perth.


THE HERITAGE
Thirty years ago in this Commonwealth
the workers’ lot was hard and cheerless.
Sweating was then an evil which flourished
in the land; wages were low; hours of labor
were tedious; equality of social place and
opportunity was an unrealised ideal. •
We were then reproducing in Australia a
second Europe, with its poverty, its wretched-
ness, its long hours, its misery, and its indus-
trial servitude.
But for the work of the Labor Movement,
the sacrifices of its founders, and the inces-
sant and undefeatable struggles of its stal-
warts, Australia would have continued a
preserve of privilege, and a land where would
have been reproduced every sweating device
and condition that has made the Old World
the shame and despair of every lover of his
kind.
The truth of this assertion is evidenced
by the history of our country.
THE AGE OF MISERY.
\
In 1898 a Western Australian Labor Con-
ference drew the attention of the Government
of the day—the Premier was Sir John For-


rest —to the unjust conditions of labor operat-
ing in the colony. In the timber industry
and on the shearing sheds the vile truck
system was in operation, and whole families
were obliged to live year in and year out in
the same place without ever emancipating
themselves from their thraldom.
At Karridale—a notorious sweat pen—
after working continuously for months,
workers found themselves actually in debt to
their employers, who, by operating the store
account, kept their employees in bondage:
wages were not paid either weekly, or
monthly, and sometimes never—the helot of
a worker being accounted, on finally leaving
the job, as owing his master for bread and
boots.
On the mining fields the conditions of em-
ployment were shocking. Unionism was
weak and the great gold discoveries, which
meant fortunes to a few, did not benefit the
many.
The Conference had asked John Forrest
that legislation providing for Compulsory
Arbitration be passed. He replied “that his
Government did not intend to pass any
Socialistic legislation of that nature.” This
answer was typical of that of the Govern-
ments of all the States.
A leading newspaper, commenting on the
disclosure, said that “outside of a few Trades
Hall agitators there would be no endorse-
ment for the regulating of wages by law.”
Years passed before Parliament was moved
to even consider the passage of industrial


reform legislation. It was not until Labor
had become a force in the land that the old
order of “freedom of contract” was modified
and the social conditions influenced for the
better by the process of law.
Down to the year 1900 in every State the
Parliaments took little or no cognisance of
the struggles of the poor. The Governments,
for the most part, were composed of men
hostile to every form of working-class com-
bination, to every extension of political
liberty, and to any and every form of social
amelioration. The truck system, industrial
victimisation, sweating of the most grievous
character, and the power of exploitation had
been sustained for over a generation by
capitalist Governments, supported and upheld
by the whole press of Australia.
WHEN UNIONS WERE WEAK
In those days of the not-so-long-since the
workers were mostly unorganised. Those in
the bush had no combination, unity among
the miners was little more than a name,
while in the cities and towns shop assistants
and factory operatives were not only without
unions of any sort or kind, but were worked
from early morn till late at night, and the
half-holiday was a rarity.
In 1902 a witness swore before a Justice
of the Supreme Court in Perth that while
continuously employed by a timber company
in the previous year his wages for ten months
were £9B/10/- while his store account
(which did not include drapery, doctor or


medicine, newspapers, milk, or rent) was
£B2/10/-. At the end of the year he was as
poor as at the beginning and had worked the
whole period for a bare existence. There
was no 8-hour day, no workers’ compensa-
tion act, no inspection of machinery, and no
regulation of apprenticeship. The employers
fixed the terms of employment, and those
workers who would not conform to the mas-
ters’ terms had to “tramp.”
FEAR’S PALSY.
Mr. J. M. Lapsley, ex-Superintendent of
the Metropolitan Fire Brigade, tells the
story of how on his arrival in Perth he com-
menced work as a plumber. The other trades-
men were working nine hours per day; they
asked for eight, but the employer was not
willing to grant the alteration. A meeting
was called by the workmen to consider the
position, but only five of those concerned put
in an appearance. Mr. Lapsley had been
made secretary and called a further meeting,
but so great was the fear of the men at the
consequences of taking part in the proceed-
ings that he was the only person who turned
up.
William Smith, now living at Albany,
arrived there over 30 years ago to work on
a coal hulk for Mcllwraith McEacharn’s.
The conditions were intolerable; hours were
long and wages low. He asked a fellow
workman if he could be told where the local
secretary of the Carpenters’ Union was to be
found. The answer was: “If you are a


unionist you had better keep it to yourself,
as the employers do not give jobs to men
belonging to unions.”
SWEATING WAS UNIVERSAL.
in the secondary industries generally, the
unions consisted of merely a small minority
of those actually employed. Boycotts and
black lists were exercised by the employing
class as deterrents to solidarity, and through-
out the continent the mass of workers and
their families were the helpless victims of
predatory interests.
Butchers’ assistants in the Midland-Fre-
mantle area commenced work at daylight
and did not finish until 8 o’clock at night.
Married men were paid 7/- per day and the
week’s hours aggregated 60. Female shop
assistants in the city worked from half past
8 until half past 6, and on the late night
until 10 o’clock, for £1 a week. Young girls,
styled either as “improvers” or given no
designation, were paid anything from 5/- to
10/- a week. Their hours were long, and the
conditions, uninfluenced by any Govern-
mental regulation, very bad.
One shirt '■. manufacturer told a Board of
Inqury that 5/- or 6/- per week was “good
wages for a shirt finisher.” Another admit-
ted that he paid 2/7 for making a sac suit —
1/3 for coats, Bd. for trousers, Bd. for vests.
Shirt makers working in their own homes
“were paid 2/10 per dozen and had to pro-
vide their own machines and cotton.”


The Board reported that the working men
and women in the tailoring industries “had
either to accept the starvation wages or
appeal to charity.”
In Victoria about this time the Trades
Hall Council launched an Anti-Sweating
League. The League’s investigations dis-
closed that in all the States there was similar
social degradation, similar industrial terror-
ism, and similar methods of utilising govern-
ments to plunder the people in the interests
of “big business.”
NOW AND THEN
The contrast between those days and now
is extraordinary. The young man and woman
of to-day cannot realise its extent. In the
nineties factories worked 54 hours, and in
cases 60 hours a week; only in certain trades
was there a half-holiday, and this often com-
menced at 1.30 or 2 in the afternoon; late
shopping nights were universal; there was
no payment for time off due to sickness or
other causes; no annual holiday; and no
compensation for accident or industrial dis-
ease.
These ameliorative changes are the work
of the Labor Movement. Not one aspect of
the existing fabric of industrial legislation
was initiated by the employers. Then, as
now, they stood for the maintenance of the
existing practice.
It is a fact of our history that of their own
volition the employers have never applied
humane and progressive ideas in industry.


Only the power of Unionism and the com-
pulsion of the law forced the improvements
which to-day assure a reasonable standard of
decency for those who work.
In the nineties, factories existed in which
the sanitation provisions were abominable.
Privacy was not ensured, and it was not
until the regulation of factories by properly
appointed and independent inspectors was
provided for in the law that the existing
services in this respect were instituted.
THE CRY OF RUIN.
Always the employers declared reforms
would be too great a strain on industry;
increased wages and reduced hours, safe-
working devices, proper lighting, adequate
and separate sanitary conveniences for the
sexes —all this, it was urged, would cost
money, penalise production, and prove ruin-
ous to Australia. These arguments are the
invariable resource of the capitalists when
faced with requests for improvements.
New South Wales believed in free trade,
and free sweating. Inspector Burkett re-
ported that “as soon as a girl asked for wages,
she was dismissed ” Two hundred and fifty
boxes, for packing sweets, had to be made
for one penny. \
Girls under 18 were wheeling barrows in
potteries for wages running from 8/6 to 12/6
per week.
All over the Commonwealth it was the
practice that employees should live in the


houses and buy in the stores owned by the
employers, and in many industries a system
of practical peonage prevailed.
In the unorganised areas of the pastoral
industry the squatters paid only for “sheep
shorn to MY satisfaction.” They charged as
much as 3/- for a bar of soap, and by the
double process of sheep “raddling” and ex-
tortion secured shorn sheep at slave rates.
THE DAWN OF THE NEW ERA.
After nearly twenty-five years of agitation
the unions commenced nominating direct
representatives to Parliament. Then, and
not until then, one or other of the old parties
gave, as the price of Labor support, that
which they had never conceded to the de-
mands of justice and humanity. With the
advent of Labor in politics the era of reform
by Parliamentary enactment commenced.
The men who had denounced regulation of
wages and conditions by law commenced to
vote for it, not because they liked it, but be-
cause the people had been stirred by Labor
to insist upon reform.
Their insincerity reflected itself in a
thousand pitfalls wherein unions and work-
ers, believing the law gave them protection,
found that all too often it was but a snare
and a delusion.
The case of the Perth shop assistants is
cited as typical of countless others. Although
the Arbitration Act was passed in 1902 it
was not until 1914 that the Union was able


to secure an award from the Court. And
even this only became possible because in
1912 a Labor Government amended the Act
so that the evasive objections of the employ-
ers could no longer avail.
From 1900 onwards many attempts were
made to establish a union amongst the Perth
shop assistants. Effort after effort failed
because of the hostility of the great employ-
ers and the fear of victimisation which pre-
vailed among the workers.
Finally in 1912, a union having been formed
despite strong opposition, its agent ap-
peared in May before Mr. justice Rooth for
an award. The employers were represented
by Messrs. Jas. Gardiner and S. J. McGibbon.
The latter gentleman offered technical objec-
tions to the case being heard, and on his
motion the application was dismissed on the
ground that the Act had not been complied
with.
Steps having been taken to correct this
disability, a second case was heard by Mr.
Justice Burnside in August. Once again the
employers, who feared the disclosures of
sweating which would be adduced, opposed
the case being heard; their agent (Mr. S. J.
McGibbon) said that shopkeeping was not an
industry within the meaning of the Act, and
that the registration of the Union was illegal.
The Court upheld the employers’ objection
and once again shop assistants were denied
the protection of the law, denied an inquiry
into the unjust conditions of their work, and
denied legal redress for their grievances.


The men who thus withheld the benefits of
arbitration from their workers were then, as
they are now, the chief political protagonists
of the party of anti-Labor.
LABOR, THE LAW MAKER.
The deficiencies in the law had stood un-
corrected for a decade, and it was not until a
Labor Government altered the statute that
the shop assistants were given legal access to
the wage tribunal But their difficulties were
not over. In 1913, even under the new law,
the Union had to defend its registration
which the employers opposed. Next year
(1914) Mr. Justice Burnside, in April, com-
menced to hear the claims of the Union. It
asked for a 48-hour week and a minimum
rate of pay. The employers stood for a
variety of technical objections, and even ap-
plied to the Supreme Court for an injunction
prohibiting the Arbitration Court from issu-
ing an award. The injunction was granted,
although the hearing proceeded, but it was
finally refused on appeal to the Full Court,
and the award was issued.
The minimum rate for a male with five
years’ experience or who was of the age of
23 years or upwards was fixed at £2/15/-
per week; for a female of 21 years it was
£l/14/6.
These rates are now considered absurd,
but it was to resist a minimum of this amount
that the employers exhausted every legal
subtlety, and indeed for years succeeded in


frustrating the demands of reform until a
workers’ Government altered the law and
terminated the immunity from regulation
which the wealthy emporiums of Perth had
enjoyed under a succession of anti-Labor
Governments.
It is well for the present generation to
remember that in no State was anything done
to alleviate the deplorable conditions of the
working class until the Labor Party became
an effective third party, holding the “balance
of power” in Parliament.
EVEN TO OUR OWN TIME.
The Tasmanian Royal Commission Report,
furnished as recently as 1907, demonstrates
that the sweating system, abolished in
States where Labor had become a power,
was still in full blast in that State, and so
remained until, in 1909, there was elected a
Labor Party, comprising more than one-third
of the Tasmanian Parliament.
Only last December the Tasmanian Upper
House threw out a Workers’ Compensation
Amendment Bill, and even to this day in
Western Australia the mutilating hand of the
Legislative Council is ever-present.
The reason why the Legislative Council
Conservatives are more audacious in resist-
ing industrial reform proposals than their
own political colleagues in the Legislative
Assembly is because the latter have to go
before all the people for judgment, while the
Council is elected on a property franchise.


The Upper Houses to-day repeat the his-
tory of anti-Labor. They reflect its soul. If
Labor was weak the Assembly would be even
as the Councils. It is only the power and
vigilance of Labor that has made Australia
the democratic and well-conditioned country
which the present generation of youth finds
so glorious a heritage.
THE IRON HEEL.
The pioneers of these reforms, the men
who pushed the work of unionism in the
nineties, were the victims of boycott and the
black list. The press denounced them as
“asses, anarchists, and parasites." The then
governments of the colonies used every
coercive act to repress progress and were the
vile instruments of capitalistic energy.
One Chief Justice denounced the members
of trade unions as a “closely knit band of
criminals.” Another judge, summing up
against some unionist workmen, told them
that they were misled “by unscrupulous
leaders, who by pretending sympathy with
the poor and suffering, fanned the flames of
discontent,” He then sent the “misled” men
to gaol for seven years.
Judge Windeyer told a jury that under the
law “a union camp was an unlawful as-
sembly,” and if the accused was in the camp
for 10 minutes he was guilty;
In the instructions disclosed by the dis-
covery of the Ranking-Morris correspond-
ence, the administrators of the law were told


to “exercise vigor, even if it caused blood-
shed.”
PROSECUTION AND PERSECUTION.
When the Shearers’ Union (it is now the
great A.W.U.) was formed in 1886, the
Government prosecuted two of its champions
—Waters and McCormick—under an obso-
lete English Act for “conspiring to raise
wages,” and secured their imprisonment for
12 months.
Between 1886 and 1896 hundreds of Aus-
tralian trade unionists were sent to gaol for
terms ranging from a few months to fifteen
years, under obsolete Acts, or specially de-
vised coercive and restrictive administration,
brutally carried out.
Sentences passed upon trade unionist work-
men in the various colonies—they are now
the States of the Federation—at this period
totalled, in the aggregate, hundreds of years.
In all States men were tried and sentenced,
not for offences against the ordinary Criminal
Code, but for alleged offences under ancient
Acts of Parliament, long repealed in England,
but resurrected by the reactionary powers of
Australia, and so applied as to make every
action and utterance of a workman a punish-
able offence.
By the year 1893 the Australian industrial
organisations were badly smashed. Many
unions existed in name only, wages which
were already low were further reduced,


sweating was intensified, unemployment and
destitution accentuated. But the workers,
defeated on the industrial field, had carried
the fight into politics A number of Laborites
were returned to the Parliaments. Labor
had become a Third Party, holding the bal-
ance of power between the old political fac-
tions. Governments, in order to exist, began
to bid for its support.
The effect of Labor’s entry into the Par-
liaments has been the most important fact in
the political history of Australia. It com-
menced a new orientation in Australian
public life, and marked definitely the deter-
mination of the democracy to use legality as
an instrument of reform and social better-
ment.
From then onward men who, to quote the
words of Sir John Forrest, “did not intend to
pass any Socialistic legislation” (meaning
thereby industrial reform laws), as the price
of their political existence and under the
moral duress of Labor’s growing influence in
the Parliaments and the constituencies, wrote
into the laws the statutory beginnings of the
new order.
The point to remember, however, is that it
was not until the workers sent direct repre-
sentatives to the State and Federal Parlia-
ments during the early years of the present
century, that legislation was introduced
establishing anything in the form of a mini-
mum wage, and which put the worker on a
legal footing.


THE PRE-LABOR EPOCH
In all the States the history of the 20 years
prior to the rise of the Labor Party is the
history of land scandals, financial swindles,
capitalistic profiteerings, public robbery, low
wages, and wholesale unemployment; sweat-
ers, squatters, financiers, and their political
agents controlled the governments.
Financial institutions held vast areas of
Crown land and profiteered by the sub-letting
of the national property. Favored individuals
did likewise, and grew rich from the sub-
letting of the auriferous and pastoral and
forest areas of the Crown.
The Land Acts facilitated every kind of
“dummying,” and titles were secured to vast
tracts of country by all manner of improper
practices. The financial institutions used the
governments as instruments to strengthen
their peculative powers.
In 1890 the “British Investor’s Review”
issued a warning to the public of Great
Britain that the then Governments of the
colonies “permitted swindles to go un-
punished.” Financiers controlling the banks
closed the doors, wiped off their personal lia-
bilities by compositions of a farthing in the
pound. Parliament was the instrument of
these boomsters and busters, who, by fraud,
brought Australia to the verge of ruin.
As an example of how these men operated,
the case of Jas. Mcllwraith (the founder of
Mcllwraith McEacharn & Co., pillars of the
present Australian shipping combine) is
cited. Mcllwraith was a Queensland poli-


tician and banker. His Government borrowed
English money and left it in the Queensland
National Bank without interest. At the same
time the Government borrowed from the
Bank, did not use it, but paid interest for the
undrawn money. Although the Bank was
insolvent it paid over £1,000,000 in dividends
to its shareholders out of public funds en-
trusted to its care. Mcllwraith then borrowed
from the bank without security, and cleared
out of the country.
Even to this day the great financial insti-
tutions entrench themselves in our Parlia-
ments, In the Legislative Councils their
directors and representatives exert a malign
influence on the public policy.
In the national arena the hamstringing of
the Commonwealth Bank is a recent proof of
the grip they hold over anti-Labor adminis-
tration.
THE CONCEPTION OF A WHITE
AUSTRALIA.
Profound as has been the ameliorating
hand of Unionism on the conditions of indus-
try generally, it is in respect to the establish-
ment of the White Australia principle that
the men and women of the present day owe
an unpayable debt to the pioneers of the
Labor Movement.
All through the years of the infancy of the
workers’ paHw the forces of Capitalism were
militant and all-powerful. Their policy was
naked and undisguised. The White Sweat-


ers and the Black Slave-trappers were twins,
working in unison in mutual control of Aus-
tralian Governments. The black traffic was
mainly in the North. Its financial heart-
strings were in the cities of Sydney and of
Melbourne —the seats of Australian Money-
Power even in the present time.
Then, as now, the economic authority of
the nation was centred in a comparatively few
people. These were split into groups, and,
on occasions, their interests diverged, the
result being that the democratic impulse of
the nation ever breathed the freer when they
disagreed.
The originator of the Australian slave
trade w r as Robert Towns, of Sydney, owner
of ships, wharves, stores, and territories.
Director of the Bank of New South Wales,
member of the Legislative Council of New
South Wales, and business associate of many
of the founders of the greatest commercial
houses of to-day.
The story deserves a book to itself, -and
cannot be fully told here. During the seven-
ties a petition was sent to the British Govern-
ment, declaring that: “Murder, piracy, kid-
napping, and other acts of barbarity charac-
terised the traffic.” . . . “Kanakas on the
stations are terrorised with the stockwhip.”
. . . “They die from poor feeding, bad water,
insanitary houses, and over-work.” . . . “They
work 12 to 14 hours per day.” . . . “Australian
aborigines are treated similarly.”
There was not one daily newspaper in
Australia that stood for a White Policy. The


daily newspapers of Australia unitedly op-
posed the White Australia idea, and de-
nounced its advocates as fools and fanatics
mouthing the “unworkable and impossible.”
They unanimously supported the policy of
colored labor, and the most radical paper of
the day, the Melbourne “Age,” on July 16.
1883, advocated the importation of Indian
coolie labor.
REPEATING AMERICA.
In a debate in the House of Commons it
was said that part of Australia “had become
a second South Carolina. The rule is that
of an oligarchy, with all the vices of a slave-
holding Government.”
So grievous were the disclosures that the
British Government appointed a Commission
to investigate. As usual, the years passed,
but in 1883 (October) the Commission pre-
sented its first report to the Imperial Govern-
ment. It said;—“ The Kanaka traffic is one
long record of deceit, cruel treachery, kid-
napping and cold blooded murders.”
Lord Derby (June 8, 1884), described “the
operations of the Australian Courts as shame-
ful miscarriages of justice.” He also said,
“There is undoubted proof of kidnapping,
murder, rapine, and piracy.” But the then
Government—a Government of squatters and
their business confreres—refused to prose-
cute.
How terrible was the reality of the slave
labor trade in Australia in those years is at-


tested by the exposure of McMurdo, the
blackbirder. He kept a diary, from which the
following is extracted: —
“I have a new cat. It is a beauty. It
has five tails done up hard with strips of
lead in the strands. The old one is worn
out. It had no bite. This will make them
hop. . . . The wretches I flogged are all
dying. .. . Seven of them are dead. £325
worth of good meat gone. Hard luck, but
they would not work, they would not eat,
they wanted to die.”
BLACK POLITICS.
Because no redress could be had from Aus-
tralian Money-Power Governments, recourse
was again made to the British authorities.
But London was far away. In 1888 Mcll-
wraith, the capitalist politician already refer-
red to, ran an election on the cry of “Cut the
Painter,” in violent protest against the inter-
ference of the British Government in the
rights of Queensland on the black slave
question.
He was supported by the Money-Power of
the continent, by the united Tory Press of
Queensland, and by the majority of the
capitalist newspapers of the other States. By
assiduous propaganda, he persuaded the
people that a White Queensland meant col-
lapse of property values, ruin of industry, and
universal unemployment.
Under this alarmist spell he swept the
country, the British Government retired from
interference, and the Black Labor gang held


supreme control, having in the country no
voices to contend with except those of union-
ists, and no opposition in the Parliament
until the rise of the Labor Party.
LABOR’S GROWING INFLUENCE.
In 1893 the Queensland Labor Party had
sixteen members; in 1896, twenty; in 1899,
twenty-three. But the members were always
in the minority and could do no more than
give persistent publicity to the conduct of
the black traffic on plantations and ships;
their increasing strength, however, reflected
the growth of White Australian opinion.
All through the nineties Labor in all the
States made the gospel of a White Australia
resound throughout the land. In Queensland,
in particular, it fought a terrific struggle.
The squatter kings, the sugar planters, and
the great bankers, assisted by the press,
persistently inveighed against the stalwarts
of reform.
In every great forward movement it is
always the faithful few, the “agitators,” the
“extremists,” the men and woman who are
described as “idealists” and “unpractical
theorists,” who blaze the track. This is as
true in our own day as in the times that have
passed.
It was not until the Laborites of Queens-
land could be given the actual legislative and
political backing of the Laborites of the rest
of the Commonwealth that the black stain
was removed from Australia’s escutcheon.


ERASING THE BLACK STAIN.
In the first Federal Parliament Labor held
the balance of power, and, for Labor support,
the Barton Government, amongst other re-
forms, agreed to “The White Australia
Policy.” On the l?th December, 1901, it was
decreed that “No Pacific Islander shall enter
Australia on or after 31st day of March,
1904,” and on 19th March, 1904, the Clans-
man carried into Queensland the last batch
of Kanakas. The black-trappers carried on
their evil trade to within twelve days of the
end of more than two years notice of its
prohibition.
There was by that time 30,000 Kanakas in
Queensland, and their transportation back to
their island homes was the work of years,
and enormous expense.
LABOR, THE REFORMER.
The first fact to be remembered in respect
to the White -Australia is that for forty years
(on the evidence of Royal Commissions and
declarations of British Ministers of the
Crown), black labor, accompanied by “kid-
napping, rape, rapine, piracy, and cold-
blooded murders,” went on in Australia
under anti-Labor Governments, without pro-
hibition or punishment.
The second fact to remember is that the
Black Slave traffic in Australia only came to
an end when the Labor Movement had be-
come a power in the land.


In respect to the great body of industrial
law whereby the power of the sweater has
been restricted, reasonable conditions en-
sured in factories and workshops, minimum
wages prescribed, hours fixed, apprenticeship
regulated, holiday pay provided, and com-
pensation for injuries assured, our history
suggests two things :
(1) That when Labor was weak and
without representation in the Parliaments
none of these things were written in the
laws;
(2) That it was not until Labor became
a virile political force in the Parliaments
of the country that Governments yielded
to the dictates of political expediency that
which for 40 years they had refused to
concede to the voice of humanity.
LET YOUTH PONDER.
Young men and women of to-day, enter
ing into factories and workshops for a liveli
hood, and knowing not the story of the
struggle whereby Labor has transformed the
conditions of a nation, may ask themselves
what has Labor done. It is a pertinent query,
and Labor’s answer is to point to the history
of our country.
This continent has been called the land of
“social experiment,” Commentators have
compared our adventurous political initiative
to that of a pulsing giant whose sobriety of
thought is allied with a matchless courage in
action. Rut there is even more in it than
that.


Australia differs from Europe to-day solely
because here the power of Government has
been made responsive to a public conscience,
that has heard, and been guided by the voice
of Labor on important national and social
problems.
THE SOUL OF A NATION.
Our great national traditions we re born in
the aspirations of men and women, who hav-
ing left the Old World were determined that
here in the new one there would be a differ-
ent outlook than the circumscribed life they
had hitherto known. Chartists from Eng-
land, Crofters from Scotland, Fenians from
Ireland, Socialists and Democrats from the
purlieus of the despotically dominated cities
of Europe, came to this country to escape the
thraldom of privilege and the palsy of cen-
turies of custom.
Here they dreamed of a nation where all
men would have an equal opportunity; where
hereditary lordship over the soil would be
unknown; and where by social action stimu-
lated by democratic political institutions the
miseries of the old world could be averted in
the building of a new civilisation.
Their beliefs and their struggles for justice
gave us the first unions, the use of the ballot,
and manhood suffrage as distinct from a pro-
perty franchise; they gave us government of
the people, by the people, and for the people,
as against dominion over the mass by a
privileged few.


And on this foundation Labor has builded
its edifice of political democracy and Indus
trial and social reformation.
THE ROLE OF CAPITALISM.
It is attested in our history that the press
of capitalism, and the Liberal and Tory
wings of the anti-Labor political parties
opposed necessary and progressive laws until
opposition had become futile.
All the great principles of Australian
democracy —the right of equal voting, the
supersession of political privilege, the abro-
gation of the rule of property —to the extent
that they exist are the fruit of Labor’s
achievement. Where these principles are
denied—as in the municipalities, the Upper
Houses, and the restrictive laws connected
therewith—they are denied because rem-
nants of the old power of the reactionaries
still survive.
The great captains of industry and finance
are more class-conscious than the workers.
Their power is never destroyed by internal
racial or religious discords. They do not
dissipate their solidarity on false issues, nor
are they stampeded by bogus cries or mere
platitudes.
They invest in politics as a business in
order to secure the class domination of
wealth, extended privileges and enlarged
immunities for capitalism, and cheaper
human material for the profitable production
of wealth. As a result of the tremendous


publicity forces they control they are enabled
to retain a sufficient hold on the mentality
of the people to now and again absolutely
submerge the voice of progress, while at all
times they are able to weaken its natural
strength.
A contrast between Labor and Anti-Labor
is not afforded by a mere comparison between
the immediate administration of a Collier or
a Mitchell, but by the conditions of Australia
as they were under the unchecked authority
of those who ruled before there was a Labor
Party, and the conditions as they now exist.
This test will prove to the student the
value of the services rendered to Australia by
the men and women of Labor who, having
glimpsed “the vision splendid" of a national
heritage based on justice, equality, and
liberty, toiled and are toiling, for its realisa-
tion.
TO SERVE THE FUTURE.
This pamphlet closes with an appeal to the
young. It is they, the heirs of the progress
that has been made, who must carry on the
work of the future. Only in the Movement
of Labor can they find an effective outlet for
their energy, a, stimulus for their ambition,
and a ready-made organism whereby the
power of collective action may be harnessed
to the individuality of their striving.
Labor invites the youth of Western Aus-
tralia to share in the service of the future; it
reminds them of the debt they owe to those
who in the past worked for these better days,


and asks that this obligation be requited by
an equal readiness on their part, by continu-
ing the great democratic tradition, to serve
their country, its needs, and its highest
aspirations.
Labor opposes nothing except that which
is evil; it supports all that is good and up-
right, and which contributes to the well-
being of the people, and of those who are to
live here after we have passed on.
Young men! Young women! You are the
sons and daughters of our loins; it is upon
your efforts that the destinies of the next
generation—your own children—will in large
measure depend. Problems, perchance not
quite so perplexing as in other lands, face
you. How shall you meet them?
Not by standing in the shadow of rich
men, serving as public proxies for their nar-
row projects. Not that way.
But by striving for the mass; by upholding
the rights of the people; by being unafraid
of social experiment; and by being ever true
to the enthusiasms and the sacrificial qualities
which are the divine gifts of youth.
It is only in this way that you can do your
part in your age and generation to combat
iniquity, to serve justice, and thus maintain
those ideals which the work of the Labor
Movement has grafted into the sou! of the
Australian nation


Mr. Collier s Appeal
to the
Readers of this Booklet
Dear Friends. —The Labor Movement is
essentially a movement of brotherhood. It
had its birth in the manger of humanity’s
need; the inns of selfishness and greed had
no room for the ransoming Cause. It had
to attack the age-old entrenchments of
wealth, power, privilege, and vested inter-
ests. It has fought to relieve men and
women and little children from the thral-
dom of influences and practices that crush
the soul, warp the mind, and despoil the
body, and to substitute a spirit of brother-
hood and independence, uniting men in a
great regenerative movement.
Part of the history of this struggle is
epitomised in this pamphlet. Having read
it you cannot but he inspired to play your
part in your day and generation.
We are the inheritors of what has been
accomplished by noble men and women who
Pioneered the movement and carried Its
banner through the years of greatest trial.
Though often misunderstood, often maligned,
and often persecuted, they strove unceas-
ingly to improve the conditions under which
the working classes lived and worked. Our
*-l . . t L


movement has ever been and still is a chal-
lenge to all other movements to advance
the cause of humanity.
In Australia we are fortunate in the
measure of freedom won and retained. But
there must not be any going back. There
must not be any sacrificing of ideals, for
Labor's task will last Just so long as
human greed remains.
It is in the belief that this booklet will
encourage the young men and women of our
country to an active participation in the
work of the Movement that I commend It
to you.
?
t
•
i
X
\
i
i
i
i
f
Yours faithfully,
0 YOUTH, flame eternal,
Still aspire with energies
immortal;
To every heaven of desire
Our yearnings ope a portal;
And though age wearies by the why,
And hearts break in the furrow,
Youth sows the golden grain to-day,
The harvest comes to-morrow.


01224726
1508
