

i yf /?/£ /
petv4->p*rn
SoS
- ' <tijt h/tUteu *->.
/ua
_ <?£>■
/ S? S!


A
p
<*4
i


distinct from other objects much like them. The colour can-
not be taken as a sufficient distinction to mark a species, nor
can variation in size, unless both striking and hereditary.
My Chromatia were all rose-pink, but I should not regard
them as distinct from violet or brown sorts. They colour
mud and other objects at the bottom of ponds. Those I took
were only a few inches under water, and the hue is probably
affected by the depth at which they grow, and the quantity of
light they receive.
The most active enemies of my pink Monads were the crea-
tures represented in Fig. 5. It is quite impossible to represent
the delicate structure of these objects in any engraving. The
reader must imagine the globular body to be white and transpa-
rent ; the little dots inside them represent vesicles obtained from
the Chromatia, and ingulped by a mouth opening* wide and slant-
ingly near the filament. Not a vestige of this mouth could be
discerned except when it was in the act of opening or shut-
ting. No definite internal organs could be discovered in
my specimens, but no doubt some existed. The filaments
were so delicate and colourless that they could only be seen at
favourable moments. The slightest motion which took them
out of the exact focus, or the best possible illumination, ren-
dered them invisible. The tails were still more delicate, and
although both head and tail were frequently seen in the same
individual, it was rarely possible to focus both at the same
time. Their tails were susceptible of considerable variation
by lateral expansion and contraction, and the animals could
change from the globular form to a pear shape, or even to
the shape depicted in Fig. 6, which represents what may be
another species, as it had no tail, and did not become either
globular or pear shaped. The most common forms of these
animals are represented in Fig. 7. They were very active,
swimming freely, squeezing themselves through obstacles,
and dashing furiously against the Monads. Sometimes they
swallowed a little Monad whole ; but their usual plan was to tug
and thump at the big ones until they could get at their contents.
The object depicted in Fig. 6 was less common, but appa-
rently engaged in the same business.
Fig. 7 shows an animalcule remarkable for the length of
its cilia. It had a conspicuous contractile vesicle and a mouth
at the smaller end. It was an active creature, and seemed fond
of the Monads in an early stage of their growth.
In one instance, one of the Fig. 5 objects used his tail as
a foot, and sprung up and down from it, but without the jerk
of a Vorticellid.
I have seldom met with prettier objects than the pink
Monads and their enemies, • and if any of my readers notice a


delicate deposit of pink or any other colour at the bottom of a
pond, I recommend them to bottle some of it for domestic use.
The sketches which illustrate this paper are from drawings by
my wife; the objects are all magnified 1750 linear.
THE AUSTRALIAN SATIN BIRD AND THE
KING PARROT.
“AN OLD BUSHMAN.”
The male Satin or Shining Bower Bird ( Ptilonorynchus holo-
cericeus), with his silky, glossy, purple coat and bright blue
eye, is, perhaps, take it altogether, one of the most beautiful
birds in the Australian forest. But it is not so much on
account of the beauty of plumage that I bring this bird
before the notice of the reader, as to offer a few remarks
on those peculiar little structures called “ bowers,” which
these birds erect in certain places in the Australian bush
for the purposes of mutual recreation, and totally independent
of, and often at a considerable distance from, their nests.
These bowers are, I believe, built, and certainly are used
by more than one pair of birds. Like human edifices, they
do not appear all to have equal care bestowed upon their
construction, or equal taste shown in their decoration, and,
although uniform in their plan, I do not think that they
are equally so in their dimensions. They may, however, be
generally described as being in plan an oval, intersected at
either end by a wing, or entrance to it. The greatest width of
the oval is generally about eighteen inches, that of the wings
about eight inches at their points of junction with it. The floor
of the oval or bower, and of that portion of the wings imme-
diately adjoining it, is paved with small sticks, along either
external edge of which is built a little ridge composed
of sticks laid longitudinally, and forming, as it were,
two wall-plates. Into both of these wall-plates a com-
pact hedge of sticks is then inserted; these on either
side inclining inwards, at about an angle of sixty degrees from
the actual covering of the bower, leaving a small space open
at the top, varying in size from one to two inches. These
sticks are longest in the centre of the bower, and are shortened
as they approach either wing. The wings widen as they recede
from the bower, and those forming their sides are placed further
apart; these also incline inwards. The whole of the sticks


used in the construction of this little edifice are either peeled,
or else have a beautifully smooth bark. The decoration of the
bower is accomplished by sticking the feathers of gaudy
parrots into the wall-plates, especially where the bower and
wings intersect each other. The whole of the flooring is also
more or less thickly strewn with these feathers, especially at
the entrance of the wings, forming a kind of tesselated pave-
ment to the whole affair. It is most ludicrous to watch the
grotesque postures and attitudes of a group of satin birds at
play in one of these bowers.
Scarcely less beautiful in plumage, and quite as interesting
in his habits, is the Spotted Bower Bird, which is very
common on the Murray, frequenting the densest part of the
mallee scrub. Shy and retired in its habits, and certainly
not so gregarious as the bird last described, the male
bird of this species is certainly a very handsome fellow,
of a rich brown covered with buff spots, and a broad stripe
of feathers growing out of the back of the neck, bearing
a remarkable resemblance to the flower of a Scotch thistle.
But the Murray bird lacks the splendid eye of his royally
apparelled brother of the Western port district, of whom, when
in full and mature plumage, with his glossy coat of satin-like
softness, the lustrous depth of whose purple hue is enhanced
by the still brighter glories of a peerless eye, it may be fairly
said, he is justly entitled to be classed among those “ things of
beauty” which are <f a joy for ever.”
I do not think that any country in the world is richer than
Australia in different species of the parrot tribe; and bril-
liant as many of them are in their colours, to my fancy there is
none to equal the King Parrot (Aprosmictus scajpulatus of natu-
ralists), nearly the size of the magpie at home; the body colour
of a rich glossy purple green, with a breast of flaming red.
The king parrot, as he floats from one green tree to another, is
one of the most splendid objects in the Australian bush, and,
although the red lory is a magnificent bird, he must yield
the palm to the parrot we are now describing. However,
beyond the gorgeous plumage of this princely bird, there is
little of interest to be said respecting him, for, unlike the lyre
bird, he has no language, save the confused jabber of his
“ corroboree” notes, and the short, but shrill pipe of his mo-
notonous call-note. Unlike the bower bird he is no builder,
and I introduce him here simply in illustration of the fact that
Victoria has also her birds of beauty, which can scarcely be
surpassed in richness of plumage by those of the sunniest
clime. The geographical range of the king parrot is I believe
very extensive, but in Victoria, the Gipps* Land district is un-
doubtedly his chief abiding place, for the further east you


travel, the oftener will your path be crossed by this “ dashing
pioneer.'’'’ It is also seen frequently in the Goulburn district,
and I have met with him as far north as Mount Hope; but there,
as in some other places, I found that he had a dangerous rival
in the graceful and golden-fronted green leek parrot, and a
little lower down the Murray by the more sombre, yet noble
black-tailed lory. He is often to be seen in the Bass Eiver
district, sometimes accompanied solely by his unpretending
queen, at others in the mixed company of his compeers. Here,
during the months of winter, they are to be found in many of
the gullies on the mountain ranges, keeping company with the
lyre bird and the Yankata cockatoo ; and in the same gully,
and doubtless often under the same trees, whilst they are
quietly feeding in the upper branches, the lyre bird is talking
to them in their own language at the foot. At this time of the
year they are remarkably quiet, and, owing to the density of
the upper foliage in these mountain scrubs, you may traverse
gully after gully in these sequestered ranges, swarming with
king parrots and other birds, and yet be entirely ignorant of
their presence, and the only way to arrive at a knowledge of
their vicinity is to repeat at intervals their short and mono-
tonous call-note, and then as likely as not you will hear it
answered from a tree under which you have just passed.
In the spring the greater portion of these birds leave their
mountain home, and descend into the lower country adjoining
it, and when this is the case, our friend proves himself not only
the “ king of parrots,” but the “ king of robbers,” stripping
the fruit from the trees in the settlers’ gardens ; and of all
vegetables, potatoes appear their favourite. After a time they
return to the ranges to rear their young, and when this is
done they reappear with augmented forces to “ raid” in the
surrounding country. I think the king parrot right well and
worthily named ; for although some may perhaps say that the
dashing dress of the blue mountaineer is brighter in its hues,
and that of the crimson-coated lory deeper in its dye, yet
neither the one nor the other, nor in fact any of the parrot
race, can, in my humble opinion, vie in stateliness of carriage
or splendour of appearance with their “ titled king,” for the
bright red tint of his front and lower garniture stands forth
in bold relief from the dark purple and green of his lordly
back, while the bright reflection from his dark green wing, as
it flashes in the rays of the noon-day sun, dazzles the eye of
the beholder, and proclaims the presence of a “ Prince of
the Birds of Air.”


9OSL £


.
1
