

THE
SCOTS’ CHURCH CASE
MASON FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.




THE
■ I
~*
8
• •
Iplkrunu:
51 & 53 Flinders Lane West.
SCOTS’ CHURCH CASE
BY THE PROMOTERS OF THE BILL.
MASON FIRTH & M‘CUTCHEON, GENERAL PRINTERS,




HISTORY OF THE SCOTS’ CHURCH CASE.
The Presbyterian Church of Victoria was formed by the union of
various Presbyterian Synods of the colony, which were originally
offshoots from the different denominations that exist in the old
■country. One of the conditions of the union, by which congrega-
tions were induced to submit themselves and their property to the
jurisdiction of the new Assembly, was that of absolute equality
between all Presbyterian Churches, so that members of every recog-
nised denomination were eligible for admission on equal terms. To
this union the congregation of the Scots’ Church, which was
formerly connected with the Established Church of Scotland, gave
their adherence in good faith, and have hitherto loyally maintained
the connection. In everything they have endeavoured to comply
with the rules of the Church ; in nothing have they refused support
to her schemes. Nevertheless, for years past they have been so
harassed by the proceedings of the Melbourne Presbytery that they
are unwillingly forced to the conclusion that the union is only one in
name, and not in reality; that not only do the old denominational
prejudices survive, but that these have been strengthened and inten-
sified. The congregation have been frequently assailed on grounds
which could not brook examination, and in defiance of the Constitu-
tion ; till at last they are driven by the overbearing attitude of the
■dominant clique into petitioning Parliament for restoration to their
original position.
SUSPICIONS ATTACHING TO MINISTERS OF THE
ESTABLISHED CHURCJI.
Naturally, the congregation, who have always received their
ministers from the Established Church, wish to preserve that link of
connection, and cannot be expected to seek them amongst the mem-
bers of any other denomination. By the Constitution of the Church
they have a perfect right to do so, as the Presbytery are formally
hound to admit ministers of all the Churches on an equal footing.
But what is the actual reception which clergymen from the Church
of Scotland have experienced ? Before Mr. Strong had ever uttered
a word in Yictoria, or even set foot on our shores, suspicions in
regard to his teaching were freely vented by members of Presbytery,
some of whom would fain have hindered him from entering the
Church. His assistants, on one ground and another, have only been
admitted by narrow majorities. The preachers of the Scots’ Church
have been tabooed and boycotted by many of the ministers ; have


been debarred from their pulpits, followed with idle rumours, and
made to feel that they are regarded as outsiders and intruders. And
all this is done in a Church which boasts before the world that it
contains no parties, and under the shelter of that very Constitution
which promises equality to all! As long as such things are possible,
there is not, and there cannot be, any real union.
ABORTIVE ATTACKS ON THE MINISTERS OF THE SCOTS’
CHURCH.
This state of affairs, fitly described as one of “ strained relations,’’
is by no means new, or likely to be temporary. It is the natural
result of the policy which the Melbourne Presbytery have consistently
pursued for some time. Which of the ministers of the Scots’
Church have they not suspected and assailed ? Mr. Menzies was
challenged by them ; Mr. Stobbs compelled to explain his views ;
Mr. Strong had been but a short time in the church, when an
anonymous letter, on the subject of his preaching, called forth an
excited pamphlet from Dr. Cairns, in which that divine urged the
Presbytery to take action on the ground of a mere rumour. Mr.
Strong’s endeavours to reform and improve the musical portion of
the church services, and to bring them more into harmony with the
tastes of the community, were viewed with great indignation by
many of the brethren. Along with his Session he was denounced
without stint, at the time, for favouring innovations ; but the
wisdom of the course which he pursued is amply attested by the
fact, that some who were most bitter in their opposition have since
adopted every one of the improvements which they then unsparingly
condemned. His articles on Lessing and Jonah, published in the
Presbyterian Review, were next seized upon, and virulently
assailed; but as they afforded no evidence of heresy, the attack only
served to increase the growing irritation. Objection was then taken
to a speech delivered by Mr. Strong on the Shorter Catechism as a
manual for Sunday-schools, in the course of which he remarked on
the absence of all reference to the fatherhood of God, and the love
of God. This is a criticism which is not only fair and reasonable
in itself, but one which has been publicly made over and over again
by men of sound reputation. Yet not even this could the Presbytery
pass over in silence. They have sought to turn every writing,
every speech of Mr. Strong’s against him ; and have grasped at
every shadow of a chance to fasten some vague charge upon him,
and upon his congregation. The introduction of an anthem, an
essay on a German author, an allusion .to defects in the Shorter
Catechism as a children’s manual—each was sufficient to rouse the
ire and draw down the fulminations of the clergy ; each was used
as an opportunity for the exhibition of that bigoted spirit which
pervades a section of the Presbyterian Church. No possible charge
could either be formulated or proved on these points, as was known
and freely confessed from the first. Yet they were eagerly utilised


to harass the minister and congregation of the Scots’ Church
and to stir up a feeling of bitterness and irritation which boded
ill for the peace and prosperity of the Church at large.
PRES BYTERIAL ACTION AGAINST MR. STRONG.
These futile attacks culminated in open action on the 4th
November, 1881, when attention was called in the Presbytery to a
paper on the Atonement, which had been contributed by Mr. Strong
to the Victorian Review. No further steps, however, were taken
till the March following, when a committee, appointed to investigate
the article, reported that some passages required explanation. A
long and violent dispute followed, but ultimately the charges were
virtually withdrawn ; for, while ministers of the Church generally
were enjoined to give prominence to the supernatural in their
teaching, no explanation whatever was demanded from Mr. Strong.
This resolution, which had only an indirect bearing on the case as it
originally stood, was the result of the fullest discussion. The com-
mittee that reported on the article was confessed by the Moderator
to be biassed against Mr. Strong, and certainly read its own
interpretation into his words. Yet withal, when the committee’s
inferences and interpretations were brought into open court, the
Presbytery could not abide by them, and were glad to retreat from
the case. True, Mr. Strong was in a certain way cautioned ; but
cautioned on what ground ? The prosecution had broken down ;
the charges that his opponents had brought were surrendered as
unsubstantiated and improvable. Under these circumstances the
congregation could only interpret the “ caution” to mean, that those
members of Presbytery who undertook the conduct of the prosecu-
tion desired to withdraw from an unjust and untenable position
without betraying the baseless character of their proceedings.
But while the congregation have thus ample right to complain
because proceedings were ever instituted at all on such slender
grounds, they have a still more grievous subject of complaint in the
method followed by the Presbytery when dealing with the case. At
first no notice was given to Mr. Strong of the doctrines which he
was suspected of contravening; so that he was kept in ignorance of
the subject-matter of the accusation till his opponents had time to
state their case. When the actual charges were divulged, it was
discovered that they turned not on what he said, but on what
he left unsaid; that they were based, not on any statement
which he had made, but principally on the ground that, in
sketching the history of the Atonement, he had not written
with that dogmatic fulness which some of his brethren desired.
The strongest bias on the part of his opponents was allowed to
pass unchecked. Thus the Rev. D. S. M‘Eachran said of one
passage in the article that the words were perfectly harmless in
themselves, but conveyed an impression of unsoundness to his mind ;
as if that were sufficient to justify a charge of heresy ! Such


an observation seemed to betray so much prejudice and one-sided-
ness, as to preclude the very possibility of expecting anything like
impartial or charitable construction of Mr. Strong’s words from
those who endorsed it. The complainants in the case were allowed
free scope to travel far beyond the particular writing on which the
motion for inquiry was based. Mr. M‘Eachran devoted his speech
principally to inferences and suspicions drawn from other writings
which were not before the court ; while, as if that were not enough,
the Rev. J. L. Rentoul attempted to insinuate that Mr. Strong was
guilty of holding by the opinions and theories of the Tubingen
school. Such was the method pursued by those who moved in this
matter, allowed by the Moderator, and applauded by the supporters
of the prosecution with the utmost fervour. But still worse remains
to be told. Not only was Mr. Strong unconvicted of heresy, but no
formal indictment was ever preferred against him ; the motion being
one merely for inquiry, and even that withdrawn in the end. Yet
certain members, taking his guilt for granted, and passing alto-
gether beyond the bounds of criticism, did not scruple to taunt him
with the dishonesty of receiving the emoluments of the Church and
betraying its doctrines, in the hope that they would be able to
damage his reputation with the public. This to a man against
whom they found nothing worthy of libel, and in a Church possessed
of constitutional powers to assert and maintain its rights and
doctrines, would be too contemptible for mention were it not
•evidence of rancorous feeling and personal animosity. Could better
proof of an animus pervading the assailants of the Scots’ Church be
found than that, with the whole machinery of. Church government
ready to their hand ; with the certainty of being able to purify the
Church by a judicial process, if there was aught in it requiring puri-
fication; with the possibility before them that they might be called
upon to decide the whole matter by judicial forms, which require at
least to be conducted with gravity and impartiality, they yet de-
scended to flouts and sneers and personal taunts ? Was it, we do
not say Christian, though they themselves protested continually
their brotherly affection and their brotherly suspicion, but was it
constitutional, or in accordance with the procedure of any court, to
allow such latitude on the side of the prosecution ? Such, however,
was the attitude maintained both by those ministers and laymen
who took the most active part in the proceedings of the Presbytery.
CASE AGAINST MR. J. C. STEWART.
Scarcely had the noise of ecclesiastical controversy died away,
when it suddenly swelled again into a roar against Mr. J. C.
Stewart, the representative elder of the Scots’ Church congregation.
Mr. Stewart had said in an address to the members of the congre-
gation, and in refutation of the taunt of dishonesty which had been
recklessly thrown at their minister, that if Mr. Strong were dis-
honest in not holding every doctrine of the Confession, then all the
ministers might with equal truth be termed dishonest; since some of


the doctrines, like that of infant damnation, were no longer preached
in any pulpit. The leaders of the Presbytery, nettled at finding
their own assertions retorted on themselves, called on Mr. Stewart to
retract the charge of dishonesty. That gentleman answered, that,
having made only an hypothetical statement, he could not be held to
have brought any accusation at all. The Presbytery, then, required
him to confess that the Standards did not contain those things
which he had attributed to them. His reply was that he could only
understand the Confession of Faith in the sense in which it was
written, and in which it was universally taught almost till the
present generation. Some fruitless efforts were made to coerce Mr.
Stewart into admitting that the Standards might and should be
interpreted in some other way. He maintained, however, that the
Presbytery could not consistently depart from the literal interpreta-
tion of some doctrines, and yet insist upon it in others. He was,
therefore, not in a position either to tender an apology for his
remarks or to recite a recantation.
It must be noticed that in this case there was really no question
of heresy. Mr. Stewart simply asserted that certain doctrines of
the Confession were no longer preached in the sense in which they
had been understood, or in the signification which the words natu-
rally and literally yield. And the Presbytery, which, in the excited
state of the ecclesiastical mind, seemed ready to find fault with any-
thing, endeavoured to evade the statement, not by showing that
they were in harmony with those doctrines, but by declaring that the
doctrines themselves were susceptible of another interpretation.
The Rev. Murdoch Macdonald insisted on the truth of the Confes-
sion “rightly understood,” thereby admitting practically that the
plain interpretation of the words is not always the right one. But
what claim could any minister have to determine the right under-
standing of the Confession ? What part of the ecclesiastical con-
stitution gives any man the power of explaining away any portion
of the Standards for himself while insisting on the literal acceptance
of some portions by another ? These questions, put by the
members of the Scots 5 Church, have never been answered. From
excited debates and noisy prosecutions the congregation have only
been able to infer that that liberty, which the majority arrogate to
themselves without question, is denied to their ministers and office-
bearers.
After passing through these troubles, the congregation naturally
cherished the hope of peace. Their office-bearers having thus
undergone the ordeal of public trial, the people reasonably expected
to be left alone, and to be allowed to continue their congregational
work without molestation. It was a vain hope, an empty expecta-
tion ; for the flames of strife, which were suffered to die away during
the winter of 1882, when Mr. Strong was absent in England, were
speedily rekindled after his return.


THE SUNDAY SOCIETY.
In the beginning of 1883 a society was formed in Melbourne to
agitate for the opening of the Public Library and Museum on
Sundays. Mr. Strong joined the society, and advocated its cause
before the public under the conviction that, as there was nothing in
Christianity to condemn, and a great deal in modern society to
justify, the movement, a wise Christian would regard it as his duty
to concede the boon to those who were desirous of it. After all,
this was only doing what Presbyterian ministers—and among them
the most distinguished of the day—have done elsewhere with impunity.
But in the Melbourne Presbytery, under whose jurisdiction even such
limited freedom of speech and action is impossible, a motion was
brought forward, directed against Mr. Strong personally. The
Presbytery meeting was held with closed doors, in accordance with a
by-law recently adopted, to veil the transactions of the court from
the public eye ; but it was afterwards decided to send the speech of
Mr. M‘Eachran, who again led the assault, to the press for publication.
The speech showed that the closing of the Presbytery doors had not
diminished the ardour usually exhibited by that gentleman and the
party of whom he is the chosen mouthpiece. He began his oration,
according to the Argus report of 9th August, by reciting the old
difficulties and suspicions, which had been discussed and settled
before, and which, therefore, should never have been re-opened.
Then he went on to denounce a literary allusion to one of the
Psalms, which Mr. Strong had incidentally made in the delivery of
a popular lecture. He resorted again to the tactics of his clique,
and raised the cry that Mr. Strong was acting dishonourably
towards the Church. In a word, he spoke of everything except the
subject that was actually before the court. The following quota-
tions will bear witness to the zeal with which the prosecution was
conducted :—“ But, it may be said, Why, then, not let him ( i.e .,
Mr. Strong) alone ? My answer is, Why will he not let the truth
alone ? He has always been the first to begin the strife. We have
never touched him till he has touched that truth which is dearer to
us than life.” ‘‘l did not expect to see him join with Unitarians,
Roman Catholics, and Secularists in an attempt to break down the
sanctity of the Sabbath, and turn it into a partial holiday.” “ Sir, I
cannot help feeling that an attempt is being made to establish a
right in our Church to teach in opposition to the Standards even
with regard to matters of the most vital importance. But that is
what we can never concede. Nothing can be more demoralising to
a Church and a community than to see men, whose honour ought to
be above suspicion, making light of their ordination vows, and teach-
ing in opposition to those doctrines which they have sworn before
God and man to assert, maintain, and defend. Better far have no
confession at all than that ministers should be guilty of such dis-
honesty.” The sinister character of such utterances is but too
plainly revealed ; the slender ground on which they are. based plain
enough. The complaint that Mr. Strong interfered with the truth


•could mean, in sober fact, nothing more than that Mr. M‘Eachran
and his friends had previously charged him with error, and failed to
make out a case. His advocacy of greater freedom on Sundays, on
Christian principles, was turned into the statement that he banded
himself with infidels and “men of bad character” to destroy one of the
cherished institutions of the Christian Church. His appeal for one
small change was wrested into the sweeping announcement that he
was trying to establish a right to teach in opposition to the
Standards. These were odious accusations, when supported by such
weak evidence, to bring against any man ; but against a minister,
who was agitating for what he believed to be a reform sanctioned by
Christianity, they were worse than odious. And, on the showing of
the Presbytery itself, they were unnecessary and uncalled for ; for
what was the conclusion of the invective in which Mr. M'Eachran
indulged unsparingly ? “ That the Presbytery express extreme
regret at the conduct of Mr. Strong in relation to the Sabbath, but
resolves, in present circumstances, to travel no further in the case.”
•Such was the lame and impotent conclusion of the very serious
insinuations and direct charges of dishonesty with which Mr.
M‘Eachran’s oration bristled. “To travel no further in the case!” If
Mr. Strong had really violated the solemn vows of his ordination ;
if he had, in truth, banded himself with infidels to weaken the
Christian Church, the resolution to proceed no further was not only
feeble but cowardly and wrong. If he did not violate these vows,
then the interference with him was uncalled for and harassing, and
such as could not be ascribed to a disinterested desire for the peace
and welfare of the Church. Had the smallest part of the personal
.charges, made by Mr. M'Eachran and reiterated with wearisome
vehemence by his followers, been true ; had Mr. Strong really
sought to injure any institution of the Church, or to teach in oppo-
sition to its Standards, the Presbytery were in duty bound to go
much further. As it is, the sound and fury of the debate evidently
signified nothing more than a desire to attack the Scots’ Church, by
giving vent to suspicions which could not be supported, and raising
a discussion which resulted in the anti-climax of “masterly
inactivity.”
JUDGE HIGINBOTHAM’S LECTURE.
The last case that arose was caused by a lecture which Judge
Higinbotham delivered on the Ist of August, 1883, in the Scots’
Church, on the subject of “Science and Religion.” The truth of
the matter is briefly—as vouched for by the secretary of the Literary
Association connected with the Church—that the Judge, who is a
member of the Church of England, was asked by the committee of
the association to deliver one of their course of monthly lectures.
The subject was selected with Mr. Strong’s cognisance because he
believed, as the lecturer expressed it, that “ the time had come when
laymen should utter what thoughts they had connected with the teach-
ing and welfare of the Church.” Mr. Higinbotham further avowed that


the entire responsibility of what he had to say rested on himself alone.
The tone and character of the lecture proved to be such as would
naturally give offence to many Christians ; and Mr. Strong, in
thanking the speaker for his address, took occasion to state that he
was not responsible for these opinions, but that he could not under-
take to discuss all the points suggested by the Judge on the spur
of the moment. Later, however, he replied to the lecture in a
sermon, which was published by the press, and disavowed any
sympathy with the principles enunciated by Mr. Higinbotham.
Nevertheless, his old opponents in the Presbytery seized upon the
event, as furnishing a basis for another motion of inquiry. On the
7th of August, one of the members gave notice that he would call
attention to the lecture. At a subsequent meeting a committee was
appointed to inquire into the circumstances of the case ; on the
4th of September, this committee reported to the Presbytery that it
was precluded from ‘ ‘ giving any advice as to the course which the
Presbytery should take.” Thereupon Mr. M‘Eachran gave notice
that at next meeting he would charge Mr. Strong with promulgating
unsound and heretical doctrine ; and the Presbytery appointed the
18th September the day for hearing the charges.
Meanwhile, Mr. Strong, weary of the continuous agitation by
which he was surrounded, resigned at once his pastorate and his
connection with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. The con-
gregation, though loth to part with him, reluctantly acquiesced in
his decision, in view of the isolated and painful position in which he
was placed by the repeated attacks of his adversaries in the Church
courts. The letter of resignation to the Presbytery was dated 3rd
September, 1883, and was couched in the following terms :
“ Dear Mr. Ballantyne—
“ I beg to resign my connection with the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria, and to surrender my charges as minister of the
Scots’ Church into the hands of the Presbytery.
“Will you kindly bring my resignation before the Presbytery at
the meeting to be held to-morrow, and, if possible, expedite matters,,
so that I may be relieved at an early date from my connection with
the Victorian Church.
“ Believe me, yours faithfully,
“ Charles Strong.
“ Rev. J. Ballantyne, Clerk to the Presbytery of Melbourne.”
Mr. M‘Eachran is said to have forwarded information to Mr.
Strong of the motion which he intended to submit prior to the
letter of resignation. But it must be remembered that his resigna-
tion was placed in the hands of the representatives of the congrega-
tion before it came to the Presbytery, and before anything whatever
was known of Mr. M‘Eachran’s intentions or charges. The letter
to the Presbytery was only a necessary consequence of a decision
previously accepted by the office-bearers of the congregation. When


that decision was unwillingly acquiesced in, nothing had been heard
of the charges of heresy which were formulated on the 4th of
September.
The question, then, that came before the Presbytery on 18th Sep-
tember was, whether they should accept the resignation or not. At
the same time Mr. M £ Eachran insisted on pressing his motion, and
was heard in support of it. His case was simply a re-statement of
his old suspicions, with the addition that he held Mr. Strong
responsible for the lecture delivered by Judge Higinbotham. He
seemed to regard this as the crowning point of Mr. Strong's delin-
quencies. He appeared to have made up his mind beforehand that
Mr. Strong wished to aim a deliberate blow at the Christian faith..
He even declared, in spite of all disclaimers, that Mr. Strong was at
heart in sympathy with the lecturer, and that “ he had got another
man to say for him what he had not the courage to say for himself.”
His supporters repeated the statement with equal audacity. They
insisted that Mr. Higinbotham had been asked to lecture for a special
purpose. They refused to believe that Mr. Strong had made any
disavowal of the sentiments expressed by the Judge. In vain the
true object of the lecture —that it was given at the request of the
Literary Association —was brought under their notice ; in vain,,
gentlemen who had been present testified that Mr. Strong had
explicitly declared his difference from its views. One member of the
court avowed his determination to accept nothing but what was
contained in the newspaper report, which did not give Mr. Strong’s
speech in full. In vain, the sermon preached on the subject was
referred to. “It comes too late,” said some. “Itis an apology for
the lecture in disguise,” said others.
Following in the wake of Mr. M‘Eachran, the Rev. S. Robinson
submitted a motion containing a list of questions on doctrinal points,
which Mr. Strong was expected to answer categorically: —
“ That the charges now made are of such a grave and serious
character as to require further investigation ; and as the Rev.
Charles Strong is thereby accused, among other things, of heresy,
the Presbytery resolve, in the first place, to call upon Mr. Strong
‘ to give full and explicit answers’ to such ‘ questions bearing on the
points involved in the accusation’ as the Presbytery shall determine.
Further, that the,Presbytery determine to ask the following questions,
with such others as it may decide upon:—l. Do you believe and
teach the proper deity of the Lord Jesus Christ ? 2. Do you
believe and teach that the Son of God, who became man in Jesus
Christ, existed from all eternity as the second person of the Trinity,
and was very God, of one substance and equal with the Father?
3. Do you believe and teach that there is a difference in kind, not
merely a difference of degree, between the incarnation of. God in
Christ and the indwelling of God in Christians ? 4. Do you
believe and teach that the miracles recorded in the Gospels are
veritable facts of history ? 5. Do you believe and teach that the
Lord Jesus Christ was not born by ordinary generation, but was-


'conceived by the power of the Holy Spirit, and born of the Virgin
Mary ? 6. Do you believe that, as narrated in John’s Gospel,
Lazarus died and was buried at Bethany, and that our Lord did
.then call him back to life ? 7. Do you believe and teach that our
Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, dead, and buried ; that He rose again
from the dead on the third day, leaving the tomb empty ; and that
He thereafter visited and spake with His apostles and other
disciples ? 8. Do you believe and teach that the risen Lord
ascended to heaven from the presence of His disciples, and that He
now and ever liveth, and can hear the prayers of His people and
make intercession for them ? 9. Do you believe and teach that
Jesus Christ is the propitiation for our sins ; that by His life and
death He satisfied God and made reconciliation for men? 10. Do
you believe and teach that the Holy Spirit is, in the same sense and
equally with the Eternal Son, a person of the Holy Trinity, and not
a mere divine influence ?”
As the list given in the motion covers the most important points
•of dogmatic theology, it would have been manifestly unjust, to say
the least of it, to demand answers from any one who had already
signed the Standards, until some good reason was shown for believing
that he no longer held them. It would have been discreditable to
force such questions upon one who, by his position, was entitled to
be presumed in harmony with the doctrine of the Church until the
■contrary could be clearly shown. Accordingly, a host of amend-
ments betrayed the divergent sentiments of the Presbytery. There
was a large number who refused to entertain such a motion at this
stage. Finally, after an indescribable and unexampled scene of
■confusion, extending over two days, the Presbytery evaded all
responsibility in the matter by referring it simpliciter to the
Assembly. Either the accusers could not sustain the charges and
proceed to libel, or they were anxious to have the case discussed in
the Assembly without being placed at the bar. They thus took
from Mr. M ; Eachran the responsibility which he had formally
assumed, and at the same time got rid of the responsibility which
they ought themselves to have borne. Having raised the difficulty,
they declined to proceed in the usual and constitutional way.
When the reference was taken up at the meeting of Assembly in
November, it was moved directly by Mr. M‘Eachran that “ there is
ground for inquiry into the teaching and conduct of the Rev.
E. Strong.” But on the second day of the proceedings this motion
was abandoned by the proposer in favour of one that Mr. Strong
be invited to attend, and not only disavow all complicity with the
erroneous doctrines of the lecture, but also to declare his faith in the
“ true deity of the Lord Jesus Christ, the propitiatory character of
His death, and the real resurrection of His body from the dead.”
The effect of this motion was, practically, to repeat the questions
■submitted by Mr. Robinson, which the Presbytery had declined to
sanction. Not only was Mr. Strong to repeat before the Assembly
•the declaration made at the time, that he was in no way responsible


■for the opinions which Judge Higinbotham expressed, but he was
also asked to re-affirm his adherence to the faith, though no charge
of departing from it had been substantiated. The Assembly,
apparently, were willing to forgive him if only he would confess him-
self guilty of that in which he did not admit any guilt.
This resolution was come to on the 14th November, when Mr.
Strong, who was to leave the colony on the following day, was
literally on the eve of departure. The invitation reached him about
nine o’clock p.m. in the Town Hall, where a vast assemblage of
his friends and of the general public had gathered to demonstrate
their sympathy with him. As soon as possible after the meeting
Mr. Strong sent his answer to the impatient Assembly, which was
on the point of convicting him of contempt of court for not replying
to its missive. Mr. Strong’s reply was as follows :
“ Town Hall, Melbourne, 11 p.m.
“ My dear Dr. Nish—
“ I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter at nine
o’clock to-night, inviting me to appear before the Assembly and
state my views on certain points. I have had no time to reply
earlier. With all due deference to the Assembly, I must, under the
circumstances, respectfully decline to do this, even at the risk of
being thought uncourteous. I will not dwell upon the point, how-
ever important, that, in my humble opinion, the proceedings in con-
nection with my resignation and Mr. M‘Eachran’s unsustained and
unsustainable charges have been unconstitutional, and even illegal,
according to the laws of our Church. But apart from this, I can
see no good which could result from my doing as requested.
“ I have been openly charged with being a dishonest and dishonour-
able man, and most unworthy suspicions have been insinuated. If
I am what I have been represented to be, no words of mine can be
of any avail to dispel the impression.
“ Allow me only to say that I have done my best to serve what
seemed to me to be the best interests of the Church and of religion
while here ; that I have preached and tried to practice what I believed
to be the essential doctrines of the gospel and of the creeds ; and
that, when I find that I can no longer remain a minister of the
Presbyterian Church, or sign her Standards, I hope to have the moral
courage to leave it. I feel that the brethren who have spoken so
strongly against me have neither understood my motives nor spirit.
“ With respectful regards to the fathers and brethren, to whom
with regret I am compelled to say farewell, and with every good wish
for yourself,
“ Believe me, very truly yours,
“ Charles Strong.
“ The Eev. Dr. Nish, Clerk of Assembly.”
Next morning it was decreed by the Assembly, on the motion of
Mr. Eobinson, that the letter was unsatisfactory. Ultimately, on
•the recommendation of a committee, the Assembly agreed to declare


Mr. Strong no longer a minister of the Church, to dissolve the
pastoral tie between him and the Scots’ Church congregation, and to
direct the Presbytery of Melbourne to declare the Church vacant.
The effect of this motion, which was carried by a very large majority,,
was to leave the case unsettled. Mr. Strong went away without the
usual certificate of disjunction, while nothing was done either to
substantiate or disprove the charges which Mr. M‘Eachran had laid,
upon the table. Nominally, this resolution involved no judicial
sentence ; but, in reality, it did. It meant that, to whatever Church
Mr. Strong might apply for admittance, he would be in the position
of a man without a certificate, and with an undecided accusation
hanging over his head. Virtually, the result, so far as this
Assembly was concerned, was equivalent to a sentence of deposition.
It sent Mr. Strong away as if he had never been a minister of the-
Church at all. It took from him that certificate which is always
given, when a resignation is accepted, and a minister’s connection
with a Church ceases of his own free will.
The apologists for this action on the part of the Assembly
protest that he “ disclaimed the jurisdiction of the court,” and
“ placed himself outside the territorial range of its authority.”
What the meaning of these phrases is, it is difficult to see. Mr.
Strong’s letter explained that it was in no spirit of hostility to the
Assembly he declined their invitation to attend. For the rest, the
Assembly, if it saw cause, could summon him to its bar ; had power,
in the event of his refusing to obey, to censure or even depose him.
for contumacy; had power to proceed with the case, and to grant
his certificate, or withhold it. The Assembly, perhaps, because it
did not see sufficient reason, did not use this authority; did not
summon Mr. Strong to the bar ; did not proceed against him in the
constitutional way of libel; did not really take up the charges
preferred against him. How, then, could Mr. Strong be said to<
disclaim their jurisdiction ? He resigned in the usual way, but
instead of granting the usual certificate, or proving sufficient cause
for refusing it, the Assembly left the matter alone, and declined to-
exert its own jurisdiction.
THE CHARGES MADE AGAINST MR. STRONG.
The charges made against Mr. Strong by Mr. M‘Eachran can,
hardly be described as more than insinuations. He was accused,
first, of “ publishing unsound and heretical doctrine, both by his
action in connection with Judge Higinbotham’s lecture and other-
wise.” His action in connection with that lecture was to disavow
its sentiments, so that only by an abnormal suspicion could he be
saddled with it. He was charged “ also with being guilty of
teaching and conduct tending to destroy the order, peace, and unity
of the Church.” This might be applied with equal justice to the
long-continued policy of the Melbourne Presbytery. He was
accused also of “ failure to assert, maintain, and defend the doctrine
of the Church when within his power.” This, which was barbed


with the insinuation that he had got another man to say what
he dared not say himself, was based on a thorough misrepresenta-
tion of the circumstances surrounding the lecture. Further, he was
indicted “with failure to comply with the instructions of the Presby-
tery to give prominence in his teaching to the incarnation, the
atoning life and death, and the resurrection and ascension of our
Lord.” It is hardly credible that the only basis for such a sweeping
accusation was that Mr. Strong had published a small children s
catechism, which only professed to state a few truths in plain and
simple language ; that he had given a few lectures in one of his
classes on Emerson ; and that he had introduced a few modern
hymns, which Mr. M‘Eachran characterised as Unitarian, but which
were almost all by Trinitarian authors. Such were the charges and
the evidence which were allowed to convulse the Church. It may
safely be said that much stronger testimony was wanted to justify a
libel or a formal trial within the rules of the Constitution. Never-
theless, it was permitted to drive Mr. Strong out of the Church.
Such a prosecution cannot but be regarded by the Church as un-
just, unconstitutional, and unworthy of the Presbyterian body. In
not acting by the rules which regulate judicial processes ; in tolerat-
ing shadowy insinuations and personal taunts ; in allowing accusa-
tions once disposed of to be again repeated; in seeking to put
interrogations before any justification for them is proved, the Pres-
bytery and Assembly have trespassed, not only against the public
instinct of justice, but against the order of Church government. If
these things be permissible, no man is safe, no peace is possible.
To demand categorical answers on certain doctrines is, under such
circumstances, not judicial but inquisitorial. It is a custom in itself
subversive of unity.
It has been said that Mr. Strong showed himself contumacious
towards the Church, which is represented as. acting in a spirit of
conciliation and forbearance. The “ conciliation” can easily be
estimated at its due value in the light of the fact that during the
whole controversy he was never summoned to appear before the
Presbytery or Assembly ; nor was he even invited to confer with the
members till the last night of his sojourn in Melbourne. Neither
publicly nor privately did his brethren show the smallest desire to
smooth and pacify matters. Had those whose conscience was
troubled regarding Judge Higinbotham’s lecture sought a . friendly
explanation of the circumstances, they would have got a disavowal
of its principles. But, instead, shutting their ears to the disavowal
actually made, they preferred to rush into Presbytery proceedings,
and make an occasion for the statement of grave accusations. On
account of the jealous suspicions with which his career has been
watched, Mr. Strong has all along been placed upon the defensive.
His co-Presbyters have sought to make the most of everything that
would tell against him, so that there was nothing left for him to do
but to defend his position in accordance with the law of the Church.
Their relentless aggression made friendlier and .kindlier relations


impossible. It is easy now to speak of conciliation and forbearance.
How much of the forbearing spirit there has really been, let the
numerous proceedings of Presbytery, familiar enough to the public—•
let the record of motions of inquiry and motions for committees,
which forms a large part of the minutes of that body—let the con-
stant nagging and badgering of the past three years testify.
SPIRIT OF THE PROSECUTION.
It is now evident that the suspicion with which ministers of the
established Church were received has ripened into a spirit of personal
animosity, growing more bitter with every case that was mooted.
In these quasi-trials it was found, time after time, that there was
not sufficient evidence to justify any action, and yet the old fruitless
demand for inquiry was persisted in with increasing frequency, as if
the clamorous desired to drive Mr. Strong out of *the Church by
the sheer force of importunity. Nay, more : not only were taunts
about dishonour and dishonesty flung recklessly at him ; not only
was his teaching branded as Unitarian, without any proof being
adduced ; not only were the speakers of the Presbytery allowed the
utmost latitude to fix on his writings the terms most opprobrious in
Presbyterian ears ; but, in the end, even his solemn assertion to the
Assembly was openly disbelieved. When he declared in his last
letter that he had taught “ what he believed to be the essential
doctrines of the gospel and the creeds,” a member of the house was
permitted to say without rebuke that “ the phrase bore the strong
conviction that the words were uttered by one who did not hold their
faith.” Nor was it Mr. Strong alone who was pursued with this
rancorous spirit ; but all those as well who were indisposed to join
in the hue and cry against him, and determined to stand for the
rights and liberties of the Church. At the meetings of the courts
every attempt was made to interrupt these speakers, and even tO'
silence them. In private they were liable to misrepresentation.
Thus the Rev. W. G. Fraser said in the Presbytery that “ he him-
self had been subjected to abuse.” It was private abuse. Private
insinuations had been levelled at him, and he had been told that his
action would damage him. Such is the spirit developed on one side
by religious prosecution. The best comment on the zeal of the Mel-
bourne Presbytery for purity of doctrine is exhibited in the fact that
they have admitted to the eldership one who publicly denies the
dogma of imputation of guilt. For Mr. Strong, there was nothing
but suspicion ready to seize on the most unpremeditated word ; for
another, the inventive genius of the same men is taxed to admit him.
THE CAUCUS.
The dominant clique is enabled to do such things through the
corruption of the Church organisation by the caucus system. They
meet in each other’s homes to arrange what motions they will make,
and who will propose them. They draw up together the charges,


which they afterwards profess to judge impartially. They reckon
their supporters before entering on any movement, so as to secure
a majority. They use their power and influence to canvass members
of the court, and to fill up vacancies which congregations have left
unfilled in the ranks of the representative elders. By such acts
they make sure .of a numerical success ; and when their action is
exposed even confess that they assemble in private meetings.
For these reasons the Scots’ Church congregation have lost all
confidence in the present Victorian Church and its procedure. They
know that Mr. Strong has been driven from the colony by the
unjustifiable policy of the Church, and by the constant “ nagging’’
to which he has been subjected ; that in every case of doubt the
procedure most calculated to harass has been resorted to without any
attempt at private or friendly explanation, and they desire to see
him back again under happier and better auspices. While regretting
the evident failure of the union into which they entered hopefully
five-and-twenty years ago, they can yet only regard it as a hindrance
to congregational life. With the Church from which a majority
by the tactics of incessant harassing and worrying have driven
their minister, without being able to convict him of any charge,
they can no longer be expected to work in sympathy. They are
struggling for the rights of the minority, hitherto trampled down by
the solid vote of the Church courts. They are fighting for consti-
tutional government and impartial discipline in place of irregular
prosecutions. They are waging war against a religious tyranny
foreign alike to the genius of Presbyterianism and of their country.
Many things they have borne with ; but they cannot sit idly by,
and see their minister received with suspicion, pursued with suspicion,
and finally forced from the Church by suspicion. Therefore, they
appeal to the highest power in the land to sever their connection
with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and to restore them to the
position which they occupied before the union. They have no desire
to break with Presbyterianism, or to deviate from its Standards.
They wish only to be placed beyond the power of such annoyances
as those to which they have been subjected, confident that not only
they themselves but the whole Presbyterian Church will gain largely
by peace.
POSTSCRIPT.
The proceedings subsequent to the resignation and departure of
Mr. Strong have been apparently designed to make the unfortunate
breach wider, and to destroy all hope of reconciliation. The Pres-
bytery of Melbourne first refused to entertain an application for
Mr. Strong’s certificate, made by his agent under power of attorney;
and afterwards, when he renewed the application directly by letter,
the Presbytery again decided to do nothing in the matter. The case
still remains in the same unsatisfactory state as on the day when the
General Assembly let it drop without coming to any conclusion, but
the present attitude of the Church Courts confirms the members of the


Congregation in the belief that they can expect nothing but hostile
measures from the majority of the Church. As if to leave no doubt
in their minds, the Presbytery recently presented an overture, which
the Commission of Assembly sustained, authorising the Home Mission
Committee to interrogate applicants for admission, even though they
be duly accredited by other Churches. The Presbyterian Church of
Yictoria would thus be enabled to close its doors against all
preachers, save those who might be willing to satisfy this irregular
tribunal. But in so doing it would take away the liberty which
Congregations have always enjoyed, and would destroy the custom
which has prevailed since the Union. An insult to the mother
Churches of Presbyterianism, it would also tend to diminish the
usefulness of the Scots’ Church and other Congregations here, by
preventing them from calling the Ministers of their choice.
The Presbytery has thus done its best to make the breach irrepa-
rable. Not content with driving one Minister away, it threatens to
destroy all freedom of selection for the future. The petty prosecu-
tions, which in themselves were sufficient to form a subject of
grievous complaint against the ecclesiastical leaders who conducted
them, have now culminated in an attempt to extinguish the liberty
to which Congregations have always laid claim under the act of
Union. The history of Presbyterian rule in the colony thus explains
and justifies the action which the members of the Scots’ Church
have approved by an overwhelming majority. The body, which
ought to have helped them in the practical work of Christianity,
lias been their greatest hindrance; the Court which is most
solemnly bound, by the very authority that it possesses in sacred
things, to do them justice, has meted out what they can only
consider to be injustice. There is no disloyalty in seeking
deliverance from the galling bondage of an authority that has
shown itself so oblivious of its dignity, and so unworthy of its
■trust as the guardian of Presbyterian principles.


NOTES ON THE SCOTS’ CHURCH BILL.
OPPOSITION BY SISTER CHURCHES.
The opposition offered to the Bill by sister Churches is based
on the assumption that this will prove a precedent which will
be followed in other cases, and that a dissatisfied Congregation in
any Church will at once appeal to Parliament, to the injury of
Church order. A precedent, however, only exists when the circum-
stances are similar. Under dissimilar conditions there can be no
precedent. Now, it is easy to show that the conditions under
which the Presbyterian Church holds its property are altogether
dissimilar to the circumstances which obtain in other churches.
The difference may be expressed in this way—that the Presbyterian
Church is the result of union, the sister Churches of growth. Thus
there has only been one Church of England in the colony, in which
the property has been vested; no Congregation, therefore, could
have a claim on the Church lands without the consent of the legiti-
mate authority. It could not be said that the property ever
belonged to the Congregation apart from the Church. But the case
is altogether different with Presbyterians. The property was originally
vested in congregations, formerly three separate denominations, who
coalesced and agreed to form a united Church. At the time of that
union Congregations which stood aloof were allowed to retain their pro-
perty, so that Parliament actually regarded the property as belong-
ing to the Congregation. Ho one was compelled to enter the union,
and when the union was finally consummated Parliament made an
equitable division of the property. The Presbyterian Church as at
present constituted is, therefore, a partnership recognised by law.
It is a union to which the consenting parties each contributed a
share. The Church of England, on the other hand, is not a
partnership, because the Congregations, instead of contributing
property to the common possessions, have from the first received it
under the jurisdiction of the Church authorities.
This view of the constitution of the Presbyterian Church is taken
by its leading ministers. Thus, in assailing Mr. Strong, Mr.
M‘Eachran referred continually to the Church as a partnership, the
articles of which Mr. Strong and his Congregation had to abide by,
once they entered it.
If this be correct (and the interpretations given to the Act by
representative ministers confirm the soundness of this view), the
Scots’ Church Congregation are surely entitled to apply for a dis-


solution of the partnership in accordance with ordinary law and
custom. No partnership is made irrevocable and indissoluble.
Those whom the law has joined it can also sunder.
The case, therefore, stands thus : The Synod of which the Scots’
Church was a member entered into a partnership with other
Synods. At that time the Scots’ Church could have remained out-
side of the new partnership, retaining its property. Now it petitions
to be allowed to withdraw, and to take the property with it.
What is there in this to cause alarm in the sister Churches
where the tenure of property is altogether different ? Members of
the Church of England, for instance, ought to see from the
peculiar history of the Presbyterian Church that, in consenting
to a division of its property, they are doing nothing to alter the
tenure of their own.
THE RIGHT TO APPEAL TO PARLIAMENT.
The promoters of the Bill for enabling the Scots’ Church Congre-
gation to withdraw from the Presbyterian Union cannot but
deprecate the attempt made by the majority of that body to stifle
all discussion of the subject by formulating the new and unheard-of
proposition, that Parliament has no right to interfere in the affairs
of the Church. The General Assembly has used its utmost
endeavour, by holding meetings throughout the country, by organis-
ing deputations to the Government and ordering petitions to
Parliament, and by invoking the aid of sister Churches, to induce
members of the Legislature to reject the Bill, on the ground that
Parliament has no right to interfere. This certainly seems to be an
extraordinary objection. The promoters of the Bill believe that it
is one of the functions of Parliament to redress grievances for which
there is no remedy elsewhere, provided that good and sufficient
reason can be shown for seeking relief. They claim no more than
what they conceive to be the right of every citizen, to appeal to the
highest authority in the realm in cases where the ordinary means of
justice fail to provide a remedy; they desire no more than a hearing
of their complaint and a judgment on its merits. That their
grievance is worthy of investigation seems to them demonstrated by
the large sympathy which they and their late minister, Mr. Strong,
received from the public during the long and harassing proceedings
of the Presbytery, the consistent support afforded them by nearly
the whole press of the colony, and the fact that, in spite of intimi-
dation on the part of the General Assembly, over six hundred
adult members and adherents of the Congregation have voted in
favour of the Bill, while only forty-five could be found to oppose it.
If, however, Parliament, in its wisdom, should consider that they
have no grievance, or one that is not of sufficient importance to
warrant the exercise of its power, the promoters only hope for a
speedy decision, in order that the present agitation may be allayed
as quickly as possible.


The objection that Parliament has no right to interfere is a
strange one to come from the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,
which owes its origin to Parliament, and which has more than once
countenanced the interference that it now condemns. Without the
authority of Parliament there would have been no Presbyterian Church
of Victoria. The union of the different bodies was prudently delayed
until the Legislature sanctioned the transference of the properties,
because the Free Church section was divided, and the unionists of that
section would have legally forfeited their properties to the party led by
Mr. Paul had they not first secured them by an Act of Parliament.
The union was not effected until Parliament authorised the transfer
of the Church trusts from the jurisdiction of one body to that of
another ; and without that authority the union never would have
been accomplished. Moreover, when Dr. Cairns’ party attempted
to claim all the property held by the Free Church Synod, even that of
Congregations which refused their consent to the union, they acknow-
ledged the right of Parliament to inquire into the facts and to do
justice between the parties by acquiescing in the division of the Church
estate. Again, at a later period, when Mr. M‘Vean and others who
left Mr. Paul to join the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, sought to
take with them more than Parliament held to be just, no protest
was raised against the right of Parliament to adjudicate on the
matter, nor did the Presbyterian Church of Victoria petition
Parliament to discourage schism. Still more recently, when an
attempt was made by a majority of the General Assembly to wrest
a piece of land from the Scotch College for the convenience of the
occupant of Chalmers’ Manse —an event which led Dr. Morrison to
ally himself with the Scots’ Church Congregation—they appealed
to Parliament to authorise a variation of the Trusts, but were
defeated. In that case the General Assembly saw nothing objection-
able in the course which it now condemns.
But it will be urged that in these former cases Parliament was
not called upon to recognise any isolated Congregation, but,
primarily, Synods and Presbyteries ; and that the effect of a Bill
enabling one Congregation to separate from the general body will be
to change the conditions under which the property was originally
granted by the Government. The answer to this objection is that
the promoters still desire the property to remain, impressed with the
obligation to adhere to the Standards of the Established Church of
Scotland, and any amendment of the Bill necessary to secure that
end will be accepted. The desire of the Congregation is to be
associated with the Church of Scotland, with which they were at
first connected, and they intend, in the event of the Bill enabling
them to separate from the union in Victoria being carried, to apply
to that Church for recognition. They have every reason to believe
that they will be recognised, and that leaders of the Established
Church will visit the colony to strengthen their hands. But even if
the Church at Home should decline to receive them, they would
willingly be bound, as Parliament might think fit, to maintain the


Presbyterian Constitution, and to use the property in accordance
with its rules. The object contemplated by the Bill is not congre-
gational independence, but separation with a view to union with
another body.
The measure is, therefore, in form an enabling Act, permitting
the Congregation to withdraw from the Presbyterian Church of Vic-
toria, in order that they may attach themselves to another com-
munion. Against this no objection can be raised, for the Act of
Union itself is framed on the same lines. The promoters of the
Bill have only followed the precedent set by those who drew up the
original Act.
THE PROPERTY.
Whatever may be the legal effect of the various statutes
relating to the property, the promoters have always considered
that the Trustees held the lands “on behalf of the Congrega-
tion” under the spiritual superintendence, first, of the Synod of
Australia, then of the Synod of Victoria, and now of the Judica-
tories of the Presbyterian Church, to be administered according to
the provisions of the Act 8 William IV., Ho. 7, which gives to the
Congregation, while under such spiritual superintendence, the
practical use and enjoyment of the property. The Act which
governed the properties of the Synod of Australia declared that,
while the functions of the Synod were spiritual, the “ real estate in
all churches and chapels, ministers’ dwellings and glebe lands, and
the sites of the same” . . . “ shall continue to be held by the same
Trustees/’ . . “in behalf of the same congregations,” under
the spiritual superintendence, &c. And precisely the same language
is used when the rights of the Synod of Australia were transferred
to the Synod of Victoria. The Presbyterian Church took no more
than the Synod of Victoria had, for the Act expressly provided that
the land should continue to be administered according to the Acts
and Deeds under which it had been acquired.
The claim now advanced rests on the assumption that the Con-
gregation have just cause for desiring to withdraw from the
Presbyterian Church Courts ; and, if so, that it would be most
unjust to cause them to forfeit all interest in the property which was
beneficially theirs before the union, and which, without their consent,
would never have been brought into the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria. Eeference has been made to the great value of the
property, but it is evident to every one that that value has been in
no way produced by the connection of the Congregation with the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and that it would have been the
same whether the union had taken place or not. But, whatever its
value, the property, with the exception of the new Church, which
was built by the Congregation at a cost of nearly £30,000, and
the Co-operative Store, which has been erected by the tenant, is in
exactly the same state in which it was taken into the union by the


Congregation, and the Presbyterian Church has not spent one
farthing upon it.
It has been said that it was the Synod of Victoria, and not the
Congregation, which brought the property into the union. This is
manifestly a prejudiced and one-sided statement of the case. The
Synod was made up of Congregations, and the Congregation could
not have been compelled to enter the union. If they had chosen to
stay out the property would have remained theirs. The Act of Union
admits this, for the third section of it excepts and secures to the
Congregations who had declined to enter the union the several
properties enumerated in the schedule. As constituted by Act of
Parliament, the Presbyterian Church is only the enlarged partnership
of the former Synod, just as two or three firms might agree to amal-
gamate. In the latter case, the private members of these firms
would be entitled to oppose the partnership, or, at a subsequent
time, to petition for its dissolution. In the same way, the Scots’
Church Congregation, finding that the union has failed to secure to
them any benefit, and that they have just cause to complain of the
policy of the Church Courts, now petition that they may be allowed
to withdraw from the partnership, taking with them the property
which they brought to it. A very large number of those who make
this demand are the same persons who formed part of the Congre-
gation prior to the union, and the children of such. Though the
Congregation has grown in numbers and influence, and has been
affected by many changes, the old members and their families have
remained faithful to it. Over 600 members and adherents have
voted in support of the Bill, while only 45 oppose it; and of these
latter only two families with eight votes were connected with the
Congregation before the union. Surely, then, the majority have a
moral right to the Church in which they have worshipped, and the
lands which they entrusted to the governing courts of the Presby-
terian Church, if they can show that there has been aught in the
conduct of these courts to warrant their seeking separation.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL TO PARLIAMENT.
The question is, therefore, narrowed down to this—viz., Can the
Congregation show sufficient grounds for asking Parliament to
comply with their request ?
The events which have led to the present Bill are so familiar to
the public that they need not be enumerated in detail. The Minis-
ter of the Scots’ Church has been driven from the colony by a suc-
cession of worrying attacks in the Presbytery, by a series of
groundless prosecutions, and by imputations of dishonesty as false
in reality as they were unbecoming on the lips of those who used
them. Before he landed on these shores, or opened his lips in this
Church, suspicion regarding the character of his teaching was
sought to be excited in the Congregation. During his career in
Melbourne he was continually subjected to hostile criticism on the


part of liis colleagues in the Ministry ; and motions for inquiry
were at various times directed against him upon grounds so unten-
able and so palpably in violation of the' laws of the Church that
they could only be regarded as harassing and irritating. By these
tactics the Congregation have been deprived of the services of their
Pastor; while no proof has ever yet been adduced by the Presbytery
that he had deviated in any way from the Standards of the Church,
or offended in aught against her rules. Not only was Mr. Strong
unconvicted of heresy, but his opponents were never able to indict
him formally, or to justify by evidence their demand for inquiry.
But if the suspicions of the Presbytery were correct, then during the
whole period of Mr. Strong’s ministry the Presbytery culpably neglected
their duty towards the Congregation. It was their duty to protect
the Congregation from being contaminated with false doctrine ; and
for this purpose they could have ordered an inquiry into the teaching
of the pulpit, and satisfied themselves on the point. They shut
their own pulpits against him, and protected their own Congrega-
tions, but they were regardless of their duty to the Scots’
Church Congregation, assuming always that he was. preaching
heresy, as they were so industriously circulating. But during
eight years they took no efficacious means of judging whether their
suspicions were correct. Mr. Strong was allowed to build up the
Congregation, to extend its usefulness, to direct its philanthropy
into proper channels ; and now when the organisation is perfected,
when the Church is engaged in a larger and more important work
than it had ventured on before, when the members, seeing the prac-
tical effects of their Pastor’s teaching, have become firmly attached
to him, the Presbytery drives him away. After eight years of indif-
ference to the Congregation they turn round now and seek to
stigmatise them with unworthy names, forgetting that nothing was
ever done in their interests, and that nothing has yet been estab-
lished against the teaching to which they are accustomed. So far as
the Congregation is concerned, the spiritual supervision of the
Presbytery seems to have been a duty which that body completely
forgot.
The tyrannical spirit of the Presbyterian Church, however, not
satiated with compelling one man to depart, endeavours to debar any
one of a similar stamp from entering the Scots’ Church. By the
Articles of Union the Presbyterian Church agreed “ to receive all
ministers and preachers from other Presbyterian Churches applying
for admission on an equal footing,” and in the exercise of their
rights under that agreement the .’members of the Congregation have
been in the habit of drawing their Ministers from the Established
Church of Scotland, and from a particular section of that Church.
Yet the Rev. Murdoch Macdonald, speaking in and for the Presby-
tery, stigmatised that branch of the Church of Scotland as an
“ illegitimate coterie,” and declared that if the Scots’ Church Con-
gregation determined to continue to draw its ministers from that
section the Presbytery would withstand them ; thus showing that


he was not prepared to recognise Ministers who are in full com-
munion with the Church of Scotland, and so violating the
Articles of Union. In addition, an overture to the General
Assembly, passed by the Presbytery of Melbourne, has been instanced
by the Assembly, which stipulates that no man shall be admitted
into the Church, whatever his testimonials may be, unless he
submits to be examined in regard to his faith, if the Home Mission
Committee (which is practically the Presbytery of Melbourne)
think fit. Coming at the present time, this motion, which intro-
duces a rule never contemplated at the union, can only be viewed as
directed against the Scots’ Church. It is an attempt to exclude
from the Presbyterian Church such Ministers as the Congregation
are entitled to call. If the motion be insisted upon, it can only be
regarded as an effort to break up the connection which the Scots’
Church has maintained from the first, and to destroy their individu-
ality as a Congregation.
The effect of these proceedings, when they are reported amongst
the Presbyterians of Scotland, cannot fail to be injurious, and will
naturally weaken the relations that subsist between the home and the
colonial Churches. This may be seen in the fact that the Rev. A.
Douglas recently refused a call to West Melbourne, on the plea that
he could not submit to the inquisitorial demands of the Melbourne
Presbytery. Still more must the Scots’ Church expect to find diffi-
culty in maintaining its alliance with the Church of Scotland,
against which especially the Presbytery directs its suspicions.
The promoters of the Bill have ample proof that the driving away
of their Pastor, and the refusal to allow them their choice for the
future, are the fruits of a policy that has been deliberately adopted
and unceasingly pursued by a majority in the Presbyterian Church.
In support of this contention, one of the Ministers has recently
declared in public that before he was elected to fill his present office
he was asked to join in an organised attack to crush out the Broad
Church party, of which Mr. Strong was said to be the representative
here, and that he refused at all risks to play such an unworthy part.
They can prove further that the forms of the Presbyterian Church have
been abused by the introduction of the caucus system. The men who
appear before the public as judges and prosecutors are accustomed
to hold meetings beforehand, at which they decide on the charge,
the evidence in its favour, and the resolution which is to be formally
proposed. Moreover, this policy has not been directed against Mr.
Strong alone. Others have been the victims of similar suspicions
on the part of the dominant majority. Mr. Menzies, though now
paraded as a preacher sound in doctrine, was the object of several
attacks. He was suspected and talked of, and his views on
the Sabbath discussed by members in Conference, but not in
Presbytery. Mr. Stobbs was actually interviewed and ques-
tioned before he went to West Melbourne. Both of Mr. Strongs
assistants have been debarred from the pulpits of Ministers belong-
ing to the Presbytery, and have been regarded with vigilant sus-


picion. In a word, the Congregation, as represented by their
Preachers, have been “ boycotted.” These things, which they are
ready to prove, seem to the promoters to afford sufficient testimony
of a settled design to exclude Ministers who are in full connection
with the Church of Scotland, and to prevent the Congregation from
exercising their just right in calling any one of such men to their
pulpit.
The Congregation, therefore, are now convinced that the union is
a hollow one, and that the conditions of the partnership have not
been fairly observed by the Presbyterian Church. There are other
considerations, apart from their own case, which materially strengthen
this view. The United Presbyterians believed, and still believe, that
the connection between Church and State was disavowed by the
Presbyterian Church at the union. Yet, when Mr. Hastie’s money
was bequeathed to the Presbyterian body which should acknowledge
that principle, the majority, rather than lose the money, claimed
that the Church’s views should be gathered from the Stan-
dards, and not from any understandings or agreements to which
Ministers may have come in order to facilitate the union. Conse-
quently, the United Presbyterian party can never have really amal-
gamated with the Free Church party, unless they have sacrificed the
peculiar principle of the denomination which they came here to
represent.
But it is said, “ Why do the promoters not petition the proper
tribunal ?” That would be, first, the Presbytery, and then the
General Assembly. But the promoters maintain that the Presbytery
lias forfeited every claim upon their confidence, both through its unjust
policy and the unconstitutional means by which the policy has been
carried out. The Presbytery is supposed to be a judicial body,
which, in accusations of unsound teaching, acts as prosecutor, judge,
and jury. But the impartiality which ought to accompany the
exercise of judicial functions has been altogether wanting in its
proceedings, which were distinguished rather by unexampled scenes
of confusion, by violent speeches, by a spirit of bitter partisanship
and personal animus, by manifest prejudgment of the case, and by
an abuse of the laws which it was called upon to administer.
Neither can the promoters appeal to the final tribunal of the
Church—the General Assembly. The Assembly, in any matter in
which Mr. Strong or the congregation is concerned, is completely
under the influence of the Melbourne Presbytery, and has ceased to be
other than a place for giving effect to the decisions of that body.
Theoretically the Assembly is composed of a minister and an elder
from every congregation. In reality, however, as country elders are,
in many cases, unable to attend, nominations are asked for and sent
to members of the metropolitan sessions. Thus, the Assembly which
disposed of Mr. Strong numbered in its ranks the members of the
sessions of the Toorak, St. Kilda, East St. Kilda, Carlton, and other
Churches. How, considering the numbers of these sessions, the
Melbourne Presbytery easily obtains the command of the Church


and the public are led to suppose that an Assembly so constituted
is the voice of the Church. To petition the General Assembly,
therefore, would simply be to submit again to the decision of the
Presbytery an appeal against its proceedings.
It is urged, again, that -if the Congregation have any grievance
the courts of law are open to them ; but they are advised that,
unfortunately, the civil remedy is only open to the Minister whose
rights are outraged, and that the grievance of the Congregation is
more indirect than direct. Parliament alone is capable of giving
adequate relief. It was Mr. Strong, whose civil rights were invaded
by the unjust action of the Church Courts, who alone could have
restrained them ; but as he chose to resign his charge—a step which
the Congregation could not control—rather than to remain and
embark upon a costly and protracted litigation, the Congregation
have no legal complaint. Neither have they any legal means of
redress because of the effect which has been produced on the minds
of Ministers who would otherwise have accepted a call from them.
It is doubtful whether a Minister can bring any action against the
Church for not admitting him according to the promises held out in
the Articles of Union, because there can be no contract between him
and the Church until he has been admitted. But, at any rate, it is
not to be expected that any man will resign his position at home in
order to come here and try a legal question for the benefit of the
Congregation.
The Congregation, therefore, have no resort but Parliament.
They complain that the Presbyterian Church has violated the Act of
Union by its prosecutions of Mr. Strong, and its evident determina-
tion to debar men belonging to the Church of Scotland from admis-
sion here. The object of the Bill is separation, with a view to an
alliance with the Established Church, so that the Trusts, far from
being- changed, will be restored. On such a point only Parliament
has the power to grant the Congregation full redress, and to decide
on the equity of their claims, as it has before adjudicated on
questions of property, of union, and disjunction. The promoters
regret that they are forced to ventilate their complaints before the
Legislature ; they would have been willing to avoid such an extreme
measure, had not the Presbyterian Church threatened to annihilate
the congregational bonds which make the Scots’ Church what it is.
The necessity of their position compels them, and they are confident
of obtaining from the representatives of the people the justice denied
them by the authorities of the Church.




COMMISSION OF ASSEMBLY’S
STATEMENT;
ANSWER
PROMOTERS OF THE BILL


GLomnxwmon of JUoembig s (Statement
“SCOTS’ CHURCH PROPERTY BIEL.”
Notice has been given that a Bill is to be introduced into Parliament during
next session, to transfer the property connected with the Scots’ Church from
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, to a portion of the Scots’ Church
Congregation who intend to secede and constitute themselves into a new
Denomination.
The following brief statement is submitted by a Committee of the General
Assembly appointed to watch over this matter, and resist such procedure, in
order that the Legislature, the public, and sister Churches may be informed
with regard to the tenure of the property, the alleged reasons for separation,
the obligations binding on the late minister of the Congregation, the Bev.
C. Strong, so loßg as he was a minister of the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria, the recent action of the General Assembly with regard to him, and
especially the insidious character of the proposals contained in the threatened
Bill. The Committee in adopting this course wish it to be clearly understood
that they strongly maintain that the proposed Bill is not one which the
Legislature should for a moment entertain. The Church is a voluntary
association governed by laws framed by its members for their own govern-
ment ; the property belonging to the Denomination is held subject to these
laws, any infraction of which can be dealt with by the Supreme Court, and
through it by the Privy Council. Such being the position, it would be a
violation of the principle of non-connection and non-interference with
Beligion or Churches, which was fully established by the adoption of the
State Aid Abolition Act, if the Legislature were to interfere in any way with
the property or the internal management of the Presbyterian Church of
Victoria,


J\,rtototr
BY PROMOTERS OE THE BILL.
The Bill is only an enabling Act, of which the Congregation may,
or may not, hereafter avail themselves. If the Bill were passed to-
morrow, neither the Congregation nor the property would thereupon
and thereby be separated from the Presbyterian Church. Two-
thirds of the members and adherents respectively, in meeting
assembled, must resolve to separate, and in like manner after lapse
of one month confirm such resolution, before separation can be
effected.
The property never was transferred to the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria, though the spiritual and ecclesiastical jurisdiction was.
The Act of Union specially provided that the properties should be
held as before the union ; and, as a matter of fact, the Scots’ Church
property is so held under grant, the trustees never having signed
the Model Trusts Deed of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
No new denomination is possible under the original trusts, which
are not interfered with by the proposed Bill. The Congregation
must be Presbyterian and hold the Standards of the Church of
Scotland.
The “brief statement” seems more calculated to misinform the
Legislature, the public, and sister Churches, than to inform them.
We think it ought to be “clearly understood” that any subject
has a right of appeal to the Legislature for the redress of wrongs,
and to be heard in support of such appeal.
The Presbyterian Church of Victoria is a voluntary association,
or partnership, formed in 1859 on certain terms; and by the Act of
Union . the several congregations were enabled to continue in
possession of their properties under the new spiritual and ecclesias-
tical superintendence.
This spiritual and ecclesiastical superintendence, as may be
learned from foregoing “ history,” has been exercised in the past
so as to vex and harass the Scots’ Church Congregation and
deprive them of their minister, without having gone so far as to
bring the action of Church Courts within review of the Supreme
Court. r


I.—TENURE OF THE PROPERTY.
The site was granted in the year 1848, for the erection of a church, manse,
and school, under the superintendence of the Synod of Australia, in connec-
tion with the Church of Scotland, by the New South Wales Government, in
accordance with Act 8 William IV., No. 7, and 4 Victoria, No. 18.
By these Acts it is provided that occupation of the church or manse by the
Minister shall cease when he is removed from his office by the decision of the
Synod, and that the powers and privileges and advantages conferred on the
Synod shall cease unless the said Synod continue to adhere to the Confession
of Faith and other formularies of the Church of Scotland.
After the separation of the Colony of Victoria from New South Wales, the
Victorian portion of the Synod of Australia separated from that Synod and
constituted themselves into the Synod of Victoria, a distinct Church, “ sepa-
rated from and unconnected with any other Church or Ecclesiastical body
whatsoever.” This Synod united with the other Presbyterian bodies in Vic-
toria in the year 1859, to form the Presbyterian Church of Victoria ; and they
adopted as their standards and formularies, The Westminster Confession,
the Larger and Shorter Catechisms, the Form of Presbyterial Church
Government, the Directory for Public Worship, and the Second Book of
Discipline.
It will be noted that the slight connection which had previously existed between
the Synod of Australia and the Church of Scotland was thus given up by the
Synod of Victoria long prior to the union which subsequently was legalised in
Victoria.
All hereditaments, estates, and temporal privileges belonging to the
former Synods and Congregations of Victoria were conveyed by Act 22
Victoria, No. 82, known as the Union Act, to the “ Presbyterian Church of
Victoria and the several Congregations thereof,” to be administered accord-
ing to the Acts and Deeds under which they had accrued to the uniting
bodies, “ subject to the decisions and judicatories of the Presbyterian Church
of Victoria only.”


The site was granted to a congregation of Presbyterians, and
the spiritual and ecclesiastical superintendence has already been
repeatedly changed. The property was vested in trustees, who are
appointed by the Congregation and approved by the Presbytery.
The departure of the Synod from the Standards of the Church
of Scotland would interfere with its superintendence, but not with
the property, if the Congregation remained faithful to the Standards.
The Synod of Victoria was made the spiritual and ecclesiastical
superintendent of congregations by 17 Vic., No. 19.
At the union the rights of congregations to the properties they
occupied were fully acknowledged by Parliament. The three Synods
then uniting did not bring the properties of all their congregations
into the union, not less than six or eight congregations refusing to
join, and being specially exempted by the Act of Union.
Indeed, on the argument now stated by the opponents of this bill,
the Free Church Synod could have retained the properties of such
of its congregations as desired to form part of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria ; but the Legislature acknowledged the beneficial
interest of each congregation as entitling it to retain property either
out of or in the union, the Act providing that they should be
administered according to the Acts and Deeds under which they
had accrued to the uniting bodies.
These are substantially the Standards of the Church of Scotland
plus the Second Book of Discipline.
This is admitted, but only proves that the superintendence of con-
gregations has been repeatedly changed by Parliament, to which we
now appeal.
This statement is incorrect. As already stated all properties
belonging to the former Synods were not conveyed to Presbyterian
Church of Victoria by Act 22 Vic., No. 82.
This proves what has already been advanced—that the
properties belong to the congregations, and that it is only
the ecclesiastical jurisdiction that has been dealt with from
time to time, the several Acts of Parliament merely protecting
property from the claims of dissentients who objected, or might
object, to the change of such ecclesiastical jurisdiction.


This Act was passed at the request of all the parties concerned, and the
right of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria to the continued possession of
the property—the subject of the proposed Bill—cannot be impugned.
lI.—ALLEGED SEASONS FOE SEPAEATION, AND FOE THE
ALIENATION OP THE PEOPEETY.
The discontented portion of the Scots’ Church Congregation have never
given to the Presbytery or General Assembly any reasons for their threatened
schism, nor sought redress of any supposed grievance, nor made any com-
plaint to them, though this is the only constitutional course for members of
the Church who feel aggrieved to pursue. The Committee, therefore, can
only conjecture the nature of their reasons by reference to statements made
through the press by the promoters of this bill. Their reasons or complaints
appear to be two—(1) That the Presbytery and General Assembly have per-
secuted Mr. Strong, and (2) That they, the dissentients, want more theological
liberty and breadth than they have under the Standards and control of the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
1. With regard to the first of these allegations, it is to be remembered
that at his admission to the pastorate of the Scots’ Church, and as a condi-
tion of his induction, the Eev. C. Strong solemnly, and in the presence of
the consenting Congregation, answered in the affirmative to the Presbytery
the following among other questions :
“Do you acknowledge and approve of the Articles of Union
adopted by this Church on 9th April, 1859, as the basis of its constitu-
tion, and declare your cordial acceptance of these Articles ?”
“Do you own and believe the whole doctrine contained, in the
Standards of this Church, as an exhibition of the sense in which you
understand the Holy Scriptures, and do you engage firmly and con-
stantly to adhere thereto, and to the utmost of your power assert,
maintain, and defend the same, and the purity of worship as practised
in this Church ?”
“ Do you promise to submit yourself willingly and humbly, in the
spirit of meekness, to the admonitions of the brethren of this Presby-
tery, and be subject to them and all other Presbyteries and superior
judicatories of this Church where God in His providence may cast your
lot; and that according to your power you shall maintain the unity
and peace of this Church against error and schism, notwithstanding of


No. The Act of Union was passed at the request of the parties
consenting to union ; but the Rev. Mr. Paul, the Rev. Mr. Miller,
the Rev. Mr. M'Vean, and others, were opposed to the passing
thereof, and, though expelled by the majority from the Free Church
Synod during the negotiations for union, had their properties secured
to them by Parliament.
Some of those consenting to union hoped against fear concerning
what was regarded as an experiment; and for the protection of the
separate properties, it was agreed that the properties should in
future u be administered according to the Acts and Deeds under
which they had accrued to the uniting bodies.”
As a matter of fact, some, if not all, of the properties belonging
to the old Free Church Synod and United Presbyterian Synod are
administered under Trust Deeds, which provide for a two-thirds
majority of congregation dealing with property. The Presbyterian
Church of Victoria never has had possession of the Scots’ Church
property in any beneficial or legal sense independently of the con-
gregation, and their right to possession is directly impugned.
Here it may be sufficient to say that the Presbytery of Melbourne
and General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria have
always shirked dealing with complaints, after having indulged in all
manner of mud-slinging, so that no appeal to the civil courts has
been possible.


whatever trouble or persecution may arise, and that you will follow no
divisive courses from her doctrine, worship, discipline, and govern-
ment ?”
Further, by the law and practice of this and all other Presbyterian
Churches, the Presbytery are bound to see that these vows are faithfully
kept, and are responsible to the Supreme Court of the Church for the per-
formance of this duty. And when a complaint is formally made to them
against the doctrine or character of any minister, they are also bound to-
inquire into and deal with it.
The Presbytery of Melbourne has not at any time taken notice of the
teaching of Mr. Strong, except when some published writings or public
act of his forced it on their attention. After the delivery of Mr. Justice
Higinbotham’s lecture, which was so antagonistic to the main truths of
Christianity that clergymen of almost all denominations felt called upon
publicly to expose its errors, a formal charge of publishing and promulgating
heresy was lodged with the Presbytery against Mr. Strong by one of their
most experienced ministers. The circumstance that, after receiving notice
of this charge, Mr. Strong laid his resignation on the table did not absolve
the Presbytery from their duty of inquiry, nor could the resignation be
accepted consistently with Church law and practice, and with faithfulness to
Mr. Strong and the Church, until the charge of heresy was in some way dis-
posed of. This charge was received by the Presbytery, but not dealt with,
On the motion of Mr. Strong’s friends, it was referred' from the Presbytery
to the General Assembly; and the Assembly, with the view of enabling Mr.
Strong to clear himself, invited him to appear and disavow complicity with
the errors of Mr. Higinbotham’s lecture, and to declare his faith in the true
Deity of our Lord, His Atonement, and real Resurrection from the dead,
Mr. Strong by letter declined this invitation, and added complaints against
the procedure of the Church Courts. From these Courts he had voluntarily
absented himself for several years, though part of his ordination vow was
“to give conscientious attendance on the Courts of the Church.” He was a
member, with the right to speak and vote, and it was his duty to be present
and to point out any irregularity should it occur. The morning following
his refusal he sailed from the colony while his case was still pending, and
without assigning any reason for his abrupt departure. The General
Assembly thereupon adopted the most lenient finding consistent with justice
to all interests, in declaring Mr. Strong no longer a Minister of this Church,
and dissolving the pastoral tie between him and the Scots’ Church congre-
gation.
When these proceedings are viewed in the light of the fact that Mr. Strong
had entered into the most solemn obligation to submit to the Courts of the
Church, and to “ assert, maintain, and defend her doctrine,” it will be seen
that there is not even a semblance of truth in the complaint that he was
persecuted.
2. With regard to the claim for more theological liberty and breadth, the
Committee would direct attention to the fact that within the limits which
the Standards permit, every man is allowed perfect liberty, and no one has,
in the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, been called to account for small
matters, on the principle that De minimis non curat lex. It is also perfectly
free to any minister or member of the Church to move, in a constitutional
way, for an alteration of the Standards, or of the method of adherence to
them, so far as he considers anything wrong or defective. But lawlessness,
or every man teaching or doing what is right in his own eyes, irrespective
of promises and engagements, cannot be tolerated in any Church, or, indeed,
in any corporate body, without involving its destruction.
The extent of the liberty desired by the discontented portion of the Scots’
Church Congregation is indicated by the occasion of the present trouble,
namely, Mr. Higinbotham’s lecture. The doctrine of that lecture is a very


Neither Mr. Strong nor the Scots’ Church congregation is in any-
way responsible for the views stated by Mr. Justice Higinbotham.
Not only did Mr. Higinbotham preface his lecture by the state-
ment that, although the subject had been approved, he alone was
responsible for the manner of its treatment, but subsequently, and
prior to Mr. Strong leaving the colony, in the most public and
solemn manner, he declared that Mr. Strong had no knowledge of
the nature of the lecture until it was delivered in the Scots’ Church.
His words w 7 ere :—“ I stated, as some of you may recollect, that the
Rev. Charles Strong was not responsible for a single word that I
uttered in that lecture. I never was given by him any reason to
believe that he approved of a single sentiment or thought it con-
tained. I repeat that I, and I alone, am wholly responsible for
every opinion, whether it be right or wrong, contained in that lecture.
. . . That subject was suggested to me by the Rev. Charles.
Strong, not indeed as a subject in its theological aspect.”
The Congregation demands freedom within the limits of the-
Standards constitutionally maintained, —the right to choose its
ministers from the Church of Scotland, and the impartial adminis-
tration of the laws of the Church with respect to its ministers.
It has been declared in the Church Courts that we may not choose
from “ an illegitimate school of theology” in the Church of Scotland ;
and recently an overture has been sustained providing for the ques-
tioning of ministers applying for admission to the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria, although bringing credentials from the Church,
to which they belonged.


negative form of Unitarianism ;* for the whole of the Apostles’ Creed is
repudiated in it, except the first article; and, apparently, it is because
teaching of this sort was not allowed to pass unchallenged in the Scots’
Church, that the Legislature is to he asked to confiscate the Church’s
property. To permit such teaching within the Church would be a complete
departure from the Standards, adherence to which is the one condition on
which the property was granted. And any separation from the Church
because such liberty is refused must needs be a separation from the
Standards in the true and natural sense in which adherence to them is
required. Further, any new denomination formed by dissentients whose
sole or chief complaint against the action of the Church is, that the
Presbytery and General Assembly endeavoured to get Mr. Strong to disavow
complicity with the errors of that lecture, cannot be Presbyterian and cannot
have any right to the property of the Presbyterian Church.
lII.—THE BILL OF WHICH NOTICE HAS BEEN GIVEN.
It is proposed by the Bill to bring the Scots’ Church to “ occupy as nearly
as may be the position of a Congregation of Presbyterians under the Act of
the Governor and Legislative Council of New South Wales, 8 William IV.,
No. 7, before the passing of the Act of the Governor and Legislative Council
of New South Wales, 4 Victoria, No. 18.”
1. This is a proposal to revert to a state of things which had ceased to
exist before the site of the Scots' Church manse and school was granted,
and therefore involves an attempt to escape from the responsibilities under
which the land was granted. The elastic phrase, “as nearly as may be,” is
fitted to gloss over the impossibility of occupying a position which has for
ever passed away. The land was granted to a Congregation under the
superintendence of the Synod of Australia which, though in connection with
the Church of Scotland, was not a part of that Church, but possessed inde-
pendent jurisdiction.f The present church building was erected in 1874,
fifteen years after the union, and when the Congregation was in full con-
nection with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and previous to Mr.
Strong’s arrival in the colony.
2. The Established Church of Scotland possesses no jurisdiction in
Australia, and could exercise no real supervision or control over a Congrega-
tion so far away. The Presbyterian Church of Victoria is in full communion
with the Church of Scotland, though independent of her control, and “ the
nearest that may be” in this land to connection with the Established Church
of Scotland is connection with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. On
Presbyterian principles the proposed secession is not only schism, but schism
without, so far as yet appears, even the vestige of a plausible excuse.
3. The Constitution proposed in the Bill for the new denomination is not
Presbyterian, either as regards doctrine or discipline, and the assumption of
the name serves only to conceal the facts. The proposal in the Bill that the
Congregation “ have for its Standards of religious belief the Standards of
the Established Church of Scotland, and for its ecclesiastical government
* This term is used in no invidious way, but simply to describe “as nearly as may he”
the teaching of the learned judge.
t The following 1 resolution was unanimously adopted by the Commission of Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, on the 12th Dec., 1839, and subsequently by the General Assembly, in
1840 “That the Synod of Australia is the supreme legislative and judicial court for the
Colonial Presbyterian Church, and enjoys in fact what it is entitled to of right, the power
of regulating the affairs of that branch of Christ’s Church, in accordance with their views
of His will, under the guidance of His Spirit—the Synod, nevertheless, considering them-
selves bound by the most solemn engagements to adhere to the doctrines of the Confession
of Faith, and the other Standards and formularies of the Church of Scotland, and >
administer discipline agreeably to the laws of that Church in so far as they are applicable
in the circumstances of the Colony.”


At last we have the admission, that the land was granted to “ a
congregation.”
It has been already shown that the trusts are not affected by the
change of ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
True, the new Church was built after the union, but the Presby-
terian Church of Victoria never contributed a farthing towards its
erection.
Provision is made for returning contributions to those who dis-
approve of separation.
Although we shall be glad to be recognised by the Home
Church, we do not claim to return to the jurisdiction , but to the
Standards of the Church of Scotland; and departure from these can
at any time be tested in the civil courts, in the absence of such
jurisdiction, by any Presbyterian, whether belonging to the Congre-
gation or not.
Further, ministers coming to this colony and joining the Presby-
terian Church of Victoria have to sever their connection with the
Church of Scotland; but this would not be necessary if the Scots’
Church stood alone as a Presbyterian congregation, so that we
would stand nearer to the Church of Scotland than the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria.


the formularies and rules of discipline, as near as may be, of the said'
Established Church,” is nullified by the proviso which immediately follows,
viz.: —“ With power, nevertheless, to the Kirk Session of the said Congrega-
tion to make, adopt, alter, or repeal rules and forms of procedure for the
management of its own affairs.” The committing of such power to a Kirk
Session is utterly unknown to the Church of Scotland or any of her sister
Churches. It subverts Presbyterianism without introducing a real or safe
Congregationalism. It permits the formal and legal introduction of any
teaching, however indefinite or antagonistic to the Christian faith, which the
Kirk Session for the time being may fancy, and makes professed subjection
to the Standards of the Church of Scotland a mere empty form.
4. The proposal to give back their subscriptions to such surviving sub-
scribers to the church building as may not agree to the proposed schism is in
itself so paltry that it requires no notice, except to state that it may serve to
disguise the fact that the great value of the property arises, not from the
church fabric, but from the land gifted long ago by Government, greatly aug-
mented by the permanent improvements of tenants, and that a large portion
of the cost of the building is still owing on the security of the freehold.
The land was given for the benefit of the Presbyterian residents in the neigh-
bourhood, and the Scots’ Church is the parish church of the Presbyterian
people of the district where it stands. At the instance of a number of dis-
contented men, who happen to be seat-holders, but many of whom reside at
a distance from the church, the attempt is now to be made to take from loyal
Presbyterians their parish church, and to turn it to the uses of a new sect,
who are departing both from the discipline and doctrine of the Church of
their fathers, that is, so far as they are persons of Presbyterian birth ; for
we have reason to believe that in a considerable number of instances the
dissentients were not, and are not now, Presbyterians at all.
IV.—BEARING OF THIS PROPOSAL ON THE RIGHTS OF
PROPERTY.
By the Act of Union adherence to the Standards of religious belief and of
ecclesiastical government of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria is required
to entitle the Church to continued possession of its properties. This Bill
proposes to deprive the Church, while adhering to that condition, of a largo
and valuable portion of its property, and to hand it over to a section of per-
sons who, by the promotion of the Bill in opposition to the orders of the
General Assembly of the Church, and by their other actions, prove that they
have no moral or legal claim or right whatsoever to the property. The
passing of such a Bill would unsettle the security of tenure of all property,
as there is no difference in principle between the rights of ownership of
property of a Church or a Corporation and of an individual. It cannot be
pleaded as a reason for such legislative interference with the rights of pro-
perty that the proposed Bill is for the public safety or welfare, as no possible
consideration of public safety or welfare demands the confiscation of the
property of orthodox and law-abiding Presbyterians in favour of persons
seeking endowment for a new denomination.
Were it possible for the promoters of this Bill to succeed in their object,
many of them who are understood to be wealthy men might, ere long, have
serious cause to regret the course they have taken in thus heading a move-
ment so utterly antagonistic to the rights of property.


How rules and forms and 'proceedings for the management of
congregational affairs can be regarded as nullifying Standards is not
quite clear.
It seems to indicate a consciousness of how “ rules and forms”
have been employed by the Presbyterian Church of Victoria to
narrow the Standards and harass ministers and congregations.
They certainly cannot be made to defend from the consequences of
any substantial departure from the Standards.
The proposal to compensate dissentients is bond fide. As already
stated, the Presbyterian Church of Victoria never contributed a
farthing to the improvements. The “ unearned increment” certainly
was nearly, if not quite, as large before the union as now. The land
was granted to the Congregation.
We are not seeking to depart from the discipline and doctrine of
the Church of our fathers. The Presbyterian Church of Victoria is
not the Church of our fathers; it is a sham and a delusion.
The bulk of “ discontented men” who lead the present move-
ment have been connected with the Scots’ Church for periods
varying frcfm 10 to 40 years ; but the cloven foot is displayed in the
statement, 11 Many of whom reside at a distance from the church .”
• Kecently 626 adult members and adherents of the Congregation
voted for the Bill, and only 45 voted against the Bill.
From what has been already stated it will be apparent that this
is a false issue.
The matter resolves itself into a question of rights of the Congrega-
tion, as opposed to the “ orders of the General Assembly. 5 ’
The Presbyterian Church of Yictoria has no title to the property
except through the Congregation, and cannot do anything with the
property but through the Congregation..
It is perfectly monstrous to say that there is no difference
'“between the rights of ownership of property of a Church or a
corporation, and of an individual,” and that “ the passing of such a
Bill would unsettle the security of tenure of all property.”
It is only necessary to point to the repeated changes of jurisdic-
tion to which the Scots’ Church property has been subjected to
justify us in characterising this whole paragraph as a most
mendacious mis-statement of the facts, and an attempt to rouse the
fears of timid property-holders.
We do claim that the public welfare is involved in the destruction
of the ecclesiastical tyranny involved in the action of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria during the past eight years or more.
A parallel may be found in the result of the high-handed pro-
ceedings of the Free Church Synod before the union, already referred
to, when the majority, which was accused by the minority of
unfaithfulness, expelled the minority and claimed their properties;
but Parliament protected the minority.


V.—BEAEING ON THE OTHEE DENOMINATIONS OF THE
CHRISTIAN CHUECH.
It will be apparent, with regard at least to all the Churches which consist
of more Congregations than one, that what is the danger of the Presbyterian
Church to-day may be theirs to-morrow. The majority of a Congregation
may, in circumstances easily conceivable, become alienated in feeling from
the Church to which they belong.
In any large city, for example, it is possible for the Minister of a Congrega-
tion, who is of average ability and plausibility, by advocating views that are
novel or extreme, to attach to himself a majority who sympathise with him.
Por, if he act cautiously but persistently, people who like the strange doctrines
will gradually be drawn to the Church, while those parishioners who dislike
them will withdraw to more congenial places of worship without making any
public complaint. By this means, if a change in the pastorate occur, or the
exercise of faithful discipline be attempted, there may be a majority in the
Congregation ready for resistance or for secession, if they do not get their
own will in everything. And, if the Legislature were to allow a chance
majority to take the property with them, it would simply put a premium on
“divisive courses,” and actively promote the disintegration of all organised
Churches.
If Parliament says “ aye” to the demand of the Scots’ Church dissen-
tients they cannot consistently say “ no” to any similar demand; and the
success of this attempt would be sure to encourage other endeavours of the
same sort. If the State pass such a Bill, the present professed attitude of
neutrality toward the different Christian denominations will be at once
changed into one of antagonism to all existing Church organisations.
Even Congregational Churches will fail to recognise in the government of
the proposed new denomination anything parallel to their own; and they
must also object to the principle of allowing a chance majority, obtained
after angry speeches, in a meeting which was open to any one who might
choose to enter, to have the power of taking Church property from the deno-
mination to which it belongs, and appropriating it to themselves.
The Committee invite the co-operation of all the Christian Churches’in
resisting this audacious attempt to take away a valuable property from *its
legal possessors ; and request their assistance, by petition or otherwise, to
prevent it. It is often said by members of all denominations that it is
impossible that such a Bill should be passed. But the promoters of this Bill
have boasted that they have got pledges of support from certain Members
of Parliament, and that no money or pains will be spared to accomplish
their purpose. The co-operation of the other Churches and of the thoughtful
and honourable portion of the community will, however, easily render their
success impossible, and, therefore, in the interests of truth and justice, we
earnestly request it.
By order of the Special Commission,
JOHN GAEDNEE,
Melbourne, May, 1884.
Moderator.


It is scarcely conceivable that any other Christian Church will
find itself similarly placed to the Presbyterian Church of Victoria
to-day.
The hypothetical case put is so repugnant to genuine Christian
charity, that we may be permitted to hope that only one Church
could be so lost to all sense of decency as to conceive it.
The demand of the Scots’ Church is limited to dealing with
property which belonged to the congregation before the Presby-
terian Church of Victoria had any existence —thereby giving up all
claim to participation in the rich endowments brought into the
union by the Synod of Victoria.
It will be clear from the first paragraph of this answer, that
this is an outrageous mis-statement. The meeting referred to was a
first step only, taken months ago, and without any pretensions to
“ the power of taking Church property and appropriating it to
themselves.”
It is hoped that “ the thoughtful and honourable portion of the
community,” which, we trust, may not be entirely outside “ the other
Churches,” as is suggested in the last paragraph of Mr. Gardner’s
pamphlet, may see that the burglary is not on the side of the Scots’
Church Congregation, and agree to leave the matter to the arbitra-
tion of Parliament, which has already dealt repeatedly with the
Scots’ Church property.
J. S. JOHNSTON,
Chairman of Committee.
Melbourne, June , 1884.


' KJ L&fU




