

fSTH P Pvr\
A Lo -1, f k
Mf
u\ '
CASE OF NEW ZEALAND,
OUR COLONIAL POLICY.
4 LETTER
HENRY SEAYELL, ESQ.
(FORMERLY COLONIAL SECRETARY AND LATE ATTORNEY-GENERAL OF NEW ZEALAND),
EDWARD WILSON, ESQ.,
OF VICTORIA.
LONDON:
BELL AND DALDY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.


Kl|W BOLT Oft ,
CASE, j SHELF,
LONDON: PRINTED NT W. CLOU RS AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARTNQ CROSS.


London, August 12, 1869.
My dear Sir, —You have asked me to state the case of
New Zealand, as bearing generally upon the relations between
the Colonies and the Mother Country. I will do so as briefly
as I can, recapitulating the facts from my official and general
experience.
The Colony of New Zealand was founded in 1840. It is
scarcely material to inquire into the motives which induced
the Home Government to adopt it, as part of the Empire.
These have been lately the subject of discussion. Lord
Granville, in a recent dispatch, insists that the object of the
Home Government wns merely “to secure order amongst a
“ number of English settlers,” who established themselves in
New Zealand “without any invitation or encouragement from
“the English Government,” and who went there, knowing the
risks to which they exposed themselves, and were therefore
not entitled to claim assistance in time of danger from the
Mother Country. Other persons maintain that the objects
were—partly at least—lmperial, and that one principal motive
was to prevent the Colony from falling into the hands of the
French, who were looking to it as a site for a penal settle-
ment. The object of the Imperial Government seems to be
to cast off all responsibility as regards the present condition
of the Colony, and to absolve the Mother Country from all
future liability on its account.
It would be unprofitable to pursue such a controversy; or to
argue the question of what are the abstract duties and respon-
sibilities of Governors and Subjects in the case of the founda-
tion of new Colonies. They are, I think, well expressed by
Lord Granville himself, who says, in effect, in his letter to
Sir George Bowen of the 21st March last, that the duty
of protection follows, as a matter of course, the claim of the
right to govern.


As a matter of fact, the early Colonists of New Zealand,
who went out under the auspices of the New Zealand Com-
pany, fixed themselves at Wellington, to the southward of the
Northern Island, and at Nelson, in the Middle Island, where
they were tolerably free from Native interference. The Im-
perial Government, pursuing a distinct policy of its own, in
direct antagonism to the interests and wishes of the Settlers,
and in spite of their earnest remonstrances, determined on
planting the Capital and establishing the Colonial Govern-
ment in the northern part of the Northern Island, in the
thick of the Native districts, surrounded on all sides with
Native difficulties. It in fact adopted, as a cardinal point of
Imperial policy, the exclusive guardianship and government
of the Aborigines, to which the interests of the Settlers were
made subservient. It insisted on treating them as a foreign
people. The unhappy results of this Imperial tutelage are
sufficiently evident upon a dispassionate examination of the
history of the Colony.
In founding the new Colony, and opening it for settlement,
it was essential to obtain the control of the territory. In order
to prepare the way for the safe and peaceful progress of
Colonization, the object of the Imperial Government should
have been to encourage, as rapidly as possible, by all legiti-
mate means, the transfer of the waste lands to the Settlers,
reserving only sufficient for the use of the Natives. This
might have been done with infinite advantage to the Natives
themselves, who at that time desired to sell their land to
Europeans. Reserving ample space, there was abundance of
waste, the utilization of which would have tended more than
anything else towards the civilization and advancement of the
Natives. But the Imperial Government decreed otherwise.
Jealously reserving to the Crown the exclusive right of deal-
ing with the Native Proprietors, it upset indiscriminately all
land-bargains which had before taken place between them and
the settlers. Large tracts of land, which had been fairly ac-
quired from the Natives, and which thus became disposable
for purposes of settlement, were thrown back to the Natives, or
practically abandoned. Having thus narrowed the field and
checked the progress of Colonization, the Imperial Govern-
ment refused or neglected to spend money, except to a
trifling amount, for extending the area of settlement in
acquiring lands from the Natives by prrrchase, the cost of
which under a wise administration would have been speedily
repaid. About three-fourths of the Northern Island (up-


wards of 20,000,000 of acres) remained in the hands of the
Natives, who numbered about 50,000 or 60,000 souls, and
who were incapable of turning to profitable use a fiftieth
part of the country. It must be remembered that the
Natives of New Zealand are not hunters; indeed, there are
no wild animals in the country. The extent of land which
they held in actual occupation was absolutely insignificant.
Thus far, at least, it cannot be said that the policy of the
Government was directed with a view to the interests of the
Settlers.
There is another point. When it was determined to plant
a British Colony, in a country occupied by an aboriginal race
like the Maories, it behoved the Imperial Government to
settle clearly, and pursue steadily, a right policy as regards
the future relations between the Settlers and the Natives.
There are examples, to be followed or avoided. There is
Extermination, active or passive, which has cleared vast
fields for Colonization.—There is the policy of Isolation,
under which the American Indian, gradually driven back
to the far west, is in process of disappearing.—Or there
remains, the policy of Amalgamation—the only policy, in the
case of New Zealand, which could be adopted without a con-
flict of races. By amalgamation Ido not mean amalgama-
tion of blood (the possibility of which may be questioned), but
political amalgamation, under which the two races may be
brought under one common Government. For my own part,
I believe that such a policy is—or rather, I should say, was
—practicable.
The Imperial Government seems to have been blind to the
difficulty. Here and there a vague sense of it appears in
dispatches. There are references to possible institutions,
to be established for the benefit of the Natives; and some
hospitals and schools were founded in the principal towns,
and in a few Native districts. In the Constitution Act we
have a feeble glimpse of a policy of Isolation, in the power
reserved to the Crown to declare Native districts, in which
the Natives may live apart from the Settlers, under their
own customs —an idea which seems to find favour in Lord
Granville’s eyes, and which would be certain to end disas-
trously. But, in a general way, it may be said, that the
whole period of Imperial rule is marked with an absence
of all real earnest effort to grapple with this difficult but


unavoidable problem,—how to bring the social and political
condition of the Natives into harmony with the progress of
Colonization. Not only has the Imperial Government neg-
lected this primary duty, but, as I purpose to show, it has
consistently strangled the efforts of the Colonists to grapple
with it.
I do not think it possible to deny the faithfulness of this
review of Imperial policy in New Zealand. Under it were
planted and grew the seeds of those Native troubles, which
have from time to time afflicted the Colony, and to which its
present dangers are attributable.
In accordance with their policy of treating the Maories as
a foreign people, the Imperial Government withheld from the
Settlers, until 1852, their ordinary rights as British citizens.
New Zealand was ruled as a Crown Colony. It would be
needless to point out the irritation this occasioned in the
minds of the Colonists, who made repeated but ineffectual
efforts for emancipation. I point to this as indicating clearly
the inaccuracy of that view which is now insisted on by the
Colonial Office and its advocates, that the Colony has been
governed in the interests of the Settlers. In 1846 a Repre-
sentative Constitution was framed, but, on account of Native
difficulties, was immediately suspended. At length, in 1852,
the present Constitution Act was passed. In 1854 that Act
was brought into operation, and the General Assembly met, but
with no practical result. The Governor refused to establish
Responsible Government, and the Assembly, greatly irritated,
separated, leaving the Government still in the hands of the
old officials, under responsibility to Downing Street.
In 1855 Colonel (now Sir Thomas) Gore Browne was ap-
pointed Governor, and in 1856 he assented to the intro-
duction of Responsible Government. I formed the first Re-
sponsible Ministry under him. But so little did Governor
Browne accept the view now put forward, as to the duties
and responsibilities of the Imperial Government, that he
insisted on reserving to himself, as an Imperial officer, the
exclusive management of Native affairs, including the right
of dealing with the Natives for their lands. He stipulated
that upon these matters Responsible Ministers should have
no control. Such a stipulation was unpalatable to the General
Assembly, but, after much trouble and negotiation, that body
assented to the arrangement. In making it, I felt the diffi-


culty of controverting the grounds on which Governor Browne
insisted. He urged that the Imperial Government was respon-
sible for the consequences resulting from the management of
Native affairs; that it was bound to protect both Natives and
Settlers, at its own cost, in case of internal war; and, therefore,
it was right that it should have direct control over these
affairs. It was impossible to resist such a plea,—just as it is
impossible now to reconcile it with the Imperial disclaimer
of all responsibility.
Subject to these conditions, Responsible Ministers com-
menced their work. I remained a member of the Govern-
ment till 1859.
So soon as we had entered on our duties, we found our-
selves involved in Native difficulties. Innumerable unsettled
land-claims threatened to breed disturbances in various direc-
tions. The difficulty of reconciling the progress of Coloniza-
tion with the territorial rights of the Natives had become
formidable. The Settlers had increased in numbers, and were
spreading in all directions. The stint of land available for
colonizing enterprise became severely felt. The Settlements
of Auckland and Taranaki, in particular, were cramped for
space. Meantime, the value of Native lands had risen with
the progress of the Colony, and the Natives became averse to
parting with it, except at greatly enhanced rates. Though
they could not use the land themselves, they desired to make
a market of it, turning to their own profit improvements,
to which they had contributed nothing. Political difficulties
were arising. The time had arrived when, in the nature of
things, a crisis might have been expected. As the Settlers
began to outnumber the Natives, the old Maori sentiment of
nationality developed itself, in antagonism to the progress of
the intruding race. The Natives felt that their ascendancy
was passing away. In the interior districts, particularly in
the Waikato, there was a state of anarchy. The power of
the Chiefs had been lost; the younger men were growing up
in a state of lawlessness. These evils were felt keenly by
the Natives themselves, and they were becoming alive to the
necessity of some political system, which should lead to the
establishment of order and law. Out of this state of things
grew Native Land Leagues, intended to check the further
sale of laud to Europeans; and a movement towards Native
self-government, which has taken the form of what is called
the “King movement.” In various Native districts, parti-


cularly at Taranaki, Native tribes were at war, and blood
had been shed in quarrels, which the Government was power-
less (or, at least, took no steps) to prevent.
I dwell on these matters, because I wish to show the real
condition of the Colon)’, to which the Colonists succeeded by in-
heritance from the Imperial Government; and how absolutely
untrue that view is, which the Colonial Office seeks to impress
upon the British public, that the evils are of recent growth,
and that we have brought our dangers on ourselves. When
Constitutional Government was introduced, the Colony was a
slumbering volcano.
The arrangement, made between Governor Browne and his
Ministers, as regards the management of Native affairs, was
soon found to work badly,—as must be the case with all divided
authority. Responsible Ministers managed ordinary affairs;
but a distinct department, called the “Native Department,”
under the Governor’s direct control, and responsible only to
him and to the Colonial Office, managed Native affairs. Be-
tween the two branches of Government—the one Colonial,
the other Imperial—there was inevitable jealousy and con-
flict. It was impossible, under such a system, to introduce
remedial measures with good effect. Efforts were made by
the Colonists to induce the Colonial Office to accede to a
change, and to unite the Government under one headship—
but in vain! So matters continued till 1868.
It is due to Governor Browne to state that he did all which
could be done by personal tact and forbearance to mitigate
the evils of this otherwise intolerable system.
But Colonial Ministers, though excluded from the manage-
ment of Native affairs, could not ignore them, as bearing
upon the general interests of the Colony. Great troubles
were evidently coming upon it. They felt it their duty to
do what they could to avert them. Anyone who will take
the trouble to read the papers (published in the Colonial
Parliamentary Blue-books) of the years 1858, 1859, and
1860, written by Mr. (now Judge) Richmond, then Native
Minister, will not fail to recognize the wisdom and ability
which then directed the Colonial Government.
In order to give practical effect to his views, Mr. Richmond


commenced experimentally, in the Waikato, a plan of local
Native government, under the direction of a Eesident Magis-
trate, in which the Natives were beginning to educate them-
selves to the work of self-government. It was hoped that the
model might be copied and applied in other districts. By
these means the craving of the Natives for the establishment
of law and order would have been satisfied, consistently with
the maintenance of the Queen’s authority. Mr. Eichmond
also proposed to commence breaking down the barrier between
the two races, as regards dealings with Native land, by en-
abling the Governor to make limited grants in fee simple to
Native owners, so investing them with full proprietary rights
—a measure to which the real objection was, that it was of a
limited and tentative character. The administration of these
measures was to he reserved to Responsible Ministers.
In 1858 Mr. Eichmond introduced into the Colonial Legis-
lature, and carried, measures to give effect to this policy.
But the reservation of the administrative working of this
policy to Responsible Ministers was fatal in the eyes of the
Colonial Office. The experiment in the Waikato was strangled
in its birth. The Eesident Magistrate was withdrawn, at the
instigation of the Native Department. The Land Act was
disallowed. The following extract from the Eeport of a Com-
mittee of the House of Eepresentatives, in 1860, will explain
the causes which led to the failure of the experiment in the
Waikato. After describing it —its working, its promise of
success, and the withdrawal of the Eesident Magistrate at
the instigation of the Native Department —they add: —
“ But r that most important defect in the arrangements
“ which have been in force of late years for the adminis-
“ tration of Native affairs becomes glaringly apparent in the
“ circumstances attending his (the Resident Magistrate’s) re-
“ moval, and the suspension of his operations—namely, the
“ entire want of harmonious action between the Ministry and
“ the Department of the Native Secretary. The official
“ minutes and memoranda exhibit, in a very striking light,
“ not only fundamental differences of opinion on vital ques-
“ tious, but a departmental conflict which would be fatal to
“ the success of any administrative plans for ameliorating the
“ condition of the Natives.”
The Colonial Office confirmed the action of its subordinate
officers in the Colony, and Lord Carnarvon, in the dispatch


acknowledging the measures adopted to carry out Mr. Rich-
mond’s Native policy, intimates the disallowance of the Land
Bill, and adds:—
“ Her Majesty’s Government wish to give the fullest effect
“ t° the system of Responsible Government, and to leave all
“ questions ot domestic and internal interest to be decided
“by the Colonial Government ; but they cannot, for the sake
“ ot the Colonists, or for that of the Natives, or for Imperial
“ interests, surrender the control over Native affairs, the ad-
“ ministration of which, considering the difficulties and intri-
“ cacies of the subject, has been crowned with a very
“ remarkable success,” &c. Then follows a declaration, that,
for the better control and regulation of the Native race, the
Imperial Government must retain in its hands the adminis-
tration of those affairs, “which may at any moment employ
‘ the Imperial troops, and he the occasion of an expensive
“ conflict .”
So nothing was done. The remedial measures proposed by
the Colonists, the salutary nature of which was admitted, were
frustrated by the Colonial Office and its working staff in the
Colony. The Colonial Ministers were compelled to remain
inactive, baffled and disappointed, until the mischiefs at work
ripened to a head.
Taranaki has always been the point of danger. Circum-
stances, which it would be tedious to narrate, but the history
of which would forcibly illustrate the maladministration of
Native affairs under Imperial rule, had led to quarrels be-
tween Native tribes about land. Blood had been shed, and
a general Native war seemed impending, which threatened
to involve the Settlement of Taranaki, and which might
spread over the whole Native districts. In 1859 matters
had come to that pass, that Governor Browne determined to in-
terfere, and went down to Taranaki for that purpose. There,
at a public meeting of the Natives, he declared his determi-
nation to put a stop to all violence; and that whilst he would
not allow land to be purchased to which the title was disputed,
he would not allow persons who had no rightful claims to hinder
the true proprietors in disposing of their land, if they thought
fit. In consequence of this declaration, certain Natives, who
claimed to be owners of a block of land at the Waitara, offered
it to the Government; and out of this transaction arose the
present war.


It is not material to my purpose to examine whether Governor
Browne was right or wrong, prudent or imprudent, in what
he then did. What I desire to point out is, that he acted
throughout the transaction as an Imperial officer, responsible,
as such, to the Imperial Government, in furtherance of the
Imperial policy,—in the capacity of Protector to the Natives
—to put an end to their feuds, to prevent the strong from
oppressing the weak, to stay the shedding of blood; and not
from a desire, as suggested by Lord Granville, to gratify the
Settlers by the purchase of land. The Colonial Office would
have it believed that Governor Browne acted at the instiga-
tion of his Ministers, whose object was to get land, quocumque
modo. Seeking to escape from responsibilities, they revive an
old and often-refuted charge. I know it to be without founda-
tion, and equally unjust to Governor Browne as to the Colonial
Ministers. I say this from no political bias, for I had ceased
to be a member of the Government.
In 1860, Governor Browne, having satisfied himself as to the
title of the Native vendors, caused the land to be surveyed,
upon which an armed body of Natives obstructed the survey,
fired upon the Queen’s troops, and levied open war, which
has continued, with more or less of intermission, till the
present time.
Upon whom did the responsibility for the consequences of
this transaction rest ? Up to this time the Colonial Office had
declared that it rested with the Imperial Government, and had
made use of this responsibility, as a plea for retaining in their
own hands the control of Native affairs. Governor Browne
believed this, and the Colony believed it. Now the Colonial
Office gives a different version of the case, and, in order to
cast responsibility upon the Colonists, fastens upon them a
charge of wrongdoing. At all events, as some of their advo-
cates say, the Imperial Government acted with good intentions,
and is under no liability for the consequences of well-intended
mistakes.
In 1861 Governor Browne was succeeded by Sir George
Grey; and, about the same time, Mr. Stafford’s Ministry was
displaced by a Ministry, under Mr. Fox, formed upon what
was termed a “ Peace ” policy. I wars a member of that
Government.
Sir George Grey, so soon as he arrived, addressed himself,


with the hearty co-operation of his Ministers, to the task of
remedying the evils which I have described, in the adminis-
tration of Native affairs, and we worked together cordially.
In concert, we planned institutions for extending law and
order to the Native districts, at a cost of about £50,000 a
year. We determined to introduce a measure for broadly
admitting the title of the Natives to their lands, and enabling
them to dispose of them at pleasure. We agreed also to pro-
pose to the General Assembly to establish, at the cost of the
Colony, an armed Police for the protection of out-settlements.
As a condition of this proposed change of policy, it was
necessary to take the management of Native affairs out of
the hands of the Native Department, and place it in those
of Responsible Ministers. So a provisional arrangement was
made, between the Governor and his Ministers, that, subject
to the approval of the Home Government on the one side, and
of the General Assembly on the other, the ordinary adminis-
tration of Native affairs should be conducted by Responsible
Ministers. The plan worked perfectly well. The new insti-
tutions were introduced, in various districts, with more or less
of success. Ministers and Governor, in general, agreed in their
views, or, if they differed, they settled their differences, in the
usual way, by reason or compromise. I wish it to be distinctly
understood, that the arrangement so made between Sir George
Grey and Mr. Fox’s Government, was provisional only, subject
to the approval of the General Assembly, and upon the basis
of a fair contribution by the Imperial Government towards
Native expenditure.
Sir George Grey had, soon after his arrival, announced to the
Imperial Government the measures proposed, claiming pecu-
niary assistance towards the cost of establishing civil institu-
tions amongst the Natives. He enforced this application by
pointing out the inability of the Colony from its own resources
to meet so heavy a charge,—the duty which rested upon the
Imperial Government of contributing to it, —and the com-
parative economy of a small outlay for the object of peace, as
contrasted with the expense of war.
It was not an unreasonable or extravagant demand. It has
always appeared to me unreasonable to throw upon the Colo-
nists of New Zealand the exclusive burthen of reclaiming a
savage race—over whom they were for so many years excluded
from all share of control—whom the British Government


adopted as their own. As well may a man cast off an adopted
child into a stranger’s charge. There are, doubtless, duties
owing on the side of the Colonists, and they have been and are
ready to fulfil them ; but it is wrong, to say the least, to throw
the whole cost upon the Colony, as is now being done. But
the proposal to charge the British Government with a share
of the cost of the Native work, seems to have changed the
whole tone of the Imperial Government towards the Colony.
( In 1862 the Legislature met at Wellington, Mr. Box’s
Government being still in office. We were prepared to submit
to the Assembly measures for carrying out our policy of peace;
though we never, I may add, dreamed of assuming the respon-
sibility of Native affairs as a permanent liability, except
under arrangement with the Imperial Government as regards
cost.
When Sir George Grey assumed the Government, in 1861,
the Duke of Newcastle had addressed him thus:—“ I wish to
“ impress upon you my conviction, that it will be your duly,
“ while avoiding all unnecessary severity, to take care, that
“ neither your own mission, nor the cessation of hostilities,
“ when it arrives, shall carry with it, in the eyes of the Natives,
“ any appearance of weakness or alarm. It would he letter
“ even to prolong the war, with all its evils, than to end it with-
“ out producing in the Native mind such a conviction of our
“ strength, as may render peace not temporary and precarious,
£ ‘ hut well-founded and lasting,” As regards the management
of Native affairs, His Grace expressed the readiness of the
Home Government to consider, “ with the strongest desire to
“ acquiesce in, any arrangement for conducting them, which
“ might appear safe to the Governor and acceptable to the
“ Colonists.” And he declared that the Imperial Government
would be ready “to treat the Colony with as much indulgence
“ as their duty would permit, on the subject of the charges
“ of military protection, and the number of troops to be main-
“ tained.” He concluded by stating, that “Her Majesty’s
“ Government can only trust that the good sense and good
“ feeling of the Colonists will lead them to a cordial under-
“ standing with the Representative of the Crown, for the
“ purpose of effectually promoting the civilization and good
“ government of the Natives, and for securing their friend-
“ ship and contentment.” The Colonial Government had
heartily responded to these sentiments.


But in May, 1862, the Duke of Newcastle, in acknowledg-
ing Sir George Grey’s dispatches (advising him of the plans
arranged between himself and his Ministers, for carrying into
effect the policy which His Grace had indicated), entirely
changes his tone towards the Colony. His letter is sharp
and angry, full of causeless complaints, which he is afterwards
obliged to retract. As regards the transfer of the manage-
ment of Native affairs, he assents to it, out of deference to feii
George Grey’s opinions; but he adds: “Ido it also because
“ I cannot disguise from myself that the endeavour to keep
“ the management of the Natives under the control of the
“ Home Government has failed. It can only be mischievous
“ to retain a shadow of responsibility, when the beneficial
“ exercise of power has become impossible.”
Thus he submits to it as a necessity forced upon him, for-
getting that he himself had suggested and declared his readi-
ness to acquiesce in it. As to military protection, the Duke
no longer inculcates the duty of securing a well-founded and
lasting peace, even at the cost of prolonging the war. Now
he says : “ I cannot hold out to you any hopes that a large
“ military force will for any length of time be kept in New
“ Zealand.” Then he somewhat grudgingly submits, on the
part of the Imperial Government, for a limited time, to bear
part of the charge of Native expenditure. This marked
change of tone, on the part of the Imperial Government,
towards the Colony, sufficiently explains the refusal of the
General Assembly to undertake the proposed responsibility.
The Duke’s dispatch arrived whilst the Legislature was in
Session. The House of Representatives became alarmed —
refused to sanction Mr. Fox’s policy—and agreed upon a Me-
morial to Her Majesty, in which, after referring to Mr. Fox’s
arrangement as provisional, and made without the assent ot
the Assembly, and after pointing out the dangers and diffi-
culties pressing on the Colony at that time, they conclude
thus:—
“In respectfully declining, therefore, to accept the proposal
“ of your Majesty’s Government, we do so, not as shrinhivg
“from labours or burthens which we ought rightly to under-
« take, but because, along with a desire on the part of your
“ Majesty’s Government to confer an apparent boon on the
“ Colony, we seem to discover, in the dispatches to which we have
“ referred, the intention to withdraw from engagements to which


tlie British nation is honestly hound, and to transfer to the
“ Colony liabilities and burthens which belong proverly to the
“ Empire.” 1 J
On the 26th of February, 1863, the Duke of Newcastle,
acknowledging the receipt of the Memorial, contemptuously
throws it aside, and instructs the Governor that the relinquish-
ment of the control of Native affairs does not require the
assent of the Colonists to make it effectual. “B is completed ”
says the Duke, emphatically, “by the act of the Home Govern-
ment.
t Ihis, then, is that transfer of responsibility which Lord
Granville tells us was “not forced upon the Colony, but
“ to it in compliance with its direct and indirect
“ demands” (///)—carrying with it, as Lord Granville insists,
the duty of self-protection without aid.
Between the transmission home of the Memorial from the
House of Representatives and the receipt of the Duke’s
letter of the 26th of February, 1863, there was an interval,
during which the management of Native affairs was carried
on practically by Ministers, in subordination to the Governor’s
directing authority. The Colonial Ministers, in accordance
with the Resolutions of the Assembly, refused to undertake
the management, with its responsibilities. But on the receipt
of the Duke’s dispatch of February, 1863, it was necessary
to lace the practical difficulty,—how was the management of
Native affairs to be carried on ? The Governor pressed
to accept it—Ministers steadily declined, pending
the meeting of the General Assembly, and without its sanc-
tion. Meantime events pregnant with important consequences
were taking place.
There is a block of land at Taranaki called “ The Tata-
raimika, about ten miles to the south of New Plymouth
It had been purchased many years ago from the Natives, and
was occupied by Settlers. During the war at Taranaki, the
Natives had driven the Settlers away, and held the land in
forcible occupation. The Governor, acting in the spirit of
the Duke of Newcastle s instructions of 1861, determined to
resume it, forti manu. He did so; and planted a military
detachment there. On the 7th of May, 1863, a military escort
on its way from New Plymouth to the Tataraimika, was
attacked by a body of Natives, and two officers and seven


privates in Her Majesty’s service were killed. The war had
broken out afresh. On whom does the responsibility for this
act and its consequences rest? No one attaches blame to
Sir George Grey for tbe course he took, which 1 think
everyone will admit was the proper one for an Imperial o nicer
under such circumstances. His Ministers approved of it.
But the result was war, which is as yet unfinished, the
Colony says, with justice, the war was an Imperial war. io
charge the Colony, which had at that tune distinctly dis-
claimed all responsibility and right of control over the
management of Native affairs, with the cost of vindicating
the honour of the Crown, and avenging the slaughter ot
the Queen’s troops, engaged in an Imperial service, seems to
me unreasonable.
During these transactions the attitude of the Colonial
Ministers is this, —using their own language: “ they (Minis-
ters) can only express their readiness to concur m any
“ arrangement whatever, as to the conduct of the Native 1 e-
« partment until the nest Session, which will remedy the
“ evils so necessary to be removed at the present crisis. But
« w ith respect to the acceptance of the position in which the
« Duke of Newcastle wishes to place them, Ministers must,
“ with great respect, observe that they consider the Resolution
“ of the House of Assembly as absolutely precluding them
« from adopting the course recommended by the Governor.
“ If, during a time of peace, the Assembly was unwilling to
“ take the direction of Native affairs out of the hands ot bir
“ George Grey, his Excellency’s present advisers cannot
« believe they would consent to its being done at a moment
« when war seems imminent, notwithstanding every effort ot
“ the Governor to avert it.
But on the 24th of June, 1863 (the state of things having
become more alarming, and there being a necessity for call-
ing out the Militia and Volunteers at Auckland and Taranaki
without delay), Ministers are again pressed by the Governor
to assume the responsibility, now forced upon them by the
Duke of Newcastle.
In a Memorandum of that date they say: “In any or-
« dinary circumstances of the Colony, Ministers would have
« but one recommendation to make. It would be that t e
« Assembly should be summoned at once to decide a ques-
“ tion of such importance. But war appears inevitable and


“ imminent, and, at a time when energetic and decisive mea-
“ sures are absolutely necessary, to summon the Assembly
“ would be to paralyse the efficient action necessary in the
“ present crisis.” They go on thus: “ The permanent settle-
“ ment of the general question of responsibility for the con-
“ duct of Native affairs might be waived till the General
“ Assembly can meet under more favourable circumstances.
“ In the meantime, Ministers, expressly leaving the definitive
“ adjustment of the matter to the Assembly, are willing to
“ take upon themselves a temporary responsibility to the fol-
“ lowing extent.” The Memorandum proceeds to detail the
plan of operations, which the Governor informs them had
been arranged between himself and the Lieutenant-General
(Sir Duncan Cameron), including an attack upon the Waikato
tribes, and the confiscation of their lands, unless they would
come to terms. The Ministers concur in these plans, and
declare their readiness to assume responsibility for them, as
regards military expenditure, to the extent of "paying for the
colonial Militia and Volunteers.
Now, I desire to draw attention to this point. At the time
Ministers assumed, under pressure, this limited and provi-
sional responsibility, the plan of operations had been arranged
between the Governor and the Lieutenant-General. An inva-
sion of the Waikato was meditated—whether wisely or not
has been questioned (I offer no opinion on that point). But
this plan was not the result of advice by Colonial Ministers.
It was agreed on between the two Imperial officers (civil and
military), apart from the Colonial Ministers. In pursuance
of the strategy, so determined on by the Imperial Authori-
ties, the Lieutenant-General, on the 12th of July, 1863,
crossed the Maungatawhiri and advanced into the Waikato
country, where he carried on a campaign for several months,
expropriating the Native occupiers, and leaving vacant a
district of about a million and a quarter of acres.
In 1864 it fell to the lot of Mr. Weld’s Government, of
which I was a member, reluctantly to nmdertake the task of
formally recording the official act of confiscation, necessary in
order to plant the vacant territory with, military settlements.
For this we are held up to public odium as wrongful usurpers
of Native land, or (as Lord Granville circuitously expresses it),
we have neglected “ the obligation imposed on us by natural
“ justice not to appropriate the property of others.”


Let me say a word on the question of confiscation gene-
rally. The principle was introduced by Sir George Grey, in
1862, in reference to the Taranaki rebels, at a time when the
Native policy was under the control of the Imperial Govern-
ment. It was approved of by the Secretary of State, and
has since been applied in flagrant cases of Native outrages
and open rebellion. The object is simply penal. The
Colonial Government, so far from seeking to acquire land in
this way, regards all land so acquired as a damnosa hereditas.
But there is no other kind of punishment which reaches
Native tribes concerned in such misdeeds. The imputation
thrown out in Lord Granville’s dispatch against the Colonists,
of seeking by means of confiscation wrongfully to appropriate
Native lands, is groundless, and in the highest degree irritating.
In October, 1863, the General Assembly met, and soon
after a change of Ministry took place. The Imperial Govern-
ment had despatched reinforcements to the Colony, and
appeared to be ready to give it efficient aid to crush the
Native insurrection. Under these circumstances, on the 6th
of November, 1863, the House of Representatives adopted
the following Resolution: —
“ That this House, having had under its consideration the
« dispatch of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the
« Colonies, dated the 26th of February, 1863, conveying the
« fixed determination of Her Majesty’s Government to revoke
“ the arrangement of 1856, and for the future to require the
“ Colonists to undertake the responsibility of the management
« of Native affairs, recognizes with the deepest gratitude the
“ great interest which Her Majesty has always taken in the wel-
“ fare of all races of her colonial subjects, and the thoroughly
“ efficient aid that Her Majesty’s Imperial Government is now
“ affording for the suppression of the rebellion unhappily sub-
“ sisting, and the establishment of law and order in the Colony,
u relying on the cordial co-operation of the Imperial
“ Government for the future, cheerfully accepts the responsi-
“ bility thus placed upon the Colonists, and at the same time
“ records its firm determination to use its best endeavours to
“ secure a sound and lasting peace, to do justice impartially
“ to both races of Her Majesty’s subjects, and to promote the
“ civilization and welfare of all classes of the inhabitants ol
“ these Islands.”
Then the Legislature proceeded to pass measures autho-


rizing the confiscation of rebel territory, and empowering the
Governor to borrow £3,000,000, for war purposes and military
immigration. The Legislature hoped and expected that the
Imperial Government would assist the Colony with an
Imperial guarantee for the loan so authorized.
In January, 1864, Mr. Reader Wood, the Colonial Treasurer,
proceeded to England, specially charged with negotiating the
loan, and making arrangements with the Imperial Govern-
ment for an Imperial guarantee. The Colony at that time
owed the Imperial Government about £500,000, for ad-
vances on account of militia, rations, &c. To that extent the
object of the loan was to repay the Imperial debt. And now
the Imperial Government began to make stipulations as to
the terms on which the Colony was to be supplied with troops.
The proposal to guarantee the loan was absolutely declined.
It then dwindled down to a request for a guarantee of
£1,000,000, of which half was to be repaid to the Imperial
Treasury, so leaving only £500,000 for the pressing exigencies
of the war. On the 26th of May, 1864, Sir F. Rogers inti-
mates to Mr. Wood that the Imperial Government will con-
sent to guarantee one million of the three million loan,
subject to certain conditions. He states, at the same time,
that for the future the Colony will be required to pay at the
rate of £4O per man for infantry and £55 per man for
artillerymen, such payment to commence on the Ist of
January, 1865, but not to be applicable to a force exceeding
4000 men in the year 1865; the Colony being at liberty to
retain one regiment gratis, undertaking to pay £50,000 a
year for the benefit of the Natives. Mr. Wood, with reluc-
tance, gave a modified assent to these terms, but pointed out
at the same time, with reference to military expenditure,
that he had no power to conclude any arrangement without
the ratification of the New Zealand Parliament.
The offer of the guarantee of one million came to nothing.
It was found to be coupled with conditions which it was im-
possible for the Colonial Legislature to comply with.
The New Zealand Legislature sadly miscalculated when, in
November, 1863, it undertook responsibilities of such magni-
tude, relying on the cordial co-operation of the Imperial
Government. Before six months had elapsed they declared
their intention to withdraw all military aid, except upon
payment of a charge wholly beyond the means of the Colony.
c 2


A good deal has been said about the wealth of the Colony,
and its capacity for bearing the burthens imposed on it by
the Imperial Government. I can only say, as having been a
Colonial Minister, that the most rigid parsimony and the
severest taxation would have failed to provide for the military
charge involved in the Imperial demand.
In November, 1864, the General Assembly again met.
Everything was in confusion. Differences had arisen be-
tween the Governor and his Ministers upon military ques-
tions. The Colonial Office had taken part with the Gover-
nor, had superseded the authority of Responsible Ministers
in military affairs, and the Ministry had resigned. The hope
of a guaranteed loam had been disappointed. The Colony
was threatened with a speedy withdrawal of the troops, ex-
cept upon terms which could not be complied with. It was
besides clear that, so long as the troops remained, the Colonial
Government would mot be permitted to exercise control over
military operations.
Mr. Weld took office, and I joined him as Attorney-
General. On the 6th of December, 1864, after a long
debate, the House off Representatives resolved
“ That the resources of New Zealand have been already
“ heavily burthened, and their, development retarded, by the
“ great sacrifices that have been entailed upon the Colony by
“ the Native insurrection. That, nevertheless, the Colony is
“ resolved to make every further possible effort to place itself
“ in a position of self-defence against internal aggression, with
“ a view to accept the alternative indicated by the Home
“ Government—namely, the withdrawal of Her Majesty’s land
“ forces at the earliest possible period "consistent with the
“ maintenance of Imperial interests and the safety of the
“ Colony.”
The Colony could no longer carry on the struggle with
the Imperial Government, as regards the responsibility for
military protection. The Mother Country had thrown upon
the Colonists the whole Native expenditure, and the entire
cost of the unfinished war. All that remained was to with-
draw the troops “as soon as Imperial interests and the
“ safety of the Colony would admit.” Some time was required
to make the necessary arrangements. Steps were forthwith
taken to withdraw them gradually; but whilst they remained


in the Colony, there was still the question as to how they were
to be employed. The Colonial Government endeavoured to
turn them to good account so long as they remained. But,
from this time, the course taken by the military authorities
seems to have been directed towards defeating the policy of
the Colonial Ministers, whose characters they maligned in
private letters to England. It was necessary to put an end
to such a state of things by expediting their departure.
It is sometimes imputed to the Colony that, in a spirit of
arrogant self-sufficiency, it required the Imperial Government
to withdraw the troops. It will be seen, from what I have
written, that there is no ground for such an imputation. The
Colony submitted to circumstances which it could not control.
The removal of the troops had become a necessity, partly
on economical grounds (the charge being heavier than the
Colony could bear), and partly because, so long as they re-
mained, the Colonial Government could exercise no control
over military operations. It is right to add that, in the
opinion of Mr. Weld’s Government, a colonial force of about
1200 or 1500 men, properly trained, and under colonial direc-
tion, would be more effective than a much larger body of
regular troops. The disciplined soldier is not well adapted
for bush-war, which requires special training. I think it
w r ould have been well if one regiment had been retained in
the Colony, if only for appearance’ sake; and an arrangement
to that effect seems to have been contemplated by the Home
Government, but it was coupled with conditions which the
Colony (rightly, I think) considered unreasonable.
One insurmountable difficulty in the way of maintaining an
Imperial force in a Colony having Responsible G-overnment is
the rule, which seems to be inflexible, that the Colonial Go-
vernment shall exercise no authority over it. On this point,
the Duke of Cambridge bas expressed his opinion. “To take
“ away,” says His Royal Highness, “ the power of the Gover-
“ nor as Commander-in-Ghief, would be an act fatal to the posi-
“ tion of the Governor, detrimental to the Imperial interests,
“ and extremely embarrassing and inconvenient both to the
“ officers and troops. It is most important, in a Constitutional
“ State, that the General should understand that it is his duty
“ to be subject to the sway and control of the civil authorities,
“ because those authorities are really responsible either to the
“ Crowm or to the Governor of the Colony, who is exercising
“ the authority of the Crown.”


The withdrawal of the troops has been going on since 1865.
In September last only one battalion of the 18th Foot remained.
During the process of removal there have been continual
differences between the Colonial and Imperial Governments,
and between the civil and military authorities in the Colony.
The Imperial Government complained of slackness on the part
of the Governor; the Colonial Government complained that it
was deprived of all authority over the troops whilst they re-
mained. Groundless charges of cruelty to the Natives were
brought against the Colonial Government in secret reports
to England, which were received by the Colonial Office,
circulated in England to the prejudice of the Colony. _ The
Governor (Sir George Grey) and his complained,
and the Governor was recalled. As to some of the gravest
of these charges, Sir George Grey has demanded a public in-
vestigation, which has been refused. Ihe Colony is without
appeal.
But a new and wholly different question has now arisen.
After a long comparative lull, in September, 1868, a horrible
massacre took place at Poverty Bay, and disasters occurred to
the colonial forces at Wanganui, accompanied with atrocities
too horrible to be narrated. In great alarm, the House of
Representatives, which was then sitting, resolved, on the 2nd
of October, 1868: “ That the removal of the 18th Regiment, in
“ the present condition of the Northern Settlements, would tend
“ to increase the excitement and confidence of the rebellious
“ Maories, and to discourage those friendly to Her Majesty’s
“ Government. That the Colony has for many years consistently
“ fulfilled, and is virtually fulfilling, the conditions on which
“ the retention of an Imperial regiment in New Zealand was
“ sanctioned in the dispatch of Lord Carnarvon of the Ist of
“ December, 1866. That this House, therefore, respectfully
“ prays His Excellency the Governor to take steps for delaying
“ the departure of the 18th Regiment until the subject shall
“ be referred to the Imperial Government.’
A similar appeal was made by the Legislative Council, by
the Governor, and by the Colonial Ministers. It was not an
appeal for fresh aid ; it was merely that the regiment might
be allowed to remain till the immediate prospect of danger
should be overpast, and that the rebel Natives might not be
encouraged, in such a crisis, by seeing the embarkation of
British troops, and, with them, all visible symbol of British


authority. To all such appeals the Colonial Office turned a
deaf ear.
Meantime the Colony, through its Agent in England, had
applied to the Imperial Government, representing its need of
money, and its difficulty in borrowing except with the aid of
an Imperial guarantee. The object of the loan was to cover
the contemplated war expenditure, and the Imperial Govern-
ment was gently reminded of the claims which the Colony has
upon it for assistance.
Lord Granville, in refusing the application, avails himself
of the opportunity of laying down the future policy of the
Imperial Government towards the Colony, in a dispatch to Sir
George Bowen, dated the 21st of March, 1869. I subjoin the
material parts in full. No one can mistake its meaning. It
is intended roughly to close the door to all further appeals
for help, no matter how great the danger, or how urgent the
need. His Lordship says: —■
“ I think it right to inform, or rather remind, you of the view
of facts taken by the Imperial Government, which in New Zealand
may not be prominently brought under your notice. It is this :
“ A number of Englishmen, without any invitation or encou-
ragement from the English Government, took on themselves to
form one or more settlements in the islands of New Zealand. The
Government of the day considered itself responsible for placing
the relations between these British subjects and the Natives
among whom they settled on a reasonable basis, and for securing
order among the Settlers.
“ It therefore acquired the islands by treaty from the Natives,
and established a regular government in the settlements.
“ The treaty did not render the English Government liable to
the payment of a subsidy (as might be supposed from Mr. Fitz-
herbert’s phrase), or any other onerous conditions, but merely
gave the Natives the rights of British subjects, and bound the
Queen to respect their territorial rights—rights, it may be ob-
served, the existence of which were perfectly recognized among
the tribes, and which they were alway s ready to support by force
of arms, if necessary.
“ The Government was amenable at first to the Home Govern-
ment, afterwards almost wholly to the Settlers. But it was never
at any time attempted to make New Zealand tributary to Great
Britain, or to direct local affairs in such a way as to produce any
political or pecuniary advantage to this country. The Colony
was governed with a view to the real or supposed advantage of
the inhabitants.


“ In one part of the Colony, New Plymouth, a great and not
unnatural desire existed to acquire part of the neighbouring
lands from the Natives. The Governor, holding, as an Imperial
officer, the position of Protector of Native Bights, but also anxious
to gratify the desires of the Colonists, took a step satisfactory to
his responsible advisers, to the local Legislature, and apparently
to the mass of the Colonists, though blamed by some as incon-
sistent with those duties to the Natives, which were in some sense
Imperial.
“ The result of this step, taken entirely in the interests and
with the approval of the Colonists, was a war, carried on partly at
the expense of New Zealand, but principally at the of
this country. And the result of the war is that the leading
tribe of the Maories is scattered, that the power of the others is
broken, and that large tracts of land, to which the Government
had no claim, and the settlers no access, except by friendly
arrangement with the Natives, are confiscated, sold, and occupied
by Europeans.
“ It may be added, though not part of the argument, that mean-
while the number of the Colonists has risen from 49,800, in 1857,
to 218,500, in 1867, and that of the Maories is supposed, with
more of conjecture, to haive fallen from 56,000 to 38,500.
“ If this statement is correct, it follows that the Imperial
Government have not transferred to that of the Colony any obli-
gation whatever, except that imposed on all of us, by natural
justice, not to appropriate the property of others; that all the
Imperial expenditure on the Colony has been for the benefit of
the Colonists, and a great part of it may be viewed as the price
paid by this country for the territories which have been recently,
and as I think unwisely, appropriated by them; and, lastly, that
no part of the colonial expenditure has been in any degree for the
benefit of the Mother Country.
“ So far, therefore, as there is any equitable claim remaining
unsettled, it is not a claim on the part of New Zealand against
Great Britain, but the reverse—a claim, and a very heavy claim,
if we thought proper to urge it, on the part of the Mother Country
against the Colony.
“ Lastly, Mr. Fitzherbert says that the Imperial Government
‘ insisted ’ on transferring the burden of its obligations to the
Native race from itself to the Colony. What the nature of these
obligations are, in the opinion of the Home Government, I have
already noticed.
“ But I must add that Her Majesty’s Government view this
transfer not as forced on the Colony, but, on the contrary, con-
ceded to the Colony in compliance with the direct and indirect
demands of the Colonists. The duty of protecting themselves,
against those whom they claimed the right to govern, followed as
a matter of course.
“ I cannot help observing, that if the opinions expressed at


different times by my predecessors are correct, the present
dangers of New Zealand are due, not to the punctual perform-
ance of their obligations to the Maori race, but rather to their
adoption of a policy which, if not inconsistent with those_ obliga-
tions, was certain to appear so to the Natives affected by it.”
If my view of the case is correct, it will be impossible for
the Colony to admit the accuracy'of Lord Granville’s state-
ments, or the justice of his reproofs.
Now I will trouble you with a few general remarks. It is
useless to disguise the fact that we are approaching a new
epoch in the history of our Colonial Empire, and that the
relations which have hitherto subsisted between the Mother
Country and her Colonies are about to undergo a fundamental
change. The policy adopted towards New Zealand is not
meant to he singular, nor is there any intention to treat her
more harshly than other Colonies. The same rule is being
applied elsewhere, though at present it presses most heavily
upon that Colony. The Mother Country declares, in an un-
mistakable form, her determination to withdraw from all
interference in the internal concerns of those Colonies, at
least, in which free institutions have been established, and
to leave them to themselves for better or worse. Some
Colonies will feel the change more than others; but the
principle affects all alike.
Such a change obliges all Colonies, each for itself, to con-
sider well their position, and to look to their future. It will
be well for them to approach the question in a spirit of
moderation.
As regards New Zealand, the tone of Lord Granville s dis-
patch, apart from its substance, is calculated to give deep
offence to the Colony. It is not, perhaps, more irritating
than dispatches of former Secretaries of State, but it has the
peculiar misfortune of being coupled with, or rather of being
the vehicle of, refusal of all material aid. It is in human
nature to bear with affront from those from whom we are
receiving substantial kindness ; but when that is withdrawn,
affront is sure to produce resentment, which will be no longer
smothered. The Colony, at such a moment, will not bear to
be told, even in the language of courtly circumlocution, that
it has brought its dangers on itself; that it has rashly as-
sumed responsibilities which it is refusing to discharge ; that


it has failed in its duties to the Natives; that it has robbed
them of their land. If the charges were true, which they are
not, the time for making them is inopportune.
For ray present purpose, I remark that a dispatch of this
nature appears to me to indicate an inherent vice in our
system of Colonial Administration, arising from the constitu-
tion of the Colonial Office, a department consisting of a per-
manent official staff, in whom the real power resides, pre-
sided over by shifting Parliamentary heads, and between whom
and the Colonial Governments there can be no sympathy.
“ The system,” says the late Mr. C. Fuller, “ has all the
“ faults of an essentially arbitrary Government, in the hands
“ of persons who have little personal interest in the welfare
“ of those over whom they rule—who reside at a distance
“ from them, who never have ocular experience of their con-
“ dition, who are obliged to trust to secondhand and one-
“ sided information, and who are exposed to the operation of
“ all those sinister influences which prevail wherever pub-
“ licity and freedom are not established.” *
It is true that the establishment of Responsible Govern-
ment, in the most important Colonies, has greatly contracted
the sphere of Colonial Office work; but room enough is left
for differences, which are constantly arising, and which, when
they occur, produce in the mind of the Colonial Government
an irritation quickened by the new sense of responsibility and
partial independence. If the connection between the Mother
Country and her Colonies is to be maintained, I venture to
express an opinion that there must be some organic change
in this department of the Imperial Government.
The subject, however, is of wider scope, and the special claim
which New Zealand has upon the Mother Country, is merged
in the larger principle involved in the newly-announced
policy, which opens to the Colonies the question of possible
Independence. I hope I may venture upon this topic without
being supposed to imply a menace, which would be simply
absurd. The Home Government itself invites us to consider
the matter from this point.
. Setting aside the special circumstances of particular Colo-
nies, I am not prepared to dispute the general right of the
* “ Eesponsible Government in Colonies,” 1840. (Ridgway.)


Mother Country to say to her Colonies, all or any of them, at
a fitting time: “We do not intend any longer to trouble our-
“ selves about your internal affairs. Their management, with
“ all its responsibilities, must rest with yourselves. Be inde-
pendent, if you please; but, whatever troubles or difficulties
“ you get into henceforth, do not look to us for assistance.”
Does it follow that, under these circumstances, the connection
of the Colony with the Mother Country must be severed?
Not, as a logical consequence. But it remains to be seen
whether it will be practically possible to maintain that con-
nection under such altered relations.
There are some practical disadvantages under which Colo-
nies are placed by the Imperial connection. The obligation
to receive Governors by nomination from home, though it
lias great advantages, will occasionally be felt as a grievance.
The necessity of submitting Acts of the Colonial Legislature
to the Colonial Office, for confirmation, though in general a
mere form, ju'oduces not unfrequently irritating differences.
A transmarine Court of Appeal is an unreality. To be
debarred from the privilege of making treaties with foreign
Powers may sometimes be thought to be a disadvantage. The
risk of being involved in wars arising out of European
politics is only partially balanced by the protection which
the Mother Country is still ready to afford.
So long as a Colony feels that, in case of extreme need, it
may claim help in possible difficulties, as part of the great
Imperial family, it acquiesces in these abridgments of its
autonomy, as a child submits to the restraints of the paternal
roof. But if a time comes (as it has come, in the case of New
Zealand) that such help is asked and refused, the relationship
is changed. The parent has abandoned the child. The
child feels and knows that it is abandoned. Henceforth it is
outside the family pale.
The announcement of such a principle will be applied by
other Colonies to their own cases.
This feeling of mutual reliance between all parts of the
Empire for help in great emergencies maty be —and is, in fact,
to a great extent —sentimental. The moral obligation of
mutual help binds families together, thomgh, in a vast number
of cases, the occasion for calling it into aictive exercise never


arises. But the obligation cannot be denied without a
severance of the family tie.
May I, without egotism, state my own views on this question
of the relative duties and obligations of Colonies and the
Mother Country ? As a member of the Colonial Legislature,
and as a Colonial Minister, I have practically acted upon
them. In New Zealand they have been generally accepted,
though there is a strong feeling that the Mother Country has
unfairly shifted from its own shoulders a burthen to which it
is morally liable.
The obligation of self-defence rests, in my opinion, upon a
Colony primarily, to the extent of its ability (to he measured by
circumstances), in all cases, whether of internal danger ox foreign
war. The distinction now drawn, and which is implied in the
present Imperial policy, between the two cases, is unsound.
Whether the danger comes from within or without is imma-
terial. If a Colony can protect itself against a foreign enemy
without aid, it is bound to do so. If a danger threatens the
Empire, and it can bring help to the common cause, it is bound
to afford it. The Colonies feel this, and are ready, to the extent
of their ability, to assist in the defence of the Empire. This
disposition was shown by several of the Colonies in the case
of the Crimean War. In the case of New Zealand, when the
Native war broke out, I objected to asking for troops from
England. Mr. Weld’s Government, of which I was a member,
urged their recall. We believed that the Colony was able to
fight its own battle. That was what we meant by the policy
of self-reliance, upon which the Colony consistently acted, till
circumstances obliged it to make that appeal for help, which
might have been conceded without cost to the Mother
Country, but which Lord Granville has so peremptorily
rejected.
Whether Great Britain would be wise in contracting the
limits of her Empire, is a question which she is entitled to
determine for herself. As a citizen of the Empire I should
deeply regret it. I believe the Colonies to be to her a source
of wealth, the security for which would be impaired if they
were independent. “lam of opinion,” says Mr. Wakefield,*
“ that the extent and glory of an Empire are solid advantages
“ for all its inhabitants, and especially those who inhabit
“ its centre. I think that, whatever the possession of our
* “ Art of Colonization,” p, 97.


“ Colonies costs us in money, is worth miore in money than its
“ money-cost, and is infinitely more im other respects. For
“ by overawing foreign nations, and impressing mankind with
“ a prestige of our might, it enables uts to keep the peace of
“ the world, which we have no interestt in disturbing ; as it
“ would enable us to disturb the world!, if we pleased. The
“ advantage is, that the possession of this immense Empire
“ by England, causes the mere name off England to be a real
“ and a mighty power —the greatest power that now exists
“in the world.” “ Suppose,” he adds, we gave them all up,
“ without losing any of their utility ais markets, I say that
“ tire name of England would cease to be a power, and that,
“ in order to preserve our own independence, we should have
“to spend more than we do in the business of defence. It
“ would be supposed that we gave therm up because we could
“ not help it; we should be, with respect to other nations,
“ like the bird which has been wounded, and which, there-
“ fore, the others peck to death.”
But remonstrances and arguments by Colonists against
such a policy are not likely to be treatted with consideration.
Indeed, we should perhaps expose omrselves to taunts and
injurious reflections.
It remains for us to adapt ourselve* to the new circum-
stances, and see how they can be shaped and directed, so as to
produce the smallest amount of injury to ourselves, and to
tire Mother Country, in whose greatness and prosperity we,
at any rate at present, feel an equal interest as citizens of
the Empire.
Granting, then, that from henceforth the obligation of
mutual help between the Colonies and the Mother Country
is to be limited to the case of foreign war, how are we to ad-
just our relations with each other for tthe future? They can
no longer be those of superior and dependent; they must be
those of simple equality. But is equallity under such circum-
stances compatible with anything sluort of independence?
Seeing, as I do, great evils in the cllismemberment of the
Empire, I shrink from the conclusion tto which my judgment
points —that any middle condition, is im such case, impossible,
or, at all events, could not, be long maiintained.
To the Colonies the transition to a state of absolute Inde-
pendence must needs be full of anxciety. In the case of


foreign war, how will they protect themselves without the aid
of the great Power on which they hitherto relied ? They
must do as other small independent States have done and
are doing. Their very insignificance may be a source of
safety. But, even now, thee total withdrawal by the Home
Government of the military,, and the contraction of the naval
force hitherto assigned for the protection of outlying de-
pendencies, warns them thatt the help they may expect from
England in future will be liimited by her own more pressing
needs, and must therefore 'be precarious. As things are,
what would be the conditicon of the Australasian Colonies,
whose gold-ships offer the richest prizes, in case of war with
any of the great maritime IPowers ? The Mother Country
will decline to enter into sspecific guarantees, and we must
rest satisfied with general (assurances of support in case of
need. Without questioning;- the sincerity of such assurances,
the question must force itseilf upon all the distant Colonies—
those especially of the Australasian group —-whether the ad-
vantages resulting from maintenance of the Imperial connec-
tion, under the altered poliicy, are a compensation for the
dangers involved in possibles entanglement in quarrels arising
out of European politics.
It is desirable that we shtould bring to the consideration of
these questions a calm judgment; and if, failing other ex-
pedients, the Colonies are tto assume Independence, there is
much to he done, as preparatory work, in the way of grouping
and organizing them, to fitt them for entering on their new
career—in a spirit, let us liiope, of entire friendship with the
Parent State. But this opsens a new subject. So I conclude.
Believe me,
Yours very faithfully,
HENRY SEWELL.
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND) SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHAEINI* CROSS.


