







PUBLISHED BY
lAN PRATT PUBLISHING COMPANY PTY LTD
117 CLARENCE STREET
SYDNEY
FOR
J FIELDING & CO LTD
9 BUCKINGHAM ST
SYDNEY
September 5, 1955
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA
BY
WEBSDALE, SHOOSMITH PTY LTD
117 CLARENCE STREET
SYDNEY


CONTENTS
Foreword Page Two
The Fielding Story Begins Page Four
A Public Company is Launched Page Eleven
A New Container is Developed Page Nineteen
War The Testing Period Page Twenty
Manufacture of Paper Packages Page Twenty-seven
Registered at the G.P.0., Sydney,
for transmission through the post
as a book.


FOREWORD
The lafe James Fielding, founder
of J. Fielding & Co. Ltd., guided
the destinies of the firm for 39
years.
fiftieth anniversary of J. Fielding & Co. Ltd., on the
sth September, 195 5, marks a further milestone in the Fielding story,
It is a major highlight in the story of a business which began in a modest way when the
century was young, but which, despite the tribulations and anxieties of two world wars and
a great depression, has today reached a position of eminence as the leader of its field in
manufacturing enterprise.
I feel that now is the appropriate time to record some of the more important events
which have shaped the Company’s history, and to present, by word and picture, a detailed
account of the highly mechanised processes involved In the manufacture of our products.
The Fielding story begins, of course, with my late father, James Fielding. His was the
pioneering spirit, the vision and the determination that banded together a handful of men
and women to begin the great adventure in 1905.


That same pioneering spirit prevails in
Australia as much today as it did in the past,
and I am convinced that opportunities con-
tinue to present themselves to those equipped
with a capacity for work and enterprise. In
this land of individual freedom the door is
wide open now to a vast industrial expansion,
in which this Company, as an integral part
of a young and vigorous industry, must con-
tinue to play its part. In rendering a service to
our clients, we have already contributed im-
portantly to the economic development of our
country’s resources, but that contribution will
be dwarfed in the years to come.
The late Henry William Lees, who, with
the founder, was largely, responsible
for the Company's sound position today.
My sincere gratitude is with the employees,
past and present, who have shown since those
early days an unswerving loyalty to the Com-
pany. Also I pay tribute to our overseas friends
who have so generously afforded us the benefit
of their knowledge and experience of the in-
dustry. It is my genuine hope that these happy
relations will continue for many generations
to come.
The prospectus Issued by James Fielding
In 1910 sought a capital of £20,000
with which to found the Company.
FIELDING & CO., LIMITED
In presenting this book, we offer it in
recognition of fifty years of very pleasant
associations with customers and suppliers,
employees and friends years which have
brought many close friendships and much
valuable support. To the older generation it
will serve as a reminder of the pioneering days,
while for the younger it will, I hope, provide
an inspiration, for it is they who will shape the
next fifty years of J. Fielding & Co. Ltd.
Shares sire to ha
3
CHAIRMAN OF DIRECTORS


the 6 tot
HE tram set James Fielding down at the lower end of George Street. As it
lurched away, he strode across the pavement and entered the unimposing
entrance to No. 227 —the home of a struggling, near-bankrupt business owned by
Julius Caro, and trading under the name of the Sydney Cardboard Company.
Employees of Sydney Cardboard had seen this man poking into every corner
of the premises in the preceding three weeks, had heard him asking innumerable
questions as to how this infant industry operated, and if they had but known,
September 5, 1905, was to be a momentous day in the firm’s history.
It had been founded in 1901, and had changed hands on several occasions, to
come finally into the possession of Julius Caro, who, with his many other business
interests, found little time to devote to fostering an industry comparatively new
to Australia. What it required was a man without other worries, a man with
complete faith in his own capacity and judgment, a man dominated by the
urge to pioneer.
At 40, James Fielding was just such a man. He was born to Margaret and
James Fielding in the district of Newchurch, County of Fancaster, England, on
April 3, 1865. His father was a ropemaker by trade, and had built, by hard work
and enthusiasm, a flourishing if not extensive business.


in 6 Ln 1905
No doubt, as the lad grew up, James and Margaret Fielding entertained
hopes that he would continue the rope-making business. But by the time he
reached maturity the industrial revolution was complete in England. To the
adventurous at heart there were seemingly no fields left to conquer, for England
had become the manufacturing centre of the world.
For a few years he worked with James Fielding the elder, and then, on a
day in 1888, announced to his bewildered parents and astonished friends his inten-
tion to migrate to Australia. There, he reckoned, he would find the adventure his
youth sought, and a future untrammelled by the social and business conventions
of old England. Australia was a country as young in heart as he and, from the
tales he had heard and the reports he had read, James Fielding knew it was a
country in which he could build his life.
The protestations of his father were as unavailing as the pleadings of his
mother, and James Fielding set out for the Southern Hemisphere.
He could not know it then, but within two years of his arrival Australia was
to be plunged into a depression as severe as that of the early 1930’5. For thirty
years the Colony of New South Wales had experienced unbounded prosperity.
The discovery of gold in the 18 50’s touched off the young country s first great
period of expansion and, between then and the ruinous depression, Australia s
The first home of Fielding's (far
left) was situated at 227 George
Street, Sydney.
The T-model Ford (above) was the
pride of Fielding's when the
industry was in its infancy.
Fielding's first move was to
premises (right) built in Buckingham
Street.


Present Headquarters of J. Fielding
& Co. Ltd. is at 9 Buckingham Street, Sydney.
An artist's perspective of the new
shipping container division at Kingsgrove.


population grew from 400,000 to over 2,500,000, thus establishing a fairly
substantial demand for locally manufactured goods. Gold provided money for
investment in industry and when the diggings declined, supplied the labour needed
by the youthful factories.
It was towards the end of this period that the engineering and chemical in-
dustries began operating, steel was rolled from imported ingots for the first time,
and the public transport systems were inaugurated. They were exciting times,
which attracted £270 million of overseas investment capital for public works and
industry, and saw established the principle of protection for home industries and
the passage of the first Factory Act.
There were some 6,000 factories in Australia, employing about 134,000
persons in the year that the young James Fielding reached this country, but there
were portents that all was not well with the economy. A general tightening-up
had begun and, although prosperity appeared a permanent thing to many, James
Fielding, who had arrived with little more than essential baggage and three
sovereigns in his pocket, found it difficult to get employment of any kind, let alone
something of a congenial nature.
Nevertheless, the joyous bustle and striving excitement of boisterous, brawling
youth that permeated the colony fired him in the struggle for existence. He
accepted whatever casual work he was offered. This kept him going until the first
of the great bank crashes shocked the colonials into the realisation that there was
no such thing as permanent prosperity.
Ironically, it was the failure of so many businesses during the depression that
followed that started James Fielding on his career as an industrialist, and led up to
that September day in 1905, but in 1891, in the heart of the depression, and
despairing of finding suitable employment in Sydney, he decided to venture to the
bush town of Parramatta. He walked the 15 miles separating the two centres.
There, a chance meeting with Arthur Langley Hinton, an accountant and
real estate agent, was to prove of lasting significance. Not only did the association
with Hinton result in a friendship until his death in 1926, it also brought the
young Fielding, in April, 1907, into contact with Henry William Lees, who was
to play a large part in the growth of J. Fielding & Co. Ltd., as Secretary from
1910 until his death in 1951, as well as General Manager and a Director for the
greater part of those years. His temperament and character complemented that of
James Fielding, and together they made a strong team, Lees’ calm, analytical
approach to problems tempering the more fiery aggressiveness of James Fielding.
The business community of Parramatta had been as severely affected by the
bank crashes as that of Sydney, and one after another once prosperous concerns
were going bankrupt for want of management strong enough to ride out the
economic storm.


w
FIELDING’S BOARD OF DIRECTORS MEETS BENEATH A FORTRAI
Left to right:
J. V. Ratcliffe, L. M. Trlggs,
L. T. Fielding, Chairman and Managing Director,
N. A. Lees, Secretary,
8
J. J. Mcllwaine, and R. Burns.


One of Hinton’s less pleasant tasks was the
winding up of such bankrupt businesses, and he
gave James Fielding a temporary job assisting
him as bookkeeper. Apparently Hinton was im-
pressed with his enthusiasm for work because,
when no more work offered in this field, he gave
the young Fielding employment as a debt
collector on a 50 per cent, basis. This took him
stamping around Parramatta and the surround
ing countryside and, as a result of his acumei
James Fielding was able to accumulate th.
modest sum of £l6B.
With this small capital he began buying bank-
rupt stock, only to sell it as quickly as possible at
a profit to himself. In the years that followed,
he bought and sold in Bourke, Brewarrina, Scone,
Dungog, and many another New South Wales
country town, and always at a profit. At Tenter-
field and Taree he went even further. In both
towns he bought bankrupt general stores and
went into business under the sign of "James
Fielding, Prptr.” He did this with the express
purpose of rebuilding them into going concerns,
so that they could be sold for a sum substantially
in excess of what he paid. And all the time his
outlook was expanding, his management skill
becoming surer, his judgment more sound.
The year 1905 saw him back in Sydney with,
for those days, a sizable amount of capital in
the bank, a wife, Ottelia Fielding, and one son,
Leslie, destined to take over the Managing
Directorship of Fielding’s when his father died
in 1944. For several months James Fielding
looked around. He investigated a number of
propositions, and had almost decided on the
purchase of one of them when he heard that the
Sydney Cardboard Company was near bankrupt
and that its owner was looking for a buyer.
It was early August when Julius Caro and
James Fielding first met, and over the ensuing
9


three weeks rarely a day went by that he did not visit the premises in George
Street. His investigations were, as usual, exceedingly painstaking, but he was not
convinced that there was a future for this new industry—the packing of goods in
cardboard.
However, on September 5, the day on which he had to make his decision
known, he strode into Julius Caro’s office, produced a bank draft for £2,200, and
wrote across the Bill of Sale in his neat, somewhat pointed book-keeper’s hand:
"I’ll take this business lock, stock and barrel.”
Even though James Fielding’s intentions then were to sell out Sydney Card-
board Company as soon as it had been rehabilitated, the first fifty years of
J. Fielding & Co. Ftd. had begun.
In 1905 everyone of means had an ediphone standing on a table in a corner
of their drawing room. The small black cylinders were encased in cardboard, and
their manufacture was to prove a solid "bread and butter” line while J. Fielding,
as Sydney Cardboard Company was soon named, looked around for new avenues
for business.
The early years called for vision and resourcefulness, and the hardships
experienced recall parallel cases of other pioneers of industry. Today, when it is
difficult to think of a single item of merchandise not packed in cardboard boxes
in one form or another, it is hard to realise what a struggle was involved in
creating new markets.
Nevertheless, the business grew surely enough to convince James Fielding that
here was a concern that it might be more profitable for him to retain than sell.
Coupled with this, no doubt, was the realisation that he was building a new
industry which would have far-reaching effects on the young nation’s economy.
He had been in the country now nearly twenty years, had been witness to the
birth of the nation in 1901, and had come to have an abiding love for the land of
his adoption. Here was the opportunity to prove that he, too, had his part to play
in the nation’s development. However, no matter what the prime cause, James
Fielding decided his future lay in the packaging industry.
Within a few years he had learned all there was to know, not only about the
business side, but also about the technical aspects of production, and his tremen-
dous drive and energy made him a formidable salesman. It was not long before
thoughts of expanding the old factory premises entered his mind.
In 1908, however, there were plans for widening the Quay end of George
Street and, an order for resumption having been made, he set about plans to move
the factory to a completely new site.
His choice was Buckingham Street, which contained only a number of very
old houses ready for demolition. It was also in the heart of a growing industrial
area, and there was further room for expansion, if necessary, by the purchase of
old houses on adjoining Chalmers Street.


\K>f I’l \NN! !'■ AT iM-fJK'b.i. AUKiT Ali_ hii N < Ui i Hi.
-f~) public company Li launched
LTHOUGH the business had been wonderfully successful, James Fielding
realised it would be impossible to finance himself the building and equipment
programme he envisaged, so in 1910 he launched J. Fielding & Co. Ltd., with a
subscribed capital of £17,527.
Including James Fielding himself and a few friends, the original subscribers
totalled only 48, and the public generally was not impressed, as only £5,527 new
cash shares were applied for. Six of those subscribers are still shareholders of the
Company, and throughout the years they have shared the original confidence of
11


/. I
Chief Accountant and Office Manager,
W. T. Mitchell, standing in the centre
of the picture, raises a point with one
of his staff in the general office.
James Fielding when he wrote in the Company’s prospectus; "It is confidently
expected by the Vendor that, with the added facilities of new premises and addi-
tional plant, the output will be increased, forthwith, by at least 25 per cent.,
bringing it up to £20,000; and, making due allowance for increased expense as and
by way of rent, interest and company charges, the earnings upon this figure should
not be less than 15 per cent, per annum on a paid-up capital of £20,000.”
Although the capital obtained fell £3,473 short of the amount wanted, the
transfer of the factory to its new site —and present headquarters—at 9 Bucking-
ham Street, adjacent to Central Railway Station, was effected. The initial building
was a three-storey brick structure, with a total floor space of 18,000 square feet.
12


In the move and the plans for expansion he was enthusiastically supported
by the band of men he had recruited around him, men who had already quite
a few years of experience in the carton and box making business. Amongst
them were H. L. Brandtman, R. Burns, F. Mayne, E. Bossi, A. Mcllwaine, father
of the present Production Manager, C. J. Dixon, J. T. Holloway and, of course,
Henry William Lees, father of the Company’s present Secretary. Robert Burns, the
present General Manager, and a Director for many years, has been employed by
Fielding’s for nearly fifty years, and is the Company’s oldest employee. His son,
Alan Burns, is Plant Superintendent at Kingsgrove. Another employee who worked
at George Street is Mrs. Minnie Smith, now a clerk in the Container Division. In
addition, Brian Holloway, a clerk in the General Office, represents the third
generation of that family to be employed by Fielding’s, the father, Eric Holloway,
being Assistant Manager of the Box and Carton Division.
The new factory provided room for innovation and although the use of
printed cartons and fancy boxes steadily extended, it soon became apparent
that there was a real need for a new packaging medium in contrast to the
conventional crating of bulk merchandise in wooden boxes. On all sides,
Company employees saw opportunities for expanding business if a suitable
container could be made in Australia.
Already in the United States of America a revolution was being brought
about in the internal shipment of merchandise of all kinds by the use of
corrugated shipping containers, and hearing of their advent and the brilliant
future opening up for them, James Fielding, with typical aggressiveness when
out after business, decided to see the new equipment for himself.
The middle of 1913 saw James Fielding again aboard ship, but this time
as a prosperous businessman bound for America instead of a 2 3-years-old
immigrant heading for Australia. After making a thorough investigation of
the way in which his American counter-parts ran their businesses and seeing
the new medium under construction and in use, he continued his voyage, re-
turning to Australia via England and the Continent fired with enthusiasm for
the new type of container.
For nearly twelve months he and his fellow directors and top executives
explored every aspect of the introduction of corrugated shipping containers
to the Australian market and, after taking into account the experiences of
American companies pioneering the new medium, decided to make a further
investigation with the view to purchasing Australia’s first corrugating machine.
Once again, in the middle of 1914, James Fielding set off for America.
The time would not appear to have been a propitious one for embarking on a
new venture of such magnitude for in Europe it was already apparent that
only a miracle could prevent international war and its attendant upheaval of
economic life.




In fact, James Fielding believed that if war did break out it would provide
just the opportunity the new medium required to prove itself in competition with
the wooden cases, which, he felt, would soon be in short supply as men turned
away from their normal occupations to serve their country.
On the eve of the declaration of war with Germany, James Fielding was to
be found in New York, having just made the momentous decision to acquire, at
a cost of about £5,000, the first corrugating plant to go into production in
Australia.
After some delays, the plant arrived. Meanwhile, in anticipation of the
purchase, the Company had been buying up the old cottages in Chalmers Street
at the back of Buckingham Street, so that, when the equipment reached Australia,
a new factory, with a total floor space of 14,000 square feet, was ready to house
it. By today’s standards this corrugating machine was very primitive, giving a
maximum production of a 50" web of corrugated board at a speed of only 30
feet a minute.
Many setbacks were encountered before the real advantages of corrugated
shipping containers became apparent to industry generally. Not only were there
ignorance and prejudice to combat; there was, too, the active antagonism of the
makers of wooden cases. In the United States of America the antagonism of the
latter industry was extremely bitter. Feelings did not run quite so high in Australia,
but naturally every effort was made to discredit the new medium and thus inhibit
the development of its use.
As in America, claims were made that the new containers would never stand
up to the rough handling they would get in transport. James Fielding took an
action typical of him to defeat these claims. He made two containers, packed them
with bottles containing tomato sauce, and sent them on a long round trip by rail,
one to the north of New South Wales and one to the south. They were inspected
on return by railway and shipping officials and by shipping agents. The result was,
of course, that much of the prejudice died.
World War I and the extreme shortage of tinplate also helped in stimulating
the need for the use of light and economical paper packages and, in addition, there
were the obvious advantages—corrugated containers were lighter, and thus cheaper
to freight, there was far less loss from pilfering, they were easier to handle and
stack, caused far fewer accidents to employees, and they provided, with their
gaily printed surfaces, an ideal free advertising medium.
The end of World War I caused some readjustment to the needs of a peace-
time economy, and during the early 1920’s highly unstable conditions prevailed.
These did not, however, prevent Fielding’s from further expansion under the sure
guidance of James Fielding.


The manufacture of cartons, boxes and
shipping containers involves many
processes. Rubber dies have to be
prepared for printing on corrugated
blanks. Photo shows a Fielding's
employee removing a die from a plastic
mould.
The design of cartons and boxes varies greatly from
order to order, depending largely on the size,
shape and weight of the product to be packaged.
Some are quite intricate, and for these special
formes have to be prepared in the knife-setting
department (right).
Formes go from the setting department to one of
the seven cutting and creasing machines in the
Buckingham Street factory. Far right, a Crosland
platen is die-cutting a corrugated blank. Fielding's
pioneered the manufacture in Australia of
corrugated containers.




In the Deritend rotary cutting and
scoring machine (above) carton blanks
are trimmed to size and scored
before going to the presses for printing.
Walter Grant (right), manager of the
shipping container division, talks
over a detail in production technique
with a Fielding's employee operating
the 60-inch corrugator in the Chalmers
Street factory.


Immediately after the cessation of hostilities, in addition to expanding the
local uses for containers, Fielding’s moved into markets created in Queensland and
Victoria. Victoria was by far the largest market outside New South Wales and,
in order to keep pace with the demand and to give a better service to clients and
eliminate freight costs, a factory was established in that State. In conjunction
with the well-known pioneering printing house of Sands and MacDougall Pty Ltd.,
Fielding’s in 1922 acquired a 50 per cent, interest in Corrugated and Solid Fibre
Containers Pty. Ltd. —an interest which they hold today.
?us container it
&n/£10 , y , 2i
.IN 1924 the field of shipping containers was further extended by the intro-
' duction from the United States of America of Australia’s first solid fibre
plant, which was accommodated in Chalmers Street by the extension of 37,000
square feet of floor space to the existing factory. Whilst this innovation met the
usual criticisms of those opposed to change, it marked another milestone in the
progress of J. Fielding & Co. Ltd.
The sceptics were soon convinced and, as a result of keeping ahead in the
field of research and the development of new outlets, Fielding’s established the
fibre board container as an essential commodity for the packaging of consumer
goods, thus making a radical change in a large and vital sector of the economy.
An example of the imaginative creation of new uses for their product lies in
the development of corrugated pads as liners for fruit cases, a record 17 million
of which will be used this year. In the late 1920’5, James Fielding, still as forceful
as ever, conducted a series of experiments by shipping Tasmanian apples in
conventional crates lined with pads to protect the fruit. The experiment proved
so successful, and so improved the delivered quality of shipped fruit, that there
was a huge demand for the pads. For some years all supplies of liners were
produced in the Sydney plant, but the uncertainty of delivery to Tasmania, and
high freight charges, precipitated the formation, in 1934, of The Tasmanian
Corrugated Paper Pty. Ltd., which was formed jointly with Paper Products Pty.
Ltd., of Sydney.
The corrugated pad today has become an integral unit in all packing houses,
and helps maintain the prestige of one of Tasmania’s most important products.
Then came the depression of 1929-33, which closed the second great period of
Australian expansion, encompassing the entire life to then of J. Fielding & Co. Ltd.
It was a grievous blow to the young and vigorous people just straddling the


threshold of true nationhood. At its peak about 300,000 persons, or about 29 per
cent, of breadwinners, were unemployed, and manufacturing industry, like every
other activity, was gravely affected.
It is a no uncertain measure of James Fielding’s greatness and the solidity
and integrity of the Company itself that, despite the exigencies of those disastrous
years, J. Fielding & Co. Ltd. maintained its dividend rate at 15 per cent., except for
1931, when it stood at 10 per cent.
But, as in the depression of the 1890’s, business proved its ability to survive,
and by the end of 1932 there was strong evidence that the crisis was over, and
that normal times were returning.
Once again the tempo picked up, more outlets opened, and brightly packaged
goods became the focal point of shop and store displays. By 1938 there was a
quickening in the atmosphere at 9 Buckingham Street, for thought was being
given to the need for still further expansion. The next year saw the formulation of
plans to step up production in all departments cartons and boxes and the two
branches of the Shipping Container Division, corrugated and solid fibre containers.
The economy was expanding rapidly and, although there had been a large increase
in output from Australia’s paper mills, Fielding’s and other fabricators created new
markets for the increased production.
But, of course, the years of World War II relegated the Company’s plans to
the background, and the demands of the Australian Services and those of her allies
became paramount.
U/dt - me. ta6tln
pet loci
FLE field of packaging and the ingenuity of the Company’s skilled staff of
designers were tested to the utmost as the Allied war machine moved into top
gear. Peace-time manufacturing standards, methods and conditions changed over-
night, as did the type of product turned out by the Company’s imposing array
of machinery. Boxes for cosmetics and chocolates gave place in priority to
utilitarian ammunition cartons and rifle containers. Jungle food rations, medical
supplies, and hundreds of other essentials, all had to be protected from tropical
heat, rain, and rough treatment across steaming jungle trails by the versatile
cardboard container. Lightness of weight, coupled with maximum protection,
saved many lives by the safe arrival of supplies packed in the products of the paper
industry, whether transported by land, sea, or air, or by human carrier.
The war years placed an unprecedented strain on plant, equipment, buildings
and personnel. One of those who succumbed was the man who had made the


Bob Smith (far left), supervisor of the printing department, watches
the feed on a two-colour Miehle in the letterpress machine room.
The Mann press (below) is one of two offset machines complementing
the letterpress printing section at the Buckingham Street factory.
21


Boxes are sent to either a stitching or a
staying machine for assembly after
cutting and creasing. Photo (above)
shows part of the battery of Vickers
wire stitching machines in Fielding's
Buckingham Street factory.
J. Z. Padman, manager of the box and
carton department, looks on while an
employee operates a hand staying
machine which applies a strip of
gummed paper to the corners of boxes.
The four-cornered stayer (far right) is
one of the most intricate pieces of
machinery in Fielding's boxmaking plant.
It attaches a strip of glued paper to
each of a box's four corners in the one
operation.




Company his life’s work —James Fielding. He died at the age of 78, having, with
Henry William Lees, nursed the Company from infancy to maturity, through two
world wars and a major depression. From a mere 20 employees, a capital of £2,200,
and a turnover of a few thousands in 1905, it had developed in 39 years into a
company with some 250 employees, a capital of £235,913, and a turnover of
£540,225.
With the restoration of peace, the Company’s plans for the future were
brought out and dusted off. In keeping with the policy established way back in
1913 of investigating everything that is new in the industry, top executives made a
number of visits overseas, particularly to the United States of America, where
packaging has long been in a very advanced state.
Plans first conceived in 1938 envisaged many radical changes, both in plant
and equipment and factory layout and design but, as reports started coming back
from executives, these plans too were radically altered to keep pace with the
revolutionary changes that took place in the packaging industry and its techniques
in the immediate post-war years.
Finally, however, a pattern of what was needed began to emerge, and
architects and engineers were put to work to design a factory 360 feet long by
300 feet wide on 16 acres of ground acquired in the industrial pocket situated
in the prosperous residential suburb of Kingsgrove, eight miles south-west of
Sydney.
The first factory has now been completed, and houses what is believed to be
the most modern corrugated container plant of its kind in the world, as well as the
solid fibre plant bought in 1924, which has been modernised and moved from its
original location at Chalmers Street. The new "Langston” corrugating plant and
ancillary equipment cost about £200,000, as compared with the £5,000 paid for
the machine bought in 1914.
This is only the beginning of the development of the Kingsgrove area, but it
has, to date, cost the Company about £600,000. Eventually it is planned to move
all the plant and equipment from the Buckingham Street factory, but this will
not be achieved until further buildings have been erected. It is confidently
expected, however, that consolidation of production on the one site will be
effected within the next five years.
The financial expansion of J. Fielding & Co. Ltd. reveals as graphically as
does the physical expansion of the business and factory premises, a remarkable story
of continuing growth.
James Fielding began to trade under his own name in 1905 with a capital of
£2,200. In 1910 the move to Buckingham Street created the need for working
capital and, although the public generally was not confident of the prospects of


Final process in the manufacture of a carton
is the sealing of "the manufacturer's joint."
Photo shows part of a battery of
International automatic glueing machines.
I A-
After printing, cartons are sent to the
strippers who, with specially designed
hammers, knock away the unwanted board,
which goes back to the mill for repulping.
this new venture in packaging, the Company was formed with a subscribed capital
of £17,527. The prospectus of the Company claimed that a dividend of 15 per
cent, a year would be paid, and although that rate was not reached until 1918, it
has since varied little, the only exceptions being 1919, 1921 and 1931. In some
years it reached as high as per cent, and, as already noted, was maintained at
10 per cent, even in the height of the depression.
In the first year’s trading to 1911, profit totalled £2,750, and the general
reserve £732. By 1935 capital had grown to £200,000, profit to £38,925, and the
general reserve to £136,200. In the next 19 years, at the end of the financial year
for 1954, paid-up capital grew to £720,418, profit to £151,072, and the general
reserve to £620,000.
During the 45 years Fielding’s has operated as a public company, there have
been no less than nine bonus issues of ordinary shares, and three issues at par of
£l, plus four small issues to employees, also at par.


A subscriber for 1,000 ordinary shares in the formation year would today
hold 20,260 shares if all cash issues had been applied for. The total value of such
shares today would be £91,170, and the total benefit from dividends over the years
would be about £46,500. Today there are 1,120 ordinary shareholders and 225
employees hold 18,272 special employee shares of £1 each. These were introduced
in 1947.
The management throughout the years has always been aware of the in-
advisability of concentrating all capital in the one sphere, and a regular programme
of investment in other organisations and real estate has been maintained. Today’s
real estate holdings are shown at about £1,500,000, and investments in the shares
of other companies at about £500,000.
It is a record of growth which reflects the unique contribution made by such
men as James Fielding and Henry William Lees. There is no doubt that even today
the management is inspired by their qualities, and that their influence will remain
throughout the second fifty years upon which the Company is now embarking.
The number of employees has grown gradually over the years, and today some
400 men and women work together in a happy relationship with top management
which has always worked towards the betterment of the welfare of the employee.
To foster the spirit of co-operation, approximately 60 per cent, of the regular
employees own employee shares, on which a dividend of 25 per cent, a year—the
maximum permitted by the Company’s constitution —has been paid in recent
years. The employee owning such shares is a proprietor in the business, in the
same way as a holder of ordinary shares, and there naturally flows from this interest
a sincere desire to further the Company’s prosperity.
For some years past all employees have participated in an annual bonus based
on trading results and, in addition, since 195 1, a measured weekly production bonus
has been adopted, and today each employee participates. The turnover in personnel
is now negligible, and the method of assessing the production bonus has the con-
currence of the Printing Trade Unions, with which the Company has been on
most amicable terms throughout the years.
Other benefits to employees include a retiring insurance scheme and a
provision to help past and present employees in certain circumstances.
The Social Club forms an integral part of the Company, and through its
activities employees and their families meet together socially.
Long service is recognised, and 36 men employees have received their reward
for 25 years’ service. Fourteen women who have worked with the Company for
15 years have also participated. Men employees with 25 years’ or more service and
still working with the Company aggregate a total of 1,166 years.


/ / /
Ldnundcture yMjaet yjucK
!/ " // / / /
APER, whether used in the form of cardboard for boxes and cartons or in
the roll to manufacture corrugated and solid fibreboard, is the principal raw
material used by Fielding’s.
In itself, paper is one of man’s oldest manufactures, it being nearly 2,000
years ago that T’sai Lun, a minister of agriculture in the service of Emperor Ho-Ti,
succeeded in making a paper from a mixture of bark, tow, and old linen. Card-
board, if the crude papyrus of the Egyptians is excepted, is a comparatively modern
development, dating from 15 th century Rome, when sheets of scrap paper were
pasted together in printing plants to form book boards. Paper was hand made
until 1798, when Louis Robert, a Frenchman, invented a continuous paper-
making machine; and then, 3 3 years later, in America, paperboard was
mechanically produced for the first time by George A. Shyrock.
Corrugated materials were first patented in England in 18 56 by Edward
Charles Healey and Edward Ellis Allen, in the form of a fluted material for the
sweat-bands of hats, the idea allegedly being derived from the crimped collars of
Elizabethan days. As a packing material it was used for the first time in America
in 1871 by Albert L. Jones to protect bottles. This was quickly followed by the
lined, or single-faced board, in 1874.
Solid fibreboard is a product of this century, being used for the first time in
1902 as sidings for wooden-framed boxes, but it was not long before containers
were being made consisting solely of solid fibreboard.
There is little doubt that some paper was made in the early days of settle-
ment of Australia by journeymen papermakers, but it was not until 1818 that
Fisher and Duncan established Australia’s first papermaking plant in Sydney, on
a site in what is now known as Bourke Street. Rags were their only raw material.
Today, of course, papermaking constitutes one of Australia’s largest industries,
and the major company—Australian Paper Manufacturers Limited —is a giant
even by world standards, with shareholders’ funds exceeding £2O million. The
company operates five mills in Victoria and New South Wales, and produces by
far the largest part of Australia’s requirements for wrapping paper and
paperboards.
A.P.M. was not founded until 1926, when several papermaking interests were
merged in Victoria and New South Wales and consequently postdates J. Fielding


According to the client's
specifications, boxes are
either plain or covered with
a printed wrapper. At left,
two women employees are
glueing gaily printed
wrappers to boxes.
In some instances, stayed
boxes are best wrapped by
machine, as in the photo
below of an Alpha
automatically fed wrapper.


& Co. Ltd., but the really rapid expansion of both papermaking and packaging
parallel one another very closely. Indeed, throughout the years, Fielding’s and
A.P.M. have worked in close collaboration to extend the use of their products.
Cellulose, the skeleton of all plant life, is the basic raw material of paper, and
its conversion into paper remains very much the same as in the days of Emperor
Ho-Ti. Within the mill the operation is a combination of two processes. The first
is the conversion of timber into woodpulp, the second the manufacture of the pulp
into paper. To produce paper required for the packaging industry, giant logs are
reduced to chips. These are cooked with water, caustic soda and sodium sulphide
in digesters, under high pressure, for three to four hours. The chips are then soft
enough to break up into pulp, and the pulp—known as chemical pulp—is blown
by pressure into large tanks.
After filtering, the pure fibres are recovered, washed and, as pulp, are fed
into the great papermaking machines. Like a brown river, the pulp is carried along
on a vibrating fine wire mesh, which drains away the water and, at the same time,
helps to criss-cross the fibres as they settle, thus forming a felt mat.
Continuing on in an unbroken sheet, the pulp web passes over cylinders that
suck out more moisture, rollers that squeeze out moisture, and then around a
succession of steam-heated cylinders that dry out what now looks like paper.
Finally the endless stream of paper —up to 180” wide—passes in and out of a stack
of polished rolls called calenders, riding one on top of the other, and these impart a
smooth finish to the surface of the product. It is then trimmed to size and wound
into large rolls or cut into sheets as required.
In making paperboard, a slightly different process is used. In this case the
pulp web is formed by pressing together a number of plies which are formed
individually by filtering the pulp suspension on wire-covered cylinders revolving
in vats. The pressing and drying of this multiple-ply sheet is similar to that of
papermaking.
Over 50 per cent, of A.P.M.’s production goes to the packaging industry—
to companies like Fielding’s—for conversion into boxes and shipping containers.
Fielding’s has always been by far the largest company operating in this field, and
last year turned out 7,418 miles of corrugated and solid fibre of varying widths,
apart from countless hundreds of thousands of set-up boxes and cartons. It was
also the first company in Australia to use in excess of 10,000 tons of locally made
paper a year for corrugated and solid fibre containers.
When James Fielding founded the firm in 1905, the number of products
packaged in cardboard were very few, but today almost every conceivable item of
commerce is either packed in cartons, cardboard boxes, corrugated or solid fibre
containers, or some phase of operations in conjunction with the product is
dependent upon such packing.


A few of the broad classes of products so packed includes motor parts, books,
boots and shoes, foods, whether canned or bottled, chemical products, cigarettes
and tobacco, clothing and dry goods, beverages, fruits, both dried and fresh,
glassware, hardware, matches, radios, soaps and cleansers, toys and sporting goods.
The list could be extended almost indefinitely, and to walk around Fielding’s
three plants—Buckingham Street, Chalmers Street and Kingsgrove—is to see boxes,
cartons and containers being made for all these and many more products in a
never-ending stream.
Packaging is a highly mechanised industry relying for success on efficient
production methods. Over the years J. Fielding & Co. Ltd. have constantly kept
abreast with the latest developments, and have instituted new techniques as they
have been discovered. In some instances they have contributed importantly to the
solving of problems besettting their American counterparts.
There has been a constant interchange of information between American
companies and Fielding’s and, as a result, the new Kingsgrove plant can be
regarded as amongst the most up-to-date and efficient in the world.
Production is divided into two broad divisions—boxes and cartons and
corrugated and solid fibre shipping containers. The former is located in the
Buckingham Street factory, and the latter at Kingsgrove, but all will eventually
be consolidated at Kingsgrove.
The manufacture of paperboard packages whether collapsible cartons or
non-collapsible boxes —is a step-by-step process. It all begins, of course, with the
salesmen who persuade a prospective client that his product would best be
packaged in cartons or boxes because of their protective quality, lightness,
attractive appearance and cleanliness.
The salesmen then call in the designers, who inspect the product and design a
suitable sample package, taking into account a number of factors, including the
nature of the product, its weight, marketing methods, how it is likely to be trans-
ported, and how stored by the retailer. Meanwhile the art department has been
consulted and, given the specifications, they prepare an attractive, eye-catching
design for printing direct on the carton, or on paper as a wrapper for the box, in
as many colours as the client desires. When these are complete, the client is
presented with a sample carton or box, exactly the same as it will appear eventually,
and, the order secured, production begins.
From storage comes the raw material—whether board or board and paper—
received from the mills in sheets of different size and weight, their use being
dependent on the nature of the product to be packed. The raw material, if not
of the correct size, goes to the guillotine for trimming; the art department prepares
finished drawings and the layout for the platemaker’s use and guidance; either
offset or letterpress plates are then made, depending on which printing process


Although the slotting
machine is one of the
simplest in the entire plant,
its efficient operation is
fundamental to the
manufacture of a good
quality box. In effect, the
slotter prefabricates the box.
The Bobst cutting and
creasing machine (right) is
the most modern of its kind
on the market, and Is a
recent Installation.


Sheets of different dimensions are delivered simultaneously
at right angles to each other in this running. Blanks are
printed by the two-colour Hooper printer-slotter.
Duplex rotary cut-off knives cut two different sized order
blanks at a time. Alan Burns, Kingsgrove plant
superintendent, is checking the running schedule.


J HE Langston corrugator is the heart of Fielding's Kingsgrove factory. It is 320 feet long,
extends almost the entire depth of the building, and is probably the most modern
corrugator of its kind in the world. Fielding's began making corrugated board in 1914 with a
machine that had a capacity of 30 feet of 50" board a minute. The new machine, installed
at a cost of £200,000, has a capacity ten times greater, and turns out a much wider board that
is far superior in quality. All production will be consolidated at Kingsgrove within the next five
years, the present factory being only one of further yet to be erected on the sixteen-acre site.
At the single-face station of the Langston corrugator,
operators are adjusting the pressure applied by
the rollers to bond the corrugated media to the liner.
Splicing in a new roll of liner at the double-back
glue station while the machine is still running. I
In this operation it is fabricating double-face board. T
Double-face board is here passing through the slitting
and scoring station, the trim being removed (top
left) by suction for transmission to the balers.
Cotton belts cover the hot and cold sections of the
Langston. Heat in the hot section sets the adhesive,
while the cold section cools the board for cutting.


Hyster rotating roll grab truck transfers rolls of paper, weighing
up to three tons, from storage to the combining machines.
is going to be used. If letterpress, then the composing room prepares formes,
thus combining the work of the artists, platemakers and typesetters. If it is to be
offset, then the platemakers take the place of the composing room.
Now the paperboard and paper is brought forward from the guillotine or
from store; the formes or offset plates are made ready on whatever machine is being
used to print the carton or the wrapper for the box.
With cartons, when the printing run is complete, the paperboard sheets are
cut and creased to form the shape that the carton will eventually take. After
cutting and creasing, the stacks of sheets are sent to the stripper, who, with a
specially designed hammer, knocks away those parts of the sheets not required in
the finished carton. This is the only completely manual operation in the entire
carton-making process. The waste is sent to the baler for return to the paper
mills for re-pulping.


The original sheets of paperboard now form a flat, printed carton. It has four
sides, and two ends composed of either single or double flaps. All that remains is
closure of what is called "the manufacturer’s joint” by an automatic glueing
process. Once closed, the cartons are wrapped flat for ease of despatch to the
client, and it is he who forms them into their final shape by opening them out,
inserting his product, and sealing the end flaps.
If a box has been ordered, the processes involved are slightly different, but
embody the same principles. While the wrapper is being designed and printed,
sheets of paperboard are fed through slotting and bending machines to shape the
box. It is then either taped or stitched with wire to complete the corners.
Depending on its nature, it goes then either to the automatic wrapping machine
or to the hand-glueing table which, with boxes, is the only completely manual
operation. Once wrapped, the boxes are ready for despatch to the customer.
The shipping container division of J. Fielding & Co. Ltd., now located at the
new £600,000 Kingsgrove project, is divided into two sections —that turning out
corrugated fibreboard, either in the roll or sheets to suit customers’ requirements,
or in sheets for the subsequent manufacture of corrugated containers; and the
solid fibreboard section, which, in turn, makes either sheets to suit customer
requirements or sheets for fabrication into solid fibre containers.
Corrugated board can be either single face, double face, or double wall.
Single face is a combination of corrugated paper with a liner which prevents the
arches from flattening out. It forms a flexible material which can be used for
wrapping or cushioning objects which vary in shape. Double face is when the
corrugated paper is sandwiched between two liners. It couples great stiffness and
rigidity with high cushioning power. It his surprising strength, and can withstand
quite high pressures. With double wall, as its name implies, there are three sheets
of linerboard combining with two of corrugating media to form a board with a
central liner. Double wall serves to make containers of the heavy duty type.
The corrugating machine at Kingsgrove is a Langston, capable of turning out
600 feet a minute of corrugated board up to 96 inches wide. It is 320 feet long and,
extending, as it does, almost the full depth of the factory, looks something like a
combined printing press and papermaking machine.
In fact, it is really a series of machines in tandem, synchronously operated.
It consists of roll stands, preheaters, single facer or single facers, a glue machine,
bridge, hot and cold section, triplex slitting and scoring section, cut-off knives,
and a delivery mechanism.
Rolls of corrugating paper and linerboard, up to three tons in weight, are
taken from storage by a special, rotating roll grab truck and delivered to their
position alongside the machine. A roller conveyor system set in the floor makes it


&
am-
THE SOLID FIBREBOARD PLANT, INSTALLED AT CHALMERS STREET IN 1924,
HAS BEEN MODERNISED AND BUILT INTO THE KINGSGROVE FACTORY
36


Solid fibreboard is the latest of manufacturing techniques to be
developed by the paperboard industry. Fielding's introduced


a simple matter for operators to push the rolls to the roll stands, where the machine
lifts them up and places them in position.
In making double-face board that most in common use amongst the
corrugated fibreboards a roll of liner is first fed into the machine, the corruga-
tions are then formed in paper fed from a second roll, starch adhesive is applied
to the tips of the arches, and the single-face board is conveyed along a bridge to
the double back glue station, where the second liner is attached. The combined
material then passes over a series of hot chests, covered with moving cotton belts,
which set the adhesive. Another series of rolls, called the cold section, cool down
and temper the board before it reaches the slitting and scoring station. From there
it passes to the cutting knives, which can deliver order size sheets of two different
sizes in the one action. The board is then taken into storage.
Solid fibreboard differs from corrugated board only in that the space between
the two liners is filled with laminated layers of chipboard known as filler chip.
It is therefore a solid piece of board, with all the advantages that this implies. It is
tougher and more puncture-resistant than corrugated, and it is especially useful
for packaging of heavy articles.
Solid fibreboard boxes are fabricated
by the Thrissell boxmaker (above),
which prints in two colours and bends
and slots the solid fibre blank.
The fabricated boxes are then stitched
either by the semi-automatic Bostich
machines (below) or by the automatic
Bowie Bosticher.
38


The two-colour Hooper (above)
prints and slots corrugated
blanks in one action.
After printing, "the
manufacturer's joint" is closed
in this case by a bank of Universal
semi-automatic tapers at Kingsgrove.
39


nr i'Uk'R! <i.\ m> COMINt- \ • Ki V->M<ov i
The "manufacturer's joint" in corrugated containers
may also be closed by an
S & S folder-squarer-taper at speeds
of up to 150 a minute.
Thirty-five different machines are installed
in the Kingsgrove factory.
40


J* .
I X
The old and the new in baling
methods. In the photo (left) taken
in the Buckingham Street factory,
the hand baler installed many
years ago is still in use, but it is
labour-wasting and tedious
compared with the automatic
baler installed at Kingsgrove for
the compression of waste for
return to the paper mill for
re-pulping. At Kingsgrove the
scrap is sucked into tubes from
five different points, and is carried
along the ceiling to a pit 12 feet
deep. When full, the scrap is
compressed into a bale six feet
long and three feet deep,
weighing about three-quarters of
a ton.
41


f "
X
Cartons, wrapped flat, being loaded
into Fielding trucks at Buckingham
Street, and (below) the loading dock
at Kingsgrove.


Fielding's formed a Research
Group in 1947, with the express
Infenfion of assisting In the
day-to-day problems confronting
management, and particularly to
encourage suggestions and
ideas from employees to improve
production methods and effect
economies. The group meets
monthly, and at the present time
comprises thirty-five members,
including department managers,
sales staff, foremen, and other
executives. Top management
personnel are ex-officio members.
Time-study methods are employed at
Fielding's to Improve production methods.
The machine being studied is a cutting
and creasing machine. Bob Pratt, foreman
of the cutting and creasing department,
is second from the left.
One of the best-selling features of
cartons, boxes and containers
Is their attractiveness, and
Fielding's maintains a large art
staff for their design.


Production of solid fibre is performed on a machine known as a paster. Two
liners, together with the desired number of filler chip layers, depending on the
thickness and strength specified for the finished board, are laminated with starch
adhesive, and the finished web is cut into blanks of the desired size. As with the
corrugated blanks, these are either delivered to the customer or taken into storage
to await further processing.
Well over a dozen different types of shipping containers can be made from
corrugated and solid fibreboard, but the most common are the slotted styles,
made up of regular, special and half-slotted containers.
Meanwhile, of course, as with cartons and boxes, the designers and the artists
have been at work. But instead of preparing formes or offset plates for the printing
process, rubber dies are made for printing corrugated containers, and metal stereos
for solid fibre containers. Rubber is used so as not to impair the board by having
to apply heavy printing pressure.
The corrugated blanks are fed into a Hooper printer-slotter, which can print
the container in two colours at once, and also prefabricate the box by inserting
the necessary slots. Depending upon the order, the printed blanks are then sent to
either the automatic taping section or to the stitching machines. These close "the
manufacturer’s joint,” and the container, with its single or double flap ends, is
ready for despatch from the loading bay.
Much the same process is followed with solid fibre blanks. They are taken to
a Thrissell two-colour printer-bender-slottcr. From there they go to the folder-
stitchers for closure of the joint.
Kingsgrove is now fully operating, and contains a vast array of machinery
all designed to manufacture the highest quality containers at the fastest rate and
the lowest price.
In all, the installation comprises thirty-five machines, ranging from the giant
corrugator, the paster, a bank of five printer-slotters and printer-slotter-creasers,
three taping and three stitching machines, separate slitter, bender and slotter
machines to cutting and creasing presses, tube taping and chopping machine, a
starch adhesive unit, and a waste-paper baler fed by vacuum from all points in the
factory where trims are taken off.
This great, highly mechanised factory would be almost unrecognisable to
the handful of men and women who commenced the great adventure with the late
James Fielding. Its completion rounds off the first fifty years of the Fielding story,
and at the same time ushers in the next half-century. It is a monument not only
to those who pioneered the industry, but also to those who, throughout the years,
have helped J. Fielding & Co. Ltd. maintain its position as Australia’s leading
manufacturer of cardboard boxes, cartons, and shipping containers.


JL FlllilllI»IIE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
L. T. Fielding, Chairman
L. M. Triggs
R. Burns
J. V. Ratcliffe, F.C.A. (Aust.)
J. J. Mcllwaine
EXECUTIVE STAFF
General Manager: R. Burns
Secretary: N. A. Lees, B.Ec. (Syd.)
Accountant: W. Mitchell
Production Manager: J. J. Mcllwaine
Manager Printing and Box Division: J. Z. Padman
Manager Corrugated and Solid Fibre Division: W. M. Grant
Sales Manager: A. B. Shaw
Chief Engineer: T. L. Evans
PHOTOGRAPHY BY DOUGLASS BAGLIN
PHOTO ENGRAVINGS BY
HARTLAND & HYDE PTY LTD
PHOTO LITHOGRAPHIC & ENGRAVING CO PTY LTD
ALFRED JOHNS PTY LTD
BLOCKMAKERS


wid* roll* available
for all building; and
farm uses 3'to 8"


T/Wzr
f r/r
3 1508 01880066 9


