

i ' " |
ISfta
I I I tm !
E.i.".r. ■
Iwiwiilu J ,u,
S r ' sas3, * > j
4JI
Bm mjgMitdw ||
B wLJmmmstmy- pf
7
Landed in Botany
BAY
• .fw JHL JSL
MY dear girl I am 2 a rule# in Botany Bay,
Ncv-er more to tiiy arms to return,
Tho' I like a negrado labour all day,
Tis for thee 1 am mostly concerji'd.
My spirits are drooping my giving place,
To those troubles which <fer whelm my breast,
And conceited 1 see there U death in thy face,
And fears ey-Vy word which, thon say'.sL.
i think of rny roily and then heave a sigh.
Drop a tear and cry newer more
The pain had b<-»en levs it condemned for to die,
Than banish'd ftuix* her i adore,
These lines are defac'd by the water that hill,
My tears intermingle my ink,.
i could not prevail on my tottering quiil*
J. found all my faculties- sink.
vy hen J foloed th 2 letter and came to the seal,
I reudv'd as a present from thee.
poet could paint what my heart it ih.ea.feKj
Kor writhe-ail the troubles 1 teel.
1 think of my Polly, &e.
The ships they set sail left ns on that spoi,
Where most had to finish their lives,
Bach one was bitterly bemoaning his lol*
Bid adieu to their sweetihearts and wives,
As for me when 1 heard! ail their; different cries^
1 pray'd to the thunder above,
To send down a ball on imy head for to By,
And by compassion to pirove.
Thatl nevermore rnigldtheave a sigh,
Dropt a tear and cry'd naever more,
The pain had been less iif condemn*d fo* to di%-.
Than banislvd frgru her I adore.
THE
Country Lass.
j ama brisk and bonny las#, who's free from cafe & strife, 1
Ul- And sweeply do my hours pa*s, I Jove a country life:
At wake or lair 1 oft am thtre, wbere pleasure's to be seen,
Ino poor 1 am contested, and happy as a cjueen,"
I rise in the morning, my labour to pursue,
And with my yoke and milk-pail I tread the morhin» dew °
My cow I milk, and there I tasce the sweets that yield, ?
The lark it soars to wrlcome me into the flow 'ry field.
And when the meadows they're mown a part t then must take s
And with the othe? village maidens 1 go the hay to make :
Where friendship, love and harmony, amongst us there is seen,
swains invite the village maids to dance upon the green.
Then in the time of harvest how cheerfully tve go,
Some with their hooks & sickles Sz some with scythes to mow.
And when the corn is safe from harm we have not far to roam,
But like all await to celebrate and welcome harvest home, *
In winter the cattle are fodder'd with straw,
The cock does, crow to wake me my icy cieam to
Tho' western winds may whistle and northern winds do blow,
Tis health and sweet contentment the country lass doth know*
So in winter or in summer we are never taiight to grieve,
In tim o eed each oh t their neighbour does relieve 5
So still 1 th nk a country I re all others doss Surpass,
I sit me down comsAted®—a happy country lass,
Printed ami Sold by J Pittr, J4. CJrral St.
And rew Street, Seven Dialr,
(Hurd, Printer, Shaftesbury, Dorset.)
