

in excess of his means, his ‘credit ’ may be 100,000/. on the Exchange, but
the holders of the bills will not look at him in that light, or his banker
either. To them this man is a merchant, whose capital represents xo per
cent, margin on his risks. That 10 per cent, margin is the real measure
of his ‘ credit,’ and also of his ‘ wealth.’ All beyond that is dependent on
the goods his bills are drawn against. If he makes a profit on his venture
his ‘credit’ increases, if a loss it decreases. It would not be difficult to
give any number of instances of this kind to illustrate the fallacy of treat-
ing the thing itself, and a suspended or floating right to its possession, as
both at the same time and in equal degree ‘ wealth,’ but enough has been
said to indicate the opinion we hold, which is that Mr. Macleod’s ‘ theory
of credit ’is most fallacious and dangerous. But in other respects the book
is delightful reading, and full of excellent discourse as well as of a charming
erudition.
The Story of the Liberator Crash , with some Account of the Life and
Character of Jabez Spencer Balfour. ‘Westminster Gazette Popular,’
No. 5. Price 6d.
Everybody should read this valuable little book. The author knows
his facts, and has taken great pains to set forth a most repulsive and
abominable story of crime, in language the simplest can understand.
Balfour played the confidence trick on a large scale to the ruin of thousands
of his countrymen, and almost rose to the dignity of a master illusionist
of the City, as well as to the honour of ‘ office ’in Parliament. His
history shows what oleaginous impudence can do, and also how easy it is
for a base, filthy scoundrel to be a shining light among the sects. There
are many morals to this story in short, and we hope the public will read
and profit by it. Mr. Carruthers Gould’s picture of the creature is itself
worth more than the price asked for the whole book, and the book is good
all through, though more moderate in language now and then than we should
have made it. And yet was there no redeeming feature about Jabez ? Is
it not true that he refused the baronetcy tendered to him by Mr. Gladstone
as a solatium for his exclusion from the present administration ? Where
among all our brood of City acolytes and high priests in the Temple of
Mammon can we find another man with a soul above the seduction of a
* title ’ ?
The Year-Book of Australia for 1893. Twelfth issue, London
E. &A. Petherick & Co. Price ioj. 6d.
This is a most useful handbook, crowded with facts, with statistics, and
with all kinds of official information. It has also some very fair maps. A
good deal of the padding, however, is of the kind adapted to infant
minds, as, for instance, on page 258, speaking of the railways of New South
Wales, the compiler sets out the view that ‘ the railways are of great
value in facilitating the movements of the people, in saving the time of
business men, in allowing the country people to come to the metropolis,
and .in enabling the city residents to take advantage of the mountain
scenery and the change of climate afforded by a trip to the highlands.’
The Australians may want this kind of ‘ information,’ but we can assure the
editor of this ‘ European and American ’ edition now in our hands that it
126
£be Silvesters' IReview


is not necessary to us. In short, the facts crowded into the book are too
often in this way buried in the chopped straw and chaff of penny-a-liners’
literature, so that the book would have been more valuable for reference if
it had been less than half its present size.
American Railroads and British Investors. By S, F. Van Oss.
London : Effingham Wilson & Co. Price 3.?. 6d. net.
In this little work Mr. Van Oss gives to the English investor the cream,
as it were, of his larger book on ‘American Railroads as Investments.’ It
will be found interesting and suggestive reading, and a good deal of matter
is comparatively new. Some of it has been reprinted from our own columns,
and other portions have been condensed from the larger work. As we
said, in speaking of that work, Mr. Van Oss is inclined to take in some
respects too sanguine a view of the future of American Railroads, but he is
not blindly sanguine by any means ; and the principal value of the chap-
ters here collected lies, to our mind, in the care with which he sets forth the
defects, mistakes, and, we might call it, indiscretions of American Railroad
management. We are not sure that we can follow him altogether in his
reasoning upon the vexed question of ‘ betterments,’ whether they should
be charged to revenue or to capital; but of one thing we are certain —
American Railroad managers will not retain the confidence of investors
here unless they can make up their minds to adopt a fixed policy one way
or another. And we sincerely hope that they will never follow our English
example to the extent of placing not merely the cost of extensions and
permanent improvements to capital account, but that of temporary
improvements as well.
Mr. Van Oss is quite right in looking upon our British habit as a
dangerous one. To the practical investor, the most interesting portion of
the little book will be Chapter VI., entitled ‘ Securities and their Returns.’
We have only one remark to make about it. The bonded debt of the
United States Railways, Mr. Van Oss says, amounts to 1,100,000,000/.
sterling, and he adds : ‘ this contains very little water.’ This seems to us too
sweeping a statement. It would not be difficult to compile a long list of
American Railway Bonds which have been issued at more or less heavy
discounts. So far as these discounts have not been written off out of
revenue—and in very few instances have they been —they are merely ‘ water.’
Nothing is more difficult now than to arrive at the net cash cost of
any American Railroad, but we should be disposed to knock off a good 20
per cent, from the total above given to arrive at the true amount of money
sunk in these properties. This is only a criticism in detail. The book, on
the whole, may be commended to the attention of our readers.
The Journal of Political Economy , published by the University Press of
Chicago (D. C. Heath & Co.) quarterly, price 75c., or $3 per annum.
This is a praiseworthy publication were it for nothing else than the
attempt made, and on the whole successfully made, to give it a cosmopolitan
character. For example, in the last two numbers which have reached us,
those for September and December 1893, we find articles on ‘Scotch
Banking ’ by Mr. J. Shield Nicholson, the ‘ Economic Condition of Spain
in the Sixteenth Century ’ by Bernard Moses, the * Italian Banking Crisis’ by
127
NOTICES OF BOOKS
