

THE
SYDNEY
TRAMWAYS
1906
POCKET GUIDE
ISSUED BY
NEW SOUTH WALES RAILWAY
COMMISSIONERS


INDEX.
Localities Served by Tramways— page
Abbotsford... ... ... ... ... 12
Alexandria... ... ... ... ... 2
Ashfield, Burwood, Mortlake ... 19
Balmain ... ... ... ... ... 11
Baulkham Hills (Parramatta... ... 20
Bondi ... ... ... ... ... 4
Botany ... ... ... ... ... 2
Circular Quay ... ... 1
Cleveland Street... ... ... ... 8
Googee 6
Cook’s River ... ... ... .. 14
Crown Street ... ... ... ... 4
Drummoyne ... ... ... ... 12
Dulwich Hill ... ... ... ... 13
Glebe Point .*.. 10
Gore Hill (North Sydney) ... ... 15
La Perouse ... ... ... ... 7
Leichhardt... ... ... ... ... 13
Manly, Curl Curl ... 21
Milson’s Point (North Sydney) ... 15
Miller’s Point ... ... ... ... 15
Mosman Bay ... .. ... ... 16
Neutral Bay 17
Pyrmont ... ... ... ... ... 9
Railway Station ... ... ... ... 8
Sans Souei, Sandringham ... ... 18
Spit (The) ... ... ... ... ... 18
Watson’s Bay 3
Waverley ... ... ... ... ... 5
Waverley—Randwiek ... ... ... 5
Willoughby (North Sydney) ... ... 16
Zetland ... ... ■ . . ... ... 2


CIRCULAR QUAY.
\\/7 ITH tlie exce P tion of the Ocean-street
W/ —Watson’s Bay line, all the direct City
VV Tramways converge upon Circular Quay.
It is a most suitable terminus, as on the
water side it is also the terminus of the
ferry boats. The principal oversea ocean liners
also berth here, and the Customs House, many
wool stores, and the offices of the Harbour
Trust are close by.
Cars are leaving- and arriving- every few
seconds —1450 trams arrive and depart in xo
hours between 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. Almost any
point in the City or Suburbs may be reached,
the routes varying- from 3 to 11 miles in length.
The best and most economical way of seeing
the picturesque views, its business and resi-
dential centres, and other points of interest
about Sydney is to journey by the different tram
routes to the various outlying termini ; the cost
is trifling, the time required for most of the
trips is comparatively short, and they can be
accomplished in a day. The routes, briefly de-
scribed, are as follow :


ALEXANDRIA
IS a manufacturing suburb with extensive
brickworks and factories. The route is via
Elizabeth Street, past Sydney Station,
through Redfern, and diverges from the Water-
loo-Botany line at Raglan Street, terminating
near the St. Peters Railway Station on the
Cook’s River line, with which it connects. Fare
2nd. Time of single journey, 33 minutes.
ZETLAND.
A short line running along Elizabeth Street,
and parallel with the Botany tramway, and
passing through Strawberry Hills and the
municipality of Waterloo. A number of indus-
tries are carried on in the vicinity. Time of
journey, 24 minutes; interval, 10 minutes.
Fare, 2d.
BOTANY.
CAPTAIN COOK’S LANDING PLACE
Botany Bay is one of the most
historic places in Australia,
and the scene of Captain
Cook’s landing when he dis-
covered the continent. The
tram runs via Elizabeth
|HR ' Street from Circular Quay
along the eastern side of
the City. Passing the
handsome new Railway Sta-
tion, through Redfern and Waterloo, reaching
the shores of Botany Bay, 8 miles from Circu-
lar Quay.
The branch line to La Perouse turns away
from the sea, and runs along unfrequented
roads past the Botany Cemetery, where stand
the monuments removed from the old Devon-
shire Street Cemetery, now part of the Central
Railway Station site. Some fine stretches of
open country with the background of the sea
are traversed until La Perouse is reached.


BOTANY PIER
The return journey may be made via Long
Bay and Kensington. Time of journey, 70
minutes. Fare, 6d.
ATS ON’S BAY.
ROSE BAY
At South Head its
higher lighthouse caps
the towering cliffs, and
is a great attraction to
visitors. The tram
runs along King Street
and William Street,
and skirts Rushcutters, Double and Rose Bays
before climbing - the heights to reach its termin-
ating point near the Gap above Watson’s Bay.
The trip affords a succession of magnificent
harbour and ocean views, and no visitor to Syd-
ney should miss the trip to South Head.
Return may be made via steamer. Time
of journey, 46 minutes. Fare, 6d.
HORNBY LIGHT HOUSE, SOUTH HEAD


BONDI
WATSON'S BAY
IS noted for its
noble stretch of
sandy beach.
Band concerts are
given at intervals
in the summer
season. Municipal
baths and facilities
for surf bathing are
provided. The route is via Elizabeth Street
and Oxford Street, past Darlinghurst Court-
house, Paddington Barracks, Centennial
Park, near the Ocean Street gate of which
stands an marking the site where
Lord Hopetoun signed the Federal Constitution,
through busy Bondi Junction, then on the des-
cent to Bondi Beach some lovely glimpses of
the ocean are obtained. Time of journey, 42
minutes. Fare, 3d.
BONDI BEACH
CROWN STREET.
A short line connecting Oxford and Cleve-
land Streets is reached via Pitt
Street. Crown Street occupies a ridge
overlooking the city. En route is situated a
large water reservoir and pumping station, and
a fine public school. Time of journey, xg
minutes ; Fare 2d.


WAVERLEY
T s one of the most popular of the Eastern sea-
-1 side suburbs, and is reached by cars which
follow the same route as those to Bondi as
far as Bondi Junction, thence turning to the
right. At the terminus is the beautifully-situ-
ated cemetery, on the shores of the ocean. The
cemetery contains monuments to many of the
State’s most illustrious dead, and holds numer-
ous fine examples of the mason’s art. Bronte
Beach is close to the terminus. Time of jour-
ney, 39 minutes. Fare, 3d.
BRONTE
WAVER LEY — RANDWICK.
This is a short connecting line running be-
tween Waverley Junction and Randwick,
and is used from Bondi and Waverley as
a “short cut” to Coogee. The line winds
among well cared for villas, and joins the Coo-
gee line in Randwick. On Sundays the jour-
ney is extended to Coogee Bay. Time of jour-
ney, ii minutes. Fare, id. to Randwick; to
Coogee, 2d.


COOGEE.
COOGEE
Coogee Bav is one of the most charming and
popular seaside resorts and has a fine beach
and swimming basin. Along the route are
to be found the home of many forms of athletics,
the Sydney Cricket Ground, the scene of many
a hard-fought battle with bat, football, cycle,
and racquet. The Agricultural Society's
grounds, whose fine Easter Show draws visitors
from all Australasia; the attractive gardens of
the Zoological Society, and the Randwick race-
course, the rendezvous of many brilliant gather-
ings.
Cars are taken in Elizabeth Street, and carry
one via Oxford Street through Moore Park and
the borders of Centennial Park, near the tram-
way workshops, and along Randwick’s pretty
villa-capped ridge, until the vast expanse of
blue ocean spreads beneath. Time of journey.
40 minutes. Fare, 3d.
CENTENNIAL PARK


LA PEROUSE.
Named after the French navigator, who vis-
ited Botany Bay in 1788, a few years
after Captain Cook. La Perouse’s subse-
quent movements are shrouded in mystery, but
a monument to his memory, erected by the
French Government, stands on the headland,
and near by is the grave of his chaplain, Pere
Receveur. Across the Bay, at Kurnel, is Cook’s
landing-place, the spot which, in 1770, saw the
hoisting- of the British flag- upon this continent,
and where stands the monument to the intrepid
discoverer. Here is to be seen the first known
white man’s grave in Australia —that of Suther-
land, one of Cook’s seamen, who died in 1770.
At La Perouse is the cable station connecting
with New Zealand and the “All Red” route.
The direct route, a most popular one, to these
historic spots follows the track of the Coogee
tram until it passes the Zoo., then through Ken-
sington, and past Kensington racecourse. A
branch turns off to the rifle range where the
New South Wales Rifle Association hold their
big annual meetings; thence through open
country to Long Bay, a resort fast coming into
prominence; the Female Penitentiary is passed,
and then the entrance gate of the Coast Hos-
pital, and presently La Perouse. Time of jour-
ney, 56 minutes. Fare, 6d.
LONG BAY


CLEVELAND STREET.
This line runs through Strawberry Hills, and
terminates at the side of the Zoological
Gardens in Moore Park, within a stone’s
throw of the Agricultural Cricket Ground and
Centennial Park, and is the direct route be-
tween the railway and these points, and also
the Randwick racecourse. Cars run from the
corner of Belmore Road and Elizabeth Street,
along Castlereagh Street, Redfern, and Cleve-
land Street. Time of journey, 10 minutes.
Fare, id.
RAILWAY.
SYDNEY RAILWAY STATION
I T is 50 years since the old station, now soon
1 to be superseded by the massive and spac-
ious Central Railway Station, was first open-
ed. In the new station every convenience for
travellers will be found, and altogether it
will be the most commodious and imposing
railway centre south of the line. From the
city proper the station is reached via George,
Pitt, or Flizabeth Streets, the Pitt Street service
running direct into the station, passing many
of the city’s finest business houses, the office of
the Insurance Societies, the Royal Exchange,
the General Post Office, and some of the prin-
cipal theatres. Time of journey, 13 minutes
Fare, id.


PYRMONT.
POWER HOUSE
PYRMONT cars turn from George
Street, a little beyond the Railway
Station, into Harris Street, the
* abiding-place of the Technical
College and Museum. Further
BBraKliS on is the Ultimo Tramway
Power House, with-its three
huge chimneys giving a fine
example of almost smokeless
firing. Huge dynamos, totalling
7900 Kilowatts, driven by steam engines whose
united efforts would equal that of 13,500 horses,
are installed, and also that remarkable develop-
ment of modern engineering, a steam turbine
of 1750 K.W. capacity. This plant supplies
TECHNOLOGICAL MUSEUM AND COLLEGE
electricity for the whole of the electric tram
ways, a number of sewage pumps, two swing
bridges, railway workshop machinery, wheat
conveyers and a host of lamps. About 200 tons
of coal are used per day, and all handling and
firing are done by machinery. A large car
depot adjoins the Power House.
Beyond the extensive Darling Harbour goods
yards are skirted, and after passing close by
the City Council’s electric lighting station and
the Meat Freezing Works and Pyrmont Bridge
Road, the run terminates within easy reach of
the Darling Island wheat shipping wharves,
and the extensive works of the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company. Distance, 3 miles. Time
of journey, 27 minutes. Fare, 2d.


GLEBE POINT.
QUEEN VICTORIA MARKETS
Glebe Point has for many
years been a favourite
k. suburb, and along the
shores of the Point are
■L many elegant homes,
and across the narrow
Bay, spanned by an
electrically - ope rated
s swing bridge, is situated
the mart for Sydney’s meat supply—the Glebe
Island Abattoirs. Proceeding via George Street
a constant succession of palatial banks, insur-
ance offices-, the General Post Office with its
graceful tower
in order the
Markets, then
Hall buildings
Municipal
which, until
is passed, and following
stately Queen Victoria
the magnificent T own
containing a splendid
Hall, the grand organ in
recently without a rival.
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY
Adjoining the Town Hall, the architecture of
St. Andrew's Cathedral affords a pleasant con-
trast to the home of the city fathers. On this
route the largest retail emporiums in Australia
are passed.
Railway Square presents an ever-changing
picture during the busy morning and evening
hours. Passing on through George Street West
to the right brings the line into Glebe Road,
with its short steep hills, until it terminates


within sight of the upper harbour waters. Time
of journey, 28 minutes. Fare, 2d.
BALMAIN
IS THE home of the shipbuilding industry, and
forms the western shore of Darling Harbour.
The tramway route is via George Street,
branching to the right opposite the University.
Passing through Forest Lodge, a rapid descent
is made to near sea-level, then by a long cir-
cuitous climb to the populous ridge above.
BALMAIN, FROM DRUMMOYNE - LONG
COVE BRIDGE
Balmain boasts some fine public buildings.
It is noteworthy, also, as being the location of
the deepest coal shaft in the Southern world —
3000 ft. The mine is in course of development,
and when opened out will allow of the mineral
being shipped direct into vessels from the pit’s
mouth. The tram line terminates at Darling
Street Ferry Wharf, the last quarter of a mile
being on a falling grade of 1 in B£, the cars
being retarded in their descent by a counter-
weighted dummy connected to an underground
cable. Charming glimpses of the city and
river are seen from the heights. The city
wharf of the ferry is at Erskine Street, Darling
Harbour, connecting with the King Street tram.
Time of round journey, about 1 hour. Fare,
tram 4d. ; interval 6 minutes; ferry, id.


ABBOTSFORD.
BIiOTSFORD, a pretty suburb, is reached via
the George Street route, passing the
G.P.O. and leading public buildings, the
Railway Station, and Sydney University
with its spacious grounds, the suburbs
of Camperdown, Annandale, and busy
Leichhardt, and along country roads
to the ferry w ? harf on the Parramatta
River, close to the finish of the cham-
pionship sculling course marked by the monu-
ment to the youthful champion, Searle. h are,
sd. ; time of journey, 59 minutes. The return
trip may be made by steamer down the Parra-
matta River to the “Quay,” and will give a
good idea of Sydney’s “fairyland of waters.”
DRUMMOYNE.
PARRMATTA RIVER AT
DRUMMOYNE
S* \ RUMMOYNE is a pic-
Jp turesque suburb
/ which has made
rapid strides since
the tram w ? as open,
ed in 1902. The
route is via
George Street, and
follows the Balmain line to Rozelle Junc-
tion. Descending rapidly, the line crosses the
Iron Cove Bridge, 380yds long, passing the mun-
icipal baths, and through the village of Drum-
moyne, following the winding main road from
which many pretty views are obtained, and ter-
minates at the Parramatta River bridge, whence
a 'bus runs through the charming fruitgrowing
Ryde district. Time of journey, 51 minutes.
Fare, 4d.


LEICHHARDT.
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
THE suburb which bears the name of the re-
nowned explorer boasts of busy thorough-
fares, a fine Town Hall, and other public
buildings. Near the tram, terminus is Leich-
hardt Park, on the shores of Long Cove, whence
a pleasant trip by steamer lands the visitor at
the Erskine Street terminus of the King Street
tram. The route is via George Street, passing
the Railway Station, George Street West, and
the University, through Annandale to Leich-
hardt terminus. The Abbotsford line branches
off at Marion Street. Time of journey, 41 min-
utes. Fare, 3d.
DULWICH HILL.
The journey to this pleasant residential sub-
urb presents considerable variety, passing
as one does through George Street, with
its rushing cars and hurrying crowds, near the
ROYAL PRINCE ALFRED HOSPITAL


Railway Station, the massive buildings of the
University standing in their extensive grounds,
on the opposite side of which are the Prince
Alfred Hospital and the Theological Colleges.
King Street, Newtown, is one of our busiest
suburban thoroughfares, and Newtown Bridge,
where are situated the railway station and tram-
way depot. After passing through Enmore the
country becomes more open, and the cars run
along pretty villa-lined roads to the terminus at
Canterbury Road. Time of journey, 49 minutes.
Fare, 3d.
ST. ANDREW'S COLLEGE
COOK’S RIVER.
This is a small stream, historic from its
name, which empties itself into Botany
Bay. At the point touched by the tram-
line a dam was constructed many years ago to
separate the salt from the fresh water. The
suburbs of St. Peters and Cook’s River are old
settled places, and have been for years the chief
brick-making- centres for the city.
The route is via Georg-c Street, and diverg-es
from the Dulwich Hill line at Newtown Bridg-c,
and follows King- Street, Newtown, to St. Peters
Railway Station, which is also the terminus of
the Alexandria route. The line now winds


along the Cook’s River Road to the terminus
at Cook’s River. Time of journey, 49 minutes.
Fare, 3d.
MILLER’S POINT.
Has many fine wharves, and is the point of
departure of the larger over-sea cargo
steamers. The route is via .George
Street and George Street North, passing the end
of Circular Quay, and skirting the wharves and
military reserve at Dawes Point to the terminus
under the shadow of Sydney Observatory.
Fare, id.
WILSON’S POINT
MILSON’S POINT & GORE HILL.
Milson’s Point belongs to the northern
side tram system, and the terminus is
opposite the Quay, across the Harbour.
A quick ferry, frequently run, gives the neces-
sary connection. Gore Hill, the outlying ter-
minus, is one of the highest points on the nor-
thern shores of Sydney Harbour, and from its
crest is seen the most enchanting panoramic
view of Sydney, the harbour and suburbs
stretching away in the distance. Seen at night,
with the brightly-lit ferry boats and the twink-
ling lights of the city in the distance, it par-
takes more of the appearance of a fairy scene.


Ihe return trip should be made via Mosman
along the northern side of Military Road to
Gore Hill. Time of journey, 30 minutes.
Fare, tram, 3d.
WILLOUGHBY
I s another North Sydney tramway route, but
1 unlike the other lines, it cannot boast of
waterside views within easy reach of the
tramway, depending for its attractiveness on its
variety of hill and dale, orchard and villa.
The route is via ferry from Circular Quay,
thence tram from Milson’s Point, passing
through Crow’s Nest and Naremburn. Aftei
crossing Flatrock Bridge, a view is obtained of
the fine -suspension bridge over the head of
Middle Harbour. Time of journey, 36 minutes.
Fare, 3d.
MOSMAN
MOSMAN'S BAY
I s SITUATED on a charming: arm of Port
1 Jackson, on the abrupt sides of which nestle
red-tiled villas in many quaint styles of ar-
chitecture. It is but a few years since the tram-
way rendered its beauties easily accessible to
city men, and the thriving- suburb of to-day is
the result. Mosman is reached by ferry from
Circular Quay, the tramway picking- the visitor
up at the head of the bay and carrying- him up


BALMORAL BEACH
the steep roads to the ridge many feet above
sea-level, t rom the heights lovely peeps of the
harbour are obtainable, and by taking the tram
at Spit junction a visit can be made to The
Spit (Middle Harbour), a spot surrounded by
scenes of romantic beauty. Returning, the cars
follow the Military Road, with lovely views on
either hand, passing St. Leonard’s Park, and
through the suburb of North Sydney to the Mil-
sons Point ferry opposite Circular Quay. Time
of journey, Mosmans to Milson’s Point, 39 min-
utes. Fare, 4d.
NEUTRAL BAY
T S occupied by the residences of well-to-do
1 citizens, and presents a series of very pleas-
ing- pictures. The route is by ferry from
Circular Quay, taking- the tram at Neutral Bay
NEUTRAL BAY


wharf. The line runs along- extremely steep
grades, past fine villas, nestling- among the
trees of their beautifully-kept g-ardens. Below
are the calm waters of the bay. Reaching- the
Military Road, a return trip may be made via
Mosman or Milson’s Point tram throug-h charm-
ing- surrounding's. Time of journey, 8 minutes.
Fare, id.
THE SPIT.
“ ' I ‘he Spit” is a long- tongme of land which
1 reaches almost across Middle Harbour
opposite Clontarf, and the vicinity
abounds in spots dear to the hearts of picnickers
A few r minutes’ tram journey from Spit Road
junction on the Mosman line down the steep
and serpentine Spit Road lands the visitor at the
steam punt which forms the connecting- link on
the road to Manly. This beauty spot is yet un-
spoiled by bricks and mortar, and furnishes
many dainty views of mirror-faced coves and
bold headlands. During- summer steamers and
coaches ply between the Spit and Manly. Bath-
ing- and boating facilities are obtainable.
Time of journey by tram, 10 minutes, and
fare id, from Spit Junction.
THE SPIT, MIDDLE HARBOUR
SANS SOUCI & SANDRINGHAM
ARE two favourite resorts at the head of Bot-
, any Bay, a steam tramway several miles in
length connecting - them with the railway at
Kog-arah Station, 7 miles from Sydney. Popu


lation is scattered along the route, and the
motor runs along for the most part through
open fields. The shallow waters of the Bay
afford safe paddling grounds for the little ones
and facilities for boating, bathing, and fishing
are at hand. Hotel accommodation is to be
found at either resort.
Trams meet trains leaving Sydney hourly.
Time of train journey, 26 minutes. Fare, 2d.
ASHFIELD & BURWOOD.
GAS WORKS, MORTALAKE
ASHFIELD and Burwood are excellent exam-
ples of railway suburbs, and are connected
by both tram and train, although not in
direct connection with the city system terminat-
ing at the Quay. This tramway commences at
Ashfield Station, 5 miles from the railway city
terminus, and runs past many pretty residences
and then through Enfield and Burwood’s main
street by the Burwood Station, then along wind-
ing suburban roads to the Parramatta River at
Mortlake, where are situated the extensive
works of the Australian Gaslight Company.
Parramatta River steamers call at this point,
and if desired a return journey to town may be
made by water.
Trams meet trains leaving Sydney at 5 and
35 minutes past the hour. Fare: Ashfield to
Enfield, 2d; Enfield to Mortlake, sd.


PARRAMATTA & BAULKHAM
HILLS.
PARRAMATTA PARK
A STEAM tramway runs from the “Historic
Town” to the orange groves and orchards
of the Baulkham Hills district. Leaving
Parramatta station, the route is through the
business part of the town, passing near Parra-
matta Park, which contains a splendid avenue
of oaks. It also boasts of a fine memorial to
soldiers of the district who died in South Africa.
Two miles out extensive woollen mills are seen,
then the orchard where oranges were first
grown. Through orchard country the line pro-
ceeds to the pretty village of Baulkham Hills.
Returning to Parramatta, the return trip to
Sydney by river steamer will be found most de-
lightful. Trams meet trains leaving Sydney at
30 minutes past the hour.
Fare, tram, 3d. Time of journey, 24 minutes.
VIEW OF BALKHAM HILLS


MANLY & CURL CURL.
Manly Beach is, perhaps, the most liberally
patronised of our watering- places. Situ-
ated between harbour and ocean, it
offers inducements to the visitor in almost any
weather. A short length of tramway worked
by horses runs from the steamer jetty through
the village to the northern end of the- ocean
beach. Fare, id. Trams meet steamer from
Circular Quay to Manly.


THE TRAMWAYS OF NEW SOUTH
WALES.
FINANCIAL RESULTS, 1904-5.
Capital ... ... ... ••• £3,6379,22
Miles open for Traffic ... ... ••• 125 f
Earnings ... ... ••• ••• £813,569
Working Expenses ... ... ••• £685,682
Net Earnings £127,877
Number of Vehicles... ... -• ••• 948
Tram Mileage ... ... ... ••• 16,413,762
Passengers carried ... ... 139,669,459






THE
Government Tourist Bureau
PHILLIP and BRIDGE STREETS,
SYDNEY,
Supplies FREE all information regarding New
South Wales
TOURIST RESORTS.
Where to Go.
How to Get There.
Where to Stay.
What it will Cost.
Guide Books, Pamphlets, Lists of Tourist Hotels
and Boarding Houses, Trout Fishing Guides, Caves
Pamphlets and Guides, Trips all round Sydney,
Local Tourist Guide Books, Handbills, Fare Lists,
&c.
YOU ARE INVITED
to call and inspect the Collection of Tourist Views
and Literature.
Sydney.
C. D. PATERSON,
Tourist Agent.


