

THE KINGDOM OF
SHYLOCK
BY FRANK ANSTEY, M.P.
The WAR LOAN and The WAR TAX
Mine Verd! Mine Verd! Much shentage on me
vestments and no Vor Tax on. mein income.
Labor Call Print , Melh
PRICE 2D.


Banks and Bankers.
Whether a; new industrial concern shall be estab-
lished or an old. on© enlarged—whether a universal pro-
vider shall receive an increase of capital in order to
extend business —all this is now decided In the private
offices of banks or bankers. All undertakings In the
field of industry are now dependent upon the consent
of the hanker* .■;
The Stock Exchange activities of the, banks are be-
coming more and more the controlling force in every
department of economic life.
Modern Capitalism is the child of money lending.
Money lending contains the root idea of Capitalism.
In money lending there is no thought of production.
In money lending economic activity has no meaning.
In money lending the possibility is for the first time
illustrated that you can earn without sweating—that
you may get others to work for you without recourse
to force.
—{Werner Somhart in “ The Jetvs and Modem
Capitalism” )


THE KINGDOM OF SHYLOGK.
BY FRANK ANSTEY, M.P.
“Love of Country.”
Romford, Essex,
May 30, 1915.
I look out over this beautiful,
delightful country, and I wonder
if it is really true that there is so
much bloodshed and horror in the
■ world. ■ Yet, last night by .my
window went the wounded west-
' ward, and this day, as for -months
past, go brave men eastward to
the slaughter, and the Jews are
making much money.
(Mother in England to her soni Australiaj
Where is the Englishman who does not
love the land of his nativity? Where is
the one . who, in, the hour of struggle,
does not forget all that is bestial in her
cities - and remember only-'all that is
beautiful in the things left undefiled?
Hills and dales, rolling downs and val-
leys, woodlands and meadowlands,
brooks and streams that yet flow un-
tainted to the sea, daisies and primroses
wild growing: in the untilled pastures,
blackbirds and thrushes, finches and
linnets warbling in the hedges, the lark
up yonder in the. sky—these pictures-
pass before . the Men of . England, “heirs
of glory,” wherever in the wide world
■they be, even as visions unfold in the
passing hours of slumber. To love a
country, and love it very dearly, is not
to be stone.deaf to the .loud. trump of
existing facts.
Through all the centuries long lines of
unnumbered and. .now- forgotten dead
have marched forth' from every village
along every road and bye-way to do
battle for this little sea-girt isle.
And amongst those men were Kings,
Kings in reality—not figureheads. Kings
who were English—not German. Kings
who. beckoned “Come”-—not pointed “Go.”
Kings who said, “The place in front is
mine”—not “The view from here” (a 100
miles behind) “is fine.” Kings whose
sceptre was a battle-axe —not a golf
stick. Kings whose slogan of “Follow
the King” meant follow him to the
battlefield—not to the water-bottle.
REAL PATRIOTISM.
Beside the King rode the fighting
barony of England, and behind them y@
yeomanry from Kent and Devon and the
hills of far Northumbria. There were
men, as always, too old or fat to fight,
and men, even then, whose thoughts on


money bent grave them no stomach for
ye battle. But none escaped the sacri-
fice. None were permitted, to dodge
their share of the common burden.
THOSE WHO DID NOT CONTRIBUTE
THEIR.BODIES CONTRIBUTED THEIR
MONEY. : ONE. OR THE OTHER THEY
HAD TO GIVE.; Wealth as well as
human beings were offerings upon the.
altar of country. No' Shylock could
make a profit from war—he got no in-'
terest. No trader could ■ “engross” or
corner the necessities .of life —he got the
hangman’s knot. He was regarded as
, a traitor, and'got a'traitor’s doom. And
this was the law of the land for long
centuries.
Thus it was that England for over.. a
thousand years waged war at home and
abroad—-wars of aggression and 'defence
—wars " by sea. and .■ . land-—wars on
Spanish Main and , coasts of Tartary—
wars against Armadas of old Madrid
and fleets of the bold Van Tromp—wars
In Normandy and Flanders—wars of
Roses and of Roundheads —wars inside
and outside, civil and foreign, some-
where, always —and yet she emerged from
that thousand years of bloody strife free
of debt, no harpies within her borders to
gather interest from. the blood of battle,
GIVE YOUR LIFE OR GIVE YOUR
MONEY. That was patriotism in the
lays, when patriotism meant “love of
country” and not a blood-sucking,
money-lender’s parody.
THE BLACK FLAG.
But times have changed. Dutch
finance, a Germanised throne and capi-
talised industry are the marks of the
transformation. Kings no longer go
forth to battle, and Money no longer
freely serves the Nation that protects
it. ■ Men may die, but Money makes no
sacrifice.. It looks upon bloody war as
a rich' gold mine yielding fat' dividends
for ever and ever without end. Human
bloodsuckers, who risk neither life nor
limb nor penny, wax fat on Armageddon.
They constitute the “Money Power” that
bestrides all ' Countries, and makes all
nations its slaves. It exercises political
power under, every form of government,
making the world one-wide dominion over
which its black flag flies unchallenged. -
* * ■ ■ ■ *
The “Money Power” is ■ something more
than Capitalism.. It is its- product, and
■yet its master. “Capitalism,” in its con-
trol of the great agencies of production,
te observable and understandable. . Th©'
other lurks in vaults and banking cham- ,
bers, masquerading its operations in lan-
guage that mystifies or dazzles. Indus-
trial Capitalism may roll itself up into
great monopolies in production and dis-
tribution. It cannot exist for an hour
-apart from the powers that hold the
“Monopoly of the Instruments of Ex-
change.” -< The men who to-day control
the one control the other.- In every
land the one set of men have their hands
’on both levers.... Profits are piled. up "in
bank credits, re-invested, and re-invested.
until the field of industrial activity is
exploited to its limit. . Money,, in the
language of the market, becomes “plenti-
ful” and “cheap.” In other words, the
industrial - outlets are diminishing, and
the rat© of interest, the “reward of Capi-
tal,” is falling. .It will fall to zero.
Something must be done—it is done. In-
ternational hatreds are stimulated. People
prepare for peace by grinding the axe of
bloody slaughter. Armaments are de-
manded, loans are raised, and the right
to levy perpetual tribute on the nation ■
is given in return. Even this is insuffi-
cient to mop up profits, as rapid as their
accumulations.
RISING “CENTAGE.V;
So war comes. '- Any pretext suffices;
but war must come. War swallows mil-
lions of the piled profits—interest rises.
More millions of loans—higher and yet
higher interest. Much rubbing of hands
on the Stock Exchanges—3% per cent,
yesterday,, 4% to-day, and 5% or 7 to-mor-
row. Men may rot on battlefields, but
Money gathers' an ever-increasing har-
vest of rich, ripe fruit.
Levy men? YES.
Levy money? ' NO! NO! NO! Gott
in Himmel! That ish confiscation. We
will lend it to you at much interest.
So the nation can levy men—but
not Money. Men may die—Money
lives. Men come back armless,,
legless, maimed and shattered —Money
comes back fatter than it went, loaded
with coupons, buttered with a ■ perpetual
lien upon the toil of the fathers and
mothers and sisters, and- brothers of the
men who died, that the nation might
live. Where, in the name of God, is the
“love of country” to those vampires
who, batten and grow rich on the rotting''
carcases of the' world’s humanity.


Bondlords and their Slaves.
“This war will bondsmen
of all of us, and the economic rule
of the bondlords—the greatest
oligarchy the world has wit-
nessed—will become absolute/’ —
Henry Slobodin in the “ International
Socialist .”
Great . Britain, we are told. Is now
spending on the war £5,000,000 per
day—or, over 1800 rriillions per annum.
The national debt is already quadrupled.
Taxation upon- the populace will
be correspondingly increased. The
workers will be, bondslaves to the
“Bondholders.” So will it be in Aus-
tralia. Yet the more the banks lend the
stronger grow their resources. They can
.lend ten, fifty, a ■ hundred times the
amount of gold- in their vaults, and yet
the gold remains—THE ■ ONLY LIMIT
ON “LOANS” IS THE CAPACITY OF
THE PEOPLE TO CARRY THE LOAD
OF INTEREST.
THE FAKERS* .
The , London “Economist” told its
readers that the first 12 months of the
war will cost the five great nations 3,500
-.millions. Two years will cost not less
than 7,000 millions. THIS WILL ■ IM-
POSE AN ANNUAL INTEREST
CHARGE OP OVER 300 MILLIONS
PAYABLE TO THE INTERNATIONAL
. GANG, TO WHOM WAR MEANS MIL-
LIONS OF ADDITIONAL INCOME AND
UNENDING MISERY TO MILLIONS.
Where does this-vast quantity of “bor-
rowed money”' Come from?- Where does
it go to? How comes it that,' after
thousands of millions have been poured
into- the' gutter that as much remains
in the great bs* ks as before the war?
The 350 millions loan raised by the
British Government draws back the
■ curtain - for those who have eyes to see.
Viscount -St. Aldwyn, of the London
Joint Stock Bank, told a group of- Lon-
don financiers:—
“The British Government called into
its Councils the representatives of
the great banks, of the Stock Ex-
change, of the accepting houses; and,
in fact, of all ■ interests, principally
concerned.”
And on the advice of those “principally
concerned,” the British Government float-
ed its 350 millions loan at 4% per cent.,
with the right, of lenders to convert a
corresponding amount of low-price loans
into present price.
The “Economist” of June 26, 1915,
points out that this privilege , means an
annual bonus of millions to the bond-
holders. It meant an annual increase in
the interest on converted pre-war Con-
sols, while holders of the -31/2 per cent.
War Loans will now receive interest at
the rate of £5/4/9 per cent.
The loan is to be raised in instalments .
of 50 millions.
The first instalment went out in
wages to soldiers arid makers of
requisites of war, passing- along the
channels of trade back to the banks for
the next instalment. Thus the circle
was complete. To the onlookers, there
was a never-ending procession of cash. It
is financial legerdemain. , By it nations
are deluded, - defrauded and ■'enslaved.
Thus thousands of millions are loaned,
yet as much remains in the vaults of the
great' banks as before, the ■ first penny
was floated. With " every new, war 'loan
the “rate of interest,” the rate of black-
mail, upon -the struggling nationalities,
is increased.
This financial pigeon-plucking scheme
is now worked on the Australian public.
• it Is dressed In popular garb. it has
"democratic” and other such labels
stuck upon it, but at the end the Austra-
lian toller will find himself scaled of extra


millions per annum. The bulk will be in
the pockets of the gang running the Aus-
tralian money market.
THE LAST STRAW.
If one of the combatant parties in this
great war does not speedily demonstrate
its physical superiority, the demands of
Shylock will be the decisive factor. It
will not be the nation that can borrow
the most money that will win, but the
nation ■ that can best bear up . under the
load that Shylock will impose or the
nation that finances in such a manner
as to be most free from his imposition.
The load of interest will be so great
that the annual revenue will not be equal
to the liquidation.
Every increase of taxation will tend to
stifle the industries of warring nationali-
ties. Neutral nations will be industrially
advantaged. Already the balance of trade
between the U.S.A. and Great Britain has
been reversed.
The 7 excess of U.S. exports over imports
are now measured in millions per month,
and the dailies of August 16, 1915, re-
ported that for the first time in its his-
tory New York is the world’s financ al
centre.
Britain can only prevent the flow
of gold across the Atlantic .• by
selling in New York its holding
in American securities' or by pre-
senting American financiers with in-
terest-bearing bonds, of .which the first
20 millions has already been negotiated
under the guidance of Pierpont Morgan.
His syndicate takes the interest-bearing
bonds, and squares the traders. This
operation we shall see repeated again and
again before the war is over. <c.)
This economic complication with
neutral States hastens the end.
New industries are developed out-
side the war zone. Trade finds new
channels. The financiers- of the fighting
nations find the gold base of their finan-
cial fakery drifting away. It can only
be stayed by paying interest to neutral
nationalities on adverse balances. The
profits made on war at one end are
whittled away at the other. Then comes
“stop the war” cry—not from Labor, but
from the hired press of the financiers.
Capital is said to be “exhausted.” So
obecliefit Governments get to work, terms
of peace are arranged—war is at an end.
AFTER THE WAR.
The war over, and the people under the
burden of millions of interest, , profits
flow once more into the channels of in-
dustry AT THE HIGHER RATES OF
INTEREST CREATED BY THE WAR.
OUT OF THE WAR WILE COME FOR
EVER ANNUAL DIVIDENDS IN THE
SHAPE OP INTEREST UPON THE
MONEY INVESTED IN BLOOD. FOR
THIS THE PEOPLE MUST TOIL.
Out of the war will emerge two
classes—Bondholders and slaves to the
Bondholders*
Listen to Lord Inchcape, of the
National Provincial Bank of England,
Limited:—
“The heavy taxation in which
Europe is involved to pay the in-
terest on the money already bor-
rowed, and on the hundreds of mil-
lions yet to be raised, will press
heavily on the people. THEIR
PURCHASING POWER WILL
BE REDUCED AND THE STAN-
DARD OF LIFE MUST BE
LOWERED.”
“The purchasing power of the masses
reduced?”—Yes.
“Their standard of life reduced?”—Yes.
All who come out of the war alive
must be bled dry, that interest-mongering
vampires within the' nation may extract
from the products of toil hundreds of
millions per annum, and it is for this and
for these that nations are thrown like
dogs into the pit of mutual bloody
slaughter.
The nations—British, German, French,
Russian,- Austrian, Australian —come back
from the war doomed to toil and pay
annual tribute, not to a foreign con-
queror, but to a small exclusivemoneyed
clique within the nation—the Kings of
the Kingdom of Shylock.
CONQUERORS AND CONQUERED.
These are the “conquerors”—these
“Lords of Finance.” Theirs be the “Un-
seen Empire.” Beneath their yoke must
men of all the nations tread. For them
must workers “eat so little and toil so
hard,” even as did Gurth the thrall of
Cedric the Saxon in the days that are
old. We go not forward to the higher
civilisation. We plunge backward into
the Midnight of Despair, from which only
the beacon of revolutionary action can
give us light and guidance and deliver-
ance.
Let us have equality of sacrifice. No
death or human wreckage for one and
perpetual profit for another.
Whosoever says that -Money; shall not,’
serve in this crisis unless it earns the
right of eternal tax upon the toil of .the
fathers and mothers and sisters and
brothers of those who die —that man is a
servant in the Kingdom of Shylock, the
Kingdom without a boundary, in which
gold is god—blood his glory—nations his
victims, and governments under every
name but instruments to his will.


Advice from the Vultures.
We grope for the wall, like the blind
And we grope as if we had n© eyes
We .stumble at noonday as in the night .
We look for judgment—but there is none
For salvation—but it is far from us
• —'lsaiah lix.
The arms of Britain, France and
Russia may be as triumphant as
those of Rome in the days of its. greatest
glory—-yet. the workmen of all the .com-
batant nations will emerge from the war
steeped, in such awful poverty,, such ab-
ject slaves of Mammon, that they will
wish they wert dead.
Lloyd 'George, speaking in the House
of Commons on May 12, 1915, said: —
“Distress, misery and wretchedness
always follow a great war.”
He went on .to say:-
■ “The standard, of - life must ' he re-
duced/ 1
Lord Inchcape, head Of one of the great
banking houses of. Britain and of the'Aus-
tralian Sugar, Shipping, ' and Banking
■ combination known as the Burns, Philp
Co., said one of the results of the war
would be—
“ The standard of life must' be re-
duced/ 1
The English financial journal, “The
Economist,” in its issue of May 22, af-
firms that as an inevitable sequence of
this war—
“ The standard ■ of.. life must be re-
duced.”
Workingmen! You shall eat, less —
have poorer food—shabbier clothes—
scantier furniture—fewer ' pleasures—and
know, more hardships than ever ' you
knew in all your days and generation.
You want to know “Why ?’>’
Is it not plain? If every year Shy-
lock is to draw hundreds of millions
more in interest from his investments on
wasted lives and bloody slaughter, you
who remain alive, must slave for' it and
pay for it? All your days shall be
“made bitter with hard bondage.” That
is your future, workingmen. That is wha.t
they mean when they say “THE STAN-
DARD OF LIFE MUST BE REDUCED,”
SHYLOCK AND SLAUGHTER.
“The Round Table,” in its June
dealing with “War costs and their future
effect,” declares- that this war will load
the people of the five great nations with
additional annual charges of 350 millions
for interest and 100 millions for pensions
.for crippled soldiers' and widows. After
the war the people of Austria, England,
France, Germany and Russia will have
to pay £450,000,000 every year—mostly to
Shylock, the investor in' slaughter.
Llovd George told the House of Com-
mons ‘ (May 12, 1915), that, if this war
lasted until April, 1916, the National
Debt of England would not be less than
£2,000,000,000, and the increased annual
burden not less than £100,000,000- —£100,000,000
more every year, mostly to Shylock for
interest.
go Australia the Interest and other
charges arising from the war, will b© In-
creased by not less than £T0 i o@0 s ot@
more per year, (a)
: The load of Commonwealth' taxation
will be trebled.
■Productive and. distributive costs will
be augmented, prices will rise to the)
level of the increased costs, purchasing.
power will be correspondingly diminished.
The returned soldiery thrown suddenly
upon a depressed and dislocated labor
market will engender amongst the wage-
earners an agonising struggle for exis-
tence.
[(a) There is already a £5,000,000 per an-
num increase in taxation. In addition, there wm
he the interest on future loans. The
war pensions will cost much more than
the £500,000 so far provided. What is
going to be done with the notes issued since the
outbreak of war remains to be : seen. The promise
to redeem in gold at the, end of the war cannot
lb kept. Whether converted into bonds or met
by a process of gradual redemption, either pro-
cess will constitute an : additional annual, charge.!


■ “Distress, misery , and wretchedness al-
ways follow' a great war.”
. Awful is , the. price' the workers must
pay, so that Shylock- may -get his. bloody
“shentage,” He will draw blood from,
sweating brows and hungry mothers all
the days that God gives them , life. This
war weakens the workers and strengthens
. the Money Bags. This war means misery
for the toiler, and “much monish” for the
bondholder.
This war makes the living worker a
sia¥@ s and fills the treasury of Shylock
full to overflowing.
SHYLOCK AND "SHENTAGE.-”
The little .clique of “financiers” who
- control the banks, insurance societies,
trustee and loan agencies of Australia,
are going to make a fine harvest out of
the “war loans.” Their “shentage” will
be their patriotism, and all they can
make will be their “sacrifice.” We., are
cutting- the road wide and smooth for the, ■
passage of our own grown Morgans,
Vanderbilts and. Schneiders.
James , Burns, Robert Philp,- Adam and
James Forsyth, J. T. Walker, J. R. Fair-
fax, of the Burns, Philp Combination;
Levy, Cohen, and Moses, of the Sydney
'Gaslight Monopoly; W.' C. Watt, Knox,
Kater, Mackellar, Binnie, Buckland, Cow-
ley, Reg Black, and Onslow Thompson,
of the Sugar Squeeze; control the 250
. branches of the ' Bank of New ' South
Wales, the 200 branches of the Commer-
cial Banking Company of Sydney, the
Bank of North Queensland, the A.M.P.,
and nine-tenths of the. Life, Fire, Trustees
and Loan Agencies ' that operate in the
two States of New South Wales and
Queensland. These are the men to whom
■ the ■ nation is to be mortgaged,' and to
whom “Labor” Governments go for ad-
vice as to' how best to do it..
The men who control the lead, tin, sil-
ver and copper output of the mines at -
Broken Hill, Mount Lyeli, Cobar, Clon-
curry, Chillagoe. "Moonta, Wallaroo and
Mount Morgan; who control Tasmanian
copper, Pioneer tin and all smelting and
refinery works in connection with the
metallic products of this continent, are D,
EL Mcßryde, W. L. Baillieu, Harvey Pat-
terson, P. C. Hughes, Janies - Harvey, M.
C., E. Muecke, Ed. ■ Miller, Frank Snow,
Kelso King, R. G. Casey, Edward Fan-
ning, J. L. Wharton, Bowes Kelly, and
H. PL Schiapp (of Knox, • Schlapp and
Co.). ■ . - .- V
These men, either directly or through
their associates and business- dependents,
control every bank that has its head-
quarters in Melbourne* and nine-tenths
of the Life, Fire,, Loan and Trustee ■
agencies of this city. . They dominate
wery loan floated in. this country, every
Institution that operates in “loans,” and.
irhen a National Government knows no
way of serving* a national purpose other
dian putting: the rope of perpetual bon-
ds'6 around the neck of its people, then
the Lords of the Money Market are
toasters of the nation. The Government
stands in with the reactionary forces,
the party loyally follows it, the people
have their standard,of life reduced. Shy-
lock gets his “shentage.” That is states-
manship. That is patriotism—on a pay-
ing basis.
BANKS AND BOODLE^.
W. L. BAILLjEU is on Broken
Hill, Cloncurry and Annam River tin
directorates. He is on Dunlops and Amal-
gamated Zinc. He is on Mount Morgan
with J. M. Niall, Kelso King and R. G.
Casey. These, in conjunction with
• 'H. Snow and. the German' Jews,
(Aaron, Hirsch and Sohn)) constitute the
Mount Kembla Electrolytic . Smelters.
Baillieu, with Edward Fanning of the
N.Z. Loan, are local directors of the-
LONDON BANK OF AUSTRALIA,
These two, with Carl Pinschof, are the
dominating force in the Brewery Com-
bine.
R. G. CASEY, chairman of Mount Mor-
gan, and his co-directors not only control
the Kembla Electrolytic, but they are
Goidsbrotigh, Mort and Co, (J. M. Niall
manager), linked up with Broken. Hill
interests through J. Sanderson and W. Lc
Baillieu.
BOWES KELLY, of Broken Hill-
Proprietary, Mount Lyeli, Tasmanian
copper, Emu Bay rails and Hercules tin,
is the presiding genius of the COLONIAL
BANK OP ■ AUSTRALIA.
R. O. BLACKWOOD is on the Broken
Hill Proprietary with Bowes Kelly, of the
Colonial Bank, D. E. Mcßryde, of the-
Commercial Bank, and H. C. E. Muecke,
of the Bank of Adelaide, and W. L. Bail-
lieu, of the London Bank of Australia.
He is also associated with TIP. Knox, of
Daigety’s, and .other financial agencies.
JAMES HARVEY, with '' M. C. E.
Muecke, of Broken Hill Proprietary, and
•Peter Waite of British Broken Hill, with
W._J, Young, A. J. Murray and Barr
Smith, control Elders Trustee Limited,
Elder Shenton and Co., and Elder, Smith
and Co. The latter company, in com-
bination with Beer, Sondheimer and Co., '
of Germany, constitute Elder’s Metal
and Mercantile Proprietary Limited.
These men control Moonta copper, Ade-
laide shipping ' and- the 90 branches of
-the BANK OF ADELAIDE. James Har-
is president of the three concerns—
mining, shipping and banking*


D. E. McBRYDE, of Broken Hill
Proprietary, Block 10, Cope Creek
Tin, is chairman of THE COM-
MERCIAL BANK OP AUSTRALIA.
HARVEY PATTERSON, Broken Hill
Proprietary, .Block 10, Block 14, Pioneer
Tin, Chillagoe, Cioncurry and Mungana
copper, associate and co-director . and
bosom pal of all the financial advisers of
Labor.
: ED. MILLER, who sits on Pioneer tin
with Harvey Patterson (Broken Hill
magnate) controls all sorts of Life, Eire
and Re-Assurance Agencies. He is-chair-
man of the BANK OP VICTORIA.
JOHN GRICE, with Hugh Strachan
and Newman Barker, controls the
NATIONAL ' BANK ' OP "AUSTRALIA.
Grice is chairman of the Trustees, Execu-
tors and Agency Co. Strachan, with
Bowes Kelly,-, controls the Union Trustees.
Edward Panning, who, with Baillieu co-
iocal director of - the' London Bank, is
chairman of the Equity Trustees, and,
with Newman Barker and John Grice,
controls the N.Z. loan. These again con-
trol “Punlops,” and, with Baillieu and
Pinschof, constitute “United Breweries.”
SEEKING ADVICE.
The control of this group over the
banking, insurance and mercantile loan
agencies of the southern States is every
day drawing nearer to unlimited and un-
restricted monarchy. This group, In con-
junction with the Sydney section, con-
stitute the financial backbone of every
Ting, trust, combine and price-raising
monopoly on this continent. Their con-
trol of a long chain of banks, of cmv
rency, .of the people’s savings in every
.form, furnishes them with facilities to
“finance” every industrial depredation,
every market manipulation, every glitter-
ing confidence trick of which the.-multi-
tude are victims.
It is to these monopolisers of land
and products', to these mining mag-
nates and stockjobbers and mar-
ket-riggers to these manipulators
of banks and insurances, to these
dear friends of Beer, Sondheimer 'and
Aaron Hirsch, that a Government of
Labor goes for “advice.”
Why not go to land monopolists for ad-'
vice on a land policy?
Why not go to the 'slum landlord for.
advice on housing?
Why'not consult sweaters .pn sweating
‘—prigs on prigging—whores on prostitu-
tion—and establish codes of , virtue,,
honesty and decent standards of life, ac-
cording to their ideas and their “advice”?
THE MARKET RIGGERS.
Yet to men who traffic in money as
sweaters in sweat, and monopolists in
monopoly, we go for advice on how to'
finance a continent; on their “advice” we-
act; and we pretend, it is a financial
policy favorable to the multitude. That's
Labor government in the year 1915.
You can understand these things being
done by a gang of Tories. •
But what - the Labor Government is
doing financially is exactly what W. L.
Bail-lieu,. Bowes Kelly, John Grice, Har-
vey Patterson, Ed. Miller, Jim Harvey
and the rest would do if they were in
power.
They have- no need to be in power. The
Labor Government is acting' on their
advice. ■ Anybody can have the halo and
the limelight so long as they ■ draw
“shentage.”
We’ll lend you the money, gentlemen.
Give- us a high rate of interest „and
guarantee our Vshentage” free from war
tax.
And this proposal, so prompted, is pro-
moted and pushed through by a Govern-
ment and a party designated “Labor.”
And if you ask why one section should
give its' life, another be perpetually
taxed, and another not only be free of
the tax, but draw perpetual bloody in-
terest from the toil of the survivors, yon
are told you do not understand, that you
are a crank, an erratic, a luny, that the
loan loot is “popular”—“democratic”—
subscribed to by all classes —old maids,
poor widows, etc., etc.
These be brought in to give an air of
generosity to robbery. Everybody can
come along, but the few big vultures will
tear ofi! more in one bite than a million
flies.
And we go to vultures for advio®.
Good business—for the vultures,.


Perks and Patriotism.
“The Great War will be long
remembered for other things be-
sides the destruction of life and
the reconstruction of the map of
Europe. On the financial side the
most notable event is the univer-
sal abandonment of the gold stan-
dard, not openly admitted, but
described in the kind of language
familiar • from the bulletins of de-
feated armies.”
— 1 “ Quarterly Review” April, 1915 •
Did you read in the daily press of
July 30 that -Herr Baer, in reply' to- an
Interviewer, said:—
There' are more Broken Hill and
Mount Morgan shareholders in Ger-
many than In' Great Britain.
Do you remember that William Hughes
'(Commonwealth Attorney-General) has
told the Australian public that the direc-
tors of these great mines are in close
and intimate relationship with Herr Baer
and his Germanic metallic “octopus”?
Do you remember that these same men
•control Associated Smelters, the Electro-
lytic, Goldbrough, Mort’s and _ a hun-
dred other industrial and financial insti-
tutions on this continent?
Do you remember that these men, with
their compatriots on the Sugar Trust and
Gaslight Monopoly, are the controlling
influence in the banks, insurances and
loan agencies of this country?
And it is to these men that the Labor
Government goes for ideas on how to
save the nation.
Salvation through the pawnshop.
And- when you have mortgaged your
soul and assigned your offspring to
bondage, you are asked to console your-
self with the reflection that you have
stimulated in the pawnbroker “the most
lofty sentiments of patriotism.”
At £4/14/4 per cent.— patriotism!
Plus a remission of taxation equal to
another ten shillings per cent., making
£5/4/4 per cent, (e.)
That’s patriotism!— mit interest.
There is created a class of bond-
holders who draw interest and pay no
tax to either Federation or . State, and a
bondslaved mass who toil to pay interest
to those who pay no tax.
That’s a great national policy—so
great that the highest commendation we
can give is that Torydom applauds it (c.)
That’s “sound finance”—because it is
born of the “advice” of the bitterest
enemies of Labor and of everything for
which the Labor movement stands.
OUR “ADVISERS”
When the. war broke, out the British
'Government gave the bankers nationally-
packed notes on the basis of securities
deposited, and then raised loans on the
currency created.
In Australia, under a -Labor Govern-'
m'ent, we are working, on' similar lines.
Everything we do to-day is on the
“advice” of bankers and stockjobbers. At
their feet we kneel for wisdom, and at
their instigation we walk along the paths
tliat they select.
[(b) The financial editor of the “Herald”
(Aug. 9) works out the value of the War Loan t©
big investors as worth £5/10/- per cent. He
works out the bonus of £342,000 (given to bond-
holders in excess of interest) as equal to an an-
nuity of 4/2 per cent.—the exemption from
State Income Tax at 1/- in the £ on £2OOO as
worth 4/6 per cent., and exemption from the
Federal Income Tax at 2/6 in the £ as equal
to a gift of 11/3 per cent.]
[(c) The “Argus” of July 16, 1915, said:—
No one can accuse the Federal Labor Govern-
ment of lack of deference to the wishes of
the Imperial authorities. . . . The fact that
the Federal Treasurer has conferred with lead-
ing bankers, and others versed in 'financial
operations, is a guarantee, etc,, etc., etc.”]


On the first day of June 1916, the total
issue of notes from the Commonwealth
Treasury amounted to £43,850,000.
This is an increase since the outbreak
of war (August 3, 1914), of £34,000,000.
Nearly all these additional notes are
stored away in the bank vaults.
Of this enormous Increase of note Issue
sine© the war consists of notes of £lOOO
denomination.
Prior to the war notes of such denomi-
nation were unknown. They are not in
circulation. They never were in circula-
tion, They are mereT.O.U’s. given by
the Government to the private bankers,
and kept in cold storage.
In addition to these £lOOO notes the
banks hold notes of smaller denomina-
tion to the extent of 10 millions, mak-
ing a total of notes held by the banks
Of £31,365,000 (as against £5,884,000 at the
begining of the war).
THE INSTALMENT SCHEME.
And since War Loans are raised in
instalments, not only will the vast
majority of these notes remain with
the banks, but whatever goes out
will come back through the channels of
commerce in time for the next payment.
Thus It comes about that the banks can,
by the Instrumentality of Government
notes, continue to lend for ever and ever.
And what the banks do not do direct,
they can do by the instrumentality of
the subsidiary institutions and inter-
locked directorates.
And they hold the'* National Govern-
ment in their clutches to the extent of
31*4 millions of non-interest-bearing
notes.
And per medium of Commonwealth
Notes the banks; and ; allied interests will
become possessed of millions of stocks
and bonds at £4/14/4 per cent., plus ex-
emption from the War Tax. (g.)
And upon these notes of the nation,
not gold, will stand the vast superstruc-
ture of private banking credit.
The Common wealth Government will
get a temporary loan of Its own notes—
at a big fat price. The big fat price will
be perennial and perpetual, and the notes
will flow back to the banks ready for thi
next performance.
And after this is done the bank hold-
ings of legal tender currency
and the proportion of these holdings to
total liabilities will be greater than
before the war.
[(d) “War loans are facilitated by placing
abundant' supplies of credit and paper money at
the disposal of the banks,”—“Economist,” Oct,
io,' 1914.
PERKS AND PATRIOTISM.
Do you know what the first eighteen
months of war did for the banking mono-
polists of Australia?
It increased the bank assets over all
liabilities from £7,000,000, an increase in
addition to distributed dividends —18
months of glorious war. ,
The banks will finance one loan after
the other until the war is at an end, and
at the end they will still hold the notes,
and these notes can only be redeemed by
a further issue of interest-bearing bonds.
By this subterranean method the Com-
monwealth notes are made the incubators
of national impoverishment. After every
“loan” float they will go out buccaneer-
ing, and come back to the harborage of
the banks towing in their rear another
pile of interest gouged from the vitals of
industry. These piratical voyages will
be repeated again and again.
That’s Commonwealth Finance.
THE PLOTTERS. ■
The banks will , not take up the whole
of the loans.
Ist. Because the directors of the banks,
who are also directors of great, mining
, and industrial companies, will want to
come in to the plunder, not only in their
capacity as bank shareholders, but as
direct beneficiaries in the great divide.
■ And Tor this purpose they will drop
into the banks they control every ounce
of scrip and security upon which they
can lay their fingers, either as owners or
trustees, and got advances upon terms
fixed by themselves, so that it leaves for
the bank an appearance of legality—
security for currency—and for themselves
a good margin of profit between the cost
of the advance and the price of the loap.
(e.)
Or, if their securities are not propor-
tional to their voracity y they will give
themselves whatever additional credit
desired, purchase bonds, deposit bonds
as security for advances, and collect
their margins.
Then their names or the companies and
corporations that are theirs in everything
but name will be paraded in the press as
the names of the patriots whose
“patriotism has been stimulated”—by a
good percentage and promise of remis-
sion from the War Tax.
[(e) Funds wherewith to subscribe - to the
War Loan can be obtained by -pledging . invest-
ments for paper money.”—“Economist,” Oct,
10, 1914.]
under Government guarantee, the means comes
with which to subscribe for national loans.”—■
“Investors’ Review,” Oct, 24, 1914.]
“Out of this great mass of credit, created


THE GULLS.
And the second reason why' the banks
will not take up everything is because
the process must be hidden, the plunder
cloaked, the public deluded. . The' loan
must De “popular” and “democratic.”
Everybody/ must be invited to participate.
The thousands who- get one-tenth will ■ be
hailed ■ as proofp of the “national re-
sponse.” The ten who -take nine-tenths'
of the pudding will be forgotten in
hosannahs at ' the “great -success.”
But whether it be the banks direct, or
the men who control them,-or their sub-
sidiary institutions, or the little host of
petty subscribers, ' every transaction
will be the cheque drawn on the
private bank, forwarded to the Common-
wealth Bank, entered up to the credit c.f
the Commonwealth -Government.
And if the Commonwealth Bank de-
sires to transform the mass of cheques in
its possession into cash, all it can draw
from the private banks will be Com-
monwealth Notes, for such notes are legal
tender to all persons and institutions out-
side the Commonwealth Treasury.
But not a note or an ounce of gold will
shift its location. When the Government
gives Brown a cheque upon the Common-
wealth' Bank for a million, he will take
it ■ to his private bank, and have it en-
tered to his credit.
That bank will ' say to . the . Common-
wealth: “That’s a million less we owe
you on the loan account.’” If Brown-
wants cash he will get . Commonwealth
notes, but notes will not trouble Mm-
■drawing cheques are easier; and' safer.
Thus, whether it be the banks direct,
or the directors, or their subordinate in-
stitutions, ' or ' the' general public brought
in as a cover; whatever the process-
direct, or circular—the . manipulation of
loans will be in the hands of the private
banks on the basis of ' gold nothing,
notes'! per cent, and cheques for the:*
balance.
THE VICTIMS.
And for this financial fakery,' and be-
cause it is the accepted fakery . of our
times,- and because we have not the
courage to break with it, the nation is
to be looted to the extent of millions per
annum.
W& are told that national bonds given
to- the Commonwealth Bank as security
and backing for a non-robbery cheque
currency would be academic-folly.
But those same bonds given to private
bankers in return for their cheques, or
for Commonwealth notes,,, is said to be
"‘sound finance”—on the advice of . the
bankers.
And the cost is millions per annum.
■ That’s where we stand to-day.
And Samson the toiler is to be brought
to Baza bound with fetters of- brass and
made grind in the prison home.


The Will and the Way.
The evolution of the Means of Ex-
change which we are witnessing is lead-
ing us, after the well-defined periods of
barter and money, to a system of mere
■clearing of balances. . . . . 'And a
National Bank, if jt is to be a truly
“National” institution, must control credit'
or fail in Its duty.
—National Monetary Commission ,
Document 494.
When the First War Loan was under
discussion in the House of Representa-
tives it was proposed as an alternative
to the scheme of perpetual annual rob-
bery:
“That Bonds be deposited in the
Commonwealth Bank, and that the
bank place the Commonwealth Govern-
ment in credit to the value of the Bonds
deposited—less cost of administration.”
This gave the Commonwealth- Bank
security for currency issued.
Blood money in the shape of interest
■ would be avoided®
■ Australian' industries and Australian
workmen- would be-saved from the an-
nual indemnity to Shylockr
All that would remain would be the
net cost of the war.
This cost could be spread over 30 or 40
years by annual repayments to the bank
in gradual redemption.
The currency would be a cheque cur-,
rency, and the further issue of notes
would be unnecessary. Bonds in the
Commonwealth Bank would enable the
Governor to deal with existing Common-
wealth notes in the most effective and
economical manner.
BONDS AND NOTES.
When “money”: was “plentiful” and
seeking investment, bonds could be sold
it the higher price. When money was
“short” and security-holders anxious to
realise, bonds could be ■ bought at the
lower price. .
The Bonds would only carry interest
during the period, and to the extent that
they were held by the public, and even
that cost would be minimised, if not ob-
literated, by the profits made at the
buying and selling ends.
Thus not only would there be a
financial advantage to the bank and to
the nation, but- the public convenience
would be served, -the market steadied,
and note depreciation made impossible.
Thus the Commonwealth Bank x would
be what a great national bank should
be—the supreme bank —the bank to which
all others are subordinate—the regulator
and controller of currency—the agent of
national benefit and not of private gain.
Only three men'' voted for this proposi-
tion. The other Representatives stuck
solid for the measure, that means
a ' never-ending . annual indemnity
to the Bondholders, a never-ending
tax upon industry, a never-ending
pressing down of the means of life for
the men who toil.
* ♦ I, ♦;
Labor and Liberal were, welded together
in the holy bonds of political and fiiian-
dal matrimony*
THE GRIP OF SUPERSTITION.
King. O’Malley—after explaining ■ that
banking business is a system ; of cross
entry—of credits and debits—currency
nine-tenths cheques—negotiable security
the solid rock of effective issue—so-called .
“deposits” mainly a record of “loans”—
that when a man borrows from a bank
he is credited as a “depositor”—that as a
result the more a bank lends the more
do its “deposits” grow—suddenly changed
over, and said what was, was not; and
what was being done was not possible.
He said a bank, with 11 '.millions “de-
posits” couldn’t “lend” 20 millions, al-
though he has been saying for years that
so-called “deposits” are mainly a bank-
ing term reflecting the value of ‘Me-
posited securities.” This being so, it fol-
lows that, when the Government de-
posited 20 millions of securities in the
Commonwealth Bank to get credited
with the right to draw cheques on the
bank to that amount, then the so-called
“deposits” in the Commonwealth Bank
would jump from 11 to 31 millions.
The human paradoxes who give ad-
herence to a new faith repeatedly for-
get themselves, and unconsciously lisp


the dogmas, formulas and incantations of
the superstition they profess to have
discarded.
It was King 1 O’Malley who, in a mani-
festo to the electors of Darwin in 1914 i
said: —
“The private banks are chiefly used
for the solidification of the great
trusts and combines.”
It was the Labor manifesto of 1910
which declared:—
“Banking is one of the frauds by
which capitalism bleeds the people.”
To-day we declare this fraud to be
one of the instruments of national sal-
vation, and, to these “frauds” national
treasurers offer up hosannahs and
thanksgivings.
MASSEY GREENE.
The man who put up a solid argument
against the’ proposition was Massey
Greene, from Richmond (N.S.W.).
He admitted in reply to a query from
X H. Catts that the proposition was
sound if there was one great nationally
constituted banking system.
But we were faced with existing facts,
and he alleged that, under the conditions
with which we are now confronted, the
emission from the Commonwealth Bank
of a cheque currency,, based on Common-
wealth ‘Bonds,' would be ■ unworkable and
end in disaster.
He said: “The Bonds will be deposited,
the credit will be given, the Govern-
ment will draw cheques on the Common-
wealth Bank, the persons to whom they
will be given, will deposit them to their
credit in private banks, the private
banks, through the clearing house, will
present the cheques, the Commonwealth
Bank will be unable to pay, it will go
Insolvent, the end .will be disaster.”.
The - answer is:— ! ,
All that the Commonwealth Govern-
ment need to do is to place the private
banks in the same relationship to the
Commonwealth Bank as are the private
banks in -England to the' Bank of Eng-
land.
THE WILL AND THE WAY.
The relationship is set forth in the re-
ports of the U.S.A. Monetary Commis-
sion. It is stated in the words of Sir
Walter Cunliffe, governor of the Bank of
England, in his evidence before the Com-
mission. It is as follows:
“Private banks holding drafts on the
Bank of England must present such
drafts direct to the Bank of England to
be PAID TO THE CREDIT OF THEIR
ACCOUNT.”
Every private bank in England is com-
pelled to accept whatever is owing to it
by the Bank of England in the shape of
a deposit receipt on the debtor institu-
tion.
Every private bank can settle its ad-
verse balance with other banks by a
transfer of its credit in the Bank of
England, but in the Bank of England
the credit remains. Thus the power of
private banks to cripple, trammel or
make insolvent the bank of the nation
is made impossible. In England this
practice has been evolved, and is applied
by bankers for bankers, for their
mutual protection, to prevent one private
bank getting to the Central" Bank to the
detriment and undoing of other banks.
In most countries the Central Bank, no
matter by whom owned, exists as an es-
sential part of the capitalist structure.
It is an institution existing for the pro-
fit-making purposes of financial mag-
nates and market riggers. It is the
agency by which State aid and national
■credit is secured for private institutions
whenever required.
In Australia, under a Labor, Govern-
ment, the ■ Commonwealth Bank ’is a
mere addition to the private banking sys-
tem. It should be made the great Cen-
tral Bank. All others should be sub-
sidiary to it. It should be the Bank of
the Nation in fact as in name. It should
be a financial fortress for national ad-
vantage. In this direction the Rational
Parliament has unlimited and unre-
stricted powers.
MONEY TRUST GOSPEL.
The bankers of the world no longer
believe that a national currency, sound
and’ solvent,, need be convertible into
gold, or that it can be so converted. They
only want the public to believe it. They
only want Governments to trade in their
interest on the, general superstition. They
know full well that a currency con-
vertible into all the commodities that
gold will buy is good currency and sound
money.
The bankers know that an adequate
currency backed by gold alone is impos-
sible. They know that the solid assets
of the nation, constitute ■ an adequate
backing for any medium of exchange
largely in excess of any that could be
required for national or private com-
mercial purposes.
Yet in Australia a Labor 'Govern- ;
ment declares that a currency
issued from the nationally-owned
bank upon : the basis of national securi-
ties in the shape of National Bonds is
no good, is unsound, is “a peanut cur-
rency,” and- it gives those Bonds to pri-
vate banks for them to issue a currency
thereon and extract, fat dividends there-
from.


CURRENCY AND BANKING.
Sir Robert Giffen. the author of
I ‘Financial Essays/’ said:—
“As Song as the attention is riveted
on, not the real currency paper, but
upon its assumed basis —gold—correct
conclusions upon currency questions
are impossible.”
The' writer -on “Currency” in the “En-
cyclopedia Britannica,” says:—
“The idea of the intrinsic value of
money is discarded by all persons con-
versant with the working- of the modern
mechanism of exchange.”
Frederick Temple in “Interest, Gold
and Banking,” says:—
“The growth of the cheque system
has had the effect of transforming the
character of banking.”
Sir Felix Schuster, president: of ■ the
Smith’s and' Union Bank of London,
said: —
“The theory of banking is one- thing—
the practice is quite another. Banking
has evolved far beyond the theory on
which it is supposed to be conducted.”
And in a speech, reported in the “Bank-
ing Record” (September 21, 1914), he
said:—
“The currency of the country is sup-
plied by cheques instead of, as the
Bank Act intended, by Bank of Eng-
land notes.”
The financial writer, McLeod, says:—
“Cheques are currency in the same
way as notes.”
SECURITY ANO CIRCULATION.
The “Round Table”, in its article on
“Lombard Street in War,” says:—
“The amount of securities deposited
in British banks are worth over
£1,000,000,000. Against these securities
cheques are drawn. Behind these
cheques thebe is not one ounce of gold
—the only security is the security de-
posited by the drawer of the cheque.”
In Australia,' the bankers, in addition
to floating mortgages' upon the gold in
their possession, have issued—at interest
—rights to draw cheques upon the banks
to extent of over £100,000,000. Behind
these cheques there is not one ounce of
gold—the only security is the security de-
posited by the drawer of the cheque.
* $ «
That’s modern banking.
• * t
“LOANS” as*e given by means of
credits.'
CREDITS are given In the books of the
banks to those who deposit securities.
CHEQUES are the paper instrumentali-
ties by which credits are transferred
and wealth monetised. Every transac-
tion Is a transfer of the ownership of
deposited security. ,
And if private banks are privileged to
issue cheques and draw interest upon
the security of deposited bills and bonds
and deeds, the Commonwealth Bank
should be equally privileged.
COMMONWEALTH POWER.
The Commonwealth Bank can, .and.
■should, issue currency upon the bonds
and securities that represent the taxing
power of the. Nation over all the wealth
of the Australian continent.
By so doing the Nation would be saved
the enormous interest that will now be
paid to private institutions.
But The National Parliament, of whom
a majority are Labor men, has declared
by ( an almost "unanimous vote that the
present banking monopoly shall stand
untouched, and that the Nation shall
continue'to pay -annual tribute to. Shy-
lock.
There are men in Parliament who
loudly, protest against rings, trusts and
combines, who grow ■ pathetic over the
iniquities of land monopoly, yet
any suggestion of Currency Reform, or
any interference with private banking
monopoly, as a sign of insanity.
In this matter the majority 'of Labor
men are as rabidly Tory as the Tories.
In this direction whatever is is best, and
better is impossible. • In this direction
money and monetary institutions mani-
pulated by capitalists for capitalists in
the interests of capitalists constitute
perfection—the last word has been said,
the last act of progress has bebn con-
summated.
Thus it comes about that, although a
majority of Laborites sit in Parliament,
and although in the direction of Cur-
rency and Banking Reform the National
Parliament has unquestioned and unre-
stricted power, nothing is done, no pro-
gress is made, no remedial policy is pro-
pounded. It even refuses to push for-
ward the banking proposals propounded
by the conferences, ' .and, ■ makes ■ them
dead letters on the programme.
Pet the : Banking Monopoly ’ is . the
greatest monopoly on this' continent. It
is the fortress and buttress and financial
arsenal of every industrial ■' and com-
mercial ring, trust, combine and price-
raising conspiracy on this continent.
And the Labor party, with unlimited-
power, refuses to touch it.


READ
44
Cbc Xabor Call”
The Journalistic Exponent of —
Labor in Politics,
Trades Unionism and Democracy
Special Articles by Leading
Democratic Writers.
Published Every Thursday
Obtainable at all Agents,
Price ONE PENNY.
GET YOUR PRINTING DONE AT THE
Xabor Call ifrrinterg
Every Description of Job Printing executed
in the most Up-to-Date Style.
All Orders Receive our Prompt Attention.
<
Address:
TELEPHONE 1734
Patrick Street, /Melbourne
