

THE
PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES
BY
FRANCIS ANDERSON, M.A.
PROFESSOR OF LOGIC AND MENTAL PHILOSOPHY
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY




THE
PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES
BY
FRANCIS ANDERSON, M.A.
PROFESSOR OF LOGIC AND MENTAL PHILOSOPHY
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
SYDNEY
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON
PUBLISHERS TO THE UNIVERSITY
1901


The following address was delivered at the Annual Con-
ference of the Public School Teachers of New South
Wales, held in the Sydney Town Hall, June 26 th, 1901.
I have amplified some of the remarks and added notes, but
have not altered or withdrawn any statement then made.
I am indebted to my wife for invaluable ajd in preparing
the address for publication.
FRANCIS ANDERSON


THE PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM OF
NEW SOUTH WALES
When a professor in the University gives an address
on “ Education/’ I suppose that what his audience
expect and perhaps dread is an “ academic ” discourse
—a discussion of principles which no one denies —in
language at which no one can take offence. An
academic discourse is a discourse of no practical
importance—to such poor uses do our fine words
come!
I do not desire to shock or startle you in what I
have to say on the subject of the Public School system
of education in New South Wales, but I am unable to
join, in what a less sympathetic critic might call, the
conspiracy of adulation with regard to its undoubted
merits, or the conspiracy of silence with regard to its
equally undoubted defects. I cannot hope that you
will agree with me in all my remarks—this is not an
academic discourse—yet I feel assured that as fellow-
teachers and fellow-citizens you have no desire to
conceal or to ignore facts. You have done me the
honour to ask me to address you. I shall show that
I appreciate that honour by speaking frankly of what
seem to me to be the defects, limitations, and needs of
the existing system of education.


In works of fiction, in the newspaper press, and in
the popular mind, we teachers are as a class often
represented as being more willing to teach than to
learn. The schoolmaster, it is said, belongs to an
obstinate and stiff-necked generation. He is charged
with being dogmatic in doctrine and pragmatic in
manner. He gradually acquires the defects of the
official mind, mistaking the means for the end, the
part for the whole, becoming the slave of routine, the
devotee of use and wont, until at last he is in danger
of revolving as a mere wheel in the machine. He does
not welcome new ideas or new methods, and, if he is
open to conviction, it is as the old Scotsman who
declared that he, too, was “ open to conveection, but
was a dour deevil to conveence.” Well, we may
admit that the teacher has many enemies to contend
with, both from without and from within himself.
The institution of these conferences, at any rate,
shows that we have a desire to learn as well as to
teach. For I assume that your association is more
than a trade-union for the protection of your material
interests. I suppose that one of its aims is to enquire
about methods and systems in neighbouring States
and foreign countries, and concerning ideas and ideals
of education.
We are sometimes told that we in New South
Wales have the “ most perfect system of education in
the world/’ But those who make this modest boast
rarely venture upon details or supply us with data
sufficient to enable us to test the extent of their infor-
mation, or the accuracy of their judgment. There
are undoubtedly many points in our system which
have earned deserved praise, but in other respects
our methods are, in comparison with those of other


countries, grievously defective, while in some, judged
by her own former standard, New South Wales is
degenerating and losing ground. Men and women
actively engaged in teaching, and acquainted with the
best that is thought and done in other parts of the
world, do not need to be told this, but the great body
of citizens, members of the Legislature, and writers
in the newspapers, seem unaware of it. The parrot
cry of the most perfect system is echoed and re-
echoed* “ Astronomers tell us that there are spots
on the sun, yet the sun is a glorious luminary ” —“ so
of our Public School system, exacting critics may find
spots, yet is she not radiant as the sun at noonday ? ”
I do not think that any useful purpose is served by
language of this kind, although it may be appropriate
at those school shows or exhibitions which serve to
waste the time of teachers, to minister to the foolish-
ness of parents, and to deceive the public.t
Before dealing with special defects in the system of
education in this State, I may be permitted to express
my opinion on one or two matters of general policy in
which we are, as teachers, indirectly interested.
It seems to me that a false step was made when
New South Wales departed, in the case of many
* It has actually been asserted that we have no need to
learn from other countries. It is possible to exaggerate
the importance of having a personal acquaintance with
systems other than our own; at the same time I really do
not see why one should be proud of never having been out
of New South Wales either in body or mind
t Of course I do not refer to gatherings, such as school
sports or the like, but to those exhibitions, the preparation
for which entails great expenditure of time and labour.
The educational value of the process of preparation is
almost nil. On the value of these shows as advertisements,
I say nothing.


of the larger schools, from the honest and healthy
c ustom of educating boys and girls together.
The separation of the sexes in education may lead to
greater and more permanent evils than any which
are likely to be the chance outcome of a system of co-
education. In the latter case the evils are accidental
or sporadic, and are counteracted, if not prevented,
by the stimulating influence of healthy human com-
panionship. In the former, the evils, if they exist,
probably follow from the system, may tend to become
permanent, and may gradually lead to a lowering of
the moral tone of the community. In this respect
Victoria and South Australia have chosen the better
way. There is nothing in the special conditions of
life in New South Wales to justify her departure from
a sound principle.
Elementary school education in New South Wales
is neither compulsory nor free. It certainly is not
compulsory so long as the compulsory clauses in the
Education Act are allowed to remain loose in their
wording, and ineffective in their working. For one
prosecution in New South Wales there are six in
Victoria. This does not imply that the people of
Victoria are less law-abiding than our own; it simply
shows that the compulsory clauses of their Act are
better drafted, and more efficiently carried out. In
1900, seventeen “truant” officers were added to the
number previously employed in the Victorian service.
In New South Wales we have no system of truant
inspection.*
The weekly charge (threepence) still made for
* An admirable suggestion was made at the Teachers’
Conference, that female as well as male truant inspectors
ought to be appointed.


school education in our State is now defended mainly
on the ground that it supplies a part —less than ten
per cent. —of the annual income, and that without it
the work of the Department would be crippled.
Well, I speak as a fool, and not as a politician, but it
seems to me that if, as politicians tell us, our revenue
is greatly on the increase; and if, as politicians also
tell us, we may expect some additional increase by
way of return from the Federal Treasurer, then the
true statesmanlike course would be to allot a part of
that expected revenue to the maintenance of a
department, which will be a permanent and ever-
growing source of expenditure. The retention of the
“ threepence a week ” helps, as every teacher knows,
to foster irregular attendance. It fails to fulfil the
other purposes for which we are sometimes told that
it is retained. From the teacher’s point of view, its
abolition would be a great relief; it would free him
from a large part of the burden of returns, an ever-
growing burden, which makes his life, in some
respects, resemble that of a dumb driven clerk.
There is one point in the continuity of our school
organisation which seems to me to require some
explanation, if not also defence. A State school
system should be so graded that competition between
different classes of schools should be almost im-
possible. Now I find that a pupil can obtain in Fort-
street Superior School, for threepence a week, an
education which is practically the same as that for
which in the High School a charge of three guineas
a quarter is made.* Surely it is not the intention of
* lb is true that in Eort-street School some of the pupils
have been charged extra fees by masters for additional
instruction, but this does not mend matters, and seems to
me a highly objectionable practice.


the Department to establish a social distinction be-
tween different classes of schools ! Yet otherwise I
fail to see a reason for the great difference in the
amount of the fees. The result is that a competition
has been set up, extremely unfair in two respects —
the High Schools are heavily handicapped by the
large fee* and are thus prevented from fulfilling their
functions as the highest-grade schools in the system,
while the other schools suffer from an unfair competi-
tion, since their best pupils are drawn away from
them owing to the great attractions offered by Fort-
street School.
I come now to our general system of elementary
education, and I hope to show, not as an exacting,
hut as a sympathetic critic, that there are spots upon
our “ glorious luminary,” and that unfortunately they
are spots which go deeper than the surface. I shall
first refer to the nature and number of the subjects
taught in our schools. Merely to add subject to
subject defeats the prospect of reform, and I do not
propose to increase the present curriculum by tacking
on to the list such subjects as book-keeping by double
entry and the principles of domestic plumbing on the
ground of their possible utility in the future life of
the pupil. The reform which is needed must come
by the broadening and simplifying of our school
course, not by the suicidal method of indefinite multi-
plication. How is this reform to be carried out ?
Mainly by a radical alteration in the nature of our
elementary school education, which is at present
narrow and exclusive because it is too bookish. The
memory and the receptive powers of the intellect
may be more or less adequately trained, but the
active and productive faculties, upon which the greater


call will be made in after life, are, if not entirely
neglected, at least not stimulated or trained in any
methodical manner. But this subject you will allow
me to postpone until I come to speak of what is done
in other countries, in educational manual training
in schools.
Our regulations prescribe eighteen subjects, but
these are not taught as separate and distinct. If
they were, the parent, the pupil, and the teacher
would each have a serious ground for complaint. We
are working on the right lines in trying to group
subjects together, to teach some by means of object
lessons, and to put off the teaching of others until the
later years of school life. But we do not go far
enough. The pressure of the annual examination
system, the fact that all our schools are under-
staffed,* and the classes far too large for effective
work, all tend to force the teacher to adopt methods,
which are to be condemned as mechanical, and even
vicious from the point of view of true education.
These methods may be the best fitted for rapidly
reaching certain results. To drive arithmetic by
rules into a child’s mind may enable him at the
annual examination to solve a problem, the like of
which he may never again see in his lifetime. But
if he has not been made to understand the rationale
* Every large Public School in the State, with perhaps
one exception, is under-staffed. That exception is Fort-
street School—an excellent school. If it is fairly staffed,
then every other school is under-staffed. If the other-
schools have a sufficient staff, it is heavily over-staffed. I
do not wish to see Fort-street School brought down to the
level of the others ; on the contrary, I wish to see other
schools raised, as regards staff, to the level of Fort-street.


of the rule, or to find out the rule for himself, the
value of the training as education is not great.* Now
the tendency of our whole system is to produce and
stereotype the mechanical methods of which I com-
plain. In spite of the efforts of teachers and inspectors,
the iron pressure of the system prevents the intro-
duction of better methods, the spending of time on
individual scholars, or the proper supervision of the
work of pupil teachers. The Government inspectors
of Yictoria agree in condemning the “ deadening”
and “’sterilising'” methods produced hy similar
defects in the educational system in that State.
In the long run, however, the short and easy
mechanical ways of teaching fail to fulfil the purposes
for which they are devised, and do not save time.
The parentis surprised that his child should take so
many years to attain so low a standard. He is not
a skilful critic of methods, hut his surprise is natural
and justifiable. A mechanical method may secure
results of knowledge in one subject, but it fails to
prepare the pupil to understand more easily, and to
* A Victorian inspector heard a teacher make his class
recite more than thirty times “ New Guinea—North of
Australia birds of Paradise —gold.” The following
example is interesting, because it is one of the extremely
rare instances in which a New South Wales inspector has
ventured to find fault witli methods of teaching. “The
mechanical part of the subject (arithmetic) cannot be found
fault with , , , , but, directly the practical part is
touched upon and a problem of only ordinary difficulty is
placed before a class, it is not unusual to find two-thirds of
the pupils so confounded as to be quite unable to make any
attempt to solve it , . Pupils are told to follow certain
rules in the solution of certain classes of sums, but the
reasons for the rules are seldom explained.” —lnspector
Flash-man’s Report, 1899.


master another one. He has to begin again the
dreary repetition, the learning of rules, the com-
mitting to memory of lists—the mechanical drudgery
which makes up so much of our schooling, and does
so much damage to our education.
The extended and intelligent use of object lessons
would serve to some extent to counteract these evil
influences. Further, while the time-table is a neces-
sary means to an end—the organisation of school
instruction—the divisions of time need not obscure the
fact that many subjects are closely related. History and
geography, for instance, may sometimes supplement
each other. Why should not grammar and the correct
use of English form a part of every lesson ? But for
these and other reforms to be possible, it is necessary
that the teacher should have sufficient time, and that
he should have had systematic training in his business.
Neither of these conditions can be said to exist under
our present system.
To allow the teacher and the pupil a fair opportunity
of developing their powers, it will be necessary to
break up the large classes, which form a permanent
encouragement of vicious methods.* It might be
possible to reduce to some extent the evils of the large
class system, if the head-teacher had more freedom
and responsibility given to him as head of the school.
He could then exercise that supervision and control
which is absolutely necessary if the school is to be
an organism, and not a collection of classes. But
* In European countries generally the classes are much
smaller in number than with us ; in .Denmark large classes
are actually forbidden. By an educational law at present in
operation there, no class in any elementary school is allowed
to number more than thirty-five.


really joa Lave no head-masters or head-mistresses;
you have head-teachers in the schools and that is all.
The principal teacher is tied down to the instruction
of one class or of two classes, and to do this thoroughly
takes all his time. It is impossible for him to know
every class in the school by personal experience,
though he ought to do so, if he is to correct bad
methods or to suggest better ones. No good man
shrinks from responsibility; he likes it, he desires it,
and the prize positions in the profession should allow
scope to other powers than those of drilling a body of
children in order to produce certain examination
results.
I do not wish to disparage drill or what can be done
by it. Yon can get a great deal out of men by
drilling them. You can drill them to the perfection
of a monotonous uniformity, until they look and act
like machines. But you may also get out of them all
spontaneity, inspiration, and enthusiasm. You may
get the very life out of them by drill* Now drill is
the only subject which can be taught thoroughly at
one time to a large number. And so long as we retain
onr present unwieldy classes, many of them at the
same time in the charge of untrained pupil teachers,
the inevitable result will be to reduce the teaching of
all subjects to the level of drill. How can it he other-
wise ? Yon are in the grip of the system, at the mercy
"* The British Army in South Africa has shown us some
of the defects of drill. “Be it always remembered that the
regulations of the Army are formed to make all people
quite alike, one uniform pattern and on one level of intelli-
gence —not yet the highest. You do not rise by the regu-
lations, but in spite of them.”— Chuechill’s lan Hamilton’s
March, p. 23.


of the machine. If you ask me whether the education
system of this State works well as a machine, I answer
that, judged by the tabulated results to which the
inspectors confine their published reports, it does
work well—as a machine. And the excellence of
these results, such as they are, does credit to the men
and women, who, working under such adverse con-
ditions, and with so little encouragement, may well
be astonished at their own success. But a system
composed of human beings cannot be judged merely
as a machine. Let us turn for our analogies to the
phenomena of life and growth rather than to those
of mechanism. We need not think less of tabulated
results, but let us think more of living processes.
Regarded from this point of view we are obliged to
confess that our results, showy as they are, have not
even their own surface value.
A reform of our examination system seems to be
the necessary consequence of my argument. Exami-
nations we shall always have, and the main features
of our present system can be retained with advantage.
It will always be necessary to test the result of school
teaching by oral and written examinations. But the
experience of other countries shows that the pro-
longed annual examination is in many respects
cumbrous and ineffective, while the “ surprise visit,”
though it enables the inspector to pounce upon a bad
teacher, and to discover defects in the general tone
and discipline of the school, can yet do but little
more. The formidable annual examination is an
elaborate process, in which the inspector is busily
engaged in testing results and in doing little else.
Much of this testing, so far as written work is con-
cerned, could, under a system which applied to the


schools as a whole, he done by a central body of
examiners.* So long as each school is examined by
itself, as a whole and in detail, by one man, the
inspector is forced to perform drudgery which could
■well be delegated to others. He, too, becomes a mere
wheel in the machine, and cannot fulfil his high office,
the duties of which demand the free exercise of his
powers of knowledge, of his gifts, and of his oppor-
tunities. The system of annual examinations has had
a long trial in England, and is now being modified
there. I do not ask that we in New South Wales
should adopt methods or reforms merely because they
have heen found necessary in another country. We
must develop our own system to satisfy our own
needs. But onr present methods of examination
and inspection are stifling the life, and stunting the
growth of true education in our schools, and altera-
tion is absolutely necessary.
A wise reform might be brought about first, as
I have already suggested, hy handing over those
examinations which test the knowledge of the pupil,
hy means of written results, to inspector’s assistants,
or to a competent central board of examiners. This
would give the inspector greater freedom to develop
a much neglected side of our examination system.
Some examinations must be merely periodical tests
of results, bat others may be tests of mental and
moral growth. The examination which a man faces
in real life is not an annual cross-questioning in a
*■ The good effect which such a centralised system of
examination might produce is shown by the way in which
the school teaching of certain subjects has been improved
by the public examinations conducted by the University
of Sydney.


witness-box. On the contrary, it forms a living
part of that continuous training by which his weak-
nesses are discovered and corrected and he himself
strengthened, braced, and inspired for future effort.
Is it an impossible task to attempt to make exami-
nations fulfil a similar function in our schools ?
They are at present a drudgery to the inspectors,
a terror to the children, a nightmare to the teacher.
Why should they not he a continuous part of the
training ?
The head-master or head-mistress must, before all
others, be held responsible for seeing that the in-
struction given throughout the school he not a process
of “ stuffing ” or “ cramming,” but one of education.
This implies that the master must be the real “head ”
and not the teacher of the highest class, that the
school must be a real unity, and not a set of water-
tight compartments, that the number of teachers
must be increased, and the large - class system
abandoned as a barbarous make-believe and make-
shift.
With such reforms, a flexible system of periodical
examinations could be made a real testing of pro-
cesses, instead of a mechanical testing of products.
The inspectors would take their true place as men of
“ light and leading,” the responsible and trusted
guides and advisers of the teachers, the controlling-
brain of the whole organic system of education
throughout the State, To ask for anything less than
this would be to degrade the office of inspector from
its highest uses.
Some educational reformers might at this point
urge that I am forgetting the great defect of our
system of elementary education, its almost exclusively


intellectual nature. The “indignant parent” com-
plains that his son is not taught “ something useful,”
something that will fit him for “ the hard battle of
life.” The newspapers echo his complaint, and
members of Parliament refer to technical education as
what is wanted in our schools. A reluctant depart-
ment transforms a few schoolrooms into badly fitted-
up workshops, hires an intelligent workman to show
the children the use of tools, and calls the result
“ manual training.”
There are two points of view from which we may
regard manual training as a necessary part of a
State education system.
We may consider that it is part of the function of
the State to provide means whereby the pupil may
be prepared for the exercise of the special trade by
which he hopes to earn bis living. This is the work
of technical education properly speaking, and of such
education in New South Wales I do not now intend
to speak. We have made an excellent beginning in
this work. What is wanted is its fuller and more
flexible organisation.
But in no civilised country are special trades, or
preparation for special trades, taught in the ordinary
elementary schools. This work is done in auxiliary,
or supplementary, schools, supported wholly or partly
by the State, and equipped with carefully trained
and certificated teachers. In England and other
European countries, as well as in America, authorities
on education are unanimous in the opinion that the
teaching of trades should he kept out of the elemen-
tary schools.
But what is the other point of view ? What, it
may be asked, is the nature of the manual training


which ought to be undertaken in the ordinary school ?
I answer, such manual training as is educational in
its nature. To teach a knack of doing a thing in a
particular way is not in itself educational, whether
we are dealing with the teaching of arithmetic or
the teaching of carpentry. To be able to produce a
result in the shape of a useful, or useless, box, is
not educational, apart from the process, by which the
powers of mind and body may, or may not, have
been rightly trained. An intelligent workman can
show how to produce a certain result, and the scholars
may imitate him successfully, and yet the main pur-
pose of education may remain unachieved. A good
workman is not necessarily a good teacher, and even
if he were, the result desired is not a special trade
facility, but a training of the child himself, by means
of those active and productive powers, which in
ordinary school instruction are unexercised and even
suppressed.
Now from this point of view I have no hesitation
in saying that the so-called “ manual training ” given
in our elementary schools is a sham and a delusion.
Certainly trades are not taught, or any efficient
preparation for a trade, while from the higher educa-
tional point of view, the training fails altogether to
be effective. The existing arrangements have been
made to satisfy and silence a popular demand, but
there has been no intelligent or systematic attempt,
beyond the most meagre instruction in Kindergarten
work, to apply those methods of manual training in
elementary schools, which have been so successfully
developed in nearly every civilised country except
our own.
Let me briefly summarise what has been done in
other countries, and first the reasons for it.


It is generally agreed that school instruction, even
at its best, fails to develop the productive, although it
strengthens the receptive, powers of the intellect as
well as the memory. To provide a well-balanced
education, then, onr methods are defective, since they
leave unexercised those natural activities —imitation,
construction, production, creation—which every child
in some measure possesses. Further, the nerve-centres
of the "brain, upon which depend our general mental
power, are so closely connected with the “motor”
centres that, if the latter are imperfectly developed,
there is apt to be corresponding loss of mental
power.*
* la a pamphlet on “ Handcraft,” by Sir James Criohton-
Browne, he says : —“ It is plain that the highest functional
activity of these—the motor —centres is a thing to be
aimed at with a, view to general mental power as well as
with a view to muscular expertness, and, as the hand
centres hold a prominent place among the motor centres,
and are in relation with an organ which in prehension, in
touch, and in a thousand different combinations of move-
ment adds enormously to onr intellectual resources, besides
enabling us to give almost unlimited expression to our
thoughts and sentiments, it is plain that the highest
possible functional activity of these hand centres is of
paramount consequence not less to mental grasp than to
industrial success.” Again : “ Depend upon it that much
of the confusion of thought, awkwardness, hashfulness.
stntterings, stupidity, and irresolution which we encounter
in the world, is dependent on defective or misdirected
muscular training, and that the thoughtful and diligent
cultivation of this is conducive to breadth of mind as well as
to bread th of shoulders ” In a valuable report on Sloyd and
Kindergarten occupations in Elementary Schools, which
was made in 1896 by J. Struthers, Esq, one of Her
Majesty’s Inspectors of Schools in Scotland, and presented
to both Houses of Parliament, Mr. Struthers says :
“ Even if we lay no stress on the physiological connexion,
it still remains true that the process of manual training by


Sloyd* is the name often used to describe school
manual training which is educational in character,
aiming not at any special technical instruction, but at
the general development of the pupils, mentally as
well as physically. The system originated in Sweden
and was at first confined to wood-working; but, as now
adopted generally in Europe and America, it includes
all kinds of work with the hands and with simple tools,
—in wood, metal, cardboard, or any other suitable
medium. The outlay for material and tools would
not need to be so great as that required by our exist-
ing sham system of manual training. Provided that
our teachers were trained for such work, Sloyd could
easily be extended to every school in the State. In
Prance, for instance, all the children in the elementary
schools receive such manual training, while supple-
mentary schools provide for the special instruction
necessary for the teaching of trades and the training
of apprentices. In New South Wales, out of a total
of 238,233 scholars, only 913 children were receiving
(in 1899) the wretched substitute offered fora proper
educational manual training.
which hand faculty is developed affords a particularly
favourable field for the exercise and development of what
are generally regarded as purely mental faculties. On this
point we may appeal to experience. One cannot watch a
group of children engaged in one of the more advanced
kindergarten occupations requiring individual work, with-
out being convinced that the higher faculties of discrimi-
nation, selection, practical judgment, and calculation or
foresight are being exercised to an unusual degree.
Probably there is no single faculty brought into play in the
teaching of the ordinary school subjects, which is not exer-
cised in an approximately equal degree in manual work.”
* Swedish, Sldyd=skill, dexterity ; adjective slog. Com-
pare Eng. sleight in sleight of hand.


The following points may be noted. The instruc-
tion. is given not by workmen, but by skilled and
specially trained teachers, most of them ordinary
school-teachers. The first work done has always been
to teach the teachers, and no one is allowed to teach
who is not qualified by knowledge of both theory and
practice.
The manual training is not permitted to interfere
with the teaching of the ordinary school subjects,
but experience has proved that the latter do not
suffer. On the contrary, “It is precisely,” says Mr.
Struthers, “ in those schools where this kind of work
has been most developed that the work in ordinary
subjects is found to be most efficient. 5 ’
In the higher classes, as well as in the lower, the
manual training introduced has shortened the time
taken in the learning of other subjects without a
decrease in the quality or quantity of the results.
Lastly, since the training is one in which individual
initiative, spontaneity, and self-reliance are empha-
sised, the classes must he limited, and one of the great
defects of the existing system would thus he in some
measure corrected.
For a full account of the very great work which is
being done in England, in other European countries,
and in America, hy the introduction of educational
manual training in the schools, I refer you to the
various reports and publications of such countries,
which I presume are accessible to you in the office
of your Education Department. For a summary of
the advantages to he gained hy the adoption of Sloyd,
I quote again from the able report of Mr. Struthers.
He says : —“ We should secure a direct result, valuable
in itself, viz., increased dexterity of hand in children,


in greater or less measure according to the time
spent upon it. But we should secure an indirect
result of still greater importance, inasmuch as we
should turn to educational account a great natural
force, the interest which children have in making
things, and cause it to contribute towards their in-
tellectual education, and specially toward the develop-
ment of certain qualities of mind and character which
should go some way to counteract the evil effects of
class teaching. And in securing these results, we
should at the same time be acting in the interests of
a complete and well-balanced education.”
If educational manual training is to be introduced
into the elementary schools of New South Wales, it
will be necessary in the first place to provide for the
technical training of the teachers. The power of a
Minister of Education is great; the power of the
officers of the Department is even greater, but an
improved system of education cannot be secured by
altering a regulation, or by ordering the teachers to
give instruction in what they have never learned.
For example, a few years ago orders were issued by
the Education Department in New South Wales to the
effect that Kindergarten work should be done at certain
times in infant schools, but no sufficient provision was
made for the instruction of the teachers, while the
supply of necessary material was ridiculously inade-
quate. At the present time many teachers are
obliged to go outside the Department for that
instruction which is not provided within. We are
suffering now for long years of ignorance, indolence,
and unwillingness to learn. Our neighbours in
Victoria, wiser than we are, have imported special
teachers with the highest certificates (see Victorian


Reports, 1899 and 1900, p. 32) whose first duties are
to deliver lectures, give instruction to teachers, and
organise manual training and kindergarten teaching
in the schools o£ that State.
And here 3 come finally to the greatest defect in
cur system, the blackest spot upon our tc glorious
luminary,” the fault which most urgently stands in
need of correction. If New South Wales is to be
judged by what she does, or even attempts to do, in
the training of teachers, she must be content to take
a place very far back in the congress of nations.
We have in this State no systematic training of
teachers which deserves the name. We even fail now
to maintain the standard, low as it was, of previous
years. Formerly, attempts were made to give some
systematic instruction to pupil teachers in special
classes. We have abandoned that. Formerly,
opportunities were given to students in training
colleges for further instruction at the University of
Sydney. Those opportunities have been reduced
year after year, until now (1901) there are only three
Training College students attending lectures there.
The Department has virtually declared that it is un-
able or unwilling to allow its future teachers to enjoy
the benefits of University education. I look hack
with longing to those years when our class rooms at
the University were filled with a large band of young-
teachers, capable, hard-working students, who, with
enthusiastic eagerness, tried to fit themselves for the
duties of a noble profession. You sent us of your
best and they justified your choice. And I look
forward with hope to the time when a return to the
same generous and intelligent policy will enable
University professors and Public School teachers to


meet together again as fellow-learners and fellow-
workers in the same cause of education.
The Public School teachers of New South Wales
form what is practically a “ close ” body. No out-
sider is admitted to the ranks except under the most
exceptional circumstances. It is therefore of vital
importance that the material from which we draw
our teachers be as good as we can get, and the
training as good as we can make it. The supply of
pupil teachers is abundant in quantity, but the
quality leaves much to be desired. This is largely
due to the fact that the inducements offered are
insufficient—the apprenticeship is a long and arduous
one, the instruction given during the apprenticeship
is absurdly inadequate, and the hope of being
admitted to the Training College very dim and
uncertain. The Department loses the services of
many of the cleverest boys and girls, who would
gladly become teachers, if they were not compelled
in order to do so, to leave off learning and begin
teaching at so early an age. Once admitted, a pupil
teacher is set at once to teach, and for four years he
continues teaching. He is supposed to receive in-
struction from the head master or mistress, the
minimum time for such instruction being fixed by the
Department at one hour a day. But as you know,
the minimum becomes the maximum. He is also
supposed to receive instruction in the theory and
practice of bis profession, but as you know also, that
is practically impossible under existing circumstances.
He is given a class and he is set to teach it. It is
a shame and a disgrace that a girl in her early teens,
unformed in body and mind, should have, as is often
the case, to undertake the charge of classes of 50,
60, 70, and I believe even 80, pupils.


Throughout their apprenticeship, pupil teachers
have really no systematic training in their business.
I may be told in reply that they have opportunities
fox practice and that experience is the best teacher.
Would this answer be taken as sufficient in any
other profession ? A smart pupil teacher with a
little help will no doubt pick up his trade, and the
tricks of his trade—the bad tricks as well as the good
tricks. He will teach as he has been taught. At the
end of the four years, if hehaspassed the inadequate
tests prescribed for him during that time by the
regulations, he is declared qualified to enter the
Training College. Now, at last, he hopes to receive
that c ‘ systematic training” which is to put the final
polish on the finished product! Alas, he may not
enter! The great majority of the qualified candi-
dates receive not the slightest additional training
or instruction. They are drafted into the schools,
where in process of time they too may have pupil
teachers placed under them, whom they will be
expected to train and to teach. The greater part
of the Public School teachers of New South Wales
have had no systematic training beyond what I
have described, and still a deluded public is in-
formed that we have a “'perfect system” of educa-
tion. The small and privileged minority who enter
the Training College occupy a somewhat better
position. Our local colleges, however, in spite of
the ability of the existing staff, are not equal in
range of study or equipment to a second-rate train-
ing college in England. One example will suffice.
In one of your training colleges, history and geo-
graphy completely disappeared from the syllabus
for a period of more than six years. Yet during all


that time the college was sending forth qualified
teachers of history and geography !
Let us turn for a moment to what is done in a
sister State—a comparison which will be found very
humiliating for New South Wales. In South Aus-
tralia the course of training and instruction for
pupil teachers is four years. The first and second
years are passed, not in learning their business at
the expense of the children, but in a school for
pupil teachers, in which they receive, from specially
qualified masters, a good general education, includ-
ing instruction in the processes and methods of
teaching. The third and fourth years are partly
spent in actual teaching in their own former schools.
During this time they receive one hour’s instruction
daily from the headmaster, or mistress. They may
be required, in addition, to attend classes at the
Training College, or at some other centre for collec-
tive instruction, and may also be aided in their
studies by correspondence with the University
Training College, or the Pupil Teachers’ School.
The Training College forms part of the University.
The required period of training is two years, but
promising students are allowed the opportunity of
further study. In addition to the usual training
and instruction, students attend lectures on psy-
chology, the science and history of education, and
school organisation and methods.
The indispensable preliminary to any effective
change in our national system of education is to
teach the teachers. We have been content to stereo-
type the faults of past generations, with the result
too often that the products of the system have been
men who forget nothing and learn nothing. Ido not


overlook the number of excellent teachers among you,
men and women who, in spite of little reward and
much discouragement, have striven to make them-
selves acquainted with the heat that is thought and
done in education. But I feel sure that such men and
women will he the first to rejoice in any reform which
will make the path less difficult for their successors.
You will have the reward of those who, witnesses for
the faith that is in them, receive not the promise, yet
see it and greet it from afar. The next generation of
teachers, happy in the possession of privileges which
to you have been denied, will rise up and call you
blessed, knowing that without your labours they could
not have entered into the inheritance.
Many years ago there was an opportunity of estab-
lishing a Training College for teachers in connection
with the University, but those in authority failed to
take advantage of it, and it lapsed. Another oppor-
tunity must he found or made. It is not necessary,
and! hope it will not he thought desirable, to setup
an elaborate residential establishment. What is
wanted is a working body of men and women, not an
expensive hoarding-house* The students would not
only have the advantages of a higher education in the
ordinary subjects, for the teaching of which no ade-
quate provision is now made, but might in addition
be required to study the application of logic and
psychology to education, the theory, history, and
practice of education, school systems, modes of organi-
*• In South Australia students of the University Train-
ing College, nob living with their parents, are required to
reside in approved lodgings and to conform to such rules
for their conduct as may be made by the Minister. This
regulation satisfies all the real needs of the case.


sation, and methods of instruction. The practical train-
ing would be properly organised on scientific lines,
and provision would be made for instruction in the
principles and practice of educational manual training.
It might not he necessary for every student to pass
through the whole course, as thus described. The
curriculum could be arranged to suit the needs of
different classes of teachers, but encouragement should
be given to all who show themselves capable and
desirous of profiting by the full course of training.
Pupil teachers should receive a part of their train-
ing in special schools, or where that is impossible
in collective classes at different centres. This of
course implies that they should be freed during part
of the day, or part of the year, from the work of
actual teaching. Under the present system gross
injustice is done to the pupil, to the pupil teacher,
and to the head-master, and what I propose is the
bare minimum of what is advocated and often attained
in other countries.
Someone may object that our teachers do not
require to be so highly educated, or that we propose
to give them an education “ above their position ”
and so tempt them to leave it. These are discredit-
able objections, unworthy of us, and of our country.
They are relics of a time when anyone was thought
good enough to be a teacher. If he were not alto-
gether blind, lame, or impotent, his ignorance or
indolence mattered little. We have been forced by
the pressure of competition to provide scientific train-
ing for those entering other professions, but in the
preparation of our teachers we still, to use Lord
Rosebery’s phrase, trust to things muddling out all
right in the end.


England has now found that in industrial compe-
fcitioiij what she has to fear most is not the underpaid
foreign labourer, but the skilled mechanic of America,
and the scientific artisan of Germany. But behind
both of these are the American and German schools
and universities, with their trained teachers, and
carefully graded steps iu the educational ladder. It
is iu these institutions that the weapons are forged
which will gain the victory in the industrial and
commercial strife of nations.
The more highly endowed a man is, and the more
highly he is trained iu the work of his profession,
the more he loves it, the more he desires to live for
it, as well as by it. Give us such men, and they
will give to your educational system what a machine,
no matter how perfect, can never possess or transfer
—-enthusiasm, intelligence, inspiration, and life. You
may then cease to complain that so many of your best
students are compelled to seek in other countries and
in other professions that encouragement and reward
which your own Department does not provide.
I am speaking at a moment when the political life
of our nation is expressing itself in one of its baser
forms—electioneering. Few electioneering phrases
are more familiar to ns than those in which politicians
demand the encouragement of productive industries,
and emphasise the need of reproductive expenditure.
Well, I speak now to the representatives of the
greatest producing industry in the world. It lies
with you, public school teachers, to foster aud train
those powers of character, will, and intelligence which
make the good man and woman and the good citizen.
And if any expenditure is reproductive, surely it is
that expenditure which provides the means of making


the coming generation more worthy of their country
and of their fathers, and more fitted for the burdens
that destiny may bring to them.
I cannot tell you, in the language of statistics, what
percentage of return you may expect from your
labours; I prefer to fall back upon the words of an old
story, the story of the man who went forth to sow,
and as he sowed, some seed fell upon good ground and
yielded fruit, growing up and increasing, and brought
forth fruit, some thirty, some sixty, and some a
hundred fold.


NOTES
I. INSPECTORS OF SCHOOLS
The position of an Inspector of Schools in New South
"Wales is not what it ought to he. His salary when he
enters upon office is less than that of a head-master of a
second class school. The result is that many of the
best teachers and most capable organisers do not regard the
position as a particularly desirable one. This is a matter
for very serious consideration. The duties of an Inspector
of Schools require the exercise of very high gifts of character
and intelligence, and any restriction of the field of selection
is dangerous for the interests of our State education.
Apart from this objection, the individual freedom and
responsibility of Inspectors under the present system seem
to lee extremely limited. I have read very carefully for
many years the reports of the Inspectors, as published by
the Education Department. They consist almost entirely
of tabulated statistics. We do not put our Inspectors to
their highest uses if we confine their reports to what might
be done by a not very superior clerk. If we turn to the
reports of the Inspectors of Schools in Victoria we shall
discover a striking contrast. According to evidence taken
before a Victorian commission, the reports of the Inspectors
were in some cases expurgated before publication. Yet in
spite of this the reports are excellent and stimulating. The
Inspectors speak with great freedom of the defects of the
schools, not in regard to broken windows and leaking roofs
merely, but of defects of teaching and organisation. They
condemn had methods, and discuss and recommend better
ones. Their reports as a whole are most interesting read-
ing, and are profitable for teaching, for reproof, for
correction. Expurgation may sometimes be expedient ■ it
is a much greater evil to make expurgation unnecessary by
restricting the Inspector to the work of tabulating results.
Until such restrictions be removed, the cultured and
capable men who form the present staff of Inspectors
cannot take their true place in the educational system of
New South Wales.


II. SCHOOLS FOR DEFICIENT AND BACKWARD
CHILDREN
Want of time prevented me from even mentioning special
schools for backward and deficient children. There are, in
every community, children, who are by birth or misfortune,
mentally imperfect, although neither insane nor idiotic.
Such children, with well-directed scientific treatment, may
become useful members of society, while without such
treatment they drag out wretched lives, and often end
their days in hospitals for the imbecile. In nearly all
European countries there are special schools for such
children. In Victoria for many years efforts have been
made on their behalf. Except in the special case of the
Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind, New South Wales does
nothing.


Sk'DNET :
WKBSD.ALE, SHUOSJIiriI & Co., Printers,
117 Clahkmck Street
