

By Kathleen Monypenny
The kites that
flew into the
moon
PITMAN




"




THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO
THE MOON
and Other Chinese Stories


For
Michael,
Rosemary, Ann, and Riddle-me-Ree
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
THANKS are due to the publishers for their courtesy in
permitting use to be made of copyright material in the
following:—
"The Dragon after his Winter Sleep," largely adapted
from a story in The Chinese Fairy Book (from Chinesische
Marchen), by Richard Wilhelm, translated from the
German by F. H. Martens: by permission of Messrs.
Ernest Benn, Ltd., and Messrs. Frederick A. Stokes (New
York).
"The Ants' Dinner-Party," based upon Wilhelm's
" King of the Ants," in the same collection.
Part of the traditional story of Princess Chang O in
" The Kites that Flew into the Moon," adapted from one of
the Myths and Legends of the Chinese, by E. T. C. Werner,
by permission of Messrs. George G. Harrap & Co., Ltd.
I am also very much indebted to the Officials of the
Prints and Drawings Department, as well as of the
Oriental Department of the British Museum, for their
courtesy and help in many ways.
I was particularly delighted at being allowed to handle
the Scroll painting " The Hundred Children" (Ming
Dynasty), in the Prints and Drawings Department.
K. M.


%
4
*
.
'
'
t « *


TNE
V rw|\ % kites
S>TJ ''I 7 j\ THAT
>W /A—1
<&, / V(\T 'nto
i4i? s / i THE
A
p«fe m
**" iffitltr


THE
KITES THAT FLEW
INTO THE MOON
AND
OTHER CHINESE STORIES
By
KATHLEEN MONYPENNY
Illustrated by
Kathleen M. Blair
LONDON
SIR ISAAC PITMAN & SONS, LTD.


CONTENTS
THE STORY OF THE CHINESE MAT . . I
THE STORY OF THE SECOND CHINESE MAT:
LITTLE-SCHOLAR-OF-THE-CROOKED-NOSE. 10
The Story of the Magic Gong . . .13
CONCERT IN SPRING-TIME . . .22
The Story told by the Dragon-Fly Boat. .25
THE ANTS' DINNER-PARTY . . -37
THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON . 50
The Story of Chang O . . • 5^
LION-DOG AND DRAGON . . .69
The Dragon after his Winter Sleep . 78
SIR ISAAC PITMAN & SONS, LTD.
PITMAN HOUSE, PARKER STREET, KINGSWAY, LONDON, W.C.2
THE PITMAN PRESS, BATH
PITMAN HOUSE, LITTLE COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
UNITEERS BUILDING, RIVER VALLEY ROAD, SINGAPORE
27 BECKETTS BUILDINGS, PRESIDENT STREET, JOHANNESBURG
ASSOCIATED COMPANIES
PITMAN PUBLISHING CORPORATION
2 WEST 45TH STREET, NEW YORK
205 WEST MONROE STREET, CHICAGO
SIR ISAAC PITMAN & SONS (CANADA), LTD.
(INCORPORATING THE COMMERCIAL TEXT BOOK COMPANY
PITMAN HOUSE, 381-383 CHURCH STREET, TORONTO
MADE IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE PITMAN PRESS, BATH
D7—(G.79)


The Story of the Chinese Mat
I AM now going to tell you the story of the
Chinese mat that lies on my floor. You
will see that it is full of hills and dales, and
we know that there is a lake because there is a
boat moored to an island; the harvest moon is
always large and red, and you can see it rising
over the lake.
Autumn had come late that year, and so the
harvest had been gathered in a hurry. The
Child - with - the - Sweet - Sounding - Name had
been very busy helping to make sweet seed-
and rice-cakes, and frightening away the birds
that ran after the men in the fields to pick up
the ripe grains that fell as they worked. She
did this with a big wooden rattle. But now the
cold winds, rain, and white mist had come, the
T o-and-From-the-World-Gate was closed for
the winter, and in the Maiden's Court sat
the Child - with - the - Sweet - Sounding - Name,


Flower-of-Heaven, making pictures and pat-
terns to put on mats and rugs for the cold
winter.
The stove gave out a thick warmth and
Flower-of-Heaven had on her blue silk py-
jamas lined with white rabbit fur. Soon she
would put her rose pyjamas lined with fox over
them. She sat on a thick quilt and as she
worked she sighed. She was doing the picture
for her new mat; it was to be dull green and
she would have the blue tiled summer-house
with the scarlet pillars in it. Leaning over her
drawing-board she put that in; the dark
brown fields would go in a line too. Soon the
men would plough the stubble and roots into
the earth before Snow White and Frost King
covered it and made it hard.
Suddenly she heard a long melodious note
of music, deep and rich like the single note of
an organ or a flute. "It must be the Bird
Chang, the Phoenix," she thought, and went to
the door. There in the windy autumn sky was
a flock of geese flying south, but no Bird


Chang. Again she heard the note, and there
against the sky was, not indeed the phoenix, but
a pure white unicorn, a golden feather in his
horn, the magic animal who is able to fly or
run, who can make strange and beautiful things
happen to humans. Little Flower-of-Heaven
went inside and sat at her board again.
But now it was summer and the long melodi-
ous note filled the air; the flowers bloomed and
the wind brought their sweet scents to the
door, the bamboos waved, and the willow
tree was no longer bare. A field of wild red
lilies spread out before her near a lotus-covered
lake, and she ran outside with her windbells —
tiny pieces of glass strung together. She hung
them on the willow and peach trees so that
they would make delicate music when the
wind blew. Wearing the pale mauve and
pink clothes of summer, she went into fields
of flowers carrying her painted glass bells with
her.
As she fastened them on the tall lilies they
nodded their heads and tinkled the bells to


say, "Thank you, thank you. We like that."
Far away she heard the cuckoo calling, as she
walked beside the lake where the blue lotus
grew, until she came to its farthest end; there
was a painted Boat tied up, and little Flower-of-
Heaven got into it. It went away of its own
accord, and she had no need to touch the oars.
"Where are you taking me?" she asked the
Boat.
"We are going on a long journey," answered
the Boat as distinctly as he could; for his
mouth, of course, was close to the water.
Then they went down a great river, past tall
cypress trees and bamboo, over rushing tor-
rents. Three times they were nearly dashed
to pieces in the rapids and little Flower-of-
Heaven held her breath.
"It's all right," gasped the Boat; "here we
are." And they sailed into calm waters, coming
to rest against an island where there was a deep
blue house, tall lilies and peonies that nodded
their heads to her. It was a splendid sight;
all the birds of heaven seemed to have gathered


in the pine tree nearby. On the top sat the
Phoenix, the bright scarlet and yellow bird
called Chang.
"Here you are," he said quite naturally, and
nodded his head in the Chinese manner.
Little Flower-of-Heaven bowed deeply from
the waist, as she had been taught to do when
paying her respects to the Eldest Lady.
Branches of flowering red cherry and peach
and pale almond blossom stretched upwards to
the sky. Leaning among the peach blossoms
was a tall figure in plum-coloured silk and a
satin cap, playing a flute. When he saw
Flower-of-Heaven, he stopped playing and
came over. Bowing deeply and looking in the
opposite direction as etiquette demanded, he
presented her with a large scarlet card bearing
a beautiful gold dragon and his name char-
acters painted in jet black. Flower-of-Heaven
for her part kept her eyes modestly to the
ground, until the Stranger pulled a kite out of
his pocket and flew it in the air; then she had
to look up and watch it, high above the almond


playing a flute
blossoms. So all day they played with the
Kite, and the Stranger played his flute and
told her how he loved her, his Flower-of-
Heaven.
The Kite had soared up into the blue skv,


higher than Flower-of-Heaven had ever seen
a kite go, and the Bird Chang sat on the top
of his tree and watched it too. Then he
blinked his gold lids over his green eyes. The
tall Stranger brought delicate food and fruits
out of the little blue house and they ate it
together and drank pale tea out of tiny thin
cups. And he opened a green box and brought
out large purple plums, pieces of golden
orange, and whole tiny cumquats covered with
sugar, and Flower-of-Heaven stood them on
top of each other and made a Sugar-Plum
Fairy. It was very beautiful, her coloured
fruit fairy.
But now the bright round moon began to
come up and the Boat was calling her. The
tall Stranger stood up. She ran towards him
and he took her in his arms and held her very
close so that she felt his heart beating. But she
had to go, for the Boat was calling her and the
Bird Chang was watching from the top of the
tree.
"Happiness lasts for a day and you cannot


preserve it like ginger," he said, speaking for
the second time.
So they walked down to the water's edge, and
there the tall Stranger stooped and kissed her,
and said, "We will meet again some day."
The Boat took her away, and the last she
saw of the Magic Island was the tall Stranger
standing beside the peach blossoms with the
moonlight shining on the folds of his silk robe.
The lilacs and peonies had bowed their silky
heads and gone to sleep, and their bells only
tinkled drowsily now and again. But the tall
Stranger stood at the edge of the lake with his
flute, and as he played the island rose into the
air and floated away towards the moon. But
the notes of the flute came down to her long
after island, bird, and trees had vanished
away.
Suddenly they were back home again, behind
the thick walls of the courtyard, with the
To-and-From-the-World-Gate shut behind
them.
Now when Flower-of-Heaven came to make


her mat she found she could not possibly show
those pale flowers or their lovely scent, or the
dear tall Stranger with his flute and his music,
or the magic journey. So just to remind her-
self she put in the Boat who talked, the little
summer-house, and the moon. But the Bird
Chang had put a single long silk thread in
with the wool Flower-of-Heaven used, and it
was a magic thread, and that is why I was able
to guess the story of the Chinese mat.


The Story of the Second
Chinese Mat
LITTLE-SCHOLAR-OF-THE-CROOKED-NOSE
ONCE upon a time there was a young lad.
His parents were very poor, but they
had managed to send him to school. He
had passed the third and the sixth examina-
tions and all the other examinations until at
last there were no more for him to pass and
he had to wear spectacles. But this did not
satisfy him, and after sucking the thumb of
idleness at home for some months he felt that
he was no wiser than he had been.
So one morning he said good-bye to his
father and mother, and, after begging the
farmer whose cows he looked after to give him
a holiday, he took his quilt and rolled it up;
and then he put his pencils and wricing things,
his paint-brush and paper, into a bamboo case
and rolled that up too. Then he set off to
find what he could.


STORY OF THE SECOND CHINESE MAT
He soon reached a thick forest at the bottom
of a gully, and here he was caught by wander-
ing brigands and nearly beaten; but when
they found he was of no importance and had
nothing to steal they let him go. Then he
walked by the side of a great wide river, and
saw the ploughed fields, and watched the birds
flying over them. The young rice was coming
up and the lilies bloomed and the bamboos
waved in the wind. But still he went on.
"Something must happen soon," he said to
himself, and hoped he would find some ad-
venture. Meantime it was nice to stroll along
in the sun.
Now on the mountain near the village which
was his home there was an old stone temple. It
had a stone-paved garden and a bright red
roof, and a great wide courtyard enclosed its
gardens. From a carved balcony on the side
of the hill you could look out over the country
and see the houses and people, and the good
land planted with beans and maize and fruit
trees, and the wide river running through it.


Part of the temple balanced on the side of
that hill like a cat on a sloping roof, and on the
highest part was a tall blue tiled pagoda, whose
windows all had bright red and yellow shades.
The four corners of its little roof were turned
upwards, so that wicked spirits or little devils
could not sit comfortably on them. Bells rang
at all hours of the day, and the monks were
very holy and very fat. If you don't know
what a pagoda is, your honourable father will
tell you and your mother will certainly be able
to build you one with blocks.
We will call Sho-Yin " Little-Scholar-of-the-
Crooked-Nose", because that was what every-
one thought him. Well, Little-Scholar-of-the-
Crooked-Nose suddenly felt very lonely as he
wandered through the forest, and remembered
his father and mother and the Temple where
he had been to school. And he looked behind
for the little leaning Pagoda and the Temple
on the Hill, and felt sure he would see a moun-
tain man at any moment. However, he made
up his mind to think of something else, and


just then he heard the Temple bell ringing.
That made him remember a story the fat monk
had told him one day. This is the story.
THE STORY OF THE MAGIC GONG
Once, hundreds of years, ago, a mighty
warrior came from a distant part of the country
with a great chain of servants and food and
camels and horses, and a whole army of
soldiers. And they had a great bronze Gong
with them. When it was struck, its sonorous
tone was heard over hills and valleys. Who-
ever made it sound conquered his enemies, and
you may be sure it was the General's most
precious possession.
There was a great battle near the Temple;
and though the Chief Gong-Ringer rang the
Gong twice during the day, for the first time it
called no magic to help, and the Emperor's
Army did not melt away.
So they passed on and rested that night.
Next day after another fierce battle the
General won. But when he halted on a hill
2—(G.79


above the town and Temple, he looked back
and saw the dead bodies and the burnt houses
and blackened crops.
Suddenly, the monk had told Sho-Yin, the
General felt very sorry he had won the battle.
Calling his Chief Gong-Ringer, he galloped up
the hill with the wind blowing his silk trousers
into a balloon, and his sleeves became such a size
that he was nearly carried backwards off his horse
with the wind of speed. Behind him panted
his faithful servant, riding as best he could
with the Gong clanking against the horse's
side. At last they reached the Temple gates.
They banged and made a great knocking,
but there was no reply. Then the Warrior-
General took his spear and nearly hammered
in the gate, but still no one came. So he stood
up on his horse and looked over the high stone
entrance, and there was the Abbot himself.
"Why don't you open the gate?" shouted
the angry General.
"I'm waiting for you to ask me," said the
Abbot calmly.


MAT^
This gave the General something to think
about, for he generally gave orders.
" Open the gate," he shouted.
He heard the Abbot walking away. So he
But still no one came
stood on his horse again and looked over the
top of the gate, and his white whiskers shook
with rage.
"You will only have to come back. I will
destroy your Temple if you do not let me in.


Kindly do so. I am the General and accus-
tomed to respect," he thundered.
" And I am the Abbot," said the other,
gathering up his gown. He too was angry
now, so he said: "I know all about you.
You have your famous Gong there and it
has failed you at last; your Army is nearly
defeated, and you're wondering what will
happen next."
When the Abbot told him his thoughts, the
General was very frightened, and his white
eyebrows bristled straight out. He turned his
horse and struck the Gong himself, but not a
sound came out of it. He was still more
alarmed. Now at last he begged the Abbot
to open his gate: "For," said he, "your magic
is greater than mine."
So the Abbot stood and welcomed the Gen-
eral when the gate was opened.
"Please come in," he said; "we will try
and find some rooms, however miserable, for
you to rest in."
Then the faithful servant came in too


bearing the Gong, and as soon as they were
inside the courtyard it rang of its own accord.
"That's a very wonderful gong," said the
Abbot; and the General explained how it had
always brought him good luck till now, and
how many years it had taken to make.
The General was given the Eastern Rooms
of the Temple. There he rested for three days,
sitting in the sun under the peach trees, look-
ing at the gardens with the Abbot. The night
before he left he woke at two in the morning,
and by the light of the moon saw the Gong
beside his bed.
" I am going to stay here," said the Gong
in a voice like a deep bell.
The General thought there must be a spirit
in the room and got out of bed to see. But
there was the Gong, as large as ever, and no
matter how the General tried to make it speak
again it refused to utter another word. In the
morning there was no sign of it in his room, and
it was time for the General to go back to his
soldiers. So he said good-bye, and, making


18 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
the best of things, presented the famous Gong
to the Temple. "For," said he, "since it
refused to ring for me, it belongs to you;
and"—here the Gong gave a faint ring of
approval —" I see that fighting is not the way to
make people happy."
So the monks took the Gong and hung it at
the entrance to their Temple, and, thanking the
General, saw him safely down the slippery hill.
And many mighty Emperors and poets
struck the Gong, but it gave its most beautiful
notes when the Abbot rang it every year on the
day the General gave it to the Temple.
Little Sho-Yin was walking along thinking
of this story, though not in the words I have
used, and wishing he could hear the rich
sonorous notes of the Gong across the lake now,
for it was evening. He also thought of the seed-
cake and melon seeds and the evening rice at
home, and his mother cooking it. So he pulled
out his kite and flew it, to cheer himself up.
Suddenly he heard a small tinkling sound.


Looking up, he felt sure he could see the little
Pagoda from the Temple on the Hill I have just
told you about. But he was miles away from it.
Yet certainly it was moving.
" Surely that can't be my —our—little Pago-
da," said Sho-Yin out loud. It was indeed
walking, however, as though it was on stilts,
and at every step its little red and blue glass
bells rang.
"Are you the honourable Pagoda from the
Temple on the Hill?" called out Sho-Yin in
great excitement.
By now the Pagoda was quite near, and
shook her little bells.
"Sho-Yin, Sho-Yin," she called. "Is that
you, Little-Scholar-of-the-Crooked-Nose ?"
And little Sho-Yin, for he wasn't really
very old, ran up to the friendly Pagoda, and
felt very hungry and tired and very unwise in-
deed. But the Pagoda seemed to know all
about it, for she said: "Just step inside here
and I'll soon take you home. Your father and
mother are looking everywhere for you."


Sho-Yin didn't need to be told twice. In
he climbed, and found himself in a small
room with walls of silk. A sugar-candy man
was there, waiting to make the funniest sweets
with his candy syrup —a bird's-nest or a bright
green lizard in hot toffee syrup. Then it was
fun to watch it set, and still more fun to eat it.
When he had had some hot soup and more hot
sweets he walked about in the Pagoda, and in
the second story he found a whole roomful of
kites and dolls.
Now the sky grew bright with clouds of all
imaginable shapes and colours as the sun be-
gan to set. Sho-Yin sat at one of the windows
and played with the little bells when he wasn't
eating the wonderful sweets the Sweet-man
made on his little charcoal brazier. Then they
carried a duck, sitting on her nest with two
ducklings just coming out of their shells, to the
top of the Pagoda.
"Please, honoured Pagoda," said little Sho-
Yin, "would you like to eat this humble piece
of barley sugar ?"


So the Pagoda ate it and at last they reached
home.
Sho-Yin's father and mother were so glad to
have their Little-Scholar-of-the-Crooked-Nose
safely home again that they forgot to be angry
with him for going so far from home to find
wisdom.
Three times they bowed ceremoniously to
the Pagoda for so kindly bringing Sho-Yin
home, and made him do the same. And he
went to bed feeling that perhaps he had found
his adventure after all, and anyway it was very
important to be brought back in a Walking
Pagoda. He never felt quite the same after his
wonderful journey.
The Pagoda smiled and rang her little red
and blue bells in farewell. As she set off to
climb her mountain in the setting sun, her
vermilion windows shone gloriously.


Concert in Spring=Time
THE snow had melted and the harsh
winds of winter had died down. For a
week the children had watched the buds
on the willow tree growing greener, until at
last this early morning the leaves were there,
folded tightly in a green roll.
It was a feast day. It was the first day of
Spring and the warm wind from the south
blew across the Western Lake, passed a caress-
ing hand over the young flowers, and brushed
against the roofs and corners of buildings hung
with bells.
The children had been carefully washed for
the feast day, and their mother had dressed
them in the pale clothes of Spring, thick silk
of iridescent blue, of rose and pale mauve, with
caps of black satin. Their father had toys and
kites in his sleeves and pockets, and as they
set off the servants followed behind their


sedan chairs, carrying trays of food, fat earth-
enware bottles of wine, dishes, and charcoal
braziers which they would light to heat the
food and keep them all warm later on.
Off went the procession. The Candy-man
in the street saw them, and joined in with his
little brazier and pots of sugar. Their father
and mother were swung along ahead by the
coolies, who carried the sedan chairs on long
poles, for that is how many people go about
still in China. Through the narrow, twisty
streets they went, until at last they came to the
Gardens of the Western Lake with its temple
and its tall square pagodas.
Here the bearers put down the chairs and
everyone got out.
Beggars stood at the gates on this auspicious
day, playing sad tunes on two strings or maybe
three, or blowing thin piercing notes on their
flutes, and the children's father put a coin into
each begging bowl for good luck throughout
the year. At last, after much bustle and talk
and blowing up of brazier fires, their midday


24 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
meal was ready. After the hot soup there was
the game of trying-to-get-your-eggshell-off-
whole, for there were many eggs, whose shells
the children had helped to paint for the feast
of Spring.
Now the gardens round the Lake and the
Temple of the Lord of Heaven are very old
and full of magic. Do not, therefore, be sur-
prised at what I am going to tell you. When
the last of their gorgeous kites, their butterflies,
and Golden Birds and Fish had floated out
across the plains below, they ran down the
hundred steps of the Temple to the edge of the
Lake.
There lay the Dragon-Fly Boat. "Get in,
children," she said softly; "get in quickly and
I will show you some of the secrets of the
gardens."
Then they sailed backwards through Time,
across the waters of the lotus-covered Lake,
until they passed under the stone arches of the
Bridge of the Falling Flower, so called because
as you went under it the flower of memory died


within you. The Boat had sails of green silk
gauze, and so skimmed over the water rather
than moved through it. This enabled the
Boat to talk better.
"As you know, my little children," she said,
"these gardens are hundreds of years old.
But long before poets and emperors made this
a garden of incomparable beauty, the Lake was
magic. This is its story."
THE STORY TOLD BY THE DRAGON-FLY
BOAT
There was once a mighty magician who could
turn men into stones and make the earth spout
forth fire. He could also make rivers run
where there was no water; but besides this,
he could shoot out dazzling rays of light, and,
mounting them, ride up into the clouds.
Now this mighty magician was out walking
one day when he met a band of fierce robbers.
They demanded his money, but as he handed
it to them it disappeared. Then they took off
his gorgeous silk coat, embroidered in colours


and sewn with pearls. He wore a peacock
feather of purest jade in his cap. But his cap
was magic, so when they took it off his head
it sailed away and sat on the top of a tree
nearby. Then they said, "Never mind that
cap; we'll have these pearls." But, my
children, when they tried to unrip the pearls
from the gorgeous coat, they found neither
pearls nor coat in their hands. Then they took
off all his clothes, and began to beat the magician
—who stood there smiling —and tied him
to that flowering peach tree over there. Then
the magician, pointing to the tree, said,
"Climb up that tree and get my cap and you
can have it." But the robbers were afraid,
and not until they had bargained his life
against theirs would the bravest and biggest of
them approach the tree.
The magician made a sign to the Earth,
Tree Spirits, and Stars, who were his
brothers; and as the robber began to climb,
the tree grew and grew and stretched and
stretched, and still the cap was on top of that


tree. Then those left behind on the ground
were afraid and muttered together, but being
desperate men drew their sticks and daggers
and surrounded the magician. The leader held
the point of his dagger over the magician's heart
and said, "If that tree doesn't stop growing,
this dagger goes into your heart."
By this time the top of the tree was near the
sky, and the cap lost in a passing cloud. The
robber was terribly afraid of going up any
farther, for he did not feel at all properly
dressed to meet the Lord of Heaven; "and,"
he thought, "I must certainly be nearly there
by now."
Meantime the dagger had pricked the magi-
cian's skin, and he was being almost choked.
"Dear me," he said, "you are making it
difficult for me to b-breathe, and I can't make
the magic to bring the tree down to earth if I
don't breathe."
So the brigand relaxed his hold a little
and untied the cords around his neck and
arms. Then the magician thought very hard


and took a mighty breath; he recited a spell,
and suddenly the Spirit of Trees appeared.
He was immense; each of his thighs was the
size of a great forest tree, his body like a rock,
and his voice like thunder. A great wind blew
out of his mouth when he spoke. He called the
robber chief up to him and in a voice of wind
and thunder asked why he was so unwise as to
want what was not his. The poor robber did
his best to look fierce and speak up, while
feeling very small; but the Spirit, hardly
waiting for a reply, heaved a mighty breath,
took a big swallow and swallowed the robber
in one mouthful.
Then he heaved another breath, and took
another big swallow and swallowed the man
who held the dagger; and then he called for the
man in the tree to come down, and his voice
was like the roar of the sea in a storm. The
robber slid down the tree as quickly as he
could, for he was very alarmed and it was cold
up there; and the tree-got smaller and smaller
until it was a little tree again, and at last he


stood before the Spirit, who made him help
the magician put on all his clothes again.
Then one of the party came and begged the
Spirit not to swallow them all, but perhaps
only one or two more, and they would draw
lots.
The wife of the leader begged for her hus-
band to be returned, but the Spirit only
swallowed her to keep him company. Then
the brigands implored the magician, who
stood there without saying a word, to send the
Spirit back into the trees, but the magician
only said he'd wait and see. At last he
consented to speak the magic formula and
perform the ceremonies; and to everybody's
astonishment and delight, the Tree Spirit
took three breaths and a mighty swallow, and
swallowed the magician!
Then for a while the brigands were glad to
have got rid of this tiresome person and,
kowtowing to the Spirit of Trees, they indi-
cated that they were such miserable men as to
be of no account and hoped the Spirit would
3—(G.;Q


30 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
deign to forget them. The Spirit took three
turns and disappeared in a whirlwind without
a reply. As the robber band went on their way
lamenting the loss of their leader, lo and be-
hold! there was the magician a mile or two
along the road, wearing his cap and taking
snuff as though nothing had happened, while
his servant followed behind with the donkey
and baggage.
The Boat ceased speaking.
" And what happened further," she went on,
" I will tell you another time, but I must now
attend to these currents, for we are among
strange islands."
They were indeed. Now one floated in the
air, while another moved right across their
track. Beyond lay the Blue Mountains,
hidden by their purple veil. At last they drew
into the banks of an island where stone and
marble pillars stood under fir trees of fabulous
a g e -
" Those," said the Boat, " are the courtyards


and buildings of the palace of the Great Em-
peror Yao." She stretched out a vermilion
plank, and they landed.
" Music has come into my head . . . listen /"
New-Born-Flower could not help skipping
as she went along, and Rippling-Water blew
his flute.
"Music has come into my head," said he.
"Listen!" And he played his flute again.
"That is because you are in the Land of


32 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
Everlasting Afternoon, said a voice close
beside them. " Look around you."
They looked, and Rippling-Water stopped
with his flute half-way to his lips.
Round Old Willow moved a cloud, and in it
were fish of gold and scarlet, pale yellow and
black, soft mauve and blue, waving their
feathery fins; and as they swam they stopped,
opened their mouths, and sang. So unearthly
was the beauty of their song that the buds
unfolded on Old Willow, and waved about in
the direction of the voice.
Nearby was a very respectable elder gentle-
man sitting on a benevolent-looking Tiger.
" Good afternoon," he said, and the children
each bowed deeply (or kowtowed, as the
Chinese say), touching the ground with their
heads as they had been taught.
The white-haired sage on the Tiger waved
his hand and said, " Please get up."
"We are not worthy, O Honourable Elder
Person," breathed the three together, but the
Elder Gentleman spoke in such a nice kind


voice that they straightened their backs, just
in time to see him smile and wave his magic
fly-whisk.
" Come with me and I will tell you a story,"
he said, gently whisking a fly off the Tiger's
neck. And the Tiger looked round and waggled
his whiskers so encouragingly, with such a kind
smile, that the children felt quite happy and
trotted along beside him.
Then the Venerable Person and the Benevo-
lent Tiger took them to the middle of the
Garden where once the Emperor's Palace had
been, and there beneath Old Willow they all
sat down on the worn stone steps. The Tiger,
who sat beside his master, took the oppor-
tunity to wash his face.
Suddenly they heard the music of the Singing
Fish again, and without knowing it found they
had joined in. Rippling-Water knelt and raised
his flute to his lips —his deep plum-coloured
sleeve fell back; little New-Born-Flower lifted
her small hand and struck her bird-shaped
harp; while Su-Siaou stood behind and


34 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
twanged the melon-shaped mandolin. As they
played their first notes they knew this to be
The Concert of Spring-time, though they had
never heard the music before. The sound
hung in the clear air, without one mistake, and
all the Spring and Summer flowers stood
round as they played; above their heads
floated the Singing Fish among the branches.
At last they stopped to take breath, but when
they tried to go on the music came no more.
The Concert of Spring-time was over. There
sat the bright Bird Chang on the topmost
branch of the highest tree, blinking his red-
gold eyelids.
" How did you get here ?" the children called
up. " Come down here and play with us."
" I flew," said Chang, taking the remarks in
order. " But would it be a good idea to come
down just now ?"
And he looked at the Tiger.
The Venerable Person felt it was time to
speak, so he slipped his arm through his
Tiger's reins.


"He is quite harmless, O Honourable Bird
Chang, if you care to come down amongst us.
Stay where you are, little makers of music," he
went on; "I am an old man and I sometimes
find it lonely here."
"But," said Chang, "I am sorry to say it is
time to go back to the present. The Boat is
waiting for us and the sun's shadows grow
long." It was true.
" If you will come back here some day I will
show you the garden and tell you some stories,
and you may ride on my Tiger," said the Ven-
erable Person. At that very moment the Tiger
said "Humph," and kindly allowed the chil-
dren to sit on his back while he ambled down
to the Lake. The Boat stretched out her long
plank, the children said good-bye to the Vener-
able Person, and went on board the Dragon-
Fly Boat once more.
New-Born-Flower wanted to cry, but
Rippling-Water blew such a blast on his
flute that she had to laugh instead. The
Sweet-man appeared from nowhere and began


to make butterflies sitting on a tiger's head out
of his sweets and sugar-candy. The last they
saw of the Venerable Person as they waved
good-bye was the tip of his white beard as it
blew back in the wind when he galloped away
on his Tiger.
The waters of the Thousand-Lotus Lake
gathered themselves up and sent the Boat
quickly on its way. As they passed under the
Bridge of the Falling Flower they wondered
how they came to be on the Boat, sailing along
among the ducks and water-fowl, who seemed
to know all about them.
Soon they were back at the steps of the
Scarlet Pavilion, and then were swinging home,
the road lit by the swaying, coloured paper
lanterns the coolies carried, their sedan chairs
making long queer-shaped shadows on the
road.
The long day was over and Spring had come.


The Aets 9 Dinner-Party
A LITTLE boy was sitting doing his
lessons. He was not a little English
No. He lived in China, and it
was a long time ago, so he had a black pigtail
hanging down his back. His clothes were of
soft padded and embroidered silk, with a black
satin coat and embroidered shoes.
It was evening but still quite light, and he
sat near a wide window looking out into the
garden. It was filled with strange and unusual
flowers that are unknown to you. Tall bam-
boos waved gracefully against the pale sky
above rose bushes and scented moon-flowers.
He had just had his supper and was sleepily
listening to the temple bells and cow-bells
ringing in the distance. As he was the eldest,
his brothers and sisters had already been put
to bed, and so he was alone.
Suddenly he heard a faint scratchy noise, a


38 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
small rustle. "What's that?" he said, aloud,
and turned round to look.
At that moment several hundred soldiers and
knights on horseback came galloping into the
room. Believe it or not, there they were,
dressed in black armour that curved sharply
out at the elbows, and long green silk coats and
trousers that hung below the armour.
They were certainly tiny, for their horses
were no bigger than flies. They had hunting
falcons on their wrists and dogs about the size
of a lady-bird. Up they came in great style.
Some cantered lightly over to his bed in the
corner, some to the table where the children
had just had their supper. Here they held a
great hunt with bows and arrows —one could
see it all quite plainly.
They caught a tremendous amount of birds
and game, shooting the gnats that flew about
with their arrows; and none of their catches
was any bigger than the grains of rice left
in the bowl or the crumbs on the table.
When the hunt was over there was great


excitement as they called to the servants to
pick up the game and carry it off to be
cooked.
Suddenly in came another long procession
with red, blue, and purple banners flying.
These little people had swords at their sides
and carried spears. They came to a halt in the
north-west corner of the room, with much
stamping of horses' feet and jingling of tiny
harness. They dismounted and handed their
horses over to the servants, and began to fan
themselves with delicate black silk fans.
Now though the little boy sitting near the
window with a book was supposed to be read-
ing, he could hardly believe his eyes, and
pinched himself to make sure he was not be-
witched or asleep. He saw a wonderful,
strange sight! Coolies and servants dressed in
blue now streamed in, in single file. They
carried tent-poles, tents, pots and pans, stoves,
low tables, and beautifully carved black
chairs.
They were very busy for a while, and the


40 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
sound of their shouting came faintly to the
little boy's ears, as they set up the tents on
the table. It was difficult to hear all that
was being said because of their size and,
besides, they seemed to be speaking a strange
language.
But now more servants came running in
noiselessly, for they were wearing soft slippers.
They carried fine plates and dishes, and soon
had them all set out for a feast, or so it seemed.
Hundreds of others just ran to and fro without
stopping, shouting orders and clearing the
traffic.
The little boy was by now quite used to the
sight of so many people in his room, and he
could see them all though they were so tiny.
Presently in rode a grand tall personage, wear-
ing a scarlet cap with peacock feather, and a
coat of black silk embroidered in bright
colours. He had an escort of several hundreds.
Men ran in front of him to clear the way,
flourishing long stalks of grass which they did
not hesitate to use as whips.


Suddenly a man in an iron helmet and with a
golden rod called in a loud voice: "His
Highness is graciously pleased to look at the
fish in the purple lake. Make way! Make
way!" And he flourished the golden rod.
Everyone tried to surge across the table.
Scarlet-Cap got off his horse, and, surrounded
by several of his party, went over to the little
bowl of ink. The servants were busy getting
out long fishing-rods from baskets.
But suddenly Scarlet-Cap said, " No, I am
hungry. Where is the feast?" and clapped
his hands.
Everyone dropped the fishing-lines, and the
servants came running. There was a bright
confusion of garments and colours, and soon
they were all sitting at the low tables, helping
themselves to food. Now dancers floated
out from the crowd on to a clear space
near some picture books. Pipes and flutes,
musical stones and cymbals no bigger than
a little piece of gravel were struck, and the
dance began. Though it was so faint, the


42 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
music from the tiny orchestra could be clearly
heard.
While all this was going on, the servants
had not been idle, and the little boy sat watch-
ing them, absorbed.
A table had been laid with silver and thin
eggshell china, none of it bigger than a blue-
bell. Now everyone sat down to the most
wonderful dinner-party you could imagine.
The Prince with the scarlet cap took the seat
of honour and signed to the musicians to go on
playing.
The little boy could hear all the orders being
given, for he had soon learned their language.
They drank something out of tiny gold goblets,
and by peeping very carefully he could see it
was white, like milk. An entire grasshopper's
leg was first brought in on a blade of grass,
followed by the body of a fine fat spider
roasted whole. Then came drops of honey
served in the petals of the daphne, and crumbs
of fine sugar from the ginger in the red lac-
quered box near by.


Suddenly Scarlet-Cap-and-Peacock-Feather
said, "Now make ready the nets and lines for
fishing."
So everyone left the tables, the music
stopped, and the servants threw nets into the
saucer of coloured paint-water. Scarlet-Cap
and his strange knights put their fishing-lines
into the saucer of ink.
Soon the nets were full of fish, while Scarlet-
Cap contented himself with a round baker's
dozen of carp, and his attendants exclaimed
loudly at his clever fishing. They too were
busy, and caught some fine trout. There they
all lay, a mass of bright wriggling silver on the
table.
"Now they must be cooked," said Scarlet-
Cap.
So the Prime Minister called the Head Cook,
who, although he was so fat, bowed three
times to the ground before his master.
"Take these fish," said the Prince, "and
cook them."
After much struggling to pick up as many


as he could, the fat cook went off with an arm-
ful of slippery fish, leaving his underlings to
put the rest in glass bowls of water.
But the little boy watching all this laughed,
for he distinctly saw the Head Cook give the
fish to the second cook. And the second cook
gave them to the tenth cook to clean, who gave
them to his assistant! Now the second cook
made the sauce, and soon the delicious smell of
grilling fish and spices filled the whole room.
At last all was ready, the fish were heaped high
on dishes, and tiny bowls of sauce placed
beside them.
Quickly the little men served the wonderful
food to their masters sitting on the table.
Suddenly the little boy felt very hungry. And
he thought, " After all, they are eating their
dinner here in my room. Perhaps they haven't
seen me, or they would ask me."
So he came over to the table, and there he
saw hot wine being poured into goblets smaller
than a thimble. Nobody took the slightest
notice of him, so he stretched across a group


of knights busy talking, and took one of the
little goblets very carefully. He was just about
to drink the drop of wine in it, when he felt a
sharp sting on his thumb. There was a tiny
red ant! He flicked it off angrily, and it fell
with a splash right into a bowl of sauce. There
was great confusion, and after some struggling
the poor little thing crawled out more dead
than alive.
"How very impolite and rude of you," said
Scarlet-Cap angrily in his small voice. "Be-
sides hurting our servant, you've splashed us
all over with fish sauce."
And they stood up waving their shiny swords
above their shiny black heads. But the little
boy only laughed, they looked so funny.
" You're like a lot of ants waving their feelers
about," he said.
But now Scarlet-Cap was speaking in scorn-
ful tones.
"I know nothing about books or lessons or
poetry, or games and kites. But look at me."
And they all looked respectfully and nodded
4—(G.79)


their heads. " I get on very well and am a great
captain, besides being attached to the Imperial
Court, and I know nothing about books. You
seem to spend your whole time looking at them
and learning to read and fly kites. Could you
have found all those fish in the Purple Lake ?
Of course not. Now if you would join with
me and promise to serve me faithfully, I could
make you one of my Captains. There's no
knowing what you might become. We might
even invite you to come and join us at our
banquet, which is being held in honour of my
birthday."
This seemed so ridiculous to the little boy
that he laughed. "Why," he said, " I wouldn't
get enough to eat from all your dishes put to-
gether, and I wouldn't be able to sit in your
chairs."
They all waved their swords in the air again
at this, and the little boy laughed aloud.
"You silly," he said; "you've just eaten
up the crumbs from my supper and a little
honey from my flowers."


At this he felt another very sharp nip on his
hand, and there was another and larger ant.
He was very angry, and, flicking it to the
and there WAS the dragon
other side of the room, picked up a book and
threw it on the table.
At once all the little brightly-dressed men,
their horses and tents and birds, their tiny
plates and cups no bigger than a sweet pea
seed, disappeared. There was only a wriggling


48 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
crawling mass of ants running down the table
to the floor, and making for the door in single
file. Down the stairs they went, and the little
boy after them, out to the back garden. There
he found they had a nest in an old barrel. And
when he found the barrel full of ants, he knew
something extraordinary must have happened,
that he had either dreamt it, or perhaps the
dragon had been about.
At that minute a little shadow fell beside
him, and there was the dragon sailing by, with
a smile on his face. "Ooauw!" he yawned.
" Did you enjoy the dinner-party ?"
" So it was you who sent the ants up to my
room," said the little boy.
" I thought you'd like to see how they live,"
said the dragon. " You're not the only one who
has a table and chairs, and fish to eat. Good
night."
And the green dragon sailed low over the
barrel and blew forth a cloud of smoke, then
waited to see the ants come swarming out.
"Well, I must be getting along," he said, and


waving his paw, went off into the sky. The
little boy, now wideawake, ran up to his room
to wave at the dragon from his window. And
there was not even a wine cup left of the
dinner-party, so he went to bed and dreamt
about it.


The Kites that Flew into
the Moon
" Once I dreamt that I was a butterfly. I awoke, and
iien" I was, a man. Now I know not if I was then a man
drea iring I was a butterfly, or if I am a butterfly dreaming
I am a man." —Chang Tse.
ONCE again the Bird Chang sat on the
topmost bough of the green tree. Below
him stretched the lawn where the pome-
granate grew, and the deep-coloured passion
flowers emptied their cups to the ground. The
Bird Chang's golden tail swept half-way down
the tree.
Below Chang, but also looking down on to
the grass, the children were playing on the
flat roof of their summer-house, which stood
in the garden and was called Pavilion of the
Blue Butterflies. They were flying their kites,
for it was early summer. Now South Wind
blew. Although he is gentle in summer in
China, he was up to all his tricks. After waving


the willow, whose boughs were flushed with
green, he came twisting up to the roof, caught
the kites and carried them far up, up into the
sky, and everyone had to hold tight. South
Wind lay flat on his stomach on a passing
cloud, and blew the wind out of his cheeks.
Up went the kites, turning into dragon-flies
and bright red and yellow dragons as they
shot through the air. Su-Hu had very soon to
jump to the edge of the roof to keep hold of
his, but he didn't slip because his slippers
had rope soles. He and his three little sisters
each had a long black pigtail that flew out in
the wind.
And then, what do you think ? South Wind
blew a great gust, and burst out laughing. And
he blew them all, kites and children, right off
the roof, and they sailed away up into the sky.
They must have been magic kites to carry the
children off like that on the end of their tails.
As the children's coats and trousers filled out
in the wind, they all felt very large and very
important indeed, even though they lost their


slippers and watched them falling down on to
the earth below. Now they passed right over
the Bird Chang on his tree-top.
"Come with us, Chang!" they called to
him as they sailed by.
Then the Bird Chang looked up. And sud-
denly he arose, spread his golden wings, and
flew with wide-open eyes straight towards the
fiery sun, far above them.
As he flew he became larger and larger, and
his wings sheltered them. People and houses
looked like ants on the earth below, and
their own garden and house seemed a mere
dot.
They could hear South Wind laughing as he
carried them up towards Chang, who was still
ahead of them. Higher and higher they went.
They were plunged through clouds and came
out, slightly damp, into a marvellous world
coloured like the rainbow, while pearly clouds
rolled up behind them. Like race-horses of the
Gods, they sped on, as fast as any aeroplane.
But Chang was faster still, and now they could


only see his green and golden tail as he led the
way.
Suddenly they were on a high mountain
with Chang beside them. The wind ceased to
blow, and the Chief Eagle of the Upper Air
sat on the highest tree overlooking great valleys
and deep ravines. Clouds ceased streaming
from the points of the kites and they col-
lapsed like pricked balloons to lie exhausted on
the ground. The Bird Chang spoke to the
White Eagle.
"Is the path in position, O Guardian of the
Heavenly Fence ?" he asked.
And the White Eagle replied in a harsh deep
voice, "It is ready. Who are these children
with you ?" he added.
"They are four most humble and unworthy
beings from the lower world whom I allowed
to come. As a matter of fact, South Wind
blew them here," he added, with a discreet
cough.
"Dear me!" said the White Eagle; "this is
most unusual."'


" I will see them safely home again," said the
Bird Chang.
" They will not be allowed to see the Meeting
on the Bridge," said the White Eagle. " But if
these children have come under your protec-
tion, O Honourable Bird of Fire, they are
welcome. Will you rest on this miserable tree
while I go and tell the Palace of your arrival ?"
And he flew off.
"Now you may sit down," said the Bird
Chang in a human voice, as he settled on the
second top bough of the cypress tree. Polite-
ness did 'not allow him to sit on the very
highest branch, for that was the White Eagle's
place. So the children sat down and looked
round. They were on the edge of a rocky
ravine, with great mountains all round them,
and in the distance they could see, hanging in
space, the famous white steps that lead to the
moon.
"Please, Honourable Bird Chang, where are
we?" whispered little Su-Hu.
" These are the Mountains of the Moon, and


there is one of the Moon Lady's palaces,"
answered Chang, as he waved a wing towards
one of the lower slopes where there was a
shining palace. Its walls and roof were of silver
that glittered in the sun, and in the garden
they could see the happy fawns and deer
grazing in the sunlight and playing among the
flowers.
"What is that white shiny streak of light
over there?" said Su-Hu, buttoning his satin
coat more tightly round him, for it was cold up
there.
"That," said the Bird Chang, "is the ray of
light upon which we have just travelled. It is
very seldom there, and it is my duty to see that
the pathway is ready; for to-night the Sun
Prince will visit the Lady of the Moon, and he
can only do that every few years when he is in
a certain position in the sky."
Why can he only visit her every few years ?
Please tell us why," cried the little Chinese
children all together, bowing politely as they
had been taught to do.


The Bird Chang flew to the ground, opening
his wings like a golden fan.
"Warmth is always better than cold," said
he, as he tucked them close under his soft
feathers. "I'll tell you the whole story
if you like while we're waiting for Proud
Eagle."
"You must know," he began gravely, "that
I am a Magic Bird, and I am really a Phoenix,
Guardian of the Sun. You must have noticed
to-day how I grew bigger the farther away from
the earth we came. The more clearly you see
me, the larger I grow, in other words."
"That doesn't sound very clear," inter-
rupted little Su-Hu.
"No doubt," said the Bird Chang rather
severely; "but then a lot of things don't.
Well, then."
THE STORY OF CHANG O
Once upon a time, thousands of years ago
when the world was still young, the Prince of
the Sun fell in love with a beautiful girl down


on the earth. But she was no daughter of the
Gods. She was not even royal, and the
Venerable Lord of Time would not allow them
to be married because she was not an Im-
mortal and would grow old. But so madly did
the Sun Prince love her that he said he would
rather lose his immortality if only he could
marry her. But his father was very angry at
this, and drove his son from him with smoke
and fury.
Then the Prince of the Sky became ill with
unhappiness. The old legends say he wept day
and night, and wasted away so that he could
scarcely be seen down on earth. When he
wept it rained, and there was a terrible flood.
At last the Prince's father, seeing things were
going from bad to worse, gave his consent to
the marriage. Great were the rejoicings among
the friends of the Prince, the fairies, the
planets, and all the innumerable circling stars.
The marriage ceremonies and feasts lasted
a whole week, and the Pleiades sang their song
for the first time. The Sun Prince and his


Maiden lived in a more marvellous palace
than any you see around you now. They
could fly about from place to place in the sky
as they pleased; they could sail over to the
Floating Islands of the Blest or up to the
Moon.
Now the Prince had been given one of the
Pills of Immortality by the mischievous Mon-
key God, and he was keeping it carefully
hidden for a surprise for his wife, so that she
too could become immortal. This was how
he got it. The Monkey God stole a pair
of wings one day and flew up to the Heavenly
Orchards where the Peaches of Long Life grew.
Whoever ate even one of these Peaches would
live for ten thousand years. But what did the
Monkey God do but get a big basket and tell
the Gardener that he had orders to pick the
peaches for the Banquet that night, and pro-
duce a passport he had stolen.
So the Gardener, suspecting nothing, let him
in. He filled his basket with the biggest fruit,
which he gobbled up all by himself. In the


two biggest he found a pure white nut. He
swallowed one and put the other in his
pocket, for he knew they were the two Pills
of Immortality. Then he crept out of the
back gate, for he wanted to get away without
being seen. At that minute the Sun Prince
passed by on his way home.
"Help! Help! Hi,someone,help!" moaned
the Monkey God, moaning and writhing on the
ground as if he were in awful pain, and well he
might be.
"What's the matter with you now?" said
the Sun, pausing for a minute. "Tell me
quickly. I can't wait."
"Oh dear, oh dear!" groaned the Monkey
God. " I feel so terribly ill, I don't know how
I'll ever get down to my jungle cave again."
And he gave another loud groan.
But the Sun knew he was full of tricks.
"How did you get up here?" he asked. And
the Monkey God told a long story, and showed
the stolen passport.
"Oh dear, I feel so ill," he said weakly.


60 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
" I'm sure I'm very bad. Perhaps, dear kind
Sun, you could take me a little way."
"Well, I'm sure you've been doing some-
thing you shouldn't," answered the Sun.
" But I can't stay talking any longer, and you'll
have to give me something for taking you
down."
The Monkey searched his pockets. "I
haven't a thing," he said and cocked an eye.
"Very well," said the Sun; "good-bye,"
and he turned to go.
The Monkey God turned pale with fear, for
he knew how angry the Gods and the Gardener
would be in the morning. "I'll give you this
nice big basket," he said.
"What's the good of a basket to me?" said
the Sun, and he gave it one look and burnt it up.
Then the Monkey God was really frightened
and his teeth began to chatter. He took the
Nut out of his pocket and looked at it. He
knew the Sun would know what he had been
doing now. "I'll give you this, my greatest
treasure," he said solemnly.


The Sun watched him scornfully. "One
more trick and I'll burn you up. What is it ?"
"It's the k-k-kernel out of one of the
P-p-peaches of Immortality in the O-orchard.
And anyway I've eaten one already, so you
can't burn me up."
"Oho, so that's what you've been doing!"
said the Sun. "But I want that Pill, and I'll
take you away before you do any more damage.
Give me the Nut. It's like a little Pill, but it's
just what I need." So he took the Monkey
down to earth and gave him a good fright by
singeing his whiskers on the way.
It was this Pill that the Princess now thought
of, for it was very famous, though her husband
had not told her about it.
One morning, as soon as he had gone off on
his tiger, she ran through all the rooms of the
Palace, looking in all the cupboards and chests
to see if she could find it, but nowhere could
she discover it. Then she called to the lark
singing outside to help her, and when he failed
she begged the magpies to come. They came
5—(G.79


62 THE KITES THAT FLEW INTO THE MOON
in flocks and peered everywhere with their
bright black eyes.
"We can't see it. He must carry it with him
or else have hidden it, O Honourable Lady
Flowering Peach," they told her.
Long after they had gone, she went on
looking. Every day she gazed at her face in
the looking-glass for fear that she was growing
old, and her husband might notice it. And
every morning, as soon as her husband went
off, she looked everywhere for the Magic Pill.
And at last one day in the height of summer,
when the Prince was away longer than usual
ripening the crops of rice and fruit on the
earth, the Princess found the Magic Pill! For-
getting that to-day would end a minute sooner
than yesterday, she went on looking at his
clothes a moment too long, and had just found
it in the pocket of his Spring coat when the
Sun came back.
''Where are you, Chang O?" he called,
shaking the branches of the walnut tree outside
the Palace door.


"Up here, in the North Tower," called back
the Princess, "looking over your last season's
clothes." And she put her head out of the
window in a great fright to see whether he was
on his way up or not. But the Prince did not
hear her, her voice was so shaky with fright;
and, besides, he felt a little cross because she
was not in the garden as usual picking fruit
for dinner.
So he banged his shield on the walnut tree,
and the tiger growled. "Is there nobody
there?" he called in a voice of thunder. But
no one answered, and, feeling a little frightened,
he leapt from his tiger and strode up the stairs
to the Tower.
Now when Chang O heard the tiger growl
and her husband's loud voice, she too was
frightened. She was still frantically putting
away all the clothes, scattered about the room,
that she had looked through, when she heard
him outside the door. She had the precious
Pill in her hand, wondering where to hide it,
and at last in her flurry she popped it in her


mouth. He opened the door, and there she
stood, lovelier than ever. But in her fright she
swallowed the Pill, and when he took her in
his arms she burst into tears. He was just
going to tell her he had a surprise for her birth-
day in a few days' time, when she tried to
tell him what she had done. But she could
not.
"Oh dear, oh dear! I've done a dreadful
thing. I 1 " but she could get no
farther. Terrified at his stern bewildered look,
she flew straight out of the window and he
after her.
Weeping, she flew on and on so fast that he
could not catch up at first, and then, just as he
was near her, she reached the Mountains of the
Moon, where she sank down exhausted. But
here he could not follow, although he tried.
And she did not know this until the Great
White Eagle brought her a message from him.
When she tried to leave, she found her way
barred by impassable mountains of ice. And
the old Lord of Time, her father-in-law, said:


" Since you have swallowed the Pill of Immor-
tality, you will live for ever." But he sent a
message as well to say she would never be able
to leave the Mountains of the Moon, and would
always have to circle round the Sun with them.
''And as for you," he added sternly to his
son, "perhaps now you will obey me, and
marry the Goddess I chose for you, for you will
very seldom be able even to see or meet the
Lady Chang O."
This, however, the Prince of the Sun flatly
refused to do. He returned to his Palace,
lonely and sorrowful, with his glittering tiger.
He has always been faithful to the beautiful
Chang O, though he sees her so seldom.
To-night they will meet. There is the ray of
light in the sky, on which the Lady of the
Moon will tread. Presently you will see flocks
of small singing birds and magpies coming to
make a bridge across it, and on that her tiny
feet will travel.
"But all that happened thousands of years


ago," went on the Bird Chang, " and soon it
will be time for us to go. I came on a cere-
monial visit from my master the Sun to see that
everything is ready and in order. I see that it
is. Now I will change you all into butterflies.
It will be easier going down like that, as we
cannot travel on the Bridge."
He gave them no time to talk, but turned
them at once into four huge blue butterflies,
each fastened to the end of his or her own kite,
with Chang holding the strings like the reins
of a four-in-hand.
"There you are. Now you won't get lost,"
said he.
As they went off, they saw the round Sun
riding his golden tiger on the edge of a blue-
green world. They heard the rustle of the
Moon Lady's silk dress, the tap-tap of her
little feet running, but nothing could they see
of her.
So the butterflies were swept down through
shafts of air past the nest of the eagle on the
mountain-tops, the gannet on his cliff, the


deer and the goat, until they came to the wide
plains of rice and beans, and the great rivers,
where the humbler beasts walked. As they
came softly downwards the Bird Chang be-
came smaller and smaller.
Now they could see their own garden and the
Pavilion of Summer Butterflies, and the pure
clear air surrounding them filled them with
joy. " Verily," said the Bird Chang as he drew
his four butterflies safely on to the roof, "it
is better to soar high than to remain on the
same level all one's life."
Then he waved a wing and the butterflies
became children again as he flew off to his
tree. But they were never sure if they had
dreamt they were butterflies or not.
"Only suppose," said Su-Hu, hanging up
his precious kite, " that we are really butterflies
dreaming we are ourselves?" No one an-
swered him.
Only the Bird Chang, seated once more on
the topmost bough of the green tree, blinked
his gold eyelids and made no reply. Below


him was the lawn where the pomegranate
grew. Near the bamboo clump sat the Most
Respected Elder Grandfather, wearing his
black satin cap with peacock feather, and in his
many large pockets they knew they would
find a tiny jar of sugar-candy shaped like a
flower, or a bird, or a nest of carved ivory toys.
When they told him the story of the Monkey
God, and the Princess Chang O, and how they
had really heard her dress rustle, and how they
were butterflies on the way home, he believed
every word, as they knew he would.


Liom-dog and Dragon
(After a piece of the Ming Scroll, THE HUNDRED
CHILDREN, in the British Museum.)
YOU have already heard of Sho-Yin,
Little - Scholar-of - the - Crooked - Nose,
and how the Walking Pagoda brought
him safely home to his father and mother
again.
Now his father was a farmer who lived on the
outskirts of a village near the high mountain.
So Sho-Yin, though he wanted to be a scholar,
was told to go and see that the birds didn't
dig up the young rice plants as they sprouted
up from the brown earth, and that was his
job. It was a warm drowsy Spring day, and
little Sho-Yin was very bored. Besides, it was
muddy there, for young rice has to be sopping
wet before it will grow, and tiny channels,
filled to the brim with water that often over-
flows, run between the rows of young plants.


So Sho-Yin climbed on the back of a sleepy
old cow called Lily Pad that he knew, and
there he lay in the warm sun, while a bird flew
down and sat between her horns. Here it was
calm, but high up on the mountain late snow
was falling, and in the deep ravines the wind
and waters roared. Sho-Yin rattled the big
wooden rattle his father had given him to
scare away the birds. They all flew off in a
cloud, and the old cow shook her head and blew
heavily through her nostrils, in the way cows do.
"Dragons will be about," Sho-Yin thought
as he lay dreaming on the cow's back. Just
as he was nearly asleep he heard a small soft
bark and looked down. There was the District
Mandarin's dog.
"Please take me up and hide me in your
sleeve, O Honourable Little-Scholar-of-the-
Crooked-Nose," said the soft wheezy voice of
the Pekinese, who sat wearily up on his hind
legs, because that was the most coaxing thing
he knew of, while his eyes filled with tears. He
was a very tired little dog. Quickly Sho-Yin


slid off the old cow's back, and soon had him
in his arms.
"I've never seen a talking dog before," he
thought, but was not in the least surprised
after the Walking Pagoda. In answer to his
thought the little dog said, "I'm a special sort
of Royal Palace dog, and have the gift of speech
sometimes when people understand me. I
followed old Bamboo-Rod the Laundryman
out of the courtyard; they never let a fellow
outside the garden of the Mandarin's house.
And I want to see the Dragon Lung, my
cousin, who might awaken from his Winter
Sleep at any moment and appear somewhere."
"Dragon," said Sho-Yin, as he played with
the little dog's silky head. " What dragon ?
Where?"
"I don't know," snuffled the little dog;
"my feet are so sore I can't think. But he's
sure to be about; it's spring-time, isn't it? It
must be, I feel so tingly and restless. Also I
had a slight disagreement with my wife this
morning, and that's a sure sign."


"Dear me, how very surprising," was all
Sho-Yin could say, and soon they were great
friends.
When the sun was disappearing and the
birds were flying to their homes in trees and
deep mountains, little Sho-Yin carried him
home. When they reached the house, with
its floor of beaten earth and its different
rooms grouped round a wide square, his
mother was cooking the evening rice in the
dark little kitchen with its huge stove across
one wall. Youngest Plum-Blossom, his sister,
sat behind the stove and stuffed small bundles
of straw into it to make a blaze; while mother
stirred the rice she kept an eye on the baby —
a funny little fellow with a jet-black topknot
and bright beady brown eyes. When he saw
the Palace dog he stood up in his little red
barrel where he was kept to play in safety,
crowing and clapping his hands with excite-
ment, so that the little dog got excited too.
After the evening meal Sho-Yin's mother
gave it food and a warm place to sleep in by the


stove. With a grateful look the little
curled up in silence without a word, only one
eye seemed to wink at Sho-Yin. Next morning,
instead of taking him home to the Mandarin's
house as he had been told, took his
new playmate to the rice field, and there they
sat or wandered about together, shaking the
rattle and frightening away the birds. It was
all new to the little dog, who was very happy,
though he missed his silk cushion, his little
comforts and dainty scraps of food. But
during the afternoon some of Sho-Yin's friends
came along, very busy playing lions with a
piece of old cow-hide for the lion-skin. When
they roared, old Lily Pad, the cow, swished her
tail and stamped in the mud.
Now Sho-Yin joined in with his rattle and
the din was really terrific. They had rubbed
blue dye over the lion's face, with red marks
to show the spouts of fire coming out of his
mouth, whilst two of them stood inside the
cow-hide and jumped fiercely about together.
That zvas a lion! The little dog joined in the


fun and barked in his high shrill voice, even
giving the lion a nip with his teeth; then
suddenly he became very calm and dignified,
remembering how his ancestors had been
lion-dogs, "and," thought he, "I could be-
come a dragon if I liked," and he sat gravely
down.
But now the magic bird, the Phoenix, ap-
peared, and the lion roared at her,* while some-
one even shot an arrow up to her high tree.
No sooner had the arrow left the bow than the
sky grew dark, great clouds came up, and a
real live dragon appeared out of a cloud.
Though he was not yet very big, his breath
was like smoke, and fire came out of his
nostrils. He halted in the air over the top of
the tree.
"What are you doing to my Phoenix?" he
growled, and the boys nearly died of fright,
throwing themselves on the ground in a kow-
tow as they had been taught to do by their
The Phoenix has two forms in Chinese legend: Masculine and
Feminine.


elders, hoping that the Dragon would not see
them. Sho-Yin meanwhile climbed a tree with
a friend to try to tell the Phoenix that they had
not meant to hurt her. They were in such a
hurry that their slippers dropped off. But the
Dragon stayed in the air in his cloud and
repeated his question, and presently the two
little boys on the ground made another deep
bow.
The Dragon waved them aside with his paw.
"Where is the boy who shot at my Phoenix ? "
he growled again; and a very little fellow
came up with a water-lily in his hand, which
he had gathered from the edge of the pool
near by.
Just then they all heard a snuffly sort of
snort, and there was the little Imperial Palace
Dog standing up on his hind legs so nicely
that the Dragon blew a great cloud of smoke
out of his nostrils and smiled.
"O Honourable and Most Beneficent
Cousin," said the little dog, "as you see this
one is very small, and he didn't really hurt


A very nice water-lily


the Phoenix. Will you let him off this time if I
ask you ?"
And he cocked his little round head as he
sat well back on his hind legs.
" Well," said the Dragon, " as a favour to you,
and because you are of royal blood like myself, I
will; and this is really a very nice water-lily."
As he spoke he came down to the ground out
of his cloud. The Honourable Imperial
Palace Dog now waved a majestic paw at
Sho-Yin and friend up the tree.
They quickly slid down, leaving, I'm sorry
to say, parts of their thick blue cotton trousers
behind them, but Sho-Yin was in a hurry for
fear his father or elder brother would come
along and find him playing instead of minding
the rice.
Now the Phoenix flew down and said in her
golden voice that she was not hurt at all.
"And, besides, the Dragon always feels a
little cross after his winter sleep," she added,
as she spread out her beautiful tail.
Palace Dog, boys, and old Lily Pad all
6—(G.79)


gathered round to look at the tail; she even
allowed Sho-Yin to touch it, and that was a
great honour and very lucky.
"Now sit down," said the Phoenix, " for we
are all tired and the afternoon grows older.
I will now tell you the story, if you would like
to hear it, of the Dragon Waking after His
Winter Sleep," and her eyes twinkled as she
looked at the Dragon.
"Oh yes, please," chorused everyone; "we
would like very much to hear the story." So
they dragged up the lion-skin and sat on it on
the ground, while the Phoenix seated herself
on the lowest branch of the tulip tree, and
opening her beak began the story which you
will read below. As she spoke, her sweet voice
was like the five notes of a flute.
THE DRAGON AFTER HIS WINTER
SLEEP
"You must know," said the Phoenix, "that
all good dragons, except the Great Ocean
Dragon, go to sleep during the Winter."


Here the Dragon came floating down, and
fetched an enormous yawn so that his smoke
went over to old Lily Pad and gave her such a
fright that she coughed. He even sat down with
the water-lily between his paws to look at it
better.
"It was a rainy cloudy day," went on the
Phcenix, taking no notice of the Dragon's
smoke, " and a scholar was reading in a room
upstairs in his house. The mist hung over all
the garden and rested on the turned-up
corners of the roof, so that it was difficult to
read. Suddenly he saw a little thing like a
fire-fly. It crawled about the table, and wher-
ever it went it left black traces of burns, shaped
like the tracks of a worm."
"Well," said the Dragon, rudely inter-
rupting, "if you're going to tell that silly
story, I'm going for a ride on my cloud,"
and his voice rumbled down in his throat as
he stood up. "It's not a very entertaining


story," he went on, "to tell after I've rescued
you."
The Phoenix smiled, and said, " I thank you,
O Honourable Dragon, for so kindly rescuing
these worthless feathers of mine, but it was
only a game you know."
"Well," said the Dragon, "I'm going to see
how that mischief-maker the Ape Sun* is
getting on, so good-bye." And he rose up into
the air before their eyes and floated away on his
cloud.
"Dragons are like men," said the Phoenix;
" always a little irritable when first woken up —
we will go on with the story if you would like
it," she added.
"I am only a worm, but I should like to
hear it," said a tiny voice from the ground.
"Being such a humble creature, it is very
comforting to think that anything so insignifi-
cant as I am would be able to turn into a
powerful dragon."
* " Sun " is a Chinese name and in this story has no connection with
our word " Sun."


"Ah, there you are!" said the Phoenix,
peering closely at the earth with her bright
gold eyes. "I couldn't see you at first, but
of course you can listen to the story, and in
any case you are not so insignificant as you
think, for without you the earth wouldn't be
so good."
The worm looped the loop three times,
which was his way of bowing his thanks, and
heaved a regretful sigh.
" But I am the meanest and plainest creature
on earth," he said sadly, "and likely to be cut
in half at any moment by a spade or an animal's
hoof. No one ever sees me." And he crawled
mournfully and slowly over to a small lump of
earth. This was too much for the Palace dog,
who gave him a tap with his paw.
"There now," moaned the worm from
another quarter, whilst everyone looked round
for him again; "you see what happens. I'm
no account to anyone. No one even sees me,
and I can't see anyone."
"Well," said the Phcenix kindly, "perhaps


you'll feel better when I've finished the story,"
and she went on —
"The little worm crawled about the table
where the scholar kept his work, and at last
wound itself round his book, which began to
grow black. Then the scholar thought that
perhaps this little thing was a dragon in dis-
guise. So he carried it carefully out of doors
on the book, and stood there for some time
without moving, w T atching to see what would
happen."
"No one's ever carried me on a book,"
moaned the worm's tiny voice from the root
of a blade of grass, and at that moment Sho-
Yin saw a flock of birds about to settle on the
rice. Up he got with his rattle in such a hurry
that they flew off in all directions, and some
came to perch on the tree and hear the
Phoenix tell her story.
"Well," said the Phoenix, when everyone
had settled down again, "the little shining
worm lay there on the book without moving in
the least. Then the scholar said, 4 lt shall not


be said that I am lacking in respect.' So he
carried it inside, put on his robes of ceremony,
made a deep bow, and took the little dragon
outside again. This time he had only to put
one foot on the ground when the little thing
raised its head and stretched itself.
"As the scholar reached the edge of the
garden, the little dragon flew up from the
book with a hissing sound, like a radiant streak
in the air, as the old legend says.
" Now he turned to the scholar, and his head
had grown to the size of a barrel, while his
body must have been a full fathom in length.
He gave one more snaky twist, there was a
terrible crash of thunder, and the Dragon went
sailing through the air, full-grown and wide-
awake now.
"Then the scholar knew that Winter was
over, and the leaves would soon come again
to gladden the eyes. He went inside to see
which way the tiny dragon creature had come,
and he could follow the tracks here and there
to the bookcase and chest where his scrolls


and writing paper were kept. The Dragon had
woken from his Winter Sleep."
"Oh dear," said the tiny voice from the
grass, "if I could eat books instead of earth,
do you think I could become a dragon ? I am
so tired of being a worm, and I'm sure I'll
be cut in half or eaten or trodden on soon."
There was a rustle among the birds at this
speech, and the Phoenix said, "Some cousins
of yours do eat books, but they remain worms.
I'd be careful, worm dear, talking about being
eaten, if I were you. Do not be so distressed,
little earthworm. Each one has its uses, if it
is only to work the damp earth."
"Everything certainly has its uses," said
the crisp voice of a sparrow as he raced a
thrush to the spot where the worm's voice had
come from. But the thrush got there first
and presently sat on a bough enjoving his
evening meal.




ALL the magic and romance of
the East are in these delightful
stories. Children of 51 1 will love
to meet the Child-with-the-Sweet-
Sounding-Name, the Little-Scholar-
of- the - Crooked - Nose, the Bird
Chang, and many other lovable
characters taken from the traditional
legends of old China.


rA<
COMMONWEALTH NATIONAL LIBRARY
By returning this book oji or before the latest date
stamped below you make ft available to other readers.
22553 9.49 St 8548
3rj J lifts
j es; OCT
'"J .CWV
2 FEB
5 MOV 6 AFK
£>C v, *\
l-1 MM-
$ 25
1 13 JL i
29 jAN / m
"I 13 i
39 -AN ' m
*f4V
* m
8 JUL
< "'Us
6 A:
JXi ' -Tn.


