

THE
STORY
OF THE
KELLY GANG
Price 6D.


THE STORY OF THE KELLY GANG
By the BIOGRAPH (Copyright) By J. & N. TAIT, Melbourne.
The Most Thrilling Moving Picture Series ever taken.
SYNOPSIS.
SCENE I.—The Kelly Homestead—Mrs. Kelly at Home—Kate Overhears the Troopers discussing the Warrant for Dan’s Arrest,
and rides off to Warn them, followed by the Police—Kate arrives with the News that the Police are after Dan —The Trooper rides up
to Arrest Dan for Cattle Stealing—He produces a Warrant for Dan’s Arrest and is repulsed by Mrs. Kelly, whom he handles roughly
—Kate rushes to her Mother’s Assistance—The Trooper asks for “Just one Kiss, Katie, Dear, and I’ll let Dan go?” Ned comes to
Katie’s Assistance, and shoots the Trooper in the Wrist—First Blood—He is held at Bay by Kate with a Loaded Revolver.
SCENE 2.—Police in Camp on the Wombat Ranges—Kennedy and Scanlon leave the others to go in search of a New Camp—
Maclntyre and Lonergan left in Charge amuse themselves by shooting Parrots -The Surprise—The Police Surrounded— Up with
your Hands, or We Fire ! ” —“ Mind, Maclntyre, if you run I’ll drive a Bullet through you! ’’“The Gang take Afternoon Tea, when
Hart rushes in to say the Police are returning—Troopers Kennedy and Scanlon arrive on the Scene, when they are shot down before
they can take proper Cover—Ned Kelly remarks, “If we had not shot them, they would have shot us. We had to do it”—Constable
Maclntyre jumps on Kennedy’s Horse as it is rushing by, and Escapes. The Gang fire many Shots after him, but without Effect—
The Gang leave the Scene of the Fight—Outlawed, and a Price upon their Heads —The Government issue a Proclamation offering a
Reward of £3OOO for the Apprehension of the Gang.
SCENE 3.—The Gang stick up Younghusband’s Station —All the Hands are rounded up and forced into the Store Room, where
they are kept close Prisoners —Ned Kelly instructs Steve Hart to go through the Pockets of all the Men ~ The Ladies are unmolested,
Ned Kelly remarking in a Jocular Manner that “ We do not rob Ladies or Children” —Arrival of Sandy Gloster, the Hawker, with his
Van —Sandy Gloster is compelled to Bail Up, very much against his Will; but, finally, does so—“ Ha ! Ha! Some New Togs, Boys, at
Last! ” “A Box of Cigars! Good Enough ” —“ Get behind the House, Dan and Steve. Here comes a Trap, with four Men in it ”
Arrival of four Sportsmen, who are immediately made Prisoners with the Rest —Mr. Macauley, the Station Manager, rides up on
Horseback, and at the point of the Revolver he is Compelled to Dismount —Disguised in the Borrowed Clothes, the Gang depart to


Stick Up the Bank at Euroa —Joe Byrne left on Guard at Younghusband’s—Bailing up the Bank —The Clerks are discovered shutting
up the Bank at three o’clock to depart to their Homes - When Ned Kelly, who feigns to be a Customer, prevails on them to open the
Door, as they state that they want to Deposit some Money -The Manager, when brought in, refuses to hand over the Keys, and is
threatened with Instant Death if he refuses - The Gang make a Good Haul of Gold and Notes, and force their Prisoners into the Van,
and drive them back to Younsrhusband’s On arriving there, Ned gives Steve Hart a Bag of Money, when he mounts and rides away
with it.
SCENE 4. - Kate Kelly* acting as a Bush Telegraph, is chased by the Police —Black Trackers at work in the Strathbogie Ranges
—Mrs. Skillian leads the Police on a Wild-Goose Chase, and finally fools them with a Dummy Parcel filled with Empty Bottles and
Stones —Mrs. Byrne discovers Aaron Sherritt with the Police ready to give Information about the Gang—She informs Kate and Mrs.
Skillian, who go to warn them They are chased by a Trooper, and to lose him ford a Billabong Joe Byrne and Dan Kelly Capture
Farmer Wicks, whom they handcuff and lead to Aaron Sherritt’s Hut, and compel him to call out that he has lost his Way —Aaron is
seen conferring with the Police, who rush into the Bedroom when they hear Farmer Wicks’ Voice—Sherritt goes to the Door, when
Joe Byrne his old Schoolfellow, steps into the Doorway, saying “Death to all Traitors” and shoots him Dead - The Policemen become
Panic-Stricken, and two of them get under the Bed, and the others keep Mrs. Sherritt in the room for their own Safety. This is the
only Blot on the Police.
SCENE 5. —The Gang meet and Capture the Platelayers, whom they drive at the point of the Pistol and make them tear up the
Rails—Scenes at the Glenrowan Inn—Schoolmaster Curnow, to win confidence of the Gang, tells Ned Kelly that Mr. Stannistreet,
the Station Master has a Loaded Revolver on him, which they compel him to give up and treat him rather Roughly - Curnow gets
away and, hastening Home, gets a Red Scarf and a Candle. Thus taking his Life in his Hands, he Proceeds along the Railway and
stops the Pilot Engine, and, Thank God, he saved the Train—The Gang Surprised at the Glenrowan Inn -The Police surround the
Hotel and Fire into it- The Gang Fire in return; but Ned Kelly, weighted down with his Armour, finds it Awkward to handle his
Gun - The Police resolve to set Fire to the Hotel, when Father Gibney implores the Police not to do so, as there are Women and
Children inside—They try to prevent Father Gibney from going into the Burning Building—The Brave Priest to the Rescue Death
of Mrs. Jones’ Little Boy, Shot down by a Stray Bullet Joe Byrne, whilst standing at the Bar, is Shot Dead - Father Gibney carries
out the Wounded Plate-layer to a Place of Safety—Dan Kelly and Steve Hart, seeing that the Game is up, and that they have no
chance of Escaping, decide to Die by Each Other’s Hands.
SCENE 6.- The Closing Scenes • Ned Kelly, who had successfully made his Escape in the Night, but, being Heavily Weighted
with his Armour, decides to come back at the Break of Day to see if he can rejoin his Comrades - He is seen approaching from the
Bush, and the Troopers Fire Shot after Shot at the Tall, Silent Figure, but the Shots seem to take no Effect, except to cause him to
Stagger -He is wounded in the Left Hand, and owing to the Armour, cannot take straight Aim - Ned Kelly at Bay -He Fights hard
lor his Life—The Police find his Vulnerable Spot, and Fire into his Legs. They bring him down at last —The Capture —He begs the
Troopers to spare his Life—Thus falls the last of the Kelly Gang, and with the fall of Ned Kelly, the last of the Bushrangers.


KATE KELLY HOLDS THE TROOPER AT BAY


NED KEL LY SHOOT FITZPATRICK


Destruction of the Kelly Gang.
Taken from the Australasian Sketcher , of July 17th, 1880.
Catching the Kellys.
We give from the “ Australasian ” the personal narrative of one who went in the
special train. It is as follows :
“ I left home last Sunday evening, June 27th, about 7 o’clock, with the inten-
tion of passing an hour or so and enjoying a glass of grog with an old friend in
Melbourne. Happening to look in at the ‘ Argus ’ office, on my way to his house,
I found that a telegram had just been received from Beechworth, with the start-
ling intelligence that the Kellys had broken out again and shot a man. Knowing
that I would have to start as soon as possible for the scene, I turned


Up Bradshaw, and finding I could not leave for Beechworth until ten minutes past
six on the Monday morning, I continued my journey to pay my promised visit.
I had enjoyed my friend’s hospitality for about fifteen minutes in a comfortable
armchair before a blazing fire, listening to some of his interesting stories of India,
illustrated by his own water-color drawings, when the following letter was placed
in my hands : —‘ Dear , A special train starts for Beechworth to-night
at nine o’clock. Yours.’ There was no help for it. The invitation was too
pressing to refuse, and in a few minutes I had left the cheerful fire and the hot
toddy and the comfortable armchair behind me,- and was on my way to Spencer-
street Station, having previously requisitioned a felt hat, a pair of woollen gloves
and £3 from another friend.
“On the platform I met the representatives of three morning journals, and
knowing that we had a long ride before us, we organised a foraging expedition in
the neighbourhood of the station, and only succeeded in annexing a small loaf of
bread and a little whisky and water in a bottle. We waited a long time in the ex-
pectation that some of the heads of the police, perhaps even the Chief Commissioner
himself, would take advantage of the special ; but we waited in vain, and it was


POLICE CAMP IN WOMBAT RANGES


DAN KELLY & JOE BYRNE


three minutes to ten when the train, consisting of an engine, one carriage and brake
van passed out of the Melbourne yard on its most eventful journey. We took up
Inspector O’Connor and his black trackers at Essendon,and Mrs. O'Connor and her
sister.
“The first exciting adventure was dashing through the Craigieburn gates. In
the press compartment we felt nothing of the shock beyond something striking the
framework of one of our windows as if a stone had been thrown with great force.
Shortly after the train drew up. We then heard of the accident, and saw that the
step of our carriage had been carried away, as well as the brake of the engine.
Things were very soon patched up, and in a few minutes we were on the road
again, dashing along at a rattling pace. The great speed we were going at caused
the carriage to oscillate violently, and at times it seemed to fairly bound along the
line. It was intensely cold, and we were delighted when we got to Seymour and
found that a cup of warm coffee was ready for us. We reached Benalla at 2.30,
and Superintendent Hare and his men joined us, together with two trucks contain-
ing the troopers’ horses. All sorts of remarks were flying about Benalla. Someone
heard that the Kelly sympathisers intended putting logs across the line. Others


told us that the line had been torn up, and that the Kellys were waiting to wreck
the train. All the persons on the platform seemed to have heard or anticipated
something, and it was this that induced Superintendent Hare to tie a man in front
of the engine to keep a look-out ; but he subsequently changed his mind on finding
that another locomotive with steam up was ready in the yard. This engine, with
red lights hung behind, was utilised as a pilot, and went ahead of the special at a
distance of half a mile. One volunteer’ joined us at Benalla ; but although there
was a large number of able-bodied men on the platform, none of them seemed to care
about the trip after the outlaws. This was in marked contrast to the state of things
at the same.place on our return journey. Then nothing was to be heard but such
expressions as ‘By Jove ! I would have given anything to be with you.’ ‘ I
would not have missed it for ;£ioo,’ etc., etc.
“ As the special left Benalla we had on board 24 souls, made up as follows :
Superintendent Hare and seven troopers. Inspector O’Connor and five black
trackers, one volunteer, two ladies, the engine driver, stoker, and guard, and
four press men,' 1


THE GANG READING THE PROCLAMATION


THE BLACK TRACKERS


“ When within half a mile of Glenrowan station, the train began to draw up,
and on looking out we saw the pilot was coming back again. Our train, drew to a
standstill at a small cutting* the embankment of which was a' little higher than
the top of a railway carriage, so that if the bushrangers had felt so disposed* they
could have poured their fire through the roof very comfortably, and it would have
been impossible to return their compliment with any effect. When the pilot engine
got back to us, we then learned for certain that the line had been really torn up
for about half a mile beyond the Glenrowan station ; but it was not known by
whom. Superintendent Hare and two men then got on the pilot engine and
went slowly ahead.
“In the press carriage we did all we could in case of attack. The representa-
tive of the ‘ Argus,’ the pluckiest man possible, climbed out through the window*
pulled the lamp out of its hole, and came back with it into the carriage. We then
barricaded the windows with the four big cushions and waited in silence for the
next move. We had no arms except one little revolver, and the carriage doors
were locked, so that if the Kellys had descended on the train at that time, they
would have shot us all without any chance of our escaping.


‘‘ All lights having been put out, the train moved slowly along until toe
reached the station. Superintendent Hare at once gave orders to get the horses
out, afid the mem had barely commenced to so do when a man in the most excited
state ran up to those who were standing On the platform and gasped out in a series
of convulsive jerks: ‘Over there —the Kelly’s—not five minutes ago—stuck' us
all up—the four of them. Quick! quick !’ Superintendent Hare at once seized
his revolver, -and, calling out> ‘ Come along, boys,’ dashed across to the house,
which-could just be dimly discerned about 200 yards away. • The men followed him
at Onße, and the horses, left to themselves, bolted pell-mell-into a paddock at the
Wangaratta end of the platform. A second or two afterwards the first shot was
fired from the east end of the verandah, instantly followed by a dozen others, until the
whole of the front of the house seemed a blaze of light. The police replied instantly ;
but not having had time to scatter, the whole of their fire came from one spot.
After two or three volleys the fire ceased altogether. We non-combatants waited
at the station under cover. Presently we heard a step on the gravel, and saw a
tall form coming towards us. It proved to be Mr. Hare, who was bleeding profusely
from a wound in the wrist. He said as we got up to him :‘I am hit.’ We plugged


STICKING UP YOUNGHUSBAND'S STATION.


DAN KELLY CUTT IN G THE WIRES
AT JERILDERIE


each end of the wound with some cotton waste and bound it up with a handker-
chief, and Mr. Hare again essayed to start for the hotel. He . got about fifty yards
when he turned back and reeled. We rushed to him and supported him to the
railway carriage, and there he fainted from loss of blood. Some of the bullets from
the verandah came whistling and pinging about us. One struck the train just
where we were standing, and-another took a’ piece off the station fence. It must
have been a bullet from the line of fire that passed over our train and struck
McDonald’s hotel on the other side of the railway. The shot went clean through
the weatherboards and took a knob off the moulding of the mantelpiece.
“Everything remained quiet for about an hour, except an uneasy movement
now and then amongst the horses in the paddock, as if someone were trying to catch
one. At the end of that time, in or near the hotel, we heard a woman scream in
the most heart-rending manner : ‘They have killed my child! They have killed
my child ! Oh, they have killed my child !’ Independent firing now recommenced,
and we -heard men’s voices yelling out from what seemed the back part of the
building: ‘Fire-away. You can’t-hurt us,’ followed by a noise like the ring of
a hammer on an anvil.


“ Abaut half an hour after this, a. woman commenced screaming again, and the
screams gradually drew towards us, when two figures emergefi Ifroih the smoke
and powder which hung very near the ground, .and came to the; station. They
turned out to be the guard, Dowsett, and Mrs. Reardon, with an infant in her arms.
We put her into one of the compartments of the carriage, and then learned definite
news about the outlaws. She said that they were all well armed, and that the four
of them were there, and that they had a lot of people bailed up in the hotel. The
poor woman was almost wild with excitement, and at first it was difficult to get
any clear statement from her.
“ Just before daybreak. Senior Constable Kelly came up to the platform from
the east end, and told us he had been making a wide tour round the house, and
that on top of the range he had found a quilted skull cap and a rifle, near a large
pool of blood. He at once came to the conclusion that the outlaws, or some of them
had escaped, especially as there had been no firing from the hotel for over half an
hour.
“ Daylight came at last, and with it Sergeant Steele and his men from Wan-
garatta. They at once joined the other police and considerably strengthened
the cordon round the inn.


DEATH OF AARON SHERRITT


PULLING UP THE LINE AT GLENROWAN


“ And now occurred the most sensational event of the day. We were watching
the attack from the rear of the station at the West end, when suddenly we noticed
one or two of the men on the extreme right, with their backs turned to the hotel,
firing at something in the bush. Presently we noticed a very tall figure stalking
slowly along in the direction of the hotel. There was no head visible, and in the
dim light of morning, with-the steam rising from the ground, it looked for all the
world like the ghost of Hamlet’s father with no head, only a very, very long thick
neck. Those who were standing with me did not see it for some time. I was too
intent in watching its movements to point it out to the others. The figure-con-
tinued gradually to advance, stopping every now and then and moving what looked
like its headless neck slightly round and round. Then raising one foot on a log it
aimed and fired a revolver. Shot after shot was fired at it; but without effect'.
The figure generally replied by tapping the butt end of its revolver against its neck,
the blows ringing out with the clearness and distinctness of a bell on the .morning
air. It was the most extraordinary sight l ever saw or heard of in my life, and I
felt-fairly spell-bound with wonder. I could not stir or speak, Presently the
figure moved towards a dip in the ground near to some white dead timber, and


more men coming up, the firing got warmer. Still the figure kept erect, tapping
its neck and using its weapon on its assailants. At this moment I noticed a man.
in a small light tweed hat stealing up to the figure, and when within thirty paces of
it, firing two low shots in quick succession. The figure staggered and reeled
like a drunken man, and in a few moments afterwards fell near the dead timber.
The spell was then broken, and we all ran forward to see who and what our ghostly
antagonist.was. Quicker than I can. write it, we were upon him. The iron mask:
was torn off, .and there in the bright light of day were the features of the veritable
Ned Kelly himself. We soon stripped him of his armour and carried him to the
station, and placed him in one of the bunks in the robm. I had several conversa-
tions with him, and he told me that he was sick of his life, as he was hunted like a
dog and could get no rest.: I asked him what the armour business meant, and he
said he meant to fight it out and paste as many of the traps as he could before they
had him. His idea was to barricade the hotel and fight through the windows,
and for that reason he had only got armour made for the upper parts pf bis body.
He told me several times that Byrne, Dan Kelly and Hart had escaped, and that
the only people in the hotel were those they had stuck up. This, of course, was not


NEDKELLY FINDSAREVOLVER
ON STATION MASTER STANNISTREET


THE POLICE SURROUNDING GLENROWAN HOTEL


true, and what his object was in telling it is difficult to say. He was dressed in the
dandy bushman style —yellow cord pants, strapped with slate cross bar pattern
cloth, riding boots with very thin soles, and very high heels indeed ; white
Crimean shirt with large black spots ; waistcoat of same material as his trousers ;
hair jet black and inclined to curl; reddish beard and moustache, and. very heavy
eyebrows —altogether a very fine figure of a roan. The doctor, who had now
arrived from Benalla, dressed his wounds, and he turned round on his side and dozed
off as calmly as if nothing had happened.
“ Returning to the fight at the hotel, we learned from those who left the house
that Byrne was dead, and that he had died leaning over a bag of flour, reaching for
a bottle of whiskey in the bar, when a ball struck him, and that the blood spurted
out like a fountain, and that he fell dead without a groan. We also heard that
Dan Kelly and Steve Hart were standing side by side in the passage between the
two huts.
The Career of the Kellys.
Although one member of the gang of bushrangers which has for years past
kept the residents of a large portion of the North-Eastern district in a state of alarm,


and to . some extent in a condition of lawlessness, still survives and now awaits his
trial and sentence, the tragic events of June 27th and 28th may be said to have
brought: to a close the long and remarkable career of the Kelly Gang and an oppor-
tune moment presents itself for glancing at a few events in their career. The police
records show that the two Kellys, at any rate, manifested their marked tendency
to crime and lawlessness at a very early date. The record of their lives is a record
of a constant succession of lawless acts, carried out in most cases with impunity
and success, so much so that they became emboldened and defied the authorities,
growing more and more daring and reckless in their exploits, until they developed
into the bush-ranging spirit which they have latterly displayed. To the majority
of Victorians the names of Edward Kelly and Daniel Kelly are now fully familiar.
In the early part of 1878 warrants were issued for the arrest of Daniel Kelly and
John Lloyd, on six charges of stealing horses from J. G. Farrell, James Farrell,
James Whitty, and Robert Jeoffrey. The warrants were issued on the 3rd
April, and the police were soon on their tracks. The gang, however, were not to be
so easily caught as on the occasion of their first ventures. They had already earned
a reputation for their daring, and had inspired many of the residents of the district


DEATH OF DAN KELLY & STEV E HART


FATHER GOB NY'S GALLANT RESCUE


with the' dread of them. They were but the leading movers. Their house became
noted as a meeting place, and the extent to which they carried on their game showed
that they had numerous active confederates besides their hosts of sympathisers.
It is stated by those in the district, who knew something of the doings of the gang,
that they stole horses from all parts of the district, and in some instances crossed
the Murray to dispose of them, and it was found a matter of extreme difficulty to
obtain evidence, to say nothing of arresting the gang, owing to their being sur-
rounded by a perfect network of sympathisers, who frustrated the efforts of the
police for a long time.
The first step towards breaking up the large body of confederates, which
seemed to be carrying on proceedings without let or hindrance, was taken on the
15th April, 1878, when William Skillian, brother-in-law of the Kellys, William
Ellier Brickley, and Ellen Kelly, were arrested on a charge of shooting Constable
Fitzpatrick on the 15th April. The two Kellys escaped and speedily took to the
haunts from which it was found difficult to dislodge them, and for a long time they
eluded all attempts to capture them. In October, 1878, Sergeant Kennedy, and
Constables Scanlon, Maclntyre and Lonergan obtained definite information as


to the whereabouts of the gang. Information that had been given to them led them
to believe that the Kellys were hiding in the ranges at the head of the King River.
Two parties of police were despatched, one from Mansfield and the other from
Greta. The latter consisted of five men, under the charge of Sergeant Steele, Who
took so prominent a part in the proceedings of 28th June. The gang .was found
in the locality which had been indicated; but despite all the precautions of the
police, the Kellys had obtained information with respect to the expedition and
its object. They were consequently prepared for the attack. The police, lulled
into a sense of security by the belief that their movements had been kept dark,
cairiped on the bank of the Stringy Bark Greek, about 20 miles
from Mansfield, in the Wombat Ranges, on the night of 25th October.
The police who ’ adopted no special precautions for their protection,
proceeded to explore the locality, and a gunshot fired by one of them
attracted the attention of the Kellys. The gang then took the police by surprise
and then followed the tragedy which is, perhaps, the most deplorable of the events
which transpired during the career of the. outlaws. The killing of Constables
Scanlon and Lonergan, the capture of Constable Maclntyre, and the other inci-


CAPTURE OF NE D KELL Y


THE ACTUAL ARMOUR
AS WORN BY NED KELLY


dents of the terrible tragedy are events of which the public still have a vivid re-
collection. The shock created a panic throughout the colony, while, in the district
in which it had occurred, panic prevailed amongst the residents, and search parties
comprising large numbers of men, started from the various centres of population
in pursuit of the outlaws. It was at this time that the authorities in Melbourne
sent Constable Nicholson to the spot to direct operations, and despatched a large
number of mounted police to the district. The Government, too, recognised the
necessity of adopting every possible means of capturing the offenders, and a re-
ward of £2OO per head was offered for the capture of the gang. It was afterwards
increased to per head. At a later date the Government a
lump sum of and a similar sum was offered by the Government of New
South Wales. However, so carefully did they elude the notice Of their pursuers
that it was confidently believed that they had left the colony, until the public
were startled by the intelligence of a robbery at Younghusband’s station- at Euroa
—an event fortunately unattended by any serious occurrences. .It was closely
followed by the memorable attack on the bank at Euroa, during which the gang,
after locking up the officials, made off with £ISOO in notes, in sovereigns, and


£<)o in silver. This outrage was characterised by all the coolness, daring, and
audacity which had been displayed in the previous adventures of the gang. The
officials of the bank and residents of the township were so taken by surprise, and
so terrified by the wild threats of the gang that they offered no resistance. The
event once more aroused the police authorities, and a large body of men, accom-
panied by the black trackers from the Queensland native police, were soon in Euroa.
It was stated that the police authorities were gradually closing in upon the outlaws,
and following a carefully considered plan of capturing them through the instru-
mentality of some of their former friends, and the murder of Aaron Sherritt points
to a suspicion on the part of the Kellys that he was assisting in the plans. Leave
this as it may, it is now a matter of history that this led indirectly to the capture
of the gang, and the tragic ending of their extraordinary career.
In Edward Kelly, the police have captured not alone the leader of the gang,
but one who was arrested ten years ago as one of the accomplices of the bush-
ranger, Harry Power, and he has throughout his ten years’ career, carried on his
work with almost unexampled daring, and with the boldest defiance of the
authorities.


Prior to the withdrawal of the black trackers, Mr. Nicholson found them so
useful that he reported about three weeks ago that if they were taken away the gang
would most likely commit another outbreak. The black trackers not only fright-
ened the Kellys, but caused them much inconvenience and hard work, for it is
well-known that bushmen of the Kelly type object to walking much, and always
ride on horseback if they get a chance. The presence of the Queensland aborigines
in the district, often compelled the gang to walk in' order to give the aborigines
a chance of following horses’ tracks, when they would otherwise have ridden.
Some time ago people used to wonder how the bushrangers when mounted, cut
across the railway line or bridges without being seen. It was ultimately ascer-
tained that the plan that they adopted was to ride up to the railway fence, say, and
then dismount, hand over their horses to sympathisers and cross the line on foot.
The sympathisers vyould ride the horses boldly through the nearest level crossing,
and nobody would suspect that the animals were those of the gang, the members
of which would receive back their horses at some spot agreed upon. Through the
past few months traces of the gang were often discovered by the black trackers.
Sometimes the trace would be the marks where bridles had been hung round a


tree and sometimes a gunyah. If, a track were new, and had not been crossed
and crossed, the blacks could follow it with unerring certainty, and their astuteness
in that direction astounded and frightened Ned Kelly, than whom there were few
better white bushmen.
Although the bushrangers were in the district, they were seen by compara-
tively few of their friends. There were various signals by which the gang com-
municated with their friends. Sometimes a couple of stones placed in a peculiar
position would be the signal, and sometimes an eccentric horse track. Thus, one
of the gang would ride in a circle near a sympathiser’s hut and then jump a fence,
and again ride in a circle, and finally strike off in the direction where the outlaws
were hid. A sympathiser, on seeing this track, would carry provisions in the
direction indicated. When carrying provisions for the gang, the sympathiser
would use all sorts of devices to avoid a discovery. Occasionally they would
pretend to be drunk and make night hideous with their cries. Hearing the wild
fellows about, honest residents of the district would retire into their homes: but
the gang would also hear them and answer with a peculiar signal. All of a sudden,
when time and place suited, a member of the gang would appear, take off the pro-
visions, and hurry out of sight in a moment.


The precautions devised by Ned Kelly were so elaborate that some very
experienced police officers doubt whether one of the gang could have betrayed
the others into the hands of the police. When they extinguished their fires, they
would remove the ashes and scatter them far and wide, and cover over the black
spot with earth. Their fires were always small, like those made by wild aborigines.
As an indication of the caution with which the gang worked, it may be mentioned
that they used to draw out and reduce to writing elaborate details of their plan
of operations prior to making a raid. It is known that the arrangements to be
followed both in the Jerilderie and Euroa affairs were fully made and committed
to paper, the object in doing so being to assist the memory. Joe Byrne, who was
the best scholar of the gang, and who when a boy, distinguished himself at school
for his ability, was secretary. For some months past the police had been
gradually closing up sources through which food was conveyed to the bushrangers,
and the latter were suffering from insufficiency of food. Dan Kelly and Byrne in
particular presented of late a very thin appearance.
Note. —The management, of course, have had to take many liberties in making
the great biograph picture of the Kelly Gang, inasmuch as the police are all shown in


uniform, whereas they were nearly always dressed in plain clothes ; but were this
adhered to in the picture the dramatic interest would be lost, and it would be
difficult for the onlooker to know which were the police and which were the Kellys.
We have also endeavoured to give as nearly a correct location as is possible ; but
this has not always been convenient. W - " might state that we have scoured the
country to give as faithful a representation as was possible, and we trust
that our endeavours to please the public are appreciated.
The whole series of Pictures were taken by Messrs. J. and N. Tait, of
Melbourne and London, and have been shown by them throughout Australasia and
also in England with phenomenal success.


SYD. DAY,
The Printer,
Melb. & Sydney.
