

THE FEDERAL
CAPITAL
WANIASSA
AS A SITE
(Written for the Queanbeyan “Observer.”)
As this question is of so great importance
to posterity it would be well to very care-
fully look into and thresh it out before a
final decision is made. Although it is
rather late in the day to re-open inquiries
about any locality which has not been
named amongst Mr. Oliver’s selected sites,
as this has been done with regard to Tumut,
Albury, and Lake George, it cannot but bo
allowable to urge the claims of another
site which is far superior to all of them.
The spot we consider to be in every way
suitable is situated on the River Murrum-
bidgee. It is within easy access of Quean-
beyan, and is almost entirely included
with its proposed h'e4eral Territory. The
inhabitants of Qdeanbeyan were paid a
visit by Mr. Oliver. They took him to
inspect a site and laid details before him at
an inquiry which he held in their town.
Since


Since then the project has somehow almost
faded'into thin air; partly through apathy
and also because the committee overlooked
the best site for the capital itself, a site
which is in every way fitted for transforma-
tion into a big city and can, moreover, be
easily and inexpensively supplied with an
abundance of the purest mountain water.
The place which it is now proposed to
recommend for the position of the capital
is, as we have already said, situated
on both sides of the Murrumbidgee and
is about seven miles below the village
of Tharwa. It includes on its right
bank the plain of Wauiassa and the coun-
try on the opposite side between the ranges
and the river ; for at this place the ranges
leave the river for a time. The centre of
the site is some ten miles from Queanbeyau
and from Tuggranong Platform half that
distance or less. The main road from
Quoanbeyan to Tharwa is within sight of
it and leaves it on the right. About the
centre of Waniassa Plain there is some
suitable and fairly level ground on which
Parliament House, public offices, and the
Law Courts could be built. Outside there
would be ample space for streets or avenues
for the business parts of the city. Further
out is undulating country which would
afford good sites for private houses. The
part across the river consists of sufficiently
level ground, with gentle undulations gra-
dually rising up to a range of hills.
Although this last mentioned piece of
country does not appear in the plan of the
proposed Federal Territory (Queanbeyuu
site) it ought to have been included in it,
os it would be an excellent spot for a
Governor’s house and private residences,
as well as for parks and pleasure grounds,
for its aspect is N.E. and it commands au
extensive outlook. The ranges behind,
which are connected with our Alps, protect
our site from bleak winds. Here, in the
exact place, when it would be wanted to
connect the two parts of the city, there
happens to be what is probably the very
best site on the whole river for a bridge;
this is at a place where there are beds of
solid rock on either side with an interval of
only about a chain between them.
The height of this site above sea level is
somewhere about 1,900 feet. Climatically
it is nearly perfect, as neither great boatnor
great cold is often experienced, while snow
and fogs are rare. The river is exceedingly
pretty here. For the most part it runs
rapidly


rapidly over a rooky bed but frequent quiet
pools are to be met with. The willows
which fringe many of them make them to
be secluded and to look tempting to the
swimmer ; lower down where.,the ranges
again join it the river runs through pine-
clad gorges and the scenery becomes still
more picturesque. In some places are
reaches which could be made use of for
boating, although on the whole the current
is too rapid and the stream too lively for
the site to he perfect for this pastime.
English trout have been placed in some of
its tributaries and are known to be doing
well in them.
The scenery around is very fine, and as
the mountains to the west and within sight
are of all shapes and sizes, and contain
such widely-known giants as Tennant and
Tidbinbilla, both of which are within easy
riding distance, this site can fairly claim to
be considered for the beauty of its scenery
to be ahead of all the others which have
been suggested. It is almost impossible to
conceive a site where the climate is so
healthy and invigorating, and yet at the
same time so free from rawness, as it is in
this highly-favoured corner of the rtate.
The greatest difficulty 7 in connection with
the choice of a site foi the capital consists,
uppuiently 7 , in getting a thoroughly satis-
factory water supply 7 . In this respect the
place which is now under uotice is more
favored than are any of the others which
thus far have been suggested, foi a most
important feature in connection with it is
that the best of water from an ever-run-
ning mountain stream can be brought to it
so easily by gravitation. On the Gudgenby
Elver, about a mile above its junction
with tho Murrumbidgee, and about eight
miles from Waniussa, is a narrow gorge
called tho Wallaby Mocks, through which
it luns. At this place the bed of the Gud-
genby river has been found by 7 measure-
ment with the aneroid to be from 150 feet
to 200 foot above tho level of Waniassa
Plain. Both sides of this gorge are com-
posed of solid rock, so that the site is perfect
for a conciete dam, which could bo made
100 feet high, or if necessary even higher.
Above this place the country opens out into
a fairly broad valley. The gorge of the
Wallaby Hocks, geologists tell us, was cut
out of the bed of solid rook which was once
there by the overflow-water running out of
a lake above it. This lake, the position of
the edges of which can. still be traced,
occupied
3


occupied what is now Naas Valley. The
making of the concrete dam to the height
of the original bed of rook would of course
restore this ancient lake ; but as so largo a
volume of water will not, for a long time
at any rate, be needed for our Federal
Capital, the darn might at first only be
made high enough to impound as much
water as is wanted ; and that would oomo
very short of covering the whole of the
valley. As the city increased in size, more
and more of the lake might be restored by
heightening the dam.
Access from ail parts of the Common-
wealth is a matter on which much stress is
rightly laid Queanbeyan is )94 miles by
rail from Sidney. It is situated on the
branch line to Monaro and is 60 miles from
Goulburn, where this line leaves the sou-
thern main line. In the event of the Fed-
eral Capital being placed at Wuniassa there
would be no difficulty in constructing a
line, some forty miles in length, from Yass.
This line would make Queanbeyan to
be slightly nearer than Goulburn to Mel-
bourne, Goulburn being 53 miles on the
Sydney side of Yass. The country be-
tween Yass and Queanbeyan is fairly level,
and no engineering difficulties would be
encountered in making this line, which
would therefore be inexpensive to construct.
It would also pass through country much
of which is agiioultural, ana would servo
a fairly large local population. It would
connect the southern, south-western, and
western districts (the latter via Harden)
with the Monaro country and the moun-
tains surrounding that plateau, and would
be useful for carrying stock to them in
times of drought. If the site we are re-
commending be adopted, the Goulburn and
Cooma line, from being a source of loss to
the State, will at once become a valuable
asset.
In the vicinity of Waniussa there is a
considerable quantity of agricultural land ;
and although the district cannot be consid-
ered as highly fertile, there is in it enough
of good land to supply the wants of the
now Capital with such necessary food pro-
ducts as cannot well be brought from a
distance. The meat, milk, butter, grapes,
apples and potatoes raised or grown in the
surrounding district cannot be si rpassed in
any parts of Australia. Eoses and most
English flowers are at home in this climate ;
while nearly all the fiuits and flowers
which make the South of France to be so
attractive, come to perfection here.
For
4


For building purposes there is. only a
short distance away, an abundant supply of
excellent timber, and within 10 miles mag-
nificent trees of mountain-ash abound;
while limestone of excellent quality is
found on the Murmtnbidgee not far off,
both above and below the site as well as in
other directions. The country around
abounds with granite which is eminently
suitable fur building purposes, for it has
been found to withstand the weather ex-
ceedingly well, although its character is
such as to allow it to be worked into shape
without difficulty.
The situation which looks to be most
suitable for the city is either open plain, or
ring-barked or lightly timbered country ;
the latter being principally on the western
side of the river. There is sufficient fire-
wood in the neighbourhood to last for a
long time to come.
Comparisons are said to bo odious 1 but we
cannot but contrast the climate, water sup-
ply, facilities for quick and direct access
from all parts of the country and the beau-
tiful scenery of its site, with the disadvant-
ages which are attached to the other places
now standing among the official recom-
mendations. The extreme heat of Aibury
during summer ought at once to put, it out
of court. The cutting winds of Yass and
its ordinary scenery ; and the bone-pierce-
mg rawness of the Canoblas, nonsuit
those places; while the dank fogs of Bom-
bala aud the chilly blasts which strike it
from the west, and the outlandishness and
low altitude of Tumut, should prevent
these places from having even a semblance
of a chance. Here the clear and ever-run-
ning Muri um lidgee spa rides through our
site and brightens it; here our beautiful
Alps slacken the cold blasts from the west
and south, and refresh the eye with their
ever-varying aspects; while the balmy but
fiesh and invigorating air gives such health
and vigor as to cause work to be easy, en-
joyment keen, appetite sharp, and sleep
certain.
For sporting purposes, also, this locality
possesses gieat advantages. Game is plen-
tiful iu tho mountains. Wallabies of many
sorts abound; while tho now übiquitous
hare and rabbit can always be depended
upon for employment for the gun; and even
dingoes and brumbies arc to be found at no
great distance. A national park, as large
as and infinitely wilder than either of those
which


which Sydney possesses, could ho created
without impoverishing the State. Fishing,
too, can ho had in abundance; and the ad-
vantages for this sport are increasing, as
the beautiful and dashing trout is becoming
more and more plentiful every year in the
livers of the district.
For excursions, the attractions which are
accessible are numerous. Within a day’s
drive —a drive through such mountains and
wild scenery as many travel hundreds of
miles to see—are the vast and still unex-
plored caves of Coolamon ; while the bettor-
known caves of Yarrangobilly are only
some dozen miles further on. At Coolamon,
also, can be seen a river which disappears
and runs under the ground, doubtless
through a series of caves, from which it
emerges as the wild and dashing Goodra-
digbee. In the other direction Lake George,
so varied in its aspects, —no*' a noble ex-
panse of water, now a mere mud hole,
now a bare plain—will often be worth visit-
ing ; while a climb to the summits of Tid-
binbilla and Tennant will make pleasant
many a day’s outiug.
This site, be it noted, is the only one
through which a running—an ever running
—river passes; and the river itself which
diains it, and drains it right well, is no
mere tributary, but the Murrumbidgeo
itself. Of such a description is the site wo
have in cur district, and so much better is
it in every way than the one which has
been recommended and those which Mr.
Oliver has selected, that in the public in-
terest no time should bo lost in getting up
an engineer to determine accurately the
position of the Wallaby Hocks with respect
to iho Waniassu Wain and its surround-
ings.
MINTED AT THE ’oeSERVLb' OFHCE Qi;£**9EYAH.
