

PUBLISHED ON BOARD
THE GOOD SHIP “COMMISSARY.”
During a Voyage from London to Sydney , April- July , 1870.
EDITED BY
THE REV. THOMAS SMITH,
INCUMBENT OF ST. BARNABAS’, SYDNEY.
JP hice pNE
Sflbnen:
PUBLISHED BY GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO.,
PITT STREET, NEXT UNION BANK.
H. GRIFFITHS, BLEAK HOUSE, ARUNDEL TERRACE, GLEBE.




1 Ps
Australian Mutual Provident Society.
ESTABLISHED 1849,
yVLUTUAL J-vIFE <^C.
PROFITS BELONG EXCLUSIVELY TO THE MEMBERS.
Principal Office—NEW PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
Persons proposing to assure their Lives should consider what SECURITY the
Institution they select has to offer.
RESOURCES OP THE SOCIETY.
The Annual Income exceeds
TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND POUNDS.
The Realised Assets of the Society are upwards of
SEVEN HUNDRED THOUSAND POUNDS.
MAGNITUDE OF ITS BUSINESS.
There have been issued over 13,000 Policies, and more than 10,000 are now in
force, assuring over
FOUR MILLIONS STERLING.
LARGE BONUSES DECLARED.
The Cash Bonuses obtained by Members of the Society have averaged from 105 to
11 per cent, on the premiums paid, regulated by the age of the Member,
and the duration of the Policy.
Advantages to New Members joining this Mutual Life
Assurance Society,
First—New Members join a Society of established credit, affording undoubted
security for the fulfilment of the contracts they enter into. Over and above
the accumulations of the Assurance Fund, the Society has a
GUARANTEE FUND OF FIFTY THOUSAND POUNDS,
which bears a favorable comparison with the Guarantee Funds formed by the
leading Mutual Assurance Societies in Europe.
Second— New Members join a Society charging moderate but safe rates of
premium. From ages 20 to 55, the premiums of the Society are," on an average,
6| per cent, lower than those of the seven most prosperous Mutual Life Offices
in England.
Third —New Members join a Society conducted on a very low scale of expenditure.
Fourth —New Members join a Society that obtains a high rate of interest on its
invested funds.
Fifth— New Members join a Society whose financial condition is presented in an
intelligible form. The exposition contained in the last Quinquennial Report
is believed to be more full and complete than was ever presented to the
members of any Assurance Society.
The Quinquennial Report, shewing the Society’s state and progress, Prospectuses,
and Forms of Proposal, may be had, or will be sent, post free, on application
at the Office, or to any of the Society’s Agents.
By order of the l^oard,
ALEXANDER J. RALSTON,
Secretary.


ASHFIELD, SYDNEY, N.S.W.,
ESTABLISHED EXPRESSLY FOR THE INTRODUCTION OF
nXTB'W -A.3XTI3 RiLllß PLANTS
FSOTT TREES OF BVBBT ©JESOaiFIPIO®.
All communications to be addressed to Mr. T. W. MORTON, the Superintendent.
Messrs, HILTON BROWNE & CO., City Agents.
Shepherd and Co.,
NURSERYMEN, FLORISTS, AND SEEDSMEN,
DARLING NURSERY, SYDNEY,
OPPOSITE UNIVERSITY.
ESTABLISHED 1837-
MAKE A NOTE OF THIS.
SMALL PROFITS AND QUICK RETURNS.
B. SIW9OS,
IMPORTER & MANUFACTURER OF
BOOTS &D SHOES,
Has opened the Establishment,
99 PARRAMATTA STREET, SYDNEY,
To supply STOREKEEPERS and the PUBLIC generally at the
WHOLESALE PRICES.


THE
Published onboard the Clipper ship “Commissaryduring a voyage
from London to Sydney , 1870.
d&bxiox :
THE EEY. THOS. SMITH, St. Barnabas’, Sydney.
Swfr-tS&xfor:
MR CHAELES YAHGHAK
THE CLIPPER SHIP COMMISSARY, A 1 14 YEARS.
Built by Messrs. Hall and Co., Aberdeen.
Owners:
HENRY ADAMSON, & CO., London.
Commander:
FRANCIS WAGSTAFF.
Officers :
Mr. DAVIDSON, Chief Officer ; Mr. RITSON, Second Officer.
Mr. MILLARD, Third Officer.
Saloon Passengers :
Rev. THOMAS SMITH.
Mrs. SMITH and Family.
Mr. HENRY GRIFFITHS.
MR. EDWIN LLOYD.
Dr. A. B. MORGAN, L.R.C.P. Mr. REYNOLDS.
Mrs. MORGAN and Family. Mr. J. BAYNTUN STARKY.
Mrs. WAGSTAFF and Family. Mr. POMEROY.
Mr. CHARLES VAUGHAN.
Mr. A. LANG ATKINSON.
Miss WITHERS.
Mrs. FELL. Mbs. POMEROY and Family. „ A v.' \
Mr. CHARLES VAUGHAN. Miss OWEN. ''
Mr. A. LANG ATKINSON. Miss BOON.




§lti> Ip#
No. 1.
THURSDAY, MAY 19th, 1870.
CONTENTS.
Q
Our Prospectus ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• •** ~
uui jrruapcubuo ... ... ••• ••• ~
Amateur Concert ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 2
Jimaiieur vjuuuciu ... ... ••• ••• „
The Art of Being Disagreeable ... ... ••• ••• '
IIH3 AIU Ul JJCiug lyioagictftuiv ... ••• * ~
Capital Punishment.. ... ... •••
v;axuxai runisumeui.., ... •••
Crossine - the Line ... ... ... ••• •• ••• ••• U
CllCi V YT XXiV/iX TXT=> —UJ. KM.a
We do not come before our readers inflated with the con-
sciousness of superabundant talent; we are not sure of our ability
to carry to a successful issue that which we have in diffidence
undertaken; but we rely upon that generous help which we ear-
nestly solicit, and we look for the assistance of our fellow-passen-
gers in our desire to provide for their intellectual improvement in
this our journey to the El Dorado to which we are all bound, and
if our expectations are realised in the assistance we seek, and in
the assistance we have a right to claim, then we feel assured that
at the conclusion of our voyage we shall have no reason to regret
having taken up the editorial pen, and with modesty reclined upon


ERRATA.
Page 50, line 15, for “changing,” read “ cheering .”
ko 4 in “ A Grizzle,” for “ turn,” read “ term.
jj >
50 34, for “first,” read “second.”
53, ~ 10, for “hissed,” read “ kissed.”
53, ~12, for “ orbs,” read “ orb.”


JThe “o'omnfeus”
No. 1.
THURSDAY, MAY 19th, 1870.
CONTENTS.
Our Prospectus ... ... •••
V/ Lli ... ... ••• ••• •••
Amateur Concert ... ... ... ••• ••• ~
The Art of Being Disagreeable ... ... ... ••• ••• 7
Capital Punishment.. ... ... ••• ••• •••
X UJIIoUIUCUU... ... - -
Crossing the Line ... ... ... ••• •••
wussmf; Kite uiud ... ... ... ■■
Life’s Changes ... ... ... ••• •• ••• ••• i-'j*
Original Poetry—Ode to the Sun ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 1®
General News ... ... ... ••• •
Nautical Chronicle ... ... ... ••• •••
Advertisements ... ... ... ••• • - ••• •••
OUR PROSPECTUS.
It is with a considerable degree of trepidation that we issue the
first number of the Commissary Review , hut our fear vanishes when
we reflect that our little paper will be perused by those who will
be ready to extend to it a criticism in which defects will diminish
into insignificance, and only the good will be remembered.
We are emboldened in our undertaking, too, when we con-
sider the aim for which we labor. “ Pro bono publico ”is our
motto. To pass away an hour which may otherwise be lost in
idleness— to provide recreation for the mind—to stimulate to
thought —to evoke the latent ability which needs to be developed
to encourage a taste for reading—to redress acknowledged griev-
ances —and to suggest remedies for apparent wrongs—“ to hold
up the mirror unto nature,” thereby drawing forth that which is
good and healthy, and seeking to root out that which is evil—
these are some of the reasons, these some of the considerations
which have weighed with us —and strengthened by the desire
expressed by several of our fellow-passengers, we are led to make
the effort which we trust will be crowned with success.
We do not come before our readers inflated with the con-
sciousness of superabundant talent; we are not sure of our ability
to carry to a successful issue that which we have in diffidence
undertaken; but we rely upon that generous help which we ear-
nestly solicit, and we look for the assistance of our fellow-passen-
gers in our desire to provide for their intellectual improvement in
this our journey to the El Dorado to which we are all bound, and
if our expectations are realised in the assistance we seek, and in
the assistance we have a right to claim, then we feel assured that
at the conclusion of our voyage we shall have no reason to regret
having taken up the editorial pen, and with modesty reclined upon


the not very easy cushion of an editorial chair. In soliciting your
aid we can give you the assurance that your confidence shall not
he betrayed. No scurrilous matter shall ever find a place in our
columns; slander shall not spend its venom on our pages, nor vin-
dictive abuse be tolerated for a moment. If we do fail in our
effort it shall be in the path marked by strict and impartial con-
scientiousness, and then our failure will reflect no discredit upon
ourselves. We shall retire from the position we have never
sought, but which we have been invited to fill, with a mind free
from self-accusation, and in our solitude we shall have the consola-
tion that ever sweetens the life of those who try to do what in
them lies to benefit their fellows, —a consolation which cannot be
bought by gold, for peace of conscience is not a marketable com-
modity. Let us ever remember that we, as members of the great
family of man, have each a part to play; that we are but doing
our duty when we seek to contribute to the general good. Let us
not court a dreary isolation, and refuse the assistance we have it
in our power to render. Let not the corroding curse of indiffer-
ence prevent us from doing our duty. Let not the excuses engen-
dered by laziness and fostered by a sense of inability—not the
inability of conscious modesty but the inability of indolence—
dwarf the mind which Grod made to be employed, and thus make
us cumberers of the ground in this world of activity and thought.
We are hastening to a land where the thoughtless and the indolent
are left far behind in the race. The parasites of humanity who
obtain place by favoritism and keep it by intrigue, and who fail
to bring ability into their calling, find no congenial atmosphere
in fair Australia. If a man is to eat there he must work, he must
think, he must call up the resources Grod has given him, and he
must reduce to action the ideals of a life of dreams. To prepare
for the enterprise in which we are about to enter, to prepare for
the battle we have to fight, for the race we have to run, we require
training. Here, then, there is an opportunity of doing something;
let that something be done. Let us each seek to contribute a
modicum, however small, and depend upon it none will be more
surprised than yourselves at the success of the effort you have been
induced to make. Whatever you write will be thankfully inserted
in our columns so long as the mode of expression comes within
the rules prescribed in our prospectus.
Again, we invite you—we have already received flattering
offers of support —we have the approbation and promised assist-
ance of our esteemed captain —and relying upon the kindness and
assistance of those fair ladies who wreath the sunshine of joy
around the life of man, whose smile stimulates to action and
encourages self-reliance, and counting upon the generous help of


the many fertile minds which have a being in our midst, we make
our bow, and lay the first number of the Commissary Review
vux J # . rp Q
before a generous and appreciative constituency. 1. b.
CONCERT.
On Tuesday, April 17th, an amateur concert took place in the saloon,
and, we are happy to say, was a decided success.
The following was the programme :
PabJ I.
Pianoforte Solo—“ Truth in absence” Miss Withers.
Song—“ Tom Bowling” ... Mr. H. Griffiths.
° « ti •1 1 ivT icjcs >rmr n
Song—“ Hilly’s Faith” Miss Smith
Piano Solo—“ The Maiden’s Prayer” Mrs. Wagstaff
Bon" —“ Kitty Tyrrell” Mr. Pomeroy.
ii "IVTicjo
Song—“ Robin is Shy” ... Miss Owen.
° // t • i ii IVTt* A+.lnnarm
Song —“Juanita” ... ••• Mr. Atkinson.
Beading— ‘ ‘ David Copperfield” •. Mr. Vaughan.
-m- ITT nil T>/-vll TT Si WT T 4-It
Son" —“ The Moss-grown Well” ... ... ••• Miss Polly Smith.
Duet—“ The Gipsy Countess” Miss Smith and Miss Owen.
(Interval of ten minutes.)
Part 11.
Pianoforte Solo ... ... ••• ••• ••• Mrs. Wagstaff.
Song—“ The Village Blacksmith”
Song—“ Tapping at the Garden Gate”
Duet—“ The Flower Gatherers”
Mr. Pomeroy.
Miss Smith.
Miss Smith and Miss Owen.
Song—“ The Friar of Orders Grey” Mr. H. Griffiths.
Reading—from “ Nicholas Nickleby” Mr. Vaughan.
Song—“ Katie’s letter” Miss Owen.
“ God Save the Queen!” The Company.
The prologue was composed and delivered by the Rev. Thomas Smith.
We give it in extenso, as taken down in short-hand by our special
reporter:
Prologue.
Here we all are, kind friends to entertain,
And spend an hour upon the watery main ;
The bell has rung, the curtain’s drawn aside,
And we now by your verdict must abide.
Your sunny faces speak a welcome kind,
And bid us leave all bashfulness behind :
We feel rejoiced, elated, at the sight,
Of so much beauty in our ship to-night.
Right glad are we to see within the chair,
Our captain, who we’ve proved no pains will spare,
To add delight to all within his ship,
And thus relieve the dullness of our trip.
Long may he live to guide his noble craft,
Nor be perplex’d with “ light winds too much aft.”


Then after years of profit and renown,
May heavenly blessings his last moments crown :
We’ll not forget to welcome, too, his wife,
The blest addition to this mortal life ;
Her kindness, sure, which our best thanks demand-
We’ll gladly give this second in command.
Right welcome, too, kind Mends, are one and all,
The rich, the poor, the weighty, and the small.
Well not forget the officers and crew—
Without their aid, oh, dear ! what should we do 1
Well try to please, and now will make a start,
With softest solo on pianoforte ;
Of “ Truth in absence” shall the notes now tell,
And memory binds us with her magic spell,
And takes us back to loved ones far away,
To whom our thoughts in fancy often stray.
“ Tom Bowling,” honest Tom shall pipe aloft,
With notes that fall upon our ears so soft.
One loved by me of “ Milly’s faith” shall tell
Such trusting faith if each one had ’twere well.
“ The maiden’s prayer ” will then well rendered be ;
Upon this verdict you will all agree.
Then “ Kitty Tyrrell” and the “ Captive Greek,”
With “Juanita” will applause bespeak.
“ Mr. Micawber” in turn will then appear,
Upon his eyelash hangs the gushing tear.
If others lack, we feel our learned friend,
With proper emphasis the piece will rend.
A little maiden, too, her tale shall tell,
And she will lead you to the “ Moss-grown well”—
Where e’en the “ Gipsy Countess” will be found,
Her charms depicted in delightful sound.
* * * * -js-
Ten minutes, then, as usual, we will take,
And revel in the captain’s wine and cake.
When all refreshed here back we come again
To hear a solo that will charm a swain.
The “ Village Smith” his bellows shall employ,
Which will impart, we feel, a thrill of joy—
Should any here now wish to choose a mate,
Remember “ Tapping at the Garden Gate
Of “ Gathered Flowers” then we all shall hear,
A “ Friar,” too, in character appear :
More music, after which in mimic rage,
Charles Dickens shall appear upon the stage.
Then “ Katie’s Letter” open shall be seen,
And all united sing “ God Save the Queen !”
* * # * *


We seek your offering for the sailor’s child,
Whose father died amidst the tempest wild.
His friends are few, his lot is hard to bear—
Will you supply a father’s loving care 1 ?
The widow cheer who mourns for him that’s dead,
And feed her children with affection’s bread.
Then ope your purse, and heaven will bless your store,
Tor help the poor and God will give you more.
My part I’ve done, it bears the mark of haste—
I’m sorry I your precious time should waste.
Next time we meet I’ll try and make amends—•
I make my bow, and introduce my friends !
We have much pleasure in stating that, after the concert, there was a
collection in aid of the Merchant Seamens’ Orphan Asylum, and the
sum given amounted to £4 Bs. 6d.
CmTtspxmDmcc.
THE AET OF BEING DISAGEEEABLE.
(To the Editor of the Commissary Review.)
Sir, —I am sorry to observe that all the passengers assembled on board
this vessel seem to lack one accomplishment, viz : —the art of making them-
selves disagreeable. Now, Sir, I think you will admit that a person of very
moderate abilities can, if he choose, make himself agreeable, but only a
very clever man can make himself thoroughly and scientifically disagreeable.
No man can be a perfect master of the art unless he gives to the question a vast
amount of care and attention. Ido not know of any situation in which a
person can be placed where there are greater opportunities for the favorable
study of this art than on board ship. It is not my intention to write an
exhaustive essay on the subject, but I have thrown together a few hints
which if properly acted on and carried out will at any rate give the diligent
student an insight into the rudiments of the science.
LADIES ! Shew a decided preference for some particular gentleman, con-
stantly read and walk with him, and for the time being make him all in all
to you, not forgetting to snub any other unfortunate fellow who may offer
you the slightest attention. Change your partner occasionally, but it is
essential that you have at all times some decided favorite. If you follow-
up this course assiduously you will be the means of diffusing a great deal of
good-will amongst the male passengers.
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN ! Come late to dinner. People are not
usually amiable just before they dine, and it will have a wonderfully sooth-
ing effect if you can time your arrival so as to turn two or three people out
of their seats to make way for you.
If you see a party engaged at croquet or quoits on the port or starboard
side of the poop, walk on that side; by so doing you have a chance of interrupt-
ing the game.
Should you smoke, always light your cigar or pipe to windward ; if the
lights are bad there will be every chance of setting fire to a lady’s dress.


At the tea-table wait patiently until some article has been sent to the
other end of the table, upon which, say “ I’ll trouble you for the butter,”
&c. y as the case may be. This is a very clever trick.
Make a point of disturbing people at night, either by dancing on deck
or blundering down the companion stairs ; and if you serenade a lady choose
a married lady with a young baby.
. When you “turn in ” always carry on a loud and animated conversation
with your companion. This is very pleasant to the other passengers.
Snore loudly if possible.
, . If ./° u find an ybody asleep (by day or night) in the companion, wake
nim ;it the person should be the captain, so much the better. Why Sir I
ask you as a reasonable man, should the captain be allowed to recruit his
energies for his arduous duties ? If he require undisturbed repose, let
mm retire to the hot hold, where he will be handy if any unforeseen circum-
stances should require his instant presence on deck. Therefore, when you
are on deck during the night, if you don’t leave the companion door open,
make as much noise as possible in opening and closing it.
Assert your opinion loudly and dogmatically on every subiect. If you
don t understand the question pretend you do. J
A great deal of amusement may be caused by a revolver or pistol.
Always carry it at full cock and pointed towards some person. If you wish
to discharge a barrel don’t go to leeward and fire into the water, but point
it aloft; by so doing if you don’t kill anyone you have an excellent chance
of damaging a sail. Fire it occassionally out of your port,—it may alarm the
ladies ; and clean it at the saloon table.
If you own an easy chair don’t use it, the sea air may damage it, and
you will want it on your arrival—so take one belonging to another person.
■Practise winking : there are many varieties of the wink, as the arch, the
sarcastic, the assenting, the dissenting, the affirmative, the negative, ’ &c.
Ihe great beauty of this mode of communication is that no one, excepting
the two parties immediately interested, can tell the exact meaning of the
wink, and people mostly draw wrong inferences. But enough— the aubiect
is inexhaustible, modes of annoyance must be left to each person’s individual
sagacity.
If a paper should be started don’t contribute; say you can’t write
and won t try; throw cold water on it by saying there are too few passengers,
and that a paper must be a failure. 6 *
Trusting these remarks will be taken in a right spirit^
I am, Sir, your obedient servant, FI.G-.
Caustic.
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.
When Lord Tomnoddy, feeling- excessively dull, and in want of
amusement took counsel with his “ tiger,” and solicited his advice
on the subject, he was recommended to quit for awhile the
fashionable haunts of pleasure in the West-end, and betake him-
self to the vicinity of Newgate gaol, where, on Monday morning-, he
s°vi r 1 j Ve t ! e enjoyment of seeing a man hanged. His lordship
delighted with the idea, took the advice; and, although he and
his companions, yielding themselves up to the inducements to
gaiety in the prospect of the glorious amusement of an execution-


scene, became very 44 jolly ” in the apartments they had secured
for their accommodation, and finally fell asleep, and so were de-
prived of the sight, they had yet the gratification of seeing the
body cut down, but not without many expressions of regret that
it was impossible then to hang another to atone for their disap-
pointment. Though Lord Tomnoddy was not alone in his taste,
but had it shared by thousands of persons, the English Govern-
ment, taking a different view, decided, two years since, to abolish
the hideous display and to limit the witnesses of it to a few officials
of the gaol.
Not many years have passed since we punished ordinary felo-
nies with death, but the healthier tone of a more enlightened age
has decreed that the gallows shall only be reared for the shedder
of blood. Yet a not inconsiderable section of men cry aloud
against the retention of capital punishment, and deny its policy
and justice. Mr. Gilpin, in the House of Commons, leads the
attack, and though, as yet, fruitlessly, it is well that we give the
question the attention and examination it deserves. Both sides
of it must be looked at fairly. A blind adherence to any custom
or policy is antagonistic to that spirit of fairness which is the
boast of Englishmen.
The important point of dispute is the right of the State to
destroy the life given by the Creator. On the one hand it is urged
that the power to do so has been committed unto governments by
the terms of the command, 44 Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man
shall his blood be shed.” But, against this comes the reply that
the old law was abolished in the advent of the Christian dispen-
sation. The point resolves itself into a theological and a verbal
question. Emphatically we are taught that the law was abolished
in Christ, but does the term include the Moral as well as the Di-
vine Law ? It is important to observe that the command was
given before the legal code was pronounced, though at a later
period incorporated with it. This would appear to settle the
point, by placing it as a separate injunction, independent of the
provisions of the law. But even were that not so, we recur to the
position that the law, undoubtedly, embraces two separate and dis-
tinct sections : one relating to the religious education or guidance
of the people, the other to their moral and civil government. If it be
conceded that the civil law was abolished, we must be prepared to
admit that the commands, 44 Thou shalt do no murder,” and 44 Thou
shalt not steal,” were swept away with it. For our part, we do
not, at present, at all incline to that opinion, and we have no de-
sire to contemplate a state of society that should deny the present
authority of the moral law, so far as it is requisite to be carried
out for the preservation and well being of the best interests of


mankind. Closely allied to this question of the Divine authority for
the retributive sacrifice of life is that of the Moral. The true
principle of statesmanship recognises the safety and happiness of
the subject as the primary aim of all legislation. Undertaking
the conduct of a nation’s affairs, no government can rightly fulfil
its duty that neglects to secure this end. Morbid sentimentalism
must never be allowed to interfere with its course of action when
the consequence would be to injuriously affect the ultimate
object. But wherein is any moral authority vested ? Mistaken
dreamers and sentimentalists entirely deny it any existence, and,
with foolish shortsightedness, stigmatise supporters of capital
punishment as inhuman and barbarous, and arrogate to themselves
the sole possession of the quality of mercy; while, on the other
hand, the advocates of the present system, believing that the truest
mercy and purest humanity often dictate the sternest justice, take
as a sufficient moral authority the guardianship of life which is
imposed upon human governments. To secure that preservation,
the most deterrent sentence must be executed upon those who
stain their hands with human blood. The death punishment is no
new invention of exquisite cruelty, nor did it have its origin in
the age of barbaric torture; hut it originated with the Grod of
Justice. To the criminal we extend infinitely more mercy than
he allowed his victim, in the allotment of time for repentance and
preparation for the bar of Grod’s judgment. Yet still it is urged,
the execution of murderers exercises no good influence on society,
and deters none by its melancholy example from the commission
of the same crime. Why not remit the old statute and substitute
for it solitary confinement for life ? On this point we reply that
statistics laid before the House of Commons shew that, in countries
where the experiment has been made, it has miserably failed, and
that instead of the promised diminution in the number of capital
offences, a large increase has been the result. Solitary confine-
ment is not the dread equal of death. What would it mean ?In
many cases, it would be but a permanent occupation of lodgings far
more comfortable than the former abodes of the criminals, and the
daily provision of the necessaries of food and clothing. Far be it
from us to deny the horrors of such a sentence, or to speak lightly
of the misery of a prolonged existence, embittered by harrowing-
remorse, to which many would prefer death itself; but it were idle
to assume it to be prospectively as full of awe as an ignominious
death. To man life is precious, even though it be unhappy ; and
the fear of realising speedily the unseen Future, bright with no
prospect of reward for evil-doers, causes numbers of whom we can
never know to pause when tempted to do a murder. Grovernments,
having placed in their hands the protection of life, dare not shrink


from executing* the severest sentence on murderers, knowing that
they are held morally responsible for any increase in capital
offences arising from concessions to the demands of a misguided
humanitarianism. C. "V.
THE MYSTERY OF SHAVING, AND TRIUMPHANT
RECEPTION OF KING NEPTUNE ON BOARD THE
SHIP “COMMISSARY,” MAY 14, 1870.
(From our Special Reporter.)
This morning broke most auspiciously; eager eyes peered upwards to the
sky, and many anxious hearts hoped that the weather would prove no
bar to the proceedings of the day. The day, as it wore on past the early
hours, revealed the happy fact that our hopeful anticipations were not to
be disappointed. At dawn preparations were under weigh. But why
this stir 1 why this commotion on board the good ship 1 Neptune was
expected on board, and mysterious rites had to be performed. The Eng-
lish are a loyal race, and having entered upon the domains of His Royal
Highness King Neptune, we could do no less than seek to contribute, by
all that was in our power, to give a welcome suitable to the rank and
dignity of that august personage, who was, by appointment, to visit our
vessel. To obey law and respect authority, is the inherent principle of
every Britisher. To respect established custom, made venerable by age,
and immortalized by history, is the duty of every man.
All emigrants, when they cross the line, are in the territory over
which Neptune claims jurisdiction, and the law of naturalization observed
in this principality demands that all persons, who for the first time enter
these realms, shall be subjected to the operation of shaving. King
Neptune is aware that cleanliness contributes to the health and comfort
of the human family, and disregard of nature’s laws have entailed conse-
quences the most disastrous ; and to obviate this preventible catastrophe,
in which the innocent fall a prey to the filthiness of those who hate cold
water, Neptune has enjoined that all and every male entering his domin-
ions shall be compelled to comply with edicts based upon sanitary
principles. The existence of the rite of shaving is a proof incontrover-
tible of its necessity. To give eclat to the proceedings, to make it as
congenial as possible, Neptune has added the grandeur of majestic pageant
to celebrate the event. You see no miserable barber’s pole; no little
dingy room, with miniature bowls and cracked basins, filled with greasy
water and lather which has been on other faces besides your own. Here
you have the elevation of the art of shaving j here you see how that
which is considered a mean occupation takes its place among those mighty
pageants which dwarf the opening of the Crystal Palace, or the inaugu-
ration of the opening of Holborn Viaduct, and Blackfriars Bridge into
the bargain, into infinitesimal nothingness. The barber here is no
miserably paid hireling, with a dirty apron hiding the tatters of his unmen-
tionables. The razor, not one of those edgeless tools, known as Mappin’s
best. No; art has lent her ingenuity to produce an instrument which


dexterously performs its office almost without a guiding hand. Scents
gathered on Arabia’s shores give pleasure to the olfactory nerves; scents
not such as are dispensed by that advertiser Rirnmdl. A member of
the Royal College of Surgeons attends gratuitously with that self-sacrifice
which is the distinguishing characteristic of that noble profession.
Specifics in the shape of pills —not the miserable little globules of
homoeopathic celebrity, which can be lost in the hollow of a tooth —but
pills of a size which prove that large-heartedness and profuse liberality is
one of the chief features of King Neptune’s rule. And, besides, you
have not a bath in which all air is excluded, and no room left for the
body and the water, but a lavatory is provided amid citron groves and
orange blossoms; yes, in a lovely spot, near which the sheep browse and
cattle feed; down in one of those rich dells where nature seems to have
furnished an elysium for jaded man, amid the melodious utterances of
nature’s songsters, where the linnet, thrush, and lark form the choristers,
and where cooing doves perform the service of love, where the robin
twitters, and the graceful swan glides with stately mien upon the
unruffled water, where lately the lion and the leopard played in millenium
innocence ; down in this retreat, with all its enchanting beauty, did King
Neptune sit in state. Oh ! as we gazed upon the scene we felt our admi-
ration glow; fancy in her wildest flight never could have pictured such
a panorama. Oh ! how we longed to fling ourselves into the cool fountain
of delicious waters. Oh ! more ; we felt a dignity conferred upon us to
be allowed to pay court to the Monarch, whose mind, developed by dwell-
ing amid such beauties, could, with such generous impulses as belong only
to the great and good, honor us with an invitation to be present at this
festival; so grand , so inspiring , and so refined in its effect upon the mind.
Who shall describle the events that happened within two or three brief
hours on Saturday 1 Our Commander, with a determination to avail
himself of a good position, where he could witness the whole scene without
interruption or annoyance, ascended the mizen-mast, and lost in a reverie
of amazement, and feeling profoundly the dignity conferred upon his
vessel by King Neptune’s presence, had almost forgotten he was still a
denizen of earth, and, to our horror, was about to soar to other regions,
when he was recalled to a sense of duty by the vociferous cheers which
rent the air, and made the tapering mast to tremble. A galaxy of beauty,
dressed out in exquisite taste, lined the way of the procession ; ladies lent
their presence and their smiles, and hands were kissed, and handkerchiefs
were waved ; some heroines, who felt the gushing of Excelsior within
their capacious souls (souls larger than their bodies), with the help of our
distinguished Chief Officer, ascended to a pinnacle where, reclining amid
cocks and hens on new mown hay, they made us shudder at their daring
and fear-nothing audacity; their garments fluttered in the breeze, and
we almost felt—to speak nautically—they would have to scud before the
wind under bare poles.
But Neptune has arrived; the hour of mystery has struck; the
tolling bell sounds as an ominous warning to the imprisoned victims who
have to submit to the rite of shaving.


King Neptune sate upon a throne emblazoned with his royal crest;
beside him his wife Amphridite, and youngest child. The judge, barber,
and assistant barber, doctor and assistant, Neptune’s Admiral, a pair of
lively bears, with a retinue of javelin knights, made up the procession.
Never was there a grander display; wealth and time had been lavished
in the preparation. The blast of the trumpet sounds ; the victims come
forth from their heated prison-house; tried impartially ; convicted out of
their own mouth, they ascend the scaffold, —not, ’tis true, of decapitation,
but where they are to be cleansed from the incrustation of filth upon
their chins. Never shall we forget the awful horror resting on the
countenances of the victims as they answered the interrogations
of the judge. We pitied them. And then as the razor glided
over the cheek—oh ! how the eyes rolled; the toes became convulsed;
the fingers were extended; the joints became stiff; and, as they fell into
the capacious fountain, where the bears awaited them, a loud howl
reverberated through the air—a scuffle, a growl, a splash—and some
came forth from the grip of the bears destitute of those necessary gar-
ments which modern civilization has provided for the being dignified
by the name of man—man, who with all his glory, needs a tailor; others
more wise, propitiated the bears by promises, which we hope will be
kept. This being over, the dependents of Neptune, his mailed knights,
his Admiral and Judge, disported in the laving tide, and with huzzas
which rent the air and made the vessel tremble, the pageant was brought
to a conclusion, with a tableau which will be for ever indelibly fixed
upon the mind. One by one the members invested with the order of
Neptune, came forth and basked under the sunny smiles of the King, to
whom they had sworn allegiance, and received as well the congratula-
tions of their friends. T. S.
Note.—We should explain that King- Neptune held his Court on the quarter-deck,
in close proximity to the sheep and cattle pens.
LIFE’S CHANGES.
Whether we look at the above subject as applied to man or to
creatures of a lower order, the mind finds abundance for the
deepest study and profit. If wisdom be the object sought after,
where can that which is of all things most worth the having be
better sought for than in Life’s Changes ? If it be to become
acquainted with the shoals and quicksands of life, study the history
of those who have made ship wreck of their brilliant positions.
Look at the man whose very name breathed amongst the com-
mercial crowd commanded the highest point of trust and respect,
but who in some fatal moment, with perhaps honorable intentions
plays a desperate chance, which if successful will add fresh lustre
to his already brilliant name ; but alas ! failing, he the man, held
up as a model merchant, a splendid financier, the beau-ideal of


younger men, who are proud in making known the fact of their
being employed by such a man, but are struck dumb when the
great house falls.
What field has yielded the writer, novelist, dramatist, his-
torian, and even the preacher, richer themes whereby to rivet the
attention of the multitude and to make their names and lives
enduring. Well, would it be, if the lessons which force themselves
on the attention of all, were stored up and often examined as a
man would, who had a well with a certain quantity of water,
which if dealt out with a reckless hand would soon become dry
and thereby cause disappointment and thirst, the means of re-
plenishing being dependant on rare and unfavorable circum-
stances.
Such then would we have as characteristic of the readers of
the Commissary Review , and as one of its contributors, having
within a few years passed through much of that which forms the
title of this paper, and thereby enabled to speak of its many
advantages. Laboring with earnestness and diligence, the future
bright with roseate hues, and so full of security that another heart
was invited to share it, the height of human happiness seemed
attained, united hearts labored and loved, finding fresh happiness
in each other’s occupied lives. Why then should the horizon of
human joy become clouded ? The clouds become threatening and
at last seems to envelope all, everything; who could have foiled
that bolt that was to effect one of Life’s Changes ? Was it idle-
ness ? Nay! no evil tongue breathes such a report. Is it in-
attention to business ? No, the friendly voice of many vero-e a
slight cessation. What then can it be ? The worst and most that
can be said is, that too much was attempted, but honor and
integrity remained, and shall it be said that Life’s Chano- e was
without its blessing and much cause for thankfulness ? No youth
and strength remained, valuable experience gained, and though
wealth may have flown, true and valued friends are about, and
with that energy which commands Divine recognition fresh 5 posi-
tion is gained, and with the lesson of Life’s Change, the heart
again receives fresh courage, and the past becomes an incentive
to new exertions, and not to repining or disclaiming against the
most High.
Again the scene changes, and dear old England’s shores which
to the stranger offers such brilliant attractions, and whose charms
have found utterance in a thousand volumes, all is to be left"
Hearts which have shown the depth of love that lay within them
say “ Hod speed and bless thee,” are bid adieu, farewell; a joyous
and beaming hope takes possession of the soul that each other may
again meet. J


The good ship “ Commissary,” under the command of the
able and seamanlike Captain Wagstaff, assisted by watchful, oblig-
ing, and ever ready officers, a crew whose desires seem to be to
raise thepiselves above their usual merits, and lastly with a goodly
company of passengers, many possessing much musical talent and
histrionic ability all deeply anxious for each other’s happiness and
welfare, assist in effecting another scene in Life’s' Changes. May
she and her living freight by Divine mercy and protection be per-
mitted to reach the desired haven, and then on future Life’s
Changes we will await, leaving the issue to that all wise and
governing hand, which disposes of man’s intentions as seemeth
good to Himself.
In closing this paper, I heartily hope that many who like the
writer are patiently awaiting another of Life’s Changes, will
realise the brightest ray of their heart’s desire, remembering that
it is neither chance nor fate that has led their steps thus far, but
the loving hand of Almighty Grod, and let this glorious truth be
ever present in the heart. “ Them that honor me I will honor
and which will form a golden mounting to the proud and noble
thought of being a true born Englishman.
J. P.
Quoth Tom, “ ’Tis strange that in the world
So much injustice should abound.”
‘ Nay,” answered John, “ The human heart,
Is never on the right side found. ”
©right mI Dodrrr.
By the Editor.
ODE TO THE SUN.
Hail Monarch of the Day—thou messenger of light—
At thy approach grim darkness takes its flight;
And Nature, roused from out her dreamy bed,
In glad surprise uplifts her thankful head.
The forest minstrels their glad voices raise,
And join with gladness in the song of praise ;
The poet’s words can ne’er the worth define,
That Nature offers at thy golden shrine.


Hail, beauteous friend ! so rich in every grace,
Thy glories are reflected in each face ;
The stars of earth, the flowers that grace the land,
Receive their tints from thy artistic hand.
How often have I seen thee sink to rest,
Beneath thy curtains in the golden west;
And prayed my life may have as bright a close,
"When I shall die to earth and all its woes.
GENERAL NEWS.
On Wednesday next, 25th May, a lecture will be delivered by the
Rev. Thomas Smith, on “ Ups and Downs,” and it is rumoured that
many incidents of ship life will be introduced by the rev. lecturer.
The chair will be taken at eight o’clock.
It is purposed to hold, on Wednesday, Ist June, an entertainment,
consisting of vocal and instrumental music and readings. Ladies and
gentlemen willing to assist are requested to communicate with Mr.
Vaughan, before twelve o’clock on Monday next, 23rd instant.
It is with some hesitation that we direct the attention of our readers
to the existence of a nuisance greatly interfering with the exercise of our
editorial duties. No sooner do we settle down in our sanctum, than a
band of itinerant musicians and ballad-singers congregate outside out-
door, and give great annoyance to our busy brain. Far better would be
the strains of a barrel-organ, than the discordant notes of aspiring ama-
teurs going through their instruction-steps. May we ask the influence
of our readers for the abatement of this grievance 1
A lecture on “ Hedley Vicars, or Voices from the Crimea,” was
given on Wednesday, 4th May, by the Rev. Thos. Smith, and was
listened to with marked attention by the large audience, the rev. lecturer
being frequently applauded. We regret we are unable to give a report
as we could have wished, and we are only able to say that it was charac-
terised by the rev. gentleman’s well known eloquence. At the conclusion
a vote of thanks was moved and carried to the lecturer, as also to Dr.
Morgan, who ably filled the chair.


NAUTICAL CHRONICLE.
Date.
April
Date. Lat. Lon. Dis. Bar. The
pril 14 Nth. West
~ 18 49.12 6.30 115 30.5053°
~ 17 48.23 8.9 82 30,5053°
~ 16 46.27 11.42 190 30.02 60°
~ 15 44.1314 55 188 29.60 62°
„ 19 42.5316.02 11129.60 64°
~ 20 40.2615.6 13830.6 61°
Weekly run —824 miles,
pril 2139.1515.27 7230.3065°
~ 22 38.01 16.14' 75 30.36 64°
„ 23 35.2517.1716430,30 65°
~ 24 32.3018.21 190 30.0068°
~ 25 31.3019.11 62 30.8 |6B°
„ 26 30.5319.12 38 30.0
„ 27 29.4619.12 67 29.90 69°
Weekly run—66B miles,
pril 28 27.17 19.21 150 29.90 70°
„ 29 24.4121.05182 30.30 72°
~ 30 2*. 49 22.28 136 30.0 73i
lay 1 21.0123.46129 30.0 74°
„ 2 18.58 25.14149 30.10 74
„ 3 15.58 25.42183 30.0 74°
~ 413.1124.56175130.0 75°
Weekly run, 1104 miles
[ay 5 10.17 23.46188 30.0 78°
„ 6 8.0 22.11 165 30.0 80°
„ 7 6.14 20.41 134 29.84 82°
„ 8 5.8 119.29102 29.80 84°
„ 9 3.55 19.00 77 29.90'85°
„ 10 3.21 18.531 36 29.90185°
„ 11 2.35119.14| 50 29.90184°
Weekly run—7s2 miles,
[ay 12 2.27 20.16 82 29.90 83°
„ 13 1.29 21.28 92:29.90 81°
Sth.
„ 1400.3 23.51 169 29.90 80°
„ 15 1.51 25.11 139:29.90 80°
„ 16 4.9 26.19153 29.90 80°
„ 17 6.55 28.41 221 29.80 82°
„ 18 946 30.28 200129.90 81°
Weekly run, 1056 miles.
April
April
Remarks.
Left Plymouth, 6.30 a.m. Noon, off Eddystone.
Fine and clear ; wind, North & North-easterly
Cloudy & light breeze; wind, N. E. & E.; foggy
Dull & cloudy; wind, S.E.; Divine service held
Cloudy, fresh wind from S. E. &S. [in saloon
Overcast and hazy ; wind, S.E. [and North
Fine & clear; wind, S.W., light, veering to N. W.
Fine ; light wind from N. and N. E.
Fine; clear weather; wind, N.E.
Passed Madeira ; wind, N.N.E.; fine.
Cloudy and overcast; wind, E. & N.E. ; Divine
Light & unsteady; wind, E. &S. E. [service held
Very light wind fromE.E., S.E. ; calm 6 hours,
[and S. round by S.W.
Very light & variable ; calm 2 hrs ; wind, S.E.
Light westerly airs & calms, veering & freshen-
Steady breezes from N.N.W. k tine [ingfr.N.W.
Fine, clear weather; wind, E. E.W. and N.
Light breeze & fine, clear weather ; Divine ser-
Steady trade wind fr. N. E. & E. [vice perf.
Passed San Antonio Islands, distant 10 miles ;
Fine, calm weather ; wind, E. [wind, E.
Cloudy weather ; wind, E.
Fine and clear ; wind, E.N.E.
Light and fine ; wind, E.N.E. [Divine service
Cloudy weather, thunder & lightning; wind N. E.
Squalls and rain ; wind, E.N.E. to S.E.
Cloudy & unsettled; calms & light airs fr. S. E.
Very light, squally & unsettled weather, with rain
Light variable airs and fine ; wind, westerly.
Very light, cloudy & squally airs fr. N.E. to S.
Cloudy & dull; wind, S.S.E. &S.E.; sent letters to
Fine, clear weather & steady trade wind. [Engld.
Moderate trade wind and fine, S. S. E. to S. E.
Westerly trade and squally ; wind, S.E.
Squally and fresh ; wind, from S. E.
To the Editor of the Commissary Review.
Dear Mr. Editor,
I have much pleasure in submitting my mite towards your paper, in
the form of a weekly log.
On Thursday, April 14th, 1870, left Plymouth, with a light wind at
W.N. W.; noon, off Eddystone, wind, light and baffling. At 8 p.m., the Lizard
lights were sighted ; here the wind veered to North, which allowed us to go
our course. At daylight on Friday, the Telegraph ship was sighted ahead ;


by 8.30 we were abreast, hailed her, and requested to be reported. Their
answer was, that they had not the wire on board, but expected it on the
morrow, when they would report us. The ship had anchored there the day
previous to our sighting her.
A few words about this telegraph ship may not be out of place here.
She belongs, and was placed there, by the International Mid-Channel Tele-
graph Company (limited); her position is lat. 49° 20" N. ; long. 6° 17" W.
The Lizard bears E. by N. half N. ; distance, 56 miles. Ushant, S. by E.
three-quarters E. ; distance, 70 miles, thus putting her in a good position
for ships making the English Channel.
The ship was formerly Her Majesty’s ship “Brisk,” a corvette of 16
guns ; her tonnage is about 1,200 tons ; she is a staunch and good ship, well
adapted for the purpose. A captain in the Navy commands her, with an
efficient crew in case of need. Her three lower masts and bowsprit are left
standing, with three trysails bent ready to set in an emergency, or keep her
steady in a gale of wind. She is anchored in 60 fathoms water, with two
immense chain cables working on a swivel. The words “ Telegraph Ship”
are painted on her blank sides, and she exhibits a globular light at night.
A large quantity of stores are on board, so that she can supply any ship that
is short after a long voyage. She will be found very convenient for passen-
gers landing from Australia, or others who wish to land before entering
the Channel. She has a steamer attached to her, whose head quarters are
Penzance ; in fact, she is a great boon to all connected with shipping.
Saturday, April 16th.—The wind proved light, 82 miles only being our
day’s work. Next day was better, showing 190 miles, which gave us a good
lift across the Bay of Biscay. The end of the week shewed 824 miles from
Plymouth.
Next week nothing of nautical note took place, except passing
Madeira about 90 miles off—nine days out. Our log for the week shows
668 miles, which is very poor. Our next week is better—l,lo4 miles. The
island of San Antonio was sighted on the 3rd—distance, 10 miles. The
ship “ Golden Horn” American clipper, was in company for ten days, when
we left her astern, thoroughly tired of her. Sent letters to England on the
14th. Our last week shows a run of 1,056 miles.
Wishing your paper every success,
I am, dear Mr. Editor, your most obedient servant,
F. WAGSTAFF.
WANTED. —YOUNG LADIES who won’t Flirt ; liberal wages. Apply
to Ed. Commissary Review.
WANTED. —GENTLEMEN who are quite impartial in offering their
arms to Ladies for after tea walks. Apply to Ed. Commissary Review.
WANTED. —WELL CUT SHIP TOBACCO ; 3s. 6d. will be given for
one pound of the same ; half-a-pound in four days, the other half in
four weeks ; must be cut “ long-ways.” Apply to A. L. A., Cabin No. 6.
LOTTERY. —There will be drawn for, by Lottery, on Saturday, the 21st
proximo, a beautiful WALNUT WOOD WRITING DESK, only
twenty tickets of 2s. each being required ; it is hoped that the public will at
once support so liberal an undertaking. Desk on view at No. 1, main deck
square, Commissary.


IThc “ o‘_onmu. f i!ianj ” scim
No. 2.
THURSDAY, MAY 26th, 1870.
CONTENTS.
The Queen’s Birthday ... ... ... ... ■ • • • • •
± UC O J-M.A UXXK.LtXJ ... ... ... - • • • • *
Home ... ... ... ... ... ••• td
Sarcasm and Raillery ... ... ... ••• •••
Correspondence ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• "2
Matrimonial Notice ... ... ... ... ... ••• r?
General News ... ... ... ... ••• •••
Nautical Chronicle ... ... ... ... ... ■ ••• “2
Advertisements, &c.
THE QUEEN’S BIRTHDAY.
Tuesday was a day of rejoicing at home and abroad, in all lands
governed by British rule. Then we commemorated the fifty-first
birthday of Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria. From
the hearts of all true and loyal subjects of the great and good
Queen who adorns the throne of the vastest empire of the world,
went up the prayer “ Long live the Queen !” Merrily rang from
city steeples and ivy-clad village towers silvery peals of gladsome
music, and from the cannon’s mouth went forth far-echoing sounds
loudly saluting the happy morn. In the gay and busy capital
night is made brilliant by flaming devices and illuminations in
the principal streets, club houses and tailors’ shops vieing with
each other. The thoroughfares are crowded by people gazing on
the Pall Mall display, or the show at Poole’s in Saville-row. The
civil servants gain a holiday and a relaxation from the hard work
they have daily to undergo between the hours of ten and four. In
the army and navy, reviews and fetes are the order of the day, and
though the English, as “ a nation of shopkeepers,” do not recog-
nise the day as a general holiday, nor consider it necessary to
keep it with feasting and drinking, they possess hearts beating
with the spirit of true loyalty, and rejoice in a steady, business-
like way, that Providence has so long spared the life of our beloved
Queen.
A brighter ornament never decked a throne, nor have nations
been ruled by a gentler sway than is wielded by her sceptre. As
a queen she has ever been actuated by an earnest desire for her
subjects’ welfare, and ever solicitous to meet and further their
wishes when likely to promote the general prosperity of her king-
dom. As a wife and mother her character is written on an endur-


ing tablet from which the record will never be erased, but endure
plainly in future history. Through years of happy wedded life
she loved and clung faithfully to the choice of her early affection,
and the purity of her court stands like white marble by the side
of the records of past reigns. On him whom she had sworn to
love she leant trustfully and with never-varying devotion, and
when, nearly nine years since, the great bell of St. Paul’s sent a
deep, sepulchral note of sadness into the night, telling that Albert
the (rood had finished the earthly course, the note of sorrow was
caught up through the length and breadth of the land ; and, on
that mournful Sunday, when the solemn bell in town and country
tolled, and worshippers, ignorant of the sad event, stared up at
the omission of Albert’s name from the grand old litany, the
hearts of England’s sons and daughters were sorrowful, and they
mourned with their bereaved queen. No pretended sympathy was
that; the nation was individually sad, and a pall hung over the
generally festive season of Christmas.
We know how she sorrowed in sad seclusion, and during
many years of retirement, away from the gay world of pleasure,
devoted herself to acts of charity. Many a poor cottager has been
visited in sickness and ministered to by the royal widow, and
remained ignorant of her station. Hers was no obtrusive or osten-
tatious spirit, proclaiming her benevolence with trumpet-tongue
to the world. She was content with the approbation of a good
conscience, and the smile of Him who never forgets the cup of
cold water. It was this true womanly spirit, fondly cherishing
the memory of her great and good husband, which drew forth our
whole sympathy, and made us bear with the absence of the Sove-
reign from the court through a long period of retirement. And
when at last she nerved herself once more to face the world and to
stand in “ the fierce light that beats around a throne,” we wel-
comed her with British cordiality, and shewed her that feelings of
the deepest loyalty for her person still existed in our breasts. And
right glad were we when, in November last, she gave her presence
to open those triumphs of engineering skill, the Holborn Valley
Viaduct and Blackfriars Bridge. So conscious did she appear of
the place she held in her people’s hearts, and so reliant on their
sympathy and protection, that her face exhibited no fear or mis-
trust as she rode in an open carriage, neglectful of the cowardly
threats of Fenian assassins.
Journeying to a far distant portion of her empire, the feel-
ings of loyalty and patriotism rise more spontaneously within us,
and we feel justly proud of claiming as our birthright the title of
Englishman. It is a noble heritage—a name which secures
respect in every clime, and has ever been the terror of the tyrant,


and the harbinger of civilisation. The victories of our country
have not been achieved only on the battle-field, but in the nobler
and higher field of moral warfare with benighted heathenism,
ignorance, cruelty, and oppression; and around Britannia’s brow
are encircled the laurels of many such golden victories. Great and
high the privilege of being citizens of a kingdom so justly renowned
as the centre of the world, glorious in her past and present history,
and budding with greater prospects for the future. So we join
heartily in rejoicing that the illustrious reign of our beloved
Queen has been lengthened by another year, and we hope earnestly
that the day is far distant when we shall have to mourn her loss.
And, to the accompaniment of joyous notes of music, and the
reverberating cannon, we unite our voices with those rising from
every corner of the habitable globe, and wafted over land and sea,
as they, with one consent, shout forth
“ God save the Queen !”
C. V.
H 0 M E.
There is a land of every land the pride ;
Beloved by heaven, o’er all the world beside.— Montgomery.
“ Home, sweet home ! ” What soul so dead that has no responsive
echo for that tune which has been interwoven with the warp and
woof of our national life. Home! it is an English word, and it
carries with it a true and English sentiment. The love for home
and its endearments is one of the most noble characteristics of the
Saxon race. What holy emotions have been stirred up by it —
what patriotic devotion and self-sacrifice has it given birth to —
what patient endurance of unrequited toil has it sanctified ; poor
and friendless must that lone being be who can call no place his
home. We, on board this vessel, going out to seek a new home,
in a country to most of us unknown —going, some to seek a liveli-
hood, others for the conservation of that boon good health—
although our faces are turned towards the South, yet cherish
the fond remembrance of our dear old English home. We feel,
that notwithstanding we have left her shore, yet our hearts are
with her still, and long as memory lasts we shall treasure up as
sacred, our love for that spot, consecrated by virtues which have
ennobled humanity. Yes, although we have left thee, we have not
bartered thee for the mess of pottage. We are j ourneying to a land
over whose battlements the ensign of England waves, and whose
national song is “ God save the Queen! ” —to a land where the
people point with pride to the ancestral glory of their Fatherland
as their priceless heritage. And though the croaking raven may


utter the doleful prophecy that her glory is on the wane, yet we
loVe her still, and dare to hope, despite the clouds that sometimes
loom upon her vast horizon, that her sun has not reached its meri-
dian glory. But should it be; should our God have fulfilled all
his purposes in her and by her ; should her sun be on the decline
and even already far in the west, we would gaze upon her still with
ceaseless admiration, and wreath her decline in the embalmed
memory of her former glory. Separated as we are from England
by a watery waste, yet our love is unchanged; the edge of our affec-
tion has been sharpened by our absence, and we long sometimes
with an aching heart for a sight of her cliffs, made hoary by the
frosts of age. We knew not how we loved the land till we were
separated from it, then we felt how intense is that enthusiasm which
circles round the heart, and is a part of the life of England’s sons
and daughters. Home ! at the mention of that name we fly back
upon the wings of love to many a nook made precious by undyino-
memories, to the home of our early life, to a father’s side, and to
a mother s knee. Yes, in fancy’s dreams, which often have a strange
reality, we look up into the old man’s face and feel a mother’s kiss
yet hot upon one’s cheek ; we hear anon the voices which are like
,', e chime of dear church bells—the voices whose echoes reverberate
through and through our being—a mother’s voice. We think of
home, we sit in the vacant chair and we realize a sister’s or a mother’s
form, and in our broken sleep, disturbed by the splash of the wild
waves, we fancy we can hear our name called by the voices so
sweetly welcome to our ear, and awake but to find we are not at
home. Home, to some it speaks of change ; we think of it and
we are led to grassy meads and babbling brooks, where we first
made rootpnnts on the dewy meadow, and built our tiny castles in
the air, and blew our soap bubbles and watched their wondrous
color as they soared aloft, then sorrowed when they fell,—to the old
home, rude it may be in architectural design, but the all in all to
us because of the loved ones there, and the happy days we spent
beneath its roof. Anon our steps wander to the fine old his-
tone church, upon whose face the storms of many centuries have
swept, and yet it stands rich in its tracery of art, where grand con-
ception and design, with execution equal, mark a wondrous age—
to the tower where iron tongues tell tales of joy and sorrow—where
e ivy clinging to the old grey stone gives an undying freshness
am whispers immortality; our step lingers at that mound’
beneath the old yew tree, through whose drooping branches the
solemn wind chants the dirge of death, and the organ-strains in
mournful cadences are often heard—there where the rank grass
grows and the snowdrop and the bashful daisy bloom is all that
remains of a mother dear, and here we stay and weep and talk to


her and seem to hold communion with the one that was, and is not,
and yet is. Quietly we tread near where our baby lies—God’s
first pledge of our wedded life. Rest in thy cradle little sleeper —
a part of us has crossed the flood and thou shalt welcome us when
the waves of death have left us on that shore where life is only
known.
Home! when we think of thee our minds revert to those deeds
of chivalry which made our England glorious —to warriors who have
never quailed before an enemy —to moral heroism which has won
immortal honors in the fields where no dead men do lie—to victories
in science where thought and deep research and patient labor for
the nation’s good have levied contributions on the gratitude of
coming ages.
Home ! when we think of thee, the coronet that encircles
Britannia’s brow seems to be instinct with the splendour of a thou-
sand glorious names calling forth our admiration, and causing
the heart to throb with an emotion which makes us proud to own
that we belong to England. The thought of home, —it is
the joy of the soldier; for as he sits by the bivouac fire,
he sees in the dying embers the conjured up faces which will
gladly welcome him when he returns, which (rod grant he
may, from battles fought and won. The sailor as he swings on
royal yard or paces his watch upon the vessel’s deck, hears in the
splashing wave the voices of the loved at home. Cheer up, then, you
who have left your English home (we trust only for a season); cheer
up, for the future is bright with blessed anticipations. Let not the
dark bird of prophetic omen fright you with the presages of evil,
but let the star of hope which shines upon you from above inspire
you with a devotion which, God-aided, must succeed; bear in mind
in your future place of temporary or prolonged sojourn that you
have a home which you have left behind, and that if you are frugal
and industrious you may return with an honorable independence,
won by the labor of your hands, to gladden the hearts that never
cease to love you. Never let the escutcheon of your country
be dimmed by your folly. Be men, be gentlemen, and let each one
feel that the heritage of our England is a noble patrimony and
one we will seek to hand down as the richest dowry untarnished to
our children. Let us learn, too, that beyond this earthly home there
is one that bears a heavenly name, where all the blessed relationships
of life will have a sanctified endurance; that humanity has a
Brother in him, who, though the Son of Man, is not less heaven’s
King, and who in love has thrown open to the bond and free, the
black and white, the poor, the lone and friendless, the doors of that
Eternal Home. T. S.


SARCASM AND RAILLERY.
the sardonic man.
here was a laughing devil in his sneer.
That raised emotions both of rage and fear •
And when his frown of hatred darkly fell.
Hope, withering fled, and mercy sighed farewell ”
vho 5- «* t 0 joke with one
*"“* ° f ol)S ' !r ™«™
t,- wif ill a . n naturc > but he looks upon everyone as a foil fa
thus Vlews eVeJ7thiiig and eve P yl)ody through^^distorted
in default “‘‘ f c “ stlc l,lan is treacherous; he must exercise his power end
m default of an enemy, will turn and rend his dearest friend ’
well as tlmsw ““ “ * °° Wd mi * *» *«“■*» the weak as
strain if 01 + i? saicasm °t others, he, if possible, retaliates in the same
stianp ,f not, he becomes sulky, moody, and disagreeable.
induceT“’ ° be effeC ‘ iTe ’ sh ™ U *» delicate. Any bunder can
that mli at t mTaUTmeTuil T ?•" «*“£
and deeply would theXeet If r ° Wn T 1 * 6 ’ amuse the Venders,
tunity fo/demandin g saltcti„m SSarCaSm ’ « oppor-
if u sharp enou 8 h > tlle y cannot fail,
As it tneir only business were to rail ;
-But human frailty, nicely to unfold,
-Distinguishes a satire from a scold.
. \age you must hide, and prejudice lay down •
A satire s smile is sharper than his frown. ” ’
thousanTdiffr e ? n ° tbee i XpreSSedin words > but be implied in a
}I6S words on the subject are worth remembering—« Sar-


casm I now see to be in general the language of the devil, for which
reason I have long since as good as renounced it.”
H. G.
(To the Editor of the Commissary Review.)
Siiß, —As I think that we should do everything in our power to make
the voyage pleasant to each other, may I venture to call the attention of
those gentlemen who promenade the deck after 10 p.m. to the words of
the immortal Shakespere on light-footedness —“ Pray you tread softly,
that the blind mole may not hear a footstep.”
Yours, &c.,
Caustic.
A GRIEVANCE.
(To the Editor of the Commissary Review.)
Dear Sir, —We are all deeply sensible that our Captain is anxious to
do everything in his power to make us all comfortable. I have a sugges-
tion to offer, which, if carried out, will contribute very much to the
comfort and pleasure of those passengers who are banished to the
lower or “ rowdy ” table. It is that a sounding board should be erected
at the head of the chief table. By this means the unfortunates “ who
sit below the salt” will have some little chance of participating in
and profiting by, the conversation of the grandees.
Trusting that something will be done in the matter,
I remain, yours obediently,
Fair Play.
NOTICE. —MATRIMONIAL.—A young man will be happy to correspond
with a young lady with an ultimate view to matrimony; He is young
and sanguine, fair complexion, grey eyes, stature decidedly short and inclined
to the dumpy ; he calls his beard and whiskers rich brown, but his enemies
designate them fiery red or carroty, (this is a matter of opinion ;) temper
very hasty. Thinks he is entitled to many hundred acres of land in England,
but some other fellow has been and put his ground on top of it. Although,
at present, he has no actual possessions, he has drawn up the plans and
specifications of numberless castles in Ayr(air)shire, and if he can only hit
upon the foundations and find the stone and mortar to build them, any lady
accepting this offer will find herself some fine morning a rich lady.
Cannot say much about his ancestors, but thinks he must have had
a father ; and feels certain that he is descended from Adam and Eve. Some
of his forefathers, no doubt, have been kings and queens, and if they
haven’t, they ought to have been. Is domesticated in his habits and very
fond of children—at a distance.


trioiP 1 ! ™ llst b e young—say from 18 to 22— pretty, amiable, indus-
trious, a, good housewife, musical and lady-like ; tatting and crochet work
are not indispensable, if she can do plain sewing and boil a potato.
1 ortune not sought after but decidedly not objected to.
L ? mm omcations, with carte de visite, to be sent to the Editor of the
' mmissary Bevieiv, who will furnish further particulars.
GENERAL NEWS.
Celebration of the Queen’s Birthday.— On Tuesday, 24th
May, the birthday of our most gracious sovereign Queen Victoria, was
w th xT mi - n ? 10 / alty ° n boarcl the g° od shi P “ Commissary.”
ptam Wagstaff, with that British spirit which distinguishes the noble
profession of which he is a worthy specimen, on the removal of the
b gave The health of Her Majesty.” The toast was received, as it
3; ma ;:w f Englishmen, with hearty enthusiasm; other
sts followed, that of “ the ladies,” not being omitted. The olive
ranches were regaled with real barcelonas and other digestible condi-
ments. in the afternoon, the votaries of Terpsichore disported them
SJiT slm f rkl gra S- to the T lodioUS of a played wRh
great skill by our obliging and attentive second officer. As evening
drG T her , CUrtains f l \ nd the day, the vessel was illuminated from stem
Vauxhall 7 a Pyr ° techniC us of the past glories of
i Croquet Match.— A grand croquet match is announced to be
played on Friday (to-morrow), Ladies v. Gentlemen. Play will commence
at IdU p.m. We anticipate a closely contested game, the names given
including many of well-known ability. ames given
The lecture on “Tips and Downs,” by the Rev T Smith
announced for Wednesday last, was postponed, through the rev lecturer’s
indisposition, to Wednesday next, Ist June.
NAUTICAL CHRONICLE.
Date. Lat. Lon. Pis. Bar. The ~ Remarks.
S. W. I
May ™}i!«Sll?J2r- 9681 * 0 Pine trade wind
” 2116 4632 5 efeSS ?o° S“ U Water spout seen. [wind
;; 22 17 nifl 3Q 2 It* lerylI ery 1 , llg s t ea ® fc ® rl y wiQ ds; noon, lost the trade
2317 si ll 75230 0 78= Squfy f rom W., baffling winds’throughout.
” '• |* 7 ( 30 - 078 Light airs and fine from East, island Trinidad
„ 2419. 8 30.31 80,30. 8 82° Light airgfrom E. andTß’finefspok^White
■ 252ft39 ' 31 - 31 107 30-10 77 ° Steady wind at S.E.. fine trade annearaS^
Weekly run 732 miles.


(To the Editor of the Commissary Review.)
Dear Sir, —This week’s log shows a very poor run of only 732 miles, but if
you glance down my column of remarks on the weather, you will see that
we have had very light winds, and I am surprised that she has even done
this.
On Thursday and Friday, a good steady trade wind blew, but a water
spout (that precursor of calms and light winds) put a stop to our speed, and
four miserable days followed.
Our losing the trades in 15° S. is rather unusual, but at this time of
year the calm band of Capricorn extends well to the Northward, especially
to the Westward of 30° West; more to the Eastward it extends farther
South, and (as we found) on making Easting, again got into the trades,
and although light, it has given us a lift past the Island of Trinadad, which
on Tuesday bore S.E. by S. distance 95 miles. Here we spoke the ship
“White Eagle,” from Adelaide to London, fifty-four days out ; she reported
having had ten days baffiing winds ; this does not say much for us, unless,
as we hope, they are by this time all over. To-day the sky looks better, and
I hope that we may get a good wind and make up for lost time, as we are
now one good day’s work behind my last passage.
I am, dear Sir, yours truly,
F. Wagstaff.
Wednesday, May 25th, 1870.
FOUND a pair of SCISSORS, which will be returned to owner on full
description to Mr. Ritson, 2 Main Deck Terrace.
LOST a gentleman’s gold RING, bearing the inscription “Remember
me.” Whoever will return the same to the Editor will be rewarded.
ENTERTAINMENT. —An entertainment, consisting of vocal and instru-
mental music and readings, will be held THIS (Thursday)
EVENING. The chair will be taken at 8 o’clock by A. B. MORGAN, Esq.,
L.R.C.P.
CHESS.— A CHALLENGE.—Mr. Hairy Griffiths will be happy to
engage with any lady or gentleman in a friendly game of chess. Play
to commence at any time.


Site " dtomtenj” fvpcir.
No. 3.
THURSDAY, JUNE 2, 1870.
CONTENTS.
Scrambling... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 28
Sketches in London—Rotten Row ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
Sold Out ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ... ... 35
Grand Croquet Match ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 36
Flirtation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 39
Matrimonial Notice ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 40
General News ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
Nautical Chronicle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 41
SCRAMBLING.
What happy days of bygone glory and boisterous fun (days, alas!
which never will come back) are brought to mind by the word
which forms the heading of this article. School days with all
their frolic and romp —days before we were seasoned with stiff-
starched propriety —days before the black bear had trodden on our
foot, or the formalism and etiquette of fashionable life taught us
the great lesson of deceit. There are some hardships about school;
we have felt it hard to leave the old house, to leave behind the
loved ones at home, to pat our roan pony on the neck for the last
time for many months, to bid adieu to old Pincher who licked
our hand and placed his paws upon our shoulders, and in his
looks said good-bye almost as if he meant to say “ come back and
come back quickly”—it was sad, sad work, wasn’t it ? We almost
feel the hot tear falling somewhere now, and lose sight of the old
home and creaking gate through the dew that has settled on our
eyelid and obscured our vision ; yet there were some days at school
which somehow redeemed all this, or at all events compensated
for it in a degree, and that was when we got a holiday through the
intervention of some powerful friend. Now there was capital fun
in the early breakfast, although our bread was not buttered by a
mother’s hand; and then the game at Hare and Hounds when we
made Harry Jenkins the fox and gave him a quarter of an hour’s
start, when off we scampered right merrily to the cry of Tally-ho !
over old Grumble’s hedges, across the fallow, striking the copse
on the hill side, and away along the flat through the Park gates
till we ran the fox to ground at Squire Kind Heart’s, where we
had our tucker full of bread and cheese, and washed our thirsty


lips in nut brown ale and cider—it was jolly ! but then the best
of it was when the Squire, whose very size was emblematical of Ids
heart, told old John to bring down from the store-room a large
basket of apples and another of nuts, “ and bring too,” said he, “ some
of the oranges which the young ladies brought from town yester-
day, for I’m going to have some fun with the young ’uns”; and
there we all stood round in a ring, the little ones in the front,
for English boys like fair play and a fair start, —it’s mean to take
the advantage even in a scramble, —and then up in the air went
the apples, oranges, and nuts, and down upon all fours we went
pushing, jostling, rushing, holloaing—and then with hands
full and bellows empty, with trousers torn and work for mother
on our knees and the doctor on our knuckles, with the dear old
Squire laughing till his jolly old sides wagged again, we sat down
to eat our spoil and crack our nuts, and in childish glee fought
our battles o’er again. Years have passed since then, and we
thought we had done with scrambling, but our experience at sea
has revived the memories of the past, and proved to us that the
old ones as well as the young ones can scramble in their turn.
If any attentive observer took his seat in the saloon of the good
ship “ Commissary at 4 p.m., he would witness a game at scrambling
which would remind him of days and scenes gone by. We were
taught that consideration for the ladies was one of the chief
characteristics of the true gentleman, but ship life does somethin<>•
to remove those feelings which are inseparable from us when we are
on land. We are turned completely upside down. See the scram-
ble 1 the bell has rung, all are ready ; there’s a keenness in the
glance, and quick movement of the fingers ; the dishes are scanned
eagerly, and a host of plates are rushed up to a certain dish, and
black looks follow if everybody does not get what everybody just
wants; and don’t the stewards get it inwardly? perhaps they
don’t, perhaps they do. What smothered blessings have I heard !
Not that there is not enough to eat, there’s enough and to spare
provided, but the sea air so braces the appetite, that one would
think everybody has a dreadful apprehension of being starved to
death, and is determined to take in a good stock to prepare
against such an awful catastrophe. This general scramble enters
into every part of the meal. Of late it has taken a new phase,
especially in the pie and pudding line. Ladies and gentlemen,
having been served with pie, are not content with eating what they
have upon their plate, but for fear they may not get serve No. 2,
send up their plate with serve No. 1 on it to get a piece in reserve"
and the scramblers never give the slightest consideration for the
unlucky individual who has to eke it out, and who himself would
get nothing unless he also joined in the scramble and served


himself before he served all comers. The result of the scrambling
is sometimes borne away from the table to make an extra meal
within the snug retirement of the cabin. Just get up in the early
morning and see how people, many of them fashionable bachelors
who go in at nine pretty stiffly, rob the poor children of their
bargoo or porridge; indeed we expect next to see grown-up people
lunch at twelve, dine with the little children at one, and dine
again at 4 p.m. And then at lunch what a rush for sardines and
bread ! and ain’t some of ’em fond of pickles ? We say nothino- 0 f
the little game of nuts and raisins. Only the other day we "saw
on more than one plate preserved ginger, prunes, muscatels, bis-
cuits, barcelonas, almonds, and an anxious look to see if there
was any thing else on the table. And then the best of it is that
it is taken away en masse. Why if it goes on as it seems in a fair
way to do, some people will set up a store when they leave the
ship. And then this scrambling enters into every thing. Is there
a game at croquet, there is a scramble for the blue or red balls
or mallets, and a pout if you get worsted in the scramble. Then
should a ship heave in sight, there is a scramble for the glasses
no matter who owns them; indeed the owner seldom gets a
glimpse out of his own glass. With the bath it’s just the same
—a rush across the cabin, and a scramble often in habiliments
which were not made for scrambling. And then, last of all, there
is a scramble for the chairs upon the poop. Now it is rather hard
to have bought a chair and never'to sit in it, but to see it used
continually by others who have no more right to it than * they
have to put their hand in my pocket. Now if we are to have any
more of this scrambling for chairs, let all the cabins be searched
let every chair be brought from its hiding-place (we except of
course the heir-looms which are prized as relics of loved ones now
no more), and then let us have a fair start, and whoever wins let
that person have possession of the chair so gained for twenty-four
hours. If the scrambling is to continue I pity the weak ones
when we disembark, for they won’t be able to get near the gang-
ly, till the strong ones are gone bag and baggage. We hope it
won’t last till then, but that we shall again resume the courtesies
of civilised life. If this article in any way contributes to that
end we shall not have written in vain.
There was scrambling for nuts, and then for raisins too,
There was scrambling for pickles, and scrambling for stew •
There was scrambling for goose, and for the boiled fowls rare
And scrambling for stewed ones although of meat so bare • ’
1 here was scrambling for the glasses when a sail just hove in sight
Ihere was scrambling in the morning, and at the dead of night ’
Ihe ladies dear, dear creatures, they have learned the art so well
ihat in the general not they all go in pell mell;


The gentlemen forget what Beau Brummell taught of old,
And jostle ’gainst the ladies with manners rude and bold.
There was scrambling for the pie, and then for pudding too,
Before number one was ate they went in for number two ;
There was scrambling for the chairs that lay upon the poop,
There was scrambling at the croquet as to who got through the hoop.
A few short weeks will pass, and our scrambling will be o’er,
And we may never meet with one another more;
We’ll cherish kindly feelings for the days before us yet,
And all that is not good and pure we’ll try and soon forget;
We all have got our faults, and we trust our virtues too,
Our paper now is filled, and we must say adieu.
T. S.*
SKETCHES IK LONDON.—No I.
Rotten Row.
The month of June. The London season is at its height. Everybody
is in town. Strange phrase to those whose only knowledge of the life of
the great metropolis is derived from an occasional flying visit. The star-
ing and simple country folk, whose faces beam with amazement as
they, with open mouths, gaze upon its sights, and get hustled by men too
familiar with its ins-and-outs, cannot understand it. Perchance they
select for their visit that period of the year, when, wearied with nightly
debates, tired of listening to Whalley and Newdegate as they bore minis-
ters about the wicked designs of the Pope of Rome; unable to appreciate,
through fatigue, the keen wit of Bernal Osborne; and hoarse from con-
tinual shouts of “Aye” and “No,” Her Majesty’s faithful Commons
leave the gay and hot town, followed in their example by the Lords, and
betake themselves to the moors of Scotland, to Norway, or elsewhere
glad to escape from the toils of fashionable life in the season. Yet still*
the stranger would fail to notice any change in the aspect of the oreat
and busy town although a general exodus of the leaders of ton has
taken place. But to residents the change is palpable. In the fashionable
quarters of the West-end, shuttered windows and deserted dwellings mark
the close of the London season, and a stroll in the Park gives additional
evidence of the fact. The crowds of equestrians who lately adorned the
Row, the brilliant equipages, and the “ swells ” have given place to soli-
tude, broken only by the occasional advent of a few compelled to remain
in town, and mounted police, who find nothing to do, and plenty of time
to do it in. So, on a bright Saturday afternoon in June, we stroll down
Piccadilly, and, at Apsley House, turn into the Park. Crossing through
the crush of horses and vehicles we get into the promenade between the
Drive and the Row. The carriage-way is thickly packed four-a-breast,
the carriages proceeding at walking pace, under the direction of an able
body of police. So we have sufficient opportunity to notice the indi-
viduals who compose the long stream, and they for their part, rather like
observation, or they would not be so content to make the slow parade.
You see that coroneted barouche, drawn by high-stepping greys,
driven by a coachman proud of them % The emblazoned panels shew the


neat escutcheon of a ducal house, and, leaning back in dignified state is
the Duchess of . Her Grace is not young or even middle-aged,
and her wrinkled face and silvery hair seem to come out strangely in the*
gay and pleasure-seeking throng. Yet, the old Duchess still enjoys the
drive, and is rather proud of showing what remains of her past beauty.
Following, comes a carriage strongly suggestive of faded gentility, while
the poor decayed family of six—for this class of carriage is generally
crowded with a full representative force, —seems to say “ though misfor-
tune has been ours, we can still hold up our heads, for we have kept
honest. ’ It is not all who can say this. For instance, here comes a
cabriolet, with handsome horse and harness, and the owner, as he handles
the reins in a masterly manner, is conscious of the dash he cuts, and
maintains a bold face, although the whole concern, —diminutive tiger,
horse, and vehicle have been bought and kept at the expense of his
creditors.
Here comes a decidedly new turn-out. The carriage, servants
horses, livery and harness, tell us at once that they belong to the Veneer-
ings. Sir Richard, and my Lady, with their eldest daughter, don’t look
quite at ease. They have not got accustomed to their new dignity. When
the newly-fledged knight was plain Mr. Veneering, the drysalter, he was
no doubt, much more in his element, and was even an ornament of the
City, but amongst rank and fashion he is not destined to shine so brightly.
The amiable daughter, as she ogles the men who lean over the rail quizzing
people through their eye-glasses, thinks, most likely, that she is quite
killing in her costly array; but, oh ! my dear Miss Veneering, how sadly
you err when you suppose men are-to be caught with peacock’s feathers
exhibited on a lesser bird. Altogether, the Veneering family are most
unmistakeably new, and even the pretentious escutcheon on their panel
cannot blind people’s eyes to it. Whose brougham passes there ?As we
look, we see hats doffed and fingers kissed to a golden-haired and splen-
didly apparelled woman, young in years, and possessing features exquisitely
chiselled, and a manner gay and pleasing. She returns the numerous
salutations in a free and easy style, and nods familiarly to young men
of rank and fashion, though they be escorting a sister or a lady 3 Ho
chaperon accompanies her, for she needs none. The eyes of women
affecting to scorn her, follow her with envy as she passes along. Moralists
may be indignant, but a stroll in the Park will show them stern facts.
Here is an Irish member, in a brougham drawn by a cob which we cannot
with strict adherence to truth, call a fine animal. He boasts no footman
or page, it is hard enough to pay the coachman and maintain horse and
carnage. With a face singularly resembling one’s idea of a certain old Gentle-
man who made amatory proposals to Mrs. Nickleby, and with eyes
wildly rolling about, one fancies his brain—(or what passes for such)
to be busy, even in the midst of the surrounding show of great people
and snobs, of gilt and gold, with some impossible scheme for the social
and political redemption of the troublesome sister isle.
But, why that excitement, causing loungers to leave their seats, and
people to collect together in groups, and equestrians to array themselves


at certain points, with expectation written in their faces ? Here they
come ! ” Only an ordinary and unpretentious open-carriage, appointed
in simplest taste, and driven by a good specimen of the burly old English,
coachman. There is not half the display that is made by people who,
like bad or imperfect pictures, need to be set in grand frames to draw
notice. The carriage is occupied by the Heir to England’s Throne, and
his fair and amiable bride. As we raise our hat the Prince graciously
returns the salute, and to the meanest subject he would do the same,
thus setting an example of politeness which might be followed with
advantage by many lesser personages. Do you see the Belgravian
mamma showing off her three daughters, who hang heavily on her hands,
despite all her efforts to make matches for them. Why won’t the men
marry? Here’s a chance. Three accomplished girls,—two rather shady,
certainly, and one of a sentimental turn, who is so peculiar in her ideas
as to talk of love in preference to a large rent-roll, and also possessed of a
decided inclination to High-Church views,—not that she, poor thing,
could evei comprehend theological questions, but it is so nice to go to
early service, to help to dress the Church, and to listen to that dear Mr.
Cassock, the mild curate, who has not yet embraced those horrid ideas
about clerical celibacy.
It is tiring, however, to lean over the rails all this time; so let us
take a seat and quiz the pedestrians who pass us, “ How do, my dear
fellow ? Havn’t seen you for an age. Where have you been ? Bye,
bye, see you again.” Salutation of passing “ swells ” who meet and see
each other no more for the season. Look at this man coming alon o- !
Which one? The one with bronzed face and stately mien. That°is
Sir "V—— E-——, a man whose name was familiar to the world, durum
the Indian mutiny, as a brave warrior; and now he passes along
unknown by many, enjoying the repose well earned by faithful service. °
Here are ladies decked out in fashion’s perfection, and looking
charming in the costume which may be an inducement to
but is yet far more graceful than the dresses of years gone by when crino-
line drew its votaries, or shapeless straight skirts enveloped the forms of
our beauties. How pretty are the ££ panniers,”—no reference intended
to anything borne by a much abused animal, —looped by bewitching
bows, over skirts displaying taste and design, and serving the double
purpose of preventing street-sweeping, and exhibiting the dearest little
foot, and the sweetest ancle. ££ Honi soit qui mal y pense ! ” And that
sweet Elizabethan ruffle has a pleasing effect, —not that we admire all
of them, for some are simply dowdy.
But, here are girls dressed in extremis. Look at that mincing gait,
and the tall heels, throwing the nose a considerable way in front of’tlle
body, as though it went before to announce the arrival of its owner. And
oh, that <£ Grecian Bend ! ” What an admirable thing for carrying pro-
visions in for a picnic, when they really would be useful and might be
turned to great account. W ill the dear creatures carry the suggestion
into practice? We fear not, for naughty men might consider the resemblance
between the fair ones and the aforesaid animal completed by the addition


of a burden. It must be something peculiar in the atmosphere, or it
may be “ the weather,” —for, goodness knows, “the weather ” has enough
put down to its account, —but that there is something wrong is certain,
else why is so large a section of fashionable ladies compelled to wear eye-
glasses 1 The eyes of women have always been most dangerous and
effective weapons against the lords of creation, and we have had enough
to do to resist them hitherto. Therefore, we ask, in the name of justice
and fair play, are we poor men to be so cruelly treated as to be compelled
to face, not only the old force, but an intensely sharpened gaze. Ladies,
beware ! You may so look us imperfect men through and through, as to
make us rush from the range of the visionary scrutineers. But we know
you don’t want to do that. Bather the reverse. Your aim is quite
another way.
Knots of men-about-town stand here and there, —men whose weary
life is made up of hasting after pleasure in the Bow, the club, the opera,
balls, parties, and mysterious suppers, with a host of anmsements peculiar
to the career of a man-about-town. Gaily-dressed dandies puff their
choice cigars, and look as though everything were “an awful bore.” Ill-
favored, beardless boys walk about, dressed in unmentionables of loudest
cut and pattern, showy scarf, and coat and hat of extreme shape, and
fancy they maybe mistaken for gentlemen. The blas6 man saunters along,
delighting to stare rudely at the ladies, and the old roue is there too.
But, we see there, besides these, the representatives of England’s wealth
and aristocracy, of her heroes, her scholars, and her artists ; and a finer
representative array of good men and true no other nation can boast.
We have looked long enough at the habitues of the drive and prome-
nade ; now let us turn to the Bow. The picture is animated and gay.
Yow a party of ladies and gentlemen gallop along, followed by their
grooms; now a lady and gentleman content with walking-pace,—
“ .spooney ” decidedly,—for fast pace is not favorable to the whispering
of soft nothings, and downward glances, and drooping eyes, and low
replies, but is rather a hindrance to that sort of thing.
Mounted on a cob, but bearing no further resemblance to “ the
galloping snob of Botten Bow ” celebrated in song,—comes the Archbishop
of Canterbury, looking very dignified, and we will say, for the informa-
tion of any person who may see in this an indication of worldly ten-
dency on his Grace’s part, that he also looked very grave, and that we
saw nothing very wicked in his looks or conduct while he remained
within our view. Yow a Cabinet Minister canters along, seemingly for-
getful for awhile of the cares which weigh heavy on the statesman’s brow,
and glad to escape from those catechising members who expect ministers
to be conversant with every possible topic, from abstruse questions of
international policy down to the adulteration of tobacco. Till Monday
night, at least, he will obtain release from worn- about the sister isle,
and the brief relaxation will, we trust, avert any immediate attack
of “ Ireland on the brain.” A young cornet, glad to exhibit the gay
uniform, and well padded figure, trots along in the full blaze of his
splendour, gazed at by those of the softer sex who adore a military costume.


Followed by furtive glances and 'unaccompanied by any servant,
comes another fair Anonyma, whose equestrian ability is of no mean order.
Now and then she reins up to converse with some of her numerous
admirers, and impudently shakes her whip at them as they ride away.
Children, mounted on pretty ponies, and guarded by watchful servants,
go along merrily; while old, infirm men, on steady hacks, are content
with the slow and sure progression. Bold, daring riders, who long for
the hunting-field, and the welcome music of the hounds; and nervous
riders, who sit or shake uneasily in the saddle, —all are here together.
And so the motley throng of the fashionable world comes and goes with
ever changing variety. Gradually their numbers lessen, and off they go
for dinner, and now we follow.
If, dear friends, your patience and inclination will allow you to
accompany us, we will, on a future occasion, visit other sights of the
great metropolis. For the present, farewell.
“SOLD OUT.”
A Reminiscence of School.
One afternoon, about the hour of three, six of our girls started with
the English governess on a shopping expedition. On our sallying
forth, our compassion was unanimously excited by a poor little boy
with an unfortunate-looking specimen of humanity in the shape of
(what shall I call it ?) a baby on his knee. We immediately, putting
our fingers in our lately replenished pockets (for we had only just
returned from the holidays), produced the surprisingly large sum
of one half-penny, which we precipitated into the eager, out-
stretched hands of the aforesaid youth, who, quite overwhelmed
with the generosity of the donation, was unable to find any words
expressive of his gratitude, and sat with eyes and mouth wide open.
This we afterwards ascertained from one of the young ladies who
had watched the whole proceedings from the window. Continuing
our excursion at a funeral pace, we at last halted at a place deno-
minated by ourselves “Jumble Hall,” and on enquiring for that
delectable refreshment from which the house derived its name, we
were informed in the politest of terms that they had “ sold out.”
Retracing our steps from that fruitless expedition, we drew up in
front of the pork-pie shop. Imagine our disappointment when we
heard that they too had “ sold out.” Our last recourse was, there-
fore, “ saveloys,” but of those one solitaire only remained, which
was so eagerly seized upon that it was nearly dragged in halves,
but at length was rescued by the proprietor of the shop, who, seeing
a fight was likely to ensue, restored to the counter the object o±
our adoration, and we left the establishment saveloy-less. Two


minutes later a casual observer might have seen us crowding into
a small baker s shop and alarming the shop-girl by our exciting
commands for bread, each fearing that it, too, might be “sold
out before our turn to be served came ; but no such catastrophe
aimed, as they happened to have a good supply of the “staff of
hte on hand. With our arms burthened with that commodity,
we hastened on. In the meantime two of us repented of our hasty
retreat from the pork-pie shop, and, with visions rising before our
e\es of sundry hams ? we returned and procured half a pound, the
im !f+i lne jlf p a ? tin g most suspicious glances alternately at us
and the dilapidated saveloy which was still lying on the counter.
Aftei a few minutes consideration, he removed it to a remote cor-
uer as if fearing our desires might again be awakened by the sight
of it. A few moments after found us at the post-office, which was
also a grocers and upon our demand for half-penny oranges, we
were again informed that they, too, had “ sold out.” Unable, how-
ever, to resist our fascinating glances, they put us up innumerable
bags of penny ones for the reduced sum of one half-penny, assuring
us at the same time that “we young ladies always got the blind
side of them ' M e next proceeded to Richmond’s, another grocer’s,
vliere two of us, leaving our companions to make their various
purchases, rushed across the road to a pork-pie shop which had
just burst upon our astonished gaze. We entered, and were
< cmanded by a small chdd, in whose dress curl-papers predomi-
a ed, and who might, perhaps, have reached the mature age of
ten what was our business? We asked if pork-pies formed an
ainde of their establishment, and, to our joy and astonishment
were informed that she had plenty, and that she would send her
mother, but when the aforesaid child disappeared, her father
arm ed and informed us that he had “ sold out.” We left the shon
\ut i anything but amiable feelings towards the small individual
who bad so deceived us, and returned home, after having spent a
most agreeable afternoon, notwithstanding our several disappoint-
ments at every one having “ sold out.”
“ Pussy.”
THE GRAND CROQUET MATCH.
(By a Correspondent.)
I his event, which has been looked forward to with much interest and
tSJt^r™ f T ce k ostp r ed b v t r ess ° f weatiier ’ *° ok i >iace <»
iuesday,_ Maj 30th. The elements during the last few days had been
rather boisterous, but now, as if in honor of the great event they were
u their very best behaviour. The sun appeared in all his glory'and a
balmy and delightful breeze from the south tempered the heat ttat


Mrs. Smith ...
Ladies.
... 1 Red
Mrs. Wagstaff
... 2
55
Miss Polly Smith
... 3
55
Miss Smith ...
... 4
55
Captain Wagstaff
Gentlemen.
... 1 Blue
Mr. Lloyd ...
2
55
Mr. Vaughan
... 3
51
Mr. Atkinson
... 4
55
otherwise would have been oppressive. The sea seemed to be conscious
that something of importance was taking place ; it sparkled good-humour-
edly, and ever and anon some wave stronger than its fellows leaped up
almost to the poop as if saying, “ do let me have a look,” or as if endea-
vouring to snatch a sweet kiss from the lips of one of the lovely damsels
who were leaning over the bulwarks. Presumptuous wave ! to dare to
aspire to that which all the bachelors on board the “ Commissary” sigh
for in vain ! ! We need only say that the preliminary arrangements
were under the able superintendence of Captain Wagstaff, and the public
will know that everything was settled in a business-like manner. Play
was announced for 1.30, and shortly after that hour the players arrived
on the ground. The sides were as follows :
It was evident that the ladies had made up their minds to do or die. No
one that looked at the charming and fascinating Mrs. Wagstaff; the
genial and kind-hearted Mrs. Smith; the lovely and accomplished Miss
Smith ; and the lively and saucy Miss Polly Smith, could doubt that the
gentlemen would have a very hard struggle before they vanquished such
opponents.
The gentlemen were resolute and determined, as if inspired with the
words of the poet—
“ We will dare the battle strife,
We will gladly peril life,
Death or victory the cry,
Win the day or nobly die !”
The leadership of the gentlemen devolved on Captain Wagstaff; the
ladies each led themselves, but of this anon. The respected editor of the
Commissary Review was prevailed upon to accept the thankless office of
umpire.
There was not much speculation, although some of the leviathans of
the betting ring were present. We tried hard to obtain the tone of the
market, and as far as could be made out betting opened at 3 to 1
against the Reds.
Having tossed for choice of colors, which fell to the gentlemen, the
interesting game was opened by Captain Wagstaff in his usual masterly
style. At the opening of the game some splendid points were made by
Miss Smith. We had hoped to give a succinct account of the game, but
we are unable to do so.


Much as we deplore the necessity for it, there are times when
we must speak our mind without fear and without favor. We must do
so on this occasion. Seldom has it been our painful duty to be present
at such a disgraceful scene as that of Tuesday. Soon after the commence-
ment of the game it was evident that one of the contending parties
(which party shall be nameless) had made up their minds for a win, tie,
or wrangle. Every art that could possibly disgrace the noble game of
croquet was called into requisition. The parties quarrelled amongst
themselves, and made offensive remarks about their opponents. They
even attempted to intimidate the Umpire, but he very properly replied
to all insinuations, “ I know my own business.” Things got worse and
worse. At last the Umpire seemed rather annoyed, and was detected
making a grimace at one of the players;—however great the provocation
this conduct cannot be justified. This is not all ; one of the players,
well known to the police for a very dangerous character, called our
special reporter a vixen,* and then attacked him with a mallet. This
was the signal for a series of most violent and unprovoked assaults on
our commissioner. It is a wonder that he escaped the fury of the mob
without serious injury, but he nobly stood his ground, resolved to perish,
if need be, in the performance of his duty. But enough ; the subject is
too painful. We can only say, that after an adjournment for dinner,
whicli did little to soothe the angry feelings of the combatants, at 5. 15
ringing cheers announced the victory of the gentlemen. The ladies
seemed very much cut up at their defeat, but soon recovered their spirits
and talked of issuing a challenge for a fresh match. Owing to the
excitement which prevailed it was almost impossible to obtain any actual
information as to the state of the game in its various stages.
Although all the ladies, at some part of the game, played well, still
they were very unsteady, and not at all up to their usual form.
To Miss Smith (4 Bed) belongs the honor of making a rover of Mrs.
Smith (1 Bed) ; this was done in first-rate style. A word of praise is
due to 1 Bed (Mrs. Smith) who, although laboring under the disadvan-
tage of being short of practice, made some extraordinary good play.
Mrs. Wagstaff, although, perhaps, the most skilful player on the ground,
seemed very nervous. Miss Polly Smith did not play as well as usual,
but this is fully accounted for by the fact of her having a bad arm.
The gentlemen all played well, but the pride of place must certainly
be awarded to that thoroughly scientific player, Mr. Atkinson.
There was a large and fashionable company present, comprising all
the rank and beauty of the “ Commissary,” but we were sorry to notice
certain dissatisfied persons who held themselves aloof as if in disdain,
and took not the slightest interest in the proceedings.
One word in conclusion. The ladies lost the match by lack of gen-
eralship ; let them appoint a leader, and what is more to the purpose,
obey her, and we fully expect that next time the parties meet the
decision will be in their favor. H. G.
* This person, being a colonial, is not well up in the sex of the fox.


THE RETURN MATCH.
The late hour at which the game was concluded precludes us from more
than a word on the subject. The sides were the same as on Tuesday.
The ladies struggled bravely against superior odds, but again, to the
sorrow of all true-hearted gentlemen, with the exception of their
ungallant opponents, they were doomed to defeat.
[We cannot hold ourselves responsible for the accuracy of the report
of this match, as our correspondent is a supernumerary taken on by us
owing to press of work, and his appearance, we are informed, suggested
the idea that he “ had been in the sun.” Ed. Com. Review .]
Hints on Politeness. —When a gentleman has invited one lady to
walk, is it quite “the thing” to be seen on the poop in a few moments
afterwards, parading up and down with another 1
FLIRTATION.
Ladies and Gentlemen, your attention! We are now in the humour
to summon you before our bar to read you a lecture, which may, with
advantage, be applied to the majority of the unmarried passengers on
board our noble ship. Under the peculiar circumstances in which you
are placed, when ladies and gentlemen are thrown together for weary
weeks, you are apt to be forgetful and careless in your deportment. We
won’t be too severe upon you. Allowances will be found in the monotony
of the life on board, and in other explainable circumstances. But yet,
even if your present deportment be not such as usually distinguishes you
on land, and there be too great a familiarity and contempt of social
courtesies, and a marked absence of a graceful or dignified bearing now
and then in your conduct, it is not on these general details we wish to
address you. No, we assume the platform on the subject of flirtation !
Don’t start so ! Your own conscience pricks you sorely on this point. Be
honest, you captivating ladies and love-making gentlemen ! Is it not so ?
Well, if you don’t feel any qualm of conscience you ought to ! What
tales of “spooning” and flirting that poop might tell, if it could ! But then
it can’t, so you will have no accusers but your own inward monitors.
“Well,” say some of you, “if we do flirt, where is the harm; why
should we be deprived of a little pleasure 1” There is no help for it, so
we must come down and argue the point with you. “Is it wrong to
flirt ?” Emphatically, yes ! It may be a fine amusement for girls to fling
their artful smiles at young men, seeking by their thousand and one well
known artifices to bring a crowd of “ spooneys ” about them, and it is a
game coquettes are fond of. It is so flattering to their small minds to
see the poor moths getting their wings burnt, and very gratifying to
hear soft, senseless twaddle babbled by foolish lips. What if these silly
youths get caught by their wiles, and do get “ sweet on them 1” What
if they do give pain to hearts young and hopeful, and then laugh at
them lOh!it is only fun and passes the time away. Rare fun, fine


sport, to act deceit, to look lies as well as speak them ! Where is the
gain 1 Ah ! where 1 Girls of this description never hold a high place
in men’s estimation. Could they know how patent are their motives,
and how thoroughly they are despised, they would be sick of the diver-
sion of flirting, and care more for the cultivation of womanly grace and
virtue.
And you, too, gentlemen, have much to answer for ! You know the
weak points of woman’s nature, and the power of a flattering tongue,
and you bring your knowledge into exercise whenever amusement may
be obtained thereby. Oh ! those honeyed words you have breathed into
their ears over and over again ! To many a girl have you sworn
love and devotion in good set terms, and they, poor things, have
believed you. You know you never meant one word of it ! But then
“spooning” is so “jolly” and you like it. Isn’t it nice to have the
girls dying with love for you, and to be set up and worshipped with
blind devotion? Well, it certainly is rather tempting, and we can
appreciate the danger of men fond of female society. But you value
honor and manliness, and to this we appeal. Is it consistent with strict
regard to truth to speak false words even lightly 1 Girls do not always
weigh language. Be careful and guarded in your words and manners if
you wish to give up the foolish habit of flirting, and are too manly to
stoop to deceit. In confessing love to a girl make sure of its fixity in
the first place. Be certain it is no passing fascination tempting you to
utter words ever after to be regretted.
Be you all desirous to remove from you any taint of selfishness, and
to cultivate feelings of consideration for others ; then will you hesitate
before you endanger the happiness of any heart or win short-lived
pleasure at the cost of subsequent pain. C. Y.
MATRIMONIAL NOTICE.
Answer to a matrimonial advertisement in last week’s Review. — A
young lady of no mean personal attractions, as will be seen by
the enclosed carte de visite has much pleasure in responding to
the dumpy young man’s proposal. He may be gratified to
hear, that she has a most decided predilection for “ carrots,”
either in soup or on a gentleman’s head; and does not object
to a hasty temper, as an occasional breeze rarefies the air. The
lady, although not of a mercenary turn of mind, will nevertheless be
glad when all the superfluous earth is shovelled off his “ hundreds of
acres.” The castles in Ayr(air)shire have a very tempting sound, and
the captivated one would as soon live in that shire with the delight
of her heart as in any other county in Scotland, England, or Ireland.
The ancestry is most unexceptionable, as the most aspiring could not
reasonably expect his genealogy to be traced beyond Adam and Eve.
Considering how little the gentleman has to offer on his own account, he
expects rather too many qualifications on the part of the lady. The
lady’s beauty is already established. Her age has been eighteen for the


last ten years, so as she never seems to grow older the gentleman
will have the advantage of perpetual youth in his promised
bride. Her amiability amounts almost to softness. Her musical
talents are most astounding, so much so that people who live
within a mile of her overpowering voice, wish they had been
born deaf. Her cooking powers far exceed those of the celebrated
Mrs. Manning. Her fortune at present does not extend beyond the silver
spoon she was said to be born with. The lady had almost forgotten the
most important item of all, viz., children at a distance; by all means
keep them there, as parrots and cats are far more to be admired.
N,B. —The lady awaits the gentleman’s decision with the utmost
trepidation and anxiety; should she not be accepted the photo’ must be
returned instanter.
GENERAL NEWS.
Lecture on “ Ups and Downs.” —Yesterday (Wednesday) even-
ing, a lecture as above was delivered by the Rev’. Thomas Smith, J. B.
Starky, Esq., occupying the chair. It was throughout practical and
humorous, and was listened to with marked attention by an appreciative
audience, who frequently applauded the rev. lecturer. At the close, a
vote of thanks to the lecturer for his eloquent and clever handling of the
subject was carried unanimously, as also one to the respected chairman
for his conduct in the chair. The proceedings closed with the “ National
Anthem.”
A large whale was observed on Wednesday morning on our
weather-bow, at a very short distance from us.
Yesterday, the Derby was run at Epsom. Owing to some defec-
tive arrangement in the telegraphic department, we have not yet received
the name of the winner, but we may do so when we get to Sydney,
NAUTICAL CHRONICLE.
Lat. Long.
Dis. Bar.
Remarks.
s. w.
26 22-20 31 55 102 30- 0 77|°
27 24 01 32-00 107 29 -90 72°
Wind, S.E. ; unsteady, hut fine.
Dull and cloudy, wind E.
Fine strong breeze at S S.E. ; heavy head sea.
Wind, S. S. E., and fine clear weather.
Unsettled and squally ; wind, S.S.E. [toS.W.
Very unsettled & squally weather ; wind N.E.
Unsettled & rain; wind from N.W. to N.N.E.
28 25-5132-47118 30-10 73
29 27 3033-31 106 30 20 70'
9 9 '
„ 3(
30 17 33 26 168 30 24 69
3132-46 30-44196 30-10 72’
1 33-53 28-40'124 30-20 72°
Distance run—92l miles.
To the Editor of the Commissary Review.
Dear Sir, —I regret to say that a distance of only 921 miles has been
run this week. This is very poor, considering the latitude we are in, but the
good old ship cannot sail without wind, which article has been very scarce
this w’eek.
I am, dear Sir, Yours very truly,
FRANCIS WAGSTAFF.


(Hie " onumssarij” ilmfii*.
No. 4.
THURSDAY, JUNE 9th, 1870.
CONTENTS.
Australia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42
Sketches in London—The Underground Kail way ... ... ... ... 46
Recollections of an Australian Medical Man ... ... ... .;. ... 48
Poachers and Poaching ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 49
Old Days ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
Nautical Chronicle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
AUSTRALIA.
“ Since the discovery and settlement of America, no colony belonging
to Great Britain, or, indeed, to any other nation, has commanded
such attention as Australia—the land to which we may now be
said to be fast approaching. It was discovered and taken posses-
sion of, in the name of the King of England, on the 28th of April,
1770, by the great navigator Captain Cook, a name which ought
deservedly to be remembered wherever there is a recognition of
genius and enterprise. The important event of the great
discoverer’s first stepping on shore in Australia has been com-
memorated by the Philosophical Society of Sydney placing a plate
of copper, with a suitable inscription on it, on the overhanging
cliff above the spot where he landed. It was first of all made a
depot for the criminal population of England, but the extreme
fertility of its soil soon commended it to the attention of persons
engaged in agricultural and pastoral pursuits. Its growth was not
very rapid, owing to its great distance from Europe ; but about
1850, when gold was discovered in New South Wales, the colony
was soon regarded as an El Dorado, and from England and the
Continent of Europe teeming multitudes set sail to make fortunes
and reap golden harvests beneath fair Austral’s sky. A large
population being drawn to the colony, and the gold mania having
to a great extent subsided, the colonists soon took to more legiti-
mate industrial occupations, so that it can now be said that New
South Wales possesses a more contented and settled population
than any other of the Australian colonies, the habits and customs
of the people being identical with those of England. Australia is
divided into five flourishing colonies, four of them with indepen-
dent legislatures—New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,


and Queensland-Western Australia is still a penal colony. New
South Wales is the oldest of this good race of thriving children.
It is estimated that New South Wales alone occupies a super-
ficial area of about 325,000 square miles ;it is, therefore, nearly
three times the size of Great Britain and Ireland, and is considerably
larger than other European States except Eussia. It is one and half
the size of Turkey, or of Spain and Portugal, equal in area to
France together with Belgium and Holland and all the minor
German States, and is nearly equal in extent to Canada. New
South Wales is the largest of all the colonies in the extent of its
territory; and more, it is thoroughly English in its forms of social
life, and above all, the most richly blessed by a kind and beneficial
Creator in its varieties of soil, climate, and mineral wealth. It
lies between the parallels of 28° and 37° south latitude, and between
141 and 154 meridians of east longitude. The climate is
warm and dry. Great variations of temperature are occasionally
experienced for short periods ; but on the average the difference
between the mean temperature of summer and winter is not more
than 20 degrees. It may be said to have every variety of climate;
for the coast region, the table land and the plains in the interior,
present the most opposite of temperature.
Some of the general characteristics of the climate are the
lightness and purity of the atmosphere, the bright clear appearance
of the sky, and the prevalence of sunshine; these, together with the
dryness of the air, tend to counteract the enervating and debilita-
ting effects of great heat, and thus render the climate more
endurable than those of countries in which a high temperature is
accompanied with excessive moisture. The climate produces the
most beneficial results upon the constitutions of persons subject to
pulmonary affections. The cheerful exhilarating quality of the
air strikes the stranger from any of the dull and murky countries
of the north as one of its most marked features. The land in many
parts is extremely fertile, and the variety of productions in the
colony such as sugar, tobacco, cotton, arrowroot, maize, as well
as ordinary English crops, give opportunities for enterprise, skill,
and profit, which cannot possibly be found in England. The
student of natural history will find a boundless region of pleasur-
able research. Statistics are very dry, but the following may not
be uninteresting :
1868 Horses, 280,000
1868 Sheep, 13,909,000
„ Pigs, 173,168.
„ Cattle, 1,728,000
The estimated value of wool exported in 1868 was valued at
£2,340,000. Eighty years ago there was scarcely a flock of sheep
in Australia.


Coal abounds in many parts of the colony, and in 1867, 770,000
tons were raised at the different mines.
Since 1851 upwards of £18,000,000 sterling of gold has been
obtained from the mines of the colony. The exports of the colony
in 1868 were over seven millions.
To give some idea of the city of Sydney the expenditure of
the Sydney municipality amounts yearly to over £60,000.
Number of letters passing through the General Post Office,
6,748,356 ; newspapers, 3,897,905.
There are 19,000 depositors in the Sydney Savings’ Bank,
with £BOO,OOO to their credit.
Population: Males, 248,512 1 . ~o n „
Females, 199,108 / rW ’
The City of Sydney is beautifully situated at the head of the
finest harbour in the world. The public buildings, churches, &c,,
rival those of the old country. When we reflect that 100 years
ago Sydney was an untrodden waste, only disturbed by the wild
man’s corrobboree, that nature was unsubdued, and when it seemed
that God had made the land for nought; when we think that
within that brief space the land has been possessed in the highest
sense, that the place once hushed in the death stillness of inactivity
is now instinct with life, that to what is glorious in nature art has lent
her decorative charms, and embellished the city in all that wealth
can give; that now, as well as the sound of the hammer, and the
fall of the flail, and the roar of the furnace for six days in the
week, on Sabbath days the sounds which tell of another life, and
point to a holier scene, the bells —sweet church bells—break upon
the ear in cadences of heavenly music, recalling memories, of home,
proclaiming that the messenger of mercy is about to unfold the
glory of the Cross, and inviting men to worship at the footstool of
Him who delights in the praises of his people; when we reflect
that all this subjugation of nature, this marvellous miracle of
genius and of enterprise has been effected, under God, by the British
people, we pride ourselves on belonging to a nation which has been
so owned of God in peopling the waste places of the earth ; for it
can truly be said in the language of the best of books, “ That the
solitary places have been made glad, and the desert has rejoiced
and blossomed as the rose.” It may naturally be asked by many
on board this vessel, “ How shall Ibe likely to succeed ?” We are
persuaded it does give some we know a good deal of anxiety; for
you feel that you will land there as comparative strangers, and that
you will have a cold and inhospitable reception. Now we can
assure you that you will not have occasion to grumble at the cold-
ness of the weather, or the hearts of the people, as more hospitable
people are not to be found within the confines of earth’s circle.


Many have landed there under the circumstances in which you
will be placed, and they are ever ready to stretch out the warm
hand of friendship to the stranger. You are not about to land
among a race of uncultivated money grubbers who have renounced all
the courtesies of civilized life, but you will find the same scrupulous
regard for the amenities of society as you find in the more polished
circles in England. There are things you will not find ; and those
are sycophancy and flunkeyism. If you go there and try to “ cut it
fine,” and talk about your “illigant” cousins, and the grand society
you have kept at home, they may suggest that you ought to have
stopped there, for the Australian eye is quick at detecting the
Horatio Sparkins in modern society, and some in clear rough
ringing Saxon, will tell you that you are a humbug. But if you
go there with a determination to do what is right, and to make the
best of everything, you will find as your reward a well-merited
success. Titles in Australia are not the passports to position—
what is a man worth himself—not what was his father celebrated
for. The stock, and not the sire, are valued most. Don’t build
castles in the air; don’t set your mind on getting this, or doing
that, and make up your mind to grumble and be disheartened it
every anticipation of your sanguine mind is not realized to the full.
Bear in mind, too, that the per centage of educated persons is much
larger than in England, for the children of Australian mechanics
have better educational advantages than even those of the middle
class have in England. Don’t imagine that you are going to
“astonish the natives,” or most probably the only person astonished
will be yourself. Make up your mind to take that which first
offers, and then look out for what will suit you ; don’t look out for
a large salary; you won’t get it at first; they will give you what
you are worth, and not a cent, more.. Above all, seek eamestlv in
prayer for direction in the temporal concerns of life. “Inal 1 thy
ways acknowledge Him, and he shall direct thy paths. Be deter-
mined, at whatever cost, to maintain a Christian chaiacter \ in all
places and in all company let your deportment be that ot an
educated English gentleman, and then your entiance into the
colony will be a blessing, and not a curse. We never, in the expe-
rience of fourteen years, have known a young man fail who was sober,
industrious, and honest. W r e shall soon retire fi om the position
of Editor to this Revieiu , but in another and higher capacity we
may be of service to you, and if it will cause a ray ot sunshine to
illumine your present hopes, and chase away any unnecessary fears,
you may rest assured that you may reckon upon us as a fiiend who
will be willing to assist you to the extent which is measured by
the ability we possess to help. We trust we have caught the spirit
of that Divine principle which feels its greatest joy in ministering


to the happiness of others, and finds its highest delight in seeing
others well to do. T. S.
I am indebted for a considerable portion of the commencement of this article to a book entitled
“ Geography of New South Wales,” by W. Wilkins, Esq., Secretary to the Council of Education.]
ORIGINAL POETRY.
( Written on hearing a man avow himself an infidel.)
Dark was the mind, no thoitght of God was there,
No brightening hope, of every virtue bare,
No looking up with confidence above,
No genial sympathy, no sign of love.
His soul was as the sky, when not a star
Shone out to view, or e’en could be discerned afar ;
It was so very dark, as black Egyptian night,
As if from that lone man our God had ta’en his flight.
He bore the impress of a man, and spake like other men;
I looked and wondered, then I looked again,
And felt a horror for his soul, that he,
Vain as he was, at God’s own bar must be.
The poor blind man who never saw the sun is dark,
But then, ’tis true, that he may have a spark
Of grace within his soul, which makes his darkness light,
And turns to brightest day the leaden gloom of night.
SKETCHES IK LOKDON.—Ko. 2.
The Underground Railway.
It is not so long since our fathers were startled by the inventive genius
of George Stephenson, and pronounced him a fitting candidate for Bed-
lam. The tale of the great engineer’s struggle with the prejudices and
accepted notions of his time is known to all. But manly perseverance
and indomitable energy fought hard against antiquated resistance, and
won the battle. Shrewd men soon saw the advantage of Stephenson’s
invention, and others who had been reluctant to embrace anything
opposed to the creed of their grandfathers and the “ good old days,” had
their scruples removed by the weighty persuasion of prospective pounds,
shillings, and pence to be gained by investments in railway schemes. O,
filthy lucre ! thou can’st influence men’s minds where logic and argument
fail ! And now, instead of journeying in coaches along turnpike roads
and winding lanes, we can tear along the iron road at sixty miles an
hour, now flying through verdant pastime meads and waving corn-fields;
now breaking the stillness of a shady wood, disturbed only in past days
by the startled pheasant and the sportsman’s gun, and then echoing with
the music of feathered songsters, instead of, as now, the shrill screech of
the railway whistle. And in a moment we plunge from these fair sights
into the blackness of darkness, and go snorting and screaming beneath
the earth’s surface till we emerge again into daylight, and pursue our


journey to the end. But though the United Kingdom is cut up in every
direction with iron roads, presenting a patchwork appearance on the
maps, it is not enough. The great metropolis must be the field for new
exploits, and here must the engineer seek new triumphs of skill. The
crowded streets of London suggested the question whether something
could not be done to remove the nuisance and expedite locomotion.
Various were the plans contemplated until that of an underground rail-
way was decided on as the most practicable. The project created no
small astonishment, but we have grown too accustomed to bold enter-
prises to cavil at them. The bill having passed through Parliament, no
time was lost in making the necessary preparations and proceeding with
the construction of the Hammersmith and City Railway. The line is an
ordinary one from Hammersmith to Bishop s Road, at which latter place
the principal feature begins to show itself in the tunnelling under houses
and streets, and sewers, and gas-pipes. At Edgware Road we descend to
the subterranean regions, where we find ourselves between two tunnels,
from which beam out solitary signal lights. At Baker-stieet, Poitland
Road, and Gower-street, we realise more fully the fact of being under-
ground. These stations are lighted dimly, here and there, by reflecting
light-holes from the street above, and the appearance is dark and sombre.
King’s Cross is a joint station for the Metropolitan, Midland, and other
linest and in general has a busy appearance. Parringdon-street, Aide-: ■
gate-street, and Moorgate-street stations are large, open, and lig ,
differing strongly in that respect from others we have named. After the
completion of the Hammersmith and City line came the St. John s
Wood Railway, forming a junction with the main line at Baker-street.
Then, at the commencement of 1869, another branch was opened from a
junction at Edgware road to Westminster, proceeding by a circuitous
route through Hotting Hill, Kensington, Brompton, South Ken-
sington, Sloane Square, and St. James’s Park to Westminster Bridge.
The stations of this latter branch of the Metropolitan Railway are of a
superior character to the first-formed line, being elegant in design, com-
modious, light, and airy. And so, showing little sign of its existence,
there is continually working a vast and well organised system, conveying
thousands of passengers yearly to various parts of the metropolis.
Say we go to one of the intermediate stations between the horns of
nine and ten any morning, desiring to travel to the City. We rush to take
our tickets at the pigeon-hole, round which a constant press is kept up, and
having obtained them, we rush to the staircase, where an inspector clips
them,°and we hurry down the steps, hearing an approaching train. _We
get through the gate on to the platform just as the City train with its
living frefght dashes rapidly in, as though the driver had no intention of
stopping. But, suddenly it halts, and bustling porters quickly shout out
“ Edgware Road !” passengers jump hurriedly into crowded carriages, in
which they have sometimes to be contented with standing room only, if
they travel by these early trains loaded with men eager to get to the City
to resume the struggle of daily life. Scarcely a moment does the train
stop. There is a marvellous difference between the time occupied in


stoppages on this and provincial lines. As the train draws up at each
station, the platform gate is shut, and the disappointed faces of men to
whom a minute is of importance, look anything but acquiescent in the
cry of the guard “ All right behind !” and they seem to say “ You mean
to say all left behind !” Then when we get to our destination we see
brainless fools jump from the carriage steps when in motion, only to save
a moment. We have, on several occasions, witnessed narrow escapes
from a shocking death through this senseless practice, which can never be
too severely censured. Helter-skelter up the stairs go the bustling crowd,
as though to save their lives, and then get lost in the stream of life
outside. What a variety of faces one sees in these gas-lighted carriages
of the Metropolitan Railway. The merchant, the lawyer, the stock-
broker, the clerk, —all more or less immersed in their own busy thoughts,
with faces gi'ave and stern, or else scanning the pages of the morning
journals. Let us not forget to notice the book-stalls, where abundant
literature is provided and vended about by persistent news-boys. Nor
must we forget the convenient and well-supplied refreshment buffets of
Spiers and Fond’s, where the passenger, when in not too great a hurry,
may regale himself. As the city trains are crowded in the morning, so
are they empty at night, when the suburban-bound are filled with tired
and weary men, glad to have accomplished their day’s work. Before we
conclude this very imperfect sketch of the underground railway, we may
state that since its opening, one hundred and fifty millions of persons
have travelled over it.
C. V.
RECOLLECTIONS OF AN AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL MAN.
An Australian Medical Practitioner often meets with strange adverr
tures and is thrown among curious scenes. At the present moment the
particulars of the ‘ Congo Creek Murder ’ revert to my mind, and
perhaps the account may prove interesting to my friends
It was a fine moonlight night in the month of January, after a hot
summer’s day, that Mr. Beckham, Crown Lands Commissioner, was pro-
ceeding on horseback, accompanied only by his servant boy, to a distant
station. They had been riding slowly for some hours, and having
descended a steep range, came by a sharp turn in the road, on the bank
of the Congo Creek ; suddenly Mr. Beckham’s horse started, and sprang
across the road, refusing to proceed. On looking about to ascertain the
cause he discovered what appeared to be a man, leaning against a tree, a
little off the road, on the right hand side; the moon shone strongly on
him, but he neither moved or took any notice of the presence of the
horsemen. The boy, frightened, refused to approach him, and Mr. Beck-
ham therefore proceeded alone to the spot where he found the lifeless
body of a lad of about 1 6 years of age. He was lying at the foot of a
tree, with his cap at his feet, but the marks of injuries on the side of the
head and face told but too plainly that his death had been caused by
violence. A few moments consideration decided the travellers that their
presence could do the poor fellow no good, and that their duty was to


follow and, if possible, apprehend the murderer. This was Thursday
night. Once in their saddle again it required but a short time to reach
the nearest dwelling—an out-station of Mr. Mackay’s—a few miles
distant. Stopping for a few minutes to direct the man in charge to pro-
ceed with information to the nearest magistrate, and to the Binalong
police station, they proceeded on their journey. After riding several
miles, near morning, they came on some drays camped; from the
draymen they ascertained that on the Wednesday night their drays were
camped near Congo Creek, and a short distance a man and three boys
stopped for the night, and that the man was angry with one of the boys,
who was just landed in the colony, and had beaten him very severely
with a large stick. These men insisted on his desisting from doing so
and returned to their drays. On starting the next morning they had left
him at the creek, but shortly afterwards he had passed them keeping off
the road at the time.
There being evidently no time to be lost Mr. Beckham pushed on
and arrived at an early hour at Mr. Comans’ station, situated some thirty
miles from the creek. Here he was told that a dray had been heard
passing late at night, and on telling his story a fresh horse was at once
found for him. On Friday night, after a further ride of fifty miles, the
dray was discovered camped, and Mr. Beckham having seen it at a
distance, rode on to Wagga Wagga, and returned, accompanied by the
chief constable, and apprehended the man in charge, who remarked he
supposed they had come in consequence of what had happened about the
boy he had left behind ; but he appeared considerably surprised at being
so quickly found out.
On the following day, at the request of the magistrates, I proceeded,
accompanied by Mr. Beckham, to Congo Creek, and found such injuries
inflicted on the body of the poor fellow as left no doubt as to the cause
of his death.
We could learn but few particulars about him, except his name, and
that he came from Liverpool. His friends to this day are probably
ignorant of his sad fate. We buried him on the bank of the creek, no
stone marks his grave, but travellers now avoid the place, and the last
time I passed the spot I saw marked on a tree Dead Man s Hollow.
Some time afterwards I saw the prisoner tried, convicted, and sen-
tenced to death at Goulburn. The sentence was afterwards commuted
for a lengthened imprisonment.
This case necessitated my proceeding 160 miles to attend the inquest
and afterwards riding a journey of 360 miles to be present at the assizes
—a distance which would rather astonish an English medical man.
A. B. M.
POACHERS AND POACHING.
I shall not in this paper speak of the poor wretch who is commonly
designated a “ poacher,” —some poor laborer most likely who is told by his
squire to do his duty in that station of life to which it has pleased God
to call him—the man whom society expects to be happy and contented


on nine shillings per week (sober he certainly ought to be) —a man with
a sick wife and miserable unhealthy children—a man whose highest
ambition is to be the best ploughman in the parish—a man who is
content to live in a miserable hovel called by courtesy a cottage—a man
who generally finds delight in multiplying small images of sin and who
occasionally receives the splendid premium of a smock frock at some
agricultural dinner for bringing up fourteen children without help from
the parish—a man who, if he ever goes to church, is contented to take
his station in the free seats, who sits on the very edge of his hard bench
and looks meekly at the parson as if apologising for entering the house
of his God, —he has never heard of free churches—a man who is bom
into misery, dragged up suffering the slow pangs of starvation, who
passes the whole of his life in a state far worse than that of a mere brute
(for the poor being must sometimes have a kind of vague consciousness
that he was created for something higher)—a man who has the changing
prospect, if he escape the horrors of death by hunger and the ruthless
fangs of typhus fever, of passing the evening of his days in well earned
retirement, and ending his life as an independent gentleman, supported
by a grateful country, housed in a splendid mansion, surrounded by
noble grounds, all kept up for his pleasure.
It is not of such a man who is in an unguarded moment tempted to
vary his diet of bread and onions—onions and bread—by a plump par-
tridge or young hare, and being caught red-handed in the act, is after a
severe lecture from the bench, committed to prison for six months as a
poacher.
No; it is of a poacher of quite another character, I will now speak.
A man who has a balance at his bankers-—a country and town house—a
box at the opera —fine carriages—a handsome wife and happy children
—hundreds of admirers and troops of friends.
Every man, woman, and child that lives in this world is a poacher.
For why % Because there is no such thing as originality, “ there is
nothing new under the sun.”
Poachers may be divided into two great classes —conscious and the
unconscious. Most of us belong to the first class. We unconsciously
appropriate the thoughts, ape the manners, and express the sentiments of
those around us. This is unavoidable—man is not a diamond shedding
abroad its own lustre, but a mirror reflecting borrowed light.
The second class of poachers are of a different sect; these are the
rqen who consciously make unholy capital out of their fellows’ skill,
ingenuity, or brains. The engineers who snatch up the idea of some
poor mechanic who has devoted years of anxious thought and labor to
the perfection of some complex machine, and who lacks the funds neces-
sary to take out a patent. The shopkeepers who copy trade marks—
the manufacturers who imitate their rivals wrappers —the touts who
advertise that Aldcroft or Ashmall has a certainty for the Caesar witch
at fifty to one (terms twelve stamps)—the photographer who shows as
specimens of his own studio the productions of Mayall—the writers
who when they see that a literary star has made a hit in a certain line


immediately adopt his peculiar style, for nothing is easier and safer than
this last kind of poaching. These are the men who should be stxdpped of
their borrowed plumes, and exposed in all their hideous deformity as
rogues, thieves, and liars.
These poachers, however, usually escape their well deserved punish-
ment. For the greater part of these cases there is no penalty, and even
if there be a statute made and provided a clever rogue usually manages
to steer clear of the meshes of the law.
But there are many people who poach consciously without a dis-
honest intention. Is this kind of conscious poaching allowable ? It
is allowable when a man (if required to do so) has the honesty to
avow the obligation. Is this kind of conscious poaching commendable 1
I say, emphatically, IT IS ; but under certain restrictions. When a
man hears or sees anything likely to benefit his fellow creatures, as
for instance, when he reads a good book, or hears a good sermon ; it is
not only commendable, but it is his bounden duty to poach on that,
preserve and distribute to his neighbors, some of the choice game that he
has had an opportunity of bagging.
H. Gr.
OLD DAYS.
How swiftly,do our thoughts run back to the happy days spent amongst
the rustic scenery of dear old England ! In fancy we visit once more
its beloved shores, and memory conjures up past enjoyments, and fami-
liar spots trodden often in company with our closest friends, —with some
of whom we shall never walk again ! Oh ! ever changing time ! bear-
ing away in thy resistless flight the hopes and thoughts of early youth !
How thou hast dimmed the bright eye, sobered ambition, and ruthlessly
destroyed the aerial castles we loved to build and people witli our fancy;
how many young hearts, happy in the all-absorbing present, have painted
a future brighter still, only to realise thy power to change and destroy !
But yet, although we be borne onward on the waves of Time nearer and
nearer each day to the mysterious and solemn future, and though our
footsteps may even now be verging on that valley of the Shadow which
divides the seen from the unseen, we may go back in memoxy to the set-
tled past, and peer over its indelible records.
Our school-days ! Ah ! we ofterx sigh for them over again ! Bright
and happy period of life, —never appreciated till it has passed, and we
have realised that life presents greater cares and perplexities than Latin
verses or recurxdxxg decimals, axxd that we have to stumble over greater
obstacles than the Pons Asinorum of Euclid. We think of the wox’k-
ing hours in school, when we mentally x’esolved to eclipse Jones, seniox’,
and gain the laurels at examination ; how we stuck to it, and came out
triumphantly at the head of the list! How eagerly we welcomed the
arrival of any new boy who could fight the bxxlly of the school, and
watched him do it. With what zest we flung ourselves into the pastimes
then in vogue. “ Prisoner’s Base” and “ Chivvy” were extensively pa-


tronised in the play ground, and we enjoyed “ hockey” too, until ono
fellow had his eye injured by a sudden and too-intirnate contact with the
ball, and then it was proscribed. Cricket and foot-ball ! what English,
boy doesn’t love them 1 We see the lively cricket field and the gay
appearance of the elevens in friendly contest, and our hearts beat high as
our best batsmen run up the score, or our bowlers do good execution on.
the wickets. We hear once more the hearty shout, “Played, sir,
played !” and join in the lusty cheer which greet the victors. And how,
in the cold, bright autumn days, we threw ourselves into foot-ball and
fought hard for the goal,—now mixing in the general melee, now racing
forth at full speed to kick the ball before a strong opponent dashed on
it. And when after the play we returned to school, how we looked
forward to the next game, and sought an early opportunity for it. Well,
well, it is all changed now ! And our school-fellows, where are they ?
Some have gone to distant lands to seek fortune and fame, some are
making way in their professions at home, some are fulfilling the expec-
tations of their friends, and some disappointing them. And others of
them, then apparently of strong constitutions, have had to obey the
summons of Death. Promising careers have thus been cut short, while
to us has been left the opportunity to make good use of health and
talents, or to throw away the time and chance and leave the world un-
known and unregretted.
If we managed to get over our school-days before we began to ex-
perience Cupid’s power, it was not long before his darts were directed at
us. Who can fail to remember our “ first love ?” No mistake about
it, it was a delightful sensation ! There was something fresh about our
hearts then, and boys can love fervently as well as men. If our affec-
tion only found expression in looks and languishing smiles, we were as
contented as love-sick boys could be. And when, later, we were more
strongly hit, we know how,—morning, noon, and night,—our thoughts
were fixed on the beloved one,—how we directed our steps to any place
where we should be likely to meet her, —how we puzzled our heads to
write verses full of gushing sentiment; and how, on Sundays in church,
—wrong as we knew it to be, —our thoughts and eyes would wander to
her. How nice it was to have a sister who could go for walks with her
on cool, summer evenings ; then we generally happened, by the purest
accident, to meet them, and were thus able to bask in the sunshine of
her presence. Have we not all, in our young and hopeful days, in-
dulged in this pleasant dream 1 We roam once again in the pleasant
lanes, and pluck the wild floweis together ; stooping by babbling brooks
to pick the “ forget-me-nots,” and we see the flush on the cheeks of the
maiden as we give them to her. Our love was not then of the shallow
kind which lies at the tip of the tongue, but a deeper and purer affec-
tion. Each flower we gave had a meaning we both understood, and,
perhaps, some day in later years we have found them carefully preserved,
and have sighed for those happy and fresh days when our knowledge of
“ life”—generally meaning the darker side of it—was limited. They
will speak, these dead flowers, and our heardened hearts bend over them


in mournful regret. Have we not, since those days, learnt stern and
bitter truths 1 Have we not felt the power of Time and absence, the
force of circumstances, and the delusiveness of our early dream 1 They
were hard lessons to learn, causing us sharp pain ; but we had to nerve
ourselves for other struggles, and so the wounds got healed. But, the
scar may always remain.
Can we ever forget the spots sacred to us by the memories of old
associations ? Ho, repeatedly we look back to the home of childhood
and the scenes of early years. Beside the river we delighted to stroll
and watch the dancing ripples hissed by soft zephyrs, while the rustling
foliage sighed as the setting sun dropped behind the gold-fringed hills.
And on that river’s bank, bathed in the rich light of the declining orbs,
stands the grand old cathedral, with its proud, square tower, _ grey with
centuries of storm and sunshine. Rich and noble in its classic architec-
ture, it seems to breathe tranquility around, and tell of a higher and
holier existence. Within its sacred walls lies the dust of ancient kings
and prelates, and through the tracery of its stained windows the light
falls in streams of colored beauty on the assembled worshippers, while
the organ rolls echoing through nave and aisle, and the white-robed choir
with jubilant voices chant the solemn anthem of praise. _ Oh ! peace-
inspiring sanctuary, memory flies back to thee, and again we kneel
within thy walls before the Great Presence !
How we loved to wander from the haunts of men to the calm
beauty of the fields in company with a bosom friend. It was pleasant
to stroll through rich corn-fields, to rest under the shade of a spreading
oak, or to feel the springing turf beneath our feet, and talk of our future
aims and prospects. Since these times we have all gone through
many vicissitudes, and we can look back on some aim attained, some
hopes realised, while others have been withered in the bud. A retio-
spect must ever call forth mingled feelings of pleasure and regret, but it
may also teach us a lesson. Can we not endeavour to regulate our daily
conduct, to consider the feelings of others as well as our own, and to
remember that
Evil is wrought by want of thought
As well as want of heart.
Then we shall avoid many circumstances which would blot the pages of
C Y.
Then, we shall avoid many circumstances wnicn wouia uiuu tuc pagoo
C Y.
memory.
NAUTICAL CHRONICLE.
Date. Lat. Long. Dis. Bar. The Remarks.
Sth. West Wind, Northerly ; light and fine.
June 2 34.8 25.53150 30.15 70° Fine ; latter part cloudy. Wind, N.N.W.
3 35.53 23.2 165 29-80 67° Steady breeze at W. S. W. Fine.
4 38.5319.20 242 29.75 61° Fresh breeze at N.W. & W.N.W.
” 539.51 14.13 254 29.70 634 Steady wind at W., & fine ) Passed Gough Isd.,
” 640.20 9.45 216 29.85 60° Do. W.N.W., & cloudy \ distant 2 miles.
” 741.38 4.30 245 29.90 60° Fresh gale at N.W., with rain
” 841.57 00.9 196 30.20 51° Thick weather. Wind, North. Foggy. t
Weekly run, 1468 miles.


To the Editor of the Commissary Review.
Ship “ Commissary,” Wednesday, June Bth, 1870.
Dear Sir, —The weekly log shows a run of 1468 miles.
The ship to-day is 800 miles from the meridian of the Cape, which, if the
wind holds, I hope to pass on Saturday night.
On Monday Gough Island was passed, distant two miles. This island is
sometimes used by whalers and sealers, who boil their oil on the rocks. There
are an abundance of seals and other oil-producing fish, which are very tame, and
consequently easily killed, thus forming a good addition to the whalers’ cargo.
The island is 4,380 feet high, covered with green moss and a few bushes ;
several cascades of water abound all round the island.
In N.F.. Bay which we passed, a beautiful cascade was seen, which would be
found very convenient for ships wanting water. There is a good anchorage in
the bay, from 12 to 14 fathoms, sheltered from the swell by the rocks we saw.
Next week I hope to have a better week’s work to show you, as we are now
in the latitude of the brave westerly winds.
I am, dear sir,
Yours truly,
FRANCIS WAGSTAFF.


No. 5.
THURSDAY, JUNE 16th, 1870.
CONTENTS.
Hope \ ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 55
Marriage v. Celibacy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
A Grizzle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59
In a Fog ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61
Selfishness ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 63
Suicide ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 63
General News ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 64
Nautical Chronicle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 64
HOPE.
There are certain subjects which naturally force themselves upon
our attention at this time; the range of our mental vision is con-
tracted, and our minds are dwarfed instead of being enlarged by
the experience of the last ten weeks. When on shore we have
heard people talk of the happiness, the inconceivable delight of a
sea trip —of the wonderful sights that meet the eye —of incidents
full of curious matter, which drew largely upon our faith —the
persons, as a rule, who talk with such gushing artlessness about
the delights of a sea voyage rarely ever have gone further than
Brighton or the Isle of Man, and if you knew the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, after the first five minutes was
over they were lolling about indifferent as to what they did, or as
to what anybody did to them. Look at their faces, and oh 1 what
a cadaverous pallor is stealing over their once happy coun-
tenances ! how awfully bilious they look! what a green hue
where the bright red used to be! the eyes rolling in their sockets,
as if they had got into the wrong place; the mouth opening and
closing with a kind of nervous spasm ; and that part of the body
concealed under the waistcoat, and known as the commissariat
department, heaving like an overstrained and broken-winded bel-
lows; they groan in sadness at their horrid fate, and yet such is
human nature, that when they get safely on shore and mix in
society, when they do their bread and butter and shrimps at
Greenwich, or call in to see a friend whom they want to impress
with the idea that they have done a sea trip, they will talk about
the duck of a voyage, the grandeur of the rolling billows, the
extreme attention of the captain, who seemed delighted to make
their acquaintance (and who presented them with a bottle of sea-


weed picked up in the great Grulf Stream), and the sorrow they
experienced in having to say good-bye to such charming and
delightful associates as they fell in with by the way. Well, at all
events, you may say it’s well to look on the bright side. But we
have wandered from our subject. But pardon this digression, for
it really is hard to fix one’s mind on anything for long at a time,
especially in the peculiarities of our unenviable situation; for what
are our surroundings at the present moment ? Outside our cabin
to the right, there is an intolerable noise, made by innumerable lit-
tle children, whom Providence never intended to be silent except
when asleep ; elder children talking loudly and incoherently and
disconnectedly about sea and shore; to the left, about three feet
from our elbow, is a scene of desolation, as dreary and dismal a fog
as ever encompassed the regions of 46 deg. S. hit. ; above our head
a person or persons stamping on the deck with a half-hundred
weight in each boot, and who are determined at all events to make
a noise in the circumscribed circle in which it is their privilege to
reside; and here, in an atmosphere not so fine as that of a violet-
scented bank in Old England, let me ask what subject do you
think can be done justice to? do you for a moment dream that
one’s soul can be roused into activity, or that anything worth read-
ing can be written. We invoke the muses, but they are silent;
we call upon our imagination, but its halls are echoless ; what
shall we fling upon the page from our dull and torpid brain ? the
type may be in the rack ’tis true, but where are the fingers to give
life to leaden characters ? There is only one idea that possesses
us, and that is hope. We hope, and what bright thoughts lie
enveloped in the magic circle of that little golden word—Hope.
It has sustained the sufferer under the most distressing circum-
stances ; it has given birth to joys amid the gloom of dark despair;
it has dried the tear upon the wan cheek of sorrow, and lit a smile
upon the care-lined face of age ; its sun has warmed the cold,
enfeebled limbs, and given life to the slow pulse-beat of approach-
ing death. Hope I it has fringed the darkest day of drear adver-
sity with a silver line of promise, and brought the gushing water
into the dearth of the arid desert; it has wreathed the sterile
plain of barrenness with the verdure of an everlasting spring ; and
caused blossoms bright and beautiful to come forth from gnarled
and withered trunks ; it has given to the background of the dark-
est picture a lightsome shade, and has caused gleams of sunshine
to fall across the gloomy sadness of the grave; it has planted the
evergreen of immortality around the tomb; it has lit the dying
soldier’s eye with bright anticipations of an unrealised to-morrow,
and has calmed the angry sea in the imagination of the anxious
mariner; amid the loud commotion of the death-beat of the storm,


and tempest, it lias come in spirit form, whispering words which
impart confidence and peace; its golden wings have flattered in
the darkness and made it light; its breath has chased the exhala-
tions which forewarned of death, and the echoes of its footsteps
have fallen on the ear, in notes of blessed music, and here, away
from home, a long, long way from home, down in the regions
where the albatross is king, and where sunshine rarely comes,
Hope, blessed Hope, sustains us, and makes us look for a
brighter and better to-morrow; do we have calms, and head winds,
and cold drizzling fogs, Hope lifts the cloud and sees, in days not
very far off, the bright sunshine of Australia, the very thought of
which gives courage and endurance, and makes us e’en content
to suffer. Yes, Hope goes on before us, and already it
has gained the looked-for shore, and called to mind a
thousand objects of interest in our new home that is to be —to
others who have been there Hope has not been less industrious, for
it has peopled many a boat with a living freight of loved ones —and
warmed us with their welcome. Hope, has it done no more ? Oh
yes, it has to some; it has winged its flight back again after years
of absence to loved spots, rich in consecrated memories—to loved
hearts, whose words lie treasured in affections casket. Again, it
has touched the land of the primrose, the daisy, and the violet —
and led us by the hand to where in dreams we often think we are,
and where in heart we wish we were. Hope, thou attendant angel
upon man —thou that dost place a pillow of peace beneath the
head of the weary, go on before us with thy sceptre of light
through the mist and darkness; let us see thy finger beckoning us
on to where the- mist shall never come, and where sunshine ever
plays upon the floor. Inspire our good Captain with the hope that
this will not be the longest passage of the season, and that if it
should be longer than he ever yet has made, grant when homeward
bound, the good ship may redeem her character; let us hope that
winds will be fairer—that the weather will be brighter —that ice-
bergs may be always miles to leeward, and foul winds never cause
our yards to be braced sharp up against the backstays, but that our
good angel may invoke the brave West-wind and send the “ Com-
missary ” and her living freight to the land we all hope soon to see;
and let us hope that each will find his expectations realized —
that good haalth may be enjoyed by all, and that good fortune
may attend upon the path of each, and when death shall wave
his iron sceptre, and night close around us all, may the sky of
that night of death be illumined by the Star of Hope—whose
reflected lustre shall reveal to us the path the Hod-man trod,
and light our way to Jerusalem the Holden.
T. S.


Comspoitbmcc.
MARRIAGE V. CELIBACY.
(To the Editor of the Commissary Review.)
Dear Sir, — This seems to be an essentially marrying age, and bachelors
have need to keep their eyes open lest they fall into the traps laid to
catch them by designing mammas and marriageable misses. There is a
vast amount of absurd bosh talked and written on the pleasures of
matrimony, and every three-volume novel sets it forth as the grand aim
of life. Allow me, as a bachelor, to express my opinions on both mar-
riage and celibacy, and to enumerate some of my reasons for preferring
the state of single blessedness to that of bonded misery. Early in life,
before they cut their wisdom teeth, young men are apt to fall in love with
a pretty face and figure, or perhaps, with an amiable girl, not remarkable
for beauty—rather otherwise. If, lacking the strength of mind and
earnestness of purpose to resist, they give way to this passion of love
and allow it to take possession of their minds, their folly is likely to be
rewarded by the domination of passions of which they were before
happily ignorant. True, they may have some moments of what they
think ecstatic bliss while nourishing the soft influence of the tender
passion, but how dearly do they pay for the short-lived pleasure. They
soon become a prey to the bitter and fiendish feelings of doubt, jealousy,
and envy, and peace of mind they know not. They grow indolent and
careless about their daily duties, abstracted in mind, moody, and disagree-
able. How happy the poor creatures feel when the jilting process comes
on, and the pretty little cottage-in-the-air gets rudely shattered, and all
the pleasant visions of wedded bliss fade suddenly away ! Love-making
may be very nice amusement for those who like it, but how great the
cost! Well, very often the jilting is omitted, or else the rejected swain
turns his attention to “ fresh fields and pastures new,” resolves to take
the fatal step and plunge into the joys of married life. Poor creatures,
they who treasure the vain idea that their anticipations will be realised !
The honeymoon may pass off well enough for two or three days,—and so
it ought to, after a fellow has made such an exhibition of himself before
a crowd of people. But, delightful as these days may be, they won’t last
long. If the newly-married chance to spend the honeymoon at a quiet
watering place, and be kept in doors under stress of weather, a short
time will suffice to weary them of each other’s society, and the pretty
little endearments of “ duck,” “ love,” and “ darling,” will get slightly
sickening. Then will soon follow those little differences of opinion
leading to a pleasant exchange of extreme language, generally winding
up with a hearty shower of tears. These are interesting little episodes
to pass the time away until the arrival of a little stranger to divert
attention. Oh ! how nice, it is to be a papa, to be disturbed in your
slumbers by the cries of the baby, and to be obliged to get out of a warm
bed to nurse the little cherub to sleep. If all this be trying, how much
more so will it be when not one but half-a-dozen brats surround you;—


when the poor husband instead of getting rest and quiet after a day’s
worry and business finds his home anything but a peaceful sanctum, for
the uproarious disturbance of romping youngsters. To have a lot of
children dangling on your knees, pulling your hair and whiskers and
otherwise annoying you, is not a likely process for the cultivation of an
amiable temper. And soon comes anxiety about the education of Tom
and the girls, and so on from year to year the weight of trouble will
increase. These parental cares and worries are only a few of what the
poor unfQrtunate husband has to endure. He is called upon when he
enters into wedded life to sacrifice his personal liberty to the dictation of
a petticoat government, and if he deluded himself that he will be lord
and master in his own household, he is speedily undeceived. When he
seeks solace in his pipe he draws down a storm upon his head, and is
warned to smoke out of doors, if he must smoke at all. If he takes up
the paper in the evening he is told he is a nasty, unsociable creature, and
vain is the attempt to read for the discharges of such like pleasantries.
Poor hen-pecked husband, liberty you know no longer,—your every
movement is hampered and you know no escape. Well, Mr. Editor,
with such examples of the difference between real and imaginary married
life daily before our eyes, is it any wonder that bachelors prefer to retain
possession of their enjoyments and liberty 1 They have discomforts to
bear, no doubt, but they are small ones. Don’t think we are solitary
fellows—quite the opposite. In the single state we can have our own
friends, go where and do what we like, consulting only our own conve-
nience. In our own chambers we can spend a quiet evening whenever
we like. There, before a blazing fire, we can enjoy the pipe of peace,
and read with undiverted attention. Isn’t this better than the clatter
and screams of troublesome children all about you 1 ? We have no dolls
of wives to dress in ever changing fashion ; no youngsters to plague us ;
no establishment to maintain ; no household worries to perplex us; and
we like this tranquil state of life. Now, you know why we remain as
we are, and refuse to cumber ourselves with so expensive a luxury as a
wife. We choose rather to “ bear those ills we have than fly to others
we know not of.”
I am, dear Sir,
Your obedient servant,
A HAPPY CELIBATE.
A GRIZZLE.
lam a confirmed old grizzler. Amongst my intimate friends I have been
dubbed “Grizzling Jemmy.” All my acquaintance have, in their turn,
tried to laugh me out of what in their impertinence they are pleased to
turn my unfortunate propensity. They argue somewhat in this style :
What good does all your grizzling do 1 “ It’s no use crying over spilt
milk,” and all the grizzling in the world won’t mend a broken head. I
don’t know how it is but I must have a grievance. lam not happy without
one. It is a free-born Englishman’s privilege to grizzle. I won't try to


cure myself of the habit. What is it to me that my continual grizzling
has a tendency to infect other people ; that is their business not mine. I
will nurse and hug my skeleton and no one shall reason me out of it.
Least of all will I control my spirit now. I never had such a chance
before, and it will most likely be a very long time before I shall have
another such an opportunity of making a number of my fellow-creatures
discontented.
Why was I fool enough to go to Australia in a sailing vessel ? Why
on earth didn’t I go in a nice flush deck steamer and enjoy the delightful
motion of the screw, and the invigorating perfume of hot oil ? Catch
me in a sailing vessel again.
As I must make an ass of myself, why did I choose such an old
lop-sided slow sailing tub as the “Commissary”] But the “Commissaxy,”
my dear fellow, is not old. More shame to her then for crawling along in
this way ; there would have been some little excuse if she had been old.
Why didn’t I go in one of Green’s ships, they always make quick
passages. No, they don’t ahvays make quick passages. Well, if they
don’t, there are' always a great many passengers, and it’s different to
being caged up with a few people. But a small number is much more
agreeable than a mob; with our present number you almost get as one
family. No, you don’t, you see too much of each other, “ familiarity
breeds contempt.” Well, so fax', old boy, yoxx have been wonderfully
fortxxnate in escaping gales, and if you have not had a very quick
passage it has, at axxy rate, been a safe and pleasant one. Safe and
pleasant, there yoxx go, who cares for a gale ? That’s much mox'e pleasant
as you call it than to go mooning and creeping aloxxg at the rate of
three knots an hour. Well, well, all the grumbling in the world won’t
add one knot per hour to the speed.
Igo on deck, lively prospect, fog, fog, fog, ugh ! disgusting. How
can this be helped ; yoxx must pxxt xxp with it. Well, I know vexy well
I can’t alter the fog; but why did the captain come down to forty-six
degrees ixr the winter ? He ought to have had more sense. Igo down
and turn ixxto my bxxnk, composing myself for a nice quiet x*ead. Oh
dear good gracious, what a row ! There the kids go rouxxd the saloon—
slap-dash—pell-ixxell —hooting and screaming—whoy ! come up ! and
worse than all a kid of a large gro .vth aiding and abetting them, axxd
making more noise than any six. What can the poor little children do ?
You sux'ely would not be so unreasonable as to send them xxp on deck in
the fog, and somebody nxust annxse them. Do ? Why can’t their parents
dose them with Duffy’s elixir, Winslow’s soothing syrup, or syrup of
poppies, and put them to sleep xxntil the fine weather comes again.
Coxxfouxxd that piano, there it goes again. Will anybody lend a
hand to heave it overboard. Thex-e’s a fellow murdexing the Rhein Wine ;
wish he had a bottle of it cox-k, and all, rammed down his thx-oat. Then
a sweet nymph commences “ Come back to Exiix;” go it my beauty ! give
us all the six verses—xlon’t omit one—what a pity yoxx ever left Ex*in as
you seem so foxxd of it. Dash my wig, the mxxsic has hax-dly ceased when,
a fellow plants himself opposite my door and reads aloxxd. Yoxx discoxr-


tented beast, why didn’t you charter a ship all to yourself? Do you
expect everything your own way? No, but there is a time for every-
thing and people should have a little consideration.
You have one thing to be thankful for, we have a captain who does
everything in his power to make the passengers comfortable. Well, I’ll
admit the captain is a good fellow, but you needn’t make such a crowing
over that one solitary agreeable circumstance. I tell you what it is—you
are bad, and want a dose of physic. Well, if I am bad, it is the captain’s
fault. He knows that pork always gives me the toothache in the wrong
place, and why did he have any pigs on board ? But, surely, Captain
Wagstaflf isn’t supposed to know what disagrees with every individual
passenger. He ought to know, sir. His common sense ought to tell him
that pork is unwholesome, and be should not put temptation in a person’s
way. Don’t tell me there was other meat on the table, and I was not
forced to eat the pork. I dote on pork, and if I like to make myself ill
I will do it. We shall be a hundred days on the passage ! What of
that ? What possible difference can a fortnight more or less make to you,
Mr. Grizzler? You won’t know what to do when you get to Sydney;
you will be like a fish out of water, and when you leave the ship it will
be like leaving your home. Don’t talk to me, I won't hear reason ; I
will grizzle. I know very well, although I won’t admit it, that the
“ Commissary ” is a first-rate ship, with an experienced captain and a good
crew, an agreeable lot of passengers, and an excellent dietary. I know
that the ship has made two very quick passages, and that the finest
clipper that ever was afloat cannot sail unless she has good winds. Stop—
admitting this, why publish that foolish article ? I will do it, I like to
be contrary, and most likely it will make somebody else dissatisfied, so
into the Commissary Review it goes, if the editor will admit it.
h. a
IN A FOG.
Practically and literally we are in a fog. We have been endeavoring
to settle down to write an article for the pages of the Commissary
Review, but our efforts have been fruitless. We have racked our bx-ain
for some subject on which to dilate, but only to find oui*selves more hope-
lessly in a fog. It may not appear astonishing to those acquainted with
life on board ship that we should experience difficulties in the pursuit of
our literary labors, by reason of the babble of discordant noises surround-
ing us in the saloon being anything but conducive to the concenti’ation
of thought. We try hard to keep our temper and to make allowances
for the dear olive-bi’anches who are compelled to disport themselves in-
doors. Poor things ! they, like us, are suffering from the attendant dis-
comforts of the material fog in which our good ship lias been enveloped
for these few days. A London fog is generally considex-ed the perfection
of gloom, but, by disagi'eeable expei’ience of both, we prefer it to the
sombre and damp mantle which hangs about us in this wintry season
of the South. There are degrees in misery as in everything else. Far
better is it to grope our way along dark streets, where we may now and


then stumble against men and lamp-posts, than to go through this de-
cidedly damp road of the sea, enveloped in mist and shut out from every
sight except our dismal, wet, flapping sails. On land we can find our
bearings, with the aid of torch-lights, but not so here, where the sun
declines to light us, and we get thrown on our own resources. People
grumble and grumble about London fogs; but, in reality, an occasional
one is rather a diversion than otherwise. There is something adventur-
ous in locomotion then, and it affords some fun, provided we are in no
particular hurry. But if we do happen to be in a hurry, then it is cer-
tainly provoking to be compelled to travel at crawling rate in an usually
fast hansom, preceded by a torch-bearer engaged to lead the horse and
find the way ; and, still more provoking is it if they manage to mistake
the way, and you get lost in densest darkness. It isn’t nice, either, if,
on your way home from the city by a Netting Hill omnibus, you con-
siderately dismount without troubling the driver to draw up, under the
idea that you are just nearing the Marble Arch, where you wish to turn
off, and find yourself, after you have groped to the Park railings, to be
some considerable distance down the Bayswater road; but you good-
humoredly laugh about it when you get to your dinner. It may be
bad, too and no doubt it is—for those unfortunate persons who happen
to find themselves under the wheels of a vehicle, or being trampled on
by bewildered horses ; but then everything has its disadvantages. Per-
haps it is not agreeable, if you go to the theatre, to find the actors and
actresses placed beyond the necessity of using paint for their faces by the
accommodating cloud of mist which renders them doubtful and visionary
specties to our imperfect ocular organs not yet calculated to pierce ma-
terial objects , but we must be as contented as we can, and give the
performers the credit of “ suiting the action to the word.” It was the
idea of Frenchmen that the favorite amusement of Londoners durum
November fogs was committing suicide by drowning, but, really, it is
not nearly so fashionable in that month as in others. This fact proves
our assertion about the pleasantness of London fogs to be perfectly true.
Would that we could say the same of those which cling around us in
4C° South latitude ! If we could persuade ourselves that they possess
some cheerful, salient features, gladly would we cling to the fond delu-
sion. There is enough, goodness knows, with the cold and damp holding
tightly to us, to put our spirits down to zero, and make our faces long
and gloomy. If we walk on the wet deck, we breathe an air redolent
with evil to delicate constitutions, and conducive to the development of
rheumatism. The view to be obtained at this risk extends to a radius
of ten yards, be the same more or less (as the lawyers say), and com-
prises a fine sea-picture of miniature ripples, encircled with a beautiful
neutial-tinted cloud of fog. Occasionally, a solitary bird appears in
sight, looking as if it had been left out in the cold against its inclina-
tion, and tries to warm itself by flapping its wings most energetically.
Through this enchanting scene our vessel moves lazily along and some-
times stands still to admire it. When the sun and moon come out again,
it is currently rumoured that there will be a great rush to the poop to


see what they are like, —so long does it seem since we gazed upon them.
Nervous ladies go to their cabins at night, not to rest, but to think or
dream of icebergs, and desert islands, and bears, and life-boats, and what
not beside. If we take refuge in our cabins in the day-time, and try to
shut out the gloom and cold by re iding the works of the inimitable
Dickens, we experience a difficulty in following the thread of the narra-
tive and appreciating the style, through the nuises before alluded to.
Children, large and small select the exact spot where our heads recline,
for the energetic rendering of sailors’ songs, interspersed with screams
and altercations, until our heads nearly split with distraction. When
these noises subside and we fondly imagine we can pursue our reading,
we no sooner resume it than a fellow passenger reads a book aloud to
interested listeners, and an extraordinary medley is the result. You
must give up,—try to sleep,—it is your only escape, if you are clever
enough to succeed. No, look at it as we will, a sea fog fails to present
any single redeeming feature, and we shall be heartily glad when we
lose this one.
We sometimes get into social fogs, and have often hard work to get
out of them. Politicians know them, and they puzzle their statesman-
ship. Some people are continually hatching schemes for the remedy of
everv conceivable abuse, but when they come to apply them practically,
they* find themselves in a fog. Over each man and woman perpetually
hangs a fog which obscure from their sight much of the sin and misery
lying at their very doors. They see not the existence of evils they could
do much to remedy ; they hear not the cry for help ever rising to their
ears from wretched outcasts; for beyond the narrow limit of their own
pursuits and pleasures their vision can extend little, for the mist of sel-
fishness surrounding them. In the religious world, mists abound pro-
fusely. Sects and parties get their eyes so clouded by them that they
wrangle fiercely, each claiming to contend for the Faith, and foigetting
that beneath and beyond the fog which encloses their own small sect
extends the large and more extensive possession of the Church Universal.
When the fog rolls away from our mental vision, we open our eyes in
wonder at newly revealed truths. What we cannot now understand we
may hereafter, when the light of increased knowledge shall banish the
mists that cloud our finite intellects, and shall reveal to us attainments
and glories of which we now but vaguely dream.
C. V.
SELFISHNESS.
You talk of the selfishness of bachelors; why, there is not a married
couple in existence who would not skin their deaiest filends to make
shoes for their children.


SUICIDE.
A very distinguished Colonel in the Army was proposed by a friend as
a member of the Yacht Club. On being ballotted for, he was, to the
surprise and mortification of himself and his friend, black-balled; and
what for, do you think ? Because the poor man had a hacking cough,
which disturbed the rather too sensitive nerves of the readers of the
papers. Thus, owing to the selfishness of these men, one most justly
honored by his country came to an untimely end ; for, in a moment of
frenzied madness, he destroyed himself. This unfortunate man left three
children orphans, to deplore his irreparable loss, for he was a widower,
and had been a most devoted father.
GENERAL NEWS.
On Saturday, the 11th June,the passengers and crew of the “ Commissary”
were highly delighted with the entertainment given them by the Rev.
T. Smith. It consisted of first-rate illustrations from scripture, and
views of great interest, shown through the largest magic lantern ever
seen on the ocean. What enhanced the pleasure of the evening was the
able manner in which all the scenes were introduced and fully explained
by the kind lecturer.
On Thursday, the 16th June, there was a successful catch, by the
Rev. T. Smith, of two beautiful molly hawks. Mr. Smith’s son also had
the pleasure of catching a very fine one.
On Thursday evening Captain Wagstaff very kindly favored the
passengers with a view of a splendid stereoscope ; the slides were beauti-
ful, and gave a graphic idea of the opening of the Suez Canal, and con-
tained many views of Swiss scenery of great interest.
RELEASE FROM DUTY.
The youths of this ship having shown so plainly their disinclination to
offer ladies their arm, are hereby informed that for the future they will
dispense with the walking-sticks, and will walk with each other, so as
to leave the youths’ hands at liberty to revel in their pockets or else-
where.


NAUTICAL
CHRONICLE.
Date. Lat. Long. Dis. Bar. Thr
Sth. East.
June 0 42.9 5.27 250 30.17 53°
„ 1041.5511.27 267 30.10 55°
„ 1141.55 16.18 22230.1855°
„ 1242.1318.28 9830.2053°
„ 13'44.16 21.33 182,30.8 59°
„ 14 44.48 25.10 157 ! 30.10 47°
„ 15 45.17 26.10' 5130 00145°
Weekly run, 1227 miles.
Remarks.
Strong breeze, E. N. E. Foggy weather.
Wind North. Foggy weather.
Light winds and foggy weather.
Unsteady weather; foggy weather; N.N.E.wind
Wind, E. & E.N.E. Foggy.
Wind, E.N.E. & N.E. Foggy.
Light airs and calm, with thick fog.
Weekly run,
To the Editor of the Commissary Review.
Ship “ Commissary,” June 15th, 1870.
Dear Sir, —I am much disappointed with this week’s run, but with all our calms
and fogs, we have managed to make 1227 miles.
In passing from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean, a complete change has taken
Elace —I am sorry to say, for the worse—as, from all appearances last week, we
ad every prospect of a good run.
This is very unusual weather for the winter months, and cannot last much
longer, so let us look on the bright side and hope.
I am, dear sir,
Yours very truly,
F. WAGSTAFF.


■■■• ■- - .. -gg
No. 6. THURSDAY, JUNE 23rd, 1870.
CONTENTS.
Scandal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 66
Sketches from Life—Professor Caulkefloore’s Dancing Academy ... 69
Marriage v. Celibacy ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 73
Nautical Chronicle ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 76
SCANDAL.
It is not our desire to-sermonize; we are not in the pulpit, but in the
editorial chair; nevertheless we have a sacred and solemn duty to
perform; we are in our place and sphere the peculiar and consti-
tuted guardians of public morals, and happy is it for a country
when the press recognizes its important functions, and seeks to
elevate the taste and purify the social atmosphere of the commu-
nity. How is this to be attained ? By the exaltation of virtue ;
by the appreciation of that which is pure and of good report, and
by refusing to countenance that which is mean, despicable, and
unmanly. Many are the forms of evil that present themselves
in our artificial society, various are the guises evil hath assumed,
and formidable are the vices against which the press has to wage a
constant war; we believe that at no time in the world’s great history
did the press ever occupy the position it does at present; never
did it wield an influence so great —never did it possess such a
sceptre of acknowledged power. The imperious might of Kings
must bow before it—the policy of diplomacy and statesmanship is
governed by its all-powerful voice. We do not claim the extreme
humility of Uriah Heep, when we say, we, ourselves, are conscious
that we have done very little in the way of extending this influ-
ence, but what we lack in ability we in some degree make up
in earnestness, and our desire is to do as much as we can in the cir-
cumscribed circle in which it is our present lot to be placed; to
suggest truths which may point as with the pen of iron convic-
tion upon impressionable hearts, convictions which shall deepen
into action, and be productive of lasting good when the Com-
missary' Review shall have ceased to be issued from the press. Our
earnest hope is that the subjects we have chosen, or those which yet
may flow from our pen, may prove beneficial to our friends in the
land of sun and gold. We have had some little experience in the


world —we have seen English and Colonial life under many aspects,
and we know nothing that has caused greater misery to the social
and religious life of a community than scandal.
“ ’Tis not the wholesome sharp morality,
Or modest anger of a satiric spirit,
That hurts or wounds the body of
But the sinister application
Of the malignant, ignorant, and base
Interpreter, who will distort and strain
The general scope and purpose of an author
To his particular and private spleen. ”
Pope has well said —
“ The world with calumny abounds,
The whitest virtue slander wounds :
There are whose joy is, night and day,
To talk a character away ?
Eager from rout to rout they haste
To blast the generous and the chaste,
And trampling reputations down
“ Whether on ship-board or in town ; ”
What mind’s in such a base employment
To feel the slightest self-enjoyment ! ”
To guard our young friends and old ones, too, against so
mean and so degrading a propensity is the purpose of our present
article. There are habits you can cure, or, if you cannot
altogether eradicate them, you can prevent disastrous consequences
flowing therefrom; you can mitigate the evil of drunkenness by
withdrawing the facilities for obtaining drink ; you can protect
yourself from the thief by the use of bars and bolts ; but the slan-
derer is not so easily dealt with—he worms himself, serpent-like,
into the folds of your unsuspecting nature —he poisons by insinua-
tions, and yet he sometimes hardly speaks.
“ Nor do they trust the tongue alone
But speak a language of their own ;
Can read a nod, a shrug, a look,
Far better than a printed book ;
Convey a libel in a frown,
Or wink a reputation down ;
Or by the tossing of the fan
Describe the lady and the man. ”
He comes in such a form as almost defies the power of resist-
ance, and causes doubts to arise in your mind as to the reputation,
it may be, of your dearest friend ; the smallest incident becomes of
importance; he twists some inadvertent expression, or look, or
action into a damning proof of guilt, and an accidental meeting,
he concludes, must be a guilty and premeditated assignation. The
slanderer assumes a virtue he does not possess, for virtue, alas, he
knoweth not; he draws a secret from you to make merchandize of


it, and he trafficks in your thoughts, and barters them to suit his
purposes; his breath is poison, he lives but to destroy ; the fairest
prospect is blighted by his presence ; he appears on the domestic
hearth where all is happiness, whose sky no cloud has darkened,
and he lays it waste by suspicions the most foul and fiendish. The
buoyancy of youth, through his gangrene eyes, betokens unholy
passion, and the confidence of mutual friends is scowled at, as the
indulging in forbidden fruit. We have seen the most prosperous
Church ruined by slander, and the happiest circle scattered by its
influence. We know no character so despicable, no being so mean,
as that creature who fattens like a parasite on scandal; alas! how
great the legion who do homage to this monster; it seems to be
the atmosphere in which some people live. Oh, the tittle-tattle—
the gossip—the wishy-washy scandal of modern tea-tables—the
confidential tete-a-tete the low whispering with mouth to ear—
the very agony of delight as the last story, receiving a due addition
is retailed —the exquisite pleasure which seems to be found in
having something against every person in the place—the sneers
about the way the hostess is dressed —the extravagance of Mrs.
Brown —the ill-bred manners of Eobinson’s daughter—the excessive
and imprudent familiarity of Mr, Jones with Mrs. Green; and then
when the evening has drawn to a close, after the scandal-
monger has returned home, what further delight! She has
gathered the delicious honey, and then, (oh sweet!) as the lady’s
maid disrobes her mistress, how she will tell, with wicked inge-
nuity and artful devilry, of things she has never seen, except by
the light of a heated imagination. What depth of villany so
deep —what wrong so wrong—as to betray the confidence of your
dearest friend ? What deed so dark as to poison with the breath
of suspicion the character of the pure but thoughtless—to make
merchandize of the weakness of the unsuspicious and the unde-
fended ? Whatever be your character, never let the shade of the
scandal-monger be your shade —never be the miserable sneak to
magnify the weakness and tarnish the virtue of your acquaintance
—never speak unkindly behind the back what would not dare to
say before the face. If you detect a fault in a friend, never talk
about it, but, in the spirit of Divine benevolence and forbearance,
speak of it to that person. Never listen to the defamation of your
friend. If you should feel bound to repeat anything you have
heard, always tell the person who has related the scandal, that, in
justice to yourself, you must tell the person slandered of
what is said, and who has said it. Avoid the company of
the tale-bearer; G-od has denounced him —consort not with him.
You are fast hastening to a new home, but, thank Ged, it is one singu-
larly free from scandal; the people there have other things to do


than to blacken the character and reputation of their fellows.
Should you have indulged in it, or should you have a predispo-
sition for that sort of thing, renounce it ere you set a foot upon
fair Austral’s shore, for, among all the vipers in that land, none
are so deadly in their venom as the reptile that bears the name of
slanderer. Depend upon it, if you do traffic in the character of
friends, and put up your back at the eccentricities of Australian
society—if you do take to speak evil as a- pastime, you will
assuredly find that Australia is not a bed of roses, but, instead, a
bed of barbed arrows or hard prickly thorns, which will make
the scandal-monger feel that the atmosphere is not congenial to
his taste, and that Australia is not the place for the distribution of
such wares. S.
SKETCHES FROM LIFE.
Professor Caulkefloore’s Dancing Academy.
Mr. Fledgeling lived with his parents in the country until he was about
eighteen years of age, when he repaired to London to make his fortune.
Old Mr. Fledgeling denied his children nothing that he considered con-
ducive to their real welfare ; but, having always led a very quiet steady
life himself, he wished his olive branches to follow in his footsteps, and,
consequently, young Fledgeling’s education in the polite arts had been
altogether neglected. Poor fellow ! he was green : he could’nt, at that
time, handle a billiard-cue ; he had’nt the slightest idea of whist; crib-
bage was a mysterious game, supposed only to be in vogue amongst
sweeps and dustmen; he had never been taken in hand by kind and
considerate friends, and introduced to the exciting game of unlimited 100.
No, he had much to learn ; but worst of all, he could not dance. This
deficiency had long been a very sore point with him. When he had been
invited to a party, he had seen with mortification that he was laughed
at and regarded as a “ muff/’ and this was the more annoying as his sister,
the charming Miss Fledgeling, had in some unaccountable manner, known
only to herself, picked up the science, and was spoken of as a charming
girl, and a first-rate dancer. But as for her stupid brother, bah ! Mr.
Fledgeling had, therefore, made a mental vow that one of the first things
he would do when he was, as he expressed it, “ on his own hook,” should
be to learn to dance. Soon after his arrival in town he was strolling up
Pentonville Hill (our fashionable readers will not know the locality), and
on an advertising board there was the very thing he wanted ; a placard
informed the public that Professor Caulkefloore and competent assistants
instructed adults in every branch of the fashionable and useful art
of dancing ; the terms were very low, and references permitted to former
pupils. He carefully copied the address, one of the bye streets off the
hill, and determined to wait upon the Professor at once. Before a person
can’dance with comfort to himself a pair of pumps is necessary, and our


young friend, inking Time by the forelock, hurried to a shoemaker’s shop
and requested to be shown a pair of dancing pumps. “ Step-dancing, sir ?”
“Yes.” Several pairs being produced, he at last fixed upon a very
neat pair, black turned up with green. This done, he went at once
to the residence of the Professor, which he easily found—a transparency
informing the passer-by that this was
Professor Caulkefloore’s
Dancing Academy.
It was a large neglected looking house, and the door-step, in particular,
was very muddy and dirty; but this was not surprising, as the Professor
never had it cleaned, on principle. A very muddy front door-step at an
academy of any kind is a first-rate advertisement, showing that there must
be numerous pupils.
Mr. Fledgeling v r as shown into a close, evil-smelling room,
by a very small, particularly untidy, mealy-faced young gentleman, who
afterwards turned out to be the Professor’s son and heir. This young
gentleman at first thought the Professor was out; but, on ascertaining
Mr. Fledgeling’s business, he thought he could find him. He retired
for this purpose, and the Professor appeared so very quickly as to lay
himself open to the suspicion of having been listening at the key-hole.
He was apparently about fifty years of age, six feet high, and stout in
proportion ; his face was very flat, flabby, and bloated, and the expres-
sion of his countenance was not improved by a broken nose; his hair was
black, very thin at the top, greasy, and tortured into corkscrew curls.
The point, however, that would strike an observer as being unusual in
a dancing master was that he was knock-kneed, and his feet were enor-
mously broad, and very flat; in fact, of the kind' vulgarly-called “ beetle
crushers.” He was attired in an old dress-coat, which seemed to have been
originally of a bottle-green color, velvet breeches, black silk stockings,
and old dancing pumps. A dirty white shirt, with a large frill, appeared
to be quarrelling with, and striving to break away from a waistcoat
several sizes too small for its wearer. His hands were encased in soiled
white kids. The general appearance of the gentleman was decidedly not
pleasing, but his manners were very gracious.
After affectionately shaking hands, he said : “ I believe, sir, you are
from the country T (How did he find it out ? Most likely from the cut of
Mr. Fledgeling’s clothes.) “Yes.” “ Ah ! a good many of my pupils are
young men from the country, and I have no doubt you will find some
very pleasant acquaintances amongst them.”
“ Do you wish to turn your attention to step dancing, sir ?” Mr. Fledge-
ling replied that he did wish to learn his steps. “ Have you shoes V’
“Yes.” “Then follow me, please.”
The Professor, to the astonishment of Mr. Fledgeling, led the way
down some verysteep stairs into a dark, underground, back kitchen, where
a small boy took possession of his (Mr. F.’s) great coat and boots, demand-
ing the sum of “ tuppence,” and tendering a ticket in return. The unrobing
completed, the Professor took him to another door. Here, he whispered,


“the first few lessons consist in watching the more advanced pupils;” he then
threw open the door, exclaiming, “ a new pupil, gents,” and immediately-
rushed up stairs, three steps at a time. Mr. Fledgeling, thus announced,
advanced into the room, which was a small and intolerably-close kitchen,
dimly lighted by two or three candles. Here were assembled about a
dozen young gentlemen, from the ages of fifteen to twenty-one, all
intently watching a little boy (another son of the Professor), who was
dancing the Sailor’s Hornpipe, and shouting out, at the top of a shrill voice,
instructions at every step. Mr. Fledgeling was astonished, but at last
fixed in his own mind that this was one of the preliminary exercises for
imparting suppleness to the joints.
The dance over, the company welcomed Mr. Fledgeling in a very
hearty manner, making enquiries after his family, particularly his Mamma.
They were not exactly the class of companions Mr. Fledgeling would have
chosen ; they sti'ongly reminded him of errand boys, and young men who
drive about light spring carts, but they all seemed very jolly and good-
humoured.
After watching a variety of dances, he made his way up stairs, where
he found the Professor, who asked him if he thought he should like the
Professionl Mr. Fledgeling replied, that he did not intend to follow
dancing as a profession ; he only wanted to go through the ordinary ball-
room dances with credit to himself.
The Professor looked puzzled, and said, “ but you said you wanted to
learn step-dancing ; and, besides, you have got a pair of stage-clogs. Ha !
ha! ha!” This led to an explanation, and Mr. Fledgeling found that he
had bought a pair of shoes perfectly useless in a ball-room, and, by showing
them, had led the Professor to think that he wished to be educated for
the stage ! ,
“Well, there’s no harm done, you shall be introduced to the
< Assembly Room,’ but you must exchange your clogs for pumps, and you
shall commence in earnest to-morrow night. But,” continued he, “ the
very first step in dancing is to pay a quarter’s subscription in advance,
or, what will come much cheaper in the end, pay me a guinea and attend
until you are perfect. This sum, too, will admit you to our grand assemblies
held twice a week.” This advice seemed good, and Mr. Fledgeling,
paid the money, and got a receipt specifying that he was free to attend
the classes and assemblies until perfect in the art of ball-room dancing.
This ceremony completed, Mr. Fledgeling was conducted to the assembly
room. It was a long, narrow room, with a greasy floor and a blackened
ceiling. The Professor had evidently had a clisagreement with the Gas
Company, and, his supply of gas being cut off, the room was dimly lighted
by candles. The orchestra, consisting of two brandy-faced performers on
the harp and violin respectively, were penned up in a little hutch at one
end of the room, and refreshments were supplied, on being paid for, from
a little box at the other end. Mr. Fledgeling being duly introduced,
the Professor called out “ Places for the Caledonians.” The sets were
formed, and the music struck up, but the Professor did not stop to
impart instructions, but went downstairs to look after the youthful clog


dancers. The dance was shuffled through in a queer sort of a way, and
then some of the company entered into conversation with Mr. Fledge-
ling-
' The ladies were free and easy in their manner, talking so familiai’ly
with Mr. Fledgeling that he was at home at once. One young damsel,
indeed, attached herself exclusively to him, neglecting the remaining
dances. She drank several glasses of negus, in the course of the evening
squeezed his hand with sisterly affection, and, when it was over, allowed
him to see her home. Others blushed, simpered, and giggled with
affected bashfulness just as naturally as if they had had their Mammas
there to keep them in check.
The gentlemen were apparently clerks or shopmen. They smoked
cigars in the passage, talked slang, and evidently thought them-
selves “ knowing cards ” about town. They soon found out that Mr.
Fledgeling was very green, and, with true gentlemanly feeling, they pitied
his ignorance, and, animated by that generous impulse of our nature
which leads the philanthropist to assist his less fortunate fellow-men,
they offered to “ teach him a thing or two,” and to introduce him to the
fashionable resorts of young men about that quarter of the town.
During the interval allowed for refreshments, there was a little
ceremony performed which Mr. Fledgeling found was never afterwards
omitted. The Professor led in his two dirty juveniles, and addressing the
company, he said, “ My sons, Ladies and Gentlemen, —These young gen-
tlemen, with your permission, will dance a hornpipe.” Thus introduced,
the boys shuffled through a hornpipe in the most approved fashion ; at
the conclusion, their parent said, “ Please excuse all defects as this is the
first time they have ever performed in public .” This was repeated at
every assembly, the Professor, who must have had a bad memory, for-
getting that most of the pupils had heard the speech and seen the dehAt
scores of times.
There was another thing that was rather amusing : the Professor let
out one of his apartments to any one who would hire it. Just at this
time a body of Mormons were in possession. These people, possibly,
animated by the music of the band, and excited to action by the noise
of the clog dancing, would shout, sing, and howl with extraordinary
fervour, so much so as at times to almost drown the notes of the
musicians.
The dancing at last was over, and, as everybody had been so kind to
him, Mr. Fledgeling felt bound in honour to oi’der a supply of liquor of
which most of them partbok, including the Professor and his family.
One remark about this treating, vulgaidy termed “ standing Samby
it you can invariably tell a man’s knowledge of the world. A young
chick, just out of the shell, treats everybody, friend and acquaintance.
A fledgeling, who can just flutter, treats his friends, whilst your old bird
gets other people to treat him.
Mr. Fledgeling having procured the correct pumps, presented him-
self the next evening for his first lesson. He was taken with another
tyro to an upper chamber, and the Professor, having shewed them what


he called the polka step, told them to practice it all the evening, and
left them to their own devices. At the second lesson, still upstairs,
Madame Caulkefloore was introduced. She was a tall, exceedingly stout,
vulgar-looking woman, with a red pimply face and staring glassy eyes;
her visage, poor thing, bore evident traces of a blow received, most
likely, in some matrimonial quarrel. She was not a pleasant ball-room
companion, owing to an extraordinary aroma she diffused, and whic
seemed to Mr. Fledgeling to be compounded of brandy, onions, and stale
baby. . . n A
This lady entered the room with a grave salutation, saying— brood
eveningyounggentlemanwewillnowpracticethepolkasteptouchmyrighthand
lightly withthefingersofyourleftencirclemywaistwithyourrightarmadvance
yourleftfootnowwestartonetwothree —(Good evening, young gentleman,
we will now practise the polka step. Touch my right hand lightly with
the fingers of your left hand, encircle my waist gracefully with your
rioht arm, advance your left foot, now we start —one, two, three.) She
then whirled Mr. Fledgeling round and round the room until he was
very giddy, and, backing towards the door with a low curtsey, she
retired, saying, “ Good evening, sir, you are getting on nicely ; practice
the step all the evening.’'
After a few of these private rehearsals, Mr. Fledgeling was pro-
nounced competent to perform in the assembly-room. Well, he attended
the reunions perseveringly for two or three weeks, but learnt nothing,
and he found, by the conversation of the other pupils, that the I rofessor
was “ a regular humbug ” and supposed not to know one single step oj
dancing. His mode of conducting business was to give free tickets to
two or three couples that could dance, get them to lead off, and t ic
pupils had to keep their eyes open, and learn from these decoy ducks.
Mr. Fled (ding saw that he had been cheated out of his money, so
he relieved his mind somewhat by telling the Professor that he con-
sidered him “a thundering old thie),” for which he nearly “had his head
punched,” and ultimately learnt the art of dancing at a more reputable
academy.
MARRIAGE V. CELIBACY.
(To the Editor oj the Commissary Review.)
My Dear Sir, —It is with great unwillingness that I take up my pen
to reply to an article on Marriage v. Celibacy, signed “ Celibate,” in the
last issue of your wide-spread columns. I enter the arena because 1
should be ashamed if foul aspersions on the happiness of the marriage state
were allowed to pass uncontradicted and unchallenged. It would be to no
purpose to unmask the creature who has polluted the pages of your
paper, except that we should be gratified at the sight of the being who


can so far forget what he owes to woman, as to give utterance to expres-
sions and to sentiments which would for ever banish him to that utter
loneliness and isolation which in his ignorance he seems to court. I
covet not the cauterized soul, dwarfed and shrivelled like some wasted
trunk, whose attenuated limb was never gladdened with one solitary
blossom ; I envy not the taste which seems to feel the height of its own
gratification secured when it can centre all pleasure and delight
on self; the true and noble man is only happy when he contributes
to the good of others ; but the enjoyment, the great end and aim of
the life of this wretched apology of a man—this Darwinian specimen of
humanity,—seems to culminate in having his “pipe in peace.” Magnani-
mous desire ! It is the pipe ! Poor slave to one of the most disgusting
habits that ever disgraced the superior animal called man ; to make his
mouth a funnel for the exhalations of tobacco; to prefer the reeking
stench of cavendish or bird’s-eye to the elevating and purifying influence
of a wife ; the nasty meerschaum or the dirty clay to the
breath of a pure, refined woman. Oh ! height of unblushing effrontery !
Oh ! depth of sottish selfishness ! to choose betwixt woman and a pipe.
Again ; he objects to children—forgetting that, only a few years ago, his
finely proportioned frame was wrapped in swaddling clothes, and he lay
a helpless puling baby upon his mother’s breast. And this is his requital
for a mother’s love ; this his value of the home in which
he was fondly nurtured; this his estimate of all that hallowed
and peaceful enjoyment, which he must have shared within the precincts
of a dwelling where affection nestled as in a loved retreat; this his com-
mentary upon sisters, deserving love. ’Tis true there may be ill-
assorted marriages, productive only of miserable heartburnings; but
where there is true affection between two hearts, whei'e, we ask, can bliss
so complete be found. Is it nothing after the day’s hard toil, to turn
one’s face towards one’s home, and to feel that there is a place of rest
away from the din and traffic of the whirl of life; —a wife into
whose ear you can safely pour your trouble ; one who will advise, counsel,
and sooth the rough chafing of a spiteful world. Is it nothing to dwell
in the love of children; to have little ones dependent on you 1 A
great author has said : “ To tell the truth, however, family and poverty
have done more to support me than Ito support them. They have com-
pelled me to make exertions that I hardly thought myself capable of;
and often, when on the eve of despairing, they have forced me, like a
coward in a corner, to fight like a hero, not for myself but for my wife
and little ones.” Does it not fire your chivalry 1 Does it not nerve your
arm to labor when you feel that the bread you win is their support, and the
name you win will be to them a priceless heritage ? Is it nothing to
have a heart to confide in 1 —“ for the married woman is her husband’s
domestic trust; on her he ought to be able to place his reliance in home
and family. To her he should confide the key of his heart and the lock
of his store-room; his honor and his home are under her protection ; his
welfare in her hands.” What a delicious breath marriage sends forth—
the violet beds not sweeter. Honest wedlock is like a banqueting house


built in a garden, “on which the spring flowers take delight to cast their
modest odors.” Is it nothing, when laid low by sickness, to be ministered
unto by one whose tender tread in the chamber of affliction is like a visit
from mercy’s angel, whose voice is like music sweet and tranquilising, and
whose patience chases away the dull horns of pain, and makes them bear-
able 1 And it is nothing, when earth shall close upon us, to feel that
o’er our grave the children of our love shall weep, and that though dead
we live yet still in the memory of loved ones, in whose hearts we shall
not, cannot die.
How different the “ Celibate,” when sickness lays him low. The
paid nurse shall do her office ; the pipe is fast going out, and it has
ceased to soothe—its odour now is nauseous, but hungry hirelings look
with thievish eyes upon his effects. There was no music in his
life—there is no music in his death. He lived isolated—an exile from
the happiness of home—and he dies unbefriended—a stranger amid
strangers. I would not deny to man his just reward. I would not rob
him of the victories he has achieved in the fight of mind and in the rude
rush of war; but if I want to see examples of heroism, which shall
inspire me with devotion ; if I want to find the sublimity of resignation
which shall win my admiration ; if I want to find the combination of
virtues the most refined and elevating ; if I want to find a being which
in itself shall combine the grand idea of how to love and how to suffer,
my mind shall rest on woman. Take away woman from the scene of
daily life; remove her presence and virtue would soon die. All that is
inspiring and hopeful being banished, life would be a dreary solitude, and
death would be a coveted inheritance. What the sun is to the natural
world, woman is to man—his light, his life; dreary and desolate, cold
and inhuman, must the heart of that being be who could pen the article
signed “ Celibate.”
His frozen heart no kindly influence feels
’Gainst love and hope his cold hard nature steels ;
A withered soul, a cumberer of the ground—
Sure in the world one only can be found—
A very unit in the world of men,
Poor foolish elf to ere take up the pen
To write down that which God Himself ordained ;
A fool indeed he has himself proclaimed.
Our desire nevertheless is that his cold heart may yet be warmed by
woman’s love, and that he may live to make ample restitution for his
foul and unmerited aspersions, and prove that there is a state more enjoy-
able than that afforded by the pipe of the “ Celibate.”
I remain, yours truly, A Happy Married Man.
T. S.


NAUTICAL CHRONICLE.
Date. Lat. Long. Dis. Bar. Th.j Remarks,
S. i E.
June 16 45 5 28.2 80 29.96,46° Foggy weather ; wind, N.E. and calm.
17 44.42 30.48 120 30.1549° Calm and light airs from N.E.
18 45.30 34.38 16030.1547° Thick, foggy weather; wind, N. and N.N.W.
’, 1945.4038.16 15829.10|45° Cloudy and dull; wind, E., E.S.E. and N.E.
’’ 2045.3 43.37 188 29.70 43°i Wind, N. and N.W. ; passing squalls.
2145.0 45.5810129.9542°; Lights and calms ; wind, N.E. and E.S.E.
2245 2549.56 17230.1040°, Constant rain ; wind, N.E., N.W. andE.N-E.
Weekly run—979 miles.
Ship “Commissary,”
Wednesday, June 22nd, 1870.
To the Editor of the Commissary Review,
Dear Sir, —The last week shows a run of 979 miles, which, if we were in
the tropics, might be considered a good run ; but, in 45° South latitude is, to say
the best for it, very poor ; it is to be accounted for by a prevalence of calms and
N.E. winds, which have continued throughout the week, driving us far south.
We have, however, began well this week, so let us hope for a good run next.
The Crozet Islands were passed on Wednesday, distant 50 miles.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours, very truly,
F. WAGSTAFF.


Editorial Notice
PAGE.
... 77
77
80
Forte
Marriage v. Celibacy
83
Birth
83
Nautical Chronicle ...
84
Advertise ments
—
—
®to “ llcciciti.
No. 7.
THURSDAY, JULY 7, 1870.
CONTENTS.
From various causes we were unable to issue our paper last week,
but we feel certain, our readers fully appreciate the difficulties
under which we then laboured. In the storm which raged around
us it was impossible for our contributors to settle down to liteiary
pursuits. Now that it has pleased Almighty God to send us fairer
weather, we publish this number in the hope that only one more will
be issued before we reach our destination, and that, next week, we
may, from our editorial chair, bid farewell to our readers and fellow
passengers over this wide waste of waters.
FORTE.
The American humourist, Artemus Ward, in one of his most amusing
chapters, sa s s that every man has his forte, and proceeds to relate how
on one occasion, being slightly elevated, he attempted to act as hind
horse to a canal boat, and, as a natural consequence, got kicked by the
leader, and ultimately landed in the canal. Summing up, he says, “ I
concluded ‘ playing horse ’ was not my forte.” How many instances of
this “ playing horse ” do we see around us every day ! How much energy
is thrown away to very little practical purpose ! Very few of us profit
by our failures, and go on “ playing horse ” to the end of the chapter.
Forte is defined as—strong—the strong point—a peculiar talent or
faculty—that art or department in which one excels. Now every one of
us, not an absolute idiot, ought to have a forte. There is no doubt that
we possess, in an eminent degree, some one talent; it is lying donnan .
within us, only waiting to be developed and brought to light. Very few
of us do develop our talents to their fullest extent. We neglect them,
and this neglect proceeds from various causes. Some of us never attempt
anything, and go on in ignorance that we have a forte. Some are too
modest to boldly assert their power; while others, though conscious of
possessing talent, are too lazy and indolent to cultivate it.


Many of us never get fair play ; our forte, whatever it may be, is
ignored. We go to school. Does the schoolmaster endeavour to dis-
cover the forte of his several pupils 1 Not a bit of it. There is a certain
routine through which all his scholars must go. We can all call to mind
the many precious hours wasted on Latin, which, m iy-be, we hated, when
the same time devoted to figures may have made us first-rate mathema-
ticians ; the weeks given to chemistry, which, otherwise applied, may
have made many boys in after-life eminent in some department of know-
ledge ; for, in some children, forte developes itself very early. We call to
mind as we write, one of our schoolfellows, a pink-eyed, white-haired,
meek youth, always behind with his lessons, but a first-class botanist;
constantly in hot water for being untidy in his person, but a wonderful
performer with bhe galvanic battery; (indeed he had made one of these
machines with which it was his delight to administer shocks to unwary
small boys). Were this boy’s talents developed? No, —every obstacle
was thrown in his way, and he was called an idle, lazy, dirty, numskull.
When we leave school, do our parents study our forte in the choice
of our business or profession 1 In ninety-nine cases out of every hundred,
No. We are made doctors, clergymen, lawyers, engineers, chemists, prin-
ters, drapers, grocers, tinkers or tailois, not because we display any apti-
tude for these callings, but because it is convenient to put us to them.
Our father is a Doctor, therefore we, his eldest son, must be a Doctor to
succeed, in course of time, to his practice, although we hate the very sight
of a gallipot. We know it is a very difficult matter to find a profession
for the young, but it is surely the duty of parents to study the inclina-
tions of their children to a certain extent. It is mainly to this ignoring
the bent of children that we see so many instances around us of round
men hammered into square holes; —so many statesmen that would have
made first-rate generals; generals who should have been clergymen;
doctors who should have been lawyers, &c., not to multiply instances of
those most lamentable of all cases, clergymen who are totally unfitted for
their most important office, who bring ridicule or something worse on
their cloth, and who do incalculable harm to the cause they are supposed
to commend.
But so it is, and if we have given up some of the best of our lives
to any particular pursuit it seldom pays to abandon it: but, cannot we
find means of using our talents, even if we may have to depend for our
bread upon some pursuit that may be distasteful to us 1 Oh yes ; there
are thousands of men who hjve done so—we will only mention two living
instances. How many of us that have read those admirable works by
Samuel Smiles, “ Self-help,” “ Life of George Stephenson,” and “ The
Lives of the Engineers,” know that this gentleman was, when the books
were written, at the head of one of our largest railway companies, and
had hardly a moment to spare from his important duties. Look at
Anthony Trollope, the author of “ The Warden,” and “ Barchester
Towei s.” A very short time since, he retired from an important situa-
tion in the Civil Service, and received a testimonial, not for being a first-
rate novelist, but, for the manner in which he had discharged tbe routine


duties of his office. Our business position is no excuse for our neglecting
our talents, and the general excuse, no time, generally means laziness.
But it is not only in our real, solid work that we need examine our-
selves, but in our pleasures also; we must have relaxation, and in our
light amusements how often do we “ play horse V’ How many men with*
no voice distract their friends by singing %- men with no delivery who
read in public ?—bunglers who will cheat themselves, and annoy their
partners by spoiling a hand at whist I—boating men whose delight it
is (instead of sticking to their boating) to decoy unwary friends into a
gig and “ spill ” them by running against turnpike gates—(but then,
every one can drive),— and so on.
We do not think that we should devote the whole of our time to
one pursuit, but we should be careful of attempting to shine in every thing.
We should find out our forte (avoiding any matter in which our own
common sense tells us we must fail) and, having once hit upon our win-
-11 lug post, keep “ pogging away towards it, and we shall arrive theie at
last The most ludicrous aspect of the matter is, that we cannot “ see
ourselves as others see us we are offended if any one tells us with can-
dour that we have made asses of oui'selves. We put it down to want of
discrimination and lack of appreciation on their part, not to our own
brainless stupidity and want of tact.
And ladies, have you not your particular forte 1 Most certainly you
} iave —then do cultivate it. Don’t persist in squalling (we won t say sing-
ing) by the hour together, voice or no voice, when the same amount of
perseverance, and half the time, devoted to the study of drawing, may make
you creditable amateur paintei's. Girls with no “touch, dont “strum
on the piano from morning to night, when, perhaps, if you persistently culti-
vated your voices you may sing like sirens. Look at Florence Nightingale
and Harriet Martineau. These women have discovered their forte, and
have worked it to some purpose. You cannot all be Nightingales or
Martineaus, but you can assuredly find some pursuit in which you can
shine to your own satisfaction and the delight of your friends.
Let us guard against regarding our own particular forte as all in all. All
birdsarenot “soarers,” as the eagle—some are “puddlers,” like the sparrow.
The sparrow is quite as useful as the eagle j if there were no sparrows
what a jolly time of it the grubs would have. Although in our self-suffi-
ciency we may think our friend’s talent very poor, it may be far more
useful than our own.
Let us all be up and be doing—now is the time ; we are fast hasten-
ing to a land where there will be plenty of scope for us. If we have
already hit upon our forte, cultivate and use it. If we have not yet
found it, think over it during the remainder of the passage. Find out
in what way we can best shine, and then stick to it. Don tbe discoui -
if it should be in a small way, but give it fair play, and “ never
say die.” Beware of a small, mean, despicable forte. We know a fel-
iow whose forte is coloring cutty pipes. He will discourse on the sub-
met (and on nothing else) by the hour together. He regards his darlings
J ith looks of tenderest affection. He even talks to them. Avoid such
w , ~
tr iflmg “playing norse.


Let our favorite pursuit be one that will bear looking into. De-
pend upon it, if God has entrusted to our keeping but one solitary-
talent, He will demand an account of our stewardship. So let us use our
talent aright. Far better will it be for us, when the day of reckoning
comes, if we have timidly hidden it away in a napkin, than if we have used
it exclusively for our own gratification and for our own narrow, selfish
ends. If we have done this in the past, let us not do so any more ;
if we have talent in any way, let our aim be to use it for the good
of our fellow creatures and to God’s honor and glory. If we do this, as
far as in us lies, we shall not lose our reward. H. G.
A CAUTIOK
Our young friends, when they arrive in Australia, wherever they wend
their way, had better not go within 100 miles of Wagga Wagga. Look
at the following extract, from their local paper :
Police Court.
“Vagrancy. —John Williams, alias ‘Brandy,’ was charged as
above. Constable Larkins stated that he found the prisoner, at about
12 o’clock on the previous night, under the verandah of the Prince of
Wales Hotel. He was about 70 years of age and appeared sick; he
said he had been four days without food ; he was not able to work, had
no money in his pockets, and did not know where to go to. The con-
stable arrested him and placed him in the lock-up. The Bench sen-
tenced the prisoner to one month’s imprisonment, with hard labor, for
having no lawful means of support.'’
Surely this must be a mistake ; in the old, worn-out country called
England, rural Dogberrys send a fellow to prison for vmndering about
without visible means of subsistence ; but they seem to go a step further
than this at Wagga Wagga, and send a chap to quod—not for wandering
about—but for not having the means of keeping body and soul together.
Is there a poor-house in the district 1 “ Brandy" is evidently an encum-
brance. Why did not the worthy Bench order him to be smothered
between two feather beds ? Is it necessary for a stranger to prove that
he has the means of support? Does Mr. Bumble search you? Would
the Magistrate of the township, if no money were found on you, con-
sider a good suit of clothes that may be “ spouted” at “ Uncle’s” as law-
ful means of support? Will some kind friend, acquainted with these
matters, enlighten us on these points, as we are rather anxious about
the matter ?
Ccmsputicnxc.
MARRIAGE V. CELIBACY.
To the Editor of the Commissary Review.
Dear Sir, —When I espoused the cause of celibacy in the columns of
your able journal, I did not anticipate drawing down upon myself such


a passionate outburst of virtuous indignation as has proceeded from the
pen of “ a Happy Married Man.” Instead of harboring any ill-feeli
towards that individual, whoever he may be, I am devoutly pleased to
find that there is one man who considers himself happy in the wedde
state after some years of its experience. With such an instance of per-
fect contentment one rarely meets, and having now met with it, I am
rather inclined to rejoice with him, for lam not a selfish man. Because
married folks are not so happy as they expected to be, I am not the one
to exult in their misery ; I pity their misfortune, and when I wrote my
previous letter, it was but as a note of warning to others. If, indeed,
your correspondent is the happy married man he describes himself, I can
readily forgive the gushing sentiment and high-flown verbiage with which
his letter teems. But, really, he seems to have overshot the mark in his
defence of married life. The language smacks more of the theoretical
than the practical, and inclines one to the opinion that the “ happy mar-
ried man ”is a fiction. Perhaps he is some young gentleman, suddenly
smitten with the charms of a tair one, painting married life according to
his ideal, firing his cannon at detestable celibates, with the hope of raising
himself thereby in the eyes of his charmer. Or, more likely still, he is
some poor, unfortunate, hen-pecked husband, gifted in literary abilities,
forced, against his inclination and experience, by the threats of his ruler,
to lash, with his ready pen, poor, unfortunate me. A society of matrons,
indignant with the wretch who could dare to lift the veil and reveal the
prosaic realities of married life, and fearful lest his notions should
spread abroad, to the injury of their daughters’ prospects of snaring a
husband, resolved, no doubt over a nice dish of tea, sweetened with gos-
sip, to find a champion to fight their battle at any cost. And when
Mrs. Brown suggested her husband as the man, she speedily removed
the doubts expressed by some of the company as to his willingness to do
so, by declaring that she would make him do it. When the worthy lady
uttered these words, all fears were set at rest, for they knew her power
over the poor man. It was not a difficult task either for Brown ; it was
not his first attempt at writing fiction. But, whichever of these surmises
be correct matters little here.
“ If you have no defence for your client, bully the plaintiff’s wit-
nesses,” is the motto of gentlemen of the long robe, and upon this advice
your correspondent has been careful to act. Expressions strongly bor-
dering on the personal are flung at “ the creature who has polluted the
pages of your paper,” “ the wretched apology of a man,” “ the Darwinian
specimen of humanity but I shall not attempt to imitate that peculiar
and elegant style in my reply. It must be a bad cause which requires
such dust to be thrown in the eyes of spectators to blind them to the
real issue ; besides, I cannot hope to gain a victory fighting with weapons
lam not accustomed to use. I rely solely on fair argument, and pledge
myself to betray no unkind feeling to those who take up the cudgels
against me.
In my previous communication I advanced certain assertions which
the “ Happy Married Man ” has not attempted to dispute. He has con-


tented himself with hurling accusations and epithets instead of argu-
ments. The truth of my letter remains undisputed, and I have but°to
notice the sum of his reply which, condensed, is really this : “ You are
a selfish bachelor, who knows not the value of woman ; you prefer the
society of your horrid pipe to her company; you cannot appreciate the
blessing of being surrounded by children; and when, on a sick bed, you
will have to pay a nurse to tend you.” Ami selfish ? That is a matter
of opinion. If I refuse to confine myself, my thoughts, and my society
within the limits of a married existence, choosing rather to live in a
large world, and to devote a mind, unharassed by petty domestic trifles,
to labors and thoughts influencing a wider sphere, am I to be dubbed
selfish ? Is it the highest aim of life to sit down by the fireside telling
and listening to tales of daily worries, and dangling children on your knee?
If I enjoy my pipe lam not necessarily its slave. It were to no
purpose here to discuss the question of smoking; old women of both
sexes have used all their endeavours to put our pipes out by their carping
cant, not hesitating to associate the habit with the road to perdition; but
this is not the age for the domination of silly prattle. Were the truth
known, perhaps my married friend himself is no stranger to the soothing
influences of tobacco, and would as readily pen the defence of the pipe
did it suit his purpose to do so. In unmeasured terms he sings woman’s
worth, supposing me to entertain for th e fair sex a supreme contempt. I
deny not to woman the possession, in occasional instances, of the virtues
and endearing charms ascribed to her by poets. My heart is not yet
steeled to the memory of a fond mother and loving sisters ■ but my affec-
tionate remembrance must not blind my eyes. Take the stereotyped
“ girl of the period,” and ask me to believe her the concentration of
womanly grace and virtue. Can I delude myself into the idea that the
painted, false-haired model of Fashion’s folly, who finds her amusements
in flirtation and novel-reading is the one to ennoble and refine man by
her influence and society, to relieve the weight of care and sorrow, and
gladden life’s pathway ? You may get a wife to do all this, but the
chances are that you will not. Marriage is a lottery, some draw prizes,
some hopeless blanks. The picture of married life painted by your cor-
respondent reminds me strongly of the settlement of Eden as it appeared
on the plan submitted to the approving Martin Chuzzlewit. It looked
very nice on paper; a very different place he found it when he got there.
In declining days it may be a comfort to look upon a family you have
reared ; that is, if they are all such as you can be proud of. But one black
sheep will be enough to destroy your happiness, and bring the “ grey
hairs with sorrow to the grave.” Worse things may happen to a man
than being nursed in sickness by a paid nurse. The prospect of securing
careful attention in those distressing days would be hardly sufficient to
induce a man to venture on matrimony; besides every girl is not a Florence
Nightingale. My letter will not close with any sentimental peroration,
nor have I the talent to make verses on the subject. I appeal only to
sound common sense, and rely on sober fact in preference to imaginative
rhapsodies. Your obedient servant,
A Happy Celibate.


BIRTH.
On the 7th instant, the wife of Mr. Price, of a daughter.
NAUTICAL
CHRONICLE.
Long. Dis. Bar. iTk.
Remarks.
S. E.
23 45.4 54.4220129.70 41
24 45.12 59.52 222 29.50 55
Fine, steady breeze at N. W. [w., E. N. W. &N .E.
Cloudy and overcast, appearance of a change ;
Squally and heavy gusts from N. W. & N. NE..
Terrific squalls from W. S. W., thun. & lightning
Moderate gale at W., threatening appearance.
Blowing a furious cyclone, commenc. at N. N. E.
More moderate ; wind, West, hard and squalls.
25 45.6 65.54 262 29.60 50'
26 45.5 71.25 222 29.5044'
27 44.31 75.4 165 29.40 41
28 45.35 80.4 222 28.5054'
29 45.5 84.40 200 28. GO 44'
Weekly run, 1494 miles.
Ship ‘‘ Commissary, ”
June 29th, 1870.
To the Editor of the Commissary Review.
Dear Sir, —This week, although commencing fine, has ended in very stormy
weather and heavy sea.
On referring to the log above, you will see that the winds have been very
violent and unsteady. On Saturday, at noon, was the first appearance of a com-
ing change and unusual appearance. On Sunday it blew in terrific squalls from
W.N.W. to W.S.W., shifting suddenly, accompanied with thunder and lightning
during the night. Monday still an unusual appearance. Bp. m., barometer be-
gan to fall very rapidly (at the rate of one-tenth per hour) ; it fell from 29.80 at
8 p.m. to 28.40 at 4 a.m., a most unusual depression.
The thermometer rose 15 degrees in 12 hours from 41° to 56°, thus showing a
great disturbance in the atmosphere ; during this time the air was very close and
oppressive ; the clouds heavy, rolled and tufted, formed principally of cumulus.
Tuesday, it blew a violent cyclone, commencing at N.E. veering to N.N.W. and
W. S.W., the sea in a perfect drift.
Wednesday, more moderate, but the gale not finished. During the week the
ship ran 1494 miles.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours, very truly,
F. WAGSTAFF.
NAUTICAL CHRONICLE.
1 I
Date. Bat. Long. Dis - Bar. Th. Remarks.
S. J 5
June 3044 52 39 40 216 28’60 51° Wind, E.S.E. and W.N.W.; strong gale.
July 1 44'10 92- 0 104 28-40 47°! Increasing gale.
243-30 95-40 121 28-90 51°! Increasing gale, and terrific squalls.
’’ 3 43-00 99-30 169 29-30 53° Decreasing breeze ; thick weather.
” 443-20101- 3 64| j 1 Moderate breeze ; constant rain.
” 543 20103’ 4 1 902970 45°, Wind, W.N.W., with passing squalls.
6 43-59 108 15'227|29 - 50 51°; Strong gale, with light rain and squalls.
Weekly run —991 miles. I


Ship “ Commissary,”
July 6th, 1870.
Dear Mr. Editor, —Since I wrote you last, the wind and weather have been
much about the same—a continuance of heavy gales and adverse winds. We have
however, made nearly a thousand miles during the week ; it might have been
nearly two had we run any risk, which, of course, is out of the question. I think
now we shall have a run of fair winds, and hope that in ten days from this we
may see our friends in Sydney.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
F. WAGSTAFF.
[Advertisement. ]
FOR SALE, a Splendid ANEROID BAROMETER, by Hughes, London ;
warranted to make any one who possesses it nervous and miserable for
days together. It will indicate every possible change of weather; and is so
sensible that on one occasion it fell to “ rain ” owing to a quantity of water
getting into the adjoining cabin and rendering the air humid. At times it
falls so considerably, that the anxious owner fears the most terrible weather
but it only comes now and then. To promote wakefulness and lowness of
spirits, no better instrument can be found. For further particulars, apply
to the Editor of the Commissary Review.


CONTENTS.
Farewell
Dreaming and Working
Celibacy y. Marriage
Nearing the Port
Some Thoughts from the Quarter Deck
A Defence of Sea Life
Nautical Chronicle ...
PAOK.
... 85
... 87
... 88
... 90
92
98
97
FAREWELL.
No. 8.
MONDAY, JULY 18th, 1870.
In a few short days we shall, God willing, set our foot on shore,
and the Commissary Review will be among the enterprises of the
past. Editor, sub-editor, all our staff, and the generous and appre-
ciative public will go different ways, and, it may be, never met i
again. It would ill become us to be silent at this period,
a period fraught with so much interest to every one of us ; we are
not dead to those impulses which at such-a time as this must stir
the coldest heart. Our warmest gratitude we owe to that Gracious
Being who has led us safely over the trackless waste of waters, and
preserved us in the midst of dangers seen and unseen; and our
thanks are also due to that brave Commander, whose unceasing
watchfulness has inspired us with hope in times of despondency.
It has been our lot ofttimes to cross the watery main, to plough
the billow and to cleave the wave ; we have journeyed with captains
skilful, brave, and kind; but never did we meet with one more
kind, more considerate, more attentive to the comfort of his
passengers, or one more calm and collected amid circumstances
which our apprehension. We write not this article in
praise of Captain Wagstafif, but when we consider the ternhc
weather which for nearly a fortnight we encountered, _ and
remember how patient and self-possessed he was, without a single
exception, all that time, it would ill become us did we not accord
to him our thankful meed of praise. Long may he dignify the
merchant service of dear old England, and prove that a gentle-
manly bearing is not incompatible with the profession of the
British sailor. To Mrs. Wagstaff, also, our best thanks are due, for
the kind way in which she has sought to mitigate the dieariness
of a long and tedious voyage, —lengthened not through the
want of good sailing qualities on the part of our noble vessel, but


by the nature of the winds, which have been most perplexing. The
gentleman who has had the medical charge of the vessel has
endeared himself to every one of us, ever willing to administer
what aid he could to mitigate suffering; his kind and gentle
manner tended almost to make his prescriptions palatable/ We
would not forget the officers, than whom more diligent and efficient
ones we have never seen; may the time soon come when they will
be in command of Australian clippers, and nothing will afford us
greater pleasure than to shake the hands of Commanders Davidson
and Ritson. And we would not pass by the crew, when we call to
mind how ofttimes, in the midst of tempests loud and crashing, have
the sailors had to speed aloft, and, in the full fury of the gale,
amid wet, and cold, and drifting hailstones, to stow the sails and
make all fast; nobly they did their duty—ever ready at the
order of command to face the fiercest storm. And you will pardon us
if we return our thanks to the stewards (more especially to him
who is at the head of the commissariat department) for that
attention, always rendered most willingly, which we have received
at their hands. And you, our kind and indulgent patrons, you
whose smile has been our best reward, and whose approbation we
have so striven to obtain, accept our very best thanks ; be assured
we shall often, very often, look back with some feelings tinged with
regret, at the separation which is unavoidable. When we com-
menced our paper, our sole desire was to afford pleasure and
instruction—to wile away the hours which necessarily, in a long
voyage, pass somewhat tardily ; we have done our best to succeed.
If we have failed, lay the blame rather on the head than heart; we
have studiously avoided personalities, and have never sought to
wound the feelings even of the most susceptible; if, unintentionally,
we have caused a pang, we sue for pardon, and we feel assured that
readily and cheerfully we shall be forgiven. We have much to
evoke our thanks, much to knit us together ; we have been merci-
fully preserved from innumerable dangers ; we have passed
through terrible nights, in which we have looked anxiously for
morning; we have together battled with the waves; our interests
have been mutual, and now we are to part. We trust we shall ever
retain a kindly feeling for each other, and pray for each other’s
welfare. Soon, very soon, please Grod, the land which looms upon
the horizon will be our dwelling-place. Beneath the golden
cross of southern skies we shall have to buckle on our armour.
May that sign which Divine fingers have traced upon
the shield of blue above us be our crest; may we wear the
remembrance of what it suggests upon our heart; may we in our
new home copy the example of Him whose sufferings have
endeared it to us. We wish you every happiness; we trust you


will not be disappointed in your anticipations, but that the sun of
Australia may smile upon you, that your prospects may be as
bright as the most sanguine can desire, and that you may never
regret having made Australia your adopted country.
T. S.
DREAMING AND WORKING.
Nothing in the world is so easy as day-dreaming. It is a habit indulged
in by the majority of people at various periods of life, and some spend
their whole existence in dreaming. So deeply is it rooted in our very
nature, that imperceptibly it develops itself with our growth in early life.
The school-boy builds a castle after his own peculiar model, peopling it
with the creations of his fancy ; the ardent-spirited youth, bounding over
all obstacles of time and space, plants himself on the highest pinnacle of
his ambition, and revels in its glory ; the schoolgirl, over her neglected
lessons, pictures herself being led to the hymeneal altar by a rich and
handsome lover; the young ensign leads armies on to victory and fame ;
the law-student sits in judicial state on the woolsack ; and the newly-
fledged curate wears the prelate’s mitre. To lie down and placidly dream
of future greatness and ease requires no exertion of the mind, and is favor-
able to the state of physical coma engendered by a romantic brain.
In many instances, dreaming is the consequent result of indulging laziness,
and of neglecting to direct the powers of thought into practical channels.
In others it is fostered by the enervating influence o‘f trashy literature.
Perhaps, this is more exemplified in the fair than in the sterner sex who,
by reason of their different constitution and mode of life, are not equally
addicted to the perusal of sensational works. Compare the girl whose
languid existence is wiled away over the pages of modern novels with
thegirl who devotes her attention to useful and domestic pursuits. The
former will be found of a listless and romantic disposition, perfectly use-
less in a household, having no ideas beyond the questionable ones picked
up from the pages of three-volume novels. She lives in a world of love,
murder, and marriage, and to all intents and purposes is perpetually
dreaming. When the times comes for her to take the name of wife, she
may do very well for a toy and ornament, but nothing more. The other
giri is of a different stamp. As a wife she will make a real helpmate ;
her notions will be pi’acticable ; her knowledge wider, being derived from
sound standard literature, not from shallow love tales.
The injurious effects of allowing a fanciful imagination to run unchecked,
continually sketching out consummations of desire, are patentto all observers
of human nature. By so doing, instead of being workers, we become lazy
dreamers, unfitted for the active pursuit of daily duties. The hard beaten
track leading up to the summit we wish to attain, is left for the more
alluring meads of fancy. To wander about, plucking the flowers of
imagination, is pleasanter far, for the time, than steadily plodding along
the dusty, stony road that must be trodden by all those who mean to
reach the goal.


T^ a^ r n amS T-t ambition m ? st not be regarded as synonymous.
The really ambitious man, who marks out for himself an ‘ object
to strive for is not to be confounded with the man who
dremis of the object, but makes no effort to gain it. We censure the
dreamer, but applaud the earnest worker. The former proves indolent
and roving in bis character, dissatisfied with his tradeor profession
neglectful of the time and opportunities continually afforded for the culti-
vation of whatever talents are imbedded in his nature. The latter all
ns nne, is grasping at the present, turning from no obstacle in the path
out effort n V°b il! n ldl ! VIS T S ° f a S° lden future t 0 be gained with!
. f’, Sach 18 the contrast between the two characters. To sit down
matbpW l7 a S f ted time . each day > working perseveringly at classics,
’ dlvimty ’ 0r J uns prudence, or any particular subject corn-
amount preparat ; lon for tlie professions, requires no small
amount of him resolution. Consulting our own pleasure, it were infinitely
preferable to dip into lighter literary productions than Butlers’
01 Paleys in theology, and Blackstone’s Commentaries, in law!
oeir-denial must be practised determinedly. When we mark out our
denreciatp +p US j sit down and count the cost. We must not
IE dh ? u eS lymgln our way, nor forget that by patient per-
n u 6 ma f tered If we expect t 0 get along at first with
apid studes we shall make a disheartening mistake. All who have
achieved the triumph of intellect have had the same hard fight to go
thiough, and we can expect no pleasanter and smoother path to be made
lor us. On our time and energy duty will have the first claim, and every
d ri e and impediment to the proper pursuit of our object must be
laid aside. This is the discipline to be practised by those who hope for
bUbCCSS. A
V choice is ours whether we will be dreamers or workers. The
w / bounds with opportunities for us to prove our mettle. Not one
6 r? u? be Ped or neglected, and, above all, to be
1 1 ! W / f vad us llttle > and afford small satisfaction at the
r , 1 . e ’ 0 o< ? b back on a blank of years, marked with no record of
eahsed aims; while to the patient worker will come the gratification
of the harvest and finally that “Well done! thou good and faithful
seivant which will be addressed to those who have laboured for the
x 6p £irci i
C. Y.
CELIBACY V. MARRIAGE.
(To the Editor of the Commissary Review.)
My Dear Mr. Editor, —ln your last week’s issue, “ Celibate ” has again
wL°vTf US W r 1 which purports to be a reply to mine of the
oeiore. 1 will not venture an opinion upon the merit of the reply. I
am willing to leave it to the judgment of your readers, whether he' has


made out a case in favour of single blessedness. I must confess I was
rather amused at the complaint made by “ Celibate,” that I had unfairly
attacked him. I would ask, in all seriousness, "Who commenced the attack
upon the marriage state 1 Who held it up to ridicule 1 Who threw down
the gauntlet 1 Who claimed to be so acquainted with the intricacies of
married life, as to fall foul of it, notwithstanding that it is ordained
of heaven, for wise and blessed purposes ? Why, “ Celibate, who,
in his extreme humility, has taken upon himself to give gratuitous advice
upon a matter in which he has manifested a supreme ignorance.
I have no doubt there are subjects upon which this rara avis is an
authority. For instance, he may give you useful advice- upon the best
mode of colouring a meerschaum pipe ;he may be an authority as
to the cut of a coat or collar, and may be well acquainted with the most
fashionable tailor and hairdresser; but as to give an opinion upon matri-
mony, with its attendant consequences of good or evil, he cannot, from
experience, be a judge.
He talks about my being theoretical,—why I speak from twenty
year’s experience of what I know. He gives an opinion upon a subject
of which he knows nothing,—a subject on which he is profoundly ignorant.
He assumes the virtue of injured innocence, and, treats me, forsooth,
with personalities, and he declares he will show me an example in the
art of writing. Illustrious teacher ! ! Why, in the next passage, when
he suggests as to how I came to answer his letter, he hints at a certain
Mrs. Brown, and then, in a self-satisfied strain of pointless sarcasm, he
talks about hen-pecked husbands who write what they don’t believe, at
the dictation of their termagant wives. In the art of hen-pecking, I plead
an utter ignorance; and as to Mrs. Brown—the Browns _ are not upon
my visiting list. “ Celibate’s ” ready familiarity with that illustrious per-
sonage, may have suggested what he conceived to be a happy though .
He lectures me on the propriety of language, and to magnify his newly
discovered love for the sex he has so wantonly and needlessly traduced,
he parades that love by taking shelter beneath the shadow of ns own
family circle. Why, sir, he cast a shade upon the sacred character ot
home when he, without any provocation, wrote his bitter attack agains
the ordinance of matrimony. To what, in his first letter, did he i en
women—“useless and expensive dolls!” Propriety of language! exquisite
illustration ! He prefers the pipe to the society of woman, and would
rather live a selfish life than bear the expense of an establishment But,
in his last letter, he has given another reason for remaining single, an
that is, because he considers all marriageable ladies as “ Girls of the 1 enoa,
and he asks with a kind of instinctive horror, whether he is to be com-
pelled to marry one. Now either he betrays a lamentable ignorance ot
English and Colonial society, or else he has written that which he knows
to be untrue. “ Girls of the Period,” (as he styles them) are the infin-
itesimal exception, and it is a gross and unmanly libel to stigmatize
women in general because some few are pleased for their own amuse-
ment, and that of senseless dandies, to make fools of themselves, ,u
are there no Young Men of the Period ? Is the sacrifice all on one side.


Is there not a debtor as well as a creditor side to the account ? Are there
not young gentlemen who ape the manners of gentility—who take ex-
quisite pains in their getting up—to whom the cut of a coat and the
pattern of a collar is the all in all of life ] who strut in padded calves, and
well-stuffed bosoms, sheltered by a “ dickey,” twirling little canes in
fingers covered by the palest lavender kid, who quiz the girls through
an eye-glass as if they wanted to improve on nature, who
lazily in Rotten Row, or where fashion holds her
revel, in the hope that they may be not altogether unnoticed
among the myriads of mankind 1 And then, with such marked and seem-
ing modesty, he says, all women are not Florence Nightingales, as if he
was worthy of no less a gem to adorn his home. But time forbids me to
say more upon the subject. I could tread heavier, but, in mercy
and in pity, I forbear. •! would clothe my words with velvet and
speak kindly, for I feel that beneath the vest of “Celibate” there beats a
heart not altogether invulnerable to woman’s love, a heart full of o- en ial
tenderness and kindly sympathy, only wanting the finer touch of a pure
woman’s devotion to make it what God ordained it to be. I claim no pro-
phetic utterance, but I have some indistinct surmisings that the- time
will come when Celibate will renounce his vows and his opinions, and find
that a home, lightened by the smile of a loving wife, is better than the
desolate crib of a bachelor, pipe, quiet, and all, and that there is no
music so sweet as that sung by the lips of happy children. Before our
journey is over, we will exchange cards ; I will invite him to my
humble roof, where he will find that the wife only exercises a rightful
authority, which is to be supreme in all the domestic economy of the
heme—the sharer of her husband’s confidence—his counsellor and
helpmate—and more, I would express the hope that, among Aus-
tralia’s daughters, there may be one who will teach him, practically,
the follies of celibacy, and that among the guests at the ioyous wedding
breakfast, there may be °
A Happy Married Max.
NEARING THE PORT.
Our hearts are now beating high with the anticipation of reaching our
destined haven. Our spirits rise proportionately as the distance separ-
ating us from the place we long for diminishes. Instead of counting
by weeks, we now count by days and hours, heralding their flight with
gladness. More than three months have elapsed since, with sad hearts,
we gi asped hands, and with a last, fond look, spoke the choking, painful
farewell to those with whom we were called upon to part. °lf tears
coursed their way down our cheeks when we gazed on the fast receding
cliffs of dear old England, it was a pardonable weakness—if weakness it
be to sorrow at leaving the land dear to us by its historical associations,
its past and present greatness, its record of chivalrous deeds, its unstained
honor, its leadership in all that civilizes and elevates, and its noble
championship of Truth and Justice ; and dearer still to us, as the


home of those whose memories are entwined around our hearts by affec-
tion’s wreath. But it was duty that called ns to leave the land of our
birth, and we obeyed its dictates though the struggle was a hard one.
Perchance, as we took the last look at its shores, we felt ourselves
nerved for whatever should lie before us, by a resolution to work with
might and will, that we may the sooner view them again from the deck
of a “ homeward bound.”
Since that time, what vicissitudes we have passed through on our
long passage ! First of all, we had to encounter the horrors of sea-
sickness, but that is the common lot of “ those who go down to the sea
in ships.” But it is none the less disagreeable for being fashionable..
How grotesquely comical some of us looked, as we leant in the agony of
helplessness over the lee-side of the vessel 1 How hurriedly we occa-
sionally left our dear familiar friend, to gaze into Ocean’s depth 1 Our
faces seemed to borrow their color from the green sea, and to wear an
expression of utter indifference to everybody in the world ! At the
mention of any fatty substance our inner nature rebelled openly, and
our elongated faces refused to relax into a smile ever so faint, at the
witticisms flung at us by our facetious and more fortunate friends. We
heartily wished some kind person would have the goodness to throw us
overboard, to end our misery; but, no one being disposed to do so, it was
left for Time to heal us. However, calmer seas and calmer stomachs
came again, and we joined in the laugh about our illness. We have
had other inconveniences to endure since then, but we have had our days
of pleasant enjoyment as well. A good run of summer weather enabled
us to enjoy many amusements calculated to relieve the monotony of the
voyage, for which we are indebted, in no small degree, to the kind con-
sideration of our able captain.
None of us will forget the memorable morning when we sighted
Gough Island, and feasted our eyes on its Church rock, its silvery cas-
cades, its trees and mossy cliffs. To us it was as a refreshing draught by
the way, after months of nothing but sea-view. To this point, ours had
been a fine-weather voyage, beneath bright and genial skies, and now
came a change. No need to call to mind the darkened clouds, the
stormy winds and heavy billows that we have so recently passed through ;
the cyclone and hurricanes are too deeply impressed on our remembrance
to be easily effaced. But Almighty God has been pleased to bring us
through these dangers, and to give us relief after these weeks of dis-
tressing storms, and, with fairer winds and calmer seas, we are nearing
the haven to which we are bound. Already, in fancy, we hear the
warm greetings of friends, and tread on terra firma with light and joy-
ous steps. We look on verdant foliage, and stroll among scenes of rural
loveliness, revelling in the delight of Nature’s banquet. We stand
watching the soft moon as she bathes the undulating landscape in efful-
gent streams of liquid light, while, in the calm serenity of the scene,
the brightest stars seem in our imagination to be the outer lamps of an
avenue leading up to the World of Glory ! To us the foliage will wear
a richer hue, the ripples dance to gayer music, and the birds chirp more
merrily, after our being so long strangers to these sights and sounds.


Nearing port! Glad the sound to wearied mariners, tossed about
by angry seas, toyed and played with by adverse winds, and cast down
and dispirited by the ££ hope deferred ” which maketh the heart sick !
Glad the sound to others, too—to the traveller over the mighty ocean of
life. We are all of us pursuing the journey to the Unseen World.
Some are sailing along the dangerous channel, amidst the rocks and shoals,
with vessels new and promising ; others have safely passed the channel
and reached the ocean. How will they one and all weather the passage ?
Will any run carelessly on the breakers, and sink the new vessel at the
opening of the voyage? Will any, having reached the open sea, flushed
with their good run, become so reckless as to neglect all precautions to
ride the gale, and founder hoplessly 1 How many of us will reach the
haven ? However battered and weather-beaten, succour is at hand when
the Port is sighted. A Pilot will guide us through the last channel if
we are not too proudly self-reliant to accept His help. In the storms
of life, think we of the Haven of Peace; make a straight course for it
by the chart that has been left to us for the passage, and, with the help
that will be afforded for the asking, we shall make the Eternal Shore,
and led by the Light that ever shineth, pass the troubled waters to the
Port “ where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest!” C. V.
SOME THOUGHTS FROM THE QUARTER DECK.
Through the kindness of one of the second-class passengers, we are
enabled to lay before our readers two or three thoughts on ship life, as
seen from the quarter deck.
“ I have no taste for the sea. In the first place, I’m afraid of acci-
dents ; I could be pretty comfortable if I wasn’t afraid of going to the
bottom. I can’t put up with the living ; I know I get what I signed
for, and can’t complain ; but the salt beef and pork I can’t eat. Oh !
how I shall enjoy a jolly beef steak when I get to Sydney.”
“ Take it all in all, I have been very well, and don’t regret the
journey —that is in fine weather —but the sickness is awful; I did my
duty in that department, at any rate. No, I can’t describe the feeling,
but it was dreadful; every time the ship gave a lurch, it hove my inside
up, as if a fellow was inside a hoisting it up with a pykle ; I’m sure I
pewhed up twice as much as I put down. There is one thing; on the
quarter deck we was light and clean, and that is a comfort. Just
before I started, I looked over the steerage of a large vessel going to New
Zealand ; the place was as dark as a coal-hole, and I wouldn’t have gone
if they had given me a free passage.”
“ I have been very pleased with the entertainments given in the
saloon ; the ladies do sing beautiful.”
“ The only time I was really frightened was the night of the storm ;
then I thought we really was a going down ; the noise was terrible; I
wished I had been digging taters in Le’mster, but it was too late.
I was out of bed when the wave come overfilling our cabin. I just


drinks up a drop of beer and some brandy as was in a bottle; I thought
it was a pity to lose it. My wife says, come you into bed, and let us°go
down together, for I never will leave you. I runs out on the deck, and
when I sees the polemasts standing I wasn’t so scared then. But, oh !
uy eye, to see them sailors swimming about in it; oh, deal’, me ! I shall
never forget it if I lives to be a hundred years old. We was all washed
clean out of our bunks. We had to run to the saloon, where we was
very kindly treated, and where we have stopped ever since.”
“ When the ship rolled it was dreadful hard work to keep in bed ; I
held on by the wall, and my wife held on by me. But it’s much worse
now in the saloon.” (Our informant gives a comical method for making
the most of the space at command, but it will hardly do to repeat his
communication in our pages ; we can only recommend our curious readers
to imagine what they would do if they were compelled to sleep “ two in
a bed ” built for one only.)
“ I would t be a sailor if they’d pay me £5 a week ; what with the
living, and the working in the salt water, it would soon kill me. ”
“By gad, I’d rather sweep a crossing than go to sea; I shouldn’t mind
if I could go in the saloon; it makes my mouth water to see four or five
joints go down every day; I should like some of that ‘ grub;’ sometimes
its very sour.” (Think of this, ye growlers.) “But, after all, we shall soon
forget our troubles when we get on shore, and I dare say I shall be the
means of persuading a good many of my friends to come out. My advice
to everybody, go first class if you possibly can; that is the only way
to enjoy a sea voyage.” jj q
A DEFENCE OF SEA LIFE.
(To the Editor of the Commissary Review.)
Dear Sir, —Everything around me—amongst other things the announce-
ment that the current will be the last number of your paper, reminds
me that we are rapidly approaching our destined haven. No doubt,
abler pens than mine will this week write for your pages congratulatory
articles, in joyful anticipation of our once more sighting land. When the
cry of Land Ho ! resounds through the vessel, ecstatic joy will be
observable on every countenance. We shall all agree that land was
never before so beautiful ; we shall forget all our troubles and griev-
ances, and shall be all smiles and honey. “ Caustic ” will, for a day or
two, forget to burn ; the author of “ Forsaken Cries ” will press one of
the ship’s kittens to his manly bosom, and make the poop resound with
his loud cries of meat, meat / “The Happy Married Man” forgetting that
he denounced tobacco, will open his heart and his cigar case, and give to
each of his young friends a fragrant weed ! “Celibate” will renounce his
vows, and it he can catch one of our young ladies in a dark corner, will
hug and kiss her with frantic delight (if she will let him); in fact we
shall all testify our delight at the prospect of speedy release, from what
Johnson terms “ a prison with the chance of being drowned.” But sir,


you, as the guardian of the public morals, should not forget that there
has been a great deal of growling ; the principal points on which the
growlers have insisted being as follows :
1. It has been a long passage.
2. Life on ship-board is wearisome and monotonous.
3. The cabins are close and confined.
4. Owing to the terrible noise in the saloon, we cannot read, write,
or sleep.
5. People see too much of each other; the close contact brings out
a person’s bad qualities, and makes things disagreeable for all parties.
6. We have been doing nothing, and the three months spent on
board is so much lost time.
Can the six points of the above indictment be proved ? I think not,
and I trust you will bear with me while I shortly examine these grave
charges, so persistently advanced against the life we have lead on board
our good ship Commissary.”
1. Length of the Passage. I have no patience with the people who
growl on this account. Can it be helped ? Can a ship make a quick
passage unless she has good winds ? Is any one to be blamed for this
delay ? To my mind, every single growl proves the growler to be
ignorant, self-willed and conceited ; translated into plain Lnglish, it
means—l am ignorant, and cannot understand the purposes and ends of
Providence ; I am self-willed, because in my arrogance I venture to
dictate to the Almighty, and to tell Him what is best lor me ; I am con-
ceited, because I am discontented at God’s wind, and think I could make
much better weather myself.
2. Life on ship-board is wearisome and monotonous. Is it?
Are the poor people who make this complaint so dead to all the beauties of
nature that they cannot find food for contemplation in the things they see
around them ? Do they never admire the brilliancy of the sun ? the soft
radiance of the moon? the fantastic ever-changing forms and lovely tints of
the clouds ? Do they never look at the glorious waves and admire them,
one moment rising with solemn graceful swell into mountains, the next
moment almost imperceptibly receding into dark ravines and deep
valleys 1 Do they never individualize these waves ? Look at this little
fellow, dancing merrily along in the sunshine, careless and happy ; sud-
denly the swell catches him ; something calls out the latent eneigy of
his character ; instantly he is alert and full of life; no more toying; lie
has a purpose, and rushes forward to perform his mission. See
that big, blustering, white-crested bully, how he puffs and swells;
as he comes rushing up he seems to say, “ look out, bulwarks, I m coming.
On he comes in the wildest frenzy, another moment and he
will dash himself in mad fury against the side of the vessel; but just at
the critical moment, his heart fails him, and he collapses into empty foam
and spray. Is not this suggestive? have we never acted in this manner
—screwing up our courage for some object, and “ funking at the last
moment ? Do the discontented never lean over the ship s side, and
intently gazing into the water, see there the faces of dear relations, old


green fields, shady lanes, old farm-houses in the country, busy
streets in town! don’t they see a thousand scenes that, may be, they have
left for ever 1 don’t they see, too, visions of the future that, alas ! can
never be realized! Have they seen the jelly-fish, the men of war,
the sharks, the dolphin, the porpoise, all created for some wise pur-
pose, and filling their proper sphere in the vast system of nature ?
Have they thought on the wonderful trade-winds, without which the
intense heat of the tropics would be almost unendurable ? Have they
experienced rest and peace, while gazing listlessly at the nightly ocean,
during a calm ? Have they felt their spirits rise, their pulses quicken,
then anxieties and cares for the future melt away, their good resolutions
strengthen, as they have bowled joyously along with a fair breeze ? Have
they thought on their own utter insignificance, as they have surveyed the
vast body of waters? Have they watched with delighted eyes the joyous
sunsets, or the magnificent sunrises. When they call these things to
mind, will they still say that a sea-voyage is wearisome and monotonous ?
Will they own that their imaginations are so dull, and their hearts so
hard, that they have gained nothing since they left the shores of England ?
Poor mortals ! poor, indeed, if these lessons have been thrown away upon
them.
3. The cabins are close and confined. Are they ? I would
recommend those growlers to inspect the steerage accommodation of a
large emigrant ship, and then, perhaps, they will be thankful their means
have allowed them to occupy the stifling cabins of the “ Commissary,”
4. You ARE GROWLING ABOUT THE NOISE IN THE SALOON, ARE YOU ?
There is a noise in the saloon, but what of it ? Is everyone to speak
with bated breath, and walk with noiseless tread, to please two or three
eccentric wights who turn night into day, and must sleep when the other
passengers are enjoying innocent amusement ? This is hardlv reasonable
I think.
5. People see too much of each other; the close contact brings
OUT A PERSON’S BAD QUALITIES, AND MAKES THINGS DISAGREEABLE FOR ALL
PARTIES. This is a very difficult charge to gainsay. Unfortunately, ship life
has a tendency to make the selfish and covetous man more selfish and
covetous ; the hasty-tempered man more crotchety and passionate; the
sarcastic man more bitter and cruel in his sallies; the sulky one more
sulky; the bouncer more bumptious; the vain more conceited. But why
need we always look at things in their most unfavorable aspect ? Can we
not call to mind instances amongst our present company, in which the
angles in our characters, which, at first, threatened to run into and
damage our neighbors, have been fined down ? Have we not received
kindnesses where we hardly expected them ? Have we not seen the genial
and kind-hearted man and woman shine out, and impart a little of their
own spirit to those around them ? Have we not found that some people
whom at first we did not like, have improved wonderfully upon acquaint-
ance ? Be charitable, and see if you cannot put this as a set-off against
any little disagreeableness that may have annoyed you.
6. We have been doing nothing, and the three months
spent on board is so much lost time. Don’t say this, please.


THE “ COMMISSARY ” REVIEW.
Is it nothing to have a halting place in the journey of
lifel Nothing to have an opportunity of resting on our oars
fm- n season ? Nothing to have a quiet time to examine minutely your
lit to see ■where and in what you have miserably failed?
Nothing to have an interval to commune with yourself? to overhaul, refit,
and as far as possible, repair damages, —to throw away much useless dead
weight, and to steady yourself with worthy aims and good resolutions for
the future'* Is all this nothing 1 I think not. If we have carefully
examined ourselves will the three months on board the “ Commissary be
altogether^ to eat> j rink> s l ee p, and smoke just
when I please, free from the anxieties and cares you are subjected to on
Sllol °l am indolent, and hate work; I was put to it too early and took a
dislike to it. I know that it is my duty to work, and I must do it, and
when the time comes I shall not shrink from my fair share of it; but in
the meantime I am perfectly happy and contented to escape the galling
of the collar and the crack of the task-masters whip. When I came on
board I resolved to make the best of things, and am glad to say that i
have succeeded in enjoying myself beyond ray fondest anticipations.
I love the sea ! I have loved it as seen from the shore or Iron, the
deck of a fishing-smack ; how much more do I love it now I have studied
it under varied aspects ! I love it in a calm ; I love it in a breeze ; I love
it when it is lashed into fury by the violence of the gale, I love t by
dav seen bv the light of the glorious sun; I love it at night dimly lit
up^l by the soft effulgence of the moon; I love it m the morning when
some kind friend calls my attention to a new effect of light and shade ,
and I love it during the middle watch, surveyed from the mast-head.
But still I shall be glad when we land. I shall be glad
for the sake of the captain and crew ; I shall be glad for
the sake of those who anticipate meeting dear relatives and
friends • I shall be glad for the sake of those who have duty awaiting
tlnm • i shall be glad for the sake of those whose health has suffered
by the voyage ; and I shall be glad for the sake of those impatient spirits
who are anxious once more to enter the arena and have a round in the
battle of life. Yes, lam pleased, for the sake of those friends, that we
are rapidly nearing the land, but, as far as I am personally concerned, I
shall leave the “ Commissary” with deep regrot. ,
That your readers may meet with no serious disappointments , that
their reasonable anticipations may be realised ; that they may obtain and
retain health, wealth, and happiness, and that they may never spend three
months more disagreeably than they have spent the three months just
passed, is the sincere wish of
Your obedient servant,
A LOVER OF THE SEA.
H. G.


NAUTICAL CHRONICLE.
i 1 I
Date. Lat. : Long. Dis.; Bar Thr
S. i E.
ily 743.20113.9 29429. 53
„ 844.40118.15 223 29.50 42
„ 944.40121.45 15229.2047
„ 10 44.13 125.36 175 29.40 50
~ 1142.24129.47 216 30.30 54
~ 12 41.27'134.41 230 30.5054
„ 13 41.19:138.34176 30.45 54
Weekly run—l 376 miles.
„ 14140.54 140.17| 82 30.50 54
~ 15 39.41 139.42 78 30.45 57
1 O 4 14 1 £1 “ OA Urt Ort •- rj
Remarks.
29429. 53 | Moderate breeze and fine weather.
Wind, W.N.W. & W.S.W.; fresh gale, squalls
Wind. N.W. & W.N.W., veered to S.W., rain.
Wind, N.W., veered to W,, with sleet & rain.
Wind, W.N.W. &N.N.W.; cloudy weather.
Wind, N.N.W. & N.N.E.; cloudy weather.
Wind, N.N.E.; moderate breeze and cloudy.
Wind, N.N.E.; cloudy weather.
Wind, N.N.E.j light breeze, cloudy weather.
Wind, N.N.E ; constant rain.
16 39.34 141.25 80 30.30 57
To the Editor of the Commissary Review.
Dear Sir, —I will now endeavour to give you a summary of our passage, which,
on the whole, has been very protracted, caused by a constant succession of unfavor-
able winds, calms, bad trades, and gales of wind.
We left Plymouth on the 14th of April, and passed the telegraph ship on the
15th, from which, to speak in a nautical phrase, we took our departure.
On the coast of Spain the wind veered twice round to the southward, which
caused some delay; this, with indifferent N.E. trades and calms, protracted our
passage to the Line to thirty days. We crossed in 23 deg. 51 min. W., which gave
us a good offing from the Brazilian coast, otherwise, as the wind prevailed to the
S.S.E., there is no doubt we should have been driven to leeward, and had to tack,
which, to say the best for it, would have been very unsatisfactory.
The S.E. trades were lost in 16 deg. S., a most unusual latitude to lose them
in. After this calms and head winds prevailed, driving us to the S.W. across the
calm band of Capricorn. In latitude 35 deg. S., the wind proved more favorable
and gave us a fair week’s run, the only good run we had since we left England.
The Cape was rounded in latitude 42 deg. S., the easting run down in 44 deg. and
45 deg. S., where a continuance of fogs and N.E. winds detained us considerably.
After this a succession of bad weather set in, and to the northward of Kerguelen’s
Land a cyclone was experienced, which blew with terrific violence for three days,
wind commencing at N.E. and veering to S.S.W. Since I have been to sea I can
safely say I never experienced such a continuance of bad weather.
Passed Cape Leeuwin on the 7th of July in latitude 43 deg. S., after which a
fair run was made to 138 deg. E., when N.E. winds set in, which lasted four days.
We, however, beat to windward and made Cape Otway on the 17th. We were
fortunate enough to get there in the evening just in time to telegraph our arrival
to Sydney, which was very satisfactory, as the mail left Sydney on the 15th. It
will let our friends at home know that we have arrived thus far safely.
After leaving the Otway a splendid run was made through the Straits, passing
between Rodondo Island and Wilson’s Promontory, giving us all a pleasant view
of the rocks and islands adjacent. Even these bare rocks were a welcome sight
after a long sea passage, reminding us of fairer lands ahead.
After passing through Bass’s Straits, the wind proved light and baffling on.
the coast. On Thursday, July 2lst, it blew a gale from the S.E., with thick,
dirty weather, wind veering to E., N. E., N., and W. Midnight, sighted St.
George’s Light, off Jervis Bay; 3 a.m„ passed Wollongong light; Ba.m., Port
Hacking abreast; 10 a.m , sighted Sydney light-house. Thus ended a long but
pleasant passage; for, with all the bad weather experienced, I shall look upon it as
one of my pleasantest voyages, from the fact of having so many agreeable people
on board.
FRANCIS WAGSTAFF,
Commander Ship “Commissary.”
July 22nd, 1870.


FAREWELL SUPPER.
On Tuesday evening, July a farewell supper was given on board the
“ Commissary,” by Captain Wagstaff.
In the course of the evening, an address was presented to the Captain,
as follows :
To Francis Wagstaff, Esq., Commander of the Ship “ Commissary .”
Row that we are in sight of the long-looked-for Port, we desire to express to
vou our appreciation of the kindness we have received at your hands. We also
wise, through you, to convey to Messrs. Davidson and Ritson, the officers or the
ship" many thanks for their courtesy and attention.
You have spared do pains to make the voyage agreeable to us ; and your kind,
and gentlemanly demeanour, as well as your diligence and ability in your pro-
fession tend to make us thankful that we have sailed under your Captaincy. Vou
have preserved your equanimity under storm and calm alike, thus causing cheerful-
ness to pervade the ship.
With thanks to Almighty God for His kind protection, we heartily wish you
every success that the most sanguine could desire, and trust that you and Mrs.
Wagstaff may long be spared. Assuring you that we shall always take a deep
interest in your welfare, we subscribe ourselves,
Allen B. Morgan, L.R.C.P.
Emma L. Morgan
Thomas Smith, Incumbent of St.
Barnabas’, Sydney
Maria Smith
Eva Smith
Polly Smith
Sydney Shaftesbury Smith
Eliza Jane Fell
Chas. Vaughan
A. L. Atkinson
Harriet Amelia Withers
Edwin Lloyd
Henry Griffiths
John Pomeroy
Jessie A. Pomeroy
James Reynolds
John Baynton Starky
Margaret Boon
Fanny M. Owen
Jane Davin
Sarah Watkins
Samuel Price
Thomas Jones
Sarah Moore.
The following address was presented to the Rev. Thomas Smith, from
the officers, passengers, and crew of the “ Commissary ’ :
To the Reverend Thomas Smith, Incumbent of St. Barnabas', Sydney.
Reverend and Dear Sir,—We, the passengers, officers, and crew onboard the ship
“ Commissary,” desire to tender you our heartfelt thanks for your ministrations
to us during our voyage from London to Sydney, as well as for the uniform
coutesv and kindness we have experienced at your hands.
Although separated for a while from the temples consecrated to the especial
worship of Almighty God, it has been our privilege to join with the Church
Militant in dailv offering the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to Him whose
gracious mercy has brought us safely through calm and storm to our destination.
Of the manly earnestness that has distinguished your preaching of the Cross of
Christ we are deeply sensible, as well as of your constant endeavour, at all-times,
to “ speak the truth in love,”


We have also to thank you for your cordial co-peration in all rational
amusements, and, more particularly, for having so successfully discharged the
editorial duties of the Commissary Review, whose pages have helped to beguile the
weariness of a long sea voyage.
That you may long have health and strength to minister in the Church, to
Set forward the salvation of all men through Jesus Christ is the prayer of
Yours faithfully,
Francis Wagstaff
Margaret Wagstaff
Allen B. Morgan, L. R. C. P.
Emma L. Morgan
Eliza Jane Fell
Chas, Vaughan
A. L. Atkinson
Henry Griffiths
John Pomeroy
Jessie N. Pomeroy
James Reynolds
Edwin Lloyd
John Baynton Starky
H. A. Withers
Margaret Boon
Panny M. Owen
Jane Bavin
Samuel Price
Thomas Jones
Charles R. Davidson, Chief Officer
John F. Ritson, Second Officer
Arthur W. Millard, Third Officer
Thos. W. White
Alex. Anderson
C. Whybrow
Joseph Nicol
Richard De Courcy
Wm. Pratt
James Duffin
George M’Crae
Willifred Goodwin Malony
Angeline T. Semat
Jacob Jacobitza
Henry Woodlock
John Lyons
Joseph Doubett
Peter Nevins
W. Craighead
Dennis Driscoll
Edward J. Lord
Thos. Lavarty
Joseph Debutt
Chas. Britton
Fred. Davis
Eliza Whybrow
Ella Griffiths
John Sullivan
W. Lake
John Evans.
It is the intention of the passengers to have the addresses illuminated,
and a handsome sum has been collected for this purpose. A very pleasant
evening was spent, various toasts being proposed and drunk with all the
honours in particular, several gentleman speaking of the courtesy, attention,
and skill of Dr. Morgan, the medical officer of the vessel.


APPENDIX.
FAREWELL SERMON.
On Sunday evening last, a farewell sermon was preached by the Rev.
Thomas Smith, to the passengers and crew assembled in the saloon for
divine worship. The reverend gentleman has, throughout the voyage,
officiated as honorary chaplain, conducting family worship morning and
evening, and on Sundays the usual services of the Church of England.
After the sermon, an offertory was made towards defraying the debt on
St. Barnabas’ Church, Sydney, and the Holy Comm union was administered.
Following, we give a verbatim report of the sermon, the text of
which was taken from 2 Corinthians, xiii. chapter, part of the 11th
verse—
“ FINALLY, BRETHREN, FAREWELL.”
The time has now arrived, in the good Providence of God, when to
all appearance our voyage will soon terminate; it may through unfa-
vorable winds be protracted, yet we hope that ere another Sabbath
dawns, we shall be permitted to worship in temples dear to many of
us by old and loving associations; and welcome to you, who are as yet
strangers to beloved Australia. It is, in all probability, the last
Sunday evening on which we shall assemble to worship in this vessel,
and thoughts suggest themselves which one cannot, if one would, repress.
Allow me in the first place to acknowledge my indebtedness to Captain
Wagstaff, for the facility he has given for the conducting of Divine
worship, not only on the Sabbath, but on week days. To me, our meet-
ings for prayer and praise have been very sweet, they have been as green
spots in a barren waste, they have cheered my spirit when weary. I
trust they have been profitable to you, and that we shall look back with
pleasure to those seasons when we met together in the saloon of the
“ Commissary ” for worship. Depend upon it, our devotions have been as
acceptable to the Great Father, as if they had had the adjuncts of
Gothic architecture, and more elaborate music. The Lord regardeth the
heart, lam truly thankful for the opportunity I have had afforded me
of preaching the gospel of Christ, and of ministering to you in holy
things. It has been a matter of rejoicing that so many have
attended, and if any of you have profited by what you have heard, I
feel myself well repaid. I court no higher privilege than that of
ministering in the service of such a Saviour as the one revealed in the
gospel. There can be no greater honor conferred on a poor sinner
than that of being the ambassador of such a King. Oh ! that each


and every one of ns paid homage at his footstool. There are many
saddening and sorrowful thoughts, which come up at such a time
as this ; we met a short time ago as utter strangers to each other ;
we have been thrown together in very close proximity for upwards of
three months ; we have formed friendships which will, I feel assured,
last long after we are on shore ; we shall take an interest in each other’s
welfare, and I trust, pray one for the other ; we have had much to
knit us together; we have braved the same tempests, and our hopes
and fears have been identical; we are brethren in regard to the country
from wdiich we have come, and we are bound for the same loved shore.
We shall soon, very soon, be separated ; each one pursuing his own way,
each one fighting in his individual capacity his own battle. But
although we are to part,—and partings fill up a large space in life’s
wondrous history,—we shall often call to mind the hours spent upon
this vessel. For myself, I can assure you I have formed friendships which
I shall ever esteem it a pleasure to retain, and although I heartily desire
to set my foot within the precincts of my own dear church, and to
minister once more to my devoted flock, yet I shall not part from you
without regret. The friendships of earth are too precious to be thrown
heedlessly away, and I shall rejoice if I am held in remembrance by the
poorest person on the vessel. In bidding you farewell my own inefficiency
grieves my spirit ! how much have I left undone that I might have done.
I have been restrained in some sense by the fact that I needed rest for
an overtaxed brain, and the rest here has been the only period of quiet
I have had in my absence from the colony; but if I have spared myself
in labor, I have earnestly sought and prayed for your eternal interests,
and right glad have I been to see that God in some hearts has blessed
the word spoken. I hope there are some here who will date the begin-
ing of a new and better life to the truths heard upon this vessel. Am I
right in hoping that among the angels in yon land of light, where
darkness never throws its shade, there has been joy over sinners, repent
in o' in our midst ? Am I right in saying that there has been here the
dedication of the heart to God ? Immeasurably blessed will be the
remembrance of this voyage if such has been the result of our services.
Who can tell but some in this vessel who may before have refused to
listen to the voice of mercy have here yielded their hearts to Him who
wa its to be gracious? Happy will you be, if, when the flood is crossed,
the battle over, and the victory won, you are able to say it was upon
the “ Commissary ” outward-bound I was led to think about the
Crucified One ; ’twas there I yielded up my soul a captive to his grace ;
’twas there I was led as by a way I knew not, to put my trust in Him
who never sends one empty away ; ’twas there I renounced self and
flung myself upon the bosom of Him who invites the weary and the heavy
laden; ’twas there I found a rest which satisfies my soul, and ’twas there
the star of hope arose on my storm-tossed spirit. Is it so ? shall it be
so in the experience of any soul ? And if not, why not ? Do not let the
precious opportunity pass unimproved; do not let wasted moments
bring an accusation against you. Oh, while it is called to-day, while life


is yours, before the grim tyrant strike with a blow which cannot be
averted, think upon the future, think upon the last “ farewell;” for the
word suggests thoughts in connexion with our decease. Ah, how many of
us have had to say farewell to those who now are numbered with the
silent dead ; memory disentombs the loved ones, they come forth fresh
with the remembrance of the past, the closed grave opens, and we call
to mind how we have looked into a mother’s eyes and placed our tiny
hands in hers; how we have nestled in the warmth of her fond bosom;
that bosom now is cold and chilly, no longer the resting place for us;
her hand which oft has been upon our head is stiff and motionless ;
and the feet which moved with quickness to supply our wants, are now
so very still. “ Farewell !” we well remember how she smiled as life
was leaving her, and the lips became so bloodless ; we remember the
last kiss she gave us, we treasure the recollection of it as a sacred
thing. It was hard to say farewell, we didn’t realise it until they
placed her in a narrow coffin, and hid her from our sight; and ’twas
only as we saw them bear her blessed form away with sad and mournful
tread, that we realised our loss. “Farewell!” we may have said it to father,
mother, sisters, brothers, children, the playmates of our early youth;
and we too, must bid farewell to all the sweet and fond remembrances
of home; we must take the journey to the grave ; sooner or later we
shall exchange the dear delights of home for the quiet of the tomb.
Yes, however much we love the world, howsoever much it pleases us,
we must say good bye ; farewell to all old friends ; farewell to scenes so
bliss-imparting. Yes, live as we will, die we must, we cannot bribe
the last enemy; we cannot purchase life; down to the grave we must
go ; down to that receptacle appointed for the living. And
the word is suggestive of memories in connection with that dear land, the
outlines of whose cliffs are still impressed as an unfading picture on
the mind. It is no small matter to leave one’s country, a country that
deserves the love of all of us ; a country which has been dignified by the
loftiest virtues, and ennobled by the holiest deeds ; a country, the justice
of whose laws have been praised, even by her enemies, and the majesty
of whose supremacy has been manifested on a thousand battle fields. It
is something to leave that cradle in which liberty has been nursed, and
watched, and protected, until she walks erect; we all have had our
thoughts about that farewell which we uttered; it is too sacred to retail
to other ears; buried within the inner folds of our secret feelings, are
the memories perfumed with a blessed recollection of homes we see only
in the visions of the past; of loved ones whose voices we sometimes hear
in the echoes of the mind, and whose forms flit by us though we see them
not. “ Farewell ! ” we have said it to homes of happiness, which
have been saddened by our absence, and loved ones will be looking
anxiously for the writing on the envelope which tells of our safe arrival.
If your experience is akin to mine, you have seen other things than
stars reflected in the fathomless blue on which for months we have
glided.;


In bidding you farewell I would remind you of the great doctrines I
have endeavoured to set before you. I have not obtruded my
particular views of Church government; I hold that to be of
secondary impox-tance; not that I do not feel strongly. I believe
in an Episcopal form of Church government; I think it is clearly
revealed in Scripture; but of more importance are those doctrines
which are the foundation of our hope; the doctrines which impart joy
and peace to the soul. I would entreat you not to lose sight of the great
truths now too much forgotten. I allude to those involving the
total corruption of our nature; the necessity of conversion to God, and
the only way of salvation by faith in Jesus Christ. I would warn you
against any confidence in mere ceremonial observances. Ritualism is
a God-dishonoring system, it puts forms in the place of Christ; “exalts the
painted cross, but degrades the Lord of Glory;” rejoices in the tawdry deco-
rations of a miscalled altar more than in the Holy Ghost; places more
dependence upon music and paintings, than it does upon prayer and faith
in Christ; “tends to make souls sickly and sentimental; is destructive of
manhood’s noblest feelings; exhausts the life of the Church in unseemly
broils, and its wealth in gaudy and idolatrous embellishments.” It is pitiable
to hear men loudly talking about Apostolic succession, and yet denying
the doctrine of the Apostles; sitting in the seat of the Reformers, and
traducing their teaching ; seeking to assimilate the practices of a protest-
ing Church to the errors against which she protests, and distinctly and
flagrantly subverting the teaching of the Book of Common Prayer on the
subject of the Lord’s Supper; surrounding the Lord’s table with the
mystery of an undefined Pagan superstition, and elevating officiating
ministers into sacrificial priests.
I would also warn you against that Rationalism which impugns the
inspiration of the Bible ; which denies the total corruption of our nature;
and which utters doubtful whisperings about the Divinity of our Blessed
Lord. I would remind you of the necessity of holiness as the effect and
not the cause of your justification ; obedience to the commands of Christ
as imperative upon all believers ; I would urge upon you to read your
Bibles regularly, carefully, and prayerfully, and to have stated
times for self-examination. To you, young men, who are going to Aus-
tralia, allow me to say that I feel a deep interest in you. I have seen
much that assures me you have talents of no common order. Your future
cannot be contemplated without a prayer that you may dignify your man-
hood by a holy life. Now is your time for action ; I feel there is a bright
prospect before you if you consecrate your powers to God. He is worthy
of your love; soil not the escutcheon of your manhood by vices so com-
mon to the young. “ Flee youthful lusts.” May God preserve you.
May temporal success be yours, and if I can be of any use to you in the
land where you will be a stranger, I shall only be too glad to aid you.
Especially would I say a word to the crew ; you are exposed to manifold
temptations, separated from home, from friends, the prey too often of
designing men and women, who hang upon your path like blood hounds


on a track; let me earnestly beseech you to reflect, and to
secure that Pilot for your soul who is willing to conduct you safe into the
haven of eternal rest. You don’t put off making ready the anchor till
you sight land; everything here bespeaks preparation. Prepare for that
Final Anchorage when the day of death shall come. In bidding you all
farewell, I have to thank you for the kindness you have evinced towards
me; believe me, lam not insensible to that kindness. I have never
journeyed with passengers I shall leave with more regret; if our way has
not been so speedy as we could have wished, yet the Lord has watched
over us, and protected us. We have been preserved from the calamity
of a fatal sickness, and from accident to crew or passengers. Let us not
forget this; it will serve to mitigate the perplexity in relation to the foul
winds that have blown so long. “ Farewell!” and again, let me invite you,
one and all, to Christ ; to that Saviour whose love no tongue can tell.
Welcome to the Living waters ye souls athirst. Welcome poor burdened
heart to the Saviour and Sin Bearer. Welcome to mercy so unbounded,
to love so free. Oh, reject Christ, and then there will be said
farewell to hope, and peace, and joy, and rest. Farewell, ye loving friends,
the time will soon be here when we must part ; but we shall meet again,
at that great Judgment Throne where all mankind must stand. In that
day this day will be remembered ; the offers of mercy will be your wit-
nesses if you now refuse to listen; and with dread despair, as the shadow
of a never ending night closing in upon you, you will see heaven in
the distance, and a vision of the-glory of God, —but to all you will have
to say, “ Farewell ! ”
Gibbs, Shallakd, and Co., Printers, 108 Pitt-street, Sydney.


Fimcis (ililimi AMD CO.,
WHOLESALE, SHIPPING,
FAMILY GROCERS
“ NEWMARKET TEA WAREHOUSE,”
24 MMFBm mm, satbabsst,
SYDNEY.
F. Gr. and CO., in returning thanks to their numerous friends and
customers for past favors, beg to remind them that they have
always on hand a large assortment of the undermentioned goods : —•
Teas, in chests, halves, and boxes, ex “Helpmeet,” “Boyßendixen,” “Dashing
Wave,” “ Melrose/’ and “ Nil Desperandum” ; Gunpowder and Orange Pekoe
Tea, in boxes; Coffee, raw and roasted; Mauritius, Bourbon, and Java
Sugars ; Defined Sugars; Taylor’s, Epps’, and Fry’s Cocoa and Chocolate ;
Coleman’s Blue and White Starch ; Orlando Jones’ Rice Starch; Coleman’s
Dark and Light Blue ; Coleman’s British Corn Flour; Coleman’s 4 lb., 1 lb.,
and 7 lb. tins Mustard ; Munn’s Maizena ; Black and White Pepper ; Ginger,
whole and ground ; Spices, in boxes, assorted ; Pickles, Oysters, Lobsters,
Fresh Herrings, Red Herrings, Kippered Herrings, Scotch and American
Fresh Salmon ; ] and 4 Sardines ; North Wilts and Colonial Cheese, English
and Colonial Hams and Bacon ; Wkybrow’s, Copeland’s, and Morton’s assorted
Bottled Fruits, English and Colonial Jams, Jellies, and Marmalade ; Orange,
Lemon, and Citron Peel; Scotch Confectionery ; English and Colonial Fancy
Biscuits ; W. I Arrowroot, Tapioea, Maccaroni, Vermicelli, Split Peas, Sago ;
Carolina, Patna, and Java Rice ; Patent Groats ; Cream of Tartar, Carbonate
of Soda, Tartaric Acid ; Washing Powder, Soda Crystals ; Whiting, Saltpetre,
Bath Bricks, Soap ; Finest Patras Currants, Sultanas and Muscatel Raisins,
Eleme and Cape Raisins, and Dried Apples; Figs, in boxes; Chinese
Preserves; Walnuts, Barcelona Nuts, Soft-shell, and Jordan Almonds;
Vinegar, in draught and bottle ; Day and Martin’s Paste and Bottle Blacking ;
F. W. 5 Medal and Bougee Sperm Candles ; Blue Stone, Alum, Jar Salt, Fine
Salt, Liverpool Coarse Salt; Epsom Salts ; Cutty Pipes ; assorted Sauces ;
Baking Powder, Capers, Curry Powder and Chutneys ; Morton’s and Why-
brow’s quart, pint, and 4 pint Salad Oil; Castor Oil, pints and 4 pints ;
Kerosene Oil, American and Western ; Paper Bags ; Clothes Lines and Clothes
Pegs ; Brush ware of every description ; Tin Foil and White Tea Paper, halves
and pounds ; colored and Dutch stout shop Twines, and every other article
connected with the trade.
Families and others are respectfully invited to favor
F. G. and Co. with a call.


bailor Enitoitg |lok BMcr,
zn t7ie oouutqg of September to
309 6mge Stmt,
€kbeu jportjr 0f Mgitgarb Stmt,
■TMUBT*
43 j I
5a JAS. PEMELL CO., I
US; PARRAMATTA STREET, Q
gBB AND OPPOSITE CD
Mailway Station, §
GEORGE STREET, Cg
CO SYDNEY.
M 2?
S Superfine Silk-dressr’i Flour, ' CT -
Best Seconds, ./heat Meal,
Kiln-dried Corn Flour, &c.
j N.B.—BEST QUALITY; LOWEST PRICES. gf*
1 sssamammam , ■ naiwj m
d 8
53
S
Cm
Ps


General house furnishing and builders’ ironmongery;
China, Glass, and Earthenware; Kerosene Oil, Lamps, Wicks, and Chimneys;
Walker’s Horse Nails, Wire Nails—all sizes; Colonial Ovens; Galvanized Tubs,
Buckets, Saucepans, Boilers, Kettles, &c.; Cutlery, Brushware, &c., &c.; Carpen-
ters’, Gardeners’, and other tools.
Builders, House Furnishers, and all Buyers in town and Country sup-
plied vnth every requisite in the above branches.
LARGE STOCK TO CHOOSE FROM & LOWEST PRICES CHARGED, AT
A. FLETCHER’S,
NO. 67 PARRAMATTA STREET,
stbubt.
N.B.—Goods delivered in any part of the city or suburbs. Country orders
attended to, and Goods carefully packed.
FREDERICK KORFF,
SHIPCHANDLER
GENERAL STOREKEEPER,
43 NEW PITT STREET,
SYDNEY.
OLD ROPE, CANVAS, METAL, AND LEAD PURCHASED.
GEORGE GRIFFITHS,
GENERAL IMPORTER
COMMISSION AGENT,
IS Bridge Street, Sydney.


"W, CARIT,
RAILWAY BRIDGE
CEMENT & PLASTER STORES,
G-EOHGE STREET SOUTH,
(NEAR THE BRANCH BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES),
i¥©ME¥ 0
GENERAL IM 1> CRT E E
BANGOR SLATES, PORTLAND CEMENT,
GALVANISED CORRUGATED IRON, DRAIN PIPES,
Oven Tiles, Ridge Tiles, Encaustic Tiles, Marble Slabs, Marble Chimney Pieces,
Slate Slabs, Fire Lumps, Keane’s Marble Cement, Piaster of Paris, Whiting,
Chalk, Fire Bricks, Fire Clay, Sheet Zinc, Galvanised and Cast Iron Gutters,
Sheet Lead, Gundy’s Patent Cooking Stoves, Register and Half Ditto, Dr. Arnott’s
Ventilators, Galvanised Iron Water Pipe, Lead Pipe, Closet Pans and Traps,
Bends and Junctions, Terra Cotta Chimney Pots, Edging for Gardens, York
Flagging, Caithness Ditto, Sinks and Sink Stones.
White Lead, Boiled & Raw Oils, Turpentine, and Kerosene Oil.
GALVANISED TUBING, ALL SIZES AND FITTINGS
T _ MKS OSWALD ALLEN,
photographers,
/portrait Miniatuie Painters,
Crayon & P° r street,,
360 «*»»«* ***“
Sydney.
STOREKEEPERS
Liberally dealt with.
READING, SON, &BTIOTANONI
92 & 94
MARKET STREET
PARCELS
forwarded by Post, Rail,
&c., to any part of the
colonies.
MERLIN WOOLS
FLEECY DO.
KNITTING YARNS
COTTONS
EMBROIDERY
Diaphanie
Dbcalcomanie
GLASS SHADES


Car. K. SMITH,
PKACTICAL HATTER,
316 GEOIIGE STREET, THREE DOORS SOUTH OF HUNTER STREET,
Is manufacturing every description of Hats and Caps ; has also a large and well-
assorted stock of
ENGLISH AND FRENCH HATS
of the latest fashion, and is in receipt of regular shipments of the above goods,
from the best London makers.
FREBIMAN’S
(late dalton’s)
StfiL Fi#f 6ALLS&T
320 GEORGE STREET,
Photographer by appointment to His Excellency the Earl of Belmore.
Mr. FREEMAN solicits an inspection of his splendid collection of ENLARGED PHOTO-
GRAPHS, finished in oil, crayon, water color, and mezzotint. 30,000 Carte negatives registered.
320 GEORGE STREET.
W. O. REN WICK,
(FORMERLY COUTIN AND GRIFFITHS),
sc foreian gras & fpautk
W 3FL jS HOUSE,
MANTLE MANUFACTURER, IMPORTER OF GENERAL DRAPERY.
The latest English and Parisian designs in loose and tight-fitting mantles, richly
trimmed, and made from silks manufactured expressly to my order, which for
quality and durability cannot be surpassed. A competent cutter engaged to
ensure a perfect fit; and all orders executed with the utmost attention and
dispatch.
Choice Selection of Dress Materials of New Spring and Summer Materials,
in Plain and Fancy Camlets, Muslins, and Grenadines, &c., &c.
HOUSEHOLD DRAPERY OF EVERY DESCRIPTION AT REMARKABLY
LOW PRICES.
MILLINERY, UNDERCLOTHING.
86 KING STHEET, SYDNEY.


J. STEPHENSON,
(l{|rotio meter, Mlatcji $ Clock JMa
WORKING JEWELLER, & c.,
368 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY, OPPOSITE JAMIESON STREET.
English and Foreign Watches and Clocks carefully cleaned, examined and repaired. Clocks wound
and attended to by the year. Country orders punctually attended to. Work done for the trade.
J. S. MURRAY,
DRAPER, HOSIER, AND IMPORTER OF GENERAL
MERCHANDISE, SLOPS, &c.,
BENEDICT HOUSE,
111 & 113 PARRAMATTA STREET, Opposite St. Benedict’s Church,
SYDNEY.
ENCOURAGE AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY!
And Benefit Yourselves by Using
mm CQUHHIAL ©iWilif*
Which is the best remedy ever offered to the Australian public fo” the cure of all
Old Sores, Eruptions, Burns, Scalds, Sore Heads, Inflamed Eyelids, Blight, Bad
Breads, Abscesses, Ulcers in Legs or elsewhere, Tender Nipples, Wounds, Cancers,
&c., &c. In lid pots, Is. each, to be had at all Chemists and Storekeepers, and
at the stores of the Proprietor, where also may be had HENRY’S CELEBRATED
WORM POWDERS.
J. HENRY & CO., Wholesale and General Chemists,
792 GEORGE STREET SOUTH, SYDNEY.
2SEn , iliMP@f) WlMta®
WEEKES’ INFANTS’ SOOTHING POWDERS, for Children cutting
their Teeth. — This really excellent medicine for preserving the health of
Children during the period of Teething, has been tested for many years in New
South Wales. They are confidently recommended in all diseases incidental to
Children, such as Scarlatina, Convulsions, Native Pock, Thrush, Measles, &c., and
from the mildness of their action and soothing properties may be given to children of
the most tender age without fear or inconvenience. Be careful bo ask for “ Weekes’
Soothing Powders,” as base imitations are being sold by unprincipled persons. Sold
in Is. packets of six powders ; six packets post free to the country.
NICHOLAS WEEKES, FAMILY AND DISPENSING CHEMIST,
101 PARRAMATTA STREET, SYDNEY.


T. FISHER,
LADIES’ AND GENTLEMEN'S
BOOT AND SHOE MANUFACTURER.
176 PITT STREET,
BTBHST.
H. S. BIRD,
PROVISION MERCHANT,
CIRCULAR QUAY, SYDNEY.
BEEP, PORK, PRESERVED PROVISIONS, GROCERIES, &c.
IN BOND:
SPIRITS, WINES, REER, TOBACCO, CIGARS, SUGAR, TEA AND COFFEE.
JJUBSOH €€)MMT.
W. SMITH & CO.,
Wm|s and JaMt JIMf a,
279 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY.
E. BECKIKEAN'M,
CHRONOMETER, WATCH MAKER,
•XXS'TOT’EBXaX.XSSES,


DAVID JONES & CO.,
OUTFITTERS,
(vfitmiltT and vfitifnisltinjj Jlirapm,
345 & 347 GEORGE STREET,
X BA.RRACK ST.,
S T 9 it S T,
AND
BASINOHALL STREET,
LONDON.
G. WILLIAMS,
IBONMON QBB,
MS P,AMIAMAggI
SYDNEY.
White Lead, Oil, Turps, Varnish, Glass & Brush ware.
COWAN & CO.,
PAPER MAKERS
AND
WlOMmi CTMTOQIBBSSo
12 BARRACK STREET, SYDNEY.


The WANZER
Jlming IfliUtltinc Comptir
Have received the highest Awards in every Exhibition in which they
have competed, including among others :
The ONLY PRIZE
AT THE
INTERCOLONIAL EXHIBITION, 1870;
THE HIGHEST PRIZE AT
THE PARIS EXHIBITION OF 1867,
See Illustrated London News, December 7, 1867,
THE DUDLEY INDUSTRIAL SHOW,
THE YORK FINE ART EXHIBITION,
THE GREAT CENTENARY SHOW,
AT MANCHESTER IN THE SAME YEAR.
At the recent great trial of Sewing Machines, held in America in
September last, they obtained three First-class Awards for
THE BEST FAMILY OR DOMESTIC MACHINE,
THE BEST EMBROIDERING MACHINE,
THE BEST MANUFACTURING MACHINE.
REASONS WHY THE
Wiiiif liilSiii
Are preferable to all others.
1. They are remarkably simple in their construction, a child can operate them and
understand their mechanism.—2. They are sure in their operation, finishing the work
in a uniformly perfect manner,—3. They make a light lock stitch, alike on both sides of
the work, which cannot be ravelled —4. They stitch, hem, fell, cord, braid, bind, gather,
and tuck. —5. They sew equally well the lightest and heaviest woollen fabrics.—6. They
sew over the heaviest seams without changing the tension or breaking the finest thread.
—7. They use any number of cotton, thread, or silk, directly from the spool.—B. They
run very easily.—2. They are not liable to oil the dress of the operator.—lo. They do
not form ridges on the under side of the work, nor ravel out, nor are they wasteful of
thread, as is the case with double thread chain-stitch Machines.—ll. They are capable
of doing a greater range of work than any other Sewing Machine.—l 2. They gather and
sew on a band at the same time, which cannot be done by any other Machine.—l 3. Hems
aud fell-seams are turned down by the Machine itself, as the sewing is done.—l 4. Bind-
ing is fixed on by the Machine at the same time as sewn.—ls. Cording placed in by the
Machine.—l 6. Braid is fixed on by the Machine, and any pattern may be worked with
the greatest ease.
The small appliances and contrivances in connection with the Wanzer Machine,
which give it advantages over other Machines, are so numerous that they cannot be
named in a circular, and must be seen to be fully appreciated.
GIBBS, SHALLARD, A CO., Sole Agents,
108 PITT STREET, SVI»\KV.


BY APPOINTMENT PURVEYORS
To His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, K.G., and Ilis Excellency the Governor
PEATE & HARCOURT,
GROCERS & «I\’E KERCHiNTS,
258, 260, AND 262 GEORGE STREET,
SYDNEY.
JOHN EXTOKT,
TAILOR, &c., &c.,
Respectfully invites an inspection of the NEW GOODS selected by himself dnring his recent visit to
Europe. They are of ihe best poasible description, having been purchased frrm the first London
and French houses. .
The facilities now at his command for the selection and importation of Goods, and the arrangements
made with some of the leading West-end tailors for trade information, etc., enable him to make
up Garments, including
Riding Habits , Uniforms , Robes , Liveries , &c.,
2 style quite equnl to the first London houses, nnd nt prices most modemt© for first-clnss articles.
301 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
JAMES JOHNSON,
saisia, & wfUffia,
225 GEORGE STREET,
CORNER OF CHARLOTTE PLACE,
Bata>mro>
EVERY ARTICLE SUPPLIED ON THE MOST REASONABLE TERMS.


aub bonbon aub 6lobc
INSURANCE COMPANY.
INVESTED FUNDS - - - £8,080,000.
ANNUAE INCOME EXCEEDING - £1,500,000.
The Board are prepared to receive applications for insurance against
Fire upon—
BUILDINGS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
FURNITURE
STOCK-IN-TRADE, &c.
WOOL (in Bales in Sheds, on Stations)
Which will be dealt with upon Liberal Terms.
Ufa BSPABfBVi
Attention is particularly directed to the advantages which the Company holds out
to intending Assurers—including the GUARANTEED BONUS SYSTEM, under
which lai'ge additions are periodically made to the Sum insured, with the option of
FUTURE REDUCTIONS OF PREMIUM, varying from 33 to 44 per cent.,
according to age.
No liability of partnership is incurred, the Bonuses not being contingent upon
profits.
POLICIES are protected from the operation of the INSOLVENT LAWS,
under the Act, XXVI Victoria, No. 13.
VOLUNTEERS are permitted to be engaged in active service within the
Colony in which they are enrolled without extra premium.
ANNUITIES , AND ENDOWMENTS OF CHILDREN. ,
Granted upon P'avorable Terms.
The Numerous Branches of the Company and a System of Agencies so
extensive, that in no part of the world is it unrepresented, afford peculiar facilities
to the Assured for Foreign Travel.
The Life Reserve now amounts to ,£2,183,000.
■ >. OQO { .■ (W.. _
Forms of Application for Fire and Life Insurance and
P rospectuscs with crery information may be obtained from
A. STANGER LEATHERS,
Resident Secretary.
Margaret Street, Wynyard Square.


PERRY BROTHERS,
IMPORTERS
92 & 94 KING STREET,
No. 2 BANK COURT,
AND AT
jfl
is.—
General y(f!ardiou.'icmint,
SILKS, DBAFKK IT,
FAITCY GOODS,
13 GRESHAM STREET, LOISriDOIT.
