

* Np
ALU
THE j
U ■•
A STORY BOOK FOR BOYS AND GIRLS u <


1
; • *
i . i
-
- •
T ** •
• *
’.J
- , s 7'- , t »i . r \
~i * l
> - ,/• •j .')*■ ;...
/. • ■
‘ 1
1 , •
■ , ■- i *■ )
■ * » #' ■ .
» -
c
/. • V 1
! . 1 )
I-
:■ ■
■ • . 1
4 ’ '
’ ♦ 1
| *
i
1 # V J J
»
1 ’
i
\
A
i ' • V
J ’ V.' * r y
.
' ) A
•*
* ; ; *. .
, " *i
' r-
)
'
> »
H
* ‘ * V
*
1
V 1 *
A
t
%
•/
"f
/■ i
J St 0 1
SI
V s
/
*
•
■> • , i
i,
• /;
•) *
, W
, *
, .1,
j « r >
• i •
V*' 7 >t
• .
i # - .
!
1 ’ L
t
•
..**■».} J
> • . > 1
1 ' « . -
'
' . (
«• V. - .
f - 1
• • ' ' ,
J
1 ? *
’• . - . •
i
f
4 '■ • ; .*
*
*
• • i
‘ *•
. \ r ' I ,
• -. > * 4. ’ *
•* ti i
>
.4
*
' ' ’ ‘ , ’ ,
1 * • . ' • ' -*> . • .
X* i ■
■' n
L ‘ •,
F .• • .
*i
> ( * *•
• 4
. - *- ,
\ • • •
•
■ > *
v 1
•» • -}x‘ 1 » "i . •
: < •
- »■ ' 1
•
• i I
♦, V 1 ■ /■
1 *
• ' ■ ,• , -
•
/'I
V V
'
■ U »"*■


H r> J/i f ii'" > "u\i\ i'"\\\\\
Henry Allan
CHAPTER I
A S Tortoise came to the winding path which led from the stream to The
Hut, the sun had just set. He was glad, for he liked to look at the evening sky at
sunset. Then the dark branches of the pines, fringed with black-green needles,
tried in vain to bar the glory which streamed in from the west. He liked also to
gaze at the strip of cool apple-green near The Hut, as it lay beneath a flame of
living gold. And then he would stare at the sky, which was stained with colours
never found on earth: dragon’s blood, rainbow rose, and crimson lake. There are
not names enough for the tints which showed in that winter sky.
As Tortoise walked slowly along the darkening path that led to supper, fire-
light, and laughter, he could hear the song of the wind in the pines and the blue-*
gums. And he could see the shadows of the trees lying on the ground like pools
of jade. He stopped and watched the sky as it dimmed to a darker orange, and
at last to the black-violet of the striding dark. And faint and far-away he heard
the hoot of an owl.
Registered at the G.P.O , Melbourne, for transmission through the post as a book.


Tortoise smiled to himself in the dark. It was a smile of perfect happiness
that curved his lips there among the trees that he loved. With his eyes still intent
upon the beauty of the sky and the trees, he thought of all the joys that were his.
He thought of his happy, carefree life with his good companions as they ranged
the Forest, fished and swam in the stream, and ate and slept in that delightful
home they called The Hut. Could anyone wish for more? Of course they couldn’t.
He could not think of anything else that he wanted, except to go on living in this
happv Forest for ever and ever.
Poor Tortoise! There was no one there to whisper to him that soon, very soon,
he would scoff at his way of life in this Forest that he had loved so much. And if
some fairy had slipped out of the scented paper-bark shrubs that fringed his path,
and had so whispered to him, he would not have believed her. Indeed, his love for
the life he lived was so great that he would not have listened to such nonsense, not
even from a fairy.
It was a night of stars. Directly above the stone chimney of The Hut they
swung, gleaming like jewels. And as Tortoise stumped along, the flare of star-dust
showed through the tree-tops, filling his eyes with wonder.
With the coming of the dark the wind whispered mysteriously to itself among
the trees, sighed, and was gone. Did it sigh because of the sadness that would fall
upon the happy band of animals on the day that Tortoise fretted to find a way of
escape from the Forest?
But Tortoise, with his eves lifted to the stars, was blissfully unaware of anything
but the fact that he was very happy and getting hungrier every minute. He sniffed
the soft breeze that had sprung up for the smell of cooking, for he knew that Hilda
Roo would now be very busv with her pots and pans. For a minute or more he
allowed visions of delectable food to float across his mind. He knew that for a
hungry animal in need of nourishment there was no better cook in the world than
Hilda Roo. Weren’t the animals forever singing her praises, even if they some-
times sang a little out of tune? Only last week Rabbit had snng, "For Hilda’s a
jolly good cook.” and they had all joined in until Hilda had to shoo them away
from the kitchen.
Yes, the animals were forever telling Hilda Roo what a fine cook she was.
And on their birthdays, and especially on Hilda’s, they shouted this compliment at
her with their mouths full of birthday cake, paved so thick with pink sugar icing
that they had to bite very hard to reach the cake beneath.
The sound of laughter and gaiety was growing louder now, as Tortoise got
nearer to The Hut, reminding him that in a few minutes he would step into the tide
of happy talk and lusty singing that flowed our through the open door into the fast-
fadmg day.


,Z S */i tJjTjWilHfljKgrVt* ' " v SPW^i^'V<f. ,«SnB»* '* i s^SL
" ~ ~ ‘ _~-• ■ i *i .-»■' lla* .
“As Tortoise stumped along, the flare of star-dust showed through the trees


Tortoise wondered if his friends at
the fireside were looking at the clock, and
saying "Isn't it time that dear old Tor-
toise got back?” Or better still, "What
do you suppose has detained our clever
young friend?” For Tortoise was proud
of his youth, or, as Robert Roo put it, he
was proud of his vigorous young tortoise-
hood.
Tortoise hoped that they were think-
ing about him. After all, it was nice to
be missed. But more likely, Numbat was
talking about himself and leading the
laughter at his own jokes. That was like
Numbat —talking and laughing incess-
antly, and nearly always about himself,
when the other animals wanted him to
talk about them. But he had a kind and
generous nature, and so nobody minded
very much just because he did most of
the talking.
“Where have you been, Torty?”
At the door of The Hut Tortoise paused and breathed deep the breath of the
Forest. It was made up of sky-air, star-shine, and the sharp fragrance of a sweep
of pines and blue-gums. With it he breathed in that peace and joy which all had
found in the Forest. Then he stepped into The Hut.
Cries of "Where have you been, Torty, old chap?” and "What kept you so
late?” greeted him as the animals crowded round him and made room at the fire of
blazing logs of laurel.
At last, when he could make himself heard, Tortoise explained that he had
gone to visit a cousin who lived in another part of the Forest.
"Why doesn't this cousin of yours come and stay with us,” asked Rabbit, who
loved company.
"If he stays with us, he won’t be able to use his new kitchen, and he just can’t
bear the thought of anything going to waste,” said Numbat, who liked to answer
questions addressed to other people, because he thought he could answer them much
better than they could.
"Nonsense!” exclaimed Robert Roo. "Torty’s cousin is busy writing a book; that’s
why he would prefer to live alone. If he were living with us, he’d have to stop


writing and listen to Numbat talking. And Numbat is always talking, except when
he’s asleep.”
All the animals laughed at Numbat, and Numbat laughed also, and said in a
boasting kind of way that he talked in his sleep, too. And it was so annoying not
to hear what one said in one’s sleep.
"But we were not talking about you, Numbat,” protested Robert Roo, "we were
talking about Torty’s cousin.”
"But I was talking about myself, replied Numbat. "There’s nothing I enjoy
more. You remember what I said last week. . . . ’
That was as far as Numbat got. Robert Roo reached down and hoisted him
up to the table and gagged him with a serviette.
"Now, Torty, old fellow,” Robert Roo said kindly, "What sort of book is it
that your cousin is writing? Is it a history of the Forest?
"Nonsense,” spluttered Numbat, who had managed to wriggle his face clear of
the serviette. "Torty’s cousin is writing a book about me.”
There was a sharp scuffle, and Num-
bat was silenced with the serviette once
more.
"No; it isn’t a history book my
cousin is writing. It’s something far more
exciting,” Tortoise informed his friends.
"Is it a book of verse?” piped
Koala.
"Poetry is not to my taste,” squeaked
Numbat through the gag of the serviette.
"This book my cousin is writing is to
everybody’s taste,” said Tortoise proudly.
"It’s a cookery book.”
At this there was a joyful shout, and
Robert Roo took his paw away from
Numbat’s mouth, so that that irrepressible
little animal could shout with the rest. In
the general rejoicing Robert Roo took hold
of Numbat with one paw, and holding on "Numbat was silenced with the serviette"


to Tortoise with the other paw. the three merry animals pranced round the room.
The rest of the animals capered along behind them, laughing happily.
Then Robert Roo stopped dancing and called for silence. ''We are all delighted
that Torty’s cousin is engaged upon an Important Work,’’ he said. "Indeed, it is
a great honour for the Forest,” he added. "So let us give three cheers for Torty!”
After the three rousing cheers had rattled the rafters, Tortoise called out as
loud as he could: "It's my cousin you should cheer, not me. After all, he‘s writing
the book, isn't he?”
"But you’ve helped him by giving him a lot of recipes. You can't deny that,
can you?” called out Numbat, just for the sake of saying something.
Tortoise was just going to protest that he hadn’t done anything of the kind,
when Hilda Roo rattled on Robert Roo’s drum with a potstick. That was the signal
that supper was ready, and the hungry animals scrambled into their places at the
table, and for a time the writer of the cookery book was forgotten.
All held knives and forks upright, like swords at salute, while waiting for Hilda
Roo to place the hot food before them. And when the ham and eggs, and great
stacks of hot cakes, and cups of strong, steaming coffee were actually in front of each
hungry animal, no time was wasted on words. The kerosene lamp and the flickering
Are threw light over plump, weather-browned faces that bulged from too-generous
mouthfuls of food. Strong, hairy paws lifted steaming cups, balanced halves of eggs
on forks and thrust them out of sight; sliced off slabs of butter to make a golden
spread on plate-size hot cakes; and all munched happily.
Now on this moon-drenched night an animal stood watching The Hut. He was
a Toad and a vagabond. He rested his paws upon his tattered umbrella, for he was
a fat Toad, and walking always left him out of breath. He wore a brown coat,
which was tattered and torn, and flannel trousers mud-stained and too tight for him,
and a bowler hat that was faded a sickly green. The coat was wrinkled across the
back, and two pads of flesh bulged behind the arm-pits. He had a large, flat face.
His eyes were shifty.
He breathed quickly and audibly and turned his head from side to side as he
waddled towards the window of The Hut. Because he was so fat he always turned
his head and not his eyes to see w’hat he wanted to see.
Now what he wanted to see was what was going on in The Hut, for he had
heard squeals of laughter and the sound of frolic. And then the banging of a drum,
followed by a sudden scuffle of feet. Then silence. So he tried to step quietly to
the window and peep in. What he saw when he reached the window and looked in
made his little eyes shine with a greedy light. He saw the animals making short
work of surprising quantities of hot food. And one of the animals, who appeared
to be the Housekeeper, carried the food from the fireplace to the dining-table.
Toad’s mouth watered at all the food he saw. So he hobbled to the door.
which was closed, and knocked. He could hear the solid thump of a kangaroo s tail
as Hilda Roo hopped across the room to open the door.


tfci_ j I f , at
'■ 7SSg$. •■*“ yja- i ? p r
“Toad’s mouth watered at all the food he saw’


CHAPTER II
THE STRANGER IN
THE FOREST
1 w HEN Hilda Roo opened the door,
tf Toad's wide, white face curved into a
| smile. He raised his faded green bowler
$ hat, and said, "Good evening, I’m afraid
I’m lost. Could you give me some supper
and shelter for the night?”
"Certainly,” Hilda answered. "Come
in and share our supper and make your-
self warm at the fire.”
Toad’s eyes were strangely gleaming,
as he walked into the room. Rabbit giggled
and blew his nose loudly to cover up his
shyness. But Robert Roo, and Numbat,
‘‘He pushed his plate away at last”
and Rover, who had been brought up as a sheep dog, made the stranger feel at home
at once. Not that Toad needed anyone to help him feel at home. He always used
other animals for his own ends. There was only one thing in the world important to
Toad and that was Toad. So you can see that he was not a nice animal at all. In
fact, he was a nasty animal; but he pretended to be nice if he could thereby make
himself more comfortable.
Tortoise looked at Toad very hard. He studied his clothes and thought that
Toad must have travelled a great deal. Between mouthfuls of food, Toad was talk-
ing of all the strange things he had seen in the world beyond the Forest. As Tortoise
listened to him, he thought that strange a ties must be very exciting. Toad saw that
Tortoise was very interested in what he was saying; so he made up more exciting
things and said them in his most important manner. The animals were very im-
pressed, especially Tortoise.
As he bit into his third helping of hot cakes and honey, Toad thought rapidly
that is, rapidly for a toad, who was not a quick thinker. "This place would suit
me nicely. Plenty of food and some one to wait on me. I could be as idle as I
wished here, and nobody would be rude to me, because they are all simple animals.
I’m much cleverer than they are. So I’ll stay and be their leader.”
He pushed his plate away at last, yawned, and said: "I hope you’ll excuse me,


but I’m very tired. I think I’ll go to bed now.” And he slid off the stool and
waddled over to Tortoise’s bed near the window and climbed on to it.
'Ts this the bed I’m to sleep on?” he said. It’s very cosy; I’m sure to sleep well.
Good-night!” And he very coolly lay back on the pillow and covered his face with his
old bowler hat, to keep the light out of his eyes.
The animals looked at one another. You could see that they thought that
Toad’s going off to bed like that was very strange. And on Tortoise’s bed, too!
They all looked at Tortoise, for he was a great favourite with each of them. They
intended to say how sorry they were that his bed had been taken from him, and
would he mind sharing one of their beds. But to their surprise, Tortoise was staring
into the fireplace with a far-away expression on his face. And when they pointed out
to him that Toad had his bed, he merely smiled in an absent-minded sort of way
and went on staring into the fire.
"Well, we must give Hilda a hand with the dishes,” Robert Roo said glumly,
as he looked at the bed where Toad was snoring noisily.
The animals were strangely quiet as they helped to clear away the dishes and dry
them after Hilda had washed them. Even Numbar seemed to be at a loss for words.
And each time he looked at Toad lying asleep in his clothes on Tortoise’s bed, a slight
frown flitted across his face. He could
not understand why Tortoise didn’t frown
too. But he did not yet know that Tor-
toise had been enchanted by Toad’s
account of the world beyond the Forest.
But as they sat by the fireside, one by
one these long-time friends began to yawn.
Then they got up drowsily and dragged
their beds into the circle of heat thrown off
by the fireplace. Tortoise undressed him-
self and pulled on his new suit of pyjamas,
although he was not sleepy. Then Robert
Roo laid the fire for the night. First he
put on three pine-knots. Over these he
piled logs of oak and pine and lengths of
blue-gum, which would burn sullenly for
hours.
Almost immediately all the animals
except Tortoise, fell asleep to the soft
whispering of the flames.
“He went on staring into the fire’ f


Tortoise found that he could not go to sleep; his head was filled with pictures of
strange cities. So he got up, and after putting on an overcoat, went outside.
Outside the night was cold. Clouds had covered up the moon and the stars. Dark-
ness had settled over the Forest. And Tortoise remembered how he used to be afraid
of the dark until Hilda Roo had chased his fears away with a poem, which she
recited in a sing-song voice. He repeated three or four verses of the poem to himself.
This is how they went;
The Dark is kind and cosy;
The Dark is soft and deep;
The dark will pat my pillow
And love me as I sleep.
The Dark is smooth as velvet,
And gentle as the air,
And he is good to animals
And people everywhere.
The Dark can see and love me
Without a bit of light.
He gives me dreams and resting:
He brings the gentle Night.
God made the Dark, so Daytime
Could close its tired eyes
And sleep a while in comfort
Beneath the starry skies.
No longer afraid of the dark. Tortoise set out for the thickets on the lower slopes
of the hillside. Just then the moon peeped out from behind the hurrying clouds, and
Tortoise saw that rain had fallen. A few drops still pattered upon the leaves of
the trees, where they sparkled until the moon hid itself behind a bank of clouds.
Tortoise found the moon showing among the black tree-trunks like a bowl of
frozen gold with a big piece bitten out of its rim, probably the work of the Little
Bear, who swung low in the sky with a peculiarly bright, satisfied look on his face.
But to-night new thoughts stirred in the head of Tortoise. Although they had
not yet taken the place of his happy thoughts about the Forest, these new thoughts
jostled the old thoughts, as if they were trying to push them out of his head altogether.
And just now they were making room for themselves in a manner that would have
been most disturbing to the peace of mind of all the residents of the Forest.


" chased
with a Docm” ' 1 Irr' I
“Hilda Roo had chased his fears away
with a poem”


'
Sf3S t*.> j J I
|hB figSt
“His head was filled with pictures of
strange cities''
If only Toad had not described the
wonders of the city! Tortoise had never
, dreamed that such wonders were to be
seen anywhere in the world. And when
Toad had spoken of the city at night,
which was so bright with its thousands of
coloured lights that the stars seemed pale
by comparison, Tortoise had listened
wildly excited. And Toad had said too
that the city at night was like a fairyland,
only it was more beautiful than any
fairyland could ever be. There were
coloured lights, high up on tall buildings,
that pricked the night with golden fire as
they spelled out words, one letter at a
time, and then vanished for a moment,
and started all over again.
What these magic letters were Toad
did not say. Indeed, he did not know, for
he had never learned to read. But he never
admitted that he couldn’t read. In fact,
he always stoutly insisted that he was a very clever animal to whom reading and
writing were as easy as eating a slice of chocolate cake.
A soft wind whispered in the dell as Tortoise walked slowly among the oaks
and elms. But what was that sound? Some one was padding along behind Tortoise;
in fact, there was probably more than one animal, for there was a ■ thumping sound
and a lolloping sound and the sound of an animal lightly trotting.
Tortoise stepped behind a she-oak and kept very still and waited for whatever
it was to reveal itself. Or rather, to reveal themselves, for, to Tortoise’s amazement,
he saw Robert Roo, Rover, Numbat and Rabbit moving along in single file through
the trees.
Suddenly they stopped and huddled together, whispering. But Tortoise could hear
every word that was said, because they had stopped beneath the oak tree behind which
he was hiding.
"Where could he have got to?’’ asked Numbat. "One second I saw him, and the
next second he had disappeared.’’
"Do you really think that Tortoise was walking in his sleep?” exclaimed Robert
Roc.


"I don’t know,” said Numbat. "But Ido know that I was walking in my sleep
until we reached this dell. You know, Roo, you roused me out of a beautiful dream
when you pulled hard at my ear and shouted something about Tortoise not being in
bed.”
"I didn’t pull your ear hard at all, and I didn’t shout. Toad’s snoring woke me
up, and I looked around to see in whose bed Tortoise was sleeping. And he wasn’t in
any of the beds; so I whispered to Rover and Rabbit and . . .
"And shouted to me,” Numbat interrupted.
"Nothing of the sort,” replied Roo. "I admit that you were hard to wake up;
I don’t think you are quite awake yet.”
Before Numbat could reply, he coughed, just as if he were going to make a speech.
The animals jumped; they had not expected a sudden noise so close to them.
Tortoise suddenly stepped out from his hiding place behind the tree, and said:
"What brings you down here to the dell at this late hour? Don’t you know that
it is time that all nice animals were in bed?”
"My dear Tortoise,” replied Numbat in his most superior tones. "Do you realise
that by going out on this midnight ramble
of yours without saying a word to any-
body, you have caused me a great deal of
anguish of mind. In fact, I have been
dreadfully worried about you. In future,
will you please let me know when you
intend to set out on an expedition in the
dark, so that I can lock the door and
keep you inside?” But do tell us what
made you go out to-night. It must have
been something very extraordinary.”
"Perhaps Tortoise has come to watch
the fairies dancing,” said Robert Roo, who
was very fond of Tortoise and of fairies.
"Now, that's what I call a very
reasonable explanation,” Rabbit com-
mented.
"Well, Tortoise, old chap, let’s have
this out at once.”
“Suddenly they stopped and
huddled together, whispering’"


"Will you be quiet. Numbat! "Any one would think that you were a dentist
and that Tortoise was going to have a tooth out. And you are not a dentist, Num*
bat, although you sometimes do make a bad impression,” squeaked Rabbit.
"Why make all this fuss because an animal who wasn’t sleepy goes for a walk
alone in the dark and thinks about things." answered Tortoise. But, speaking of
fairies, weren’t you, Roo? don't you think that we might steal into Fairy Glade,
now that the moon is shining brighter, and wait and see the fames dancing there?"
"Yes; let’s all go to the Fairy Glade to see the fairies dancing," replied Roo glee-
tally. And before Numbat could protest, the animals, led by Roo, who jerked Num-
bat along by holding on to his ear. scampered off to the glade of the fames.
There, they hid behind a she-oak and stared fixedly at a moonlit patch of flower-
decked grass, softly breathing lest they put to flight the fairies who would surely come
to dance that night.
Guarded by the stars and sentinelled by the pines and she-oaks, the flower-strewn
glade awaited the coming of the fairy dancers.
It had not long to wait. Like a flight of beautiful butterflies the fairies flashed
into the moonbeams; there was a sound as of tinkling bells: that was the fairies talk-
ing. Then sweet music filled the glade: that was the fairies singing, as they capered
joyously at their revels.
The watching animals were fascinated by what they saw; they gaped in open-
mouthed wonder, and even Numbat was silent. But it was Numbat’s fault that the
fairies fled before they had finished their revels. In the middle of a dance he sneezed,
and the noise he made frightened the fairies, so that with tinkling cries of alarm they
flew away.
But the animals were so excited at having seen so wonderful a spectacle
as the fairies dancing, that they forgot to be cross with Numbat, who was so disgusted
with himself for sneezing when he did, that he didn’t speak a word for nearly five
minutes.
It was five very excited animals who returned to The Hut. tired but happy.
Tortoise climbed in at the foot of Roo’s bed. and forgetting Toad and his tale of the
city in his excitement at having seen the fairies in the glade, he fell asleep after a time.
Toad was still asleep when the rest of the animals were awakened by Hilda Roo
banging on the drum with her potstick. They knew what this meant: it meant that
they had to get out of bed and wash their faces, not forgetting to rub behind their
ears, and help Hilda Roo set the table for breakfast.
For breakfast there was oatmeal and bacon and eggs. The aroma of the porridge
bubbling in the pot, and the bacon sizzling in the pan, made the animals race one


» £|f >' MB '!?,- M^/ . jH^^
2g j. _ v v 1 *
I s \ 'n I V\ k \v ' -
Sr J3b®t? Is 'l JsC^P jS «^' r
“The waiting animal? were fascinated bv what they saw"


“They brought their fishing lines
with them”
another to the bench outside and dash their
faces in a basin of cold water drawn from
the stream. Then they spurted back into
The Hut and busily got the breakfast
things ready.
By this time Toad was awake. But
he did not get out of bed at once; instead
he lay there on Tortoise’s bed wondering
how he could get the bed for himself,
together with Tortoise’s chair by the win-
dow, and his place at the table.
When Hilda Roo called out to Toad
that his breakfast was ready, he slid off
the bed and went out to the bench to wash
himself. He came back into the room
rubbing his hands vigorously, and said
how he missed his hot shower before
breakfast, "But cold water is so very
bracing; it makes me want to be up and
doing,” said Toad, who hadn’t washed his
face at all.
"If you would like to do something this morning, you ought to come fishing with
Tortoise and Numbat and me,” suggested the generous Roo.
"Fishing! Ah, yes; a most interesting occupation. I shall be glad to show you
how we fish in the ocean. I’m sure you’ll like that. I’ll also show you the correct way
to handle a boat in a storm; such information might prove very useful.” Toad’s voice
was very patronising.
So after breakfast, Tortoise, Numbat, Robert Roo, and Toad set out for the
stream. There they had a row-boat tied up to a willow tree. They brought their fish-
ing lines with them, including a line for Toad.
When they had settled themselves in the boat, Roo took the oars and sculled
smartly round a bend in the stream. Toad had exchanged his hand-line for Tortoise’s
bamboo rod. And being a very talkative animal, he was soon describing the city again.
While he talked he cleaned the bowl of his pipe. This interested his companions,
who had never seen anyone with a pipe before. He blew through the stem. It whistled.
This made Numbat and Tortoise laugh; so they asked Toad to blow through it again.
Putting the pipe down beside him on the thwart, he searched in his pockets for the
ounce of tobacco he had brought with him from the city. It was nowhere to be found.
He took off his faded bowler hat and looked into the crown, without success, even


though he fumbled under the band and pawed all over. He opened his coat and then
his shirt. He searched about his chest. This made Numbat giggle so much that Roo
had to threaten to put him ashore in order to make him behave.
Then suddenly Toad remembered where he had hidden his tobacco: he had put it
in his boot!
While Toad was filling his pipe with tobacco, Numbat sang snatches of songs
and trailed his paws in the clear water. He also chortled gleefully, as if he had just
thought of something very clever.
Roo was now rowing as if he were in a boat race. He was a strong rower but
not a very skilful one. His exertions made him happy, for he was an animal who was
fond of exercise. His joyful spirits suddenly burst into song a rousing sea chantey
in which his crew joined lustily.
The sun was shining, and kingfishers darted brilliantly above the boat. Toad
was puffing contentedly at his pipe, and when the last strains of the sea chantey had
died away, he began to talk of the marvels of the city and the right way to handle
a boat in a storm. He had started to describe the big stores and the theatres when
there was a shout from Numbat. He had discovered a stowaway. The stowaway
suddenly slithered along the bottom of the boat until he was at the back of Roo. It
was a lizard. He muttered something
about hoping nobody would object to his
presence in the boat. Nobody did, so
Lizard darted up on to the seat beside Roo.
He was lying there, soaking up the warm
sunshine, when he saw out of the corner
of one eye a succulent-looking reed. He
slithered forward and snapped at it and
over-balanced and fell in.
There were shouts of "Lizard Over-
board!” and Roo pulled hard on the port
scull to swing the boat round to rescue
Lizard. But the scull missed the water,
Roo’s feet shot up into the air, and with
a loud cry he fell out of the boat.
Toad yelled, "Help! help!” But
Tortoise grabbed the oars and slewed the
boat smartly round to pick up both Roo
and Lizard, who were hauled aboard in a
very wet and bedraggled state.
“Roo’s feet shot up into the air’’


"You’re a born sailor, Tortoise," Roo spluttered as soon as he was able to talk.
Lizard nodded his head to show that he agreed with Roo.
"You should sail on the high seas,” added Toad, who never missed an opportunity
to turn Tortoise's thoughts away from the Forest. For Toad was bent on taking the
place of Tortoise in The Hut. He went on to describe the joys of sailing on the open
sea, and pointed out to Tortoise that he would quickly make enough money in the city
to buy himself a yacht.
Tortoise was delighted with what Toad said about owning a yacht. In fact, he
even forgot to bait his hook, with the result that he caught no fish.
He thought about the city and a yacht, while listening to Toad, during the return
trip to the willow tree, where the boat was moored.
CHAPTER 111.
THE CALL OF THE CITY
ORTOISE stumped off alone to the edge of the Fairy Glade and sat down
under a blue-gum. It was a sunny afternoon, and when he stretched out his legs and
crossed his feet the shadows cast by the tree reached to his face. That was good. For
Tortoise had been walking very fast for him, and thinking furiously all the time.
And now that his body was quite cool, he sighed with content. But he was con-
tent, not so much because his body was now comfortable, but because he had made
his Great Decision. He was going on a journey to the City. So, he sat there under
the tree and thought of the pleasures and joyful adventures that awaited him.
Toad had told him that he might become a Great Actor, because he looked The
Part. But he was certain to become Famous, for he had all the marks of a Famous
Person. Toad did not go into details about these things. Indeed, there was no need
for him to do so, for Tortoise was completely under the spell of the tales told to him
by Toad.
With a rush of pleasure, Tortoise saw himself on the stage of a theatre; the
applause was deafening, as he bowed to the wildly excited audience. That was Tortoise
the Actor. Yes, he would become an Actoi, he thought, as he reclined on the soft
grass, caught up in a whirl of day-dreams. His thoughts of future triumphs prodded
Tortoise to enthusiasm; so that he scrambled to his feet, and started back to The Hut.
For he intended to lose no time in preparing for his journey.
Behind the Forest, in the west, rose the blue shape of hills. Tortoise had some-
times wondered what was beyond those hills. Now he would find out.


“With a rush of pleasure, Tortoise saw himself on the stage of a theatre’’


"Tortoise packed his ruck-sack with
some food for the journey"
Before he reached The Hut he ran
into Robert Roo. This usually happy
animal was looking rather gloomy. So
Tortoise asked him if he was not feeling
well.
Roo replied that he was enjoying the
best of health, but he was worried about
Toad. He said that he didn’t like Toad,
and he was sure that Toad was trying to
influence Tortoise, so that Tortoise would
go away from the Forest and leave Toad
in possession of his Share In Things.
"The time has come to tell you, Roo,
that lam going away from the Forest. I
am going to seek my fortune in the City.
Toad said that there I shall win fame and
fortune.”
Roo was speechless for a minute after
Tortoise had spoken. Then he asked:
"But why do you want to leave this Happy Forest? There’s everything here that an
animal could wish for?”
"Everything, except Fame, and Fortune; and Great Excitement,” replied Tortoise.
"But you will return to the Forest some day, won’t you, Tortoise?”
"Some day I’ll drop in for a day or two,” answered Tortoise. "But first, I must
have Adventures, and Fame and Things. I’ll enjoy the Forest more after I’ve had all
these things, my dear Roo. So please don’t worry about me. I’ll be all right.”
"But perhaps something will occur in the City to prevent you from ever enjoy-
ing life in the Forest again, Tortoise,” persisted Roo.
"What, for instance?” inquired Tortoise.
"Well, for one thing, you might be run over by a motor car and injured for life.
Just think how that would handicap you in your rambles in the Forest! Or you might
ruin your digestion, and think how that would spoil your enjoyment of Hilda Roo’s
cooking. Don’t risk those things, Tortoise, by seeking after something that might
leave you unable to enjoy all the pleasures that you will return to here in the Forest.”
But Tortoise had set his mind on going, and nobody could persuade him to give
up this mad idea, as Hilda Roo called it. So the animals had to look on helplessly


while Tortoise packed his ruck-sack with some food for the journey, and his few
belongings.
Outside The Hut there was a great deal of noisy cawing and agitated flying about
in the elms and gum-trees. For Mopoke, Kookaburra, Cockatoo, and the rest of the
birds were very upset at the thought of Tortoise leaving them.
The wind sighed too, as it soothed the poor, groaning trees and the agitated birds.
There hadn’t been such a commotion among the trees since that day long ago when
Numbat hurt his foot and had to stay in the depths of the Forest all night.
"What do you think about it all, She-Oak?” the Blue-Gum asked.
The She-Oak shook its branches with emotion. "This is all Toad’s doing,” she
answered.
Toad was not there to see Tortoise set out on his journey. He was afraid of what
Robert Roo and the rest of the animals might say to him. So he strolled down to the
stream, and taking from his pocket a flute-like instrument, lay down in the shade of a
willow tree. With his feet in the air he played Songs of the Road and other vagabond
tunes. After a while, he took an orange out of his pocket and, biting into the pulp,
thought how smart he had been in getting rid of Tortoise. Then he looked round
cautiously to see if there was anyone who might overhear him. There was nobody about,
so Toad laughed in a mean, triumphant way he had. Then he threw the orange rind
away and picked up his flute again.
Robert Roo and Hilda Roo and the
rest of the animals found words are feeble
things when it came to saying good-bye to
Tortoise. Hilda Roo, with her eyes moist
with tears, could say nothing less dazzling
than a hug. Tortoise knew those hugs;
he knew that they showed Hilda’s love
for him more than any words could have
done.
Tortoise could only stammer a few
words of farewell; he could not trust him-
self to say very much, for now that he was
leaving the Forest, his heart was filled
with tenderness for all the joys that he had
had among his friends whom he was now
forsaking.
He set out alone, as he did not want
anyone to go part of the way through the
Forest with him, for fear that he might be
persuaded to return.
“He marched sadly away, turning only
once to wave farewell"


He marched sadly away, turning only once to wave farewell. As he strode on
through the Forest, the trees seemed to spin about him, for his eyes were wet with
tears. Yesterday it had seemed that the adventure before him was a glorious thing —
Fortune seemed almost within his grasp, and he was happy. But now he was not so
sure. But as he marched proudly on, he dismissed from his mind these nagging doubts,
and by and by there came back to him the lost gleam of the bright fortune that he was
certain awaited him in the City.
That night Tortoise slept under a blue-gum in the fold of a hill that overlooked a
stream. There was frost on the grass when he awoke, and he sat up shivering. Frosty
sunlight came in a long shaft across the hill, and the air was clean and icy on his face.
Bevond the hill there were ridges, blue in the morning.
Tortoise stretched and twisted, threw off the blanket Hilda Roo h?.d given him and
stood up whistling. But it was not a happy whistle; it was meant to cheer him up.
He wondered what his friends in The Hut would be having for breakfast! He
sniffed the air for the warm, spicy smell that floated deliciously from The Hut when
Hilda Roo was baking cinnamon and carroway seed cakes. But no such fragrant aroma
reached him now. So Tortoise unwrapped a stack of sandwiches, and after eating
several of them, continued his journey.
That afternoon he came to a brook that flowed with the strange silence of streams
where there are no rocks nor boulders to make them murmur. In the soft sand at the
edge of the water he saw deep prints of sharp hoofs, where a strange animal had drunk
at dawn.
This strange animal was now' watching Tortoise from a thicket close by the brook.
It was an old Donkey which had run away from a travelling circus. As the Donkey
was in need of someone to talk to, he trotted out of the thicket toward Tortoise, who was
looking in another direction.
When the Donkey got within a few yards of Tortoise, he brayed politely and
inquired if Tortoise w'as going far. Tortoise was startled at first, but he could see that
the Donkey was a friendly animal. So he replied that he was going to the City, and
he would be glad to have Donkey’s company.
I don t like cities,” answered Donkey. "I prefer to live in the country. There's
much more freedom in the woods. But I will take you on my back until we come
within sound of the City I'm sure you are in need of a rest after all the walking
you have done.”
Tortoise replied that he would be delighted to ride on Donkey’s back. And as
Donkey knew the right track to rollow, the meeting wnth this strange animal was very
useful for Tortoise.
Bobbing up and down on Donkey’s back, Tortoise w'as feeling cheerful again.
And Donkey w ? as such an interesting companion; he had such strange tales to tell of
circus life that Tortoise never weaned of listening to him. But, in spite of the thrills
of the circus, Tortoise preferred the Stage. He w'as going to be an Actor, not a per-
former in a circus. But he listened greedily all the same.


“When the Donkey got within a few
yards of Tortoise, he brayed politely”


“Tortoise stepped over to the nettle
flower and listened”
carried him to the top of a hill from which
the City showed in the distance. "And
what a pretty place it is here on this hill-
side, with its carpet of wildflowers!”
Lf l&j The shrilling of a train whistle
rm sounc kd far away, and Donkey turned his
head away from the City, and said to
Tortoise that he would go back to the deep
woods. So they said good-bye to each
tl mil other, and Donkey went loping down the
: hill, away from the noise of trains and out
of sight of cities.
CHAPTER IV
THE WANDERER
REACHES HIS GOAL
c, HAT a day to be alive!” exclaimed
~ * Tortoise to his friend Donkey, who had
When he had gone, Tortoise sprang up, swung his ruck-sack over his shoulder,
and stumped down the hillside that led toward the City. At the foot of the hill he
paused to drink at a stream. There he saw a brilliantly-coloured butterfly hovering
over a blue nettle flower. Crawling near the nettle flower was an old snail, who was
shaking his head at something the butterfly was saying.
Tortoise wondered what the butterfly and the snail were talking about; so he
stepped over to the nettle flower and listened.
It seemed that the butterfly wanted to fly away to the otner side of the stream,
because she had heard that life there was more interesting.
Oh, my dear!’ breathed the old snail, who was hugging the under side of a green
leaf, don t attempt to cross over. Keep to this side —the other side is just the same
as this. Believe me, just the same flowers—just the same greenness, only not quite the
same number of interesting insects as there are on this side. Stay where you are and
have your little flutter in peace.”
That was too much for the butterfly. Wflat an idea! Never to go out into the
open? Never to venture forth? To live creeping up and down this side! Her wings
quivered with scorn.
"Really,” said she, 'Tm not a snail!”


And away she flew. But just at that moment a crow came swooping
down toward the stream. Its wings brushed against the butterfly, touching it only
lightly. But the butterfly was dead when it fluttered to the ground on the other bank
of the stream. A little fleck of cerise and black, she lay in the grass.
Tortoise seemed deeply impressed by what had befallen the butterfly, which would
not listen to good advice. He too would not listen to good advice from his friend,
Robert Roo.
A faint but bleak west wind was blowing as Tortoise plodded on toward the
City. Except for a light silvery ridge of cloud in the North, the sky was blue all over.
Birds were busy flying hither and thither and filling the sky with their songs.
That night he slept almost within sound of the City. The first streaks of dawn
found him asleep on a hillside, with his head rolled up in a blanket and the rest of him
uncovered. As the dawn crept up, turning night into day, a magpie came out on a
blue-gum bough above him and squawked joyously. Tortoise stirred at the sound and
awoke. From sound asleep he was awake, alert, in the instant; sprang upright with a
bound, threw back his head and drank in the morning air, and gazed upon the City in
the distance.
After walking for an hour he came to a swamp, where a Brolga was enjoying a
breakfast of insects. Tortoise spoke to him, asking if he would give him a lift on his
journey to the City.
"I am flying past the City this morn-
ing, and could drop you on the outskirts,”
said the bird.
"I don’t think I’d like to be dropped,
thank you,” replied Tortoise, who felt a
shiver run through him at the mention of
the word "drop.”
"It was very clumsy of me to have
said that I would drop you on your
journey. On the contrary, I would be
most careful with you. You could make
a saddle with your blanket, and I would
then fly with you on my back,” the Brolga
answered helpfully.
"I should like that. When do we
start?”
"As soon as I’ve had a few more in-
sects. Would you like an insect? They
“Brolga was enjoying a breakfast of
insects"


He asked a Great Dane, who owned a Pie Stall, if he would give him some food"


are not very appetizing in this marsh. For the most interesting insects you have to fly
farther into the woods,” explained the Brolga.
When the Brolga rose into the air with Tortoise on his back, a squall was brew-
ing. The sky was piled high with cloud, which looked like mountains of grey snow to
Tortoise, as the wind rushed past him at a furious speed. Yellow lightning flashed and
gleamed, but a strip of clear blue stretched along a straight corridor in the sky, like a
gap in a rock-girt coast. Down this corridor, flying toward the City, rode Tortoise on
Brolga’s back, while the thunder growled in the tall cliffs of black clouds on either side.
Tortoise was not afraid as he raced long the blue sky road. But he was glad
when he could see the sun again.
On the outskirts of the City, Brolga alighted in ? paddock. Tortoise said what
a wonderful ride he had had, and then said good-bye to Brolga, who flapped off into
the sky again.
It was midnight when Tortoise reached the City. He was hungry and tired. He
had neither friends nor money; therefore, he had some difficulty in finding a place where
he could sleep that night.
He asked a Great Dane, who owned a Pie Stall, if he would give him some food
and let him sleep in the stable with the horse that dragged the stall around the streets.
Vne Pie Stall Owner replied that he would give Tortoise something to eat, if
Tortoise would wash the dishes. He would also let him sleep with the horse in the
stable, if he cleaned out the stable every morning before breakfast. Although Tortoise
did not like the idea of cleaning stables and washing dishes in a Pie Stall, he was too
hungry and sleepy to refuse the offer.
He worked for the Pie Stall Owner for three months. At the end of that time,
he was worse off than when he had first come to the City. For he received no wages,
and was therefore unable to replace his clothes, which were nearly threadbare.
But Tortoise had learned to read. That was something he had accomplished.
But now that he could read, he found that the neon-lit advertisements in the City at
night had lost their enchantment. As he spelled out the words, he saw how foolish
he had been to imagine that those thousands of coloured lights which were strung about
the City transformed it into a Fairyland. For there was no enchantment about brightly
coloured lights that advertised pills and sausages and all kinds of businesses.
Tortoise was sadly disillusioned with what he had seen. And when he had called at
2 theatre, and asked to see the manager, the manager’s secretary, who was a haughty-


jpi$~
“The Pekinese replied in a sneering sor*
of way"
looking Pekinese, replied in a sneering sort
of way, when he told her that he wanted
the manager to let him act in his theatre.
She had said that the manager was much
too busy to waste his time with a silly
Tortoise, who was more fitted for the work
of a bootblack than for the profession of
an Actor.
Tortoise now wanted to return to the
Happy Forest. But the Pie Stall Owner
would not let him go. He told Tortoise
that he would tie him up every night, so
that he couldn’t run away. And that
night he tied .Tortoise to the stable door
with a Ipng cord. But the next night,
when Tortoise was tied up in this manner,
he cut the cord with a knife which he had
taken from the Pie Stall.
CHAPTER V
THE WANDERER’S RETURN
A FTER he had freed himself, Tortoise crept silently out of the stable, for he did
not want to waken the Pie Stall Owner, who slept in the loft above. He had almost
reached the door, when he stubbed his foot against a tin, which rolled noisily over the
brick floor. A hoarse voice called out from the loft. But Tortoise did not reply; he
ran as hard as he could until he reached the street.
If only he could find Brolga!
It was morning when Tortoise came to the outskirts of the City. A bleak wind
was blowing. Trudging along the highway, he heard the distant hum of a motor car
growing louder, he felt the sudden swoop, the choking dust, as it passed him, and he
heard the horn growing fainter in the distance. He was glad to be leaving all this
noise and dust. He wanted to return as quickly as possible to the song and laughter
of the Happy Forest. There he could forget the wild pace of the City, as he roamed
the woods with Roo and Numbat. He recalled how keenly he had relished the meals
served by Hilda Roo, and contrasted them with the scanty and poorly cooked food he
had had in the City.


Tortoise walked on and on, over grey wastes, through low bushes under the grey
skies, pausing now and then to scan the sky and the fields for Brolga. But there was no
sign of Brolga.
At noon on the following day, Tortoise rested beside a stream, and watched a
duck and her brood enjoying themselves. He was so interested in their performance,
that he got up and walked along the ban k, so that he might get a better view of them.
But the mother duck did not appreciate Tortoise’s curiosity. When he got too near for
her liking, she gave a signal, and the little brood scampered over the surface of the water,
churning a tiny and furious disturbance and squawking excitedly.
Tortoise could not understand why the ducks were frightened of him, until he
saw his reflection in the water. He did not
dressed Tortoise that had left the Forest to
looked thin and threadbare, and his eyes were
in The Hut would recognise him!
He was busy with these gloomy thoughts
look anything like the plump and neatly-
seek his fortune in the City. Instead, he
blood-shot. He wondered if his friends
when he heard a braying sound from
among the trees. Yes, it was Donkey. And how glad Tortoise was to see him. And
Donkey was equally glad to see the animal he had befriended, some months before.
At first, he stared hard at Tortoise as if doubtful that it was his friend. But
being a polite animal, he did not comment
did he ask him if he had enjoyed his
sojourn in the City. He could see that |
the adventure had been a great disappoint- fi
ment to Tortoise.
When Donkey offered to take Tor-
toise back to the Forest, he accepted
eagerly. So when he had hoisted himself
on to Donkey’s back, and that kind-
hearted animal stubbed along with his tail
half-raised, as though he had forgotten to
put it back into place after once lifting it
in a greeting to his friend, Tortoise felt
like shouting, he was so happy. Indeed,
he did burst into a cheery little song which
Donkey asked him to repeat, because he
liked it so much.
But long before he reached the
Happy Forest, the dwellers there knew of
his coming. For Mopoke had been flying
over the Forest, and had seen Tortoise on
on his altered appearance. Neither
"Tortoise rested beside a stream"


of room, and on his way back he had browsed among the buttercups, swinging his tail
happily.
After chatting with Donkey about the delights of boating, Tortoise went to the
window and looked out at the Happy Forest. A pang of delight went through him
as he saw the moon-lit trees and the emerald slopes that led to Fairy Glade.
Once more the beauty and the laughter of the Forest were his to enjoy. He would
wake up in a room echoing with bird’s songs and sparkling with sunshine.
Tortoise had always liked to look through the window of The Hut when the
moon was shining. And to-night the moonlight rested on the trees and the grass and
the meadows like a silver tissue. But his friends were calling to him to come and join
them in a glass of lemonade. So, with a happy sigh, Tortoise turned away from the
window and the enchantment of the Forest.
Later in the evening there was a party in The Hut for Tortoise. Happy animals
danced and sang songs of welcome. They also played the one-two-three hop of children’s
parties, with Oranges and Lemons to wind up the fun.
It was a very happy Tortoise who fell asleep in his own bed a little after midnight.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by Victory Publicity Fty. Ltd., 262 Queen Street, Melbourne.


• ' •, i •. ■ t • . . . ■■■>• - . ■s .
i • * • - i A , i v 1 »
' i , J -i ■ * ’ , S v i
, ’ \ • i v ’’ • ’ • 1 % f \ • , J . 1 .
* < w ' \ r l ) ■ ' ' . - • . , t 1 .
'2 » i ' 1 . . > * 4 » *
■ , - ' - • •>. ? .i • * ■ V ?I N
1 ' 1 , ! ■ f • ' 1 ! ■' I ■ \ > >’
t • 1 . J 1 *. f • > » 1 ,/' ,*< t*
1 • i - * • <
' . • - V 1 •• .
■ ■ ■ ‘ ■ , v' ‘ \\ - S V ,V‘, . -I.* ■ ' ,
I ' i ' 1 ' * ' \ 1 ' . '•
J < - U • .* . . . '
. • *• ■ . s . / * * *v- , » S - ; » ., if
. * 2 . v jv . * « ;> :v • 1 ‘ . * ►
- * S , i
■( i », *» . ■) • l'. J * •
’ . V- • v i .
. •• I I f ' * • * • Jt
; * . . - . • * * • '■ ■■ ■ -, * '
• ’ •■'■■» * • -i
‘ ■
• ; *ii; - ■*' • ■ ■ . 1 V s 1 j . ,
* * fi '
. •' ’ ..
i :A A . . : ;
« *. ' » , * 4 •
V*\ . • \ , • • i, . . ■ » . . »
. ■
4 ■ # J *4‘
* > , A . ? t _ -
“r - ‘ V
' * f f ’
V- : ; - ■ ‘ ' • f •• ' '*■ H A . ■
. . .. , . . i -■
, * '
I I . !
T >
• . ( '
!®S-v Pi j . ' > t
■■ ,..< . . > ■ V .
1 ,. ' ■ ■ • -
• , -V
•
i ,
H ' i - • ' ■
: v •- ■ < ■ =■ ■
1. . « >
♦
. V ‘ '
L1 . * , • \ • Si 1 , .
*
t , ‘ ’ • , 1 t
* i *
.
. . • I •• • L . -v
-
' l - i ’» i. • \ y * » 4 . . • * v .
.•
* ' ■ . ! • • • v- ' 1
- , >, . f • j | v : .i
*
t» ■ „ - 1 ■ '. _ ■■■'»■


' - *•* #>y
