

THE RESCUE OF THE
MILITARY FENIANS
FROM AUSTRALIA
With a Memoir of
JOHN DEVOY
WHO PLANNED THE RESCUE
And the Names and Careers
of the Rescued and
their T^escuers
°i 'f
ut $
Pyo\\O
' N& Dublin:
NUGENT and COMPANY, 45 Middle Abbey Street.
1929.
[Price THREEPENCE
printed in Ireland]




MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY
WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE
RESCUE of the MILITARY FENIANS
FENIANISM, and the daring exploits, sufferings and amazing
adventures of its leaders and their followers, had a great fas-
cination for and appealed in a striking manner to the
imagination of the Irish people. It had a remarkable influence in
reviving in the breasts of a people crushed by centuries of oppression
the spirit of independence and self-reliance that was such a powerful
factor in moulding, and bringing to success, the Irish-Ireland move-
ment of our time.
It is a well-established fact that nothing alarmed England more
in connection with the revolutionary association known as the Fenian
Brotherhood than the knowledge that a very considerable portion of
her army had been won over to the Irish National cause by able and
indefatigable agents, many of whom wore her own scarlet uniform.
The brain directing the work of these agents was that of the late
John Devoy, who spent sixty years toiling for Irish freedom, and
of whom it was said that he was perhaps the most dangerous enemy
of England in the entire Fenian Brotherhood, and of whom also it
was said that in some respects he was worthy to rank very close to
Wolfe Tone.
BIRTH AND EARLY YEARS.
John Devoy was born at Kill, near Naas, Co. Kildare, on Sep-
tember 3, 1842, and came of a patriotic and athletic family. His
father was a fine hurler, an accomplished wrestler, and neat dancer,


and his youngest brother, Joseph, was a fine athlete. His sisters
were very patriotic girls, and one of them, Mary Devoy, was a great
worker in the Young Ireland Society, which met at 41 York Street,
Dublin, and taught many of the young people who attended the
classes the patriotic literature of Ireland.
While John was still young, the family moved to Dublin, and
resided in Cork Street. He attended an Irish class in the late ’fifties,
and on one occasion Eugene O’Curry put his hand upon his head and
said : “ This will be a leader of the Gael who will speak in the tongue
of the Gael.” Irish was spoken round Dublin in his time; people
coming into the markets from Meath still had Irish, and with his
companions of the Irish class, John Devoy made use of every oppor-
tunity of hearing them converse in the native language.
BEGINNING OF PATRIOTIC WORK.
He took the Oath of the 1.R.8. in 1861, and was a worker and
leader in the cause until his death in September, 1928.
To acquire military experience, young Devoy joined the French
Foreign Legion in 1861, and spent one year in Algeria. He returned
to Ireland in 1862, and until 1865 he was Centre of the 1.R.8. in
the district in and around Naas.
In October, 1865, he was appointed chief organiser for the 1.R.8.
of the Irish soldiers in the British Army in Ireland. He operated
for the most part in Dublin, and his business was to make as many
Fenians in the regiments of the garrison as he possibly could. A great
number of Irishmen at that time wore the red coat, but their hearts
were sound Irish hearts, and Devoy’s success was extraordinary.
Almost every regiment evidenced his influence, and Fenianism per-
vaded some of the crack corps, such as the 10th Hussars and the
sth Dragoon Guards. He participated in the sensational rescue of
James Stephens from Richmond Bridewell, Dublin.
ARREST AND SENTENCE.
A warrant was issued for his arrest late in 1865, but he managed
to escape apprehension until February, 1866, when he was arrested
by a large force of police, military, and detectives in Pilsworth’s
premises, No. 132 James’s Street, near Steevens’ Lane, Dublin, then a
2
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


rendezvous of the soldiers from the Royal, Richmond, and Island
Bridge Barracks. Subsequently he was confined in Mountjoy
Prison for a year, and in February, 1867, was sentenced to fifteen
years’ penal servitude, and was confined in Millbank, Portland, and
Chatham Prisons until January, 1871, when he was released on con-
dition that he would settle in the United States.
Devoy arrived in America in the beginning of 1871 with four
other Irish political prisoners, released under similar conditions.
These were Jeremiah O’Donovan Rossa, Capt. John McClure,
Charles Underwood O’Connell, and Harry Mulleda. He worked
on the New York “ Herald ” and “ Recorder,” and on Chicago
dailies.
THE MILITARY FENIANS.
In the meantime the Rising had been a failure, and amongst the
bravest and best of those cast into gaol were the soldiers who were
convicted by courtsmartial. The military Fenians were especially
dear to the heart of Ireland. John Devoy, who had organised them,
sworn them in, and plotted and planned with them, could not but
regard them as his own favourite children. Consequently all the
sympathy of his big heart went out to his brave boys, held behind
prison bars, or chained together to labour in the convict gangs of
Britain.
The British Government held these gallant military prisoners in
especial odium. As ’65 and ’67 receded more and more into history,
the prison doors were opened, and captive Fenians once more
emerged from durance vile. The leaders had been pardoned. But
the English rulers kept the military men fast. They had added to
their Fenianism the unforgiveable offence of having joined the
organisation while they still wore the uniform of England’s monarch,
and it seemed as if a special vengeance was decreed against them.
They were tortured by all the means that hate or devilish ingenuity
could devise in an English convict prison. Colour-Sergeant
McCarthy, after enduring twelve years of terrible suffering, was
released practically in a dying condition in January, 1878, and
Corporal Chambers, Private J. P. O’Brien and Michael Davitt
joined him in a couple of days. A pathetic incident occurred when
3
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


the four ex-prisoners returned to Dublin to receive the gratitude and
love of the patriot citizens of the Capital. They had been invited by
Mr. C. S. Parnell to breakfast with him in Morrison’s Hotel,
Dawson Street, on the second morning after their arrival. After a
few minutes’ conversation, McCarthy was observed to grow deadly
pale and totter across the room. He was laid on a sofa, where
Chambers and O’Brien supported his head. Davitt and the others
did all they could to revive the sinking patriot, and give relief to the
dying man. All efforts proved unavailing; in a few moments the
noble spirit of the martyred soldier passed away beyond the reach of
the British tyrant. Poor McCarthy was no more! Chambers,
whose nervous system had been shattered during his twelve years’
imprisonment, broke down and had to be taken away. At the inquest
on McCarthy subsequently, his fellow-prisoners testified that he had
been most cruelly treated for years in Chatham prison, and the jury
gave a verdict that his death had been accelerated by that treatment.
The evidence given at the inquest awakened intense sympathy for
the released men and for those who were still enduring the cruel and
inhuman treatment. This sad event had the effect of focussing
attention on those still in prison, but even the pleading of some of
the foremost Englishmen of the day, men more liberally minded
than their fellows, was ignored, and all hope was practically
abandoned, when John Devoy was inspired to the great adventure
of rescuing the men undergoing penal servitude for life in Western
Australia.
Amongst the military convicts in the latter colony was that
splendid, unconquerable fellow, John Boyle O’Reilly, matchless
even amongst the resolute band of the patriots of ’Sixty-five.
O’Reilly was born near Drogheda, and served his apprenticeship as a
compositor on the Drogheda “ Argus.” Later he was a non-
commissioned officer of the Lancashire Rifle Volunteers in Preston,
and in May, 1863, he returned to Ireland and enlisted as a trooper
in the 10th Hussars, the “ Prince of Wales’ Own,” at the age of
20. John Devoy stated that O’Reilly swore in some eighty men of
the regiment, had them divided into two prospective troops, obtained
possession of the key of an unused postern gate, and had everything
ready to take his men, armed and mounted, out of the barracks at a
given signal. O’Reilly was arrested, however, tried by courtmartial
4
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


and sentenced to be shot, but was transported to Australia for life.
After eight attempts, he finally succeeded in effecting his escape in the
barque, “ Gazelle,” and was now in America. There were still six
soldier Fenians in the Western Australia convict chain gangs, tearing
and wearing their hearts out in sheer despair. #
It may be interesting here to give short biographies of these six
soldiers of Irish freedom :
1. MARTIN HARRINGTON was born at Macroom, Co. Cork, and
enlisted in the 61st Regiment British Infantry. He fought in the Indian
Mutiny and received medals and clasps for his bravery. He left India
and landed at Portsmouth in October, 1860. He was arrested in Dublin
on the 10th March, 1866, for desertion, and on suspicion of being con-
nected with the insurrectionary movement in Ireland, was tried, found
guilty, and sentenced to penal servitude for life. In 1867 he embarked
from Portland for the convict settlement of Western Australia, and
arrived at Frecmantle 10th January, 1868.
2. THOMAS DARRAGH was born at Broomhall, Co. Wicklow, and
enlisted in the 2nd Queen’s Royal Regiment of Infantry in 1852. He
fought in the Chinese War and received a medal and two clasps for
bravery. He returned to England in May, 1860, was arrested at the
School of Musketry at Fleetwood on 22nd September, 1865, was tried
by Courtmartial on 21st February, 1866, and found guilty, and was
sentenced to be shot —a sentence which was afterwards commuted to
imprisonment for life. He arrived in Australia on the 10th January,
1868, in the transport, " Huguemont.”
3. JAMES WILSON, whose real name was McNally, was born in
Ncwry. He served seven years in the Bombay Artillery, and was at
various times in America, India and Syria. Returning to Ireland, he
enlisted in the sth Dragoon Guards about 1860 or 1861, and became a
member of the Fenian Organisation in 1864. He and Martin Hogan
deserted together in November, 1865, finding the Regiment too hot for
them, after imbuing a large proportion of the men with their own
principles. He was arrested in Dublin on 10th February, 1866, and was
tried by General Courtmartial on 20th August; he was found guilty and
sentenced to penal servitude for life. Transported to Western Australia,
where he landed on 10th January, 1868.
4. MARTIN JOSEPH HOGAN was born in Limerick, apprenticed
to coach painting, and worked at his trade up to 1857, when he enlisted
in the Sth Dragoon Guards. He joined the Fenian organisation in 1864,
and deserted to avoid arrest at the latter end of 1865. He was arrested
5
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


in February, 1866, and tried for desertion, mutiny, and conspiracy to
raise civil war in Ireland. He was found guilty and sentenced to penal
servitude for life. He was sent to Australia, and his resolute disposition
more than once brought upon him the severity of his taskmasters.
5. ROBERT JCRANSTON was born in Stewartstown, Co. Tyrone,
and enlisted in the 61st British Infantry in 1863. He was arrested in
Dublin in April, 1866, tried by General Courtmartial on the 18th June,
1866, and found guilty. Sentenced to penal servitude for life. He was
sent to Australia, 1868.
6. THOMAS HENRY HASSETT was born in Doncraile, Co.
Cork, and was a carpenter by trade. He joined the Phoenix Organisation
in 1859, and went out afterwards with the Papal Brigade to Italy, and
served through that brief campaign. He enlisted in the 24th Foot in
1861, and joined the Fenian Organisation in 1864. It is said he himself
swore in 270 members of the Regiment, and it was he who suggested that
the contemplated fight should begin in Dublin by seizing the Pigeon
House, which contained 25,000 stand of arms. When it was considered
to be in danger a guard of 90 men was placed on it, and of these 60
were Fenians. Hassett suggested a plan of capture to his superiors in
the organisation, but the proposal was rejected on the ground that they
were not ready for a general fight. In January, 1866, he deserted, and
marched into the Fenian rendezvous in his uniform with his gun upon
his shoulder. “ Most of the fellows who desert for Ireland’s sake,” said
he to John Devoy, “ come to you empty-handed, but here am I ready for
work." He was arrested in Dublin on 28th February, 1866, and tried by
General Courtmartial, was found guilty and sentenced to penal servitude
for life. With the other prisoners he was sent to Australia, and in 1873
he escaped from prison in Western Australia, lived with the Irish farmers
for a time, but it being a bad season they could not give him an outfit.
Two months having passed he made a dash for the coast, stowed himself
away on an outgoing vessel, was captured by the water police, and
brought back to the convict establishment, and for two years afterwards
he was kept in irons with the chain gang.
JOHN DEVOY INVOKED.
James Wilson (McNally), already mentioned, managed to get an
appeal through to John Devoy. In 1876 he was not yet 40 years
of age, and had been in penal servitude for a whole decade. He did
not appeal to Devoy in vain. The rescue of the military Fenians
became almost an obsession with him, and he wholly dedicated him-
self to the project from the moment he got Wilson’s appeal. A cheery
6
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


reply brought a ray of hope to the distant convict’s heart, and Devoy
at once conferred with John Kenneally and James McCarthy
Fennell, who had been prisoners themselves. He then took the
matter to the Clan-na-Gael Convention at Baltimore in 1874.
A Committee was thereupon appointed to go ahead. It consisted
of Devoy himself, John W. Goff (afterwards Recorder of New York),
and three Others, but Devoy was the head, brains, and moving spirit
of the whole daring enterprise. Funds were the first necessity, and
it was not easy to get enough for even so splendid and noble an
undertaking. Only he himself could tell how hard was the toil
involved in gathering in £5,000. Spurred on by an ex-prisoner,
John King, some New Zealand Miners subscribed £BOO, and in
Ireland £l,OOO was collected.
DEVOY FINDS A CAPTAIN.
In seeking a Captain, Devoy naturally sought the advice of John
Foyle O’Reilly, and from him received the suggestion that a whaling
vessel should be sent on the dangerous errand. O’Reilly, when
rescued in the “ Gazelle,” had met Henry C. Hathaway, who was
third mate, and they became tremendous friends. Hathaway was
i.ow Captain of the night police force in New Bedford, and to him
O’Reilly sent Devoy. Hathaway, a very daring spirit, entered into
Devoy’s plans with zest, and at once pitched on Captain George S.
Anthony, a whaleman of infinite courage, great experience, and
imperturbable temper. He had recently married and retired from
whaling, but still heard the call of the sea. A meeting was
arranged through Anthony’s father-in-law, John Richardson. Devoy
and Hathaway studied each other—in fact, Devoy had prospected
the Captain for some days already.
The Captain was of athletic build, with brilliant, black eyes.
Devoy then was a short man with full black whiskers. He told the
story of the gallant fellows pleading for rescue and sketched the
plans he had matured. His friends w r ould provide a whaleship.
Would Anthony take the command? The latter asked for a day to
think. Next day he came. He said: “Yes.”
Devoy’s eloquence had captured the Captain, for he knew the great
risks—the proffered pay was nothing—his young wife had given him
7
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


a baby daughter but a few months before; his mother lay ill; be
had to select a ship and start at once. It was an immense sacrifice
the dashing American sailor made. Probably not a man on earth
could have induced that sacrifice except the intrepid and invincible
John Devoy. Anthony and Richardson searched out the “ Catalpa,”
bought her for £l,lOO, but before she was ready to sail the total
cost had mounted to about £3,600. She carried 23 of a crew, the
only Irishman on board, Denis Duggan, sailing as carpenter.
For about six months the pretence of her being on a whaling
voyage in the North Atlantic was kept up. On the 20th October
she was at the Azores, having taken 210 barrels of sperm oil, which
were shipped to the States from Fayal, and helped to pay expenses.
The “ Catalpa ” then proceeded to Teneriffe, where fresh water
was taken in, after which her course was shipped for the River Plate,
which place the crew thought the object of the voyage, but after
proceeding a little way her course was changed to the east, around
the Cape of Good Hope, past St. Paul’s in the Indian ocean, until at
length the stout barque cast anchor at Bunbury, in Australia, there
to await instructions from John Breslin, who had arrived at the
scene of operations.
THE RESCUERS.
Undoubtedly, the chief actor in the rescue was the famous John J.
Breslin, who planned the escape of James Stephens from Richmond
Bridewell, and who was selected to go to Australia and establish
contact with the prisoners. The following short biographies of
himself and brave companions should prove of interest:—
JOHN BRESLIN was born in Drogheda, and was about forty years
of age; his father was a Co. Tyrone man. John received a good educa-
tion, was very studious, and a hard reader. At the time of the escape
of James Stephens he was an official in Richmond Prison, but was not
suspected of complicity at the time. When at length suspicion began to
rest on him he went to the United States, but soon after returned to
Ireland as an envoy from the Fenian Brotherhood. He was in America
at the time of the Rising in ’67, but it was his proud family boast that
his five brothers went forth from their father’s house to take part in it,
bearing with them the fervent blessings of their father and mother. Cool-
headed, courageous, cautious, and a strict disciplinarian, he always proved
8
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


himself the right man in the right place whenever there was stem work
to be done for Ireland.
CAPTAIN THOMAS DESMOND was born in Cobh, Co. Cork, and
was about 35 years of age; he had spent most of his time in the West
and California, and was living in Los Angeles when selected to act along
with Breslin, with whom he sailed from San Francisco for Australia.
JOHN KING was born in Tallaght, Co. Dublin, was about thirty
years old, and had lived for a number of years in New South Wales.
He was chosen by the Nationalists there to proceed to Frcemantle, taking
with him the £BOO collected for the rescue project.
THOMAS BRENNAN was born in Dublin, and was aged about 34.
He learned the trade of shoe-making, and became one of (he most
active members of the Fenian Brotherhood. He was engaged in the attack
on Stepaside and Glencullen Barracks, and afterwards settled in America.
DENIS DUGGAN was born in Dublin, learned the trade of coack-
making, joined the organisation in 1861, and, being a very active figure
in the Movement, was placed in charge of a section of one of the largest
circles in Dublin. He was arrested in 1866, and was confined successively
in Mountjoy, Belfast, and again in Mountjoy Prisons. Eventually re-
leased on bail, he remained in Dublin until the Rising of *67, and was
one of the little band that captured Stepaside and Glencullen Barracks
under Patrick Lennon.
THE FLIGHT FROM FREEMANTLE.
John Breslin and Captain Desmond arrived in Frcemantle in
November, 1875, and engaged a room at an hotel. Desmond went
on to Perth, and found immediate employment in a carriage factory.
Having learned that one of the Fenian ex-prisoners, William Foley,
was at large in Frcemantle, Breslin made use of him to convey to
James Wilson notice of his arrival and arrange method of com-
munication. About the middle of December he visited the prison,
or, as they called it in the Colony, the establishment, and in company
with two other gentlemen was shown through the interior by the
Superintendent, and found it to be very secure and well-guarded.
By January, 1876, he had had several interviews with Wilson, and
had determined on the plan for escape.
9
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


All the prisoners wanted were working outside the prison, and
communication with them was comparatively easy. With regard to
the method or plan of communication between themselves, it may be
well to state that their good conduct and length of imprisonment had
enabled them to communicate with each other with greater ease and
freedom than the other prisoners. ,
All this time it may well be imagined that the “ Catalpa ”
was most anxiously looked for. At length the welcome
news of her arrival at Bunbury came, and Breslin proceeded there,
met Captain Anthony ashore, and explained to him what he purposed
doing with the ship. The part of the coast he had selected for em-
barking from was distant from Freemantle about twenty miles south,
at a place named Rockingham.
It lay at the head of the sound, and a narrow passage at the end
of Garden Island led out to sea. He intended the “ Catalpa ”
should stand well out to sea ten or twelve miles outside Garden
Island, and that a whaleboat should put into Rockingham and
pull out to the ship, when they could get on board, which
could easily be done under ordinary circumstances in four or five
hours. While waiting and to avoid suspicion, Captain Anthony over-
hauled his vessel, painted her, and was in no hurry to get his wood
and water on board.
By an ingenious preconcerted arrangement telegrams so worded
as to deceive all but themselves passed between John Breslin and
Captain Anthony, so that each was well posted as to what was going
on at Rockingham and Freemantle, respectively. Preparations were
made. The six men were kept ready through Wilson, with whom
Breslin had an interview, and horses and wagons were engaged to
carry off the prisoners, and it was determined to fix the escape for
Faster Monday, the 17th April. What followed is best given in
Breslin’s own graphic language :
At 5.30 a.m. on Easter Monday I had the ostler called and the valises
put in the trap, waked up King and Desmond. Brennan was already
awake and dressed —and left for Rockingham at 6 a.m. I told Desmond
to get his horses harnessed up and be ready to leave at 7.30 a.m. I drove
up High Street as if going to Perth, turning sharp round by the prison
10
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


The men were beginning to assemble for parade. Being ahead of my
time, I drove slowly along the Rockingham Road, and Desmond coming
up shortly after, drove by me. Coming to a shaded part of the road,
we halted, and divided the hats and coats, three of each to each trap;
time, five minutes to eight. A few moments later I saw three men in
the prison dress wheel round and march down the Rockingham Road.
Driving up to them, I found the men were Wilson, Cranston and Har-
rington. I directed them to pass on, get into the trap with Desmond,
and drive away. Desmond wheeled his horses around, and they were only
seated and ready to start when the other three came in sight, and on
driving up to them I found one man carrying a spade and another a
large tin kerosene can. As soon as I came near enough to be recog-
nised, he who carried the spade flung it from him into the bush, and
the holder of the kerosene can bestowed a strong kick upon it in good
football fashion. I found the men were Darragh, Hogan, and Hassett.
I now had all the men I wanted and felt glad.
My horses got restive and refused to wheel around. Darragh caught
one by the head, but he jibbed and kicked, so I was afraid he would break
the harness. I told Darragh to let him go, and, whipping both of them
up smartly, they started fairly together, and when I got them on a wider
part of the road they wheeled around nicely. I now drove back and took
up my men. Desmond was already well out of sight, and King shortly
after rode up and told me all was quiet when he left. At 1.30 a.m. we
made the beach and got aboard the whale boat. The men had been
instructed to stow themselves in the smallest possible space, so as not
to interfere with the men at the oars, and in a few moments all was ready,
and the word was given: “Shove off! Shove off!”
THE PURSUIT.
It was between nine and ten o’clock on the same morning that
Hogan was missed from his work at the Comptroller’s residence, and
could not be found. Suspicion was aroused, and soon the officials
learned, to their consternation, that six Fenian prisoners had escaped !
In an hour and a half after leaving Freemantle the mounted police
arrived in hot haste at Rockingham, only to find that the fugitives
had slipped from their grasp, and were on the open sea. The horses
and carriages used by the escaped prisoners and their friends were
found where they had been left. To add to the discomfiture of the
authorities, it was found that the wily Fenians had cut the telegraph
wires between Perth and Albany, where a gunboat was stationed.
The government officials, however, were determined to make an
effort to recapture the prisoners, and a steamer, the “ Georgette,”
11
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


When John Devoy was exiled in 1871
From left to right. Sitting —Charles Underwood O’Connell, Jeremiah
O’Donovan Rossa. Standing —John Devoy, Harry S. Mulleda. Taken
in January, 1871.
—Reproduced from The Gaelic American.


was sent in pursuit. She was fully equipped, and armed for any
possible encounter. After twenty anxious hours in the open whale-
boat, with a liberal allowance of rain and seawater, with the glorious
uncertainty as to whether they should gain freedom or the “ chain
gang,” the prisoners and their rescuers scrambled on board the
“ Catalpa” in double quick time, and once more enjoyed their well-
earned freedom.
UNDER THE STARS AND STRIPES.
At daylight next morning those on board the “ Catalpa ” observed
they were being pursued by the “ Georgette ”; and at about eight
o’clock the latter steamed ahead and fired a round shot across the
bows of the “ Catalpa.” Captain Anthony stepped on to the weather
rail and raised his speaking trumpet. As he did so, the “ Georgette ”
hailed “ Barque ahoy!” and the answer went back : “ What do you
want?” “ Heave to!” came back from the “Georgette.” “What
for?” shouted the American captain through his trumpet. No reply,
and the question was repeated still louder : “ What am I to heave to
for?” After a pause, the “Georgette” hailed: “Have you any
convict prisoners on board?” Answer: “No prisoners here—no
prisoners that I know of.” The “ Georgette ” then hailed : “ You
have six convict prisoners on board. I give you fifteen minutes to
consider, and you must take the consequences. I have the means to
do it, and if you don’t heave to I’ll blow the masts out of
you!” Captain Anthony then shouted through his speaking
trumpet: “That’s the American Flag; I’m on the High
Seas; my Flag protects me; if you fire on this ship you fire
on the American Flag.” The fifteen minutes’ grace and several
other minutes had expired, but the “ Georgette ” did not fire, and as
she ranged alongside again, Captain Anthony felt that the game of
bluff was played out. After ten minutes’ sailing side by side, the
“ Georgette ” hailed : “ Can I come on board ?” To this Captain
Anthony replied : “ No, sir, I’m bound for sea and can’t stop.” The
“ Georgette ” still kept the “ Catalpa ” company till 9.30 a.m., when
she slowly swung off, and, without having the courtesy to bid
hon voyage, steamed back to Freemantle. The remaining incidents
of the voyage are written in the log of the good ship “ Catalpa.”
13
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


For four months nothing was heard of the “ Catalpa ” until at
length she cast anchor in New York Bay at one o’clock on the
morning of Saturday, 18th August, 1876. At daybreak John Breslin
proceeded to O’Donovan Rossa’s hotel, and a party went aboard to
give the men a cordial greeting, and to see to their comforts after
so long a voyage.
CONCLUSION.
The rescue was one of the greatest sensations of the time. It was
accomplished under such adventurous and thrilling conditions that
it sent a glow of pride and admiration through the Irish world, and
spread alarm amongst the enemies of the Irish National cause.
The rescue had, indeed, an interest and effect far more than
personal. It occurred when the national cause was battling against
tremendous odds, and its stimulating and bracing influence on the
Irish at home in the unhappy Motherland and in America could
scarcely be exaggerated.
The voyage of the rescuing ship became a popular theme in two
hemispheres, and her captain became a hero, and his name a toast
wherever Irishmen assembled together. Poets sang the perils and
victory of the gallant ship and her dashing captain, and story-tellers
spun the yarn of her colossal impudence in the very teeth of Eng-
land’s might.
Twenty years later John Dcvoy sat on the platform at Phila-
delphia, and saw the gallant Anthony present to the Clan-na-Gael
the flag which flew over the “ Catalpa.” On that memorable day
the duty of accepting the flag most naturally fell to John Devoy.
But he was ill and could not stand the strain of speech. But he had
prepared a spirited and eloquent address, which was read to a de-
lighted and enthusiastic assemblage.
John Devoy was an ardent and powerful supporter of every pro-
gressive movement in Ireland which did not set a limit to Ireland’s
national aspirations. When the Irish Volunteers were organised, he
lent all his influence and the influence of his paper, “ The Gaelic
14
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


American,” to the project to raise funds to aid the organisation, and
helped more than any other man of the Irish race in America to
supply the “ sinews of war ” to the men of Easter Week, 1916, whose
plans were communicated to him two months before the Insurrection.
He looked upon the Free State arrangement as a concession wrung
from England, and not as a final settlement of the Irish demand.
Since his release from prison in 1871, John Devoy visited Ireland
twice—first on a secret mission in 1879, and again in the summer of
1924.
When he disembarked at Cobh in the latter year, he was received
by the Minister for External Affairs, and welcomed to Ireland on
behalf of the Government. It was a historic scene when the tender
from the American liner, “ President Harding,” touched the quay-
side, and a few moments later the veteran Fenian, who was the first
to come ashore, stood again on Irish soil, the cheers of his country-
men ringing in his ears, the military guard of honour presenting
arms, and the bells of St. Colman’s Cathedral crashing out their
joyous peals into the summer air. Bareheaded, in the sunshine, the
exile stood in his acknowledgment of the reception.
When he arrived in Dublin, military honours w T ere again accorded
him on arrival at Kingsbridge, and he was warmly greeted by his
relatives and the public.
Had he but elected to accept the unique invitation of the Govern-
ment to be the guest of the State, instead of deciding to be a sort
of private visitor, there would be nothing to measure the enthusiasm
of the Gael at his return after forty years. It was little short of
marvellous to note that, even by those who differed with his attitude
on the national question, he was regarded with respect amounting
almost to affection. All sides recognised in him the embodiment of
the resolute Irishman who always placed his country in the front
of the picture, and never wavered in his steadfastness and devotion
to Eire.
At the opening of the Tailtcann Games the ground shook with
the thunderous applause which spoke the nation’s welcome. Later he
15
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


presented prizes to the winners in the athletic events of the Tailteann
Games, and in doing so urged the importance of Gaelic pastimes in
reviving the old standard of physique. He hoped the old brawn and
muscle would be restored as well as the old prestige of vitality and
vigour.
During his sojourn, he looked up all the surviving friends of his
boyhood, and visited the graves of his companions-in-arms in Glas-
nevin. During a visit to the scenes of his boyhood in Kildare he
showed a thorough knowledge of every inch of the locality, though
sixty years had elapsed since he had seen it.
Before his departure, John Devoy was entertained to a farewell
banquet in the Dolphin Hotel, Dublin, where many tributes were
paid by distinguished men to his labour in the cause of Irish freedom.
In response, he made an earnest appeal to Irishmen to combine for a
common object, without losing their identity or sacrificing their ideals.
To-day, in accordance with the life-long desire of the veteran
patriot, his body returns to his native land. His remains will rest
alongside the Fenian dead in Glasnevin Cemetery, and all that is
mortal of John Devoy will mingle with the dust of those who dared
and died for Ireland.
[The publishers desire to acknowledge their indebtedness to Mr. John
J. Whelan, Librarian, Public Library, Kevin Street, Dublin, for his courtesy
and assistance in obtaining many of the particulars contained in this
biography].
Wic. Warren & Son, 15 Lower Ormond Quay, Dublin.
16
MEMOIR OF JOHN DEVOY


• s
*


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUBTRAI
00849460
