



, > uKth


THE
NEW SOUTH WALES
COAT OF ARMS,
WITH
NOTES ON THE EARLIER SEALS.
BY
W. A. GULLICK.
Sydney:
William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer.
1907.




?5 OCT 1933
Gazettal of Despatch and Royal Warrant.
The Treasury, New South Wales,
19 th February, 1907.
His Excellency the Governor directs the publication, for general
information, of the following Despatch received from the Secretary
of State for the Colonies, and the enclosures thereto.
J. H. CARRUTHERS*
New South Wales—Miscellaneous.
Sir, Downing-street, 23rd November, 1906.
With reference to your Despatch No. 16 of the 20th March
last, I have the honour to transmit to you herewith a certified copy of
the Royal Warrant granting Armorial Ensigns and Supporters for the
State of New South Wales.
2. A second certified copy has been filed for record in this Depart-
ment. The College of Arms has been informed that an account of the
fees due should be forwarded to the Agent-General.
I have, &c.,
ELGIN.
Governor Sir Harry Rawson, G.C.8., &c., &c.


Warrant Granting Armorial Ensigns and Supporters for
the State of New South Wales.
EDWARD R. & I.
(Bfctoai'i the Seventh by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the
Seas, King, Defender of the Faith, To Our Right Trusty and Right
Entirely beloved Cousin and Councillor Henry, Duke of Norfolk Earl
Marshal and Our Hereditary Marshal of England, Knight of Our Most
Noble Order of the Garter, Knight Grand Cross of Our Royal Victorian
Order, Greeting : Whereas, for the greater honor and distinction of
Our State of New South Wales, We are desirous that Armorial
Ensigns and Supporters should be assigned for that State.
HutOtD therefore that We of Our Princely Grace and Special
Favour have granted and assigned and by these Presents do grant and
assign the following Armorial Ensigns and Supporters for the said
State of New South Wales that is to say for Arms “ Azure a Cross
Argent voided Gules charged in the centre chief point with a Lion
passant guardant, and on each member with a Mullet of eight points
Or between in the first and fourth quarters a Fleece of the last banded
of the second and in the second and third quarters a Garb also Or:
And for the “ Crest on a Wreath of the Colours A Rising Sun each
Ray tagged with a Flame of fire proper : And for the Supporters On
the dexter side A Lion rampant guardant: And on the sinister side
“A Kangaroo both Or,” together with this Motto, “Ortaßecens Quam
Pura Nites,” as the same are in the painting hereunto annexed more
plainly depicted to be borne for the said State on Seals, Shields,
Banners, Flags or otherwise according to the Laws of Arms.
Our Will and Pleasure therefore is that you Henry Duke of Norfolk
to whom the cognizance of matters of this nature doth properly belong
do require and command that this Our Concession and Declaration be
recorded in Our College of Arms in order that our Officers of Arms and


1
all other Public Functionaries whom it may concern may take full
notice and have knowledge thereof in their several and respective
departments. And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.
ddhm at Our Court at St. James’s this eleventh day of October, 1906,
in the Sixth year of Our Reign.
By His Majesty’s Command,
(Signed) ELGIN.
I hereby Certify that the foregoing Copy of the Royal Warrant
assigning Armorial Ensigns and Supporters for the State of New
South Wales is faithfully extracted from the Records of the
College of Arms, London.
As witness my hand at the said College this twentieth day
of November, 1906.
A. S. Scott-Gatty, Garter.


Correspondence.
Dear Sir, Herald’s College, London, E.C., I May, 1906.
An application to the Crown through the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
asking for an assignment of Armorial Ensigns for the State of New South W ales,
has been referred here for the preparation of the necessary Royal Warrant. For
this purpose I shall be much obliged if you will kindly give me the information
necessary for drafting the warrant, i.e., a precis of the Acts —both of the Imperial
and of the Colonial Legislature, the Orders in Council, &c., and the dates thereof—
by which New South Wales was originally constituted a State, as these details
have to be recapitulated in the said warrant.
A sketch of the Arms desired-was enclosed with the application referred to, and
to this design there does not appear to be any objection ; but since a written
description—technically a “blazon”—of the Arras is also incorporated in the
Warrant, may we be informed how it is suggested that the animal in the first and
fourth quarters of the shield should be described ?
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
G. AMBROSE LEE,
York Herald.
The Agent-General for New South Wales.
New South Wales Arms.
Dear Sir, Herald’s College, London, E.C., 7 May, 1906.
lam much obliged for your letter of the sth instant. With reference to the
Crest proposed—a sketch of which is marked “ A ” —a demi sun or “ rising sun '
is already on record as the Crest of a private family, and we, therefore, propose,
in order to avoid interference with existing rights, to recommend that each ray be
tipped with a little flame of fire, so that the Crest will appear more or less like
“ B.” I shall be pleased to hear that there is no objection to this necessary slight
variation.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
G. AMBROSE LEE,
York Herald.
The Agent-General for New South Wales.


A.
B.




NEW SOUTH WALES COAT OF ARMS
In giving effect to the Premier’s instructions to supply sketches for the
Coat of Arms, suggested by a Colonial Office despatch of 29th Novem-
ber, 1905, several designs were submitted for consideration.
That finally adopted at once passed both the Colonial Office and
Heralds’ College, practically without objection, and being now granted
by Warrant under the Royal Signet and Sign Manual “ for the greater
honour and distinction of Our State of New South Wales, to be borne
for the said State on seals, shields, flags, banners, and otherwise
according to the Laws of Arms,” these notes are compiled in
explanation of the historical references underlying the symbolism.
As the King is in law the “ Fountain of Justice,” so he is, by
tradition, statute, and practice, the “ Fountain of Honour ”; and
honours thus granted are enrolled, recorded, and issued by Heralds’
College, according to the Statutes and ordinances of the realm.
Being now thus granted and assigned by the King as Sovereign
and Supreme Executive of the nation, our Arms become symbolic
registers and honourable records of those by whom they are borne,
and emblems of distinction to be prized and guarded accordingly.


The Coat of Arms with its field of azure is
THE ORDlNARY—
divided into quarterings by the principal fea-
The Red Cross.
ture of an “ Ordinary”—a Cross argent or silver,
voided gules—in allusion to the old badge of the Colony, the Red Cross
of St. George on its silver field.
The adoption of this first local official design or badge resulted from
an Order-in-Council of the Home Government, dated 7th August, 1869,
bearing on Flags to be used by Governors of Colonies, and by Diplomatic,
Consular, and Military authorities when afloat. To ensure uniformity
of practice, the order was re-issued for correction to date, above the
signature of Earl Carnarvon, on the 21st May, 1874.
The late Mr. Barnet, Colonial Architect, with Captain Hixson, then
President of the Marine Board, designed this early Badge. The
latter officer, being an old R.N., naturally favoured, as its basis,
the symbol of his early service—the White Ensign of the Navy,
and as such, it was fixed in the recommendation to Governor Sir
Hercules Robinson. This was late in 1875, and the design was trans-
mitted in a despatch of the Governor to England bearing date 9th
January, 1876.
Gazettal of Badge.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 15th February, 1876.
GOVERNMENT NOTIFICATION.
His Excellency the Governor has been pleased, with the advice of the Executive
Council, to direct that, for the future the badge of the Colony to be emblazoned
in the centre of the Union Jack used by the Governor when afloat, and to be


inserted in the Blue Ensign used by vessels in the employment of the Colonial
Government shall be as hereinafter described:—
Argent, on a cross gules a lion passant guardant or, between four stars of eight
points also or.
Drawing of Badge. (Original block.)
By His Excellency’s Command,
JOHN ROBERTSON,
Colonial Secretary.
It is worthy of note that no Motto was gazetted with this, and the
purpose to which it was to be applied had a peculiar fitness which will
be noted later on.
. , At the next official stage this same badge
Recognition Of Badge was accepted) and retransmitted to the State in
by Home Government. a despatch from Earl Carnarvon, the Secretary
of State for the Colonies, bearing date 11th July, 1876, as being


enrolled among the representative badges for the flags of the Colonial
possessions of Great Britain, as they were to appear in the Admiralty
Flag Book.
This application of the St. George’s Cross or Navy flag badge to our
Colony for use on Government vessels has much Australian historic
interest. To the Naval Service belonged Captain Cook, when he arrived
in 1770 and took possession in Botany Bay, at the spot now known as
Kurnell; also Governor Phillip, who arrived later, in 1788, to complete
Cook’s discovery by settlement and foundation of the Colony. Then
followed, at brief intervals, Governors Hunter, King, and Bligh, all
R.N. officers, and the connection is renewed again at the present day
in the person of our Governor, Admiral Sir Harry Rawson, G.C.B.
Represented for so many years by the Premier, even the name of the
electorate, “St. George,” opposite Cook’s historic landing-place, forms
another link in the connection (see also “ St. George’s Cross ”).
Continuing the description of the Arms—
THE CHARGES ON borne on the ordinary are the four golden stars,
THE ORDINARY— or mullets, of eight points, representative of the
The English Lion. Southern Cross, with the central emblem of the
Lion passant guardant or. This lion is typical
of the three used in the quartering for England on the Royal Standard
and in the Arms of the United Kingdom, and was intended by the
first designers to represent the “ Lion in the South.”
The three Lions, or “ three Leopards passant ” (to use the old
Norman term) may still be seen on Guernsey coinage. They form
the badge of the Channel Islands, the oldest possessions of the
British Crown. These islands comprise the only territory remaining
to England of the old Duchy of Normandy. William I was Duke of
Normandy before he was King of England, and as Duke he ruled that
little Archipelago off the Norman Coast, his arms thus arriving in
English heraldry through the Conquest of 1066.


The Southern Cross has been from the earliest
SOUTHERN CROSS time a mariner’s guide in the south, and symbol
“ Each member of beauty and promise in the Southern Hemi-
with a mullet Of sphere, Recognised by Australians as their
eight points or ” emblem from the first efforts at framing a flag or
Arms for their representation, its stars appeared
in silver on a cross of blue in the old Kangaroo and Emu days of the
early fifties. It appeared again in our earliest —but also unauthorised—
Australian Flag, with its white field, pale blue cross, and white stars,
which many of us still look back to with pleasant memories of the past;
and it is enshrined in Australian literature by many a heading
descriptive of the country and its events “ Under the Southern Cross.”
The original Blue Cross and its charge of stars was not, however,
steadily adhered to in the old representations of the arms ; in fact, the
one point which investigation brings out is the endless variation in
use for want of a proper authoritative example impressed on the public
mind. The clashing of the flag effect at a distance with the White
Ensign of the Navy is popularly assigned as the reason of the offer of
the English Naval authorities to allow the use of the Blue Ensign—and
a local badge —to avoid future confusion, but it seems from official data
(C.S., 75/10,550) that the real reason was the desirability of uniform
practice with regard to flags throughout the British Dominions
On the
QUARTERINGS— V. . . ° ’
“a Fleece of the last, banded of the second
The Golden Fleece. ( see R o y a i Warrant) as an emblem of a great
achievement of Australia in the peaceful arts.
The official advent of the Golden Fleece was in a Victorian Seal
granted after the first Constitutional Government of 1856—and
although on the decease of her late Majesty all Colonial Seals
were withdrawn, in the new one, with the inscription of King
Edward VII, the use of the same emblem is continued. As “ Peace


hath her victories no less renown’d than war,” so we may fairly claim
to carry as the mark of an achievement the emblem or badge of one
of the oldest and most honoured Orders of Knighthood in Spain, or
Europe. Instituted in 1429, shortly after our own Orders of the
Garter (1348) and Bath (1399) —the Golden Fleece was placed in most
respects on an equivalent footing with those much-prized Orders of
our own country. Noting the nationality and occasion of its institution,
and the direct historical and de facto connection of the two countries
with the origin of the wool industry in Australia, the pre-eminent place
is assigned to this charge; and the motto attached to the ancient badge
Prcetium laborum non vile* —“ Not a bad reward for labour”—has
proved an apt prophecy in its local association.
The following history of the institution of the Order is extracted
from a well-recognised source —a copy of which is public property in
our Library :
\
Spain : The Order of the Golden Fleece, f
“ This Order was instituted at Bruges, in Flanders, the 10th of
January, 1429 (the day of his marriage with his third wife, Isabella
of Portugal), by Phillip, Duke of Burgundy. The occasion of its
institution is a subject of controversy among antiquaries; but it
appears most probable that, having determined to institute an
Order of Knighthood, he chose for the badge of it the material of
the staple manufactories of his country, which was the Fleece; and
this emblem might have been the more agreeable to him from the
figure it made in the heroic ages of the world, when the Argonautic
expedition was undertaken for it. However this may be, it at first
consisted of thirty Knights, including the Sovereign, who were of
* Pretium Non Vile Laborem. Hugh Clark. 1784.
Pretium Laborem Non Vile. Burke “ Orders of Knighthood.” 1858.
t “ A Concise History of Knighthood,” Vol. II ; by Hugh Clark, Heraldic
Engraver. London, 1784.


the first families in the Low Countries; and, though it has under-
gone some changes since its foundation, it has ever been ranked
among the most illustrious and distinguished Orders of Knighthood
in Europe.
“ * * * * They wear usually a Golden Fleece Proper,
pendant to a broad plain red ribbon round their necks; but on days
of ceremony they wear the collar of the Order, which is composed of
double steels, interwoven with flint stones, emitting sparks of fire,
the whole enamelled in their proper colours, at the end whereof
hangs on the breast a Golden Fleece. * * * * The motto of
the Order is Prcetium non vile lahorum. * * * * ”
(Hugh Clark s Concise History (Burke’s “Order of Knighthood,”
op Knighthood,” 1784.) 185 g j ’
The popular reference to New South Wales as “ The Land of the
Golden Fleece ” is thus preserved by this heraldic charge.


Following on this quotation, the direct historical connection of the
origin of the wool industry in Australia from this Spanish source is
easily traceable by study of our earlier “Historical Records,” and some
of the earlier official Australian almanacs.
It would appear that His Majesty King George 111 received from
the King of Spain a present of a small stud flock of Spanish Merino
Sheep, which, from the fineness of their wool, were in high repute.
King George bred from this flock, and some of their descendants
were given to a Colonel Gordon, then Commandant at the Cape of
Good Hope. On his decease the widow sold them to Lieutenant Kent
and Captain Waterhouse, and some were brought to Sydney and sold
again, being purchased by Messrs. John Macarthur, Rowland, Lawson,
Bayley, and others. It is to the advantageous crossing of these
Merinos with the Cape Sheep that much of the first success of our
Wool Industry is ascribed. From the foregoing facts and quotations,
this application of the Fleece as a primary charge will be seen to have
a directly traceable connection and basis.
THE GARB OR Second and third Quarterings.—The Garb,
_______ __ or Golden Wheat-sheaf, is the Emblem of
WHEAT-SHEAF. . .
Agriculture and of our successful initiation
and development of that peaceful art, the Australian origination of
which is primarily claimed from the fact that wheat was first planted
on the shores of Sydney Harbour—this circumstance is commemorated
not only in our historic records, but also by old James Ruse’s tomb-
stone, still standing in Campbell town churchyard. Agriculture is
now our second primary asset, bidding fair to rival the pastoral
industry, and plant a yeomanry on the soil.
From such small beginnings of peaceful husbandry and agriculture
we have grown, and nurtured, and strengthened into a people with


recognition as a State. May “ Peace and Plenty,” the motto im-
pressed on some of the earlier tokenage, long continue descriptive
of our heritage !
The Rising Sun, continues our earliest
CREST 8
adopted Colonial Crest, taken from the old
The Rising Sun. Kangaroo and Emu Arms, with its memories
of the “Rise and Shine” Motto in currency days. It is the only
portion of the suggested Armorials which the Heralds’ College found
necessary to alter, and that slightly only, by the addition of the tags
of flame, as in its primary form it was already allotted to a private
family (see letter in Appendix). It perpetuates the later term of
endearment for our State as “ Sunny New South Wales,” and
Wentworth’s allusion.* (See p. 18.)
Guarding the Coat of Arms are the sup-
SUPPORTERS— , “ T . p . , ,
porters. The Lion Rampant guardant carries
The British Lion. a p rofW ] er significance than the merely Norman-
English reference of that charged on the centre point. From the people
of all the parent stocks of Great Britain, those of our State have sprung,
and they are not fully represented by the central emblem, which leaves
out of account Welsh, Irish, and Scotch, and is thus narrow in its
claims or acknowledgments. Whilst serving to cover this omission, the
grant of supporters to the shield is also the recognition of a higher
ranking than is afforded by the unsupported shield.
What Wentworth thought in his day seems worthy of passing
reference, and is well exemplified by the following extract from
report of the debate on the second reading of the Constitution Bill in
1855, p. 231
“ Sir, I can refer, for proof of JMs, to one of my early productions—
a production which attracted more attention than it deserved, but
which, at all events, shows that from my boyhood upwards the


establishment here of the British Constitution has been my sole end
and aim. Sir, that production concludes with these lines :
‘ May all thy glories, in another sphere,
* Eelume and shine more brightly still than here !
And oh, Britannia ! shouldst thou cease to ride,
Despotic Empress of old Ocean’s tide ;
Should thy tamed lion, spent his former might,
No longer roar, the terror of the fight;
Should e’er arrive that dark, disastrous hour,
When, bowed by luxury, thou yieldst to power ;
W T hen thou, no longer freest of the free,
To some proud victor bend’st the suppliant knee ;
May this, thy last-born daughter, then arise,
To glad thy heart, and greet thy parent eyes ;
And Australasia float, with flag unfurled,
A new Britannia in another world !’ ”
On the opposite side is borne in gold the
The Kangaroo. Kangaroo, at once our most distinctive and
typical animal, restricted almost entirely to
our continent and adopted alike in sport and earnest as emblematic
of Australia. To this, the Mother State can advance the strongest
claim to right of use by date of foundation and her parentage of
the remaining States.
As supporters the Emu and Kangaroo were considered, but the
Ostrich and Kangaroo—the bird armorially indistinguishable from
the Emu-having been some ten years back granted to Lord
Bosmead, in recognition of his gubernatorial services in New
South Wales and the Cape, the old supporters would not have
been available, without a difference. This would have betrayed the
secondary nature of our claim, and the Emu was consequently not
included in any design submitted.
Orta recens quam pur a nites—“ Recently
THE MOTTO. risen, how purely thou shinest ” —a line first
suggested as applicable to the Garden Palace of
1879-80, by the late Dr. Badham, a classical scholar of high repute


and Dean of the Faculty of Arts of Sydney University from 1867 to
1884. Its present application to the Crest of the Rising Sun, is
representative of our rising position in the rank of nations. It is
previously noted that no Motto was included with the Badge of
the Colony gazetted in 1876; still, from some cause the Motto
of the first Great Seal of 1790 has of late years become freely
associated with it. In such association, Sic fortis Etruria crevit,
figures prominently on many public buildings, State documents,
and elsewhere, during the last quarter of a century. So far, no
Executive approval of this addition to the Badge is traceable,
and although the early Victorian Seal granted in 1838 contained the
original convict design on its field, with the Royal Arms paramount, it
dropped the Motto completely. In fact, with the exception of the
wax Seal employed by his Excellency the Governor, the convict
emblems passed from official cognizance with the advent of the
Victorian Seal granted by local request after the first Constitution had
been introduced. Neither that Seal, nor King Edward’s, which replaced
it quite recently, contains any reference or Motto, beyond the ordinary
ones attached to the Royal Arms which occupy the upper position,
and the usual Motto entwining the Prince of Wales feathers in
the field. It would therefore, appear that the addition of Sic fortis
Etruria crevit to the gazetted Badge is not properly supported by
official cognizance or formula, and is rather a matter of unauthorised
reintroduction, —the date being hard to define.
It has been objected that the element of lasting time seems
insufficiently provided for in the adaptation of the old Uni
versity Scholar’s motto to rhe present Arms, still we must
recognise that we are but as yesterday inscribed on the roll of
nations, and may sincerely hope that most of our history has yet
to be written.
Further notes bearing on the old motto are included later on, under
heading “ Earlier Seals.”


The Red Cross of St. George.
Argent—a Cross gules.
ST. GEORGE — The legend of St. George came to us from the
Patron Saint Of East. The Greek Church honors him as the
England and of Great Martyr—Captain of the noble army of
Soldiers. Martyrs. His cult in the East formed very
early, as Constantine, the first Christian Roman Emperor, built a
church in his name about 323 a.d., only twenty years after his death.
In the West, his position was defined by Pope Gelasius, in 494 a.d.,
as one of those Saints “ whose names are justly reverenced among men
but whose actions are known only to God.”
St. George came into the world at Diospolis, or Lydda, in Palestine
in the year 280. His parents were rich, and good Christians, and bis
father being in the service of the Emperor Diocletian, the education
of George was entrusted to his mother. At the age of seventeen
George embraced the profession of arms, and the loyal services of his
father, who had lately died, were recompensed to the son. He is stated
to have combined great beauty of person, and intelligence with exquisite
courtesy, and pleasing the Emperor Diocletian, was quickly raised from
rank to rank until made Military Tribune of the Emperor’s Guards.
From the first, the persecution of the Christians, and the decree of
the Senate ordering them, excited the indignation of the young soldier,
who boldly denounced these cruel edicts against his brethren. In
vain did his friends recommend him to be prudent, and recalled to him
the favours of the Emperor. He knew well that his own call to “con.
fess and suffer ” might come at any moment, and so he distributed his
money and wardrobe among the poor; set free the slaves who were
with him, and left directions to provide for those who were absent.


Thus prepared, George approached the Emperor, and himself pleaded
for the innocent Christians, demanding as the least that they be granted
liberty—since this liberty could hurt none. But the benevolence of
the tyrant Emperor changed to fury, and George was consigned to
prison and torture, and later on was asked to sacrifice to the Pagan
Gods, but refusing, was taken to the place of execution and beheaded
on 23rd April, 303 a.d. — (St. George’s Day, April 23).
But St. George cannot be left without his Dragon, and the more
popular legend is that on his knightly travels to a certain city in Lybia,
called Silene, he found the inhabitants in trouble in consequence of an
enormous dragon, which devoured the flocks and herds of the people,
and when these were exhausted, they were forced to sacrifice to him
two of their children daily, which were taken by lot. The king of the
country had but one daughter, called Cleodolinda, and the lot eventually
falling upon her, the monarch in despair offered all his gold and treasures
to save her, but the people declined, and threatened to burn his palace.
Then the king submitted, and asked only a delay of eight days to
bewail her fate before she was taken forth as a victim for sacrifice.
At this time St. George was passing through the country and
undertook her championship. After a terrible combat, he beat
the dragon to the earth, and eventually despatched it. Then the
king heaped upon St. George great rewards and treasures, which
were in turn distributed to the poor, as the knight kept nothing. Here
the story joins in with that previously given, as he was taken before
Dacian as a Christian, and afterwards sacrificed under the decree of
the Emperor Diocletian.
There is also another legend of his appearing at the head of an army
as one of the Seven Champions of Christendom—a celestial knight who
won a great victory over a Moslem host.
So he stands for ever before the young manhood of Christendom, one
of its seven great champions, the type of courage shown in brave inter-


The Village of Ludd.


cession for the oppressed ; of purity, not merely spotless in whiteness
firm to endure, but fiery, with chivalrous manhood, mighty to save ; true
soldier in Christ, rewarded for victory in one combat by being sent
forth to another harder fight—the mart} r-soldier, whose order and
decoration is not a crown, but a cross. (Adapted from “ Martyrs and
Saints,” Mrs. E, R. Black.)
The historical connection with England is well brought out by an
extract from The Land and The Boole , by W. M. Thomson, D.D.
(1881), who says :
“ We are now approaching Ludd, the village where Peter was when
summoned to Jaffa on account of the death of Dorcas. It has a
double history—that of the place, and that of the Church of St.
George.
“ ; . . In the Onomasticon
and early ecclesiastical notitia it is called Diospolis; but this foreign
title ultimately fell off, and the original name was resumed. Under
this name it figures largely in the history of the Crusades, especially
in connection with the Church of St. George. The Saracens had
destroyed the edifice on the approach of the Crusaders, but it was
soon rebuilt by them, and became the splendid cathedral of a Latin
bishopric. It was subsequently destroyed by Saladin, who feared
that it would be occupied by Richard of England as a fortress. Again
it was rebuilt, and, after many succeeding demolitions and restora-
tions, it gradually fell into the ruined condition which all travellers
in this country for the last three centuries have described. The
Moslems long ago built a mosk in the western end of it, and lately
the eastern part has been made into a Greek church. No one can
look upon .the remains of this edifice without being struck with the
air of grandeur which it bears, and deeply impressed by its long
and eventful history. The material of which it was built is a hard
yellowish limestone, that takes a fine polish and is very durable,”


The cult of St. George was henceforward specially promoted in
England by Richard Cceur de Lion, who had invoked his name in the
Crusade Wars in Palestine, and since then, at Coronations, the plain
white banner of St. George with its red cross is carried in the pro-
cession, and, as part of the ceremony itself, the golden spurs of St.
George are touched to the king’s heels,
and laid on the altar in token of
Christian Knighthood.
Church or St. George,


The symbol being thus brought to England from the Crusades
Edward 111 next enshrined it in our oldest and noblest order of
Knighthood, that of the Garter (1348) where the Red Cross is the
■central emblem of the brilliant star of the Order, the highest guerdon
of the Nation’s honor.
From these times of the Crusades it formed the banner of England
until James I came to the throne, and added St. Andrew’s Cross on its
blue ground. It floated over Drake when he fought the Spanish
Armada, and is perpetuated to the present day in the flags of the Navy
and the Army, while for generations past the figure of St. George,
equipped with shield and banner, has been borne on the Great Seal
of England.
Thus, interwoven with English history, this Red Cross has been
regarded from the earliest days, as a symbol to guide the life of the
nation. Spenser used it in his “ Faerie Queene,” written in the times
of good Queen Bess, and how the legend is still kept alive in our
own times, few words express better than the beautiful epilogue by
Shapcott Wensley, set to Dr. Elgar’s cantata, “The Banner of St.
George.”
EPILOGUE.
It comes from the misty ages,
The banner of England’s might,
The blood-red cross of the brave St. George,
That burns on a field of white !
It speaks of the deathless heroes,
On fame’s bright page inscrolled,
And bids great England ne’er forget
The glorious deeds of old !
O’er many a cloud of battle,
The banner has floated wide,
It shone like a star o’er the valiant hearts,
That dashed the Armada’s pride !
For ever amid the thunders,
The sailor could do or die,
While tongues of flame leapt forth below,
And the flag of St. George was high !


0 ne’er may the flag beloved,
Unfurl in a strife unblest,
But ever give strength to the righteous arm,
And hope to the hearts oppressed !
It says through the passing ages,
‘ ‘ Be brave if your cause be right !
Like the soldier-saint whose cross of red
Still burns on your banner white ! ”
Great race, whose empire of splendour,
Has dazzled a wondering world !
May the flag that floats o’er thy wide domains
Be long to all winds unfurled !
Three crosses in concord blended.
The banner of Britain’s might !
But the central gem of the ensign fair,
Is the cross of the dauntless knight !
Kipling well understood this necessity of moral stamina, and warned
the nation of its continued obligations in his beautiful “ Recessional,”
written immediately after the surpassing display of Empire pageant
power and wealth, which assembled in London to celebrate the late
Queen’s Jubilee in 1897.
RECESSIONAL.
By Rudyard Kipling.
God of our fathers, known of old,
Lord of our far-flung battle-line,
Beneath Whose awful hand we hold
Dominion over palm and pine—
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget—lest we forget!
« * * * * »
The Cross of St. George is the emblem of the oldest member of the
British group in the north, and New South Wales, as the oldest member
of the Austral-British group, can well support her claim to its use.
With the memories entwined around its glorious history, may we ever
keep the sentiment alive
“ Under the Southern Cross.”


EARLIER N.S.W. SEALS
FIRST GREAT SEAL.
“ Device for Seal.
4 Aug. “ Court of St. James’s, 4 August, 1790.
“ Whereas there was this day read at the Board a report
from the Right Honourable the Lords of the Committee of
Council appointed for the consideration of all matters re-
lating to trade and foreign plantations, dated the 3rd of
this instant, humbly offering to His Majesty for his royal
Great Seal. approbation the draft of a Great Seal to be made use of
within the Government of New South Wales and the
islands adjacent in the Pacific Ocean, viz. :
obverse. “ On one side : — Convicts landed at Botany Bay ; their
fetters taken off and received by Industry sitting on a bale
of goods, with her attributes, the distaff, beeldve, pick-axe,
and spade, pointing to oxen ploughing, the rising habita-
tions, and a church on a hill at a distance, with a fort for
their defence. Motto : Sic fortis Etruria crevit ; with this
inscription round the circumference : Sigillum Nov. Camb.
Aust.
Reverse. “ On the reverse : —His Majesty’s arms in a shield, with
the supporters ; garter and imperial crown, with the motto ;
and round the circumference His Majesty’s titles.


Seal approved. “ His Majesty, taking the said draught of a seal into con-
sideration, was pleased, with the advice of his Privy Council,
to approve thereof. And His Majesty doth, hereby order
that his Chief Engraver of Seals do forthwith engrave the
said seal, according to the said draught, and lay the same
before His Majesty at this Board for his royal approbation.
And that the Right Honourable Vm, Wyndham Grenville,
one of His Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, do cause
a warrant to be prepared for his Majesty’s royal signature
to the said engraver for that purpose.”
“ Warrant for Seal.
21 Jan. “At the Court of St. James’s, the 21st of January, 1791.
“ Present:—
“ The King’s most Excellent Majesty.
“Lord President Lord Amhurst.
Duke of Dorset, Lord Hawkesbury.
Duke of Leeds. Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Viscount Falmouth.
“A new seal for His Majesty’s Government of Kew South
Wales having been this day laid before his Majesty in
Council for his royal approbation, His Majesty was pleased
to approve thereof, and to order, as it is hereby ordered,
Warrant for that the Right Honourable Lord Grenville, one of His
seal to be
prepared. Majesty’s Principal Secretaries of State, do cause a warrant
to be prepared for His Majesty’s royal signature, for trans-
mitting the said seal to the Governor of Kew South Wales
and empowering him to make use thereof within the said
Government.”


.I-I\ >
Generally called First Great Seal.
4X\
i fa*?A
v
First Victorian Seal— lB3B.
Showing disappearance of Sicfortis Etruria crevit.
By papers 1869/16,834 it is shown that the Colonial Secretary, Mr.
Charles Cowper, applied for a new Great Seal for the Colony, which
application was forwarded in Despatch 135/4 th November, M.2,404 B,
and in the Gazette, 4th November, 1870, official notice is given of the
new Great Seal being received.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 4th November, 1870.
His Excellency the Governor directs the publication for general information of
the following Warrant of Her Majesty, forwarding and authorising the use of a
new Seal for this Colony.
CHARLES COWPER.


! i~'~ { '"\ ] >: /^jj
N s y ''".
z
(1.5.) Victoria Reg.
Warrant authorising the use of a Seal prepared for the Colony of New South
Wales.
To Our Governor and Commander-in-Chief for the time being of Our Colony of
New South Wales and its dependencies, or in his absence to the Lieutenant-
Governor or Officer administering the Government of Our said Colony. With this
you will receive a Seal prepared by Our order for the use of the Government of
New South Wales. Our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby authorise and
direct that the Seal be used in sealing all public instruments which shall be made
and passed in Our name and for Our Service in Our said Colony. And we do
further require and command that you do return the old Seal to us through one
of Our Principal Secretaries of State in order to its being defaced in like
manner with other Seals by us in Our Privy Council. And for so doing this shall
be your warrant.
Given at Our Court at Balmoral this 23rd day of August, 1870, in the thirty -
fourth year of Our Reign.
By Her Majesty’s Command,
KIMBERLEY.
Later Victorian Seal— lB7o.
Showing disappearance of Convict Emblems and advent of Golden Fleece.


Seal of King Edward VII.
Influenced and advised doubtless by the local
ORIGIN OF MOTTO— knowle(J q£ gir j h Banks, when Australia
Sic fortis Etruria
crevit was first settled, the English Government of the
time bestowed upon the Colony a Seal peculiarly
descriptive of the conditions of its establishment, and added as a
motto a classical quotation from Yirgil’s Georgies. I give the context
containing the reference, with its poetic picture :
Ex P. Vergili Maronis georgicon , libro 11, vv. 513-535.
“ Agricola incurvo terram dimovit aratro :
hinc anni labor, hinc patriam parvosque nepotes
sustinet, hinc armenta bourn meritosque iuvencos.
Nec requies, quin aut pomis exuberet annus
aut fetu pecorum aut Cerealis mergite culmi,
proventuque oneret sulcos atque horrea vincat.
venit hiems : teritur Sicyonia baca trapetis,
glande sues laeti redeunt, dant arbuta silvae ;
et varies ponit fetus autumnus, et alte
mitis in apricis coquitur vindemia saxis.
interea dulces pendent circum oscula nati,
casta pudicitiam servat domus, übera vaccae
lactea demittunt, pinguesque in gramine laeto
inter se adversis luctantur cornibus haedi.
ipse dies agitat festos fususque per herbam,
ignis übi in medio et socii cratera coronant,


te libans, Lenaee, vocat pecorisque magistris
velocis iaculi certamina ponit in ulmo,
corporaque agresti nudant praedura palaestra,
hanc olim veteres vitam coluere Sabini,
banc Remus et frater, sic fortis Etruria crevit
scilicet et rerum facta est pulcherrima Roma,
septemque una sibi muro circumdedit arces.”
Translation.
“ The husbandman with his crooked plough furrows the soil; from
this comes the work for the year ; by this he maintains his country and
little grandsons, by this his herds of oxen, and his bullocks that have
served him well. And there is never a time of rest; for either in fruits
the season richly abounds, or in the offspring of cattle, or in the sheaf
of Ceres’ stalk, and loads the furrows with increase, and overflows the
barns. Then winter comes; in the olive-mill is bruised the berry of
Sicyon, the swine come home, well satisfied with mast, the forest gives
the fruit of the arbutus, and autumn drops his various produce, and
on the sunny cliffs the mellowing vintage basks. Meanwhile his dear
children hang about his lips, his stainless house preserves its purity;
his cows hang down their udders fraught with milk, and fat kids on the
smiling lawn with levelled horns against each other strive. The sire
himself keeps holy-day, and stretched along the grass, where is a kindled
altar in the midst, and his companions wreathe the wine-bowl, with a
libation invokes thee, O Father of the wine-press, and for the masters
of his cattle sets upon an elm the target, for a match at the flying dart ;
and their wondrous hardy limbs they strip for the rustic wrestling bout.
This life of yore the antique Sabines lived, and Remus too, and his
brother ; so, I ween, brave Etruria grew, and Rome became the beauty
of the world ; and one within herself, incompassed with her bulwarks
seven heights.”
But, alas, when confronted by the accrued facts of history and later
research, it appears poetic license. The conditions of Government


which really existed in the ancient Etruria, contrast somewhat harshly
with the Virgilian allusion, as the following extract from Denis’s work
will show;
“ Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria.
“ Political freedom was a plant which flourished not in Etruria. Ihe
power was wholly in the hands of priestly nobles j the people had no
voice in the government —not even the power of making themselves
heard and respected, as at Rome. Whatever may have been the precise
relation between the ruling class and their dependents, it is clear that
it was akin to the feudal system, and that the mass of the community
was enthralled. The state of society was not precisely that of the
Middle Ages, for there was more union and community of interest and
feeling than among the feudal lords of Germany, France, or England.
The commons must have been a conquered people, the descendants of
the early inhabitants of the land, and must have stood in a somewhat
similar relation to their rulers to that which the Perioeci of Laconia
held to their Dorian lords, or the subjugated Saxons of England bore
to their Norman conquerors. That they were serfs rather than slaves
seems evident, from the fact that they formed the class of which the
Etruscan armies were composed. The Etruscans possessed slaves, like
the other nations of antiquity I —nay, their bondage was proverbially
rigorous 2 ; but these were captives taken in war, or in their piratical
expeditions. Niebuhr shows that ‘the want of a free and respectable
commonalty—which the Etruscans, obstinately retaining and extending
their old feudal system, never allowed to grow up —was the occasion
of the singular weakness displayed by the great Etruscan cities in their
1 Liv. V, 1, 22. Dionysius (XI, p. 562) speaks of the Etruscan nobles leading
the nevearat, or serfs, out to battle against the Romans; and the “ agrestium
cohortes ” mentioned by Livy (IX, 36), were probably of the same class.
The rebellious slaves who usurped the supreme power at Volsinii are shown by
Niebuhr to have been also serfs, not domestic slaves. Hist. Rom. I, p. 124 ; 111,
p. 546. See Vol. 11, p. 22, of this work.
2 This would appear from Martial, IX, 23, 4—“ Et sonet innumera compede
Tuscus ager.” Cicero says the Etruscan pirates used to tie their living captives
to the bodies of the dead (ap Serv. ad. Hln. VIII, 479); and Virgil relates the
same of Mezentius, the tyrant of Agylla. Mn. VIII, 485.


wars with the Romans, where the victory was decided hy the number and
strength of the infantry .’ 3 It was also the cause of the inferiority of the
Etruscan to the Greek civilization—of its comparatively stationary and
conventional character; yet had there been no slaves, and had the entire
population been of one race, the lower classes would hardly have escaped
enthralment, for it is difficult to conceive of a system of government more
calculated to enslave both mind and body than that of the aristocratical
augurs and aruspices of Etruria .”
As shown by the illustration, even before the grant of our first self-
governing Constitution, the Home Government had eliminated all
trace of the old Etrurian reference, and, in response to the request
made later, when the new laws were fairly working, they discontinued
also the convict emblem, and substituted instead the badge of a Golden
Fleece between two Prince of Wales feathers, on a background of ten
stars. The Prince of Wales feathers are apparently a piece of
“canting” Heraldry with reference to the name of the State.
Thus a point to be noted in these matters is the carefully graduated
recognition of status indicated on our State Seals. As the con-
stitutionally ascending steps have been achieved so they have been
armorially recognised. With the first penal settlement stage came
the bestowal of the old Seal, with its convict emblems ; next, all these
were swept away with the advancing status of the Colony; and
now as a State we have simply been asked to make a local choice
of Arms, which when claimed have been granted and enrolled to
3 Niebuhr, I, p. 122. Engl, trans. The great historian, however, goes too far
in asserting that the extant works of the Etruscans could not have been executed
without taskmasters and bondmen (p. 129); indeed, the distinction between the
public works of the Egyptians and Etruscans, admitted by Niebuhr himself—that
all the works of the latter we are acquainted with have a great public object—is a
sufficient refutation of this position. The works of the Etruscans are not osten-
tatious, useless piles, but such as might be produced in industrious, com mercial,
yet warlike communities, of no great extent and under the influence of more
popular freedom than was ever enjoyed in Etruria. The temples of Psestum,
Agrigentum, and Selinus are examples of this.


be borne for the said State on seals, shields, banners, flags, or other-
wise according to the Laws of Arms. If, therefore, we continued to use
the old motto, with its convict association, we should do it in the face of
this consideration already shown, and discount a great victory which
Wentworth and his colleagues won for us in 1856, by voluntarily
continuing the use of our “birth-stain” after the Home Govexmment
has abolished it for more than half a century. For in spite of the
classical reference and poetic beauty of the picture conveyed by the
Virgilian motto and its context, the true state of Etrurian politics is
disclosed by history and research. The prose extract from Dennis
is unpleasantly exact, almost to cynicism, as a reflection of the com-
parable state of affairs at the first settlement of Australia. All
the functions of our Government —civil, military, and religious —were
controlled in the power of one governing caste, a state from which
we have advanced, stage by stage, to our present broad, almost
autonomous, basis.
It is curious to note how easily an error
Lithograph of may occur. When preparing the 1879-80
supposed Garden Palace exhibits, illustrative of the
First Great Seal. early history and progress of the State, it was
determined to lithograph the first Great Seal,
and a large coloured sheet was then prepared, and circulated as repre-
senting in facsimile the Seal for the period 1791—1817. In this the
pick-axe was omitted. Examination showed a very simple cause,
as the drawing was made from an imperfect and broken wax
impression—the only one then obtainable. Ily mischance one of the
fractures divided the impression just where this feature was repre-
sented, and consequently, although the drawing was made by an
artist of known repute for accuracy, the pick-axe did not appear;
and it was not until after extended inquiries that a very old negative
of the Seal in question was found within official keeping that the
existence and posit! m of the implement could be determined.


Mischance, however, still further attaches to this representation as
it will be seen on reference to the lithograph that it bears the inscrip-
tion, Georgius Quartus; and as that monarch did not succeed to the
throne till 1820—with this inscription it cannot be the first Seal. An
official document “The Australian Almanac” of 1827, published under
authority of Governor Darling by Robert Howe, chronicles amongst
its notable events the following paragraphs:—
“ 1791. Territorial Seal received by Lieutenant Governor (afterwards
Governor) King, who arrived in the Gorgon; with His
Majesty’s Most Gracious Authority for granting Pardons
Absolutely or Conditionally, Sept. 26.
“ 1817. New Territorial Seal, accompanied by a warrant from His Royal
Highness the Prince Regent, arrived in November.
“ 1820. General mourning for his late Majesty ordered, July 20.
His Most Gracious Majesty, King George the Fourth, pro-
claimed, with all due solemnity in Australia, July 24.
“ 1822. A brazen tablet, in commemora’ion of the visit of Captain Cook
and Sir Joseph Banks, to the shores of Australia, designating
these illustrious characters the Columbus and Maecenas of
their time, was affixed against the rock on the South-head of
Botany-bay, on which they first landed, in presence of His
Excellency Sir Thomas Brisbane, March 19.”
There occurs in the medal struck to com-
LOCAL HERALDIC memorate the Garden Palace Exhibition of
ERRORS — 1879-80 a curious instance of how an error,
once in public use, may be perpetuated. Al-
-6 a . though the Art Committee connected with
Exhibition. that Exhibition included among its mem-
bers the late Mr. Barnet, who—as before mentioned—was part


designer of the Badge of the Colony, and well acquainted with
heraldic detail, —the Stars of the Southern Cross are depicted with
only five points.
This error in the 1879-80 medal led to a
Penny Postage repetition, as, when designing the present penny
Stamp. postage stamp, the engraver, Mr. Chambers,
selected as his authority one of these Garden
Palace medals ; hence the continuance of the peculiarity in the stars on
our current postage stamp. It is due to Mr. Barnet to mention that
he called attention to the stamp error, but was somewhat disconcerted
to find the source from which it arose.
An example of a similar nature occurs in
Pick-axe and Spade — connection with the pick-axe and spade alluded
not Pick and Shovel, to in the Royal Warrant for the Seal of 1790.
With the material available at the present
time, it was difficult to trace them both, and application was made
to the Curator of the Australian Museum, to see if he could find
the pick-axe in the early tokenage. In his reply Mr. Etheridge
says:—
“Referring to your inquiries to-day (23-406) as to the appearance of the
* pick and shovel ’ on Australian tokens, I regret to say, much to my
surprise, that not a single token in our collection shows these articles
as a portion of a Coat of Arms. They appear to have been first used
in 1791 by Governor King (see one of your own Department’s publica-
tions—Hyman, ‘An account of the Coins, Coinages, and Currency of
Australasia’, 1893, p. 103 f.n.).”
Following the suggestion, at a later date, an opportunity occurred
of discussing the point with a well-recognised authority in numismatics,
Mr. Coleman Hyman, who gave assurance of their existence in some
of his specimens. This shows an alteration of the original intent of


1790 Agricultural Symbols to Mining Emblems in Saltire in the
fifties, although earlier Governments discountenanced the first gold
discoveries.
To the Chief Secretary’s Department I am indebted for assistance
in authenticating many references, and for the Yirgilian extract
and its translation to Mr. F. M. Bladen of the Public Library. The
material advanced with regard to the designing of the Red Cross Badge
has been compiled from kindly assistance upon various occasions
by Captain Francis Hixson, R.N., and the late Mr. James Barnet,
Colonial Architect, its originators.




