

THE CASE
OF THE
SCOTS CHDECH, CHDECH-HILL,
SYDNEY,
WITH REFERENCE TO THE RECENTLY
PROPOSED CO-PASTORATE,
IN FAVOUR OF
MR. JOHN M'GrIBBON,
PREACHER OF THE GOSPEL;
BY JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D. D.,
MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH.
Itjfcttq:
PRINTED BY R. BARR, 124, YORK-STREET.
MDCCCLIII.
fn Hy




THE
CASE OF THE SCOTS CHURCH,
CHUECH-HILI, SYDNEY.
On my return to New South Wales from England, in the month
of March, 1850, I brought out with me about twenty-three pro-
fessedly pious, zealous and devoted young men, in various stages of
progress as to intellectual qualifications, to be educated for the
Christian Ministry, under tit and proper persons appointed for the
purpose, and to be sent forth thereafter, as preachers of the Gospel,
or Evangelists, to those parts of the Colony that were destitute, or
deprived of the regular dispensation of the ordinances of religion.
These young men were all accommodated, with one or two exceptions,
in my bouse, which was of large size, and was quite unfurnished on
my arrival; the fittings up of the cabins they had occupied on
board ship being brought ashore and transformed, with their own
labour or assistance, into tables, benches, book-shelves, sleeping-
berths, &c., &c. Three fit and proper persons —all college-bred
men themselves —were engaged to superintend their education, at
a salary of £lOO per annum each, for the payment of which for the
first year I was the only responsible party; and the College Hall,
or Lecture Room of the Australian College, which had been greatly
dilapidated at the time from the ravages of insects, was put into a
state of complete repair for their accommodation at an outlay to
myself of not less than £7O. Many professedly Christian people,
indeed, who contributed no assistance in any way, in carrying out
the object themselves, laughed at the whole enterprise, and scorn-
fully predicted, what they, doubtless, sincerely desired, its speedy
and entire failure. But the thing went on notwithstanding,
although it subjected my family in the mean time to much hard-
ship and privation; the young men were lodged and maintained in
comparative comfort, and their education advanced with great zeal
and success, both on the part of the teachers and on that of
the taught.


Among the young men who were thus lodged, hoarded and
educated, at my private expense, was Mr. John M'Gibbon, from
Edinburgh ; the amount of whose intellectual qualifications, when
he joined our corps in London, in the month of November, 1849,
was a fair, but by no means, first-rate, English education, a
moderate acquaintance with the Latin language, and such a general
knowledge of the principal points of Divinity as a youth of pious
parentage and personal ability usually acquires in early life in
Scotland, He set himself diligently to pursue his studies, under
my personal inspection, on board ship, writing essays and discourses
on subjects prescribed, which I occasionally criticized and corrected;
and from the period of his arrival in the colony he was employed,
in common with certain of the other students, in dispensing the
ordinances of religion on Sabbath, at Balmain, Pyrrnont, Parra-
matta.street, Paddington, the South Head, &c.—preaching stations
which we supplied at the time in the best way we could, in and
around Sydney.
From an early period after my return to the Colony on the occa-
sion referred to, I was led to form a highly favourable opinion of
the character and talents of Mr. M'Gibbon, for the work of the
ministry ; and accordingly,'not only recommended that he should be
licensed to preach the Gospel by the Synod of New South Wales,
as he actually was, December 20, 1850,* but proposed even that he
should be ordained as a Collegiate Minister or Co-Pastor in the
Scots Church. For as I had found it necessary, from the year
1846, when I left the Colony for England, for the sixth time, to
* Extract of the Minutes of the Synod of New South Wales. —Monday,
November 4, 1850. —The Moderator (Dr. Lang) next adverted to the case of
Mr. John M‘Gibbon, one of the students, and the most forward in some respects,
in the College. It had occurred to him, that if Mr. M ‘Gibbon were licensed, it
might give him somewhat more elevation and command amongst the people as a
preacher. Not that it could give him more right to preach, for License was
rather a form than any thing essential, and he held that the practice of preach-
ing was, for the students generally, a most important and material part of their
training for the ministry. Still the people were under some sort of prejudice,
although he considered it a right feeling in the main, on this subject, and on
their account he proposed to the Synod that Mr. M‘Gibbon should have trials
assigned him. He would press, however, that the proposed License should not
interfere with Mr. M‘Gibbon’s position as a student, and that he should not hold
himself as under relaxed obligations to continue as heretofore all his classes.
Mr. Quaife remarked that the last consideration was of very high importance,
and that it was incumbent on all the young men to continue diligent in studv
after they entered on their public work ; for it was impossible to make acquisi-
tions in a short College period, sufficient for the future. When it was practica-
ble, even College studies should be continued for a time. This must then be the
next condition, after the sustaining of the trials, of Mr. M'Gibbon’s License.
The Synod having fully agreed with these observations, Mr. M‘Gibbon under-
went the usual preliminary examinations in Latin and Greek, and had then a
regular series of Trial Exercises and Discourses prescribed to him.


have a coadjutor in the ministry of that church, so as to enable me
to visit distant parts of the interior freely, and to watch over the
infant churches wc were forming, or proposing to form, in distant
parts of the territory; and as other arrangements I had contemplated
for this purpose during my absence were found utterly impracticable
on my return to Sydney, I naturally looked, for the assistance I
required, to one of the most promising of our own corps. I would
have greatly preferred indeed —especially for the first Presbyterian
Church in the Colony, and the Mother Church of the body to
have had for my ordained assistant or co-pastor a regularly-educated
and University-bred man, and one who had been recognised as a
Minister in full connection with that portion of the Presbyterian
Church at Home, with which we sympathise the most strongly,
from the identity of our views'with theirs, on the subject of the
support of religion by the State, viz.: »The United Presbyte-
rian. But I was willing to have waved both of these important
points in Mr. M'Gribbon’s favour, and consequently I was quite sin-
cere in inviting him, as I did, to become my ordained assistant and
fellow-labourer in the Christian Ministry, an arrangement which 1
both could and would have brought about at that time with equal
facility and good will. But, Mr. M'G., being himself averse to
any such measure at the time, and his views being then directed to
some other quarter, the arrangement was not pressed, and nothing
further was said on the subject till I had again to leave the Colony
for England, on the 15th of February, 1852. It was then arranged
that Mr. M‘Gibbon should officiate for me in the Scots Church
during my absence, as he had previously done, with much accept-
ance, during the four months I had been absent at Parramatta,
in the year 1851. And to shew that I carried home with me to
Scotland the good feelings I had till then entertained towards him,
I searched out his parents in Edinburgh, whose address he had
accidentally omitted giving me, to tell them all the good I could
respecting him, and to express to them my own best wishes on his
behalf.
Mr. M‘Gibbon speaks, in a letter, to the Committee of Manage-
ment, which will appear in the sequel, of the comfortable home he
had left in Scotland, and talks rather disparagingly of the inferior
position he occupied in comparison with it, when residing under
my roof, in Sydney. No doubt, any young man of right feeling
will always consider his father’s house as the pleasantest abode in
the world ; but, as I found Mr. M‘Gibbon’s parents, who were very
humble, but very creditable people, living in a room and kitchen,
in a back lane off Leith Walk, in Edinburgh, with a tent bed and
a chest of drawers in the room, it was evidently a very different
style of house from mine, which, it is well known, is as a private
residence, one of the largest and best in this great city. But young


men’s minds, especially when they suddenly find themselves in a
situation of influence and prominence in society, to which they could
previously have made no pretensions, expand wonderfully after
crossing the sea, and their views and prospects expand in the
same proportion ; while, unfortunately, all recollection of the past
fades as completely from their memory as if they had drunk of the
fabled waters of Lethe., which, according to the ancients, consigned
all the past to entire oblivion. For example, Mr. M'Gibbon has
completely forgotten, throughout the whole letter referred to, the
somewhat important fact that, from the moment of his arrival in
this Colony, and while pursuing his studies for the ministry, he
was receiving his board and lodging gratuitously in my house, to
the great discomfort of my compliant and uncomplaining family; that
a commodious and handsome hall for the classes he was attending
had been provided exclusively by me, and that the whole three
accomplished teachers, under whom he was studying, (I am sorry to
say by no means so sedulously as he ought to have done, considering
his own meagre qualifications in various important branches of
useful knowledge, which they were both able and willing to have
taught him, if he had only been equally willing to learn at their
hands,) had my personal obligations at the time for salaries that
absorbed the whole of my own. For although unforeseen circum-
stances prevented me from fulfilling these obligations to the full
extent at the time, the balance due still remains against me, and I
am happy to add, will shortly be paid, when certain property
of mine, now in the hands of the auctioneer, comes to the hammer.
Nay, Mr. M'Gribbon has entirely forgotten, throughout this whole
affair, the fact that it was entirely to me that he stands indebted for
the important and influential position in this great city, into which
he has so suddenly risen, and which is so remarkably different from
the one he held so lately in Edinburgh. But every day that
passes in this Colony only affords us additional instances of that
saddest of all exhibitions of human nature which is implied in the
well known question of our blessed Redeemer, There were ten
cleansed; but where are the nine ? Mr. M f Gibbon is clearly one of
the nine: he is not the remarkable exception to the general, I had
almost said, the universal rule.
During ray short stay in the City of Philadelphia, in the year
1840, when pursuing enquiries into the state and prospects of
Religion and Education in America, and residing first in the house
of the Rev. Dr. Bethune, and afterwards in that of Judge Jones,
two of the most eminent men, at the time, in their respective
departments, in the United States, I ascertained that it was their
belief and conviction that the practice of giving young men a
gratuitous education for the Christian Ministry had proved unsuc-
cessful in many instances; that it turned the heads of a great


inany of these young men by placing them too suddenly in
situations, of prominence and influence which they could never
have attained so speedily, if at all, by their own unaided exer-
tions ) and that the men on whom alone society could depend for
its progress and advancement, were not the forced and hot-house
plants of gratuitous Education Societies, which were then very
general and very popular in America, but the men who attained
knowledge under difficulties and by their own vigorous and unaided
efforts. I made the experiment however of affording a gratuitous
education for the ministry, in the cases I have referred to, on a
pretty extensive scale; but I confess the general result has led
me to attach much more importance than I did then to the opinions
and experience of my excellent American friends, Dr. Bethune and
Judge Jones.
During my absence in England, circumstances and events, which
will be more particularly detailed in the sequel, intervened to place
the arrangement, which I had myself originally suggested, and to
which I had looked forward for a time with the sincerest pleasure,
viz. :—that of a co-pastorate in favour of Mr. M'Gibbon—out of
the question. Within three months from the period of my
leaving the Colony on that occasion, Mr. M'Gibbon had left my
house, in which he had then resided upwards of two years, in a
way that was deeply injurious to our cause, as well as disrespectful
to my family, to whom he had previously been so long and so deeply
indebted. And Divine Providence having in the mean time, and
as if to put the Christian charities of certain parties to the test,
thrown a particular church and minister on the Christian sympathies
of Mr. M'Gibbon and the Committee of Management of the Scots
Church, who were acting under his acknowledged influence at the
time, they had conjointly exhibited such a degree of heartlessness
in the case as was scarcely conceivable on the part of a professed
Christian Church under the circumstances—allowing the fair
prospect which there was at the time for the permanent establish-
ment of another church and congregation of our communion to be
blasted, and virtually compelling an ordained minister in full stand-
ing in our body to leave our Church altogether and join the Inde-
pendents. For these and other reasons which will appear in the
sequel, I deemed it indispensably necessary, for the future welfare
and advancement of the church, on my return to the Colony, to
resist the adoption of a measure which, I learned, had been resolved
on by a majority of the Committee of Management, and which it
was proposed to carry with a high hand, without reference to my
feelings and views under the altered circumstances of the case, viz.,
the immediate appointment and ordination of Mr. M'Gibbon as
Co-Pastor of the Church.
On the evening of Tuesday, therefore, the 22nd November—


before I had been returned to the Colony a week —the following
card (No. 1,) was forwarded to me by the Secretary of the Com-
mittee of Management, who had had a meeting that evening, to
which I immediately returned the subjoined reply, (No. 2,) A
copy of the Resolutions passed at the meeting (No. 3,) having
accordingly been forwarded to me by the Secretary, I sent him
the following card, (No. 4.) and accordingly addressed the subjoined
letter, (No. 5,) to the Committee of Management previous to the
proposed meeting of the deputation on the evening of Thursday,
the 24th November.
(No. I.)
Scots Church, Tuesday evening, November 22.
My Dkar Sir—Will it be convenient for you to receive a deputation from
this Committee, consisting of Messrs. Fyfe, Manson, Hunter, Dr. Smith,
Andrews and Rodgers, on Thursday evening, at six o’clock;
I am, dear sir,
On behalf of the Committee of Management,
Your obedient servant,
James Antrobus.
To Rev. Dr. Lang.
P. S.—An answer by the bearer will oblige,
(No. 2.)
Tuesday evening.
My Dear Sir —As I have no doubt the Committee have some proposition to
make, I think it would be better to apprise me of the nature of it in writing,
before any Conference should take place on the subject, that I may have time to
deliberate upon it and not be taken by surprise. May I request, therefore, that
you will favour me with any Resolution or Resolutions come to by the Com-
mittee, before proceeding to the formality of a Deputation 1
I am, my dear sir,
Yours, very truly,
John Dunmore Lang.
Mr. James Antrobus.
(No. 3.)
COPY OF RESOLUTIONS
Moved and carried.
"That a deputation consisting of Messrs. Fyfe, Dr. Smith, Manson, Hunter,
“ Andrews, and Rodgers, wait upon the Rev. Dr. Lang, to receive his
"opinions relative to what steps should hey taken foi seeming - Mr.
"M‘Gibbon as Co-Pastor to this Church.” Carried.
“ That the above deputation lay before Dr. Lang the proceedings of the late
“ Secretary of this Church, with a view of appointing a successor to per-
"form all the duties connected with this Church.” Carried.
" That the deputation appointed wait on Dr. Lang on Thursday evening, at
"six o’clock, if convenient.” Carried..


Tuesday evening.
Mt Dear Sir—As the subject of the proposed conference is one of a very
grave nature, I think it will be better that the Committee or Deputation should
receive my answer, in regard to the first of the Resolutions, in writing, which I
shall be happy to forward to the Chairman of the Committee before Thursday
evening.
I am, my dear sir,
Yours, very truly,
John Dunmore Lang.
Mr. James Antrobus.
(No. 5.)
Sydney, 24th November, 1853.
Christian Friends — l beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the
22nd instant, enclosing a copy of a Resolution purporting that a deputation of
the Committee of Management had been appointed to wait upon me this evening,
“to receive my opinions relative to what steps should be taken for securing
Mr. M‘Gibbon as a Co-pastor to the Church.” Agreeably to my reply of
Tuesday evening, I prefer giving you my opinion in regard to this proposal at
length and in writing, and now .do so as follows :
Before proceeding to England, in the year 1846, I was earnestly desirous that
another minister should be appointed to co-operate with me, so as to enable me
to devote a large portion of my time and attention to visiting the distant settle-
ments of the Colony, for the planting of Churches and the general advancement
of our cause : and on my return to the Colony in 1850,1 expected that some such
arrangement would be carried out. But the unhappy dissensions that had taken
my absence, and the ruin which they had entailed upon our cause
for the time-being, having rendered it necessary that both Mr. Quaife and Mr.
Ritchie should be removed to other spheres, (as it was hopeless that, under exist-
ing circumstances, either of them could satisfy the congregation generally), I
had to resume the duties of the ordinary pastorate. This, I believe, was really
hurtful to our cause, for while I was unable to discharge the duties of the office
as they ought to have been, I was precluded from visiting the remote settlements
of the Colony, which was absolutely necessary at the time for the general inter-
ests of our body.
I have no hesitation in acknowledging that I am of precisely the same opinion
still. At the same time, the situation of a Collegiate Minister is one of so very
peculiar a character, that there is the utmost danger in entering hastily into
that relation, lest there should be either a want of congeniality of disposition
between the parties principally concerned, or lest unforeseen difficulties should
arise afterwards. There have been very few instances of succes ful collegiate
charges at home, either in the Established Church or in the Secession ; and,
there are many ministers who would stand very high and maintain an unexcep-
tionable position as the ministers of separate congregations, who would never
succeed in a collegiate charge, and whom it would be decidedly injurious
best interests of all concerned to place in such a situation. Mr. Ritchie of Yass
told me himself, as a proof of his feelings on the subject, that he would never
accept the appointment of Co-pastor with any other minister.
Now, although I have always had, and sjdll have, the highest opinion of Mr.
M'Gibbon’s character and talents, and shall most willingly do everything in my
power to promote his permanent settlement as a minister of the Gospel in the
city of Sydney, I feel constrained by an imperious sense of duty, to withhold my
consent to his* being appointed Co-pastor, or, in other words, assistant and suc-
cessor, for the following reasons ;


1. Nothing, J confess, would have given me greater pleasure at one time,
than such an arrangement; but the case is somewhat altered now. It was Mr-
M‘Gibbon’s duty to have remained in my house, even at a considerable personal
sacrifice, during my absence from the Colony ; and I am quite sure that, although
everything in it was necessarily very plain and homely, from the great sacrifices
I had been making in supporting and educating so many young men as candi-
dates for the ministry, as well as otherwise, it was the earnest desire of my
family to make Mr. M‘Gibbon as comfortable as possible. Other ministers of
much older standing had lived there during my absence both on the last and on
former occasions, and had found it quite practicable to do so. Besides, my family
never looked for any board from Mr. M‘Gibbon, any more than they did from
Mr. Gibson ; and the Committee were quite at liberty to give him what salary
they pleased, without any interference on my part. In such circumstances, to
leave my house, as Mr. M'Gibbon did, and in the way too in which it was done,
shows such a want of an accommodating spirit in Mr. M‘Gibbon, and holds out
so indifferent a prospect of friendly co-operation, and perfect cordiality for the
future, that I could never give my consent to his being appointed Co-pastor, or
Assistant and Successor, as I do not think it would be for the permanent advan-
tage of the Church. My family have had much to suffer on my account, which
they have all borne very willingly, hitherto. It is, therefore, the more incum-
bent upon me to see that they should not be treated with discourtesy in any
quarter, and I could scarcely feel satisfied on the point, if Mr. M‘6ibbon were ap-
pointed my Assistant and Successor.
2. I have also to express my regret that both Mr. M'Gibbon and the Committee
should have acted as they did in the case of the Rev. Mr. Gibson. Mr. Gibson
had been driven from his station by disease and death in his family. There was
an eligible opening for him at Balmain, where a Church was already erected,
almost entirely at my expense, and where he had the fairest promise of a good
congregation. A little countenance and assistance on the part, of our Church
and congregation would have been sufficient to establish Mr. Gibson in that im-
portant locality, and thereby to form another Church and congregation in con-
nection with our body in the immediate neighbourhood. But no countenance or
assistance of any kind was afforded to Mr. Gibson, of which he has since com-
plained very bitterly ; and he was consequently not only ousted from his station
by the Independents, but actually driven from our body, and has since gone to
Newcastle as an Independent minister. I confess I cannot but feel the deepest
regret at the want of everything like interest which all this showed in our
Church and cause ; and it is not to be excused on the ground that the Church
had been thrown off by the Synod, for Mr. Gibson was not present at the meeting
at which that was done. To show the interest which my family—well knowing
my own feelings in the case—took in Mr. Gibson, even in my absence, he and
his family of five persons lived in my house for five months, cost free ; and Mrs.
Lang paid Mr. Gibson £25 besides, from funds she had collected for his support,
independently of the Committee and Church altogether. A hundred a year, I
understand, might have been raised in this way, if Mr. Gibson had remained at
Balmain ; but the want of all countenance and support on the part of this
Church and congregation, led to the result I have stated, so very discreditable to
our body. It almost makes me say, an enemy hath done, this , and I cannot
receive as a Co-pastor any person who could sanction or countenance such
proceedings.
In connection with this reason, I cannot hut think there must also have been
a want of Christian sympathy on the part of the Committee, in the case of the
late Mr. James S. Smith, so long a zealous and efficient elder of this Church.
It was through Mr. Smith’s exertions that both Mr. Ritchie and Mr. Ramsay of
Melbourne were sent out to these Colonies, for he went home entirely at my
insi ance and expense, having given up his business to do so. On his return to
e Colony he fell into bad health, and sunk into extreme poverty ; but although


no man belonging to the Church regarded him, I was happy to find on my
return to the Colony, that he had not been entirely neglected. Mrs. Lang
sought him out herself, and invited both him and his daughter to my house,
where he remained five weeks ; and she collected £l7. for them besides, among
her own private friends. It paid their passage to Moreton Bay, and left a little
over. Now, considering the circumstances in which my family were situated
during my absence, these cases contrast very strangely with the want of every-
thing like Christian sympathy to which I have adverted in the case of other
parties connected with the Church; and I feel, therefore, under all the circum-
stances, I have no alternative in the matter but to withhold my assent from the
arrangement you propose.
3. The state of the Church and College property at the present moment forms
my third reason for withholding my approval of this proposal. The Committee,
I understand, have occasionally been making enquiries about the College build-
ings ; and a previous Committee endeavoured, during my previous absence, in
England, to get the possession and management of these buildings into their
own hands, under the idea that they were Church property. I took no notice of
the matter on the previous occasion, but I deem it necessary, for the information
and satisfaction of all concerned, to do so now. The allotment of the Scots
Church was originally granted to four Trustees, of whom I was one, (being the
only one now remaining, as the only other alive has long ceased to act,) for the
erection of a Church and minister’s dwelling, and for the establishment of an
institution of some kind for the education of youth. In the year 1830, a street
was run through the allotment, and the then adjacent property of the late Sir
John Jamieson ; and a portion of ground was received from Sir John in exchange
for a much smaller portion he was to receive from us. I purchased an additional
portion from Sir John (including the portion thus exchanged with him), which I
paid entirely from my own resources. The vacant allotment between my present
residence and the Church was then marked off' permanently for a manse or min-
ister’s dwelling ; for the Church has never had one yet. It included a considera-
ble portion of the ground received from Sir John ; and the rest of the original
allotment was then duly appropriated for the College, for the erection of which
the Church and congregation never contributed anything. Nay, when the
Church was originally brought to its present state of completion, there was a
debt of £1,300 on it, which I had to take entirely on my own shoulders, and of
which I regard the amount paid to Mrs. Lang, during my recent absence, merely
as the interest, for I cannot view it in any other light.
The College buildings were erected partly by a Government grant, partly by
a subscription, but chiefly by myself; for the property I had to sell, to maintain
a hard struggle with the Government and other adversaries, during their erection,
would now, lam quite confident, sell for at least £25,000. It included the
houses now known as Petty’s Hotel, with frontage to five streets ; for Clarence
Street runs through what was formerly my garden, for which I received no com-
pensation from the Government. It also included a whole acre of building-
ground, with a two story verandah house on it, in Kent, Bathurst, Sussex and
Union Streets, besides upwards of 4,000 acres of land in the interior. The
Church has, therefore, nothing to do with the College buildings ; nay, when the
congregation builds a manse for the minister, on the vacant allotment reserved
for the purpose, it would justly be chargeable with the cost of the half-gable
erected for it by the College.
My great object for the last 23 years, and the one for which I have sacrificed
my personal property to an extent so unprecedented in this Colony, was to found
a College for training up young men for the ministry. This object, lam happy
to say, is now much nearer its accomplishment than ever; for as the vacant
ground appropriated for the College, and the present College buildings, are much
too valuable for the purpose, as well as too much in the centre of the city, an
act of Council, which I intend to apply for, could easily be procured by and bye,


to enable the Trustees to dispose of what property belongs to the College, with a
view to the erection of more suitable buildings in some other and more eligible
situation. This great object lam keeping in view, as a means of re-uniting all
the three sections of the Presbyterian Church, as soon as the state salaries are
discontinued : but in order to its accomplishment, I must retain my present hold
upon the property till the proper time for action shall have arrived; and the
appointment of a Co-pastor at the present moment might occasion difficulties,
and thereby frustrate the whole arrangement, which I must anticipate and
prevent.
At the same time, although in these circumstances I cannot sanction the ap-
pointment of Mr. M‘Gibbon as my assistant and successor, I am most anxious to
promote Mr. M‘Gibbon’s settlement as a minister of the Gospel in the City of
Sydney, which I think may be effected very easily ; and I pledge myself to do
everything in my power to forward the object, if a portion, whether large or
small, of the congregation choose to call him as their pastor, and to take
measures for erecting a Church for him either north or south. Money can easily
be borrowed now, at a low rate of interest, on good property in Sydney; and
with the present and future influx of people into the Colony, Mr. M‘Gibbon would,
lam quite sure, soon both fill his Church and clear it of debt. It would be far
better both for himself and for the cause, that he should thus be in a Church of
his own, which his present position would render quite practicable, than being a
mere colleague to any other minister. I shall never find fault with any person
for attaching himself to Mr. M‘Gibbon ; for with'the present and expected im-
migration I should have no fear of the present Church being duly filled within a
reasonable period, even though it large portion of the present congregation should
leave it; and if we part for the purpose of forming another Church, let it be in
friendship and in peace. There will, ere long, be a very large population in the
portion of the city to the northward of our present Church, between the two
harbours, which, I think is the best direction at present; and if another Church
were planted in a suitable locality in that direction, it would be sure to succeed
in Mr. M‘Gibbon’s hands. At all events, lam persuaded the object might he
accomplished within a reasonable period with perfect facility, and without requir-
ing pecuniary sacrifices of any extent in any quarter.
As this will doubtless appear very strange advice from' a minister in my
situation, I beg to state that 1 have acted in precisely the same way on various
other occasions, and with perfect success.
1. On my return from England in 1831, I found that the late Dr, M‘Garvie,
who had been supplying my place in my absence, had, rather unworthily 1
thought at the time, supplanted me in the affections of certain influential mem-
bers of my congregation. On hearing the circumstance, so far from feeling
indignant in the matter, I waited upon the parties I refer to, T. Barker, Esq.;
the late Mr. T. Shepherd, of the Darling Nursery, and Mr. T. Inglis, then a
leading merchant in Sydney—telling them (to their own great surprise, as they
acknowledged themselves,) that as I understood they were attached to Mr.
M‘6arvie, and wished to promote his interest, there was a fair field for their
doing so, and every prospect of forming another Church and congregation in the
southern portion of the town. They took the hint, and a second Church was
planted accordingly.
2. On my return from England again in 1837, with a numerous body of
ministers, one of them, Mr. T .Dugall, from the north of Ireland, endeavoured, on
my recommendation and advice, to form a third Church still farther south,
chiefly for the north of Ireland Presbyterians in Sydney. Mr. Dugall proved an
unsuitable person for the field, and went to Van Dieman’s Land ; but the present
minister, Dr. Fullerton, succeeded him and proved successful in accomplishing the
object.
3. On my return from England in 1850, instead of allowing Mr. Quaife’s
small congregation to go down, I gave every encouragement to the settlement


of Mr. Blair, as an additional minister in Sydney—which he might have been
long ago, had it not been his own fault, for the prospect at the time was very
favourable —although it diminished my congregation. And with the same view
I did everything in my power to form Churches at Balmain and Pyrmont,
although there were members of my own congregation residing at the time in
both of these localities.
It is, therefore, no strange or new thing for me to make the proposal I now
do ; for ours has truly been a mother Church in this respect. I trust, therefore,
it will only be as well taken as it is cordially given. For although I do not
think it would be for our mutual comfort that Mr. M‘Gibbon should be appointed
Co-pastor of the Scots Church, I am sincerely desirous that he should be settled
as the minister of an additional Church in the city of Sydney —for there is room.
Trusting that the good hiftid of God will lead and guide you in this important
matter,
I'am, Christian Friends,
Your sincere friend and pastor,
John Dtjnmore Lang.
To the Committee of Management,
of the Scots Church.
• *On the Sabbath following, (4th December), the following notice
was sent me, on the part of the Committee of Management, to be
read from the Pulpit.
(No, 6.)
A congregational Meeting of this Church will be held here on Thursday even-
ing next, Bth instant, at 7 o’clock precisely, and as the business to be brought
under the notice of the Meeting is important—all interested in the Church are
rticularly requested to attend.
Scots Church, Church Hill.
Sabbath, December 4th, 1853.
I accordingly informed my congregation that such a notice had been
sent me, but that I must decline calling any such Meeting as it
contemplated, till I should be made acquainted with the Resolu-
tions to be submitted to it. For as I had reason to believe that it
was intended to submit the whole question of the co-pastorate to
the Meeting, and to get a vote upon it, I could, by no means, in
accordance with the principles and constitution of the Presbyterian
Church, allow any questions to be brought before such a Meeting,
affecting in whatever way my position as the pastor of the Church.
For we were Presbyterians; and not Independents—and it was con-
trary to our Ecclesiastical Constitution to submit any question, be-
tween a pastor, and either the whole or a part of his congregation,
to a congregational Meeting. This was doubtless the practice
among the Independents; but I thought it a very bad practice, as a
case which Jiad happened not many years ago, in this very city,
clearly shewed. For the original pastor of the Independent Church
in Sydney, the Rev. William Jarrett—who, I am happy to say,
was both an able and an excellent man, unexceptionable alike, both
in his doctrine and in his practice, but who was a man of an inde-
pendent mind and chose to think and act for himself in certain


matters —having thereby given offence to certain upsetting and in-
fluential people in his own congregation, who wished to make him
their humble servant, they formed a faction against him and got him
voted out altogether at a congregational Meeting ! Mr. Jarrettwas
thus obliged to return to England with all his Colonial family, and
throw himself upon the wide world again. He came out after-
wards to Van Diemen’s Land, and from thence, crossed over to
Port Phillip; where he is now a Presbyterian Minister and a member
of the Synod of Victoria, which disclaims, like ourselves, all con-
nexion with the State. In short the Presbyterian Church provides a
competent Court for the decision of all such questions, as those be-
tween pastors and their people, either in whole or in part, —a court
of competent jurisdiction in the case, before which both parties are
heard for themselves, and which is composed of disinterested, competent
and impartial men. For although at present, from disease and
other unforeseen and calamitous circumstances, our body did not
include more than eight or nine Ministers altogether, and these
widely scattered over the territory ; the Church of Scotland had
originally consisted of a still smaller number, while the Presby-
terian Church of France, which had once upwards of 2000 Minis-
ters, commenced its ecclesiastical organization with only eleven.
All matters of finance I would willingly leave, as I had always done,
in the hands of the Committee of Management; but I could never
sanction either that Committee, or a Congregational Meeting at
their instance, to decide an “ecclesiastical question ” like that of the
proposed co-pastorate of this Church. The congregation had their
undoubted rights in the case; and these I would always respect, by
never using any influence I might have in placing over them, in the
relation of a co-pastor, any man who was not decidedly acceptable
to a decided majority of the congregation. But I had ray rights
in the matter also; and neither the Committee of Management nor
the congregation could have any right to insist upon placing in that
office any man or Minister with whom, as in the instance in question,
I was sorry to say, there could be no prospect of my acting with
cordiality. If any portion of the congregation, whether large or
small, chose to attach themselves to Mr. M'G-ibbon, and to call
him to be their pastor, on the understanding and condition of their
making an immediate and vigorous effort to form another Church
and congregation for him in this rapidly extending capital, I \tould
not only be most willing to promote such an arrangement, but
would be happy to divide the Service with Mr. M'Gribbon in this
Church, that they might all remain in harmony together, till he and
his adherents got a Church of their own. I had made the same
offer more than twenty years ago, when a second Church in Sydney
was formed out of this one ; and I was therefore doing no strange
thing in making the same offer again. As a more permanent re-


cord of these sentiments, I addressed the following letter, (No. 7,)
to the Committee of Management for their Meeting on the 6th
December, 1863.
(No. 7.)
Sydney, 6th December, 1853.
Christian Friends and Brethren,
In the present conjuncture of our Church affairs, I deem it expedient and neces-
sary to submit to you a few additional considerations, on the subject of our actual
circumstances and prospects; to prevent, if possible, any of those unpleasant
exhibitions that would most certainly have.ensued, if a congregational meeting,
such as you had proposed, had been called in existing circumstances, and espe-
cially to prevent any breaking up of that harmony and unity of action that have
hitherto prevailed in our body.
I beg therefore to repeat to you with the utmost sincerity, what I have already
stated, that I have the highest opinion of Mr. M'Gibbon’s character and talents,
and would consider it quite a calamity for our body, if he were either to throw
up the Ministry or to leave the City of Sydney, where he has made so many
friends and found such a field of usefulness. I have never had the slightest alter-
cation myself with Mr. M'Gibbon, and I sincerely desire that I may never have
any. At the same time I feel perfectly assured that if the relation of co-
pastor were once formed in his favour, it would never be one of comfort or happi-
ness to either party. With this conviction on my part, neither the Committee of
Management, nor the congregation, can have any "right to insist upon such an
arrangement; for there is no principle of ecclesiastical usage more firmly es-
tablished in the Presbyterian Church than this, that an assistant or co-pastor
shall not be appointed in any Ministerial charge, where the Senior Minister has
a strong conviction that it would not be for mutual comfort and edification. But
if any members of the Committee of Management and congregation should agree
to give Mr. M'Gibbon a call to the Ministry, on the understanding and condition
that he shall be settled as soon as practicable as the Minister of another Church
and congregation, in the City of Sydney, and that an effort should be made
forthwith for this purpose, but that in the mean time he should merely divide
the Service with myself till that arrangement should be effected, and that things
should go on otherwise as heretofore, I should be most happy to concur in Mr.
M‘Gibbon’s immediate ordination ; and I am quite confident that the arrangement
would prove completely successful, and that, in the course of eighteen months,
or two years at the utmost, another Church and congregation might be perma-
nently formed in the City of Sydney. For I believe if we were only acting har-
moniously in this matter, assistance would be got for the purpose from the public
generally, as well as from those more immediately concerned.
Besides, I think our body generally has a right to expect something of this
kind at Mr. M’Gibbon’s hands. No man of a generous and apostolic spirit would
like merely to step into another man’s shoes, or to enter into another man’s line
of things made ready to his hand. A young man of a zealous and energetic
disposition will in such circumstances, as those of the colony at present, endea-
vour to form a Church and congregation for himself; and with the present pros-
pects of Sydney, I think there can be no fear of ultimate success in such an object.
As for myself I have already taken the requisite preliminary' steps for inviting
up to Sydney from Fort Phillip a Presbyterian Minister recently arrived in that
colony, who had been engaged for our mission in Scotland by the late Mr. J. S.
Smith in the year 1845, but who had afterwards gone to Canada. He had re-
turned from Canada however last year, and he left Scotland for Melbourne early
this year. This Minister I propose shall be settled at Balmain, and shall live in
my house cost-free, in the meantime, exchanging of course with me occasionally
in Sydney. For I propose to continue to keep open house, as I have always
done, for Ministers and candidates for the Ministry; especially as I shall be


abler to do so in future than I have sometimes been m times past. And it is
mv earnest desire, so long as I am connected with the Church, that it shall
continue to be a Mother-Church to all other Churches of our Communion, and
not a step-mother, as it was in ray absence both for Mr. Gibson and Balmain.
This then is ray proposal, and I appeal to you all as to whether it is not a
wise and a Christian one under the circumstances, Let Mr. M'Gibbon’s friends
o-ive him a call to the Ministry on the understanding and condition of his being
eventually settled as their pastor in another Church and congregation. Let Mr.
M'Gibbon be ordained on that footing and divide'the service with me in the
meantime, so that the congregation may keep together and no part of it be
driven into holes and corners, till that object can be realized ; and instead of
bickerings and dissensions, which wffl otherwise ensue, let a great and harmo-
nious effort be made for the accomplishment of the object proposed, both within
the congregation and among the public generally— commencing for instance, with
a public Soine for the purpose immediately after Mr. M'Gibbon s ordination,
and giving out that we are making the necessary preparations in anticipation of
the crreat expected immigration from Scotland and the North of Ireland. lam
perfectly sure such an object as this would be very popular at the present mo-
ment, and I should be extremely sorry to lose the favourable opportunity which
the present conjuncture affords. . „ , ,
Trusting therefore that you will see the propriety of coming to some such set-
tlement of our present difficulties as the one I propose, in sincere affection for
the cause in which we are engaged, . _ . , , „
I am, Chnstinn Friends and Brethren,
Your sincere Friend and Pastor,
John Dunmore Lang, D. D.
To the Committee of Management of the Scots Church, &c.
The following morning I received the subjoined notice, (No. 8,)
from the Secretary of the Committee of Management, and in the
evening the deputation mentioned in it waited upon me with
replies to my first letter.
Scots Church, Church-hill, December 6, 1853.
Rev. Sir,-In obedience to the Committee of Management, I beg to forward
you a Resolution passed at the Meeting 1 . _ , p_ j„__ a
“That a Deputation consisting of Messrs. Manson, Donaghy, and Rod„ers,
“wait upon Dr. Lang, at 7 o’clock to-morrow evening, with our reply to his
“letter, accompanied by Mr. M'Gibhon’s reply to our Resolution ; and also to
«inform Dr. Lang of a motion just passed that no salaries be paid until a meet-
“i"g of the congregation has been held ; further, to ask the Dr. when such a
“ meeting shall be called.”
I remain, dear sir,
on behalf of the Committee of Management,
Your’s truly,
James Antrobus.
Rev. Dr. Lang.
In answer to this notice I addresed the following letter, (No. 0),
to the Committee of Management for their intended meeting on
the evening of the 8 th.
(No. 9.)
Sydney, Bth December, 1853.
Christian Friends and Brethren, -I beg to ' a ck=o»ledge jour the
6tli instant informing me of a Resolution passed y


Salaries be paid until a meeting of the eongregation has been held,” and appoint-
ing a Deputation to ask me “ when such a meeting shall be called.”
I beg to state in reply that I can on no account call a meeting of the congre-
gation under such a threat as I conceive this dissolution implies. As a minister
of the Gospel, 1 am precluded from acting in any case under a threat, and
especially a pecuniary one ; and if the Committee have forgotten, as they have
evidently done in this instance, what is due to my office, I must not be forgetful
of it myself. I have lived and preached in the Colony before without a salary,
and I may be enabled, perhaps, to do so again. At all events, I will certainly
never call any meeting of the congregation while such a Resolution stands upon
their books. . > .
I beg to state further that as the Committee seem to me to be inclined to mix
up matters spiritual with matters temporal, which is contrary to the constitution
of the Presbyterian Church, and to submit to the decision of a congregational
meeting, on matters which such a meeting can have no right to decide, I must
insist on being furnished with a copy of the Resolutions to be proposed to such a
meeting, before I can consent to call it, even after the obnoxious Resolution
abovelnentioned shall have been rescinded.
I beg to add that, from a multiplicity of engagements, including a meeting
with my brethren this day, with a view to the settlement ot a minister in the
interior, I have been unable as yet to peruse either ot the documents with
which I was furnished by the Deputation ot yesterday evening. Ton will there-
fore understand that this communication has no reference whatever to these
documents, and that it refers exclusively to the Resolution passed by the
Committee about the payment of salaries, &c.
I am, Christian friends and brethren,
Your sincere friend and pastor,
John Dukmorb Lan«.
The Committee of Management,
of the Scots Church.
In reply to tins letter, the following notice (No. 10.) was
handed to me by the deputation mentioned in it, and it was accord-
ingly arranged that a congregational meeting should he held on the
evening of Thursday, the 15th.
(No. 10.)
Extract from minutes of Meeting of Committee of Management, of Scots Church,
Church-Hill, held in the Church, December 8, 1853.
That the motion respecting the discontinuing of the salaries subsequent to the
17th of November be rescinded. —carried.
That a copy of the above Resolution be forwarded to Dr. Lang, by a deputa-
tion, consisting of Mr. Donaghy and Mr. Manson, who shall further communi-
cate to Dr. Lang, that the only object this Committee had in view in passing the
motion transmitted to him 6th instant, was that, in consequence ot what has
transpired since his late arrival in the Colony, the majority of the members ot
this Committee purpose resigning; but before doing so they are desirous or
delivering up their trust to the congregation from whom they received it. And
that after reading the Report and submitting a statement of accounts, the only
Resolution they contemplate moving is—
“ That the Report now read and the accounts submitted to the congregation
“ be received and approved of.”—Carried. . _
“ John Five,
Chairman.


The following are the replies of Mr. M'Gribbon and the Com-
mittee of Management respectively. It was scarcely in character,
indeed, for Mr. M'Gibbon, as a mere preacher of the gospel, to
make himself a party in such a case at all; and it would probably
have been much better, both for his interest and reputation, that
he had not. But as he has chosen this course, and as the Com-
mittee of Management have done little more than endorse his
statements, adding merely certain unfounded imputations of their
own, I shall take the liberty to subjoin a few remarks on both
documents j observing, however, in the meantime, that it must be
quite evident to the candid reader, from the documents themselves,
under what influence the Committee have been acting in this mat-
ter all along.
(No II.)
Cumberland-street, Nov. 29, 1853,
My Dear Christian Brethren, . .... .
By a resolution of your Committee, I am put in possession of a letter sent
you by Dr. Lang, as a statement of his opinions relative to a proposal you made
him to secure ray ordination to a co-pastorate with him in the Scots Church. I
understand that you design me to reply to the objections therein stated, as far
as they concern myself. And lam the rather inclined to comply with youi
wish, because I find in perusing that letter, certain reflections are made on my
conduct, as well as charges made against me, which I deem base, heaitless and
slanderous, although from my sense of unimpeachable 1 rectitude in every trans-
action of mine with the Doctor himself, his family and Church,! mightlea,ve ray
character and conduct to vindicate themselves, and regard every inueudo and
unjust imputation which the said letter contains, as utterly beneath my notice.
However, I am not willing to let pass this opportunity aftorded me, ot putting
on record for your preservation and use, as well as tor the satisfaction of all
concerned in our affairs, my perfect innocence of every charge preferred against
I turn now to the objections, under the force of which. Dr. Lang “ feels con-
strained, by an imperious sense of duty, to withhold his consent to my being
appointed his co-pastor.”
1. He objects to accede to your proposal, because of a variety ot matters
which concern his family ! He says it was my duty, to have remained in his
house during his absence. Now, this statement is oracular indeed. One would
think that it must have been my duty, just because Dr. Lang says so. He con-
descends to give no proof. He says I was bound to remain in his house, and he
wishes you to conclude that therefore I was bound. But if such fce his opinion
of what were my obligations, he is alone ; for even his family, whose cause he
undertakes to plead so zealously, will not coincide —they do not think that it was
my duty ! nay, they seem to be as oracular as the Doctor himself when they give
it out, as thev have done a hundred times, that it was my duty, to leave the
house long before I did so ! But aside from the opinions of the Doctor and his
family, I wish to know how it can he made out that it was my duty, in any sense
whatever, to have remained in his house during his absence ? Where lay the
obligation ? With his family, as such, I never had anything to do. _ They never
stood in any other relation to me than that which any of your families occupy.
Any connexion which I maybe supposed to have with the Doctor himself, i should
have had even if he bad had no family. His house was never subject of the
least consideration, when we agreed to stand in the relative position of teacher
and pupil. To remain in his house at all, was never made the subject of a pro-
mise on my part. To his family therefore, as such, I never was under any natu-


ral, moral or religious obligation ; and therefore, I conceive, I was as much at
liberty to leave his house (without affecting in the slightest degree our mutual
understanding,) at any moment I desired to change, as I was to enter it at first.
Neither impliedly nor by express promise did 1 agree with him at any time,
much less at his departure to remain in his house at all hazards, under allcon-
ceivable circumstances : and it is utterly impossible for him, with all his inge-
nuity and oraculousness, to make it appear credible that I would do so. Nay,
had he ever attempted to make a continued residence in his house, a condition of
friendship and co-operation, I would at once and for ever have rejected his offer.
Most certainly, I would have withheld ray consent to stand in his place, and en-
gage in his labours during his absence, when he besought me even to tears, to
take the charge of his pulpit, (for having determined to give up all ministerial
pursuits, it was against my will that I took the charge,) had be given me the
faintest idea, that it would' therefore become my bounden duty to remain in his
house, and associate w r ith his family. I ask any reasonable man, is it likely that I
would bind myself, to remain under all conceivable circumstances ; when, owing
to the very existing circumstances of his family, and Church, and College, I had
resolved to leave him altogether ? It is true, that at his earnest request, and as
a favor to him to my own personal loss at the time, I yielded to his entreaty, to
take care of his Church during his, absence ; but, unless taking care of his
Church, (which I did consent to do,) and remaining in his house, (which I did
not, and never could agree to do,) be the same thing, I cannot but say that
this cryino- up what was my duty, is not only the most egregious trifling with
your cominon sense, but it imputes to me a moral obliquity, of which I hope you
think me incapable. I scorn from me and consider unworthy of more of my
notice, this unbecoming insinuation, that I am guilty of a dereliction of duty,
in leaving a house to remain in which I never was bound, by any consideration
whatever.
But, after all, what will Dr. Lang and his family say, if I shall prove from his
own words in the letter to which this refers, that, even admitting I was bound
by some consideration to remain in his house, all obligation ceased (and conse-
quently I was free from blame,) when I did leave. He says, that it was my duty
to have remained in his house, even at a considerable personal sacrifice. Now
what is this, but to say that, if I was at a sacrifice by remaining in his house,
beyond what mav be justly termed considerable, it was no longer my duty to re-
main, and of course I was free to leave ? This position is incontestable.
Doubtless, no personal sacrifice would appear considerable to the Doctor, which,
in any way placed his views of self-denial under a disadvantage ; but it is not
with the Doctor I have to do—it is with you, or any other ordinary men of
common understanding. A prodigy of self-denial Ido not pretend to be, but I
nevertheless assert, that had the Doctor been situated m exactly the same cir-
cumstances that 1 was, when I left his house, even he with all his magnanimity,
would have thought that he had been making a very “ considerable personal
sacrifice,” and possibly would not have borne the indignities and privations^of
his situation, so long as I did. Dr. Lang is quite at liberty to say, ‘‘l am quite
sure that it was the earnest desire of my family, to make Mr Mctiibbon as
comfortable as possible.” The question is, what is Dr. Lang sure ot ? (tor he is
sure of many things which are not true,) but was it the tact ? I deny it : and
I hate the insinuation which contains a gratuitous insult, that I was not content
with what was necessarily very plain and homely, tor it was not luxury that i
looked for, but common comfort. Dr. Lang is quite at liberty to say also, that
“(other ministers of much older standing than Mr. McGibbon, lonnd it quite Prac-
ticable to live in my house on former occasions in my absence.” With what
other ministers did I have nothing to do. Kev. Mr. Stewart, who was in the
house when I left, found it quite practicable to remain till it pleased him to
leave • but the person who would assert, that Mr. S.’s position and mine were
equally comfortable, would only prove that his ignorance and temerity were equal.


But even with Mr. Stewart I have nothing to do, for upon the whole, his dispo-
sition “ and that of the family with whom he associated, were much more con-
genial,” than theirs and mine were ever likely to be. But in my own defence,
and from my own experience, I could speak in a very “ plain and homely style,”
of the sacrifice of every thing like comfort which I was making—a very conside-
rable sacrifice to me. Indeed, the whole concern from the day I entered his
house, till the day 1 left it, implied a very considerable sacrifice, which, up till
the departure of the Doctor I bore, for many reasons, without a murmur, but
after this, it became intolerable, and intolerable, principally because it was unne-
sessary. Were Ito enumerate the promises which the Doctor made to me, and
contrast the comforts of a home, which I had left to embark on his scheme, with
the treatment which I received at his house, the sacrifice might appear conside-
rable : but not wishing to expose the nakedness of the land, and supposing that
I was suffering for Christ, I took with it gladly. But latterly, I found that it
was not for Christ that I was enduring ; but undergoing a voluntary humility,
enduring contempt and making my comfort a whole burnt offering at the shrine
of his family's caprice. Did Dr. Lang know, when he was writing so confidently
of his family’s desires for my comfort, that, for four months together shortly
before his departure, I lay on the top of my own boxes without a bed of any
kind whatever ? And after all his certainty about things, did he know
that I had to bear the contempt of a Koman Catholic girl, if I found fault, and
“ 1 cannot help it,” if I complained to Mrs. Lang, a thing which I almost de-
spised to do ? Did he know I had to clean my own boots and carry my own
water ? Did he know, that if I returned too late for meals, from any of my or-
dinary visitations of the people, I had to want ? But lam disgusted with this
recital of about half the things which robbed me of all ordinary domestic com-
fort, and I am ashamed of the cause w hich has compelled me to it : but if there
was one thing more detestable than another, which tended most materially to
diminish my comfort, it was the practice which prevailed at table daily, which
compelled me to hear the character and names of individuals both in the Church
and elsewhere, examined and discussed, for the sake of mere amusement, till I
complained of it to Mr. Stewart. Sacrifice ! w r as it not making a sacrifice to
deny myself of all necessary domestic comfort ? Was it not a considerable sac-
rifice to deny myself, that which was essentially necessary to my usefulness, in a
work which* I was performing as a favour to Dr. Lang ? And if Dr. Lang will
reply, that all this was not a personal sacrifice, I will tell him that it was more,
for it well nigh resulted in a sacrifice of my very person —for owing to the want
of proper domestic treatment, I became so emaciated and weak, that I was una-
ble to ascend the stairs to my own room without a pause, or preach without pain
and exhaustion, so that I became apprehensive of my health and life. I know
perfectly, that to have remained a few months more, would have effected the de-
struction of one of these : and perhaps that would have been thought “ a consi-
derable personal sacrifice,” by more than Dr. Lang. Will it be enough now to
add, that both Mr. Stewart who was at the house at the time, and “ the late
efficient Elder James Smith,” approved of my step ? But although all had dis-
approved of it, was it my duty to sacrifice, or run the risk of sacrificing, either
health or life, to please Dr. Lang and family ? The idea is preposterous, and I
marvel at the unfeeling and peremptory language of the Doctor, in which is
concealed a heartless insult to my manliness, my Christian character, ray common
sense, and my disinterested desire to keep up his credit in the Church, and to
promote its interests.
Let it not be overlooked bore, that although the Doctor can with great cer-
tainty say, that his “ family never looked for any board from me," his words
are not by any means correct : for the question is not, what did his family look
for. No sooner did I receive the first money which the Committee sent me after


the Doctor’s departure, (and recollect the precise nature of the resolution, viz.,
that as the revenue of the Church increased or decreased, so my salary which
was called £IOO, should rise or fall accordingly). 1 say, no sooner did 1 receive
the first money, than I waited on Mrs. Lang, and desired her to make a charge
for my board, as I was now receiving a salary ; but instead of fixing a sum per
week, she said that it could run on, and stand over until the Doctor should return,
when he would receive the whole amount, at a rate per year. Was this looking
for nothing ? Did this shew a desire on my part to receive the board
free, and yet find fault —the mean insinuation which his words imply ? Did this
shew that, it was my duty to deny myself of the very comfort which I had
pledged myself to pay for ? Did this shew that, I was bound to make personal
sacrifice, even unto health or life, when I had in view the day of making up the
account besides? I know that no reduction of the rate per year would compen-
sate me for the loss of comfort and health. I know that, w'hat a man pays tor,
he has a right to receive ; and therefore, I judged it proper, as I had a perfect
right to do so, to leave that house where 1 was not receiving what I needed in
this way, to find it somewhere else, on the same terms, viz., payment.
While on this point, 1 am unwilling to pass over two other most unfounded
and slanderous accusations. Prom my leaving his house, Dr. Lang judged that
lam destitute of an “ accommodating spirit .” I hope that you, who have
watched my movements so long, are able to deny this false conclusion. Dr.
Lang well knows, that I have an accommodating spirit, for he has largely profited
by it. Since I became connected with him, I have never failed to accommodate
him. My actions have been nothing else but one series of accommodation.
Not one of those who came out with him by the “ tllifton” has accommodated
him as I have done. Not to mention the accommodating services which I ren-
dered him previous to his incarceration in Parramatta, when no other man could
be found to answer his turn, who was it, I ask, that stood in the gap on that oc-
casion, when, without a moment’s warning, he was withdrawn from his duties,
and from the want of another minister, acceptable to the people generally, the
Church must either have been divided or closed ? I ask, was it no acconimoda-
tion to shield him from the disgrace which must have inevitably been cast upon
him, then, had the Church been scattered, and to enable him too, to have his sa-
lary as usual ? Who was it, that enabled him to go to Moreton Bay, and clear
his character, to agitate his politics, and to gain information for his contemplated
work in England ! Was that no proof of my accommodating spirit ? for, it
must ever be remembered, that, on each occasion I yielded against my inclination
simply to please him. Who was it that enabled him to go to the diggings, to
scour the country there for his own private ends ? Was that no accommodation,
both to himself and his family, seeing, while he was at liberty to roam, his family
were provided for as usual ? And who, I ask, once for all, yielded after much
solicitation to stand in the pulpit, that he might proceed to England twenty-one
months ago—bore the odium which his conduct then elicited from the whole
Colony without flinching—kept his Church open in spite of enemies who w r ere
thirsting for its ruin, shielded it from becoming the laughing-stock of the irre-
ligious and profane—rendered it prosperous, flourishing and respectable both as
to building and people, without the least hope of pecuniary gain —and gave it
back to him again, on his return ; a credit to any man, the child of a soul w’hich
had long been in travail, the subject of many a fervent prayer poured out at
the throne from a weeping- and bleeding heart ? My brethren, lam pained
while I thus revive the recollection of sorrows -which have now come to a close.
But I wish to ask you, have I accommodated Dr. Lang in these services ? if I
have, 1 wish to know if the conclusion be just, that, notwithstanding these pal-
pable evidences of my wish to save him to the utmost, my leaving his house
under the circumstances narrated, is a proof which outweighs them all, and
shews incontestibly that I am destitute of an accommodating spirit?
The other accusation which 1 referred to is, that in leaving his house I was


guilty of “ discourtesy to bis family." I most emphatically, and with the clear-
est conscience deny it, never any thing of the kind was intended by me. Dis-
courtesy you know, is capable of a definition. There are some squeamish people
who think they are discourteously treated, if you dare have a mind of your own
on subjects, or if you regulate your conduct toward them on the principles of
sincerity and truth. Nay, if you do any thing to these persons with a due re-
gard to your own honour, and make not your dearest interests subservient to
them, they are offended, and of course, it is then quite natural for them to com-
plain of discourteous treatment. But whether leaving Dr. Lang’s house under
the circumstances I have stated, was an act of this false or of true courtesy, I
am not concerned to decide. I did it from a necessity, which the family them-
selves caused. I acted on principle, and under an “imperious sense of duty"
to myself, to you, to my best friends, to Dr. Lang himself, and to one who is
higher than us all.
2. Dr. Lang objects to accede to your proposal, because of a variety of matters
which concern “ Mr. Gibson and the late James Smith.” He says, that he has
to express his regret, that both Mr. McGibbon and the Committee should have
acted as they did towards these two gentlemen. As far as lam concerned with
the case of'these two gentlemen, I shall state in a few words. Dr. Lang has
long been noted for rashness—giving heed to mere reports. It is a vice of the
most pernicious qualities to which he has long been addicted, and if that vice
had no injurious influence on any one but himself, I would certainly let him
alone to enjoy all the pleasure it seems to afford him. But it is not so, the most
innocent must suffer to afford him any enjoyment—and me, he has made along
with yourselves, his victim on this occasion. lam perfectly stunned at his ex-
pressions of regret, at the way I acted toward Mr. Gibson. He plainly does not
know how I acted. Yet he is quite sure, that I acted without any Christian
sympathy, and forthwith, he bursts out in a savage and unchristian rage, to de-
stroy me as “an enemy !" 'His folly and rashness in this matter are consum-
mate, and were it not that I have some regard to my character and peace, I
would leave this ebullition of feeling to the working of principles, which are very
far from being creditable to their possessor.
Now, it may be that some of the Committee are not aware of what I did to
Mr. Gibson, and it will therefore be necessary to tell them, in order that they
may judge for themselves, of the Doctor’s Conduct. Ere Mr. Gibson came down
from the Clarence, he had written home to Dr. Campbell of London, and to Dr.
Boss of Sydney, complaining of his difficult position in consequence of his con-
nexion with Dr. Lang. From Dr. Ross’ people, he had received a letter of
condolence, containing a cheque for £4O or £SO, and I believe, certain gentle
hints, that his position would be much more comfortable, were he connected with
them. About the same time, he had received also a letter from Dr. Campbell,
in which he was strongly advised to rejoin his own body, (for Mr. Gibson asserts,
that he never was, and never intended to be a Presbyterian minister,) to leave
Dr. Lang’s body, and associate with Dr. Ross’. When Mr. Gibson came to
Sydney, (the day of his arrival on a Monday,) he went to Mrs. Lang and found
admission there. Two days after he went to Dr. Ross’, when the subject of
conversation was, his contemplated change at the suggestion of Dr, Campbell
and Dr. Ross’ advice to him was—to throw up connexion with Dr. Lang and join
the Independents, assuring him that they would guarantee him a salary. It
would appear that he told Mrs. Lang about offers he had received, and she, as a
matter of course, requested him not to accept of them, but to labour over at
Balmain, where he was sure to gather a congregation, persuading him that
Church-hill would take up his case, and afford him sufficient aid till Dr. Lang
should return. In a state of suspense, balancing these two propositions in his
mind, he waited till Sabbath ; when in church, he felt a little curiosity to know,
what the “ special meeting of the Committee" was for, which was to be held on
the Tuesday following, the intimation of which I read out after service. It was,


you will recollect, to prepare a draught of Report for the Annual Meeting,
Well, of course, this was talked orer, after the dismissal, in the house. Mrs.
Lang assured him that it was to take his case into consideration, and admonished
him kindlv, to quiet his fears, and content himself till Dr. Lang should return,
The Monday after this, (eight days after his arrival in Sydney,) I happened to
meet him in a friend’s house,, where I deeply sympathised with him in his late
distressing losses. There I enquired of him what he proposed doing, to which
he answered, that be did not know, but requested my advice. We left the
friend’s house together, and at the foot of Jamison-street, I told him that I could
not possibly advise him in any way. There he told me plainly, that he wished
to leave Dr. Lang, hut did not know upon what plea to break off. It was there
also that he told me what I have narrated above, and repeated that it was his
earnest desire—that he left the Clarence with the design, to leave Dr. Lang,
“ for whom,” he said, “ he had been made a martyr since his arrival in the
Colony, and whose £.ynod was a mere farce.” I told him, that when Mr. Lodge
left Newcastle, I offered to resign Church-hill in his favour. I said moreover,
that if the people chose to have him (Mr. Gibson) instead of me, seeing he could
perform all the functions of a minister, I would ho most willing to resign, as I
offered to do, to Mr. Lodge. I warned him not to take any step hastily, which
would disconnect him from the Synod. I told him, if he should make up his
mind to go to Jamaica, about which he spoke, I would do all in my power to
raise him a sufficient sum to meet his expenses, or if he chose to place himself
at Balmain, I would exert myself to the utmost to supply his wants. But, after
all, I added, that if he had fully resolved to leave Dr. Lang, to join Dr. Ross,
a consummation which he devoutly wished, and waited only for a plausible plea
to effect— he had better satisfy his own mind about the step, and not fear the
wrath of Dr. Lang —the great hinderance it would appear, which stood in the
way of his doing, what he believed to be his duty. You know what unpleasant-
ness ensued, at that special and following meetings of the Committee, in conse-
quence of letters from Mrs, Lang. That, of course, put an end to my moving
in Mr. Gibson’s case officially. And as he neither called on me after my inviting
him, although he was, oftener than once at the door of my lodging, visiting a
gentleman in my house ; nor acknowledged me after this, in any way whatever,
I allowed him simply to retain the cold and distant position which he had chosen.
Nevertheless, I did what I could in a quiet way to render his circumstances easy.
I encouraged some people to give to Mrs. Lang’s fund. I visited certain people
at Balmain and encouraged them to attend his ministry. I directed parties to
him to be married, while, certainly, had I been so destitute of Christian sympa-
thy as Dr. Lang most unwarrantably insinuates, I should have suffered his case
to lie past unnoticed, as indeed it deserved.
Now this is what I did to Mr. Gibson, over which, it appears, Dr. Lang
regrets. You know what you pledged yourselves individually to do for Mr.
Gibson, but which was ungraciously and contemptuously, refused. And I own
freely that if Mr. Gibson had not assumed such a distant and even hostile
position, and if I had not been aware of his hankering after the guaranteed
Salary of the Independents, more might have been done for him ; but as the
facts of the case were, for Dr. Lang to accuse me of a want of Christian sym-
pathy, with these evidences to the contrary staring him in the face, and above
all, to accuse the Committee, and Church, and Congregation, of withholding
“all countenance and support from Mr. Gibson,” when in fact ihree-fourths of
the subscribers of Mrs. Lang’s fund, belonged to the Church, shows such a reck-
lessness on his part, with respect to truth, that it is enough to shake all my
confidence in the soundness of his judgment. But when the warmth of his
passion, in his ignorance of facts, leads him to assert that I used my influence to
drive him from his (Dr. Lang’s) connection, and infuriates him so much that he
designates me an enemy, I stand amazed and confounded at such unaccounta-
ble and offensive proceedings. This is enough. And Dr. Lang will consider


himself happy when all his enemies become and remain as stauncjj and disinter-
ested friends as I have been in the case of Mr. Gibson. Perhaps when be
becomes acquainted with the facts he will repent of this grievous wrong which
he has perpetrated on the innocent. Till then I wait patiently : and in the
meantime, I pray that the evil which he has done me may not be laid to bis
charge.
With respect to Mr. James Smith, I have little to say, for the accusation
founded on his case deserves no attention. It is false that “no man belonging
to the congregation regarded him.” Among many others whom I might name,
I myself was one. But a man so habitually addicted to drunkenness as the same
James Smith was, could elicit but little Christian sympathy as an Elder of the
Church ; nor did he deserve any. I wrote to him of his sin—l remonstrated
with him—l reasoned with him—l urged him to Christian duty—l enquired
after his own and his daughter’s welfare at least once a week, spending much
time with him. My efforts were indeed fruitless ; and I assure both the Com-
mittee and the Dr. that for the credit of the Church, for whose interests I was
troubled with anxiety, had there been a Session of Elders amongst ns, 1 should
have had recourse to discipline and suspended him, long before he was sought
out by Mrs. Lang. Erom the notoriety of his unfitness for the Eldership, I bad
to request him not to officiate at the dispensation of the Supper, lest the whole
of us should be scandalised and the ordinance profaned. Did this prove a want of
Christian sympathy toward either Dr. Lang or James Smith ? I hope not. But
a curious circumstance came to my knowledge when Mrs. Lang was collecting
the £l7 which is spoken of in the letter. She called on a lady whom I shall not
name, not being connected with the Church, for a subscription. When interro-
gated why Mr. M'Gibbon did not call on the Church for aid from the pulpit, her
answer was, I would not, and that, therefore, she was necessitated to call on a
few friends privately herself. - Whether this was true or false I leave you to
judge, when i knew not then that Mr. Smith was in such extreme want.
3. Dr. Lang objects to accede to your proposal because of matters which con-
cern the Church and College buildings, and land adjacent. Now this objection
I cannot appreciate, because I do not understand any of those things. Never-
theless, I cannot but mention what appears to me to have been in the Dr’s, eye,
when he penned this objection, and 1 repudiate with righteous indignation the
accusation implied. It is evident that when the Dr. wrote “ the Committee
I understand have been making occasional enquiries about the College buildings,"
and when he added “ that a previous Committee during his previous absence,
attempted to take these buildings into their own hands,”—l say, it is evident
from this part of his letter, that he had heard, and that he wrote under the
influence of a horrible slander, which has been industriously circulated to the
prejudice of both you and me, viz., that I was using my influence to persuade
you to eject Mrs. Lang from the house she occupies, that I myself might possess
it —persuading you, at the same time, that it is the minister’s manse. And
further the slander goes, that I was endeavouring to raise £9OO, which I alleged
is the Dr’s, claim on the Church building, so that that being paid, I could seize
both the Church and House. Circulating this slander with all the zeal ot an
enthusiast, I detected Mrs. Lang in more places than one. Nay, so energetic
was she, that into houses where she had not been for a considerable time, she
flung this malicious report, and as if not contented with a bare relation of this
base piece of wickedness, she busied herself to interlard her story with Christian
epithets, “ hypocrite,” “ scoundrel,” “ unworthy young man,” &c., &c., &c., so
as to make my name as odious as possible in the minds of the people ! Now, 1
need not defend myself from this slander. 1 appeal to you all ; which ot you is
able to convict me of doing what this slander asserts ? He that originated the
story was a malicious enemy, and I cannot esteem those, whoever tjfey be, who
spread it abroad, but as his friends and agents.
The Doctor tells you, “ that owing to the circumstances in which the Church


buildings are placed, he must retain his present hold of them, and that, there-
fore, the appointment of a co-pastor at the present moment might occasion diffi-
culties and frustrate some object he had in view.” Whether this he correct or
not, lam not careful nor interested to know. What I wish you to notice from
this statement is this, that, it is utterly inconsistent with the professions he has
always made, and makes again in the introduction to his letter. He has no he-
sitation in' declaring that he is of opinion, that another minister should be ap-
pointed to co-operate with him, that he may go about to settle other Churches,
and that the general interests of the body may be promoted ; yet it is his opi-
nion that it would be dangerous to do so just now. It will occasion difficulties
in his way if any Co-pastor (not only I but any) were appointed ; and he gene-
rally tells you that, till the different sections of the Presbyterian body are united
and the state salaries of other ministers are discontinued, the state of the Scots
Church, Church-hill, must continue as it is—no Co-pastor can possibly be
appointed. With this, of course, I have nothing to do. Most certainly I shall
never, either directly, or indirectly frustrate his intentions. With all my heart I
wish him to cherish the objects be has in view.
After the series of objections which I have just reviewed, which contain so
many injurious insinuations against my character and conduct during his absence,
Dr. Lang asserts, in his letter, his great desire to forward my interest; and from
his high°estimatiou of my ability, advises as many of you and the congregation
as wish, to form a division and establish a new Church. The praise he gives me
in this new section of his letter, after the most wanton trifling with my finest
feelings, and the most base attack on my rectitude, isjike gall added to vinegar.
Insult is here added to injury. Into my heart he has already inserted a dagger,
and now he attempts to draw it out with a smile. Instead of oil and wine, he
pours into the cruel wound, which he the slightest offence, has
made, poison. And what am Ito think of the man who could do this ? Does
he consider me a child, that I should be pleased with flattery in exchange for my
rectitude ? Does he think me a fool, that I should prefer his frown on the one
hand, and his smile on the other, to an independent mind, and the heaven-born
principles of sincerity and truth ? It is marvellous that he should form such
notions of me. I hate flattery at all times, but especially when it is intended to
cover the interested and selfish design. He calls me, “an enemy” at one
moment, his “ young friend” the next, and his “ esteemed young brother” the
next, and then again he likens me to one, who “ unworthily supplanted him in
the affections of his people !” What I ask, can I think and feel when lam thus
treated ? Does a fountain send forth sweet water and bitter ?or does the heart
of a true and sincere friend conceive and send forth, such hard and cruel and of-
fensive words as those, which the Dr. has used concerning me ? It is impossible
—the idea is monstrous.
Do not think, my brethren, that I feel too keenly. I have greater pain in pe-
rusino’ this second section of the Doctor’s letter, than I had in the first. To be
insulted, accused, and, in a manner proscribed, I can bear with some degree of
patience from ray sense of innocence ; but to be flattered and smiled upon by
the same person, at the same moment, does the next thing to exasperating me.
It is well the Doctor anticipates your surprise, at the advice which he gives in
this second section of his letter, viz., to divide and form another Church over
which I might be placed as a pastor. He thinks that you will look upon this,
as “ strange advice,” as coming from him. And so it is. But it is advice,
which does not in the slightest degree affect me—all that I have to do with this
matter is, to notice one or two things, which he throws out, in the precedents
which he gives for this procedure, which disparage me, or at least, which, in
themselves, are calculated to make a false impression. He regards me as situated
now, in similar circumstances, to those in which the Church was placed, when he
returned to the Colony in the year 1831. The late Dr. McGarvie had been
supplying his pulpit in his absence, just as I have been. When Dr, Lang re-


turned, he found that Mr. McGarvie “ had rather unworthily supplanted him in
the affections of his people,” just as he finds now that I have done, (this is most
unquestionably the plain construction of the words and their connexion—what
else can the words be intended to mean ?) And as a consequence, when Dr.
Lang found that many of the people wished Mr. McGarvie as their minister,
just as you want me, he thought it best to advise Mr. McGarvie’s friends to
erect him a church for himself, just as you are now advised to do for me. Now
this is a most cruel and heartless attack on the disinterestedness of my past la-
bours. That I used any means to supplant Dr. Lang in the affections of his
people I deny ; and challenge him to name one individual. Whatever distance
I shewed his family, I always spoke kindly of the Doctor himself to his people ;
nay, when some of them were ready to take offence at his erratic, eccentric, and
unministerial conduct, I never failed to inculcate charity and forbearance. And
you know, that from the day the Doctor left, till the day he arrived, I never
failed to pray for him publicly, as the pastor of the Church, wishing that he
might soon be returned to them, to minister to them the gospel of Christ. If
Dr. Lang, then, is treating me on the same principles on which he treated Mr.
McGarvie, it is plain that he inflicts on me a wound, which he can never heal—
he commits an injustice which is palpably gross. With the other instances
which he cites as precedents for his “ strange advice,” I have nothing to do.
Now, brethren, in closing this letter, the writing of which has cost me so
much unnecessary trouble, and which I could never have imagined Dr. Lang
would have caused, I shall only add,
I. That I have no desire to change Dr. Lang’s opinions, or to argue myself
into the co-pastorate ot the Scots Church, by anything which I have said. If
Dr. Lang’s opinions of me, as in his letter expressed, are justly formed, let him
cease to call me his “ young friend who has laid him under great obligations.”
And, God forbid, that 1 should ever force a connexion, which implies such*sacred
and eternal concerns.
2. I never expect that this letter, nor all the writing of which I am capable,
shall ever repair the damage which I have received at the hands of the Doctor,
without the slightest aggravation. I shall bear, therefore, the hardships of my
lot, patiently waiting the time when the character and actions of both of us
shall be fully investigated.
_ 3- I consider that, although I utterly disclaim the doctrine of merit, when we
view our actions with reference to God, I was justly entitled to the greatest gra-
titude from Dr. Lang, for the service I have done him. But what have I re-
ceived ? Nothing but the most heartless, and cold contempt, which, lam sure,
he will not shew to those who deserted him ; but which he casts upon me, who
have served him to the last, and that faithfully.
4. I consider that he has wronged me most of all, in that he has condemned
my conduct in certain matters unheard. If I know anything of the law of
Christ, by which he is bound, I assert it was his duty to confer with me, (ere he
put a pen to paper,) to ascertain the truth of the reports he had heard. But
instead ot hearing what I had to say in my own defence, he condemns me on the
ground of a mere “ ex-parte ” statement. He had not the manliness to defer
his writing accusations, which affect ray best interests till he had gained all the
evidence attainable, as to what was the truth. And if this was creditable to
him, either as a man, as a minister, or as a Christian, I leave you and the world
to judge.
5. The document itself, I mean Dr. Lang’s letter, as a statement of solid ob-
jections to the appointment of a co-pastor to a Christian Church, is a curiosity
in the history of Presbyterianism But of this I say nothing.
6. As a means of advancing the cause generally, and as a proof of his earnest
desire to settle me as a minister, he proposes the formation of a new Church in
his connexion ; but I cannot possibly perceive how he should form such, contrary


t,o opposite opinions of my “ unaccommodating spirit.” It apjiears that, h«
thinks me stubborn and flexible at the same moment —an enemy and a friend to
the same person at once.
7. I understand, that on Sabbath last, he gave an “ addenda” to the letter
which I have just reviewed. He told the congregation that it was his earnest
desire to settle me as a minister in Sydney —‘down about Miller’s Point. In the
meantime, he proposed, till a new church should be built, that I and ho
should officiate in the Scots church alternately, preaching in the new station on
that part of each Sabbath, on which we were nob engaged in the Hill church.
Now, suppose that we were to accede to this proposal, how long would the new
station remain open, when it is certain that Dr. Lang is about to visit the whole
of the colonies for the sale of his book ? And, further, observe the strongest
objection which he has to my ordination as eo-pastor of the Scots church, is,
that he could not co-operate with me owing to his family’s feelings ; but 1 ask
what is the difference, as far as his family is concerned, between my co-operating
with him in the Scots church for (say) two years, or less or more, (the time the
new church is building,) and my co-operating with him twenty ?
Brethren, I have to apologize for the length of this letter, but owing to the
numerous matters which the Doctor’s letter embraces, all ot which more or less
affect me, I could scarcely shorten the,reply. Permit me now to take my leave
of you, wishing that every blessing both temporal and spiritual, may descend
upon you, and that though our peace has been disturbed by circumstances un-
foreseen, our Christian regard for each other may never diminish.
I am your sincere friend,
With much thanks for your kindness,
To the Committee of Management, \
Scots Church, Church-hill, Sydney. /
(Signed) John M‘Gibbon.
(No. 14.)
Scots Church, Church-hill, November 29, 1853.
Reverend Sir—Having received your letter of the 24th instant in answer to
a note of ours on the 22nd instant, inclosing the three following Resolutions,
viz. TT ,
“ That a Deputation, consisting of Messrs. Fyfe, Manson, Dr. Smith, Hunter,
“ Anderson, and Rodgers, wait upon Doctor Lang to receive his opinions relative
“to what steps should be taken for securing Mr. McGibbon as co-Pastor to this
“ Church.” . „ , ,
“ That the Deputation acquaint Dr. Lang with the proceedings ox the late
“ Secretary of this Church, with a view of appointing a successor who shall
“ perform all the duties pf that office connected with the Church.”
“That the Deputation wait upon Dr. Lang, if convenient for him, on Thursday
“ evening next, at 6 o’clockeach, and all, were unanimously passed by the
Committee of Management, and as there are certain grave charges brought
against us in your letter, we now beg to reply in a few words.
Before proceeding to do so however, we most respectfully inform you that you
misunderstood the purport of our resolutions altogether, and had you received
the Deputation as was proposed, the letter now before us, so discreditable to y oui -
self, would never have been written. We did not ask you if you would accept ot
Mr. McGibbon as co-Pastor, neither so much as, what is your opinion ci such a
connection ; but our Resolutions asked your opinion, in the peculiar position m
which our church is placed, as to the steps to be taken in order to have Mr.
Me Gibbon ordained as co-Fastor ivith you to this church . As a voluntary body,
we deemed we were quite in order in making this request, and we must confess
that we were not a little astonished at your arbitrary and unprecedented dicta-


tion. It is also the opinion of this Committee, that if you were to define the
principles of as regards the position in which the Minister of a
Voluntary Church stands towards his congregation, and vice versa , it would be
satisfactory, both to the Committee and yourself, as the Committee is impressed
with the idea that this church has not been treated as a Voluntary Church should
have been.
The first reason you assign against Mr. McGibbon’s appointment, is so fully
answered in Mr. McGibbon’s letter to us, a copy of which we send you, and as it
more particularly refers to him, we say nothing upon it, further than to remark
that throughout your letter you appear to be influenced by the erroneous idea
that we wish to introduce Mr. McGibbon as Pastor altogether, and thus affect
your position. Be assured, this idea was never entertained by the Commit-
tee, and so far as we know, by any member of the congregation ; nor could we
be so unmindful of Christian duty as to cherish for a moment such a desire
against a man, who, all cannot but acknowledge, has made great sacrifices in
promoting the cause of Protestantism.
In your second reason for not acceding to our proposal, you express your regret
that we acted as we did towards Mr. Gibson, accusing us at the same time, for a
want of Christian sympathy- Mr. McGibbon being associated with this charge
also has replied in such a manner that little remains for us to say. However,
we deny in toto what you assert “ that no countenance or assistance, of any kind,
“ was afforded to Mr. Gibson,” and as a proof of this we refer you to our corres-
pondence with Mrs. Lang on the subject wherein we stated that, “ although we
were not prepared to accede to Mrs. Lang’s proposal to guarantee Mr. Gibson
£2OO per annum, yet we were prepared and would willingly aid Mr. Gibson, as
members of the church, by our private subscriptions.” But if Mr. Gibson bene-
fitted not by our proposal, Mrs. Lang is the cause ; for a most pert note was the
reply, stating that our private subscriptions were quite unnecessary. Now, sir, in
the case of Mr. Gibson, we take equal credit with yourself for being “ constrained
by an imperious sense of duty” to act towards that gentleman in the manner we
did. For in the peculiar position in which you left us as a church, or rather, as
no church at all, and the ordinary financial demands of the church being month
after month met with difficulty, was it reasonable or just, to expect that we could
or would guarantee what we knew, under existing circumstances, it was impossi-
ble to perform ? Notwithstanding you accuse us with the want of “ anything
like interest in the cause,” it almost makes us say that none but “ an enemy”
would think so unworthily of us.
As the late Mr. James Smith’s case is so very foreign to anything that should
associate itself with your reply, we regret exceedingly that you have introduced
that poor unfortunate man. Although Mr. Smith’s case was not brought before
us as a committee, most of the Committee being perfectly ignorant of his circum-
stances, yet he was not overlooked by some of the members who offered to supply
him with such- necessaries as ho wished. These parties, however, are not in the
practice of publishing their good deeds before men, but try to follow the injunc-
tion, “ Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth.”
Your third reason for not admitting Mr. McGibbon as co-Pastor, is based upon
the present state of the Church and College property. As this portion of your
letter is wrapped up in such mystery, we defer, at present, making any lengthy
remarks upon it, more than to say, that you are grossly misinformed as to
the motives of certain members of the Committee, in making enquiry about the
deeds of the church property. It was with no such intention as you appear so
readily to have believed, and thus condemn the committee, as you have done, in
many parts of your letter, without either judge or jury. And we are no little
surprised respecting the amount you allege is due, by the church, to yourself,
which, by the by, has, on several occasions, been represented more, sometimes
less, than the present amount of £I3CO. It is a popular opinion that the church
is not indebted to you at all; that various subscriptions have been raised both


for this church at Church Hill and also at Balmain, which have wiped off all
claims. But be this as it may, it is advisable that a statement should be pre-
pared and the subscription lists produced, in order that this popular opinion,
respecting these matters, may be satisfactorily met. Further we never certainly
understood that the money Mrs. Lang received from this church, during yom
absence, was viewed “ merely as interest,” nor do we believe you to be sincere
when you state that you cannot view it in any other light. However if this is
the interest, it is well that we should soon know more about the principal.
The concluding part of your letter appears to us most unaccountably incon-
sistent You represent Mr. McGibbon as proud and over-bearing—wanting an
accommodating spirit-as having treated your family with discourtesy, as des-
titute of Christian sympathy ; and by the want of such a disposition, as the latter
lias proved himself in your opinion, an enemy to the advancement ol the Gospel
of Christ. And vet, Notwithstanding this, you say “I am most anxious to pro-
“ mote Mr. Me Gibbon’s settlement as a minister ot the Gospel in the city ot
“ Sydney, which I think may be effected very easily, and I pledge myselt to do
“everything in my power to forward the object, &c., &c.” And then you pro-
ceed laying down certain plans, how such may be accomplished, which to us,
appear as impracticable as unnecessary, in the present state ot affairs, it mi"h
be practicable for Dr. Lang to command means to erect and gather another
church, although such were impossible for us to accomplish ; and we cannot but
think that it would have been more praiseworthy in you to have proposed means
by which the Scots Church, at Church Hill, could bo better tilled, than attempt-
ino- to found another. But surely when you wrote the sentiments above referred
to? vou must have entirely forgotten the character you had previously given r.
McGibbon • and with such a letter of commendation, how could yon tor a moment
suppose, any body of Christians should be so deprived of their reason as to accept
as their Pastor,* a man so branded ? The idea is preposterous. And how you can
reconcile the above character given to Mr. McGibbon with the many endearing
appellatives you so lavishly heaped upon him, such as, “My young triend, My
respected young friend," “My respected friend and brother who has given such
“general satisfaction while occupying my pulpit during my absence,” is beyond
our powers to imagine ; hence we cannot but come to the conclusion that these
are not your sentiments, or your mind was employed considering some other
subject while penning the letter before us. ......
There is another part of your letter that appears to tis almost as inconsistent
as that, to which we have alluded. You say “ Before proceeding to England m
“the year 1846, I was earnestly desirous that another minister should be
“ appointed to co-operate with me, &c„ &c.,” and in the paragraph follow-
ing you say, “ 1 have no hesitation in acknowledging that lam precisely
“ the same opinion still, &o." But, strange to say, you proceed in your
third objection for not admitting Mr. McGibbon as co-Pastor, to express yourself
as follows- “The state of our Church and College property, at the present
« moment, forms my third reason for withholding my approval of this proposal
We suppose the state of the Church and College property was in precisely the
same position in 1846 as it is nowin 1853—and if so, why is it not as practicable
now, as it was then, to have a co-Pastor ?” We leave the luture to decide this
question. . . . ,
We have considerably exceeded our intention, but your letter is so open to
objections that we have been compelled to trespass upon your time. Hoping,
however, that you will re-consider the position you have assumed, and listen to
the voice of the church.
We are, Reverend and dear bir,
Your Christian friends,
For, and on behalf of Hie Committee of Management,
John Fyfe, Chairman,
To the Rev Dr. Lang.


REMARKS ON THE FOREGOING LETTERS OF MR. M'GIBBoN AN©
the committee of management.
It is quite evident, from Sir. McGribbon’s anxiety to clear him-
self of all blame or imputation, in regard to his leaving my house
in the way he did, that he is conscious of the obvious impropriety
of the step, notwithstanding all that he has said on the subject.
It was grossly improper and indecent, under all the circumstances
of the case. Mrs. Lang was quite distressed at the idea, and espe-
cially at the unseemly aspect it would have in the eyes of the
public, when Mr. McGribbon was preparing to leave. But the Rev.
Mr. Stewart, of Brisbane, who was residing in my house at the
time, (in precisely similar circumstances as to treatment, with those
of Mr. McGribbon,) and the late Mr. J. S. Smith, who was occa-
sionally there also, being both aware of the extreme annoyance and
discomfort, which Mr. McGribbon’s procedure, as a member of my
household, were occasioning to my family, told Mrs. Lang, “to
give herself no trouble about what the public would think on the
subject, but to let him go by all means, as his leaving would be a
good riddance for the family.” Mr. Smith is since dead, but Mr.
Stewart is still alive, and can testify whether this was not the
ground, and the only ground, of the sanction which he gave to Mr.
McGribbon’s leaving, and to which Mr. McGibbon appeals rather
unfortunately.
For Mr. McGribbon’s conduct had been unaccommodating, over-
bearing, and I will not hesitate to add, even insolent in the ex-
treme, to all the members of my family, from the time I left the
Colony for England. Mr. McGribbon had all along been on the
worst of terms with most of the other students, and complaints on
the subject to myself were incessant. These I quashed, as much
as possible, for Mr. McGribbon’s own sake ; and my family had
been obliged, for months together, to give him his meals alone,
merely to keep the peace. But when all the other students had
successively left the house, for various fields of occupation and use-
fulness elsewhere, and Mr. McGribbon had nobody left of his own
class and standing, to quarrel with, he set himself to wreak his ill
nature on my family and servants, making every one around him
as uncomfortable as possible. There were two female servants in
the house at the time —one a Scotch girl, of at least equally re-
spectable parentage with Mr. McGribbon, and the other an Irish
Roman Catholic girl, the niece of a priest, and one of the best of
her class Mrs. Lang had ever had in her house. But Mr. McGib-
bon’s language was so rude, imperious, and insolent to these girls,
that they actually refused to do anything for him, _ and Mrs. Lang
had repeatedly to accompany one of them up to his room in his
absence, and to remain while she cleaned it out—merely to keep
the peace of the house, and to leave the young man no ground of


complaint. It is quite possible that, in these circumstances, Mr,
McGibbon may have had occasionally to brush his own boots, and
to carry up his own fresh water himself 5 but as I have myself had
still greater hardships than these to undergo in my time, I uni-
formly reserve my sympathies for more important occasions.
As a proof of the earnest desire of my family to minister to Mr.
McGibbon’s comfort in every way, Mrs. Lang requested him to let
her know when he would be home from his calls or visits, and
dinner would be ready for him at any hour. But Mr. McGibbon
refused to give her this information, and it was not always possible
to suit his time, which was very irregular. On one of these occa-
sions, when Mrs. Lang and her sister had been obliged to go out
after dinner, the remainder of the joint, wdiich had been hot at
the usual dinner hour, had been left, in the way that was usual in
my own case on such occasions, for Mr. McGibbon. But Mr.
McGibbon refused to dine on the cold joint, and sent out the ser-
vant to the butcher’s for a beefsteak. Now, I confess, I could
never have used such freedom as this, with any of my fellow-
creatures, under the humblest roof that has ever given me shelter
or hospitality in my journey of life ; making it a rule on such oc-
casions, to conform to the habits of the people, —asking no questions
and making no complaints. So long as Mr. McGibbon was one of
the students, there was always abundance of the good wholesome
fare of the Colony —beef, bread, sugar and tea —of the best quality,
and served up with all the regard to comfort and propriety that
was practicable—for we had additional servants for the express pur-
pose of attending to- their comfort ; and when I left the Colony
for England, my family continued to live in precisely the same way
they had done before my departure. When Mr. McGibbon, how-
ever, had finally resolved to leave, and told Mrs. Lang, as his reason
for doing so, that he wanted more com,forts than he had, Mrs. Lang
felt so hurt and disgusted at the conduct of the young man, that
she did not even ask what the additional comforts were he required,
but simply acquiesced in his leaving, as the Bev. Mr. Stewart had
recommended.
So long as Mr. McGibbon was merely one of the students, it was
impossible for my family to treat him any otherwise than the rest,
without awakening jealousy on the part of the others. Ihe stu-
dents had in the first instance brought up their bedding from the
ship, and fitted,up temporary bed-places, &c., for themselves, with
the fittings up of the vessel which were also brought ashore, for
the express purpose 5 and as there was plenty of room, especially
after a few of the number had left us, which they did very soon
after our arrival, the sleeping apartments occupied by the students
had quite as comfortable an appearance as those of Eton and the
other great schools of England, which I had visited myself, and in


which such interesting initials as those of Arthur Wellesley and
Robert Feel, were pointed out to me as having, been cut out with a
penknife on the timbers of the rooms, by the young aspirants for
immortality. Now, it is very possible, that Mr. McGibbon’s bed-
place may have broken down, as sometimes happened with the
other young men, and that instead of getting it repaired, he had
placed his mattress on his boxes. As to the mattress itself, there
is a little incident to be told, which Mr. McGibbon has rather un-
generously concealed. For some reason or other, he had tluown
his mattress out into the court-yard, and the Scotch girl above-
mentioned, having observed it, ripped it up, washed it, filled it
again, and carried it up to Mr. McGibbon’s room, and asked him
where he slept and where she should place it; when, instead of
giving her a civil answer, he asked her, in an insolent tone, which
hurt the girl exceedingly, What business she had to ask where he
slept ? But all such hardships in Mr. McGribbon’s lot ended
some time before my return from Parramatta, in August 1851; an d
consequently long before my departure for Pngland in 1 ebruar^,
1852. For as soon as the other students had left, an iron bedstead
was got for Mr. McGribbon’s special use, and the apartment he oc-
cupied was as comfortably fitted up as any other in the house.
The same apartment, in precisely the same condition as when he
occupied it, was subsequently occupied for some time, first by the
Rev. L. Lodge, late of Newcastle, who had been compelled to seek
a change of climate for his health, secondly by one of my sons, who
was a clerk at the time in the Bank of New South Wales, and
thirdly by the Rev. John Gibson, now of Newcastle, and one of his
children, for five months. Besides, I deny that Mr. McGibbon was
treated in any way differently from any one of these parties. The
only difference arose from the difference of disposition in the par-
ties respectively.
There was a passage in Mr. McGibbon’s letter, illustrative of his
peculiar hardships and grievances, while under my roof, which the
Committee thought too gross for transmission to me, and which
they consequently erased, at the place were certain asterisks will be
found in the printed copy of the letter. But as the passage was
read and commented on, at the expense of my family, in the Com-
mittee, I am bound to notice it, as I have incidentally ascertained
precisely what it was. It complained that the room Mr. McGibbon
occupied in my house was infested with a certain disagreeable spe-
cies of vermin. Now this is very easily explicable. A stable at-
tached to my house had been for some time used as fowl-house,
and was so infested with a certain small troublesome insect called
henlice, usually generated in such situations, that my children were
strictly prohibited from entering it; and when one of the members
of the Committee requested permission to use the stable for his


horse during my absence, Mrs. Lang sent word to him, that al
though he was quite welcome to the use of the stable, she was
afraid he would be unable to make use of it, as it was so infested
with these insects, from having been long used as a fowl-house.
Now, as it was a matter of notoriety in my house, that Mr.
McGibbon was in the habit of occasionally entering the stable, for
what purposes I know not, the probability is, that he had uncon-
sciously carried a whole colony of these unmentionable insects
along with him to his own apartment. But as there were no com-
plaints from any one of the three parties, who successively occupied
the apartment after Mr. McGibbon, although they were all quite
as fastidious in matters of personal cleanliness as himself, he must
have carried off the colony along with him when he left my house.
Whether Mr. McGibbon was under any obligations, either to
myself personally or to my family, for being lodged, boarded and
educated so long, as a candidate for the ministry, free of all cost,
under my roof, is perhaps a matter of opinion ; and as Mr.
McGibbon enters so strong a disclaimer against the idea of obliga-
tion on his part, I shall not insist upon it, but leave it for others
to decide. But lam totally at a loss to discover the overwhelming
weight of obligation, under which Mr. McGibbon conceives he has
laid me, by officiating for me first during my absence for four
months at Parramatta, and afterwards during my late voyage to
England. When I was licensed to preach the gospel myself in
Scotland in the year 1820, after eight years’ regular attendance at
the University of Glasgow, preceded by three years’ previous at-
tendance at a Grammar School ; both myself and my horse for
my father happened at the time to have a Highland pony, of all
work, that was always at my command—were, in of
the death of two ministers within the bounds, in constant requisi-
tion to supply the parishes whose ministers had to preach in the
vacant congregations, (which a mere licentiate was not at liberty to
do,) for nearly a twelvemonth together ; and during that whole pe-
riod, although I had to ride many hundreds of miles, and to preach
incessantly every Sabbath, often at great distances from my home,
I never received a farthing for my services—no, not so much as
paid the tolls; for it was not the custom of the Church of Scotland,
to allow any pecuniary compensation in such the
honour of being employed in such a work being held sufficient.
But Mr McGibbon knows well, that it was no wish of mine, that
he should officiate gratuitously forme, while I was at Parramatta.
I insisted on his receiving a suitable portion of the salary for the
period ; and although, on his declining it, I thought he had done
no more than his doty to myself and the Church on the occasion,
it was no wish or suggestion of mine, that he should receive no
compensation for his services on that occasion, and I believe, he did
receive a suitable present from the Church.


As to Mr. McGibbon’s services during my absence in England,
I believe they have been duly acknowledged and compensated by
the Committee, as far as such services can be compensated, with
money, in the shape both of salary and of testimonials. But it was
quite in my power, both when at Parramatta and before I sailed
for England, to have made a totally different arrangement for the
supply of the pulpit during my absence, from the one actually
made ; but I wished on both occasions, to secure the services of
the person who, I knew, was most acceptable to the congregation,
and I also wished to give that person an opportunity of strength-
ening his own interest and influence with the congregation, with a
view to his being eventually appointed my assistant and successor,
or co-pastor —an office, of which I am truly sorry to say, he has
since rendered himself totally unworthy by his own acts and deeds.
And does Mr. McGibbon pretend to say, that so young a man, and
one so peculiarly circumstanced in regard to the want of previous
University training as himself, was under no obligations to me for
placing him in a situation of so much prominence and influence,
as all this implied, in the first Presbyterian Church in the first
city of this hemisphere ?
As to Mr. McGribbon’s assertion, that I was affected even to tears
when soliciting him to supply my place during my absence in Eng-
land, it only exhibits the overweening self-conceit of the young
man, and the rich exuberance of his fancy. I declare most solemnly,
that Mr. McGibbon never saw me in any such situation, or in any-
thing approaching it. I believe, I have as tender and feeling a
heart for the sufferings and wrongs of others, as most other men;
but I am, perhaps constitutionally, blessed with a degree of Indian
fortitude in regard to my own, to which anything like tears is an
utter stranger. The thing is ridiculous—it is simply untrue.
And so also is the assertion, that the systematic evil-speaking at
my table, served to drive this pious young man from my house ! I
can scarcely allow myself to characterise, as it deserves, this super-
latively false, cowardly, and malignant insinuation. It merely ex-
hibits the impotent wish, on the part of Mr. McGibbon, to injure
the characters of those to whom he had previously shewn the
blackest ingratitude ; and in so far, it is in perfect accordance with
a well-known principle of our fallen nature, which leads us to in-
jure the characters of those whom we have otherwise wronged.*
* I should be sorry if it were supposed that Mr. M‘Gibbon’s conduct, in
reference to my household and family, was a fair sample of that of the students
generally. On the contrary, we receive, from time to time, even to the present
hour, the warmest expressions of interest and kindly feeling from certain of their
number. In a letter, for example, to Mrs. Lang, from Mr. David Tinnim-,
(the one who staid with us longest, indeed till a short time before I sailed for
England, and who on leaving my family, paid his board where he went for


Mr. McGibbon attempts to make up a little ecclesiastical capital
for himself with people of vulgar minds, by alluding, as he does so
pointedly, to my “incarceration” at Parramatta. He is quite wel-
come. lam not ashamed of that part of my history. On the
contrary) I have told it to all the world, and commented upon it
too, in my books.
Mr. McGribbon is evidently also desirous of impressing the Com-
mittee with the belief, that my repeated journies to the interior,
during which he occasionally supplied for me, were entirely of a
political character. He is under the grossest mistake ; for I never
made a single journey for political purposes, during the years 1850
and 1851. My first journey was to the Upper Hunter, and the
Manning River ; during which, I rode upwards of 400 miles,
preached six times, delivered six lectures in as many different
places, and paved the way for the settlement of two ministers, all
within seventeen days. My second journey, to the Upper William,
had a similar object exclusively ; and my third journey, to Hunter’s
River, was undertaken at the request of Mr. Lodge of Newcastle,
to preach for him, and to preside for him at .a soiree for his church.
My journey to the Gold Mines was undertaken at the express desire
of the Synod, for the purpose of preparing the way for the settle-
ment of a minister —Mr. Blair—at the mines. I paid my own ex-
penses on that occasion, both up and down; but I collected £7 , to
assist Mr. Blair in his. My journey to Moreton Bay was equally
unconnected with politics ; and although Mr. McGibbon falsely in-
sinuates that I went there to vindicate my character, my character
required no such vindication, for there was no part of the colony
in which I met with a more cordial reception. During the three
Sabbaths I was there, I preached morning and evening for the Rev,
Mr. Stewart who was then ill ; and I was not a little provoked to
learn, on myreecent return to the Colony, that although Mr. Stewart
had been living for months in my house, and in comparatively good
health, during my absence, he was only asked on two occasions,
(once by the Committee for some public object,) to preach in the
Scots Church.
Mr. McGibbon pretends to say that it was all one to him whe-
ther he remained in my house, or left it for more comfortable quar-
ters, as he should have had to pay for his board in either case. It
is grossly untrue, and Mr. McGibbon knows it. Mr. McGibbon
knows well that no minister or candidate for the ministry ever paid
more than a twelve-month thereafter ,) of date, “ Melbourne, December 7, 1853,”
there is the following expression;—
“ You may think it presumption in me to be so solicitous [about the health
of my family, on hearing that we had sickness in the house] ; but I can truly
say, that the season Hived with your family, and the kindness which I received
from you, have well nigh made me one with you and yours ; and I cannot
but turn towards “ College Buildings,” with much interest.


for his board in my house. He knows that he paid nothing him-
self, so long as he was merely a student, and that none of his fellow
students ever did. He knows also, that neither Mr. Lodge, nor
Mr. Stewart, nor Mr. Hibson ever paid any board while residing in
my house. And was it likely that he—the young man supplying
the Church in my absence—was to be the solitary exception to this
general rule ? When Mr. McGribbon offered Mrs. Lang payment,
she declined it, telling him that she was not accustomed to any-
thing of the kind ; that what he received from the Committee was
little enough for himself; that he was quite welcome to live in my
house as theretofore, and that if the Doctor chose, on his return,
to make any such arrangements with him for the past, that was
his affair and not hers. In short, Mr. McGHbbon’s attempt to make
out either Mrs. Lang or myself mere lodging-house keepers, is as
unsuccessful, as, under all the circumstances of the case, it is
equally impudent and disgraceful.
But what will the reader think, if I can shew that, after all this
display of urgent reasons for leaving my house, the whole affair
was a mere ruse to get back to it again in a different way, and in a
different capacity ? Mr. McGribbon and the Committee of Manage-
ment had, it seems, taken up the idea, that the house I occupy,
and the one adjoining it, together with the house occupied by Mr.
Donald McPherson, late Schoolmaster and Session Clerk of the
Church, were the Church property, and consequently subject to
the management of the Committee. A person, for instance, in
the confidence of the Committee, told Mrs. Lang, that if she did
not clear out the next house, which was partially occupied by the
Rev. Mr. Quaife, and the house occupied by Mr. McPherson, she
would come into collision with the Committee, as they would do it
for her. Mrs. Lang merely replied, that she never interfered in
these matters, and that she would certainly never disturb any ar-
rangement that had been made by her husband before he left the
Colony. On another occasion, Mr. James Antrobus, who had re-
sided in my house as a student till the month of August, 1851,
stated in the Committee, “ that the officiating minister, Mr.
McGribbon, ought to have apartments in the manse,” meaning the
house I occupy. Nay, Mr. McGibbon himself called on the Rev.
Mr. Threlkeld, who was on friendly terms with all parties con-
cerned, and who called on Mrs. Lang at Mr. McGribbon’s instance,
to inform her that the impression which had gone abroad, that Mr.
McGribbon wished to turn her out was unfounded, “ as he only wanted
to have access to rooms in the manse.” Mrs. Lang merely informed
Mr. Threlkeld in reply, that she was under no apprehensions of
the kind, and that his own uneasiness on the subject was quite un-
necessary. It was for these reasons I deemed it requisite to clear
up the question of property in the College-buildings, in my first
letter to the Committee.


In regard to Mr. MeGibbon’s attempt to whitewash both himself
and the Committee from the charges in my letter, on the subject
of their treatment of Mr. Gibson and the Church at Balmain, I
am sorry to say his statements are quite at variance with those of
Mr. Gibson and Mrs. Lang, substantiated as the latter are with do-
cuments, of the existence of which Mr. McGibbon was probably
not aware. Although neither Mr. Gibson nor myself regarded Mr.
G.’s passing over to us from the Independents, or his repassing to
them, as involving any compromise of principle, (the thing being done
every day in America,) it is at least certain, from what Mr. Gibson
repeatedly told Mrs. Lang after his return to Sydney, that having
once joined our Synod, he would not have left it, if he could have
been established as a minister of our body at Balmain. And the
reason why he did leave our body and allowed the church at Bal-
main to be extinguished for the time, was simply the entire want
of countenance and assistance he experienced, from Mr. McGibbon
and the Committee of Management of the Scots Church. His
own statement on the subject—contained in the following extract
of a letter to myself, of date Newcastle, Nov. 30, 1853, before I
had written a syllable to him since my return to the Colony—is
surely explicit enough.
(No. 15.)
Newcastle, November 30th, 1853.
I need not tell you my reasons for leaving you ; you have doubtless heard from
Mrs. Lang of my heavy-trials at the Clarence, and the utter contempt with which
I and my family were treated by Mr. McGibbon and the Committee at Church
Hill. There were two, I think, that were friendly towards us, but the others
were influenced by Mr. McGibbon and his man Friday. I could say much, but
forbear ; I waited many many months for your arrival, but as you did not come,
and I knew I could never feel comfortable in the Scots Church fellowship [that
is with Mr. McGibbon and the late Committee of Management], I deemed it
right to seek re-union with my old body, the Congregationalists. I hope ever to
entertain respect for you and your excellent wife.
To the same effect Mr. Gibson writes as follows, in a subsequent
letter, of date, “ .Newcastle, December 12,1853,” after hearing from
me in reply to his letter of the 30th December :
(No. 16.)
I am thankful that you still entertain the same views and feelings towards me
as heretofore, and only regret that you had not arrived sooner from England,
that I might have fully explained my position. I knew you would regret my
leaving the body ; but I certainly did not anticipate the favourable turn of things
at Church Hill. You have acted firmly and nobly in reference to M‘Gibbon
and the Committee ; your conduct is most satisfactory to me. lam glad that
you cannot be moved by the *»•«*« fry.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours’ very truly,
John Gibson.
The Kev. Dr. Lang. •


Mrs. Lang’s letter to the Committee, in the case of Mr. Gibson,
of which I have certainly no reason to feel ashamed, either in re-
gard to its spirit or its composition, notwithstanding the manner in
which it has been characterised by Mr. M'Gibhon and the Com-
mittee, is as follows :
(No. 17.)
To the Committee of Management of the Scots Church.
Sydney, April, 1853.
Gentlemen — l beg leave to apologize for writing you on any subject, but more
especially regarding the interests of our Church.
The Eev. John Gibson, late of the Clarence River, and for many years a Mis-
sionary in Jamaica, was urged by the Doctors of the Clarence district to leave
that locality, as the only means of restoring his broken health and that of his
family ; his wife and three of his children having died there. His intention, on
leaving latter district, was to proceed immediately to Jamaica ; but on his
coming to Sydney, his own health and that of his family has improved so much
that ot course he will remain in New South Wales, especially as several fields of
usefulness have been opened up for him.
He feels himself, however, in a very painful and unpleasant position. The
Independents here have offered him liberally, and agreed to support him com-
fortably, were he only to renounce all connection with Dr. Lang. Such a step
of course he is unwilling to take. I have urged him to content himself where
he is till the Doctor’s return. I will feel pleasure in supporting him and his
family, and will do all in my power to promote his interests. He is a true Mis-
sionary and a zealous Minister of the Gospel.
Several parties at Balmain are desirous that he should remain among them,
and of course will give to his support; and I have written to some friends in the in-
terior to aid in his support for the present, there being but little doubt that that
locality will soon maintain its own Minister.
Were you, as a Church, to stand by him, only to offer to make up the deficiency
of a salary of £2OO, he would then go on his Christian course with some confi-
dence, and feel encouraged, rather than as a dependent in my house, a position
painful to a refined mind. The Dr. I know at one time gave a Minister £lOO
from his own income to preach at Balmain, and to support the ordinances of re-
ligion there.
_ I have established, since the Ist of April, a society with the intention of as-
sisting in supporting Mr. Gibson as a City Missionary, a situation in which, I
thought, along with his duties at Balmain, he might do much good, and he is
willing to enter upon such a sphere.
I have already got many subscribers and still have the prospect of many more.
The sum to be subscribed is only one shilling per month, which of course will
entail much labour in collecting ; but that I may modify by future arrangements.
I will exert myself to promote this interest, a duty hig’hly incumbent upon a
Christian body, so many strangers arriving daily upon these shores. This fund,
together with the amount of support at Balmain, will of course go so far in sus-
taining Mr. Gibson, and were you only to volunteer to make up the deficiency,
he would with confidence and pleasure go forward on his Christian way rejoicino-.
I know that such a man being obliged to leave our body for want of support
would be painful and distressing to both the Doctor and himself. I will do all
in my power to maintain him, and I would be delig'hted to know that you would
also.
I have written this letter, unknown to any one but myself, trusting it might
influence you to aid in retaining this good man in our body ; at the same time


trusting that the deep interest I feel in Mr. Gibson’s welfare will be a sufficient
apology for my intrusion.
I remain, Gentlemen,
With deep interest and sincerity,
Yours affectionately and sincerely,
WILHELMINA LANG,
To this letter, Mrs. Lang received the following reply from the
Committee of Management.
Sydney, April 21st, 1853.
Dear Madam —In accordance with the request of the Committee of Manage-
ment of the Scots Church, Church Hill, I herewith forward you a copy of the
resolution passed by them at a Special Meeting held last Tuesday.
“That this Committee cannot entertain Mrs. Lang’s proposition, relative to
“ the support she wishes guaranteed to Mr. Gibson—and that Mr. Antrobus be
“requested, in answer to Mrs. Lang’s letter, to forward her a copy of this mo-
“tion, at the same time stating that the Committee are willing, as members of
“the congregation, to aid Mr. Gibson by their private subscriptions.”
Carried unanimously.
I remain,
On behalf of the Committee,
Your obedient Servant,
J 4mes Antrobus, Hon. Sec,
To Mrs. Lang, Jamison-street.
To which Mrs. Lang returned the following rejoinder. It is
certainly laconic enough, as the case perhaps deserved ; but it is
anything hut pert, as the Committee rather unhandsomely charac-
terize it.
Mrs. Lang begs leave to inform Mr. Antrobus that a private subscription, in
aid of the Rev. John Gibson, is quite unnecessary.
To Mr. James Antrobus.
It was the countenance and friendly co-operation rather
than the pecuniary assistance of the Scots Church that Mr.
Gibson required at Balmain; but this was heartlessly withheld
from him, and Mr. Gibson was a man of too sensitive a nature not
to feel deeply under such marked and unmerited neglect. It is
scarcely to be credited, that, notwithstanding all he had suffered in
the cause at the Clarence Biver, and, notwithstanding his residence
for five successive months in my house, while endeavouring to
establish himself in Sydney and Balmain, Mr. Gibson was never
asked to preach in the Scots Church—the Church which had always
till then been the Mother Church of the Presbyterian communion
in this colony I Whether Mr. M'Gibbon was jealous of the popu-
larity of Mr. Gibson, Ido not know; but such conduct was heart-
less in the extreme, and it is not to be palliated with what Mr,
M'Gibbon says of his encouraging some people to subscribe to Mrs,
Lang’s fund for his support, of which he alleges three fourths were
contributed by members of the Scots Church. This is notoriously
incorrect; the whole of the proportion of that fund which Mrs,


Lang paid over to Mr. Gibson for the time he had been at Balmain,
(for which she has his receipt for £25 8s. ; ) was contributed exclu-
sively by friends of the cause at Bathurst and Moreton Bay, (chiefly
by Joseph Gordon, Esq., of Bathurst, and W. Richardson, Esq., of
Brisbane), whom Mr. M'Gibbon could not know, and with whom
he could have no communication. After Mr. Gibson’s departure,
the Sydney subscribers to the fund, having, at Mrs. Lang’s sugges-
tion and request, agreed to transfer it to the support of the Mission
to the Aborigines of the north-western interior, under that truly
apostolic man, the Rev. W. Ridley, B. A. I have paid Mr. Ridley,
on Mrs. Lang’s account, the amount in hand, viz., £3O, since my
return to the colony. In short I have no reason to retract a sylla-
ble of my first letter to the Committee on this point. Mr. Gibson
was virtually driven from our body, and a highly promising church of
our communion at Balmain was extinguished, through the heartless-
ness of the Committee of Management of the Scots Church, acting
under the influence of Mr. M‘ Gibbon, And how could I overlook a
case of this kind ?
Mr. M'Gibbon seems to think that a posthumous and peculiarly
heartless charge of intemperance against the late Mr. J. S. Smith,
is a sufficient set-off against the charge I have preferred in my let-
ter against the Committee of Management acting under the influ-
ence of Mr. M'Gibbon, of their cold-blooded and unchristian ne-
glect of this humble but meritorious individual, when sunk into
poverty, old age, and disease. It is true, I have heard that Mr.
Smith did occasionally, under old age, provery and increasing in-
firmities, forget himself, since his return to the colony in the year
1850, although I never saw anything of the kind myself. But it
was impossible to forget that he had for many years before been
a zealous and really efficient elder of the Scots Church, that he had
in many instances sacrificed his own temporal welfare to promote
the interests of the Church, and that, when possessed of the means,
he had generously assisted many newly arrived emigrants, who were
humble enough at their outset, but some of whom now carry a very
high head in this community. Now the charities of Mr. M'Gibbon
and the Committee, acting under his influence, towards this unfor-
tunate individual, were all of the he thou warmed and clothed
character —they went no farther. The priest, Mr. M'Gibbon, and
the Levites of the Committee of Management, acting under his
pious example, like their prototypes, of old, passed by on the other
side, and left the duties of the good Samaritan to be performed by
the humble wife of the man whose back, they supposed, was at the
wall. It was peculiarly fortunate for him that he was so well
represented in this instance in his own household, if not in his own
pulpit. As Mr. M'Gibbon is under some misapprehension as to
where Mrs. Lang got the £l7 for Mr. Smith, I shall give him the


£
s.
d.
David Dickson, Esq., of Buhvarra, near Maitland
0
0
Samuel Gordon, Esq,, Bridge-street
0
0
Mrs. John MTherson, Port Phillip
0
0
Mr. Hercus, Dunmore, Hunter’s River.... ..
1
0
0
Mrs. Hercus, do. do.
0
0
Mrs. Ross and her daughter—neighbours of Mx'. S.
I
0
0
George Bowman, Esq., M.C. Richmond
0
0
Alexander Campbell, Esq., J.P. Svdnej
0
0
list of Donors, from which he will see clearly that Mrs. Lang was
not in the way of talking scandal about him in the houses of mem*
hers of the church, when performing an act of Christian charity to
old age and misfortune; for it will appear from the list of contri*
butors, that the sums obtained must necessarily have been contri-
buted in answer to private letters from Mrs. Lang, informing the
parties who were all well acquainted with him in his better days,
of the circumstances of Mr. Smith, and not in the way of personal
solicitation.
Subscription’s in aid op Me. James S. Bmith.
Mr. James Gillespie,“Baker, an old neighbour of Mr. S., volun-\ i o 0
tarily left in Mrs. Lang’s hands, when paying him an account/
Mrs. Sylvester, 65., Mrs. Donald M'Pherson, 55... t 010 0
Mrs. Walker, an old neighbour of Mr. S., 10s., Miss Jane I „, „ „
Warren, 2s 6d . | 012 6
This comparatively small amount was handed to Mr. Smith on
his departure for Moreton Bay, merely as an instalment j as Mrs.
Lang expected that I would raise something more for him, as I cer-
tainly should have endeavoured to do, when I returned to the co-
lony. But as he died at Brisbane in the interval, any further con-
tributions on his behalf were rendered unnecessary. I cannot, how-
ever, dismiss the case of Mr. Smith without noticing a somewhat
remarkable fact. He had returned to the colony in the same part
cf the same ship with Mr. M'Glibbon; and having had abundant
opportunity of observing the peculiar disposition of the young man,
he cautioned me repeatedly, and in the strongest manner, even be-
fore he was licensed to preach, against engaging him as my assis-
tant in the Scots Church, assuring me that, if t did so, he would
certainly prove an Achan in our camp. These were the very words
he used, and I thought less of them at the time than I do now.
As to the allegation that Mrs. Lang ever applied such epithets
to Mr. M'Gibbonas those of “ unworthy young man,” “ hypocrite,”
and “ scoundrel,” in any house or place, or to any person whatso-
ever, Mrs. Lang requests me to meet the charge with an indig-
nant denial; no such words having ever crossed her lips. But this
is, unfortunately, not the only instance in which Mr. M'Gribbon has
been drawing upon his fancy for his facts, and then leaping to con-
clusions to suit his own convenience. In regard to the other alle-
gation that Mrs. Lang had been going about like a fury, at the idea
of Mr. M'Gibbon and the Committee threatening to turn her out


of her house, the charge refutes itself; for as Mrs. Lang knew
perfectly that neither Mr. M'Gibbon nor the Committee had any
power in the matter, she had felt no uneasiness on the subject from
the first. The evidence which these pages afford, of what Mrs.
Lang had to do in my absence, as well as of the dispositions of
some at least of those she had to do with, proves sufficiently that
she is a somewhat different character from the imaginary person
whom Mr. M'Gribbon maligns. I leave it to the reader, however, to
decide as to what is to be thought of Mr. M'Gribbon himself, for
preferring such charges against a matron, in whose family he had
resided so long as the recipient of a gratuitPus board and education,
and who had voluntarily made herself little better than an upper
servant for more than a twelvemonth, in providing for the comfort
of Mr. M'Gribbon and others in the same situation.
Mr. McGfibbon professes to be greatly at a loss to account for
the alleged inconsistency of my procedure, in regarding him as a
fit and proper person to have the charge of a separate Church of
his own, while Ido not consider him a fit and proper person, to oc-
cupy the situation of co-pastor in the Scots Church ; as also in ex-
pressing my willingness to co-operate with him for a year or two,
in the ministry of that Church, but not permanently. There is
no inconsistency in the case, however. A man may be fit enough
to have the sole charge of a Church and congregation of his own,
whose peculiarities of temper and disposition may nevertheless
unfit him for the situation of co-pastor along with any other minis-
ter. Besides, the situation of co-pastor in the Scots Church, at
the present moment, is one in which an impracticable person might
do much harm, which he would have no opportunity of doing, as
the minister of a Church and congregation of his own. For in-
stance, if Mr. McGribbon is to be settled at Woolloomooloo, as it is
reported he is, he will have no opportunity there of extinguishing
a Church either at Balmain or anywhere else, as he had in the
Scots Church. I was, therefore, quite willing to have co-operated
with Mr. McGribbon for a time 4 while establishing himself elsewhere
in Sydney—although not permanently. And surely any person, of
the commonest understanding, must perceive, that although one
might have no objections to co-operating for a time, with any pro-
fessed Christian brother or sister in any work of faith or labour of
love, it would be a totally different question, as to whether that
brother or sister should be taken into the closer relation of a
husband or wife.
I do not consider it necessary to notice all the paltry and ill-
natured insinuations Mr. McGibbon has been pleased to throw out
to my prejudice, in the course of his letter ; simply because it is
not my character that is in question in the case, but merely my
procedure, in putting a veto, as I did, and had an undoubted right


to do, on Mr. McGibbon’s appointment as co-pastor. And although
Mr. McGibbon complains loudly of being tried and condemned un-
heard, that is not the real state of the case by any means. I re-
turned to the Colony on the 16th Dec. I preached for the first
time after my return on the 20th ; and on the 22nd I received the
Notes Nos. 1 and 3 in the preceding list of documents, through
which I learned that the Committee had determined, previous to
my return, that Mr. McGibbon should be appointed co-pastor, and
that the deputation appointed to wait on me had been so appointed,
not to confer with me on the measure itself—for that had been de-
cided already, as the Committee acknowledge themselves in their
own letter—but simply on the -steps necessary to carry it out. It
was absolutely necessary, therefore, for me to state the grounds on
which I objected to the measure altogether, before the meeting of
the Committee on the 24th; and was all I did in my letter to
the Committee.
Mr. McGribbon professes to be very indignant at my hinting at
any resemblance in his own procedure, during my absence in Eng-
land for the greater part of the two past years,' to that of the late
Dr. McGarvie, when officiating for me in my absence, in the years
1830 and 1831. For my own part, notwithstanding Mr. McGibbon’s
disclaimer, I consider the two cases to have been remarkably similar;
and I must acknowledge that both Dr. McGarvie and Mr. McGibbon
studied their own interests in the matter, with a zeal and success
sufficiently praiseworthy. This, however, is not my opinion merely.
The Rev. Mr. Gibson, when residing in my house for five months
during my absence in England, and, therefore, occupying rather a
favourable point for observation, was in the habit of comparing Mr.
McGibbon to the young man Absalom, sitting at the city gate, kiss-
ing the hands of all and sundry who passed in or out, and stealing
away the hearts of the men of Israel from his father David, the
king. To carry out the simile, I only wish this pamphlet may not
prove like the three darts in the of Joab; for methinks the
young man Absalom has got somewhat entangled in the oak of ec-
clesiastical controversy.
Mr. McGibbon gives himself no small credit for his success in
building up the Church since it fell into his hands. He might as
well have given himself credit for the immigration consequent on
the gold discoveries, which has, doubtless, tended to swell the num-
bers of all communions throughout the Colony. But the Scots
Church congregation, under Mr. McGibbon, was never at all equal
to its extent in the year 1846, when I left the Colony for England,
and when a' whole series of calamitous disruptions ensued, through
events and circumstances which it was impossible either to anticipate
or to controul.
In conclusion, I appeal to any intelligent and candid person, in
the least acquainted with ecclesiastical questions, as to whether I


could have had the slightest prospect of cordial and harmonious co-
operation, in the peculiarly delicate and difficult position of a colle-
giate minister, with any person who could write of me and my
family, with the very slight provocation which my previous letter
afforded, in the terms in which Mr. McGibbon has written to the
Committee. The thing was utterly out of the question.
It is pretty evident, from the letter of the Committee of Manage-
ment, (or properly speaking, of a mere majority of that Committee,)
and especially from their wholesale and unhesitating endorsement
of Mr. McGibbon’s vituperative letter, that the Committee were
merely Mr. McGibbon’s men of straw —mere puppets which he
moved from behind the curtain, by means of the wires he held for
the purpose. The machinery was of too vulgar a character to
escape immediate detection.
I am quite aware, without being told again by the Committee,
that there was no intention on their part to ask my opinion, as to
whether I would accept of Mr. McGibbon as a co-pastor. I was
simply to be consulted as to the details that were proper for carry-
ing the thing out, agreeably to the sovereign will and pleasure of
the Committee, which, as I well knew, had been ascertained and ex-
pressed before. And i-t is only now —rafter they have discovered
their mistake, and found, agreeably to the common saying, that
they had been reckoning without their host —that they condescend
to apply to me for information, as to what is the constitution of a
Presbyterian Church on the Voluntary system.
After the manner, therefore, of the old divines, I will answer
this question both negatively and positively ; premising, however,
that the Constitution of a Church —whether Protestant or Roman
Catholic, whether Episcopalian, Presbyterian, Independent, or
Wesleyan Methodist —is something totally different and distinct
from the mere accidental circumstance, as to whether the funds
that support the ordinances of religion within that Church, are
derived from any one source whatever, rather than from any other.
The constitution of a professed Christian Church, if that Church
is at all based on a scriptural foundation —the foundation of Christ
and his apostles —is firm, unshaken, and unchangeable as the Rock
of Ages on which it rests. But the circumstance as to whether
the ordinances of religion in that Church, are supported in one way
or in another, from one source or from another, is a mere accident that
cannot affect its constitution in any way. For the Church may be
in the fire of persecution, and all human countenance and support
whatever, for the ordinances of religion, may be withheld, or with-
drawn from it ", and yet it may all the while be more glorious and
bright than ever, like ihe bush burning, but not consumed. With
this preliminary remark I observe —


That a Presbyterian Church is not a sovereign democracy, like
an Independent Church, in which questions and rights of all kinds
are to be submitted to the vote of a majority, whether of members
or of seatholders, at the instance of a mere Committee of Manage-
ment, chosen to| take charge exclusively of the raising and appro-
priation of funds ; but a republican and representative society, in
which the rights of all parties are placed under the protection of
an apostolic constitution, which ensures an impartial hearing for
all questions, and throws the shield of its support around all parties
alike, whether pastors or people. Now, it is one of the undoubted
rights of a Christian people, under the constitution of the Presby-
terian Church —a right, which I trust, I shall never attempt to
infringe—that no pastor or co-pastor shall ever be intruded upon
such a people, without their own express consent and concurrence.
And it is equally the right of a pastor, that no co-pastor, or assis-
tant and successor, shall be forced upon him without his own
express consent and concurrence also. But as it is the uniform
tendency of public bodies, acting under some general and indefinite
appointment, to usurp powers that do not belong to them, it is the
bounden duty of those, who have the best interests of all concerned
deeply and exclusively at heart, to hold any such body, in such cir-
cumstances, within the limits of the constitution. The right I
claim in this matter, as a Presbyterian minister, would have been
willingly accorded to me in any Presbyterian Church in the United
States, where all such Churches are under the Voluntary system,
notwithstanding the adverse decision of any Committee of Manage-
ment whatsoever. The question which the Committee of Manage-
ment undertook to decide in my case, would have been taken
entirely out of their hands in any Presbyterian Church in America,
and decided by the Presbytery of the bounds, the Synod or
the General Assembly. For it is a matter of no importance, under
the constitution of the Presbyterian Church, whether the Supreme
Ecclesiastical Judicatory, in any particular case, bears any one or
other of these designations.
The Committee are entirely under a mistake, in supposing that
my letter to them was written under the idea of their having any
intention to supplant me altogether. I never had any such appre-
hension or idea; and any future arrangements that might have been
made in regard to salary, in the case in question, had no weight
whatever in my estimation. My sole reason for protesting against
the measure prescribed by the Committee, was my belief and con-
viction, that the union winch was sought to be created, would never
have been one either of cordiality between the parties principally
concerned, or of advantage to the general interests of the Church.
I had an undoubted right to hold such an opinion, and I had an
equal right to insist upon it, and thereby to protest against the me-
ditated tyranny of the Committee.


I have no further remarks to make on the case of Mr. Gibson, in
addition to those I have made already. I merely repeat that it was
not so much the pecuniary aid of the Committee that was wanted,
to any extent that could have been felt under the circumstances, as
their countenance and co-operation towards a Christian minister who
had been virtually cast, by the hand of God, upon their sympathies.
Had they made any enquiries into the matter, they would have
found this out at once; but they did not, and their act and deed
of neglect is not tq be excused or palliated by the inappropriate and
unbecoming epithet which they apply to Mrs. Lang’s second note.
The offer of certain of the Committee to supply the late Mr.
James Smith “with such necessaries as he wished,” may doubtless
have been very generous; but it bears so striking a resemblance to
the well-known practice of inviting a stranger “ to dine with one
any day,” which is generally understood to mean no day at all, that
it was no wonder that a man of a peculiarly generous and sensitive
nature, like Mr. Smith, could not bring his mind to avail himself of
it by sending them a list of his wants. At the same time I regret
to think that these generous persons, who can only see in the publi-
cation of the list of donors of the small fund raised by Mrs. Lang,
for the application of which she was in duty bound to account, a
violation of the Christian precept to let not the right hand know what
the left hand doeth, should have so easily satisfied themselves with
allowing both hands to do nothing whatever.
In regard to the allegation of the Committee that they concur in
what they call a popular idea that there is no debt whatever on the
Scots Church, in the face of my positive assertion to the contrary, I
beg to refer to the following memorial of the Trustees, Elders, and
Committee of Management, to his late Excellency, Sir*. George
Gipps, of date 26th May, 1838.
To His Excellency Sir George Gipps, Knight, Captain General, and Com-
mander-in- Chief in and over the Territory of New South Wales, and to the
Honorable the Legislative Council;
The Memorial of the undersigned Trustees, Elders, Committee of Manage-
ment, and Members of the Scots Church, Sydney,
Humbly Sheweth: —
That the Scots Church, Sydney, was erected in the year 1824 ; the cost of its
erection in its present unfinished state, having been £3,000 sterling.
That the Right Honorable Earl Bathurst, having ordered that a third of the
estimated cost of its erection, should be contributed from the Colonial Treasury,
the sum of £520 sterling, was advanced on account of the building, in the course
of the year 1825, and appropriated accordingly. °
That a salary of £3OO per annum, having been subsequently granted to the
Minister of the Scots Church, on condition that the grant in aid of the erection
of the Church should be withdrawn, the portion of that grant previously paid has
been hitherto allowed to remain as a mortgage on the building.
That His Excellency Sir Thomas Brisbane, having in a reply (which was after-
wards disapproved of by Earl Bathurst) to a Memorial of the Presbyterians in


the year 1823, soliciting assistance for the erection of their Church, refused that
assistance somewhat ungraciously, the stream of public liberality in favor of the
Scots Church was suddenly checked, while various individuals, taking- advantage
of the temporary alienation of the local Government, withdrew their subscrip-
tions.
That on the opening of the Scots Church for public worship, in the month of
July, 1826, a debt of £1,500 had been incurred for its erection, the whole of
which has ever since been borne by the Rev. Dr. Lang and his family; the
additional subscriptions received thereafter defraying only a small portion of the
yearly interest.
That this debt, in the ordinary course of things, would have been cancelled by
the gradual efforts of the congregation long ago, had not Dr. Lang been obliged,
on behalf of the general interests of the Presbyterian Church in this Colony, to
undertake four successive voyages to England at his own charges, since his'first
arrival in New South Wales; the congregation of the Scots Church having, on
all these occasions, except the last, been either dispersed or greatly diminished.
That in these successive voyages to the mother country, Dr. Lang has been
the means ot bringing out to this country, in several instances at his own private
expense, thirty Ministers and Licentiates of the Presbyterian OhurJi, all of whom
(including one deceased and two dismissed) have been settled or are about to be
settled as Ministers of the Gospel, and instructors of youth, in this Colony and in
Yan Diemen’s Land, besides twenty schoolmasters, and fifteen Catechists or Lay
Missionaries of the German Mission to the Aborigines.
In consideration, therefore, of the various and important services rendered to
this community, by the Minister and Congregation of the Scots Church, and of
the impossibility of either liquidating the original debt on that building in such
circumstances as those above-mentioned, or of completing the building while the
said debt remains unpaid, your Memorialists humbly solicit that the principle
recently introduced into the Colonial Ecclesiastical System, of granting a sum
from the Colonial Treasury, equal to the whole amount subscribed by the Public,
for the erection of Churches and Chapels, may be acted on retrospectively in the
case of the Scots Church, and a grant made under the supplementary estimate
for the present year, equal to the amount hitherto contributed by the'Public, in
addition to a sum equal to the amount already advanced by the Government.
In preferring this request, Your Memorialists beg leave to refer to the case of
the Roman Catholic Church in Sydney, which was commenced at least two years
before the Scots Church, and which is still unfinished ; grants from the Public
Treasury having been made at various periods towards its completion, on the
principle above stated.
And your Memorialists, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c., &c, &c.
Sydney, 26 May , 1838.
[Here follow the signatures.]
Governor's Minute on the foregoing ;—
This is an application for an advance of money, equal to the sums which have
been subscribed for the Scots Church, (Dr. Lang’s) in Sydney.
It is not a favorable moment to bring forward any proposition of the sort.
Let me, however, know-, in the meantime, how much money has ever been
granted to this building. Was there not a mortgage on it remitted ?
This Petition is extracted from the Documents and Evidence
appended to the Report of a Select Committee of the Legislative
Council, on a subsequent Petition of the same kind, and from the
same parties, to the Legislative Council in the year 1843. The
Chairman of that Committee was Alexander Thomson, Esq., then


one of the members for Port Phillip, and now one of the members
of the Council of Victoria for the town of Geelong—and the Report
itself concludes as follows :
“ That in such circumstances, the Committee cannot deny that there is much
truth as well as force in the allegation of the Petitioners, “ that as the Scots
Church has been the Mother Church of the Presbyterian Communion in this
Territory, and the one to which all the rest owe their existence and establish-
ment, they have not been treated by the local Government with the same
consideration as other communions, whose Ministers and Members could have no
superior deserts to plead.”’"X
While the Committee, therefore, cannot see any reason, in the past procedure
of the local Government towards other ecclesiastical bodies in the Colony, why
the assistance originally proposed by Earl Bathurst, towards the erection of the
Scots Church, should have been afterwards withheld, on the appointment of a
salary for the Minister, they beg.to recommend, that as the debt on the Scots
Church (which at the opening of that building for divine worship in the year
1826, was £1,500, or thereby, and which has since been greatly increased by
unpaid interest) was originally incurred through an injudicious act of the local
Government, strongly disapproved of and censured at the time by the Secretary
of State, it be respectfully recommended to His Excellency the Governor, to
place upon the Supplementary Estimate, a sum not exceeding £1,480, towards
the liquidation of that debt; and they do so with the greater confidence, for the
following reasons ; —‘first, because the General Church Act has been allowed to
have a retrospective operation, in the case of other ecclesiastical buildings
similarly situated ; —secondly, because sums of £2,000 and upwards, have been
granted to the principal places of worship of the Episcopalian and Roman
Catholic Communions, respectively ; —and thirdly, besause the Petitioners have
renounced all claim upon the Public Treasury, for a salary for their Pastor, from
and after the Ist of April, 1842.
A. THOMSON,
11th October, 1843. Chairman.
Now as this recommendation of a Select Committee of Council
was simply negatived by the Governor, in consequence, I
believe, of my being of the opposition; and as there has been no
attempt made to liquidate the debt of the Church since the period
in question, it is sufficiently evident that the popular idea to which
the Committee of Management refer in their letter is, like many
other popular ideas, quite unfounded. Ever since I renounced my
government salary on the first of April, 1842, I have been particu-
larly careful not to make pecuniary demands on my congregation)
but although I did not deem it expedient to bring forward the claim
of debt on account of the Church, while present in the colony myself,
I thought it but fair and equitable that the interest at least should
be paid when I was out of the colony ; and when in England in
1847--1849, I received the portion of salary allowed me on this
ground alone, as I can easily prove. I can impute to nothing but
the extreme irritation of the Committee, at the defeat of their well
concerted measure, in regard to the co-pastorate, their pitiful expres-
sions of ill-nature in regard to the Church at Balmain. I have for-
tunately a record of my own original outlay for that Church, as well


Total cost of ground, two allotments, 60 foot by 80, at £2^
per foot frontage; Deposit, £19 16s. paid I2th May,
160
14
4
1841, and remainder on 22nd May, 1843, —£140 18s. 4d., \
Contract for walls, roof, floor, windows, and door
142
0
0
48
0
0
25
0
0
For Kev. T. Atkins’ salary one quarter
25
0
0
For Eev. S. Handt’s salary for one year
100
0
0
£500
14
4
as of the amount received from the public on account of it, including
a collection of £5 (for that was all that was ever made for it in
that quarter) in the Scots Church. It is as follows: —
Cost of the Presbyterian Church, Balmain.
£ s. d.
Now the whole amount ever received from the public, towards
this object, including the collection at the Scots Church, and a
larger one at the opening of the Church at Balmain, was .£4B, I
am only surprised at the Committee s not having applied their con-
venient popular idea to the case of the church at Pyrin on t j for which
I incurred nearly an equal expenditure, excluding the amounts paid
for salary at Balmain, with still less assistance from the public.
In my first letter to the Committee, there was not a syllable to
the prejudice of Mr. M'Gibbon’s fitness for the pastoral office as the
minister of a separate church and congregation, and I accordingly
offered him the right hand of fellowship in that capacity. _ Why,
then, the Committee seem to ask, do you object to his becoming co-
Pastor of the Scots Church ? As if the two cases were not totally
different from each other ! If the Committee, however, cannot sec
the difference, I confess I despair of being able to give them the
requisite discernment.
Surely, the Committee allege also, if the Church and College pro-
perty create any difficulty in the case now, they must have done so
equally in 1846, when the co-pastorate was first proposed. But this
is by no means a necessary inference. The case is totally different
now from what it was then. The property involved in it is greatly
more valuable now than it was in 1846, and would therefore be
likely to form a bone of contention, by exciting cupidity, as, it is evident
it has done already in certain quarters, which it would not have done
then. With a co-pastor who could write such a letter as Mr.
M f Gibbons, and get the majority of a Committee of Management to
endorse its'grossly calumnious statements in regard to the character
and proceedings of my family, I should have bad reason to expect
that the available church property would have been appropriated in
building a coach-house and stable for Mr. M'Gibbon, after he had
been put in quite possession of The Manse, rather than in
founding so superfluous an Institution as a College for the


training up of young men for the ministry. In the interests
of education therefore, I deem it incumbent upon me, to prevent such
an appointment under existing circumstances. These interests have
been zealously protected by me, at the sacrifice of extensive
personal property of my own, for twenty years past; and now that
there is at length the fairest prospect of accomplishing, for posterity,
one of the great objects of my life, I canuot consent to see the result
perilled, at the very moment of its realization, by an arrangement
that would, in my opinion and belief, infallibly lead to immediate
and endless contentions on this very subject of Church property.
The general result of these proceedings may be very briefly
stated. The congregational meeting, required by the Committee
of Management, to receive a statement of their proceedings, was held
on the 15th December; and after the statement had been submitted
and received, and thanks voted to the Committee for their past ser-
vices, a majority of their number tendered their resignation, which
was accepted accordingly. It was my own wish that the whole case
Wr Committee, with the replies of the Committee
and Mr. M'Gribbon, and my remarks—should have been submitted
to the judgment of a few impartial persons mutually chosen as
arbitrators; but as there was no disposition evinced to accede to
this proposal, I had no other course left than to publish these docu-
ments, with an introduction and remarks, for the information of
many who will doubtless feel interested in the matter at a distance,
as well as of not a few on the spot.
™ A *r,°^ S th f case , of the Co ‘P as Worship was thus finally closed,
Mr. M (ribbon threw himself into the arms of the State Church
or Synod of Australia; and he is now, I understand!
acting under that body—preaching and forming another Church
and congregation Woolloomoolloo, one of the suburbs
. J^ntlc . l P at i n g> 33 I do, the eventual reunion of
the different sections of the Presbyterian Church in this
colony, when the present unscriptural and latitudinarian sys-
tem of supporting religion, in all its forms and phases, from
the public Treasury, is discontinued, this withdrawal, which I
had virtually recommended myself, can be no heartbreak to me:
and immigration is now directing itself too strongly to this colony
to render any such diminution of the congregation as is likely to
ensue trom this division more than temporary. Mr. M'Gibbon’s
new church will be as much an off-shoot from the Scots Church, as
mea f, r 1 ? h c d be ™ P reviousl 7 arranged by the minister and
?! ,r 0 » a ° d th ® Sco I ts Church, and not the Synod of Australia, will
be the mother-church of that new scion from*' the Plant of Renown,”
aa it has been of so many others in these colonies. That Mr.


M‘Gibbon id to occupy, as a Presbyterian Minister, an important
locality in the suburbs of this great city, is rather gratifying to me
than otherwise, under whatever flag he chooses to sail; and that he
is likely to import something like vitality into the old moribund
Synod, is equally so. lam conscious of being able to say, in per-
fect sincerity, with the great Apostle of the Gentiles, who had evi-
dently things of precisely the same kind occurring occasionally under
his own eye, and in his own churches : Some preach Christ even of
envy and strife; and some also of good will. The one preach
Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my
bonds. But the other of love, knowing that lam set for the defence of
the Gospel. What then ; notwithstanding every way, whether in pre-
tence, or in truth , Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea, and
will rejoice. Philippi i., 15,16; I should be sorry to put forth such a
monstrous allegation as that which has been put forth again and
again by certain diminutive Free Churchmen in this Colony, who
have recently been retailing their Celtic calumnies in person in the
mother country, viz., iC that any person would peril his soul’s salvation
by hearing the Gospel under the old Synod.” For, considering the
notorious fact that these very men took three full years to screw up
their own courage to the “ disruption” point, I cannot but regard
the two classes of men pretty much as “ six and half a dozen.”
As to Mr, M'Gibbon’s making common cause in the mean time with
State Churchmen, and thereby countenancing and supporting the
Holy Alliance, that is his own affair, not mine.
At the same time it may, perhaps, serve to throw some light
on this, as well as on other ecclesiastical movements and proceed-
ings already referred to, to observe that, immediately after 1 left
the colony for England in the month of February, 1852, attempts
were industriously and perseveringly made, in various quarters, to
create the impression and belief that the Synod of New South
Wales—which I had been instrumental in forming, in the month
of Aprillßs0 —was on its last legs, and would soon die a natural
death. These attempts were only the more successful, from certain
calamitous events —especially the necessary withdrawal of certain min-
isters of our body from important stations which they had previously
been occupying with acceptance, in consequence of disease and death,
in their own persons, and in their families—occurring about the same
period. And, as in the case of the sick lion in the fable, certain of the
other denizens of the forest, taking advantage of the circumstance,
assembled in force on the occasion, to insult over the dying beast
and to divide the spoils. First, there was the Independents,
straightway forgetting the Golden Rule of doing to others as
they would wish to be done by, and applying the screw—as
gently doubtless as they would to a bale of silk, or other soft goods,
in their own peculiar line—-to my good friend, Mr. Gibson, at Bal-


main, by sending another minister there to supplant him; for dis-
guise it as they may, the act was anything but either Christian
or creditable. Then there was the Synod of Australia, under its
late man of business, Dr. M'Garvie—writing to every minister and
member of the Synod of New South Wales, and cajoling them, (by
acts of meanness, altogether worthy of the man, but utterly
unworthy of the minister,) to give up all connection with Dr. Lang,
and join the State Church. It was an Independent Minister in
Port Phillip who first told me that the unworthy practice, which
prevails so extensively among reputed Evangelicals in this colony,
of enticing away the members of other Evangelical congregations,
by the adroit application of such specifics as persijlage, inuendo , and
downright calumny , is technically called sheep-stealing. Now, as
the clergy are sometimes designated “ black cattle” at home, I would
humbly submit that the somewhat kindred practice of enticing
away ministers should, in like manner, be designated by the well-
known colonial term “ cattle-stealing.” And right sorry am Ito say
that neither the Independents nor the old Synod of Australia are alto-
gether free from the soft impeachment, although the latter body seem
to have entered upon the nefarious practice more systematically and
on a larger scale. In the case of the Rev. J. Carter, of the Manning
River—a very good, but rather weak man, I mean as to every°
thing like decision of character—these efforts of the old Synod
proved successful: and they seem also to have had their effect with
Mr. M'Gribbon, who, like a prudent young man, naturally wishing
to have two strings to his bow, had actually been negotiating with
certain members of the State Church, for his contingent admission
into that body, before my return to the colony; and who, accord-
ingly, when matters were ripe for the denouement , gave the sick
lion, like the ass in the fable, the last kick * Whether the tawny
patient, however, is likely to suffer cither much or permanently
irom this insult and injury, it would, perhaps, be premature to
prognosticate. In the meantime, as, I understand, certain parties
ai c, in the usual testimonial fashion of the day, getting up a monu-
ment fox the late Dr. M'Garvie—l presume, to commemorate his
services to the Old Synod, and in particular this last service of
having done all he could to give the coup de grace to the Synod of
New South Wales—and as these parties have, doubtless, been too
much occupied otherwise to think of a suitable epitaph for their
hero, I would humbly propose the following, as one which, unlike
the usual mendacious compositions of this class, is strictly accordant
with the truth J
■- I hero is abundant reason to believe, that if Mr. M'Gibbon had once
been ordained co-pastor of the Scots Church, he, and his friends on the
Committee would have endeavoured, on the first collision, to carry over
the whole property of the Scots Church to the old Synod. It was well,
therefore, to relieve them in time of this burden.


IlEftE Lyes
THE REVEREND JOHN M'GARVIE, D.U.
Tor twenty-seven years, from the period of his arrival in New South Wales,
A Minister of the Gospel, which ho never preached,
And as devoted a worshipper of the god Mammon as ever landed
in Australia;
Sacrificing, as he uniformly did, the very decencies
and proprieties of his own honourable profession,
to the sordid pursuit of gain.
Author of a thousand meannesses unworthy of the Christian Ministry,
He was never known to perform a generous action
during the whole course of his life:
And Death hurried him off the scene too unexpectedly, at last.
To afford him an opportunity of atoning for his past omissions,
By devoting, even the smallest portion of his unhallowed gains,
To any public or praiseworthy object.
Arriving in the Colony with scarcely a second suit of clothes
And having only a salary of One Hundred a-year,
for a long period thereafter,
He nevertheless contrived, by the most penurious habits,
Conjoined with the habit of carefully shutting his eyes to every means of
doing good in his adopted country,
Not to mention other questionable practices,
To amass a colonial fortune of Thirteen Thousand Pounds I!!
And the sympathising reader may rest assured,
That it was from no want of inclination,
But simply from sheer inability to carry it along with him,
That he left behind him the whole of this
Most unclerical hoard.
But though dead, ho yet liveth in the spirit of worldly-mindedness
Which characterises the Body to which he belonged ;
And which even the pious Neophyte from the Scots Church,
Who has just joined its communion,
Amid the acclamations of its rejoicing Members,
Will scarcely be able to neutralise.*
* I am quite aware of the virtuous indignation with which I shall probably be
overwhelmed in certain quarters, as the author of this honest epitaph on a deceased
brother ; and I expect, of course, to be reminded most indignantly of the maxim.
Nil dc mortuis, nisi bonum —(say nothing of the dead but what is favourable.)
But a writer of history, whether for the present or for future generations, will act
upon a much higher principle than the one implied in that popular emanation from
the father ot lies. He will take for his maxim. Nil dc mortuis, nisi verum —(say
nothing of the dead but what is strictly accordant with truth.) The example's
which public men give to the world, in their life-time, become the undoubted
property of the public after their death ; and it is the bounden duty of the friends
of virtue to seethat that property be disposed of honestly, and in the interests of
truth, and not in the spirit of unmerited adulation and impudent mendacity. So
long as I am conscious, as I certainly am in the present instance, of discharging a
peculiarly sacred and most important duty to my country and to posterity, I si mil
care very little about either the curses or the denunciations of those whose
good opinion I neither desire nor value.


As to the Scots Church, now that the recent difficulty has been
got over, I shall certainly make every effort to obtain a suitable
co-pastor a University-bred man, if possible—who will be generally
acceptable to the congregation, and likely to work harmoniously
with myself. For lam more than ever convinced that my services,
such as they are, after a public ministry of thirty years in this co-
lony, are likely to be of much more value to the community, in connec-
tion with the great objects, both religious and secular, with which
I am identified, if I had only a nominal connection in future with
my church and congregation, and were free to move about the
territory. Old Ministers are often peculiarly sensitive about the
proposal to give them assistants and successors, or co-pastors—either
from a natural repugnance to be supposed past service, or from a
wish to monopolise the congregation and emoluments for themselves.
There is not a particle of either of these feelings in my case, as I
trust the result will speedily shew.


APPENDIX.
After the greater portion of this pamphlet had gone through the
press, it occurred to me that it might be advisable to forward to the
Rev. John Gibson, of Newcastle, the portion of Mr. M'Gibbon’s
letter that referred to him, leaving him to make any remarks on it
he pleased. I did so accordingly, and the following was Mr. Gib-
son’s immediate and hastily-written reply :
Newcastle, January 2nd, 1854.
My Dear Sir—l have just received your note with a copy of Mr. M'Gibbon’s
i misrepresentations ; and at your request, although unwilling to appear in the
public prints, I forward you my version or rejoinder.
I am not surprised at Mr. M'Gibbon’s ebullition of feeling and his gross misre-
presentations —for I saw much on board the Clifton , and saw and heard enough in
Sydney, to lead me to take a heavy discount off his statements. I have often thought,
dear sir, that you did wrong in allowing an inexperienced, untried youth, so unex-
pectedly and suddenly to wear metropolitan honours in your pulpit. He appeared
to me to carry too much sail —hut, being a Scotchman, and having a loud voice,
he was preferred by some of the Committee to older, tried, and more experienced
men. I have always thought this an error of judgment; and knowing his ambi-
tion, I am not surprised that he has, during your long absence in England, man-
aged so successfully, like Absalom of old, to gain over some of the younger and
less experienced of the Committee. I say, knowing him and the Secretary of
the Committee, I am not surprised at the collision or split which has taken
place since your return. Before, however, I give my reply to Mr. M'Gibbon’s
mis-statements , I feel bound to say, that your tirra, honest, uncompromising pro-
cedure with Mr, M‘Gibbon and the Committee, or his partisans, has greatly en-
hanced my esteem of your character. Although you are not a perfect man, yet,
you have done great things for the colony, and I admire the great sacrifice you
are now making for truth, justice, and honour—l repeat it, you have acted nobly
with reference to Mr. M'Gibbon, &c. Whilst in Sydney, I heard from several
respectable quarters, that, unless you ordained Mr. M'Gibbon as your co-pastor,
there would be a split—but it is much better that even that should occur than
that truth, honour, and justice should be sacrificed. After Mr. M'Gibbon’s
heartless conduct to poor Mrs. Lang, myself, and the rem/iant of my family, I
am not surprised at anything he may say or do. But to my version, and I hope
to speak only truth. My statement must be hurried and imperfect, as you
require a reply by the returning steamer. Now, sir, Mr. M'Gibbon states, that
I had written to Dr. Campbell, of London, (my old pastor) and Dr. Boss, of
Sydney—this is so far true—but in writing to the former, 1 had done so many
months ere I contemplated joining my old body, the Congregationalists. To my


several letters the good Dr. replied fully on sundry matters personal and ecclesi-
astical—in it he expresses his regret that I did not go out to Australia under the
auspices of the Colonial Missionary Society, and expressed his conviction (if
matters were not improving) that it would be well to seek reunion with my old
body; as “ho deemed it necessary in all new colonies for a minister, in the begin-
ning of his mission, to be aided by some society, Colonial or British.” Now at
this* time, the prospects of all interests on the Clarence were very gloomy, tho
result of the gold discovery abstracting population; and as my income was
materially abridged, I was urged by my Committee to accept Government aid,
which had been proposed to me by Dr." M‘Garvie of Sydney—but to both pro-
positions I promptly replied in the negative. It was then suggested by the
Committee that I shouid seek a larger sphere of usefulness, where i should have
tho prospect of adequately supporting my family. On their advice I acted ; and
wrote to Reverends Dr. Ross and Mr. Boazly, enquiring if they would employ
me in bush labour, as I required aid from some parent church. To this commu-
nication Mr. Beazly replied, stating that they had just sent home for two or
three ministers. Subsequently, the Secretary (Mr. Nott) wrote me officially in
answer to my application for an engagement in the bush, or assistance at the
Clarence, that as “ the Committee did not at present contemplate employing
ministers in the bush, they could not accept my offer of service” ; and as an ex-
pression of sympathy in my heavy trials, enclosed mo a cheque for twenty-ono
pounds—not £45 or £SO, as'Mr. M'Gibbon stated. ...
Subsequent to my application to that Committee, I was visited with several
domestic afflictions and terrible bereavements, which compelled me to vacate the
Clarence, in order to save the three surviving children. Within twenty months
I lost a beloved wife and three children ; two of the latter died last February,
within three weeks of each other; one twelve and a half years, and the other
four and a half years. Now, sir, as I lost so many members of my family, and
nearly lost two of those who survive, to say nothing about my own illness there
(for I was fourteen days confined to my bed with severe gastric fever), I thought
Providence indicated a removal, and this was confirmed by the advice of Dis.
Dobie and Skinner. When I left the Clarence I resolved to return to Jamaica,
where I laboured as a missionary eleven years, and where I more than once
nearly sacrificed my life ; but, on arriving in Sydney, I consulted several friends,
ministers, and a medical gentleman, who all advised my remaining in the Colony,
which I resolved to do. There I remained a few weeks with Mrs. Lang, until 1
removed to Balmain.®
Now, sir, whilst in Sydney I was told, but not officially, that whilst connected
with another body, my own body could not take me up; and, of course, I did not
expect them. I must say that the Congregationalists acted most honourably in
that matter; it was only when I had wholly disconnected myself from your
Synod that they entertained my application for labour.
Now, sir, I did not act with any dissimulation, for I informed Mrs. Lang and
Mr. Quaife, more than once, that I had made application to the Congregation-
alists ; and they (Mrs. L. and Mr. Q.) advised me to “ try Balmain and remain
in the Synod until you arrived, which would only bo a few weeks ; that, more-
over, the Church-hill people would aid me. ’ I then waited on Dr. Boss, and
told him that I had been urged to remain until Dr. Lang arrived, and that 1 was
to occupy Dr. Lang’s wooden church at Balmain, and be supported by the people
at Church-hill. Now, sir, it was after this that I met Mr. M‘Gibbon in the
'lo V-/I1 UI Hi* i-wllj Ollf , . .
“ friend's” house, and then that “ friend” had almost to urge him to come into
the parlour where I sat. Now, sir, I and my remnant of family had been to hear
him preach the previous Sabbath (the day before 1 met him at the “ friend s
house), yet he never came near me or mine, nor did he ever speak to my wife s
* I find I have been in error in saying that Mr. Gibson’s family had been five
months in my house, during my absence in England. On referring to the dates,
Mrs. L. finds that the period was four mouths.—J. D. L.


mother and mj three motherless children, although they went weekly , for three
months, to hear him ! Sir, I went four times to hear him, and yet he never
gave me an invitation, either to visit bis house or preach for him, as* etiquette or
common decency would have suggested. Now, sir, whilst in this “ friend’s’’
house (the only member ot committee who expressed sympathy with me), Mr.
M'Gibbon did certainly, with his mouth, express sympathy with me under my
heavy afflictions, &c.; but when I told him that “ I thought I had some claim
upon the Church-hill people, having been sent by them to the Clarence, (fora
missionary sermon was preached for the mission),” he replied that “ I had no
more claim upon them than any other private Christian.!' Now, sir, we did
walk to the end of Jamison-street, and some of the conversation he quotes in his
statement is true, but a good deal is not so. Sir, from that time I never met him
for many months, and he never enquired after me or mine, notwithstanding I
went to hear him three times, after this interview at the “ friend’s” house. Now,
sir, it was on the followiny day after this interview that the Committee meeting
was held at Church-hill, and, on the suggestion of the “ friend,” I sent in a
letter asking for their advice as to what course to pursue ; and, if I went to
Balmain, would they<aid me? To this the Secretary replied, stating that '• it
was not within their province to advise me, and that they had not the least con-
nexion with the Synod of New South Wales.” This, sir, was a settler ; however,
with Mrs. Lang’s patronage, and at her earnest solicitation, 1 went weekly to
preach at Balmain, where I continued, until I found that two ministers in the
same churdfli were not required. And, moreover, hearing that, even if you arrived
in the Colony, Mr. TvPGibbon would be co-pastor ; and believing it, from the
strong feeling that existed in the Committee on behalf of this bold voung man, I
deemed it prudent and right to resign ray connection with your body, and seek
reunion with my own. Being a Congregationalist (not an ultra) from prin-
ciple, I thought, moreover, I should have more liberty and be more useful. To
be a good Presbyterian, with some people, it is necessary to be a Scotchman ;
but, unfortunately, I am a Londoner.
Sir, Mr. M'Gibbon states that “he warned me about leaving the’Synod.”
Why, sir, he ridiculed it, and said he would resign the pulpit as soon as you re-
turned to the Colony ; that he had raised the congregation ; and that the funds
were larger than at any former period, &c.*
But, sir, I must hasten to conclude, and will only touch upon his misrepresen-
tation as it regards being near his house, and not calling, his “ quiet way" of
helping me, and my case “ passing unnoticed,” as, he says, it “ deserved.”
First—l went, in company with a friend, to see a lodger there, some four
months after my first and only interview with Mr. M'Gibbon ; and as I and my
family had received the most heartless treatment from him, I could not enter
the house. He had, prior to this, invited a friend of mine from Jamaica to
preach for him ; and yet I, who had wrought hard and suffered more than any in
the body, was refused even a recognition ! Others were invited to preach, but
not his friend, whom he was helping to injure in “ a quiet way /”
Second—l received no aid from Mr. M’Gibbon nor his friends ; there was a
fund to be applied for my aid if I remained, but I had none of it; only two or
three donations from Mrs. Lang’s country friends. Mr. M‘G. was certainly very
“ quiet, ” for he could not even say a word of consolation to my afflicted family!
• After I had renounced all connection with the State, as a minister of the
Gospel, in the year 1842, the revenue of the Scots Church amounted to from
£5OO to £6OO per annum, —considerably more than it was under Mr. M'Gibbon
—during the worst years we have ever had in the Colony. This amount not onlv
paid the salaries, but gradually extinguished a comparatively recent debt o*f
about £6OO, incurred for repairs. From the year 1846, other and higher objects
than that of building up a congregation in Sydney demanded my attention
especially as I expected, from that period, to find a suitable Co-pastor.—J. D L


But lastly ami briefly—He says, “ had 1 been destitute of Christian sympathy
1 should have suffered his case to have passed unnoticed, as indeed it deserved.”
Now, sir, it occurs to me that the reason why Mr. M'Gibbon treated me in his
“ quiet way," if not with “ hostility," was, that he was jealous of me; and
'thought, doubtless, that I might be in the way of his future elevation. Sir, I
ask, did my giving up an opening for usefulness in Victoria and Hobart Town,
and other lucrative places, with a good manse attached—did my three years’
exile in the dull bush, where I travelled hundreds of miles every few weeks over
field, ridge and flood, and preaching nearly every night to the keepers of herds
and flocks-—did the losing a wife and three fine sons, to say about the
narrow escapes of myself and surviving children from fevers : sir, after suffering
so much in endeavouring to carry out the mission which you orioinated and
which your people approved—after returning, as a man who had ’seen and felt
affliction—did 1 “ deserve ” to be “ unnoticed ?” I trow not. Sir, I knew you
would feel indignant at the heartless and cruel conduct of Mr. M’Gibbon and
some of the Committee. Now, sit, I have the highest testimonials from the
London Missionary Society and Dr. Campbell, and others; and knowing my
onerous duties and sufferings, not in this country only, I think with humility
that I “ deserved" better treatment.
Sir, I “ assumed” no “ distant or hostile position." I attended the church
several times ; my family attended for months. I applied to the Committee for
their advice and aid, which were refused; others were asked to preach, /was
Sassed by; I was told I had no “ claim" upon the church, <fcc. Sir, I deny
tr. M'Gibbon’s statement, that “ I was hankering after a guaranteed sa~
lory," or I could have had it from more than one body. Sir, I was wholly
induced by good Mrs. Lang to put up so long with so much contempt
from Mr. M'Gibbon and his partizans—had you arrived earlier, I should have
resigned my position with your body and gone to my old friends ; I made sacrifice
of comfort, and other assistance by delaying so long to identify myself with my
own body. Sir, I had offers from Launceston and other places in this colony—
but principle and honour made me refuse the kindness of friends. Sir in con-
clusion, I believe that if Mr. M'G. had possessed a heart that can feel for other’s
woe, he would have asked me to occupy your pulpit, at least once, and introduced
me to the people ; but no, I and mine received only repulsive treatment l I be-
lieve if Mr. M'G. had been friendly to me, the Committee would have at least
given my afflicted family a shake of the hand. I know many in the church re-
gretted that we were thus treated. Sir, I could say much more on this painful
subject, but must forbear. 1 however forgive Mr. M'G. and his friends, and hope
he will see his folly and sin in this matter. I think he has only to thank him-
self for his present unpleasant position, and for the appearance of these state-
ments of truth. Sir, the apostle says, “ first pure, then peaceable .” May the
time soon come “when Judah shall not vex Ephraim, or Ephraim envy Judah."
n Peace be within thy walls ! 0 Jerusalem !”
Sir, you can use this as you think best; and hoping Mr. William is better and
with kind regards to Mrs. Lang,
I remain, my dear sir,
Yours very truly,
_ Jno. Gibson.
The Rev. J. D. Lang, D.D.,
Sydney.
P.S.—Since writing the above, I remember Mr. M'G. saying to me in Mr.
Douglass’ house that “ he thought it better for me to join the Congregationalists.”
In his reply he st&tes that he “ warned me not to disconnect myself from your
Synod.” Sir, it was purely on Mrs. Lang’s and your account that I did not,
when I first arrived in Sydney, go over to my old body. Fom never asked me to give
up my views of policy—l told you that I believed Congregationalism and Pres-
byterianism to be the best of “ isms," and the more the two bodies united or
amalgamated the Sir, I regret Mr. M'G. has not adhered to the truth.
I could refer yon to parties for the confirmation of what I have here written ;
but doubtless you are aware of the circumstances of the case. Enongh-I aw
done.
