

THE
New South Wales
Annual Review.




THE
NEW SOUTH WALES
ANNUAL REVIEW
OF
SHIPPING and COMMERCE
FOR
1902.
COMPILED, PRINTED HND PUBLISHED
BY
The (Commercial Publishing (Company of Sydney, Ltd.,
37 PITT STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W.


TO OUR CLIENTELE.
“NEVER TURNED HIS BACK , BUT LOOKED STRAIGHT FORWARD.
NEVER DOUBTED THAT THE CLOUD WOULD BREAK.
NEVER DREAMED THAT WRONG WOULD NOT BE RIGHTED:
SLEPT TO WAKE.”
WE present this, the 11th issue of the
“Annual Review of Shipping and
Commerce of New South Wales,” to
our supporters and the commercial
community, at a time when New South
Wales may be compared to the Sun
breaking through a cloud. There
were some—fortunately only a few —
who failed to see a silver lining;
the majority, however, have
shown by their patience and
■ steadfastness, that they fully
believed the cloud would break.
To these men—the men who
control the destinies of our
commerce, the backbone of our
y national progress—the country, as
a whole, owe a deep debt of grati-
tude. Confronted with difficulties
of every kind, difficulties within
and difficulties without, they
never faltered. With a sup-
reme patience and confi-
dence, begotten of a faith
in the possibilities, won-
derful resources, and
great recuperative
power of the State, they
did their duty, and, by
firmness and self-re-
liance, maintained the
Stale’s credit, pres-
tige and reputation
BROWNING.
during one of the most trying
limes in our history.
An example lias been set cf which we might be justly
proud, and one that will leave its impress for a lasting good
upon our National character.
The present generation have to be thankful that those on
whom this duty devolved never wavered, and those, who are
yet unborn, will learn with pride that pessimism played no
part in the lives of their forefathers.
While the past may be remembered with pain, it cannot
be regretted, for it is fruitful of many valuable lessons. In
the present there is much to think of, in the future, much to
prepare for; but in neither is there anything to fear. There
will be difficulties and drawbacks, but these come to every
Nation, and to be “forewarned is to be forearmed,” and, met
in a proper way, they will vanish like “mist before a sum-
mer's sun.” Every Australian has a responsibility; every
citizen is a trustee of the country in which he lives. Let each
recognise the importance of this trusteeship, and if thought,
word and deed be actuated by right principles, we are build-
ing upon a foundation which nothing can shake, and with
this in mind, it is not too much to hope for, nay, it is within
the realms of possibility, that the Commonwealth will yet he
the brightest gem in the British Empire.
THE PUBLISHERS.


THE
New South Wales Annual Review
OF
SHIPPING AND COMMERCE.
To 31st December, 1902.
SYDNEY, JUNE, 1903.
No. 11.
Introduction.
. , R
H FORMAL introduction o e eview
of the Lommeice an ipping
J«ew South Wales, se mg or i
objects and contents in a genera
way, was in oi mei issues consi ere
sufficient, but as the woi . i ias assume grea
proport ,ons, cnlaige i s scope, ex on e i
sphere of usefulness, an maeiia y a e o
iL value by doa mg wi i a p lascs o
meicial li c in a way uevei e ore a emp e
m . . us i la asla ' a ™° l . c e a 1 c , J r ,° • f
article is necessary It is very doubtful if any
other country ,n the world has ever had its
ra c an lesouices se oi i in a more com
pro lensive, up o a c, an a rac ive mannei
an !s one in ns pu ica-ion. uc con
cep ion, ic lcsu ° J?) 10 1 ’ S U , J an
experience of what tins young country re-
quires in the way of commercial development
is responsible for our undertaking to show by
means o caie u y compie ai ic es, s a is
tics and illustrations from the finest half-tone
en b \y la le commeicia s a us o
New South Wales really is, and to give some
i ea o tie impoitance of its trade.
No one can go through the pages of the
Revicw” without feeling deeply impressed.
From the point of view of those directly en-
gaged in commerce—the men who readily
gave their assistance by way of subsidy, and
without whose help success could not have
bocn achieved—it is to be hoped that the
Review will meet with absolute approval.
e feel certain that it will, for they must
lecognise that much good will inevitably re-
su t fiom its publication. It will circulate to
a parts of the civilised world, and make
fiiown the fact that Australia and its separ-
a a States are worthy of the closest attention.
c puncipal nations of the world are all com-
pe mg for commercial supremacy, and are only
°o anxious to extend their trade relations,
par icularly with the younger countries. It
lore ore follows that those nations in general
and their commercial communities in particu-
lar will be eager to scan a book that tells them
of the possibilities which exist for opening up
new avenues for the exchange of various com-
modities. Who can tell what great interest
may be thus aroused, what new markets may
bo opened, and what developments may take
place! The prosperity of our future lies
mainly in the profitable disposal of our pro-
duce, and this is what should concern those in
whose hands the destiny of our State lies.
It is apparent to all those who keep in touch
with the movements of other nations, especi-
ally as far as commerce is concerned, that
extraordinary efforts are being made to push
business in all directions. This being the case,
it behoves us in this Southern clime to seize
upon every opportunity that exists for keep-
ing abreast of the times. Our commercial
bodies arc, no doubt, alive to the necessity of
keeping our products and our country before
the world. Much valuable work is being done,
and although we have taken upon ourselves a
portion of the duty of safeguarding and ex-
tending our trade relations —aims and objects
for which our Chamber of Commerce is con-
stituted —we are merely acting for and on
behalf of the commercial community of New
South Wales, and by virtue of our position as
the Publishers of the “Daily Commercial News
and Shipping List,” the recognised organ of
Shipping and Trade. Under such circumstan-
ces we felt it our duty to undertake the work.
Had we not done so, no doubt the Chamber of
Commerce would have recognised the need of
such a publication, and produced it under
its name. .
The magnitude of our self-imposed task
will be apparent to anyone who even so much
as glances between the covers of the “ Annual
Review.” Though we have yet only a century
and a quarter of life behind us, our interests
are manifold, and it is necessary for those
desirous of grasping to the full the life and
work of the community to search in many
directions for the influences that are in opera-
tion on the national wealth and progress at
the present day. We are not a people of one
idea, a country of one dominating industry.
Doubtless the point of departure is in most
cases the same, for, like all young countries, we
<iraw our sustenance from the soil, and primary
production is the basis from which all, or
nearly all, our many lines of development
stretch out divergently. To achieve an ade-
quate conception of the import and import-
ance of these lines, it is necessary (to follow
out the metaphor) to trace them to their ter-
mini, and when their direction, past, present
and future, has been determined, to gather
together the facts and conclusions to which
they bring us, and review in one homogeneous
whole the correlated interests with which
every citizen of the State has some connection.
To enable our readers to realise the signific-
ance of the present, wo have begun our work
with a reference to the past, and in the section
entitled “ The Commercial Development of
New South Wales” are traced all the early
struggles, the hopes and fears, successes and
rebuffs, experienced by the men who, in the
first dawn of the State’s freedom, saw the pos-
sibilities that lay before her, and spent their
enthusiasm and their energy in setting the
foundations of our commercial structure of to-
day in such a fashion that the walls have since
stood four square to all the winds that blow,
unshaken by the storms that sweep across
the face of the commercial world from time to
time. A review of the year’s trade is given
both in its import and export branches, com-
piled from the latest available figures, eluci-
dated by explanatory articles, and amplified
by an extended list of the Exports from New
South Wales for the eighteen months to 31st
December, 1902. In addition, special articles
have been devoted to Wool and Coal, the posi-
tion of both, as two of the staple products of
the mother State, warranting the extra space
devoted to them, while the operations of the
New South Wales Board for Exports in the
direction of the shipment of frozen produce to
London has been outlined. The section occu-
pied by Shipping will be found especially
valuable, the facts and figures contained in the
principal article bringing the statistics up to
the end of last year, and examining in detail
all the available data of the maritime trade of
New South Wales for 1902. Closely allied
to Shipping are, of course, the Navigation De-
PUBLISHERS I
The Commercial Publishing Company of Sydney, Limited, 37 Pitt Street, Sydney.
directors:
W. J. Boylan, Esq., Managing Director.
Capt. R. B. Davis. James Arthur, Esq. Senr.). C. A. Coghlan, Esq.
SECRETARY:
F. W. Arthur.


partment and the Sydney Harbour Trust, and
the scope of both of these institutions has been
dealt with. An instructive and at the same
time attractive description of the Lighthouses
of New South Wales, embellished with several
artistic engravings, has been included, and the
section is completed with a list of all the
Marine Casualties which occurred either in
New South Wales waters or to vessels owned or
trading to the State between the Ist July,
1901, and the 31st December’, 1902. The pro-
gress of both primary and secondary produc-
tion during 1902 has been written up in an
informative manner, the dry tabulations neces-
sary being enlivened both by illustration and
reading matter. Other articles deserving of
mention arc those relating to Banking,
O
Insurance, the Railway and Tramway ser-
vices, the Government Statistician, the Arbit-
ration Court, the Progress of Newcastle, Ar-
tesian "Water, and other subjects, all of which
have a bearing, direct or indirect, upon the
life of the community. One of the most not-
able features of this year’s “ Annual Review”
is the method employed in working up the
commercial side of the publication. All the
principal firms of Sydney have been described
at length, the ramifications of their business
explained, their history outlined, and their
promises illustrated, while personal sketches
of their principal members have been included.
The value of such a comprehensive collection
of articles on business houses operating in all
the branches of the commercial world is not
easily to be measured, and the publishers feel
confident that the reading public will appreci-
ate the efforts made to put them in posses-
sion of reliable information regarding the
commercial, banking, and other financial in-
stitutions of the State.
Indeed, we can hardly imagine that the
“ Review” in its entirety will not be heartily
appreciated by all sections of the community.
We venture to think that anyone holding a
contrary opinion would be absolutely dead
to the spirit of enterprise and energy whicl
arc the prevailing characteristics and essential
qualities of the successful man and a pros
perous country, without which the progress
that has been such a distinctive feature of the
past cannot continue. Therefore, one and all
have a common interest in the development
of our country. Energy and enterprise must
be encouraged, self reliance cultivated, and.
above all, high principles of business integrity-
maintained in each and every transaction.
In conclusion, we beg to thank all those
gentlemen who gave the Review” their prac-
tical sympathy and encouragement, and alse
all those who rendered valuable assistance in
ihe compilation of the various sections, and t(
whom much of the success of the work must
be credited.
CONTENTS.
Commercial Development—
PAGE
The Record of the Century ... ... ... 2a
The Sydney Chamber of Commerce ... ... 25a
The Royal Exchange ... ... ... ... 29a
Trade Review—
The Year’s Record ... ... ... ... 2n
Our Foreign Trade ... ... ... ... 10n
Shipping-
Statistics for 1902 ... ... ... ... 2c
Shipping Companies ... ... ... ... 10c
Shipping Casualties ... ... ... ... 41c
Lighthouses of N.S.W. ... ... ... 50c
Royal Shipwreck Relief Society ... ... 55c
Sydney Harbour Trust ... ... ... 57c
Navigation Department ... ... ... 59c
Cable Service ... ... ... ... ... 60c
Importing Trade-
Past, Present and Future ... ... ... 2d
Some Leading Lines ... ... ... ... 5d
Operations in 1902 ... ... ... ... 8d
Associated General Merchants and Importers 12d
Associated Warehousemen ... ... ... 13d
Historical Sketches—Leading Importers ... 14d
Manufactures—
A Year of Development ... ... ... 2e
Chamber of Manufactures ... ... ... 5e
Historical Sketches—Leading Manufacturers ... 6e
Wool—
The Staple Industry ... ... ... ... 2f
Coal-
Review for Year 1902 ... ... ... ... l G
Exports—
PAGE
A General Review ... ... ... 2h
Detailed Statistics of all Exports ... ... 5h
Primary Production—
The Pastoral Industry ... ... ... 3.1
Agriculture ... ... ... ... ... 4-i
Dairying 6-1
Mining ... ... ... ... ... ... 7-i
Forestry ... ... ... ... ... 10-i
Fruit 11-i
Rainfall of N.S.W 12-i
N.S.W. Board of Exports ... ... ... 22-1
Banking-
Progress for 1902 ... ... ... ... 2j
Historical Sketches —Principal Banks ... ... 4j
Insurance-
Review for 1902 ... ... ... 2k
Historical Sketches of Leading Offices ... ... 10k
Metropolitan Fire Brigade ... ... ... 40k
Railways and Tramways—
Historical and Descriptive Sketch ... ... 2l
Miscellaneous-
Architecture and Building ... ... ... 2m
Statistician’s Department ... ... ... 9m
Industrial Arbitration Court ... ... ... 10m
Artesian Water Supply ... ... ... 11m
Newcastle ... ... ... ... ... 14m
NEW SOUTH WALES ANNUAL REVIEW OF SHIPPING AND COMMERCE. June, 1903.


Commercial
Development.


Commercial Development
of -* (
u\. New South Wales.
From the Earliest Efforts
to the Present Day. >£
=— An =- =-
Interesting Retrospect.
“Whose Merchants
are Princes.**
CHE Commercial Development of Australia,
using the phrase in its widest and most
comprehensive sense, has indeed been re-
markable, nay astounding, especially so when the
inauspicious circumstances attending its birth
and early career are remembered. When the mo-
tives which prompted the British Government
—after the loss of the American States—in
the selection of this Island Continent as a
place for isolated criminal settlement, are con-
sidered, side by side with the wonderful results
that have accrued from slightly over a century
of colonization, the conviction is irresistibly
forced home that those responsible for the crea-
tion of an Australian colony —to paraphrase
Emerson’s quaint lines—“ budded better than
they knew,” as the country which they con-
sidered to be one admirably situated only for
a “ dumping ground,” or place of detention
for the worst incorrigiblcs of British prisons,
has, by a happy irony, become, the homo of a
young and virile nation, unique in its free-
dom, and replete with the inherent potentiali-
ties of present and future greatness.
To realise something of the immense devel-
opment that has been effected in this great
Austral land, and to understand some of the
agencies that have been at work to bring about
this beneficient change, no better medium can
be employed than a retrospective glance at the
early and persistent struggles of trade and
commerce to obtain a foothold in New South
Wales. Less than a century ago the Common-
wealth of to-day had its prototype in the un-
pretentious hamlet on the banks of the Tank
Stream, on which the name of Sydney had been
bestowed. What a transformation has been
effected since then, and still the work of tran-
sition proceeds apace, nay even with acceler-
ated speed, year by year.
The genesis of Australian trade affords very
interesting reading in these days, when the
Statute Book bulges with enactments delimit
ing the obligations of every branch of trade
and commerce, and Courts of Arbitration are
called upon to adjudicate in all manner of in-
dustrial disputes. Born amidst unpropitious
surroundings, and cradled under conditions
that were inimical to healthy growth, the Com-
merce of New South Wales slowly but safely
emerged from an infanev which might have
been irrevocably warped, into a strong and
lusty manhood, as soon as the stigma that
blighted the early days had been removed,
and the colony entered upon her heritage as a
community that was “free” in the best sense
the ternp
When Governor Phillip, with his contingent
of “ bond and free,” planted the Ensign of Bri-
tannia on the shores of Sydney Harbour, com-
merce was an unthought-of quantity. Fed
and clothed from the Government store,
depending upon importations of the barest
necessaries from abroad, paid from the Gover-
nor’s Treasury chest, there was no opportunity
for a trading connection to manifest itself.
Even the live stock brought to the colony from
the Cape, in those days were consigned to the
Government, and in 1788 they consisted of but
two bulls, five cows, one horse, three mares,
three colts, twenty-nine sheep, nineteen goats,
seventy-four pigs, five rabbits, eighteen tur-
keys, twenty-nine geese, thirty-five ducks, and
two hundred and ten fowls.
The irregularity of supplies from abroad,
and the necessity of averting famine, with its
concomitant distress, compelled the authori-
ties to seek arable locations, in order to pro-
duce an auxiliary food supply. Governor
Phillip himself was most assiduous in his en-
deavours to open up tlie country and make it
self supporting as far as possible. He explored
the Parramatta River, and fixed on the site of
Rosebill for an agricultural farm, but his best
efforts in this direction were minimised owing
to the fact that with very few exceptions the
convicts were destitute of even the rudiments
of agriculture.
In 1790 famine overlooked the settlement,
. and all hands were for some time placed on re-
-duced rations, until a vessel arrived with pro-
visions. For some time afterwards the Colony
hovered on the brink of want, owing to the ir-
regularity in the arrival of supplies from
abroad, and the failure of the local crops. In
order to encourage agriculture, Captain
Phillip introduced the system of free grants of
land, and by 1792 there were 67 settlers, with
417 acres under cultivation, and 100 acres
cleared. At that time the price of
commodities to the free settlers was:—
Flour, 9d. per lb.; potatoes, 3d.;
sheep, £lO 10s. each; goats, £8 Bs.; sows,
£7 7s. to £lO 10s. each ; tea, Bs. to 10s. per lb.;
sugar, Is. Bd. per lb.; spirits, 12s. to 20s. per
gallon; porter, Is. per quart. The first grain
harvested in the colony was grown on the Go-
vernment farm at Rosohill, afterwards Parra-
matta, and realised 200 bushels of wheat, 35
bushels of barley, together with a small quan-
tity of oats and maize.
In 1795 the rich agricultural lands of the
Hawkesbury had been discovered, and several
grants were made to settlers who were willing
to proceed thither. The crops grown on the
alluvial flats realised the best anticipations,
but, in 1806 the river came down in flood, and
swept away nearly all the available food stuffs,
just at a time when the colony was on the verge
of famine. The want of stock very seriously
hampered the work of the farmers, and the
price asked for both horses and cattle, £7O and
£BO respectively, placed them beyond the
reach of most. In those times the trade of the
Colony was almost wholly under Government
control, and the prices were fixed by authority.
The officers of the notorious New South
Wales Corps had practically now usurped the
functions of Government, and they virtually
constituted an oligarchy in trade. They had
become so nowerful and aggressive that, to all
intents and purposes, they set the ordinances
of succeeding Governors at defiance. The last
days of Governor Phillip’s regime were
rendered exceedingly uncomfortable by
their dominancy in trade matters, and
in the interregnum which followed his
departure, when the commanding offi-
cers of the Corps administered the Govern-
ment, their position was materially streng-
thened by every means in their power. Dur-
ing the administration of Governor Hunter
they made their positions more remunerative
for themselves, and more intolerable for all op-
posed to them, while the monopoly they estab-
lished formed a serious impediment to inde-
pendent trading. Both naval and military
officers were absolute monopolists in all
branches of trade, and from the influence they
wielded they were blocks to the wheel of pro-
gress.
They not only seized control of the importa-
tions when they first arrived, but they also
sold to the settlers at the most exorbitant rate,
making such huge profits that, after a few
years’ residence in the colony, they were able to
retire with fortunes. When a vessel with mer-
chandise arrived in port, their custom was to
go aboard at once, and confer with the Cap-
tain or Supercargo about the price, and as they
were the only persons able to buy in quantities,
they were enabled to beat the vendors down to
their own terms. As these officers practically
constituted the Government, they utilised the
Government stores wherein to warehouse their
purchases. They also, bought the produce of
the settlers, and, as there was virtually no
money currency in those days, resort was had
to barter. The settlers were, perforce, com-
pelled to exchange their productions for what-
ever articles of use, ornament, or necessitv


they required. The officers exercised great in-
genuity in getting the farmers and others to
part with their goods at a shamefully low
price, but they took every precaution that the
articles they bartered with—chiefly rum—
were appraised at a figure very much in excess
of their value. Under such a system of whole-
sale swindling as they were able to carry on
under the euphemistic title of “ Trade,” it was
not surprising that they grew rich in a very
short space of time. To convey some idea of
the enormous profits they netted, it need only
be mentioned that they bought rum at from 4s.
to 6s. per gallon from the ships, and retailed it
at £7 per gallon.
The Colony at that period was governed un-
der a system of military law, the officers con-
stituting for many years what was known as
the military jury, before whom all criminal
charges and civil suits were tried. It can
easily be seen that they possessed an enormous
“ pull” over the population, and they were not
slow to exercise their corrupt influence for
their own pecuniary aggrandisement. At first
very robust career in the Colony, ceased to
exist, injustice of the most barefaced character
held sway, and crime of all kinds became ram-
pant.
The Rev. Samuel Marsden, a clergyman
who played a prominent part in the early his-
tory of Australian settlement, although in all
probability not without blemish himself,
could not altogether restrain his indig-
natioii at the degradation primarily
caused by the unfettered and iniquitous
system of trading in spirits carried on
by the “ Ring.” In a letter which
he wrote, and which was subsequently pub-
lished, he lifted the curtain slightly, and dis-
closed something of the pernicious agencies
that were undermining the community. He
said: “ All our officers, whether Civil, Military,
or Naval, trade and profit to a large extent.
All keep mistresses who use shops, and often
retail spirits. Rum, which costs them from
the American ships visiting the port, from 4s.
to 6s. per gallon, they retail at £7 per gallon.
They often monopolise much sugar, and sell
Bond in 1797. Under this bond they agreed
that two selected officials should deal with the
vendors of goods or produce, whether im-
ported, or produced locally, and in the event of
these two agents not being able to drive a bar-
gain, they covenanted that they would not seek
to influence the vendor to sell them on terms
that had been refused by the agents. The
penalty for a broach of this agreement was fixed
at TIOOO. Still, such were the enormous
profits they made, that even this salutary pen-
alty was not forbidding enough to prevent
some of the more avaricious and audacious
among them taking the risk to achieve a smart
stroke of business.
So overbearing and galling was the yoke this
unscrupulous combination placed on the com-
munity, that petition after petition, asking for
relief, was forwarded to the Governor who hap-
pened to be in office at the time. Those peti-
tions, alons: with reports and representations
from the Governors, were sent home to the
British authorities, but it is questionable if
these ever reached their proper destination.
A VIEW OF SYDNEY COVE A CENTURY AGO.
the naval and military officers stood alone in
this class of nefarious transactions, but as time
went on, a few free colonists arrived who were
possessed of a little capital and some influence
in England or India. As soon as these grasped
the position of affairs, and saw the opportunity
the officers had of making money quickly
at the expense of the unfortunate settlers, they
insisted on taking a hand in sharing the spoils,
and, as they had influence behind them, the
officers admitted them to the “ Ring.” Spirits,
generically referred to as “ rum,” which the
“ Ring” purchased for a mere bagatelle, formed
the chief medium of exchange, and the settlers
almost invariably were compelled to accept
this commodity, whether they required it or
not, in payment for their produce. This, of
course, led to an appalling amount of drunken-
ness and debauchery, amongst a population
that was sparse and scattered. Many
ot the crimes committed in those times
were traceable to the rum traffic,
which completely demoralised the whole com-
mumty. Morality, a quality that had never a
tea for £3 per lb.” Truly a terrible indict- 1
ment against those who were vested with ju-
dicial authority over the people.
As usually happens amongst rogues, the
members of the “ Ring” were not always a
happy family, hut the squabbles of the rum
traders did not result in honest men getting
their rights. As a matter of fact, their per-
sonal bickerings led to the settlers and others
not included in the trading clique being more
squeezed. Some of the officers having the bus-
iness faculty more highly developed than
others were enabled to make larger profits, and
this naturally aroused the cupidity of their
less resourceful comrades, who, ironical as it
may seem, began to throw out insinuations re-
garding conduct unbecoming officers and
gentlemen. Notwithstanding their personal
jealousies and recriminations, the clique were
wise enough to discourage a schism that might
result in their monopoly being threatened, or,
perhaps, abolished. On the contrary, they
proceeded to make their mercenary position
more secure by the formation of a Combination
At any rate no redress came. Governors
Phillip, Hunter, King, and Bligh all tried to
curtail the operations of this powerful ring, but
unavailingly. Each of the first four Govor-
nors issued ordinances at different times, doal-
ing with the rum traffic, and against officers
buying merchandise for private trade before it
could be purchased by the Commissariat. The
Bond, conscious of its powers, was not to be
deterred, and when the Vice-Regal representa-
tives sought to exercise their authority, they
were met with a defiant resistance that always
ended in favour of the monopolists. To show
how far they were prepared to go in support of
their filched privileges, it is only necessary to
direct attention to their high-handed and ille-
gal action in deposing Governor Bligh, and
handing over the authority of the King’s De-
puty to one who apparently was only too
eager to become their willing tool,
To Australians of the present day, accus-
tomed to the fullest measure of freedom, it may
seem extraordinary that in this land less than a
hundred years ago a number of men wearing


the King’s uniform could transform themselves
into a gang of freebooters, and, in combina-
tion with a clique of avaricious civilians, defy
the authority of the King’s representative, and
ride rough-shod over the principles of equity
and justice, without being called upon to even
explain their conduct. The reason is not far
to seek, as the monopolists had powerful in-
fluence both here, in India and in England,
and, as the British nation at that time was en-
gaged in a life and death struggle with an im-
placable foreign foe. The Government was,
therefore, not disposed to incur fresh responsi-
bilities, and invite additional anxiety by in-
dulging in a solicitous regard for the welfare of
a few thousand people, mostly convicts, in such
an isolated place as Sydney then was. This ac-
counts for the long immunity which the rum
monopoly enjoyed from Imperial interference,
and which was only dissipated when the Home
authorities were compelled to move in the mat-
ter of Governor’s Bligh’s wholly illegal deposi-
tion and imprisonment. Governor Macquarie
was sent out at the head of his own regiment,
the New South Wales Corps was disbanded,
and the power of its officers, though, as subse-
quent events showed, it was not altogether
broken, was at least crippled to such an extent
that trading operations were, between the years
of Macquarie’s arrival and departure (1810-
1821) established on a more equitable basis,
and the mercantile pursuits made more avail-
able to the general community.
The Whaling and Sealing Industry.
The first important development of Austra-
lian trade was manifested by the whaling and
sealing enterprises, which had their origin in
1791. Captain Melville, of the “Britannia,” a
ship belonging to Messrs. Enderby and Sons,
of Boston, was the pioneer of this industry, and
he chanced upon it in rather an accidental
way. While on a voyage from England to
Port Jackson with a load of convicts, ho no-
ticed, after rounding the Horn, that sperm
whales—the best commercial species—were
more numerous off the Australian Coast than
off that of Chili and Peru, which was then re-
garded as a good location by American whalers.
After his arrival in Port Jackson, and as soon
as he had discharged his convict freight, he
fitted up the “ Britannia,” and set sail on a
whaling cruise.
In the early days, the Americans wore appar-
ently just as keen on conquering new markets
as they are to-day, for the records show that
among the first traders to Port Jackson were
a considerable number of American ships,
which brought produce and merchandise of
various descriptions for sale. The skippers of
these ships had, like Melville, noticed that the
Australian seas teemed with whales and seals,
and as the sea captains of those days were not
subject to the office rule which prevails to-day,
a number of them fitted up their vessels as
whalers, and went in search of oil and fat. By
the end of 1791 there was quite a number of
vessels engaged in the industry. The fact
that there were immense schools of whales in-
habiting the waters adjacent to the Australian
Coast, was soon abundantly proved, and Syd-
ney quickly became the centre of a large and
lucrative trade, while the resultant products of
the whale and seal fisheries formed the earliest
exports from Australia.
•' The Britannia,” the first ship to engage in
this trade was British owned, and as the ven-
ture proved a very profitable one, a number of
other vessels belonging to the same nationality
also started .out, and, with the Americans
shared the prizes that were to be secured in
the vast waste of waters between Australia and
South America. The success which attended
the first few expeditions was so gratifying that
a rapid growth in the great Southern Fishing
Industry was soon apparent. Quite a mania
for whaling set in, and Sydney being the only
port on this side of the world for the repairing
of the ships and provisioning the crews, a good
deal of business was transacted here. Sydney
men were also attracted into the industry, and
ultimately most of the vessels engaged in the
trade wore owned by them. The popularity of
the industry was such that all the available
labour in Sydney at the time was absorbed,
and while there were berths to be obtained
aboard the whalers, no one would take a billet
ashore.
China was recognised as a good market for
sealskins, but this was closed to Australian ves-
sels owing to the East India Company’s mon-
opoly, which, however, could not apply
to American ships, the captains of which were
not slow to take advantage of the openings for
business in the Flowery Land, as in one year
an American vessel took no less than 20,000
seal skins from Australia to China, For many
years the export of the fisheries product formed
the staple article of export from New South
Wales. In the year 1808 one Sydney house
alone sent to London oil and seal skins to the
value of £50,000. It is recorded that the ship
“ Honduras” took from Sydney for London
35,000 seal skins, valued at £lO,OOO. These
figures will convey to present-day readers an
idea of the magnitude of an industry that has
become extinct, and which it would be toler-
ably safe to say has so far been forgotten that
comparatively few Australians of to-day are
aware that it ever existed. As time went on,
and the fishing industry grew in importance
and value, considerable friction sprang up be-
tween the British and Colonial whalers and
sealers on the one hand, and the Americans on
the other. The former accused the latter of
tactics not consistent with the best interests of
the industry, such as the indiscriminate
slaughter of whale cubs and female seals. Go-
vernor King endeavoured to check the Ameri-
cans, by ordering that no vessels under foreign
colours should be allowed to clear from Sydney
for any whaling voyage within the limits of
New South Wales territory. The Americans
resorted to the expedient of using some of the
small islands of the Pacific as stations, where
they built craft to engage in fishing within New
South Wales waters. A counter stroke was ad-
ministered by further orders by the Governor
to the effect that no foreigner was to be allowed
to build within the jurisdiction of Sydney, any
vessel of more than fourteen feet in length.
The profits accruing from whaling and sealing
were very considerable, which will, in a great
measure, explain the avidity with which the oc-
cupation was pursued.
For many years these fisheries were the main-
stay, as they formed the foundation, of Austra-
lian commerce, and about 1841 they had reach-
ed their highest point of productiveness. From
that time they rapidly declined, and soon
ceased to exist, chiefly owing to the virtual ex-
tinction of the seals, and the ruthless destruc-
tion of the baby whales, causing an almost total
extinction of the species in Australian waters.
The Cast India Company.
Any article dealing with the history of Com-
mercial Development of New South Wales
would not be complete if it omitted to touch
upon the “ dog in the manger” part played by
the powerful East India Company towards the
early trading aspirations of this country. The
charter of this rapacious corporation gave it a
monopoly of the Eastern markets, and, conse-
quently, all oils and skins arriving in Great
Britain in vessels not actually owned and regis-
tered in that country, were subjected to pay
extra duties. This differential imposition was
very keenly resented by the Australian traders,
as it was felt that it was an unpatriotic, as well
as unprincipled, method adopted to strangle a
trade that was just in its swaddling clothes.
The Charter of the Company possessed such
a drag-net influence that a paralysing grip was
laid on Australian development, and though
successive attempts were made to break
through this monopoly, it was found that the
mesh was sufficiently small to prevent anyone
getting through. The Companys’ ships, under
contract with the British Government, con-
veyed the convicts to New South Wales and
Van Diemen’s Land. Here they secured what-
ever produce they could —a considerable por-
tion of which was found by the Military
“Ring” that held sway in New South Wales—
for the Indian and China markets, and from
the Orient they loaded up with merchandise
for England.
The Company undoubtedly treated the Col-
onists in a very cavalier fashion. When its
ships visited Australia they took only such
loading as they wished, and frequently the
visits of the Company’s vessels were very irre-
gular, supplies not infrequently ran short,
while stocks often accumulated, and either
perished or lost their chance in the markets of
the world. While the Company was thus in-
different as to what became of settlers in New
South Wales, or the produce awaiting export
in Sydney and other Colonial ports, it placed
an embargo on all cargoes arriving in London
by Australian shippers. It also, in terms of its
Charter, prevented vessels over a regulation
tonnage, owned in Australia, from trading out-
side certain defined limits, and this effectually
hindered Australian-owned vessels trading to
the East or to Europe. No wonder McCul-
loch, the commercial economist, declared that
“ a Company that maintained armies, and re-
tailed tea, that carried a sword in one hand,
and a ledger in the other, was a contradiction.”
It is only right, however, to state that the
monopoly of the East Indian trade was granted
to the Company years before the settlement of
Australia was effected, but it is nevertheless a
fact that the Company utilised to the full the
exceptionally inordinate powers embodied in
its charter to control the trade of the new Con-
tinent, and for a considerable time the British
Government used its influence to buttress the
avaricious policy of the Company. The ty-
ranny under which Colonial traders laboured
engendered the sympathy of successive Govcr


nors, who made repeated representations to the
Home authorities, and, after a lapse of time,
the Government requested the Company to
permit the settlers of New South Wales to
send their produce to the markets they desired
The Gargantuan monopoly, in declining to ac-
cede to the request, made a characteristic re-
ply, which was to the effect that, if the peti-
tion wore granted, in a very short time the
China and Indian seas would be swarming with
Australian adventurers, much to the detriment
of the Company’s interests. This offensively
negative ult imatum put the Sydney merchants
on their mettle, and, encouraged by Governor
King, they openly threw down the gauntlet to
the overbearing Corporation whose arbitrary
methods had goaded them on to specific action.
In 1805 they freighted the ship Lady Bar-
low with 14,000 seal skins, 300 cured skins, and
100 tons of beef-wood for the London market.
The Company, as soon as it was made aware of
this venture, set to work to defeat the Sydney
shippers, who had thus dared to interfere with
its sacred privileges. An appeal was made to
Shipping and Shipbuilding.
Owing to its geographical position and
unique harbour & advantages, Port Jack-
son ] las a i wa y S been a favourite ren-
dezvous for shipping. As was only to
bo expected, at the founding of the
Colony, the ships that arrived during the
first few years were chiefly either vessels con-
taming supplies for the settlement, or convict
transports, with an occasional frigate or sloop
0 f W ar, j us t, as a reminder that Britannia was
still ruler of the waves in the new and then
little known regions of the South Pacific.
The endeavours of the Government and
those in authority during the early stages of
the settlement, were mainly directed to staving
off famine owing to the want of supplies arriv-
ing from abroad, which fact alone shows that
Australia had not begun to attract traders in
search of a market. Indeed, so apathetic were
British merchants towards the prospect of busi-
cutta firm of Campbell and Clarke, who were
the owners of the ‘‘ Norfolk.” Mr. Campbell
became a pioneer merchant, took a prominent
pait in furthering the interests of the strugg-
ling Colony, and ultimately was one of those
who were mainly instrumental in freeing Aus-
tralian trade from the tentacles of the British
East India octopus.
The complaints which reached England with
reference to the iniquitous transactions in
spirits and trade carried on in the Colony,
caused the Home authorities some little an-
xiety, and, with a view to regulating matters,
the Duke of Portland wrote to Governor Hun-
ter, in 1799, advising him that, in consequence
of the increasing intercourse of Britain and
other countries with the Colony of New South
Wales, it would be necessary to ascertain the
number and description of all such vessels as
might arrive at Port Jackson in the
course of each year. The port regu-
lations provided that no vessel was to
be allowed to land any article, or
to break bulk, before the return of such vessel,
SHIPPING IN SYDNEY COVE BEFORE THE GOLD FEVER.
the House of Lords, and, after inconsiderate
delays, a decision was ultimately given which
resulted in the cargo being disposed of on an
unfavourable market, mulcting the Colonial
merchants in a loss of .£7,000. Before this de-
cision was given, a second shipment of Colonial
produce was sent to London by the ship “ Syd-
ney, and this the Company prepared to block,
but, on a friendly hint from the Government,
it gave way in this instance, and the cargo rea-
lised a good profit. The struggle was main-
tamed for some years longer, when, owing to
he numerous representations anent the hard-
s nps mflicted on the Colonists by the cupidity
ot this combination, and Act was passed by
e mperial Parliament in 1813, allowing Col-
onists the light to ship direct to the London
marcot. This proved to be one of the many
ows which the British people, disgusted with
the Company’s arrogance and insolent exae-
ions, lamed upon it, and which eventually
18 i r01 ? 1 'ts vantage ground, till the
prou and domineering concern sank to rise
no more.
ness relations with the settlement, that they
were forestalled by the Americans, who can
lay claim to having played a very important
part in opening up and promoting the growth
of trade with the infant Colony.
The first foreign trading vessel to visit Syd-
ney was the American brigantine “ Philadel-
phia,” under the command of Captain Patrick-
son, which arrived in Port Jackson with a
general cargo from Pennsylvania, in November
1792. The cargo brought by this vessel sold
at a good profit, and the news of this
remunerative speculation having spread, re-
suited in several other ships of the same nation-
ality arriving in Port Jackson, crammed with
merchandise, during the next few years. This
was the commencement of an oversea trade be-
tween America and Australia, which has, not-
withstanding interruptions and vicissitudes,
continued to expand up till the present.
The “ Norfolk,” which reached Sydney from
Bengal with a cargo of general merchandise
and stock in October, 1798, also brought, as a
passenger, Mr. Robert Campbell, of the Cal-
and of her cargo, was properly filled in and
duly attested by the master. This was the
first attempt made to obtain, officially, some
definite knowledge regarding the shipping, to-
gether with the imports and exports of the
Colony.
The Duke of Portland sanguinely imagined
that, by the adoption of this scheme, the Go-
vernor would bo greatly assisted in preventing
the importation of spirits without that official’s
license being first obtained for that purpose,
He also considered it would afford the chief
administrative officer of the Colony an oppor-
tunity of “ regulating both the entries and the
sale of such articles as shall be allowed to be
imported into the Colony in such a manner as
to prevent all monopoly, and afford the inhabi-
tants an opportunity of purchasing the same
at a fair and reasonable price.”
The Duke of Portland, however, did not
know the chicanery and audacity of the men
whom he desired Governor Hunter to hobble
by virtue of these regulations. Governor
Hunter, in giving effect to the desires of the


Home Office, appointed Richard Atkins, the
Registrar of the Vice-Admiralty Court, to keep
a correct register of all inward and outward
shipping at Sydney. His honest endeavours
to carry out the most important part of his
instructions, dealing with the regulation of the
“ Rum Traffic,” were not only frustrated, but
the Governor himself was so cruelly assailed
by those engaged in the nefarious trade as to
make his term of office extremely unpleasant.
The first return issued covered a period from
the 3rd November, 1799, to the 13th May,
1800, and showed that six oversea vessels with
general cargoes arrived, London, Cork, Cal-
cutta, and Boston being the ports whence they
sailed. , There were also two whalers and an
East Indiaman of 384 tons, carrying despatches
to China, also “ H.M.S. Reliance,” and a colon-
ial schooner, with a military detachment from
Norfolk Island, making a total of twelve ar-
rivals for a space of something over seven
months.
A very interesting feature of these old-time
records was the frequency with which vessels
visiting Port Jackson were described as
“ Prizes,” their port of origin being apparently
unknown, or more probably obscured by the
renown attaching to their capture by the Brit-
ish during the period when the might of
Napoleon was pitted against the prowess of
England. The official returns, at first, were
somewhat irregularly kept, but those which
were issued about the beginning of last century
indicated that a large proportion of the in-
ward and outward tonnage was made up of
whalers and sealers. The destination and
ports of call of some of the ships of the period
seem rather strange to modem ears, but, when
one recollects the great changes that have
taken place in regard to trade centres and
ocean routes, chiefly through the advent of
steam, it becomes not very difficult to under-
stand the courses navigated by some of the old-
time Sydney traders.
From the date of Governor Phillip’s entry
into Port Jackson, with the eleven ships which
comprised the First Fleet, on January 26th,
1788, until June 7th, 1800, the number of
vessels that visited the Port was 118, and of
this number 37 were convict transports, so that
the number of merchantmen—about 80 for a
period of twelve years —would not bo likely to
lead to questions regarding the congestion of
traffic on the harbour agitating the public
mind of those days.
On February 4th, 1803, the arrival of the •
“ Castle Good Hope,” under Captain McAskill,
with a cargo of live stock and general mer-
chandise from Calcutta, created wide-spread
interest, on account of her size, her registered
tonnage being 1,000 tons. Up to that time
this vessel was the largest that had entered
Sydney Harbour.
A general return of Colonial vessels, issued
on 27th December, 1805, showed that there
were six such vessels, ranging in size from 6 to
185 tons, and employing from 2 to 25 men.
These vessels were chiefly engaged in trade be-
tween Sydney, Newcastle, the Hawkesbury,
and Bass’ Straits. In the easy-going times of
a century ago it would be accounted a miracle,
were a ship to accomplish the voyage between
England and Australia in less than about four
or five months, and when, in the early half of
1799, the “Albion,” under Captain Bunker,
did the voyage in three months and fifteen
days, a record was established that was not
eclipsed for many a year afterwards.
For a number of years the growing shipping
of New South Wales had to contend against
many hindrances, one of which was the want of
properly tested hydrographic charts, and an-
other was the want of beacons and lights along
the coast line. The absence of a lighthouse at
South Head was for a long time severely felt
by mariners, but it was not until 1816 that one
was erected.
The navigation laws of England were also
prejudicial to the growth of Australian trade,
and vexatious restrictions were adroitly manu-
factured by interested parties to discourage
and smother local maritime enterprise. The
first steamer to reach Sydney from London was
the “ Sophia Jane,” propelled by paddle
wheels. She arrived in the Harbour on the
16th of May, 1831, and was, during the whole
of her stay in port, an object of wonderment
to the whole population.
These reminiscences of early Colonial ship-
ping furnish tangible data for instituting in-
teresting comparisons with the present enor-
mous volume of maritime trade, which now in-
cessantly flows to and from the ports of New
South Wales. For the first thirty years of
New South Wales’ career there were no proper-
ly kept records of shipping. Hence the infor-
mation gained, respecting the development of
this most important adjunct of Commerce,
from the foundation of the Colony up till 1822,
is apocryphal, but only in the sense that it is
not official, a fact which, however, does not
detract from its genuineness and accuracy.
Up till the commencement of the third decade
of last century, development had been spas-
modic, but, since that period was entered upon,
the progress of shipping in New South Wales
has been prodigious. In 1822 the number of
vessels entered and cleared at all the ports of
New South Wales, totalled 131, with an ag-
gregate tonnage of 43,117 tons. Just before
the separation of Victoria the figures stood at
976 vessels, of 234,215 tons entered, and 1014
vessels, aggregating 263,849 tons, cleared. The
demand for oversea imports, consequent upon
the gold discoveries, was responsible for a large
increase in the number and tonnage of vessels
arriving in Sydney during the mid-century de-
cade, and in 1860 the figures stood at 1424
vessels entered, and 1438 vessels cleared, the
total tonnage amounting to 427,835 tons and
431,484 tons respectively. From 1860 on-
wards, trade relations with the outside world
maintained a steady augmentation, and, in
the year 1901, the total tonnage entered and
cleared at New South Wales ports reached the
enormous figures of 8,521,234 tons.
The development which has taken place in
the shipping business of this State of recent
years has been phenomenal, as a visit around
the foreshores of Port Jackson, and a compari-
son of the type and size of vessels doing busi-
ness with this port ten years ago, with the
mammoth liners and gigantic cargo carriers of
to-day, will prove abundantly convincing.
Considering its natural position, its manifold
facilities for shipping of every description, and
its numerous other advantages, Sydney holds
undisputed sway as the premier maritime city
of Australasia. This fact is proved by statis-
tics, which shows that the lion’s share of the
external tonnage of the Commonwealth falls
tc New South Wales, which claims more than
one-third of the total, while Victoria follows,
with a trifle over one-fifth, the other States be-
ing considerably in the rear. On the basis of
population the shipping of this State—that is,
the entered and cleared tonnage, averaged per
head, exceeds that of the United Kingdom,
the United States of America, and the great
countries of Europe. Notwithstanding that
direct steam communication has been in exist-
ence for some years between Sydney and the
principal ports of the Continent, and has Deen
encouraged by Government subsidies to several
magnificent lines of foreign steamers, the trade
between this State and Great Britain has
shown little or no diminution during the past
decade. The great bulk of the external trade
of New South Wales is still done with the
United Kingdom, with Germany, the United
States, and France following in that order.
The substitution of steamships for sailing
vessels is a very noticeable feature in shipping
to this part of the world. This results from
a variety of causes, the chief being the dis-
tance of Australia from the great market cen-
tres of the world, and the necessity of econo-
mising time as much as possible in reaching
them, especially as the principal exports from
this country are primary products, which are
more or less of a perishable nature.
A very gratifying point in connection with
New South Wales shipping is to be found in
the small proportion of vessels arriving and de-
parting in ballast. The reason of this is be-
cause the great and varied resources of the
State can generally be relied on to furnish suf-
ficient cargoes. The rapid growth and healthy
internal development that has for years been
going on in New South Wales has had its
counterpart in the immensely increased ton-
nage of its ports, and the hard fact that the
chief port of this State and of the Common-
wealth—Sydney—in the value of its trade is
exceeded only by London, Liverpool, and Hull,
carries with it the conviction that the people
of this portion of the globe have come into “ a
goodly heritage.”
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY.
As a reasonable and natural corollary to
the Whaling and Sealing Industry, a consider-
able ship-building business sprang into exist-
ence in the early days of New South Wales.
The first recorded instance of shipbuilding in
the Colony was that of a small craft called the
“ Rosehill Packet,” for carrying on the trade
between Sydney and Parramatta. The keel
was laid down on December 30th, 1788, and
the vessel launched in the following Sep-
tember.
In 1798 Governor Hunter, owing to the
“ Supply” having been condemned, laid down
the keel of a small brig at Sydney, for the pur-
pose of keeping up the necessary intercourse
with Norfolk Island, in the absence of the
“ Reliance.” The size of this brig can be
gauged from her tonnage, which was roughly
from 125 to 150 tons.


Some years before this, however, namely, in
1792, the British Government sent out to the
Colony a small vessel, the “Francis,” in frames,
for use on the station. When the frames were
landed there was some difficulty experienced
in setting the vessel up, as, amongst the whole
population, there were only three or four or-
dinary ship carpenters, and Governor Phillip
bitterly regretted that the Navigation Board
did not send out one or two good ship-wrights
to superintend matters. After considerable
delay the vessels was launched at Sydney Cove
in February, 1793.
The Whaling Industry brought about a con-
siderable amount of activity amongst ship-
builders, many of the whalers and sealers being
built locally, while the amount of repairing
and refitting work carried on was by no means
small. When the days of whaling declined,
the ship-building trade, to a large extent, went
with it. As the various ports, to the North
and the South of Sydney, opened up, and the
Island trade began to develop, a demand set
Imports and the Cariff.
Commerce in New South Wales did not
start under the brightest auspices, and its
early history so abounds in the narration of
the discouragements and difficulties which be-
set the path of legitimate trading that it
seems almost impossible to believe the puny
weakling of a century ago could have grown
and developed into the robust giant which
the commerce of this State to-day indubitably
is.
During the first stage of settlement, there
was, of course, nothing to export, hence, for
some years imports formed the sole trade, and,
as the persons constituting the Government
were the only traders, any enterprise in which
they were not active participants did not re-
ceive much encouragement, but, on the con-
trary, was often subjected to such treatment
as frequently meant ruin for those interested.
official statement relative to the trade of New
South Wales was issued in 1823 by Sir
Thomas Brisbane, but it conveyed very little
information of value. The first official record
of trade now extant relates to the year 1825,
when the population of the Colony was esti-
mated at 36,219 persons. Then the value of
the imports from Great Britain amounted to
£250,000, from foreign countries £30,000,
and from British Colonies £20,000, making a
total of £300,000. The exports amounted to
£111,219, of which £32,311 represented the
whale and seal industry.
It is curious to reflect that, though this
was a British Settlement, the British mer-
chants seemed to think so little of it that
they allowed the Americans to come in and
capture almost the whole of the trade that
was to be done, during the first quarter of a
century. The state of New South Wales
trade during the first forty years can be as-
sumed when it is recollected that, up till
about 1828, there were only twelve merchants
BRIDGE STREET IN THE FIFTIES.
The Vacant Land on the Right is the Site of the present Royal Exchange.
in for moderately-sized sailers and steamers.
In 1883 and 1884 there was quite a spasm of
activity displayed. In the first-named year,
50 sailing, and 52 steam vessels, and in the lat-
ter 39 sailers and 64 steamers were con-
structed. The industry then rapidly declined
in importance, probably owing to the fact that
iron has almost entirely supplanted wood in
the construction of all kinds of vessels, and, as
these can be constructed abroad at less cost
than locally, the wants of New South Wales,
in this respect, are met by imported craft.
Notwithstanding the disadvantages under
which local builders labour, owing to the high
pnee of materials and skilled artizanship, they
manage to turn out a few small craft, such as
schooners, ketches, steam ferry boats, etc.,
chiefly wooden. Nearly every kind of wood
suitable for ship-building is found in large
quantities along the coast districts of this
Colony, but, owing to the almost universal
adoption of iron in preference to wood, very
little advantage can be taken in this respect
of the timber resources of this State.
The military “ ring,” which monopolised the
New South Wales trade, the tyrannous devices
of the British East India Company, and the
iniquitous navigation laws of England, all
militated, both in overt and covert manner,
against Colonial enterprise, but, owing to the
dogged perseverance and the insistent advo-
cacy of several far seeing and patriotic men,
who, even in those early times, recognised
something of the potentialities of this great
country, the powers which had so unjustly
held Colonial development in thrall wore ul-
timately destroyed, and the infant settlement,
now freed from the yoke, began its unique
career of progression.
The needs of the young country for years
necessarily required that food stuffs, clothing,
and other personal wants should be imported,
as there were no means of acquiring them in-
side the territory, but, although it is known
that the quantity of material of various kinds
imported during the first thirty or forty years
must have been pretty considerable, no stat-
istics are available on this score. The first
on their own account in Sydney, the business
up till then and for years later being princi-
pally done by agencies. The Custom
House was first established hero in 1800, when
specific duties were levied on spirits, wine and
beer, with the object of forming a fund to
complete a gaol in Sydney. During the early
years the Imperial Government defrayed the
cost of administration and maintenance of
prisoners, but all expenditure arising from
works or development had to be met by spe-
cial taxation of some kind. In 1794 Gover-
nor Hunter, desiring to build a school, raised
money for that purpose by the issue of li-
censes to grog sellers, auctioneers, butchers,
and others. His successors, particularly Gov-
ernor Macquarie, resorted to similar expedi-
ents to “ raise the wind,” when money was
required to carry out what might be called
public works.
Governor King was a strong advocate for
Colonial development, and he assisted, as
much as he possibly could, the endeavours of
a few intrepid spirits who tried to save the


frail trade of the Colony from being ruth-
lessly crushed out by the monopolists. He
implored the Home Authorities to relax or
remove the harassing restrictions, and even
countenanced some Colonial traders, notably
Mr. Robert Campbell, in ignoring the British
East India Company’s charter by sending Col-
onial produce to London in their own ves-
sels. During his regime he issued a number
of orders, having for their object the better-
ment of trade, but, owing to the conditions
that then prevailed in the Colony, the effect
of most of his orders became nullified. In
June, 1802, an order was issued by the Gov-
ernor, stating that all goods brought for sale
by individuals from any part to the eastward
of the Cape of Good Hope, should pay a
duty of 5 per cent, ad valorem on the prices
they were laid in at, which had to be attested
before the Governor, exclusive of wharfage,
and the duties on wines and spirits. Goods
of all kinds, except those of British manufac-
ture, brought from any part of the world,
were to pay a similar duty. This example of
trade preference in favour of the mother coun-
try was copied by all the succeeding Gover-
nors.
The conditions governing the import trade
frequently led to a great deal of inconveni-
ence to the public generally. This was es-
pecially so during the time of unrest which
culminated in .the open rupture between Gov-
ernor Bligh and the Military “ ring.” The
attention of almost everyone was diverted
by the struggles of the monopolists to break
up the authority of the Governor, and conse-
quently trading matters fell somewhat into
abeyance. In 1808 there was such a scarcity
of clothing in the Colony that an order was
issued in July of that year informing the set-
tlers that they would receive one pair of shoes,
of which they must take the greatest care, as
it was uncertain when a further supply would
be received. Footgear appears to have been
a very scarce commodity about this time, as,
in addition to the foregoing terse intimation,
embodying a practical suggestiveness, there is
on record an account of an incident of a
humourous character. Some gentlemen of
the period were proceeding to a Governor’s
levee at Parramatta. They were walking in
their top boots, which were then considered to
be the “ correct thing” for functions of this
kind, but, the day being very warm, they
soon began to feel uncomfortable. In order
to relieve their swollen extremities, they sat
(lown by the roadside and removed their
boots, but when they came to put them on
again they found the boots would hot yield,
no matter how they tugged and pulled at
them. They then endeavoured to purchase
new boots in Parramatta, but none were pro-
curable, and the gentlemen, who were deter-
mined not to miss being presented to the
Governor, had perforce to attend in their
socks.
In 1812, Governor Macquarie, who had a
habit of ferreting around, and finding out
things for himself, considered that a weekly
market at Parramatta would benefit the com-
munity, and, with a view to giving effect to
this idea, he instituted a market day, and
opened a market, where settlers were able to
dispose of their products without being com-
pelled to convey it to the middlemen in Syd-
ney. Governor Macquarie, who came to the
Colony after the stormy events culminating in
the deposition of Governor Bligh, had cleared
the atmosphere somewhat, set himself to open
up the country and improve the condition of
the settlers as much as possible. To carry
out his plans involved a considerable expendi-
ture, and, as this had to be raised by specific-
taxation. Macquarie appears in the character
of a “ revenue tariffist.” Soon after his ar-
rival here, in 1810, he raised the assize of
bread to 12id. per 21b. loaf, and in the same
year he caused tolls to be erected. In 1813
he issued an order levying duties on nearly all
the exports of the Colony. These duties on
exports were strenuously resented, as they
were considered to be a handicap on Colonial
enterprise, and to amount to a baneful inter-
ference with the spirit of speculation.
In those days, the Naval officer adminis-
tered what was the equivalent of the Customs,
and for this service was allowed a commission
of 5 per cent. In the year 1822 the sum of
£41,621 was received as Customs dues, and
the Naval officer obtained as his moiety no
less than £2,000. In 1820 Governor Mac-
quarie decreed that the duty on home and
Colonial manufactured spirits should be 10s.
per gallon, while foreign liquors should pay
15s. per gallon, and the duty on tobacco rose
from 6d. to 4s. per lb. It was also decreed
that all goods inmported into the Colony
should have to submit to a duty of 15 per
cent, ad valorem. If the volume of trade in
those times was not very large, it seems toler-
ably certain that competition was not over
keen, and that profits were not of the
“ cut to the bone” character so much in
evidence at the present time. Auctioneers,
in addition to paying a stiff license fee, had
also to pay a duty of H per cent, on all
sales, and a hawker’s license cost £2O. Mac-
quarie’s fatherly interest in the welfare of the
settlers seems to indicate that the average
trader of his day was not burdened with an
over sensitive conscience, which enabled him
to discriminate between fair profit and abso-
lute extortion. He quickly saw that the prac-
tice of officers in the service of the Govern-
ment bartering spirits for the produce of the
settlers was a pernicious one, and calculated
to hinder the progress of legitimate trading.
He therefore ordered that no more goods
(spirits) were to issue from the King’s store
to civil or military officers, overseers, superin-
tendents. clerks, jailors or constables. Thus,
the “ rum traffic,” which had been the bug-
bear of his predecessors in the gubernatorial
office, received its quietus, and the hopes of
those who desired to see the trade of the Col-
ony unshackled, and free to develop along
proper lines, at once began to rise. With
Governor Macquarie’s regime, there dawned
a newer and brighter era for Commerce in
New South Wales. The various orders issued
by the authorities regulating and controlling
the early business transactions of the Colony
doubtless appear to people of the present day
as somewhat of grandmotherly interference
with trade, but the history of the time shows
that these were rendered necessary if the hon-
est dealer and the people were to succeed in
their struggles against unscrupulous capital-
ists and official traders, who imposed on all
and sundry. Bread was a favourite subject
for manipulation by the rascally dealer, and
this led to the resuscitation of a primitive in-
stitution in the form of a Bread Assize, by
which the quality, weight and price of
the “ staff of life” were fixed by the Governor.
Neglect of compliance with the assize brought
a pretty heavy penalty down on the delin-
quent. A baker at Parramatta, whose 2 lb,
loaves were found to be 6 oz. deficient in
weight, had his oven pulled down, in addition
to paying a large fine.
During Macquarie’s time, something like
an attempt was made to collect information
respecting the condition of trade, but this
necessarily was an operation that bristled
with difficulties, and, consequently, the infor-
mation which has come down to modern
times is that conveyed through official chan-
nels, and is in no wise of a detailed nature.
The following figures in 1822, at the close of
Macquarie’s term, convey some idea of the
trade of the Colony at the time. Customs
duties realised £41,621; duties on sales by
auction (value £25,073) amounted to £376.
The duties on non-British goods (value
£101,334), amounted to £5223. Wharfage
on 60,943 packages brought in £1523, and the
duty on spirits realised £29,888. The pro-
ceeds of these duties were expended in the
ratio of £ to the support of schools, and the
remaining | to the construction and mainten-
ance of public works. During the happy-go-
lucky regime of Governor Brisbane, the ra-
pacious monopolists and unprincipled traders,
who had been severely scotched by Governor
Macquarie, finding the wholesome pressure on
them released again, began to assert them-
selves, and an incident which occurred in 1823
shows to what lengths they were prepared to
go in their opposition to anyone who dared to
interfere with their nefarious practices. Gov-
ernor Brisbane, although not the kind of man
to trouble himself much with commercial mat-
ters, after a couple of years residence here,
found that some of the corn factors were prac-
tically robbing the Treasury through the Com-
missariat store, so, in order to minimise the
effect of the system of plunder, he, after due
notice had been given, altered the old prac-
tice of receiving the years’ supply of corn into
the public store at a given price, and deter-
mined henceforward to purchase only a three
months supply. This exasperated the un-
scrupulous traffickers, and they determined to
be revenged ; as a result of their manoeuvring
the price of wheat fell to 3s. 9d. per bushel,
and many of the farmers preferred to feed
pigs on the wheat rather than send it to mar-
ket. This led to a scarcity, and the dealers
were soon able to force the price up to 245.
per bushel. When the Governor wanted to
buy wheat for the Commissariat, he was met
with the extortionate demand of the traders
for 245, per bushel. The Governor refused to
submit to this outrageous pressure, and sent
an order to India for a cargo of wheat. When
the vessel arrived in Port Jackson some of
the Sydney trading gang learnt that this ship
had a small quantity of tea on her manifest,
and they made complaint to the Commander
of a British mau-o’-war then lying in the Har-
bour, that this was an infringement of the
East India Company’s charter. The captain
of the warship, after due consideration of the
technicalities of the situation, found himself
compelled to order the vessel and its cargo
back to India. Thus, the trading monopo-
lists of Sydney, favoured by the East India


monopoly, obtained not only a victory over
the Governor, but they secured an advantage
against all who were opposed to their sinister
and corrupt methods of doing business. With
such selfish and retrograde elements in the
commercial community, it is somewhat sur-
prising that clean, honest, and equitable me-
thods of trading were not altogether elimin-
nted. That such was not the case, was mainly
due to the intrepidity and firm resolution of
a comparatively small band of far-seeing men,
posscssed of keen business instincts and actu-
ated by the spirit of fairness, integrity and
honour. These men, though often made to
sufferer personal loss and indignity, un-
flinchingly held to their principles, and most
of them lived long enough to witness the dis-
lb., and on manufactured tobacco or snuff, 2s.
per lb. These were the only fixed duties,
All other imports, not being the growth, pro-
duce, or manufacture of the United King-
dom, were liable to pay an ad valorem duty
of 5 per cent. During the decade 1820-1830
the trade increased steadily, the expansion of
settlement in the interior, consequent upon
the mania for cattle growing, giving a strong
impetus to the imports, which in 1825 were
valued at £300,000, and in 1830 at £420,480.
The decennial period, 1830 to 1840, which em-
braced a time of general development, after
the collapse following the cattle “ boom,”
showed a wonderful jump in the value of im-
ports, the figures for the last-mentioned
year, totalling £3,014,189.
of the fiscal dues again took place, when the
impost on 1 spirits” was reduced. During the
interval between 1830 and 1840 the condi-
tions of trade greatly improved, while the
old commercial leaven was rapidly dissipated,
and its place taken by a more wholesome
spirit of enterprise. The opening up of the
rich pastoral areas of the interior, and the re-
quirements of an increasing population, re-
inforced by heavy drafts of immigrants, nat-
urally caused a very appreciable rise in the im-
port figures, which continued to swell until
the “ boom” of 1840-1-2-3 burst. A great
shrinkage ensued, so that the value of im-
ports for the decennial year louu, viz.,
£2,078,338, amounted to considerably less
than that for the final year of the previous dc-
THE SYDNEY EXCHANGE IN THE EIGHTIES.
comfiture of those who opposed them, and to
reap the reward of consistent and strenuous
endeavour in the cause of an honest and hon-
curable commercialism.
In 1830 there was another decree issued
eahng with the tariff, and in this instance
le spirit a nd beer dues were the chief ones
a acked. It was enacted that all spirits,
e produce of the United Kingdom or His
ajesty s plantations in the West Indies,
siou d pay a duty of 6s. 6d. per gallon, on
spirits made or distilled from grain the pro-
uce ot the State or its dependencies, 2s. 6d.
per gallon, and if made from sugar or mo-
■ es os. bd. per gallon; and on spirits, not
rT f? r( p!]* Ce *J le Kingdom, import-
? ’ s - bd- per gallon. On unmanufactured to-
acco there was lediied a duty of Is. 6d. per
In 1840 there was another alteration in the
tariff, when the duties on spirits and tobacco
were increased and a duty on necessaries im-
posed. In 1842, another re-adjustment took
place, when spirits again came under review,
and certain restrictions on local distilleries,
in respect to the use of anything other than
grain for distillation, were removed. At the
same time the order of the Queen in Council,
allowing the produce of Britsh India to be
admitted on the same terms as that of the
United Kingdom, freed the Colony for ever
from the tentacle grasp of the voracious East
India Company. The tariff of these days was
imposed for purely revenue producing pur-
poses, and in its incidence it seemed to affect
the entire population in something like a
rational proportion. In 1848, a re-shuffling
cade. The years immediately preceding the
land boom saw an abnormal development of
the import trade. Values of all kinds were
inflated to an enormous degree, and specula-
tion was running amok. Obligations were
lightly entered upon, as everybody thought
that their position was secure. The Govern-
ment was in receipt of large sums of money,
principally from the sales of land in the Port
Phillip District (Victoria.) In this Colony,
and in the Moreton Bay Settlement, land was
being sold at a very rapid rate. The period
from 1839 to 1842 was characterised by ex-
travagance and wanton speculation, abetted
by the unlimited credit everywhere obtain-
able. But the crash was inevitable and im-
ponding. The upset price of land for sale by
auction had been fixed by the Governor, Sir


Richard Bourke, at 55., but, during Governor
Gipps’ term of office, this price was raised
to 125., and ultimately to £1 per acre, mainly
at the instigation of the founders of the Col-
ony of South Australia. The wild spirit of
speculation then rampant was intensified by
the action of the Government in altering its
land policy, and in the conduct of its finan-
cial operations. The rush for land furnished
the Government with an overflowing Treasury
and the Government compelled the bank to
pay interest on its balances at the rate of
from 7 to 71 per cent., in lieu of the 4 and 4|
per cent, that had been previously allowed.
At that time there were only two Banks doing
business in the Colony, the Bank of New
South Wales and the Bank of Australia, the
former being favoured by the Emancipist
class, some of whom at one time or another,
held positions on the Directorate. The latter
was founded to counteract what was, by the
crusted conservatism of the community, con-
sidered to be the dangerous influence of the
Emancipists, and, consequently, the Bank of
Australia, presided over by what were in the
local parlance dubbed the “ Pure Merinos,”
had no great love for its financial rival.
Owing to the deep rooted antipathies that
existed between the managements of these two
institutions, the Government had no difficulty
in obtaining the high rate of interest asked,
because if one of the Banks declined the Go-
vernment business, the other was only too
anxious to undertake it. The high interest
charges payable on the Treasury balances
caused the Banks to raise the interest charge-
able to loans and advances to the settlers to a
great extent. The money paid in by the Go-
vernment as proceeds from land sales was im-
mediately reissued by the Banks to speculators
and others to buy more land, and so the wheel
went round, until the Banks became loaded up
with indigestible securities, that brought
about a state of financial congestion, followed
by collapse. The panic that ensued was almost
indescribable, and its effect was to dislocate
business and effectually retard development.
The merchants and traders of the time were
heavily involved, and their losses amounted
to a very large sum. Many were irretrievably
ruined, and others seriously crippled. At this
period (1843-4) Mr. Wentworth, in his place
in the Council, stated that it was “ notorious
that nine-tenths of the houses, lands, and man-
sions of the proprietors were mortgaged up
to their full value.” As to the squatting in-
terest, it was known that gentlemen with
10,000 sheep could not get credit for a bag of
sugar or a chest of tea. The liabilities on the
insolvent list in fifteen months had swelled to
nearly two millions, the dividends of the in-
solvents amounting to 6s. Ud. in the £, and
in most cases no dividends were paid at all,
whilst in the six months previous to August,
1843, six thousand writs had been issued by
the Supreme Court at no less an expense than
£60,000 to £70,000. The merchants were
without custom, traders without business, and
mechanics and artisans were pining for work
in the streets. At this time the warehouses
in the city were crammed to their utmost ex-
tent with articles of almost every conceivable
class, quality, and design. In fact, judging by
the extremely heterogeneous character of the
imports of the period it was very difficult to
realise how the condition of the people should
so soon have changed from a struggle with the
primitive exigencies of colonial life to a plane
of luxury such as was compatible only with
the most advanced and wealthiest peoples of
the world. When the bubble burst in 1842,
the inhabitants of New South Wales soon rea-
lised upon what an unstable foundation their
inflated and haphazard prosperity had rested.
Immediately, the colony was thrown on its
beam ends. The money market became clewed
up, credit was unobtainable where previously
it had been so lavish, business was paralysed,
consignment upon consignment of goods were
unsaleable, mortgages fell in by the hundred,
and insolvency became general. The revenue
from land sales, which in 1840 amounted to
£317,250, dwindled to £17,034 in 1842. While
the colony was reeling under such a staggering
blow, it is easy to understand that trade, both
import and export, received a serious setback.
Fortunately, even at that early date the recup-
erative powers of the country were as potent
as at the present day, and although the colony
was affected with a severe drought, which im-
mediately followed the land boom collapse,
nevertheless it rose to the occasion, and in a
few years’ time, with the return of good sear
sons, prospects brightened, and confidence was
restored, while business began to show an all-
round expansion. The. stream of immigra-
tion, which had been pouring into the terri-
tory since 1832, had been temporarily checked
by the disasters of the early forties, but to-
wards the end of that decade it was again in-
creasing in volume.
Such was the condition of the colony when
in 1851 gold was discovered in the Turon dis-
trict. All at once the steady progressive pace
which the country had for a few years been
travelling at gave place to a wild exciting
gallop. Everything was thrown into chaos
almost in a twinkling. Enterprises of every
kind sprang into existence, and business in-
creased at a tremendous rate. The stories
spread abroad respecting the wonderful rich-
ness of the new El Dorado attracted great
numbers of people hither to try their luck.
The sluggish stream of immigration was
changed into a veritable wave, so great was
the number of persons who were daily landing
in Port Jackson from all quarters of the globe.
The outbreak of the diggings practically
changed the current of commercial enterprise
in New South Wales, and forms, as it were, the
dividing line between the old and new, the
main characteristics being absolutely dissimi-
lar. Money, as well as population, poured into
the colony in apparently endless profusion,
and not only was gold mining and prospecting
pursued with energy and persistence, causing
many new areas of country to be opened up,
but enterprises of every known and unknown
character were launched on the public, and
many of them proved very remunerative to
the promoters. Fortunes were won and lost
with startling rapidity, and lew people cared
to touch any form of speculation or business
that did not give promise of large and quick
returns. For this reason, the pastoral and
agricultural industries fell almost into disuse,
as labour was .not obtainable to work them.
This general “ shaking up” whiffh commerce
and trade received in New South Wales during
the time of the gold fever undoubtedly did
good, as it enabled the colony to break itself
free of the trammels that bound her to an ig-
noble past, and in the accession of new blood
and the acquirement of wider and nobler
ideals, New South Wales emerged from the
shock and fever of the gold times stronger and
more competent to work out the great destiny
awaiting her.
To form some idea of the enormous trade
expansion that eventuated during the decen-
nial term ending 1860, it is only necessary to
bear in mind that the value of the imports
sprang from £2,078,338 for 1850 to £7,755,859
in 1860, and the exports, chiefly gold, in-
creased in a corresponding degree, rising from
£2,399,580 to £6,311,351. After the first
flush of the gold excitement, business and
trade settled down to a more normal state, and
the bulk of the people who had become con-
vinced that “ gold digging” was not their forte
began to take an interest in other undertak-
ings, which, if not creative of so much excite-
ment and craving for a speedy fortune, offered
solid results to all who with energy and pati-
ence engaged in them. The pastoral and agri-
cultural industries began to show evidences
of renewed vigour, and as the population had
greatly increased, and become more stable,
thus providing a good local market for manu-
facturers, factories of different kinds began to
make their appearance not only in Sydney, but
also in many of the country towns.
In 1852, what is known as the Deas-Thomp-
son tariff came into operation. This was more
comprehensive in its scope than any of its pre-
decessors, and the duties were made uniform
for all countries doing business with the
colony, the preferential treatment of British
goods being abolished. Two years later this
tariff was slightly amended, when the duties
were increased, and in the following year a
revised scale of duties was imposed.
In November, 1855, Constitutional Govern-
ment was proclaimed in New South Wales,
sweeping away the former cumbrous system
which, however suitable it may have been in
the early days, was now found out of touch
with the aspirations of a free and intelligent
community. The creation of responsible
government had much to do with the subse-
quent development of the colony in all its re-
lations. About this period the first railway
in Australia, that from Sydney to Parramatta,
was opened for traffic, and, within a very short
time, other lines were projected to bring the
rich inland districts into communication with
the metropolis. Progress during the latter
fifties and the following decade was solid and
satisfactory. The Parliament of the country
was kept busy during that period dealing
chiefly with purely domestic legislation, and
the people had set themselves resolutely to
develop the grand heritage of which they had
become the possessors.
In 1865 there was another amendment of
the tariff, when opium and tobacco were
affected, an export duty at the rate of 2s. 6d.
per oz. was levied on gold, but this was subse-
quently reduced to Is. 6d., and in 1879 was
abolished. In 1861 the first attempt to deal
with the Chinese question was made, when a
poll tax of £lO was made leviable on all
Celestials. The tariff underwent a good deal
of “ tinkering” during the next few years
until 1866, when a new tariff came into force,
the principal revenue producing articles being
wines, spirits, ale, tobacco, malt, nops, opium,


rice, and dried fruits. In the following year,
the poll tax on Chinese was abrogated, and
for the ensuing fourteen years the immigra-
tion of aliens was unrestricted.
The early seventies saw New South Wales
rapidly coming to the front as a commercial
power. Throughout the decade prosperity
proved. The decade 1870-80 showed wonder-
ful development, the value of the imports for
that period bounding from £8,284.378in 1870
to £14,176,063 in 1880. In May, 1871, a re-
vision of the tariff was effected, when the
number of articles on the list of specific duties
was largely increased, and the ad valorem
between 1880 and 1890 the colony went ahead
by leaps and bounds, the value of the imports
rising from a little over fourteen millions ster-
ling to £32,615,004 in the decade. The means
of both internal and external communication
were greatly improved and expanded. New
lines of steamships, both British and foreign,
THE PRESENT ROYAL EXCHANGE.
increased, money was plentiful, and business
was good In 1879 a grand International Ex-
hibition, intended to convey to the world an
object lesson concerning the resources of the
colony, was held at Sydney. As a commercial
exposition it proved a huge success, and since
that date the trade relations of New South
Wales and foreign countries have vastly im-
duties of 5 per cent, continued. A much
larger free list was introduced for the purpose
of cultivating the South Sea Island trade,
Fiji at this time being placed under a British
protectorate, jirior to annexation. In 1874
the ad valorem duties were repealed, and the
number of articles subject to specific duties
considerably reduced. During the ten years
were laid on the Sydney berth, and the old
type of oversea steamer was superseded by a
very much superior class of steamship. Steam
began to oust the sailers, and everywhere the
indications were manifest that the colony s re-
lations with the outside world were most
sound and progressive. Internally the country
was being developed at an astounding rate.


Railways were being constructed to all points
likely to yield a commercial advantage. The
Queensland border on the North and the
Victorian on the South were tapped, and the
Darling country was connected with the rail-
way system at two points. Melbourne, Bris-
bane, and Adelaide were brought into com-
munication with Sydney by means of the iron
horse. The telegraph system was greatly en-
larged, and the overland line, the last link in
the system, connecting Australia with Britain
and the Continent by cable, was in full work-
ing order. With such admirable facilities
for business—facilities which > _re-, undreamt
of a quarter of a century before —New South
Wales, strong in her own inherent resources,
continued to forge ahead. The immensely
rich silver fields at Broken Hill, on the ex-
treme Western border, gave a fillip to both
trade and settlement.
In 1886 a protectionist Government came
into office, and a tariff in consonance with its
principles was brought into force, and re-
mained the law of the land until in 1892, when
a prominent politician went to the country
with the battle cry of a “ Free Breakfast
Table,” and was returned with a strong ma-
jority to give effect to his views. He increased
the number of articles that were subject to
specific duties, and ad valorem duties of 10 and
15 per cent, were imposed, but there was a con-
siderable free list. In 1891 the value of the
imports reached £25,383,397, but in the fol-
lowing year they dropped to £20,776,526,
probably owing to the great Maritime and
Shearers’ Strikes of that period.
In 1893 the colony experienced a monetary
crisis, caused by the failure of a number of
financial institutions and land companies. For
some years previously the seasons had been
propitious, while mining and other forms of
development had prospered to such an extent
that British capital flowed in freely to partici-
pate in the good things offering. As a conse-
quence, the Banks began to overflow with
money for investment purposes, and as this
found its way into the multitude of schemes
that were set afloat, a period of boom ensued.
Under this forcing process, properties of every
description advanced enormously in price, and
values everywhere became inflated. Caution
was forgotten, and prudence ignored, in the
plenitude of money that was offering. The
line of safety was crossed, and, when the arti-
ficial conditions could no longer withstand
the strain, the rebound occurred. At the first
signal of danger the British investor and
capitalist clamoured for his money back, and
the effort to comply with this imperative and
insensate demand brought a number of the
Banks on to a lee shore, and some perilously
near total wreck. In this State and in Vic-
toria a number of Land Companies and Finan-
cial institutions, which had been run on prin-
ciples utterly at variance with sound finance,
went under at the first blast of the storm, tak-
ing with them thousands of depositors who had
been tempted by the high rates of interest
offered to lend them their money—mostly
hard-earned savings. In this State, one Bank
closed its doors, and several others whoso head
offices were in London had to follow suit, and
suspend payment. The result of these opera-
tions was a panic which spread even amongst
the depositors of the Government Savings
Banks. Following the lead of a few who acted
the part of “ bell wethers,” the depositors in
the Barrack Street Savings Bank made a tem-
porary run on that Bank, but the manage-
ment, confident in the stability of the insti-
tution, unflinchingly met the claims of the
alarmed depositors with repayments in gold,
while a proclamation by the Premier guaran-
teeing the Bank effectively allayed all fears,
and the run subsided as rapidly as it com-
menced. The Government, recognising that
an important public duty was cast upon it,
promptly faced the situation, and at its re-
quest Parliament enacted legislation which
minimised the effect of the blow, and enabled
the Banks to reconstruct. In Victoria, where
the speculative spirit had got out of bounds,
the effect of the crisis was more pronounced
and damaging, and in Queensland, where
financial restraint appeared to have been
greatly neglected, the position assumed an
acute phase. There can be no denying the fact
that confidence received a staggering blow
throughout Australia, but iin Victoria and
Queensland the crash had further reaching
and more injurious results than in New
South Wales. Here its effects were more
transitory. The material wealth of the coun-
try was untouched. The inflation of values
had simply been on paper, and although num-
bers who, in the delirium engendered by the
prospect of speedy wealth, had speculated
rashly, lost heavily, yet the country remained
sound at the core, and when the excitement
abated and its aftermath had spent itself, the
vitality of the State immediately began to re-
assert itself.
These failures bred a certain amount of dis-
trust in the community, and a further progres-
sive reduction in the value of imports was wit-
nessed during that year and the two succeed-
ing years. In 1896 a sweeping change was
made in the fiscal policy of the colony, when
the hybrid tariff of 1891 was repealed in
favour of an almost free trade tariff, some few
articles, such as sugar, being made liable to
diminishing duties, a period of two years being
allowed for their ultimate cessation. Wines,
spirits, ales and narcotics were, however, made
subject to a substantial impost. For the first
time in the history of the colony, the system of
Government finance underwent a radical
change. The revenue requisite to liquidate
the various obligations of the State, which had
hitherto been largely raised by indirect taxa-
tion through the Custom House, was now to
be largely dependent upon a scheme of direct
taxation, which embodied an income tax of
6d. in the £ on all incomes earned in the
colony, subject to a general exemption of
£2OO, and a Land Tax at the rate of Id. in the
£ on the unimproved value, with an exemp-
tion of £240 on all estates and a special exemp-
tion in favour of religious, educational, muni-
cipal, and eleemosynary institutions. This
policy remained in force until the colony in
1901 joined with the other five States in form-
ing the Commonwealth of Australia, when a
Federal tariff in accordance with the altered
conditions was promulgated and passed by the
Federal Legislature.
From the year 1896, when the free trade
tariff came into force, the value of the annual
imports increased from £20,561,510 until in
1900 they stood at £27,561,071, the highest
on record.
Exports.
In Exports as in Imports the State of New
South Wales occupies the leading position in
the Commonwealth. The export trade of this
country began when the Colony was very
young, and consisted chiefly of the pro-
ducts of the whaling and sealing in-
dustry, which was carried on from
Sydney with great vigour. The custom
was for the Convict transports, after deliver-
ing their human freight over to the penal au-
thorities, to refit and equip for a whaling ex-
pedition, or, if sufficient inducement offered,
to load up with whalebone, oils and skins for
the London market. Besides the ships be-
longing to the transportation contractors,
some of the vessels belonging to the few Syd-
ney merchants of the period, after discharging
their cargoes of Eastern produce from India
or general merchandise from Britain, usually
filled up with the products of the fisheries. The
success of these undertakings excited the cu-
pidity of the British East India Company,
which quickly formed plans to frustrate the
attempts being made to build up an export
trade between New South Wales and the
mother country, in the hope of ultimately di-
verting this lucrative business into its own
capacious maw. Owing to the machinations
of interested parties, the British Government
imposed a duty on whale and seal oil imported
from Australia, and, as the return from the
trade was thus rendered inadequate, the Col-
onial shippers relinquished that portion of
their business. The East India Company
complained to the Imperial Government that
the invasion of the Home market by Colonial
shippers, who sent their own exports in colon
ially owned bottoms, was a violation of tin
Company’s prescriptive rights, and, conse
quently, when the British Government decreed
that Colonial vessels were not to navigate be-
yond the limits of the territory, the New South
Wales export trade received a staggering blow.
As no records were kept in those early times,
it is of course impossible to arrive at an esti-
mate of the amount of oil and skins which
found their way to London from Australian
waters, but it must have been very consider-
able, as the number of vessels attracted to en-
gage in the pursuit of the Cetacean was by no
means small. Governor King seemed to have
had every sympathy with the Colonists in their
endeavours to establish an export trade. The
first entire cargo of skins caught by the Colon-
ial fishers was purchased by Robert Campbell,
the principal merchant in Sydney, and, obtain-
ing the Governor’s consent, he shipped them
by the “ Lady Barlow” to London. The mani-
fest of this vessel showed that 260 tuns of ele-
phant oil and nearly 14,000 seal skins were
shipped, all but 300 of them being
dry from want of salt. This was the
first export cargo sent by New South
Wales colonists to Britain, and it is
small wonder that the population almost
to a man felt proud at this first attempt to
show the people of the Home Land that the
Colonists still retained the enterprising vir-
tues which were so strongly characteristic of
the stock from which they sprang. Unfortu-
nately, however, the best hopes and worthy in


tendons of the Colonists were blasted by the
Home authorities, who seem to have been un-
der the iron heel of the East India monopo-
lists. Thus it came about that the “ Lady
Barlow,” on her arrival in the Thames, was
seized by the Customs authorities, and com-
pelled to lay under restraint with her hatches
battened down and sealed for a period of four
months. When at last the embargo was re-
moved, the cargo had to bo landed for exporta-
tion, and, as this occurred at a time when the
export market was idle, the prices obtained
were not satisfactory, and the consignors were
mulct in heavy loss.
The initial effort to establish an export
trade with the outside world ihus proved
a discouraging failure, but it did not daunt
the courage of that worthy pioneer merchant,
Robert Campbell, and his associates, as they
subsequently despatched the “Honduras,” with
30.000 salted and 6000 dry fur seal
skins belonging to the Colonists, also
about 10,000 salted skins which the
packet had taken in two and a half years
This vessel cleared from Sydney before the cir-
cumstances connected with the detention of
the “ Lady Barlow” became known to the
Colonists. However, on arriving at London,
the “ Honduras” met with a reception differ-
ent from that accorded her predecessor, and
her cargo was disposed of in such a manner
that a handsome profit was realised. The
Colonists were very much exasperated when
news came to hand concerning the detention of
the “ Lady Barlow,” and, fearing a repetition
of the same scurvy treatment from the Home
authorities, they countermanded the charter
of the “ Sydney,” which was ready to sail with
50.000 skins, about 600 tuns of oil, four masts
for frigates, and about 300 tons of timber for
shipbuilding. The “ Sydney” was accordingly
unloaded in port and chartered by Governor
King to proceed to India for a cargo of rice
and wheat, but she, unfortunately, was
wrecked on the voyage. Having to contend
against such great odds, it is not surprising
that the export trade of New South Wales had
a hard struggle to obtain a footing. Eventu-
ally, the Home authorities began to evince
some little sympathy with the handful of Col-
onists in their struggles for commercial free-
dom. Fortunately, the Colony had been fa-
voured with Governors who lost no opportun-
ity to press the claims of the people on the
Home Office, and this persistent pressure at
last resulted in the authorities in England re-
questing the East India Company to permit
the Australian settlers to send their produce
direct to China. The haughty corporation,
then in the zenith of its power, refused to ac-
cede to the request on the ground that if it
wore granted, in a very short time the Indian
and Chinese seas would be overrun with Aus-
tralian adventurers, much to the detriment of
the Company. The Colonists, notwithstand-
ing the discouragements and defeats they en-
countered, manfully stood to their guns, and
battered away at the stronghold of the monop-
olists with such purpose that, in 1819, the Bri-
tish Parliament passed an Act under which
direct shipment of Colonial produce could
be made to London without any reference to
the will or interests of the crafty corporation,
whose shadow had so long lain athwart the
pathway of Australian commercial advance-
ment.
With the removal of the Company’s inter-
dicts, the export trade of New South Wales be-
gan to expand, the chief items on the manifests
of outgoing vessels being oil, skins, whalebone,
and timbers for shipbuilding and cabinet
work.
After a few years this was augmented by
station produce, as the pastoral industry
progressed, and with the introduction of
steam, coal, principally from Newcastle, be-
gan to loom up largely among the exports.
Apropos of coal, it may be interesting here
to state that in 1801 the first cargo of Hun-
ter River coal left the Colony, having been
exchanged at Sydney for a quantity of iron
with a vessel bound for England. The pro-
gress which the Colony was achieving in the
industrial sense towards the close of Governor
Macquarie’s term of office is shown by the
fact that in 1822 no less than twelve ships
freighted with colonial produce left New
South Wales ports, their destination being
England. In the same year the Duke of
COMMANDER JOHN LAMB,
First President Sydney Chamber of Commerce,
1851-52.
Sussex, at a large meeting in London, pre-
sented John Macarthur with two large gold
medals from the Society of Arts, “ for im-
porting into Great Britain wool, the produce
of his flocks, equal to the finest Saxony.”
At the same time the British Government an-
nounced that, in order to encourage a spirit
of enterprise in the production of a com-
modity which promised to be a source of
great wealth to the whole Empire, Parlia-
ment enacted that no higher duty than one
penny per lb. should be charged on New
South Wales wool imported into England.
A change had evidently come o’er the
spirit of the British legislators, but still their
Conservatism could not brook the thought of
relinquishing the impost altogether, and al-
low wool grown by the King’s subjects in
this part of the world in free. In 1825 —the
earliest year of which there is any authentic
record—the value of the New South Wales
exports amounted to £IOO,OOO, chiefly made
up of fishery products. Five years later it
had increased to £141,461, During the de-
cade 1830 to 1840 the export trade developed
very considerably, the value of produce out-
wards for the terminal year of the period
being £1,399,692. The items which went to
make this total included fishery products,
timber, wool and coal. The succeeding de-
cennial period 1840 to 1850 showed an anal-
ogous measure of development, the value of
the exports for the final year of the term
amounting to £2,399,580. The Governor,
Sir George Gipps, in his opening speech to
Parliament in July 1845, congratulated the
Colonists on the progressive improvement
that had bcci/manifested in regard to their
affairs: “ Since the close of the last session
it had been ascertained that in 1844, for the
first time in the history of the country, the
exports exceeded the imports, a fact which af-
forded the best promise that the Colonists
would speedily be enabled to recover from
those difficulties in which large numbers of
them had become involved in recent years.”
While it, no doubt, was very pleasing to the
Governor to announce that the exports ex-
ceeded the imports, yet probably his joy was
not shared by the Colonists, most of whom
were engaged in recovering from the stagger-
ing blow they had received as the result of
the disastrous land mania, which reached its
culminating point in 1842. Sir George Gipps
must have been an eminently sanguine man,
or—whatever may have been his talents in
other directions—he had “ no head for fig-
ures.” The veriest tyro in finance, aware
that the people having financially outrun the
constable, knew that they were stricken with
a paralysis that absolutely prevented them
incurring fresh liabilities, and, as a conse-
quence, the value of the imports fell to a
Very low figure. Had Sir George accurately
diagnosed the condition of affairs at the time,
he would easily have discovered it was
not that the exports had overtaken the im-
ports, but that the latter had receded until
they met the former. Although private fin-
ance was very much in a state of unstable
equilibrium, yet the public credit was good,
and the Treasury was in funds. The pro-
ductiveness of the country had not been less-
ened, neither had the automatic increment
of animal wealth been stayed by the excite-
ment of the boom. It is easy to understand,
therefore, that with a normal increase on the
one hand, and an abnormal shrinkage on the
other, the former must eventually displace
the latter.
The decade 1850 to 1860 proved to be the
most eventful one in the history of the Col-
ony, nay, of the whole of Australia. Up till
now the country had progressed at a steady
rate, but the discovery of gold in 1851 usher-
ed in a new era, which was destined to be
fraught with great and far-reaching conse-
quences to the Colony. The import market,
which had been languishing since the land
boom collapse, suddenly jumped to a pre-
viously undreamed of figure, and the value
of the exports, which now, of course, in-
cluded gold as an article of colonial produc-
tion, swelled out into an imposing array of
figures. To show the extent to which gold
affected the export returns for the first ten
years after its discovery, it is only necessary
to state that the value of gold exported up to
the end of 1860 amounted to over ten and a
half millions. For the next decade, 1860 to


1870, gold still continued to furnish a consid-
erable part of the export tarde of the Colony.
Coal,also, had come prominently to the front,
while wool and station produce had increased
to a marvellous degree. If the early pioneers
who, in the face of unprincipled opposition
and blockading tactics, had tried to open up
an export trade, with but one ship’s cargo,
could have seen the outcome of their action
after an interval of half a century, they
must have rubbed their eyes in wonderment.
The small acorn, planted in an uncongenial
soil, had within a comparatively few years
grown into a sturdy oak.
By the time the seventies wore entered
the vast and varied resources of the Colony
were being systematically exploited, and pro-
duction of all kinds was being energetically
stimulated. So consistent was the rate of
progress, that the year 1880 showed the
value of exports to have risen to the unpre-
cedented amount of £15,602,802. The figures
for the next ten years, ending 1890, showed
phenomenal increases, due mainly to the de-
velopment of the primary industries of the
MR. J. S. WILLIS,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1853-54.
State. The export of silver and silver ore
from the Barrier mines had considerable in-
fluence during this period, while both gold
and coal mining were responsible for sub-
stantially enhanced returns. The final de-
cade of the century, notwithstanding the de-
pression caused by the labour troubles at the
beginning of the term, also exhibited a salu-
tary progress, the value of the exports for
1900 being £28,164,516, an amount consider-
ably in excess of the import values. During
this period the chief articles of export were
wool and pastoral products, gold, silver, coal
and copper, butter, dairy produce and tim-
ber. The secondary industries of the State
had made great strides during the last years
of the century, and while it cannot be con-
tended that they added anything materially
to the export trade, it must be conceded that
their ability to cater for the local market in
certain directions exercises an influence in
declining the import returns,
Immigration.
One of the weightiest factors in the devel-
opment of the resources of New South Wales,
as in all new countries, was the system of im-
migration that prevailed in the past, the ab-
sence of which, at the present day, is be-
wailed by local economists, who attribute
most of the evils that now afflict the body
politic and the country generally, to a dearth
of new blood, a suffusion of which, they aver,
would do incalculable good at the present
juncture. Of course there are others who
declaim against this policy. With the argu-
ments and postulations of theorists, this ar-
ticle claims no association, the unassailable
facts of practical experience being recognised
as the surest guide to an accurate conclusion.
The community of to-day is very apt to for-
get, or at least to greatly undervalue the great
and lasting benefits which accrued to Austra-
lia in general, and New South Wales in par-
ticular, by the stream of immigrants which
poured into the country during the past.
The history of New South Wales, brief
though it be, abounds in proofs that the
fusion of blood which ensued in consequence
of the large numbers of new arrivals from
Europe during the middle portion of last
century, not only enriched the race with ele-
ments calculated to successfully cope with the
novel conditions of Colonial environment, but
has transmitted to the present generation a
vigour and energy which, while it proudly
maintains the best traditions of the parent
stock, is building up beneath the Southern
Cross a virile community, endowed with the
best characteristics to achieve and retain a
foremost position among the Civilised people
of the world.
The first immigrants to arrive in New
South. Wales were several men, their wives
and families, who came by the ship “Bellona”
in 1793, and who received grants of land vary-
ing from 120 to 80 acres in extent in the
vicinity of what is now Bankstown. The lo-
cation upon which they settled was first
called Liberty Plains, from the fact that the
settlers were free. It was expected that the
“ Bellona” would have brought a contingent
of fifteen Quaker families, who were known
to have contemplated immigrating, but it
seemed that, after arrangements had been
made for their passage, some representations
made to them respecting the country of their
intended destination, divertsd them from their
purpose.
In 1830 the question of immigration was
brought forcibly home to the Colonists, and,
as a result, several schemes were suggested
and formally proposed, but they seem to have
become addled. In that year the harvest
was one of the most prolific known in the
Colony, and the Hawkesbury farmers wanted
four hundred labourers to gather the crops,
but the Government could supply only one
hundred and twelve men. Consequently,
the farmers felt their operations hampered,
and, while fuming under this grievance, the
agitation for immigration was begun.
Towards the middle of 1831 the first im-
migrant ship arrived, bringing fifty young
women who had been trained to domestic du-
ties in an orphan asylum at Cork (Ireland).
These were placed in charge of a committee
of ladies on their arrival, and, within a com-
paratively brief time, most of them contracted
marriage. Towards the end of the year the 1
second immigrant ship arrived with fifty-nine
mechanics, chiefly artizans, belonging to the
building trades, with their families. The im-
migrants, who were mostly Scotch, came out
under the aegis of Dr. Lang, who had become
greatly impressed with the advantages which
the country presented for people of indus-
trious and thrifty habits, and ho was cease-
less in his advocacy of a wise immigration sys-
tem. The conditions under which this band
of immigrants came out were somewhat singu-
lar. Lord Goderich, the Secretary of State at
the time Dr. Lang visited the old country,
apparently absorbed a good deal of the wor-
thy doctor’s enthusiasm in the cause of immi-
gration, as he loaned Dr. Lang £l5OO to de-
fray the costs of the workmen, the loan to be
repaid in five years, without interest. A fur-
ther sum of £3500 was advanced from the
Treasury in connection with this scheme,
MR. T. C. BREILLAT,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1855.
which turned out a successful one.
Among the items on the estimates pre-
sented to the Legislative Council in 1832,
was a sum of £IO,OOO, to assist a scheme of
public immigration, the Imperial Govern-
ment having generously decided to contribute
an amount double that provided by the Col-
ony. The Legislature reduced the sum to
£3600, which was eventually voted. This oc-
curred in Governor Bourke’s time, and was
the first appropriation from the funds of the
Colony for immigration purposes.
In 1832 the Secretary of State, in a despatch,
announced that, in order to correct the evils
arising from the great disproportion between
the male and female portions of the population
of the Colony, he had seriously considered
what means might be adopted for supplying
the deficiency of females so much complained
of. As a step towards correcting the evil, he


had obtained from the Lords Commissioners
of the Treasury a sanction for applying to the
assistance of female immigration, so much of
the territorial revenue of the Australian
Colonies as arose from the sale of land. As
a step towards giving effect to these ideas, it
was recommended that the sum of £IO,OOO
should be appropriated from the Colonial land
fund to pay a moiety of the cost of conveying
1200 female immigrants to New South Wales.
At this time, the prospects of a large acces-
sion to the Colony, in response to the induce-
ments held out by both the Home and Colon-
ial Governments, were such that a number of
the leading Colonists instituted the “ Immi-
grants’ Friends’ Society,” the title of which
conveys a good idea, of its aims and objects.
In May, 1832, forty-eight military pensioners,
with their families, arrived in the Colony,
they having entered into an agreement with
the Secretary of State to commute their pen-
sions for small grants of land.
A ship arrived in Sydney in August, 1833,
having on board 215 female immigrants, all
of whom were subsequently drafted to situa-
tions with reputable families. During this
year 2685 free persons arrived in the Colony,
and of these no less than 1432 came out with-
out assistance from the public purse, and 642
were assisted immigrants. These figures in-
dicate that, even at that early date, the Col-
ony was beginning to attract favourable at-
tention amongst the better class of popula-
tion in the old country. In 1835 the Com-
mittee of the Legislative Council, appointed
to make inquiries into the subject of immi-
gration brought in their report, which was of
a very voluminous character, bristling with
important recommendations, but this report,
like most of its kind, seems to have been
pigeonholed.
A new method of immigration, termed the
“ Bounty System,” was tried, but this was so
fraught with abuse, and incentives to immor-
ality on the part of the female immigrants,
that it soon fell into disfavour, and had to be
ultimately abandoned.
In these days the recent “felt hatters” epi-
sode reads strangely apposite when one reads
that, in 1840, a prominent settler in Cam-
den indented six families from Germany as
vine dressers, to improve his vineyards.
In 1841, the question of immigration be-
came a burning one. The Council was in-
formed that, in the course of the year, 16,612
bounty immigrants had been brought to the
Colony, at a cost of £276,000, and, as the
funds at the disposal of the Colony were inad-
equate to meet this drain, a proposal was
made to raise money by the issue of deben-
tures. This proposal, which was regarded as
tantamount to the establishment of a national
debt, raised a storm of public comment, and
petitions were forwarded to the Home author-
ities against it. About this time, some of
the most influential residents were desirous of
instituting a system of Coolie immigration
from India, China, or Polynesia, but the an-
tipathy manifested towards this proposal
caused its abandonment.
In 1847, the necessity for labour to cope
with the progressive development of the coun-
try was brought conspicuously forward, and
the Legislature was asked to revive immigra-
tion on a large scale to meet the daily in-
CAPT. K. TOWNS.
President Chamber of Commerce, 1856-7, 1865.
creasing demand. Statistics issued in 1849
showed that the expenditure on immigration to
New South Wales, during the ten years end-
ing 1846, amounted to £992,729, for 55,063
immigrants introduced during that period,
the cost per head being £lB 3s.
The gold discoveries in the early “ Fifties”
were responsible for an enormous influx of
population from all parts of the world, par-
ticularly from the British Isles. Ship-load
after ship-load of immigrants arrived in Port
Jackson, and the stream continued in increas-
ing volume until the later auriferous finds in
MP. J. L. MONTEFIORE,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1866-67-68-69-74-75.
Victoria diverted the human current in that
direction. Nevertheless, a large number of
those who followed fortune to New South
Wales, elected to remain, and thus the gold
boom, among the other benefits that it con-
ferred on this Colony, materially assisted in
a large augmentation of the population. The
Government, late in 1853, recognising that
the rush to the gold districts of Victoria had
caused a diminution in the number of immi-
grants to this country, made strenuous efforts
to enhance the system of immigration, and,
for this purpose, two sums of not less than
£lOO,OOO each were appropriated in that
year.
The tide of immigration having consider-
ably receded, while the country had continued
to develop, the dearth of labour was again be-
ginning to be felt, and, in 1861, Messrs.
Henry Parkes and W. B. Dailey were dis-
patched to Great Britain and Ireland as im-
migration agents and lecturers, in order to re-
vive among the yeomen population chiefly, a'
desire for the betterment of their condition
in a land which was described as “ flowing
with milk and honey.”
A liberal scheme of assisted immigration re-
mained in force, and, during the period from
about 1870 to 1886, in which the Govern-
ment of this State pursued a spirited public
works policy, large numbers of both skilled and
unskilled workers were attracted here, along
with their wives and families. In this period
the Colony became enriched by the addition
of thousands of men and women in the hey-
day of life and vigour. To show to what ex-
tent the system of State-aided immigration
was availed of, it need only be pointed out
that, in 1883, the number of assisted immi-
grants landed in the Colony, numbered 8369.
When the full tide of prosperity, engendered
by the construction of innumerable public
works, began to turn in consequence of the
policy of tin Government undergoing a
change, large numbers of men were thrown
upon the labour market. The surplus work-
ers in the Colony were by no means tolerant
towards a system which tended to aggravate
the already congested state of the labour
market, and the Immigration Vote was even-
tually eliminated from the Estimates. Dur-
ing the past ten years the advance in the pop-
ulation of New South Wales has been mainly
dependent upon the natural increase, and by
the advent of persons, principally from the
other States, who have been attracted hither
by the superior inducements this State offers
to men and women of money and energy.
At one time the influx of Chinese, which
originated in the rush of people of all nation-
alities to the gold-fields, threatened to develop
into alarming proportions, and several indus-
trial occupations began to he seriously men-
aced by alien workmen and traders. Public
feeling was aroused, and, in 1888, a drastic
Restriction Act was passed, under which Chi-
nese immigration was practically ‘ wiped
out.”
The provisions of the Aliens Restriction
Act, enacted by the Federal Parliament in
obedience to the popular sentiment of a
“ White Australia,” takes keen and vigilant
cognisance of coloured aliens coming to these
shores, and, consequently, the number now ar-
riving is practically nil.


Land and Settlement.
The internal development of New South
Wales nominally began when Governor Phillip
and his Colony landed on the shores of Port
Jpckson, and commenced clearing a site for
settlement, and erecting huts for their protec-
tion from the elements. The necessities of the
population gradually made themselves felt,
and, in order to provide the means of subsist-
ence during the long and irregular intervals
that ensued, between the arrival of one supply
ship and its successor, the Governor cast about
to discover some arable land for the cultiva-
tion of such products as the inhabitants stood
in need of.
This led to the settlement at Rosehill (Par-
ramatta), and ultimately to those on the
Hawkesbury, the rich alluvial flats of which
for many years constituted the granary of New
South Wales. By degrees towns were formed
at Windsor, Richmond, Castlereagh, Liver-
pool, and Penrith, and gradually a widening
MR. J. B. WATT.
President Chamber of Commerce,
1870-71-79-80-81-82-33.
area of land was brought under cultivation.
The discovery of the Hunter River, with its
valuable coal deposits and rich agricultural
areas, also greatly assisted in developing the
internal resources of the country during Go-
vernor Hunter’s term of office. When this
administrator arrived in the Colony, he
brought with him a number of agricultural la-
bourers, who were granted land on the Hawkes-
bury, and very soon 6,000 acres of wheat and
maize were in evidence. About this time the
fertile cow pastures (Camden) were discovered,
and on the land was found the herd of 60 head
of cattle, the descendants of some animals that
some years before had strayed away from the
original settlement and multiplied. This dis-
covery proved an exceedingly valuable one, as
it demonstrated the adaptability of the coun-
try for stock raising.
During the administration of Governors
Hunter and King, agricultural development
proceeded at a gratifying rate, and the latter’s
regime saw the formation of a settlement at
the mouth of the Hunter (Newcastle), and the
colonization of Van Diemen’s Land by the
creation of settlements on the Derwent (Ho-
bart), and on the Tamar (Launceston).
Governor Bligh’s administration was
marked by events which brought to a climax
many of the disabilities under which the set-
tlers suffered, owing to the oppressive exac-
tions of the Military Trading Ring in Sydney,
and the pernicious restriction of the British
East India Company abroad.
When Major-General Macquarie took over
the reins of Government in 1809, it was under
the most favourable auspices. He was unen-
cumbered by many of the hindrances that had
militated against the success of the beneficent
plans of his predecessors. The wise and patri-
otic policy which he consistently pursued dur-
ing his twelve years’ residence in New South
Wales has often —and with apparently good
reason—been referred to as the commencement
of the prosperity and the rising greatness of the
Colony. When a passage was discovered over
that hitherto impenetrable physical barrier —
the Blue Mountains—by Messrs. Blaxland,
Wentworth, and Lawson, and the fertile
Bathurst plains, with the rich rolling downs
of the West, were seen awaiting occupation, a
new era of development dawned, while practi-
cally a new province was added to the Colony.
The explorations of Hamilton Hume brought
to view the splendid pasture lands of Berrima
and Goulburn in the South, and John Oxley,
who dived into the unknown regions beyond
Bathurst, traced the Lachlan River 400 miles
along its course, discovered the prolific country
of which Wellington is now the centre, and,
subsequently, striking northward, came upon
the Liverpool Plains and the highly endowed
table-land of New England, thence to the
coast along the valley of the Hastings, to what
is now Port Macquarie, thus opening up a vast
area of magnificent country for the energy of
adventurous settlers.
During Governor Macquarie’s regime the
greater nortion of what is now the State of
New South Wales had been delimited, and a
large number of persons were settled on the
land in the fertile locations along the Hawkes-
bury and Nepean'. Governor Brisbane, who
succeeded Macquarie, resolutely countenanced
the exploratory work so well begun by those
who preceded him. Allan Cunningham, the
botanist, was encouraged to prosecute his tra-
vels and researches in the north, and Messrs.
Hume and Hovell added lustre to their names
by their daring overland journey to Port
Phillip, during which the Murrumbidgee,
Murray, and other important rivers, together
with immense tracts of new country, now form-
ing the State of Victoria, were discovered and
named. The important work that had been
carried on in Brisbane’s time, was continued
during the regime of Governor Darling. Allan
Cunningham, penetrating what wac then con-
sidered the far North, came upon the wonder-
fully fertile plateau, to which he gave the name
of Darling Downs. Afterwards he found an
outlet from this elevated tableland to Moreton
Bav. Meanwhile, Sturt, who had been explor-
ing the region of the distant West, came across
the Darling River, and, following the course
of that stream to its junction with the Murray,
made valuable discoveries en route.
By the time Governor Burke commenced to
administer Colonial affairs at Sydney in 1831,
a rough outline and configuration of the teiri-
tory now embraced in the State of New South
Wales had been obtained, and settlement be-
gan to spread out in all directions.
The internal advancement of the State has,
necessarily to a great extent been bound up
with the question of land settlement, which,
during the progress of Colonial evolution, has
naturally undergone frequent modification and
change. The alienation of the public estate,
in the first stages of the Colony’s history, was
effected by means of grants, orders and dedica-
tions, the Governor for the time being possess-
ing the sole right of disposal.
In 1831 the principle of sale by auction was
first introduced, and in 1843 the system of land
selection was brought into existence, but its
operation was limited to lands which had pre-
viously been surveyed for sale by auction. The
change effected in matters relating to Coloniza-
tion, caused by the excitement consequent on
the gold discoveries, resulted in a great altera-
tion in the conditions of settlement on the soil.
As the interest in gold-digging waned, the de-
sire for land increased on the part of the nu-
merous immigrants who had been attracted to
the Colony, and who still continued to pour in
MR. GEORGE KING,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1872-73.
at a rapid rate. To cope with the new condi-
tions that had arisen, the Robertson Land Act
of 1863, embodying the important principle of
“ Free selection before survey,” coupled with
terms of residence and improvement, was
passed. The object of the framers of
this enactment was to establish an
agricultural population alongside the
pastoral tenants. Since then, Amending
Land Acts have been passed to remedy de-
fects that only became apparent after the law
had been in operation for some time. The
main principles of the original bill have been
preserved, out the alterations that have been
effected from time to time give the pastoral
lessee more security, and also confer more
equitable terms upon the bona-fide settler,
while at the same time the Public Treasury
obtains an increased revenue.
New South Wales, with an area of
198,848,000 acres, has 48,003,857 acres alien-
ated, and 126,938,678 acres leased, leaving an
area of 23,905,465 acres still neither alien-
ated nor leased, much pf which the State has


reserved from occupation, portions being util-
ised for travelling stock and various other
purposes of public requirement.
Climatic conditions have undoubtedly exer-
cised very considerable influence over land set-
tlement, and the consequent industrial occupa-
tion of the settlers. The whole of the Eastern
division, forming a zone between the great di-
viding range and the Coast, which possesses the
advantage of a reliable rainfall, has developed
the principle of closer settlement in a greater
degree than the two other and much larger di-
visions, and given great encouragement to
dairying and its cognate branches of the farm-
ing industry, also to sugar growing and timber
getting. All the ports of the Colony, includ-
ing Sydney and Newcastle, are situated on the
eastern fringe of this zone, and this has called
into being manufactories and trade concerns
that have generally assisted in developing both
the primary and secondary industries of the
State, and have indirectly led to an acquisi-
tion of population, and consequent settlement.
The Central division takes in a large area of
magnificent mixed lands, pastoral, agricultural
and mining, consequently, these three sections
of industrial life support a number of com-
munities whose existence is mainly dependent
upon a proper recognition of the principles of
land settlement. The Western division, which
comprises the largest and driest division of the
territory, is given over practically to the pas-
toral occupation for which it is most naturally
adapted. Here the population is necessarily
MR. CHARLES SMITH,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1876-77-78.
more scattered and sparse than in the other
two divisions, but, strangely enough, the
Western is the one that at the present day con-
fronts the politician and the student of physical
economy with problems of very weighty im-
port, upon the speedy and correct solution of
which a great deal of the future material wel-
fare of the State depends.
Pastoral.
It has very truly been said that the back-
bone of the prosperity of New South Wales
is the pastoral industry. This need occa-
MR. S. A. JOSEPH,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1883-87-88-89.
sion no surprise when it is remembered what
a large proportion of the State is pre-emin-
ently adapted by Nature for the breeding of
cattle and sheep, and the growing of wool of
exceptional duality. This enterprise, which
to-day boasts of such gigantic proportions,
certainly had a very humble beginning. The
live stock which was brought to the Colony
by Governor Phillip in the First Fleet, con-
sisted only of one bull, four cows, one calf,
one stallion, three mares, three foals, twenty-
nine sheep, twelve pigs, and several goats.
Some of the cattle managed to stray away
soon after landing, and their whereabouts re-
mained unknown for several years. A party
of settlers, led by the blacks, came upon the
lost cattle —which had by this time increased
to sixty head—browsing on a broad patch of
succulent herbage (60,000 acres) at a place
called from the above circumstance the
“ Cowpastures,” now Camden, about 40 miles
from Sydney. While no record of stock
brought to the Colony appears to have been
kept during ,the earlier years, yet there
seem to have been some sheep imported from
India during Governor Phillip’s time. The
suitability of the country for pastoral pur-
suits was discerned during the early stages of
settlement by some of the more far-seeing and
energetic settlers, and attempts were made at
various times to introduce and acclimatise
sheep and cattle from England and the Cape
of Good Hope. In the days antecedent to
steam transit the transport of valuable breed-
ing strains of stock from abroad was a matter
of very great difficulty and expense, and the
losses incurred were not calculated to en-
courage those engaged in the hazardous en-
terprise. Nevertheless, some of the more
indomitable Colonists persevered, and, ulti-
mately, had the satisfaction of seeing their
small herds visibly increased. In 1796, eight
years after Phillip arrived here, there were
57 horses, 101 cows, 74 bulls, 52 oxen, 1531
sheep, 1427 goats, and 1869 hogs—values
ranged high then, a cow being worth £BO, a
horse £9O, a sheep (Cape breed) £7 10s, and
a breeding sow £5O. The Cape sheep were,
about this time, augmented by a number of
a coarse-woolled variety, obtained from Ben-
gal, which made up the Governor’s flocfc—
kept for the use of the settlement.
Captain John Macarthur, a prominent per-
sonage in connection with the early affairs
of the Colony, was greatly struck with the
improvement which took place in the quality
of the wool of these sheep under the influence
of sun and climate, and he began to speculate
on the commercial advantages that would
accrue from the cultivation of fine wools.
Captain Macarthur must be conceded the
main credit of giving to Australia and to
New South Wales in particular, the magnifi-
cen golden fleece which, to-day, constitutes
one of the corner stones of the State’s pros-
perity.
Macarthur, early perceiving the valuable
prospects of sheep breeding, entered heart
and soul into the enterprise, and by 1795 he
had gathered together a flock of over 1000
head, which was held in high estimation. His
ardour in this direction induced him to seek
means to improve the quality of his sheep, as
he began to forsee a chance of opening up
remunerative commercial relations with wool
factors in Britain. Just about this time an
accidental circumstance gave a fortuitous im-
pulse to Macarthur’s ideas. Some high-grade
merinos of the Escurial or Royal Cabana
MR. W. G. MURRAY,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1885.
flock, which had been presented to the Dutch
authorities at the Cape of Good Hope, got
into the possession of Colonel Gordon, who
committed suicide, and afterwards the sheep
were disposed of by his widow. Captain
Waterhouse, of “ H.M.S. Reliance,” which
had been sent from Sydney to the Cape for
supplies, purchased twenty-nine of the sheep.


and shipped them for this port, but, on the
voyage thither several were lost. On the ar-
rival of the remainder in Sydney, Macarthur
tried to secure them all by an offer of £ls per
head, but was able to obtain only three rams
and five ewes. Some of the others were
bought by Mr. Cox, whose name afterwards
became well known in connection with the
famed Mudgee wools. Captain Macarthur,
on returning to the Colony from a visit to
England, brought with him, in 1805, ten rams
and ewes purchased from the flock of George
111., at Kew. These sheep were of pure mer-
ino descent, from stock presented to His Maj-
esty by the King of Spain. They were said
to be of the Negretti flock, which was con-
sidered to be more robust, though their wool
would not be estimated as being as fine as that
of the Escurial flock, of which Macarthur al-
ready had several representatives. Of all the
numerous combinations of the great ovine
race, the merino stands prominently in front.
MR. T. LITTLEJOHN,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1884.
So vigorous is this breed, and so readily does
it adapt itself to new conditions, such as a
change of location and climate, that, with
proper attention and care, they retain and
even refine those excellencies which have made
them famous above all others for the superior-
ity of their wool.
Macarthur, having accumulated a flock of
considerable strength, began to cross his old
stock with some of his newly-acquired strains,
and, by careful selection and judicious blend-
ing, succeeded in obtaining fleeces of a texture
so fine that they won warm appreciation from
English manufacturers, who hitherto had been
dependent upon Spain for their somewhat
scanty supplies of fine wool. In this way he
pioneered the noble industry which, to-day,
has reached its enormous dimensions. In
1858 his flock was dispersed, and its valuable
constituents drafted to all parts of Australia,
to continue the propagation of a strain that
has never been equalled, and which has vir-
tually built up the reputation of New South
Wales as a wool-producing country. Ever
since Macarthur proved the success of import-
ing new and superior breeds to reinforce the
older stock, the experiment has been a popu-
lar one with sheep breeders. In 1823 and
1825 the Colonial stock was strengthened by
the importation of a further consignment of
Spanish sheep, and, later on, came the im-
portation of a number of fine-woolled Saxon
merinos and the Rambouillet variety from
the French Imperial flocks.
It has been ascertained that, under the in-
fluence of the Australian climate, the charac-
ter of the Spanish fleece has, in some respects,
been changed. The fibre of the wool has be-
come softer and more elastic, and the staple,
though losing in density, has increased in
length, but the weight of the fleece has under-
gone very little alteration. Taken on the
whole, the quality of the wool has benefited
by the influence of local physical conditions.
The discovery of a passage across the Blue
Mountain escarpment opened the door to the
rapid development of the pastoral industry.
A few adventurous spirits pushed forward,
and “ sat down” on rich locations, so that
in a very short time they became wealthy.
Their success excited the spirits and enter-
prise of others, who, in turn, acquired broad
lands and large flocks. The pastoral indus-
try progressed by leaps and bounds, and the
minimum bunttm of every active man’s exist-
ence was to become a squatter. The intro-
duction of free immigration about this time,
coupled with a liberal system of land grants,
gave an extraordinary fillip to settlement.
The Australian Agricultural Company, —an
English Corporation having a capital of
£1,000,000 —in consideration of the objects
enumerated in its charter, which were the
cultivation of land, the rearing of fine-woolled
sheep, and of cattle and horses, and the gen-
eral improvement of the Colony, obtained a
grant of one million acres of ground free of
cost, in the most productive portion of the
territory—the Hunter River district. The
operations of the Company, combined with
those of numerous private persons who had
obtained extensive land grants, caused a great
demand for stock to set in, with a resultant
heavy rise in price, and this in a very short
time brought about a period of reckless spec-
ulation such as had never before been experi-
enced in the Colony. The entire talk of the
community at that time, to quote Dr. Lang,
“ was all of runts and heifers.” The whole of
the people seemed seized with one desire, and
this exclusive and universally predominant
idea was to rapidly acquire a large fortune by
the rearing of cattle and sheep. Well might
the condition of affairs prevailing during the
years 1826-27-28 be designated the sheep and
cattle mania. This was the first “ boom”
that Australia had experienced. The period
of inflation was followed by a three years
drought, which completed the havoc com-
menced by the wild spirit of speculation. The
gross irregularities that were permitted to
obtain in regard to the operation of the sys-
tem of land grants, were in a great measure
responsible for the speculative mania which
resulted so disastrously for the Colony. Dr.
Lang tersely hits off the situation by describ-
ing the case of an individual who had just
come to New South Wales from the Isle of
France in search of health. On his arrival,
hearing of the facility with which land could
be obtained from the Government by new
arrivals, he forthwith applied for a grant of
two thousand acres, which he accordingly re-
ceived, and which he promptly sold to an old
resident, without ever having himself seen the
land, for the sum of £5OO. He left the coun-
try soon afterwards, rehabilitated in both
health and pocket. During the calamitous
years embraced between 1826-30, credit was
said to be shaken, confidence lost, and panic
ensued, yet when the drought broke in 1830,
and rain fell generally throughout the State, a
metamorphosis was almost immediately ap-
parent. The pastoral industry quickly pulled
itself together, and very soon was again in a
flourishing condition. In 1831 there were
1,401,284 lbs. of wool, valued at £75,979, ex-
ported from the Colony. As years went on,
new areas of country were laid under tribute
to the squatters, and stock increased at a
great rate. In the years just antecedent to
SIR WILLIAM M'MILLAN,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1880.
the discovery of gold, the flocks and herds in-
rceased beyond the capability of their pastur-
ages, so that they were sent out to graze on
the nearest unoccupied country. In this way
the Western portions of New South Wales
were taken up and occupied. In the late
thirties ' and early “forties,” the Colony was
“ booming along” at a great rate. The ex-
tensive immigration that took place during
this period brought in its train an unprece-
dented rush of British capital. A spirit of
wild speculation again began to manifest it-
self, and this was encouraged by the extraor-
dinary facilities for getting into debt. The
Government- at this period was receiving a
large revenue from the sale of public estate,
and this was placed with the banks at inter-
est equal to 4 per cent., but, under the in-
fluence of the Governor (Sir George Gipps)
the interest on the Government balances at
the banks was raised to 7 and U per cent.
The banks, in turn, in order to pay this large
amount of interest, while returning substan


tial dividends to the shareholders, were com-
pelled to enlarge their discounts and to take
security for their advances. Values of all
kinds became inflated to an astonishing de-
gree, while expenditure of the most extrava-
gant nature was freely indulged in. When
the sales of Government land began to fall
off, the wheel of prosperity became clogged,
and a financial cataclysm was precipitated
involving most ruinous consequences, so that
almost universal bankruptcy supervened.
The obligations to the banks and other finan-
cial institutions, could not be met on ma-
turity, and, as a consequence, land, stock and
property of every description were forced up-
on the rapidly falling market for realisation,
thus further aggravating the monetary de-
clension. A few instances might here be
cited to show the enormous shrinkage which
took place. Cattle, which, before the crash
came, had been bought at £6 6s per head,
were sold at 7s. 6d. each, and horses, which
had been purchased for sixty guineas, realised
less than £l. A house in Sydney, for which
the owner was glad to obtain £I2OO, he only
a short time before had refused to accept
£SOOO, and sugar shipped at Manila at £ls
per ton, in anticipation of a strong advance
on arrival, had to be sacrificed at £lO per
ton.
A peculiar circumstance in relation to this
“ Monetary Crisis,” as the smash was
euphemistically designated, was the fact
that, throughout this period, the sea-
sons continued remarkably good, and
while stock increased rapidly, the neces-
saries of life remained abundant and cheap.
In fact, the augmentation of stock, particu-
larly sheep, became so great in proportion to
the requirements of the population, that they
constituted a veritable drug on the market.
At this period (1840-4) there were esti-
mated to be over six and a half million of
sheep, considerably over a million head of
cattle, nearly a hundred thousand horses, and
about seventy thousand pigs in the Colony.
The great depreciation that occurred in the
value of stock brought the pastoralists face
to face with disaster, but the position was,
to a great extent, saved by the experiments
made by a Yass squatter, who ascertained
that, by boiling down sheep for tallow, a re-
turn of ss. per head could be netted. The
success of the venture having been demon-
strated, boiling down works were started all
over the Colony, and the tallow industry be-
came an important and lucrative one.
Such was the condition of the pastoral in-
dustry when, in the early “ fifties,” the dis-
covery of gold in New South Wales electri-
fied the inhabitants and produced a condi-
tion of affairs that completely revolutionised
the domestic economy of the Colony. In the
general excitement and disorder which en-
sued, the pastoral industry played its part.
The squatters and settlers secured a local mar-
ket for their stock, and the influx of popula-
tion caused a general rise in -the price of
meat. The rise was, of course, most pro-
nounced on the fields, where the inrush of
crowds of diggers and others set up a demand
that had to be met. While stock owners
were thus benefited on the one hand by a rise
in price for their cattle and sheep, they were
handicapped in other ways, chiefly by the
difficulty of obtaining labour, which, owing
to the wide prevalence of the gold fever, was
both scarce and dear. As the excitement and
turmoil of the gold-seeking days waned, the
pastoral industry once more resumed its nor-
mal course, and expanded at an ■"ormous
MR. J. H. STOREY,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1889-90-91-95-96.
rate throughout the Colony. The far in-
terior was brought into requisition for stock-
ing, and the results obtained convinced
people that the land which seemed all desert
or dreary plains covered with monotonous
salt-bush, was in reality most fattening pas-
ture. Energy and perseverance carried the
industry all over the Colony. Many for-
tunes were dissipated, and many lives lost in
carrying on the work, but still the great pas-
toral interest progressed, and the temporary
shrinkage, which eventuated as a result of
popular attention being attracted to the gold
MR. H. C. FRASER,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1891-92.
fields, was quickly overtaken. In 1861, there
were, in New South Wales, over five and a
half million sheep, which, in 1871, were in-
creased to over sixteen millions. In the lab
ter year the amount of wool exported from
New South Wales was sixty-five million lbs.,
valued at £4,748,000. In 1881 the number
of sheep had risen to over thirty-six millions,
while the wool exported reached 139,600,000
lbs., valued at £7,149,000. The years 1883-
84, especially the latter, were bad ones for
the sheep farmers, and the horrors of that
drought-stricken period were almost too dis-
astrous to contemplate. Notwithstanding
this visitation, which resulted in the loss of
over eight million sheep, the recuperative
energy of the industry was such that, on the
completion of the decade in 1891, the num-
ber of sheep in the Colony totalled close upon
sixty-two millions, while the export of wool
exceeded 340,691,382 lbs., valued at
£11,312,980. Since then the pastoral indus-
try has experienced seasons of prosperity and
adversity. Unfortunately, the . more recent
years have been marred by a calamitous
drought, which has had the effect of greatly
depleting the flocks and herds of the State.
The reduction in the number of sheep has, of
course, led to a considerable diminution in
the export of wool, but this loss is minimised,
to some extent at least, by the general im-
provement that has taken place in price in
London and elsewhere. This increase in
market figures does not adequately compen-
sate for the loss in the quantity of wool for
export, yet, nevertheless, it is most welcome
as a counterbalancing influence, and as a
token of hope for better prospects in the fut-
ture.
Up till very recent years the bulk of the
wool grown in the State was shipped to Lon-
don and disposed of at the London Wool
Sales, which enjoyed a world-wide reputation.
When the clip is so shipped it is usual for the
banks or other financial institutions to take
charge of the shipment, after making suit-
able advances against its sale. By
this means the grower or shipper
has not now to wait the inconsider-
ately long periods that were formerly the
rule before he obtained a financial return
for his labour. The establishment of wool
sales in Sydney has been found to be a great
advantage, as British and foreign wool fac-
tors and manufacturers find that, by purchas-
ing locally, they are able to escape several
heavy charges not otherwise avoidable. Large
quantities of New South Wales wool is now
shipped direct to Germany, France, Belgium,
and America, and the question of the import
of Australian wool is one that has already
had some consideration at the hands of for-
eign fiscalists. When the Australian Com-
monwealth comes to deal with questions of
reciprocal and preferential duties in re-
lation to foreign countries, the questions
of wool import will form the pivot on which
Australian, and especially New South Wales
interests will turn.
CATTLE AND HORSES.
In New South Wales cattle breeding is se-
condary to that of sheep, a number of circum-
stances conducing to that result. In 1881
the Colony was at its zenith in cattle pro-
duction, when there were estimated to be
2,597,348 head here. During subsequent
years the numbers declined until, in 1899,
there were under two million head, to be pro :
cise, 1,967,081.


Horse raising in New South Wales has been
steadily prosecuted for years, although ob-
stacles have at times been encountered which
did not encourage the best results. The cli-
mate and herbage of the country lands are
eminently suitable for horses, and, where
proper attention is paid to the canons of
breeding, an excellent class of animal has
been produced. The Indian market pro-
vided New South Wales with a first-class out-
let for its surplus product, and, latterly, the
demand for army remounts has drained the
local supply to a considerable extent. Gener-
ally speaking, the breeding of saddle and light
harness horses is most popular, but a fair
amount of attention is paid to the draught
class, especially for farm and station work.
On the whole, it may be said that thought is
now being directed towards improving the
breeds by the introduction of superior stud
MR. J. INGLIS,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1892-93-94.
horses, and a careful selection of breeding
mares. In 1902 there were computed to be
450,050 horses in the Colony, of an estimated
value of £3,500,000.
MEAT EXPORT.
The question of the profitable disposal of
the surplus live stock of the Colony was al-
ways a vexed one until the principle of chill-
ing and refrigeration became capable of suc-
cessful manipulation. Now that the trade
with Britain in Australian frozen beef and
mutton has been satisfactorily established,
immense frozen cargoes leave Sydney at in-
tervals. This business was practically com-
menced in 1881, when 9980 cwt. of chilled
meat, valued at £8,554, left Sydney. Year
by year, the trade went on expanding, until
in 1901, the export figures stood at 513,993
cwt. of frozen beef and mutton, valued at
£585,715. Preserved meats, which form no
inconsiderable item among the exports of
New South Wales, have also increased during
recent years, and in 1902 no less than
13,379,176 lbs., valued at £280,908, were sent
away.
DAIRYING.
Dairy farming in New South Wales has,
during recent years, made gigantic strides,
mainly owing to the introduction of the sep-
arator system, the extension of butter fac-
tories, and the opening up of oversea markets
for the surplus product. At the present time
the industry is in a very prosperous state, and
its future is decidedlv hopeful, as New South
Wales has immense areas of rich country, im-
mune from drought, admirably adapted for
dairy farming. Cheese has not yet entered
the lists as an export article, but from it good
returns are obtained by the makers on the
local markets.
Swine breeding may be classed as a cognate
branch of dairying, but, for some unexplained
reason, this State does not prosecute this pro-
fitable adjunct to farming with the vigour
that might be expected, and, consequently,
the cured product, ham, bacon, lard, and salt
pork, do not figure amongst the exports from
New South Wales.
Agriculture.
The first attempts at Agriculture in New
South Wales were of course made by Captain
Phillip, who, soon after forming the settle-
ment of Sydney, tried to cultivate grain crops
for the sustenance of the Colony, but with
unsuccessful results. In the following year
a settler named James Ruse, having obtained
a grant of land, started farming operations on
the upper reaches of the Parramatta River,
where the first harvest in New South Wales
was garnered. The Government farm at
Rosehill proved a success, and land in the
vicinity of Parramatta quickly began to be
taken up, cleared, and planted, until, by the
end of 1792, there were nearly 2000 acres
under cultivation, and in 1797 the first wind-
mill was erected in Sydney. A short time
afterwards some of the rich arable flats of
the Hawkesbury were laid under tribute, and
excellent crops resulted.
By the end of 1799, the area of land under
the plough in the Sydney, Parramatta and
Hawkesbury districts was computed at 4392
acres of wheat, and 1436 acres of maize. In
1803, rust first appeared in the local wheat
crops, and caused not only great loss, but so
depleted the prospective supply that the Col-
ony was apprehensive of a famine, but, during
the ensuing two seasons, good crops were har-
vested and prospects brightened.
The early attempts at agriculture were sub-
ject to great vicissitudes, chiefly owing to
climatic vagaries, and ignorance on the part
of the farmers, but, as time went on, the
settlers began to obtain a better acquaintance
with their suroundings, and, new areas of
good country being opened up, agriculture
began to grow apace. In 1824 the Colony
was favoured with a phenomenal harvest, and
so abundant were the supplies coming to hand
that in one day the price of wheat fell from
255. to 10s. per bushel. Four years later, ow-
ing to a long continued drought, the crops
failed, and the price of cereals was forced up
to an abnormal figure. During the three pre-
ceding years, a mania for cattle farming had
taken possession of the people, and agricul-
ture was forgotten, so that ,when the drought
came along, it found the Colony absolutely
unprepared to meet a time of scarcity, and
the Government was forced to import largely
to avoid a famine. These lean years were
followed by good seasons, and large areas
along the Hawkesbury and the Nepean were
cropped for grain. The discovery of the
Bathurst Plains, and the magnificent country
of which Goulburn is now the centre, opened
up great possibilities for agriculture, and, as
population increased in those districts, culti-
MR. T. H. KEIGWIN,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1894-95.
vation was resorted to in order to supply local
wants. From a very early period the fertile
alluvium of the Hunter River Valley had
been recognised as affording opportunities for
the agriculturalist, and, certainly, the san-
guine anticipations indulged in with regard
to that part of the country have not been
thwarted.
In 1818 a settlement was formed at what is
now Maitland by eleven well-behaved con-
victs, who were allowed land to cultivate, and,
in the same year, a few other convicts were
located on a rich pocket on the Paterson
River, near where the town of Morpeth is
now built. The productiveness of the Mait-
land and Paterson Districts was demon-
strated on many occasions during the early
days, and, although the Hawkesbury District
was awarded the title of the “ Granary of
New South Wales,” yet it was upon the rich
surplusage of the Hunter District that the
Colony had, on more than one occasion, to
roly, in order to pull it clear of a famine. As
the country became opened up, and railways
into the interior cheapened the cost of trans


port, large areas in the north-west and in
Riverina were reclaimed from being sheep
walks, and placed under grain, with excellent
results.
Within the confines of New South Wales a
great diversity of natural conditions prevail,
which afford wholesome stimuli to the devel-
opment of agriculture. Except in some of
the inaccessible mountain districts, and por-
tions of the furthest western localities, the
soil of the whole of New South Wales may be
said to be susceptible to cultivation. The
results that have been attained so far in re-
gard to the fertility of the soil generally, have
been such as to justify the assumption that
the country is eminently suitable for agricul-
ture. It is true that there is a lack of uni-
formity in the seasons, and, at some periods,
there is a diminished rainfall in different por-
tions of the State, hut these are conditions
that will doubtless alter very materially as
the country becomes more settled. In these
respects, New South Wales cannot be said to
differ very much from other countries, as all
are subject to meteorological fluctuations,
which cause an alternation of good and bad
times to the husbandman. New South Wales
has an area of 198,848,000 acres, and it would
be irrational to suppose that over this im-
mense area there was no room for the play of
barometric oscillation. The exact opposite
is indeed the case, as the three great divisions
of the State, Eastern, Central and Western,
each exhibit great variations in respect to
seasonal influences and conditions, so that,
while one portion may be undergoing a spell
of dryness, another is receiving copious rains,
while a third is revelling in the results of an
abundant harvest. It is this physical diver-
sity which no doubt forms a bulwark of the
State’s prosperity, a fact that probably will
be more clearly recognised as settlement in-
creases, and the agriculturalist become “ au
fait” with the varying circumstances of his
environment.
Up to the present, agriculture has never
been pursued with the zeal which might have
been expected. The reason for this is not far
to seek, as New South Wales has always been
essentially a stock-raising country. Never-
theless, during the past ten years, marked
progress has been made in cultivation. In
1893 there were 1,010,727 acres under crop,
while in 1901 the area had increased to
2,445,564 acres. This gratifying extension
has been largely contributed to by the plac-
ing under wheat of several large estates that
formerly were devoted to grazing, and to the
“ metoyer” or share system of cultivating.
The unsurpassed productiveness of land in
this State is exemplified by the large yields
almost invariably obtained, which, on the
whole, exceed those of any other State. Ag-
riculture, like every other form of industry,
established in a young country, has, meta-
phorically, had to fight its way up to its pre-
sent stage against insurmountable obstacles,
not the least being lack of rapid communica-
tion with the markets. The extensive rami-
fications of the railway system is now, how-
ever, minimizing, and, in time, will annihilate
this difficulty.
Of all the agricultural produce, harvested
in New South Wales, wheat has for years
headed the list in respect to value, that for
1901 being estimated at £2,051,297, for a
yield of 16,173,771 bushels, which, in propor-
tion to the area under crop, gave an average
return of 10.56 bushels per acre. Taking the
whole period from 1871 to 1901 (thirty years)
the average annual yield was 11.39 bushels
per acre. The highest average was in 1887,
when 17.37 bushels per acre were recorded,
and the lowest in 1889, when the yield
showed 4.75 bushels per acre. The prospects
of wheat growing in this State are improv-
ing in a highly satisfactory degree, and
growers are beginning to devote more atten-
MR. A. W. MEEKS,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1896-97-98.
tion to improving the yield as well as to in-
creasing the acreage. The results shown at
the experimental farms has stimulated a
healthy tone amongst wheat farmers, and
with fair seasons the wheat harvest during
the next few years will show strong progres-
sive advances.
MAIZE.
The cultivation of maize has long been the
mainstay of the farmers located on the allu-
vial flats and fertile valleys of the Coastal
rivers, where the moist soil and humid cli-
mate are eminently suited for the growth of
this nutritious cereal. Attempts to grow
maize have been made in the interior districts,
but, owing to climatic conditions, only with
qualified success. The coast districts north
of Sydney are the most prolific maize areas,
the average yield from which in 1901 amount-
ed to about 34 bushels per acre. The South
Coast District is a contributor to the extent
of about 10 per cent, of the total yield. The
1901 crop was estimated at £839,032.
OATS.
Oats, as a staple crop, have been somewhat
neglected, but there is a strong probability
that, in the future, they will receive more
attention, as their cultivation gives a satis-
factory return. Being essentially a cold climate
product, it thrives best in those locations
where the winter is severe. For this reason,
the plateaus of the interior provide the bulk
of the crop. During the decennial period
ending 1901 the average yield per acre was
19.6 bushels, and during the last year of the
' decade the production was valued at £59,355.
OTHER CROPS.
Hay forms an important factor in the
State’s produce, the value of the 1901 har-
vest being set down at £1,515,574. Sugar
cane, of which the Clarence, Richmond, and
Tweed River districts are the habitat in New
South Wales, is becoming a diminishing quan-
, tity, chiefly owing to the fact that, notwith-
standing the aptitude of the country for cane,
farmers find dairying a more remunerative
occupation. The value of the output for 1901
) was calculated at £143,861. For the same
f year the value of the fruit crops, including
citrus, was £410,155. The value of the agri-
cultural industry to the State is shown by
the value of the produce harvested in 1901,
which was computed at £5,955,674. Before
concluding this section the importance of viti-
culture demands some reference. It has been
abundantly proved that the vine flourishes
amazingly in almost every portion of the
State, and bears enormous crops of fruit,
equal in size, appearance and flavour to the
product of the best renowned vine-growing
centres in Europe. The wine-making indus-
try in New South Wales has experienced
many vicissitudes, but it has managed to forge
its way into a strong position solely by reason
of its merit. At the Bordeaux Exhibition,
where the tests were extremely severe, the
judges considered some of the New South
Wales wines worthy of a place in the cate-
gory of Grand Vins. At the Chicago Exposi-
tion, also, the excellence of the Colonial vin-
tage was pronounced to be on a par with that
of the best wine exhibits from Southern
Europe. Of recent years, especially since the
advent of Federation, vigorous steps have
been taken by the leading vignerons to push
their wines into greater public prominence on
the local markets, while, at the same time,
endeavours are being made to give it a hold
on the British markets. The industry is one
that requires careful nursing, and also very
judicious methods of marketing and, as these
facts are being better understood, grape
growing and wine making is beginning to
win its way to a greater degree of public ap-
preciation. The future now looms up bright
and encouraging.


Mining.
The mining industry is one that has exert-
ed a wonderful influence over the develop-
ment of New South Wales as well as of Aus-
tralasia. Indeed, it would he difficult to
imagine the condition of this Continent to-
day had its mineral wealth remained undis-
covered. It is, however, tolerably certain
that, had this potential agent been non-exist-
ent or lain dormant indefinitely, colonial pro-
gress would not have been so rapid or satis-
factory. The gold discoveries of the early
fifties effected an extraordinary change, and
transformed the Colony from a sheep-walk in-
to an enterprising and progressive commun-
ity. possessing a multiplicity of interests that
could only be maintained by a country rich
in the diversity of its productions. There-
fore, it can be said that the advent of
gold mining divides the history of the indus-,.
trial development of New South Wales into
two periods, the main characteristics of which
are absolutely dissimilar.. Prion to that mo-
mentous event, the country seemed destined
to remain a pastoral region, as the isolation
of the Colony from the populous centres of
the Old World, and the paucity of its inhabi-
tants militated against the development of
agriculture, and gave encouragement only to
those forms of industry for the advancement
of which a local market was available. Un-
der such circumstances the progress of the
Colony had been somewhat slow, and the
methods adopted by the authorities during
the thirties and forties to force growth and
expansion, terminated in an aftermath of
depression. Settlers had been attracted here
in large numbers, mainly owing to the gen-
erous alienation of public lands, but, when
the bubble burst in 1843, great numbers
were stranded, if not irretrievably ruined.
The prospect before the Colony certainly was
not an inviting one, and it was not surpris-
ing that the Jeremiahs of that time set up
a chorus of lamentation that the bottom had
fallen out of the country. Subsequent events,
however, proved that these “ calamity howl-
ers” had reckoned without their host, for,
with Hargreave’s discovery of gold at Lewis
Ponds Creek in 1851, the industrial pendu-
lum began a fresh oscillation in the direc-
tion of prosperity. The next few years wit-
nessed an exhibition of topsy-turveydom that
could not fail to ultimately prove of advan-
tage to a country so lavishly endowed with
the potentialities of wealth and greatness as
New South Wales.
The rich discoveries of gold attracted thou-
sands of immigrants to these shores, and,
when the “palmy days” of the diggings de-
clined, the Colony found itself opulent with
a population, energetic, reliant and imbued
with a strong belief in the future of the vast
and resourceful heritage to which they had
become the heirs. The impetus thus given
to settlement was felt throughout the whole
territory, and resulted in the opening up to
productive account of those diversified ele-
ments which constitute the wealth of New
South Wales.
GOLD.
Although gold was the metal which un-
d"v. I 'tedly made this country what it is, yet
it seems a strange irony that, to-day, its ra-
tio of importance is overshadowed by other
constituents of productive wealth. Among
minerals, it has to yield to both coal and sil-
ver, while, alongside that of pastoral, agricul-
tural and dairy produce, the value of its out-
put loses in the comparison. Gold, never-
theless, still figures conspicuously in the list
of New South Wales minerals. In the early
days, the metal was obtained chiefly from al-
luvial, which was easily worked and did not
necessitate the employment of costly plant.
The alluvial areas were, however, never of
very large extent, and, consequently,
were soon worked out. It is, however, the
opinion of experts that these alluvial spots
are simply the surface indications of the vast
wealth under the surface still undiscovered.
It has been ascertained that a very large
area of the State is auriferous, but, up to the
present, comparatively little has been done
to prove its value. Although gold is gener-
ally found in quartz veins, it is familiarly
associated with the older metamorphic rocks,
also with iron and copper pyrites, and in
galena and silver ores. The extraction of
MR. J. S. BRUNTON,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1898-99.
gold from its matrix is usually an expen-
sive process, requiring intricate machinery to
deal with the refractory elements. With the
lessening of the cost of extraction it is prob-
able that many of the fields now abandoned
could be again worked with highly payable
results. Along the coast both north and
south of Sydney, gold has been found in the
beach sand, and this form of mining gives
employment to several hundred men. The
introduction of the systems of sluicing and
dredging has revived interest in many dis-
tricts where the streams, watercourses, and
other wet locations are known to contain an
auriferous deposit. The principal quartz-
mining centres are at Adelong, Armidale,
Bathurst, Hill End, Orange, Parkes and Wya-
long, while at Cobar the gold is largely asso-
ciated with copper. The gold found in this
country is never of absolute purity, as it al-
ways contains traces of other metals, and of-
ten boasts a fair percentage of silver, to the
presence of which the light shade in the gold
is due. From 1851, when the noble metal
was first discovered, till 1901, the amount
raised in New South Wales amounted to
13,475,633 ounces, of the value of
£49,661,815. The heaviest yields were re-
covered in 1852 and 1862, when the
respective amounts were 818,751 ozs.,
valued at £2,660,946 and 640,622,
valued at £2,467,780. During the
past few years commendable enterprise has
been shown in opening up quartz reefs, and
in resuming work on old claims that had been
abandoned under the impression that the ex-
haustion of the surface gold had depleted the
whole. Deep sinking has also been resorted
to on many of the more extensive fields, and,
as in many cases the expenditure has been
justified by the results, quartz mining is
rapidly coming to the front as a permanent
industry. The Government fully recognise
the value of arousing enterprise in this di-
rection, and, with the object of encouraging
mine owners and others to test the reefs at
greater depths than are now worked, a re-
ward of £2OOO has been offered for the dis-
covery of payable quartz at a depth of 1500
feet, the amount to be increased to £3OOO
when a depth of 2000 feet has been touched.
The value of the machinery engaged in
gold mining is reckoned out at £975,177, of
which £150,788 has been spent on dredging
plant. Of the entire amount of gold raised
in Australasia during the 49 years ending
in 1901, valued at £443,550,310, New South
Wales has raised 11 per cent. The immense
area in the State over which gold has been
traced, and the comparatively small amount
of development work that has been carried
out, leads those acquainted with the mining
industry to the belief that, when the country
is better ptospected, and the disposition of
the auriferous deposits better understood, a
new and highly profitable era for gold min-
ing will dawn in New South Wales. It is
freely conceded that, while there may not
be many of those subterranean coruscations,
colloquially termed “ jeweller’s shops,” in
this country, there are numerous rich reefs
and highly valuable deposits patiently await-
ing the advent of capital and energy to con-
vert them into hard cash.
SILVER.
New South Wales is justly entitled to the
distinction of the Silver State, because of
the enormous amount of that metal which has
been produced here during the past twenty
years. Silver is found in varying quantities
throughout the State, and is associated chief-
ly with lead and copper ores. Rich discov-
eries of argentiferous ore have been made in
the New England and Bathurst districts, also
on the Barrier Range on the Western con-
fines of the State. The Broken Hill field was
discovered in 1883, and has since developed
into one of the biggest silver producing cen-
tres of the world. It covers 2500 miles of
country, and the principal lode, which varies
in width from 10 to 200 feet, may be traced
for several miles. The phenomenal richness
of the field is attested by the gigantic busi-
ness of the leading mine, which, from 1885 to
1901, mined silver and lead ores which were
valued on the Loudon market at £23,131,330,
and paid in dividends and bonuses close upon
£8,000,000. The aggregate output from the
Broken Hill district up to the present ap-
proximates in value to close upon
£30,000,000. The value of silver and lead
ore exported from the State up till the end of
1901 totalled £32,341,577. * The serious de-
preciation in the price of silver and lead dqr


ing the past decade has had a pernicious
effect upon the silver mining industry, and
has caused the closing down of all but the
principal mines, but any subsequent recovery
in price will probably bring about a re-open-
ing of many mines not only on the Barrier,
but also in various other parts of the State.
TIN.
Both lode and stream tin are plentiful in
the State, and the amount of stanniferous
wealth won in New South Wales has been
such as to place this industry fourth in the
list reflecting the value of minerals raised
here, as its total market worth has been ex-
ceeded only by gold, silver and coal. The
value of the aggregate output up to the end
of 1901 is estimated at £6,583,494. The in-
dustry dates from 1872, and the years 1881
and 1882 were the most prolific. The fluc-
tuations in the price of the metal have had
their corresponding effect upon the output,
but at the present time, the satisfactory price,
combined with a more seasonable rainfall,
has imparted a wholesome stimulus to the in-
dustry which, in the future, must take more
cognisance of the deep deposits and lodes, as
nearly all the accessible shallow stream tin
deposits have been worked out. Prominent
geologists have expressed the opinion that
innumerable deep channels or leads of tin are
still lying undisturbed under regions of ba-
salt, and that it only requires money and
brains to unearth them and convert them in-
to profit-making concerns.
COPPER.
Next to tin, mining for copper has con-
tributed to the general development of the
natural wealth of New South Wales, but,
like both silver and tin, the prosperity of
the industry has been interfered with by the
repeated falls in the market price of the
metal, while the great distance of the prin-
cipal cuprite centres from the port, necessi-
tating heavy freight charges, has been a fac-
tor that to some extent has had a retarding
influence. The real copper area of New South'
AVales lies between the Bogan, Lachlan and
Darling Rivers. Cobar being practically the
centre. Here is situated the Great Cobar
Mine, one of the richest and most wonderful
of its kind in the world. The copper, taken
from this property, contains both gold and
silver in association with the cuprite, and
the system of treatment of the ore, adapted
at the smelters, extracts a percentage of gold
more than sufficient to pay all expenses of
mining and treatment. The copper output
reached its greatest figure in 1883, when it
was valued at £472,982. It gradually de-
clined, principally owing to depreciation
in prices, to £63,617, in 1894, but since that
year it has been steadily on the up grade.
Cheaper and more efficient methods of work-
ing have contributed chiefly to this result,
although a rise in price, owing to a strong
demand for copper setting in as the result of
the extraordinary developments in electrical
science, has helped to instil fresh energy and
life into the industry. In 1901 the value of
the annual output was £430,824, while the
aggregate value of the output up to the end
of that year was £5,875,605,
IRON.
This metal is found in various forms, dif-
fused throughout the country, and extensive
deposits of the most valuable kinds of ore are
known to exist, many of the samples showing
MR. A. P. ROBINSON,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1899-1900.
metallic iron up to 60 and 70 per cent. Na-
ture, apparently wishing to assist man in
developing the iron industry in New South
Wales, has, in most instances, placed the iron
deposits alongside of immense limestone and
coal areas, thus not only providing large
bodies of ore, but, at the same time, furnish-
ing an admirable flux in the limestone, and
abundance of coal for smelting. Some of
these ores compare well with the best Ameri-
can for making steel. As early as 1852, iron
works were established near Mittagong,
where limonite in quantity existed, but, after
operations of an intermittent character had
been carried on, the undertaking turned out
unprofitably, and the works closed down.
About ten years afterwards, a fresh start was
made at the Mittagong works, when a quan-
tity of iron bridge work and piping was
moulded direct from the smelted ore, without
undergoing the pig iron process. The fu-
ture of the industry assumed a roseate com-
plection in 1875, when a strong Company took
MR. J. RUSSELL FRENCH,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1900-1901.
over the works, but this flash of prospective
prosperity proved illusive, and turned out to
be only the hectic colour denoting impending
d’ssolution, as the Company, after producing
a few thousand tons of pig iron, discontinued
operations.
Some years ago iron smelting works wore
erected at Eskbank, where, for some time,
hematite and other iron ores were treated,
but, after some 22,000 tons of pig iron had
been made, this branch of the iron master’s
business was abandoned. The works were
subsequently converted into rolling mills,
where large quantities of scrap iron are suc-
cessfully re-rolled and turned into marketable
lines. At these works a Siemens’ steel fur-
nace has been placed in commission, and
steel now forms an item in the output of
the Eskbank factory. Of recent years sev-
eral attempts have been made to put the iron
industry on a satisfactory basis, but circum
stances of a political, rather than an econo-
mic kind, have always intervened, and mili-
tated against the successful inauguration of
the enterprise.
Propositions for the establishment of works
have been made, and numbers of surveys and
tests have been carried out to ascertain the
value and extent of the deposits, but so far
the only work for which the rich iron de-
posits of this*"State are utilised, is as a flux
for the various mineral ores treated at Dapto
and Cockle Creek smelters, and as a gas-pur-
ifying agent at the gas works throughout the
Commonwealth.
A proposition to establish works on an ex-
tensive scale within this State is again in the
air, and there seems little or no doubt that
the industry could be made a highly remuner-
ative one. Besides providing a unique and
powerful agent in developing the resources of
the country, it would, at the same time, create
an extensive market for labour. The propo-
sition, however, is being shuttlecocked about
in the political arena (Federal and State) in
such a manner that it is feared it will emerge
so emasculated and battered as to have no
hope of life.
Still the fact remains that the supply of
iron ore in New South Wales is practically
inexhaustible, but it requires brains, wedded
to enterprise, to convert this huge stock of
mineral into a national asset in the com-
mercial sense. *
COAL.
Coal bulks up largely in the mineral
wealth of the parent State, both on account
of its superior composition, which enhances
its value, and the fact of the enormous extent
of the deposits renders it, to all
present intents and purposes, inexhaust-
ible. The carboniferous areas cover
24,000 square miles, but the area
wherein coal can profitably be mined
is set down at about two-thirds of the
above, or, roughly, 16,000 square miles, which
are estimated to contain several hundred
thousand million tons. The chief centres of
the coal industry are at Newcastle and the
Hunter River District in the North, the
Illawarra District in the South, and the Lith-
gow district in the West. The existence of
coal has also been proved at many other
places, and at some is successfully worked.
An attempt to prove that the Illawarra Coal
measures existed under Sydney Harbour,
brought to light the existence of a seam of
good steam coal 10 feet 3 inches in thickness,
at a depth of 2929 feet below the surface.
A strong Company has since been formed in


London to work this mine, which, from its
proximity to the metropolis, and the ship-
ping, is considered by those who ought to
know to have a splendid future. The de-
velopment of this gigantic industry might be
said to be coeval with that of the State, as
the prosperity of the latter has always been,
to a great extent, dependent upon the former.
The Northern, or Hunter River district, is
the principal centre of the coal industry,
where the number of collieries under official
inspection is over seventy, giving employ-
ment to close upon ten thousand men and
boys, the value of the output amounting to
nearly one and a half million sterling.
Coal was first discovered in this district by’
Lieutenant Shortland, on the present site of
Newcastle, near the mouth of the Hunter, in
1797, but it was not until 1826 that mining
operations began in earnest. In that year
the Australian Agricultural Company ob-
tained a huge grant of land, with the right
to work the coal seams. The Company
opened up several mines on the property, but
their operations were conducted on primitive
methods and on a small scale, and it was not
until the Company’s monopoly ran out that
the industry began to forge ahead, and since
then the progress has been very rapid.
In the Southern district there are just un-
der a score of collieries in active operation,
giving employment to between 2500 and 3000
hands. The product of this district, which is
mined chiefly on the adit system, has achieved
a high reputation for steaming purposes, and
consequently it is in great demand for bunker-
ing. Of late years the demand for Southern
coal has greatly increased, and large ocean
steamers now bunker from South Coast col-
liers. Doubtless, when better protection is
afforded to shipping by the construction of an
artificial harbour at Port Kembla, the trade
will show still greater improvement. Dur-
ing the decennial period ending in 1900, the
output rose from 837,873 tons to 1,265,053
tons —a very substantial increase indeed.
In the Western district there are 21 mines
officially inspected, but, as they are much
smaller and more economically worked than
those on the Coast, the number of hands em-
ployed is not in the same proportion, there
being less than 600 men engaged—while the
average quantity of coal raised per miner is
much greater in the West than elsewhere.
The seams of coal are thicker, and the mineral
is more friable than in the Northern and
Southern Collieries.
The Western Collieries, by reason of their
geographical position, have practically a mon-
opoly of the western portion of the State, and
they are also able to enter into competition
with the other collieries, at Sydney. Under
these circumstances it is not surprising that
the Western coal trade has, during the past-
few years, increased at a great rate, despite
hindrances incidental to a young industry
of this kind. These Western collieries are
situated in close propinquity to some of the
richest iron deposits of the State, and, if the
iron industry gets a proper foothold in the
near future* and there is no reason why it
should not, then these mines will have an
enormous call put upon their almost un-
limited resources.
In 1847, the output of coal amounted to
the meagre total of 40,732 tons, valued at
£13,750. A comparison of these humble
figures with those for 1901—a record year —
which showed an output of 5,968,426 tons,
valued at £2,178,929, will convey some idea
of the enormous strides made during the past
half century. The total quantity of “ black
diamonds” unearthed in the State is estimated
at over one hundred million tons, valued at
more than forty millions sterling.
The number of coal mines under inspection
in this State exceed 100, the majority
of which are undertakings in which a large
amount of capital has been expended, and
which, in return, provide handsome divi-
dends to the fortunate shareholders, besides
giving remunerative employment to a large
army of workers, whose periodic wages, in-
variably spent in the district where they are
earned, maintain a community of traders
and artisans. The coal mines of the State
give employment to close upon fifteen thou-
sand persons, over two-thirds of whom are
engaged underground. The industry is one
that on the whole is peculiarly liable to dis-
turbance, owing to the fluctuation in the de-
mand from outside markets, and the compe-
MR. E. H. ROGERS,
President Chamber of Commerce, 1901-02.
tition of foreign coal owners, who, in their
eagerness to invade the market and secure
orders, resort to every device to anticipate
the New South Wales coal. Internal dissen-
tion in the past has given rise to strikes and
lockouts, which have resulted in much tem-
porary injury to the trade, but, thanks to an
Arbitration Court now constituted by law,
these internecine disputes may be regarded as
things of the past. The excellent quality of
New South Wales coal, and its freedom from
dangerous gases, renders it particularly valu-
able for export, while the facilities for quick
and inexpensive shipment that exist at New-
castle, Sydney and the Southern coal ports is
an advantage which greatly assists shippers.
In addition to the enormous amount of coal
exported to all parts of the world, local con-
sumption is now responsible for the absorp-
tion of a very considerable quantity, the large
smelting works at Dapto, Cockle Creek, and
Lithgow being amongst the chief consumers.
. Although Victoria, Queensland, and West-
ern Australia have coal deposits that are
worked, no great headway seems to have been
attained, notwithstanding the political in-
fluences that have been exerted to buttress
them, and New South Wales coal, both in re-
gard to quality and price, is able to beat its
interstate rivals on their own. ground. The
future of the coal industry in this State is
decidedly reassuring, as most of the collieries
have more orders ahead than they can con-
veniently execute. In the Northern, South-
ern, and Western coal areas, during the past
few months, fresh ground has been broken,
and several new mines are coming to the
front as prolific producers of first-class coal.
The manufacture of coke being a cognate
branch of the coal industry, it is feasible to
expect that local enterprise would take this
in hand. At Bellambi, on the South Coast,
the Broken Hill Proprietarv Company has a
large number of ovens in operation, from
which it supplies the Company’s smelters
at Port Pirie, in South Australia. The
Mount Lyell Copper Mining Co. has also a
lot of ovens in operation at Bellambi, where
there are also another half-dozen coke-
making plants in active and profitable opera-
tion, producing an annual output valued at
considerably over half a million sterling.
Kerosene shale is found in different parts
of the State, and is worked to advantage at
Joadja, in the South, and Hartley Yale, in
the West, where oil and other products are
extracted. Of recent years the more efficient
and economic methods of treating this ore
have opened up new possibilities for the in-
dustry in this State.
In addition to the foregoing, New South
Wales has been proved to be rich in other
economic minerals, such as Antimony, Bis-
muth, Chromium, Cobalt, Manganese, Mer-
cury, Platinum, Wolfram, Zinc; also in pig-
mentary and fictile deposits.
Amongst other minerals of a commercial
value, found in abundance in the State, may
be enumerated Mica, Asbestos, Marble of
splendid quality and almost infinite variety.
Granites, Trachytes, Limestone and Sand-
stone, the last named being of pleasing warm
colour, with a fine grain, which lends itself
readily to architectural effect, and is conse-
quently much availed of for building pur-
poses in Sydney.
As a gem producer New South Wales has
already given evidence if its value in this
rosnect. Diamonds have been found in vari-
ous places in the State, but prospecting work
has been onlv of a desultory character. At
Bingara, in the North West, an attempt has
been made to follow up diamond mining in a
systematic fashion, but many hindrances,
principally the scarcity of water, have im-
peded operations of late. The New South
Wales diamond, although rarely very large,
is credited ..with being harder and much
whiter than those from South Africa, and on
a par with the best Brazilian.
Opal occupies a foremost place amongst the
precious stones of this State. The finest quality
opal known comes from the White Cliffs
field, near Wilcannia, in the Far West, which
it is calculated has produced nearly one mil-
lion pounds worth of stone.
The sapphire, emerald, ruby, garnet, chry-
solite, topaz, amethyst, cairngorm, and
onyx are also found, but no methodical
system has yet been resorted to in order to
discover to what extent they exist, although
old prospectors are sanguine that most of
them are present in highly pavable quan-
tities,


The Sydney
Chamber of Commerce.
Its History and Development.
The Sydney Chamber of Commerce may
fairly claim to be classed amongst the oldest
representative institutions of New South
Wales. Away back in the dim past of colonial
history, it was a force in the community, and
in 1826 its members presented an address to
Sir Ralph Darling, the seventh Governor of
New South Wales, on his arriving in Sydney
to enter upon his duties. It is, however, dur-
ing the last half century that the Chamber of
Commerce has exercised its power as an agency
for the benefit and improvement of commer-
cial matters generally. It came into active
existence in 1851, a momentous year for the
colony, as the gold discoveries of that time
completely changed the whole tenor of mer-
cantile life in the country, and brought about
a condition of affairs that operated most
beneficially on the future of this country.
In the oldest minute book of the Chamber
are to be found many items of an interesting
nature, but unfortunately, like most records
of an analogous character, the minutes some-
times refer in exasperatingly brief and concise
terms to matters apparently of more than
passing interest. Nevertheless, the records,
whatever their defects, afford at the present
day the only clue that can be obtained as to
the doings of those who, in their time, wit-
nessed a metamorphosis of commercial and
mercantile enterprise in the mother colony.
On the 29th of March, 1851, a meeting of the
merchants of Sydney was held to consider the
expediency of establishing a Chamber of Com-
merce in Sydney. The merchants who for-
gathered on that memorable occasion were
strongly imbued with the idea that the coun-
try was progressing rapidly, and that an as-
sociation to conserve and advance the commer-
cial interests of the city was required. At the
initial meeting, a Provisional Committee was
formed, and, as the result of their labours, the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce became an ac-
complished fact on the Ist of August, 1851.
The original rules of the Chamber were
printed on parchment, and were signed by J.
Walker, Chairman of the first meeting held
in Sam Lyons’ auction rooms at the corner of
what is now George and Margaret S r roots
Following the name of the Chairman, came
those of twenty-eight of the leading merchants
of the metropolis, but it is very doubtful if
any of those who took part in that meeting
still survive. The records show that at the
initial meeting no less than fifty-three mem-
bers were enrolled, a circumstance which, con-
sidering the size of the city in those days, is
eloquent of the enthusiasm that must have
been breathed into the movement. Represen-
tatives of the following firms which still exist
to-day, and occupy a conspicuous place in the
commercial life of the Commonwealth, were
amongst the first members of the Chamber: —
J. S. Willis and W. S. Merry (Messrs. T. and
W. Willis), W. Ranken Scott and James Hen-
derson (Messrs. Scott, Henderson and Co.), J.
R. Young (Messrs. Paterson, Laing and
Bruce, late Messrs. Young and Lark), John
Fairfax (Messrs. John Fairfax and Sons), R.
T. Ford (Messrs. Ford, Adams and Co.), J. B.
Metcalfe (Messrs. Wall and Molesworth),
Robert Towns (Messrs. R. Towns and Co.),
David Jones (Messrs. D. Jones and Co.), Ed-
MR. J. BARRE JOHNSTON,
President Sydney Chamber of Commerce, 1902-03.
ward Knox (Colonial Sugar Co.), T. S. Mort
(Messrs. Goldsbrough, Mort and Co.).
The first committee consisted of Messrs.
John Lamb, J. S. Willis, Alexander Campbell,
J. W. Gosling, Edward Knox, John Alex-
ander, T. Whistler Smith, Robert Towns.
George Rees, J. R. Young, M. E. Murnin, John
Walker, Thomas Walker, E. Ebsworth, and
John Mackay. On the 7th of August a meet-
ing was held to elect the principal officers,
when the following gentlemen were appointed
to the most responsible positions in the gift of
the Chamber; Commander John Lamb,
Chairman; John Walker, Deputy Chairman;
J. W. Gosling. Hon. Treasurer; and William
Dawes, Secretary.
Rule No. 2 of the Articles of Association set
forth in most comprehensive language the
raison d’etre of the Chamber; “ That the ob-
jects and duties of the Chamber shall be to re-
ceive and collect information regarding all
public acts or other matters affecting the mer-
cantile or maritime interests of the colony
with a view to the removal of evils,' the redress
MR. H. C. MITCHELL,
Secretary Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
of grievances, and the promotion of the trade
of the colony and the public good, to communi-
cate with authorities and individuals thereon,
and to take such steps in reference thereto as
may appear necessary, and which may be
taken more effectively by such an association;
to receive references on matters of custom or
usage in doubt or dispute, deciding on the
same, and recording the decision made for
future guidance, so as to form by that and
other means a code of practice by which the
transaction of business may be simplified and
facilitated, and finally, when required, to ar-
bitrate between disputants wishing to avoid
litigation and willing to refer to and abide by
the judgment of the Chamber.”
Under such a liberal Charter it is not sur-
prising that the Chamber at once jumped into
a deserving popularity amongst those compris-
ing the commercial community of the day. To
give effect to its important provisions called
for the exercise of untiring energy and inde-
fatigable perseverance on the part of its
officers, and the gratifying measure of success
which crowned their efforts proved that the
best interests of the Chamber had been con-
fided to able and competent heads. Work
seemed to them a pleasure, while the hind-
rance and difficulties which frequently ob-
structed their progress seemed only to give
zest to their enthusiasm, and impel them on
with great determination to overcome every
obstacle and attain the end in view. When,
in retrospection, one considers the commercial
abuses of the period, and the almost Hercu-
lean task the Chamber set itself in the way of
mercantile and maritime reform in the face of
prejudice and prescriptive interests, the won-
der is that it was able to accomplish anything
at all. The conveniences and facilities of to-
day were then unknown, but notwithstanding
these deficiencies, the officers of the Chamber,
backed up by the members, set their shoulders
to the wheel, and by dint of firm resolution
and “ hard pegging,” succeeded in effecting
changes that not only removed the obstacles
which clogged the wheels of progress, but, at
tlie same time, lubricated the whole commer-
cial mechanism, and caused it to work with
greater smoothness, efficiency, and economy.
Amongst those who took an active interest
in the establishment and work of the Chamber
during the period of its infancy were gentle-
men whose names are still fresh in the memory
of the present generation, or who. are still
amongst us occupying prominent positions,
and enjoying high reputations for their pro-
bity and worth, both as business men and as
citizens of the premier city of the Common-
wealth. Such men were Edward Knox, J. L.
Montefiore, S. A. Joseph, M. Metcalfe, J. H.
Storey, Captain Towns, Sir Alexander Stuart,
C. F. Stokes, J. S. Willis, W. C. Willis, George
King, R. J. King, A. C. Daniell, W. R. Scott,
James Henderson, B. Molineaux, Thomas
Littlejohn, A. H. Macfee, Sir William McMil-
lan, Davidson, Nicholl, W. G. Murray, J. H.
Challis, Donald Larnach, Thomas Holt, Sir
Daniel Cooper, Sir Saul Samuel, Sir Stuart
Donaldson, Sir George Dibbs, Sir Henry
Parkes, J. B. Watt, Thomas Buckland, and
others.
A recapitulation of some of the conditions
prevailing when the Chamber came into exist-
ence, together with the efforts put forth by its
members to secure improvement, will doubt-
less arouse interest. In those days the mails
between other parts of the world and Australia
were carried by sailing vessels, and as these
were dependent upon the vagaries of wind and
weather, communication with Europe and


America, and even the intercolonial ports,
was both uncertain and irregular. This was
one of the first matters which the Chamber
took under its cognisance, as the minutes
record that on the 31st of December, 1852,
members congratulated each other with the
following-cheering prospect: “There is no
longer doubt that within a few months the
communication between this city and England
will be regularly established by steam vessels
in seventy days, or probably even a shorter
date.” What would they have said to the pro-
spect of mail communication with Britain in
twenty-eight or thirty days, and telegrao iir
communication within a couple of hours, such
as is now enjoyed, and which by most people
is taken just as a matter of course.
development and expansion generally were a
few of the matters which absorbed the atten-
tion of members during the first few years.
In 1858, the Chamber, for some reason,
underwent an eclipse, from which it duly
emerged in 1865. During this interregnum,
the necessity for such an active institution
was severely felt by the mercantile community.
It was realised that, if apathy were allowed to
creep into their deliberations, it would prob-
ably lead to a segregation of interests, and
thus they would be unable to ventilate their
grievances and urge remedial measures with
the force and insistence which could be exer-
cised by an aggregation of their numbers and
influence. About the middle of 1865, it was
recognised that the time was opportune to
subjects awaiting its attention. The Chamhei,
as might naturally be supposed, was a stiong
supporter of freedom in all trade matters, and
consequently when, at the end of 1865, a new
tariff in the direction of lessening the burden
of Customs taxation was proposed, the Cham-
her gave its approval, but when the bill in its
passage through Parliament became so emas-
culated as to prove worthless, and its place was
taken by a proposal to impose ad valorem
duties, the Chamber became thoroughly
aroused, and gave the measure its strongest op-
position, the head and front of which was a
vigorously worded petition to the Government
against ad valorem duties, which were declared
to be highly detrimental to intercolonial
trade. While it condemned the imposition of
COMMITTEE OF THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (1901-2).
Some of the subjects taken in hand by the
Chamber proved perennial grievances, and
despite the great amount of magnificent work
that has been accomplished, much yet remains
to be done, as the agenda paper at any meeting
of the Chamber bears witness. Marine, rail-
way and telegraphic communication are so
universally recognised as potent agencies in
the development and progress of the country,
that there is little need for the Chamber now
to trouble itself with these, but the exigencies
of every-day life are so prolific of novelty and
change that there is still plenty of work almost
daily arising to tax the resourcefulness of the
Chamber. The questions of Brokerage,
Wharfage, Insolvency Laws, Official Assig-
nees, Immigration, Naval Defences, Mail Con-
tracts and rates, Mintage, Bills of Sale, the
Tariff and Customs, Stamp Duties and trade
resuscitate the old energy and zeal of the
Chamber to continue the good work that had
been so persistently pushed forward some few
years before. Accordingly, on the 23rd of
August of that year a meeting was held, at
which there were present Captain Towns, J.
S. Willis, G. R. Dibbs, B. Molineaux, J. Alger,
G. A. Lloyd, S. A. Joseph, George King, T. C.
Breillat, G. S. Caird, and others. At this
meeting a motion “ That it is desirable for the
benefit of the mercantile, trading, and mari-
time interests of the colony to reconstruct the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce,” was adopted,
and subsequently a new set of rules was framed
and confirmed. During the time that the
Chamber had pursued its nominal existence, a
considerable number of matters of vital import
had accumulated, and when the reconstructed
Chamber began its work it found a plethora of
the Stamp Duties, the Chamber fought hard
to get the Government to arrange for tele-
graphic communication to be made with vari-
ous coastal stations, so that merchants, ship-
pers, and the public generally might be'daily,
if not hourly, informed of the maritime move-
ments and happenings off the coast. Up till
that time no news could be obtained regarding
what occurred in the “ offing” until the vessel
reached an anchorage in Port Jackson. Even
the position of shipping along the coast could
not be ascertained until the vessels were
sighted from South Head,
The boon then so much desired has long
since been obtained. As far back as 1868 the
question of a Uniform Tariff and Customs
Union for the Australian Colonies was discus-
sed at the invitation of the Melbourne Cham-
ber. Great interest was taken in the matter


and several meetings were held, at which it
was debated at length. Eventually the Cham-
her early in the following year decided that
the proposed Customs Union would not
prove to the benefit of New South
Wales. In the same year, the Cham-
ber, at a special meeting held to
discuss the desirableness of establishing
cable communication between Britain and
Australia, passed a resolution urging upon
the Government “ the necessity of telegraphic
communication with the mother country.”
At the time of passing that resolution, the
Chamber probably entertained little idea that
within about two years the gigantic enterprise
they were urging would have become an ac-
complishcd fact, as the Eastern Cable Service
Chamber were particularly energetic, and
many matters of great importance were forced
to the front by their persistent advocacy. The
Cental system was introduced in all grain
transactions, and has been found to be a great
convenience. The establishment of more ef-
ficient methods for the disposal of New South
Wales wool in London, and the proper protec-
tion of the companies that were embarking in
what was then the hazardous frozen meat
trade, were matters which engaged serious at-
tention, and received the best advisory sup-
port of the association. The simplification of
the tariff and the abolition of ad valorem
duties, also the re-establishment of the San
Francisco mail service. Insolvency Law amend-
ment, Increased Wharfage and Dock Accom-
the Association had been prompt to show their
loyalty to the reigning House, and when in
1887 Her Majesty the late Queen Victoria
celebrated her Jubilee, the Association adop-
ted an appropriate address of congratulation,
which was forwarded to the Queen in London,
Recognising that the imposition of Interco-
lonial fiscal duties was a barrier to the progress
of Australian development, the Chamber has
never hesitated to assail these, and when in
1888 an invitation was given for the Chamber
to be represented on a conference to be held
under the auspices of the Victorian Chamber
of Manufacturers, the Sydney Chamber of
Commerce, faithful to its fiscal traditions, de-
dined to send a delegation, but, with com-
mendable candour, gave as the reason for not
INTERSTATE CONFERENCE OF CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (1902).
MR. J. RUSSELL FRENCH, CHAIRMAN.
came into operation in 1872. The project for
a Pacific submarine cable from San Francisco
via Honolulu, Fiji, New Caledonia, to Aus-
tralia, which was advocated by the Chamber
in 1870, achieved a very much more tardy rea-
lisation, as more than thirty years elapsed ere
the “ Orient and Occident” were brought into
direct communication by wire, laid along the
great ooze plains of the Pacific Ocean. Dur-
ing that long interval the route originally pro-
jected was considerably modified in directions
that were approved of by the Chamber, as the
(changes brought the surface entirely under
British control, the terminal points being
located in British territory at Vancouver, in
Canada, and Southport, in Queensland.
During the decade 1870-80 members of the
modation, and differential railway rates,
so as to bring a share of the
Riverina trade to Sydney, were
amongst the multiplicity of matters to
which the Chamber bent its attention and
energies. The succeeding decade, 1880-90, was
occupied mainly in advocating what might,
with propriety, be designated domestic re-
forms—that is, matters relating to improve-
ments of the port, and amendments in the
mercantile laws, especially that of Insolvency.
After years of patient waiting and persistent
agitation by the members of the Chamber, a
new Bankruptcy Act was passed in 1888, and
the most sanguine anticipations were indulged
in regarding the working of this new measure.
From the time of its inception, the members of
accepting the invitation, that the programme
of the Chamber was Intercolonial Free Trade
and Protection against the outside world,
The decennial period embraced between
1890 and 1900 saw many measures of importr
ance discussed, and in a number of instances
the Chamber pushed its conclusions to a prac-
tical finish. During this period, the inau-
guration of a system of technical and commer-
cial education of the young was warmly
espoused, and the adyancement that has been
made in those directions is largely the result
of the strenuous endeavours put forth by the
Chamber. The reconstruction of the Marine
Board on lines more consistent with up-to-
date methods was strongly urged, and mem-
hers were complimented by having a number


of their ideas on this subject incorporated in a
Parliamentary enactment. Notwithstand-
ing the great number of local matters dealt
with by the Chamber, its members found time
to give careful consideration to many matters
of special concern, involving a reference to the
Legislature. Although Parliament could not
always see its way to adopt the recommenda-
tions of the Chamber, yet the fact that the
views of the association are reflected in many
of the statutes of the State is an evidence that
the deliberations of the Chamber were appre-
ciated by those composing the Legislature. In
fighting for its rights, the members of the
Chamber have always taken a broad and
liberal view of all questions, and while con-
tinually on the alert to further the interests
of the commercial community, have not been
unmindful of the best concerns of the general
public.
The year 1900-01 was a memorable one in
the annals of the Chamber, as the Federation
of the Australian Colonies was the precursor
of manj T changes which could not fail to arrest
the attention of members, and provide them
with food for discussion, if not material for
action. In the round of celebrations which
heralded the inauguration of the Common-
wealth, the arrival of the first Governor-
General, Lord Hopetoun (Earl Linlithgow),
and the visit of the Duke and Duchess of York
to open the First Federal Parliament, the
Chamber played a conspicuous part, befitting
its importance as the corporate representative
of the mercantile interests of the citv. Many
of the reforms and improvements which the
Chamber had for years advocated were fore-
shadowed in the measure for the creation of a
Harbour Trust, and the provisions of a new
Industrial Arbitration Bill received due con-
sideration, as did a proposal to limit the num-
ber of public holidays, the frequency of which
seriously interrupted the operations of trade.
The Chamber also sought to have the condi-
tions relative to the export of produce im-
proved, and the Minister for Mines and Agri-
culture promised to adopt some of the sugges-
tions made to him on the subject. During the
passage of the Legal Procedure Act through
Parliament, two cardinal clauses were incor-
porated at the instigation of the Chamber.
The matter of the appointment of a commer-
cial agent to represent the interests of New
South Wales in London and to disseminate
useful information regarding the products of
the State was warmly espoused, and the advis-
ableness of appointing a suitable person was
urged upon the Government. A number of
matters of purely local concern which came
within the Chamber’s sphere of in-
fluence were placed prominently be-
fore the “ powers that be,” with
every prospect of being dealt with in a
practical manner. During the year an inno-
vation was effected in the establishment of
“ High ’Change,” which promised to enhance
the usefulness of the Chamber. This institu-
tion aims at bringing the commercial men to-
gether in an informal assemblage at a con-
venient hour of the day to talk over matters
affecting their affairs, that could hardlv be ac-
corded a place at the more formal meetings on
’Change. A very short experience of this new
procedure was sufficient to convince members
of its value as an adjunct to the more definite
work of the Chamber. The establishment of
the Federated Council of Chambers
of Commerce of the Commonwealth
was consummated in 1901. By this
federation it was not intended to interfere
with, or supersede any, of the individual
chambers in the slightest degree, but there
were many matters, touching the commercial
interests of Australia as a whole, which could
be dealt with more effectively by a Federated
Council than by the separate efforts of indi-
vidual Councils, or even the joint efforts of the
separate bodies. As the outcome of a sugges-
tion made by a member of the Council (Mr.
Barre Johnston), an Australian Chamber of
Commerce was formed in London to look after
the commercial interests of the Commonwealth
in that quarter.
The year had been one of onerous work
steadfastly pursued, but the following year,
1901-02, was destined to be one of even greater
responsibilities, to successful cope with which
called forth increased activity on the part of
members of the Chamber. With characteristic
loyalty, members evinced their deep concern
for the welfare of the King during the anxious
period caused by the illness which resulted in
the postponement of his Coronation, and when
at last the brilliant ceremonial had become a
fact, no body of men within the compass of
His Majesty’s wide dominions were more sin-
cere in the wish that “ His Throne may be
established in righteousness that it may stand
fast for evermore,” than the members of the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
A good deal of time was devoted to studying
the developments of the new nhase of political
life resultant upon Federation, and keen dis-
appointment was felt that instead of the pre-
dicted economics becoming realised, the State
was being committed to fresh financial obli-
gations, which were considered to be unwar-
ranted. Several other acts promulgated and
passed by the Federal Parliament failed to
meet with the commendation of the Chamber,
as the effect of these enactments were con-
sidered to be restrictive of enterprise, and
damaging to mercantile interests. The
Customs Duties Act and the method of its
administration were matters tnat engaged the
close attention of members, and remonstrances
were addressed to the Minister in charge of the
Customs Department asking for relief from
what were considered to be some of the more
obnoxious regulations that were alleged to be
prejudicial to the advancement of legitimate
trading. The proposal initiated in New Zea-
land to absorb the Fiji Islands met with the
active resistance of the Association, as it was
believed that, if such absorption were to even-
tuate, it would probably interfere with the
flow of trade between Sydney and the Islands.
The consummation of a long desired and much
talked about project.—the establishment of
cable communication with Canada, elicited
heartv appreciation, more especial!" as the,
route chosen was an all-British one, and
brought New Zealand, Fiji and Norfolk Island
into direct and rapid intercourse with Sydney.
During the present year the time of the
Chamber has been chiefly occupied in com-
bating what members conceive to be the arbi-
trary administration of the Customs Duties
Act. With firmness, tempered by courtesy,
the Chamber repeatedly addressed the Depart-
ment, and also interviewed the Minister (Hon.
C. C. Kingston) in the hope of getting some of
the regulations which are considered to be al-
together too drastic, and in some instances
absolutely subversive of business, removed or
toned down. While scouting all idea of seek-
ing for favours, the Council of the Association
is most insistent that the rights of merchants
should not be sacrificed, or that obstacles
should be placed in the way of mercantile
dovelojiment.
Throughout its entire existence, the Cham-
ber has pursued a thoroughly consistent
course, and the record of work done is a fitting
testimonial to the value of such an institution.
Owing to its powerful advocacy of the rights
of the merchants, many effective reforms have
been won, vexatious conditions ameliorated,
and the whole of the commercial environment
improved and benefited. The energy, resource
and capacity which has distinguished the
Chamber in the past is still inherent within it
to-day, and under the stimulating influence
begotten of the knowledge that there are
heights yet to be stormed, the vitality and re-
soluteness of the Chamber is every day in-
creasing, with every prospect that it will con-
tinue. In looking back over the past, its
members have reason to be proud of the bene-
ficient results it has achieved, and while evinc-
ing a justifiable pride in the influence and
power of the Chamber, they cannot refrain
from according a due mede of praise to those
who, as officers, bore the heat and burden of
the day, and successfully guided the Chamber
through many an anxious and trying time to
victory, peace, and honour.
The following gentlemen, whose portraits
appear in preceding pages, have filled the
office of President since the foundation of the
Chamber:—John Latnb, 1851-2 ; J. S. Willis,
1853-4; T. C. Breillat, 1855 ; Robert Towns,
1856-7, 1865; J. L. Montefiore, 1866-67,68,69,
74-75 ; J. B. Watt, 1870-71, 79-80-81-82-83 ;
George King, 1872-73; Charles Smith, 1876-
77-78; S. A. Joseph, 1883, 87-88-89; Thos.
Littlejohn, 1884; W. G. Murray, 1885; Wm.
McMillan, 1886; J. H. Storey, 1889-90-91, 95-
96; H. C. Fraser, 1891-92; James Inglis,
1892-93-94; Henry Keigwin, 1894-95; Walter
Friend (acting) 94-95 ; A.W. Meeks, 1896-97-
98; John S. Brunton, 1898-99; Augustus F.
Robinson, 1899-1900; J. Russell French,
1900-01 ; Edward H. Rogers, 1901-02; J.
Barre Johnston, 1902-03.
The Council, consisting of fifteen members,
for the current year comprises Wm. Clark, J.
Russell French, M. Gotthelf, J. Barre John-
ston, G. S. Littlejohn, J. P. McArthur, A. F.
Robinson, Edward H. Rogers, J. M. Sandy, F.
W. Stoddart, J. T. Tillock, E. Trelawny,
George Wall, J. St. Vincent Welch, F. E.
Winchcombe.
For many years the office of the Chamber
of Commerce has been located at the Ex-
change in Bridge Street, a most central and
eligible situation, “ where merchants most do
congregate.” The present Secretary, Mr.
Henry Charles Mitchell, than whom hardly
anyone is better known or more esteemed in
the city, has held the position for many years,
and he has made the interests and advance-
ment of the Chamber matters of intense per-
sonal concern. Energetic, shrewd and capable,
his advice is of inestimable value to the exe-
cutive on all occasions, while his suavity and
bonhomie are elements that find their reflex in
the popularity he rightly enjoys.


The Royal Exchange
of Sydney.
It is now considerably over half a century
since the idea of forming a merchants’ ex-
change in Sydney took root and germinated.
At that time, the commercial interests of the
metropolis were small compared with what
they are to-day, but they nevertheless were
in the hands of men who were far-seeing and
optimistic. They were mostly men who had
witnessed the vicissitudes of fortune, and had
themselves home the brunt of many a
struggle, in which commerce had to free itself
from the disabilities of the early days of the
Colony’s history. They knew something of
the uphill fight which individual effort had to
make against the primitive and inequitable
conditions, and it was with a view to the
amelioration of these, and to provide them-
selves with the means of facilitating business
transactions, and repelling undue interference
with their interests that they resolved to band
together. The idea was a happy one, and was
conceived at a most opportune time, as the
gold discoveries of 1851 and subsequent years
attracted to the Colony an enormous influx of
people, whose requirements brought about a
complete revolution in business methods.
Amongst those who assisted in drawing to-
gether the unification of commercial interests
were many whose names have come down to
the present, as honoured memories, or as re-
presentative of some of the leading firms of
the State to-day. When the little band of
Sydney merchants had thus become united
in a sort of guild for mutual support and ad-
vantage, they promptly set about acquiring a
“ local habitation.” With commendable fore-
sight they selected, as a site for the new Ex-
change, a most eligible location, right in the
heart of the City, at the corner of Pitt and
Bridge Streets. Here they decided upon the
erection of a building worthy of the interests
that were to be represented, and from which
would radiate all the forces that were to ani-
mate and control the commercial development
of the rapidly expanding city and quickly-
growing country. The Sydney Chamber of
Commerce and the Sydney Exchange are co-
eval as well as contemporary institutions, and
the personnel of their management was in
some respects identical. Both recognised that
old methods were giving place to new, and
that the time had arrived for judicious action
being taken to preserve the best traditions of
their craft, and to mould the agencies at work
developing the resources of the Colony, on
lines consistent with the highest ideals of
honesty and equity. The ravages of the white
ant of finance and trade had been witnessed
by them in the years that had gone by, and
they were animated by a desire to prevent its
encroachments in the future. Thus, though
these two institutions formed separate en-
tities, they had much in common, and it
speaks much for the unanimity which bound
them that, notwithstanding the aggressive at-
titude they sometimes had to assume in as-
serting their rights, invariably in the face of
heavy odds, no friction ever occurred.
On the 25th of August, 1853, the founda-
tion stone of the Exchange Building was de-
clared to be well and truly laid by the Go-
vernor, Sir Charles Fitzroy. In connection
with this event a print was struck off bearing
the following anouncement: —“ The first stone
of the Sydney Exchange, designed for the con-
venience of persons engaged in the pursuits
MR. G. J. COHEN,
Chairman Royal Exchange.
of Commerce, was laid on the 25th of August,
A.D. 1853, and in the seventeenth year of the
reign of Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen
Victoria, by His Excellency Sir Charles
Augustus Fitzroy, K. 8., Governor-General of
all Her Majesty’s Australian possessions, in
the presence of the principal civil and mili-
tary dignitaries of the Colony, the members of
the Sydney Exchange Company and the
assembled colonies. Architect, John Fred-
erick Hilly.” Then followed a list of the
Directors and the Secretary, which read as
follows : —Alexander Campbell (Chairman),
Benjamin Darley, Frederick Ebsworth,
Thomas Chaplin Breillat, John Gilchrist,
MR. C. H. HAYES,
Secretary Royal Exchange.
Michael Egan Murnin, George Rees, George
John Rogers, Thomas Whistler Smith, John
Walker, Joseph Scarffe Willis, Joshua Rich-
mond Young. Secretary, William Dawes.
The following coins were deposited under
the foundation stone of the new building:—
One sovereign, one crown, one half crown,
florin, one shilling, one sixpence, one four-
pence, one threepence, one twopence, one
penny, one three-half-pence, one two-and-a-half
pence, one mite, one one-sixteenth farthing.
The ceremony of laying the foundation stone
having been completed, a grand banquet was
held in the evening to further celebrate the
event.
The first meeting of members of the Ex-
change was held in Sam Lyons’ rooms in
George Street, on the Bth of April, 1851, when
the first directorate was formed. It consisted
of John Lamb (Chairman), John Gilchrist
(Deputy Chairman), Alexander Campbell, J.
Walker, J. R. Young, J. S. Willis, J. W. Gos-
ling, D. Jones, W. R .Scott, George Rees, G.
Thorn, and T. W. Smith. By a curious irony
of fate, the very circumstances which the pro-
moters thought would favour them, turned
out the reverse, and consequently, at the out-
set, difficuties were encountered which might
have discouraged men imbued with a less san-
guine belief in the future of this country.
The attractions of the gold-fields lured all the
available labour thither, and, consequently,
the wages of all Sydney workmen advanced
very appreciably, while the price of building
materials was greatly increased. This un-
looked-for rise in values caused the original
estimates to be considerably exceeded, a,nd not
only was the raising of additional capital ren-
dered necessary, but delay was occasioned.
After a period of more than four years from
the commencement of operations, the edifice
was completed, and, on the 30th December,
1857, the Exchange was formally opened for
business by Sir William Denison, the then
Governor. The new structure, composed of
Sydney freestone, and designed in the Corin-
thian order, formed a notable landmark in
the city. In those days it stood out conspicu-
ously from among the plain and ungainly
structures of the Macquarie period that arose
from the adjacent streets. It quickly became
a centre for the commercial interests of the
city, and much enthusiasm was displayed in
connection with its operations. After some
years, however, the vitality of the organisa-
tion began to wane, and for a considerable
time matters remained persistently below par.
About this time a rival exchange was started
near the Post Office, in George Street, and,
under energetic management, it promised to
annihilate the older institution. Fortun-
ately, however, for the Sydney Exchange, a
time of revival was near. One of its mem-
bers, the late lion. G. A. Lloyd,, had been to
America, and, having observed the systematic
working and efficient methods of the San
Francisco Exchange, on his return to Sydney,
sot himself to “ shake matters up,” and re-
habilitate the original Chamber. He in-
oculated members with his enthusiasm in the
cause, and it was soon apparent that the old
institution was feeling the effect of the new
vigour.
The effete methods of management gave
place in 1871 to a new system under Mr. C. H.
Hayes, who was specially engaged for the
task, and, within a year, the Sydney Ex-
change had outdistanced its old rival, and
was proceeding along the road to prosperity
and influence with accelerated speed. To


show the progress that was made during this
period, it is only necessary to mention that
the subscriptions for 1871 amounted to only
£63, whereas those for 1872 totalled £9OO,
and within a very brief interval the annual
subscriptions aggregated over £l5OO. The
Exchange had now been fairly started on its
career, and since then has grown and devel-
oped with the trade of the metropolis. In
the early days of the Exchange the large room
on the ground floor, which is now regarded as
the Exchange proper and reading room, was
in much request as a banqueting chamber, for
which it was excellently adapted. It was for
many years regarded as the best hall in Syd-
ney, and, if the old walls could speak, they
could many “ a tale unfold.” All the prin-
cipal public meetings were held in that room,
and, the floor being admirably laid, the ma-
jority of the social functions and dances of a
few decades ago were given here. In those
times, a gallery existed at the eastern end of
the hall, where the telegraph office is now
located. The reading room then occupied the
space now appropriated as a dining chamber.
A few years ago it was found that the ac-
commodation was not sufficient to meet cur-
rent requirements, and the question of pro-
viding additional space was discussed. The
Directors having been advised that the foun-
dations and walls were sufficiently strong to
carry a couple of new storeys, it was deter-
mined that they should be added. The new
elevation, which has been carried out in har-
mony with the original building, was com-
pleted and formally opened in 1900, in the
presence of a large assemblage of the City’s
representative men. In its more modernised
and completed form the Exchange building,
from an architectural standpoint, is able to
hold its own with any of the structures by
which it is surrounded. It forms the centre
or rallying point of all the mercantile in-
terests of the metropolis, and some idea of
what this means can be grasped when it is
borne in mind that Sydney takes a front rank
amongst the maritime ports and trade em-
poriums of the world. Within the members’
room are to be found all the principal papers
and periodicals, notifications, quotations, and
bulletins of all kinds respecting the condition
of trade m all parts of the globe. What in-
formation is not to be obtained at the Ex-
change is not worth having. A Post and
Telegraph Office is located within the build-
ing, and its work is much appreciated,
as is shown by the receipts, which
amount to over £20,000 annually. A
nn«tal x .i, ,
the General Post Office 6 in ° Martin P| Vltl
and a Telpnhnno p i u aC . C ’
immedilte tmmT fi 'rt p “f- 8 “ embers 111
immediate touch with their clients m many
parts of the country. A number of societies
and associations have their offices in the build-
ing, or hold their meetings in the large hall
on the first floor, where there is seating accom-
modation for over 300 persons. The Sydney
Wool Exchange finds ample and convenient
accommodation within the building, and the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce, which was the
first constituent of the Sydney Exchange
Company, has a spacious hall, and well-
appointed offices on the third floor. [lllus-
trations of the evolution of the Exchange
Building will be found in preceding pages.j
The affairs of the Exchange are managed
by a Board of Directors, consisting of Messrs.
George J. Cohen (Chairman), W. A. Cottee
(Deputy Chairman), Joseph Abbott, Hollo A.
Cape, S. Dickinson, A. H. K. Maxwell, George
M. Merivale, Alfred G. Milson, Josiah
Mullens, Edward Trelawny, Walter Watt,
George Wall. Secretary and Manager, C. H.
Hayes.
The following gentlemen have filled the
office of Chairman of Directors, some of them
for more than one annual term ; —John Lamb,
J. S. Willis, Hon. Alexr. Campbell, J.
Walker, T. C. Breillat, M. E. Murnin,
Michael Metcalfe, George Thorne, Jno. Alger,
Sir Saul Samuel, Hon. S. A. Joseph, George
J. Cohen, W. H. Eldred, George M. Meri-
vale. The present Secretary, Mr. Hayes, has
been with the Company for over thirty years,
and, under his capable management, it has
achieved a career of great usefulness and grat-
ifying success. He is deservedly popular
not only among the habitues of the Exchange,
but also with the whole of the public whose
business brings them within the range of its
influence. Despite his long term of arduous
BRIDGE STREET, LOOKING TOWARDS THE EXCHANGE FROM GEORGE STREET
...
ser^ lce ’ h c 18 stlll halo and hearty, and the
Wlsb a wlO now 1S ability is that he
. ma y lon S continue in the position he has so
long and so worthily adorned.
“EXCHANGE CORNER,” PRESENT DAY.


Trade Review.


Trade Review of N.S.W.
For 1902.
A Stationary Period.
Scarcity of Supplies.
S6c Year’s Record.
TN the annals of the commercial history of
New South Wales it is to be feared that a
black mark must be placed against the year
1902. Merchants and traders generally
have been, from a variety of reasons, com-
pelled to acknowledge that the past twelve
months have been characterised on the whole
by a restriction of operations, a difficulty in
many instances of obtaining sufficient sup-
plies, and a curtailment of turn-over in mark-
ed contrast to the buoyancy of 1901. The
causes for this are not far to seek. Of chief
importance is the unparalleled drought,
which affected practically the whole of the
State from the Western border right up to
the Coastal districts. In only seven in-
stances out of the whole State did the rain-
fall exceed the average, the latter being based
upon returns extending over a lengthy
period. For the most part the fall was very
much below that average, and in the Western
districts conspicuously so. White Cliffs (aver-
age 10.62), for example, only recorded 3.45
inches for the whole year, and of this amount
only four points fell in the first, six months.
Figures for some typical stations follow, the
average in every case being given in paren
theses:—Albury (28.45), 16.66; Bathurst
(24.01), 14.86; Booligal, (11.79), 3.88;
Bourke (15.83), 6.99; Brokein Hill (9.28),
3.32; Casino (46.13), 18.61; Coonabarabran
(31.06), 15.37; Cootamundra (34.34), 15.56;
Delegate (24.92), 26.15; Deniliquin (16.49),
10.97; Grafton (38.77), 23.15; Hay (14.42),
8.46; Junee (21.18), 13.66; Maitland (34.87),
23.28; Moree (24.67), 8.00; Mud-
gee (27.18), 14.12; Narrabri (26.24), 17.17;
Nimitybelle (24.92), 26.37; Orange (38.30),
20.67; Penrith (35.18), 14.48; Sydney
(49.67), 43.07; Tamworth (27.82), 13.83;
Walgett (19.15), 7.48; Wellington (24.07),
14.46; Wentworth (11.45), 6.54; Windsor
(33.02), 17.36; Young (26.75), 12.45.
When it is explained that most of the sta-
tions mentioned in the above list are the cen-
tres of active agricultural, pastoral, or dairy-
ing districts, it can be well understood how
severe has been the strain, financial and other-
wise during the past year.
But, apart from this, the rate of increase
m trade in New South Wales during 1901
was abnormal, and could not last. It was, in
fact, due to a well-defined artificial stimulus.
Prior to the imposition of the Federal Tariff
on October 8, 1901, the New South Wales
Fiscal Policy was based on the Freetrade
theory. The Federal Tariff, on the other
hand, had Protection as its basis. The result
was natural. Importers, distributors, re-
tailers, and consumers all bought heavily un-
der the Freetrade regime, because they
bought cheaply, and, when the Federal tariff
came into force it was found that all the
warehouses in Sydney and in the country
centres were filled up to the ceiling with duty
free merchandise. This excessive accumula-
tion was very largely responsible for the quiet-
ness of trade during the twelve months under
review. What actually took place was this,
that part of the trade which should, under
normal conditions, have been done in 1902,
was carried through in I£ol, to the apparent
detriment of the latter period. The word
“ apparent” is used advisedly, for, to use an
old truism, one cannot have one’s apple and
eat it too. A certain amount of trade was to
be done. We did it early, and had a slow
time later. It was naturally so.
We do not mean to assume that the drought
has had no deleterious effect on trade, but
what we do think is that the drought was not
solely to blame for the stagnation of 1902.
Later on the drought may make itself more
distinctly felt, but as against that contin-
gency there is the fact that good rains have
fallen in many parts of the State. The bane-
ful effect of the wholesale stocking up prior
to the tariff imposition cannot affect trade in
1903, for duty free stocks have to all intents
and purposes been exhausted.
GROCERIES, Etc.
While trade generally was quiet dur-
ing 1902, groceries have been fairly ac-
tive. Certainly some quietness prevailed
just after the tariff was imposed, but
this was a natural consequence of the ex-
tended notice given that duties would exist
where no duties had been previously levied.
Later on, however, when the drought began
to affect general business, it stimulated the
grocery trade, for, while it restricted local pro-
duction, people had still to eat, and they
were, in consequence, driven more and more
on to imported food-stuffs. This tended to
harden prices of many articles which had al-
ready been raised on account of the tariff.
The 1902 season in dried fruits was one
that proved satisfactory alike to importers,
to distributors, and to consumers. Usually
a large quantity of inferior fruit comes to
this market, but last year there was less than
usual, owing to the season in Greece and
Smyrna having been a bountiful one. A
large crop inevitably means good fruit, for
the greater part of the damage is usually done
at the drying period. Shipments to Aus-
tralia sailed immediately it became legal to
export from Greece. Samples were excellent
for the most part, and gave great satisfaction
to the trade, being sold at from 4d. to 4Jd.
per lb. Later on purchases were made down
to 3|d. for delivery, and, at the close of the
season, 4d. was asked.
The C. S. R. Company’s quotations for I. C.
sugar opened at £2O 10s. in January Ist
dropped to £l9 ss.’ in October, and closed
with a rise to £2O ss. in December. Only
about 5000 tons of sugar were produced in
New South Wales, the bulk of the require-
ments being imported from Queensland. The
failure of the rice crop in Japan had, of
course, its reflex in Australian markets, and
Sydney quotations during the year advanced
from £l7 to £22 per ton, or a rise of £5 in
the twelve months. Rangoon rice, on the
contrary, receded in value, the open-
ing and closing quotations being re-
spectively £9 10s. and £8 10s.
Other Eastern products had no marked
features of interest during the year. Seed
sago receded from £l7 to £ls per ton, Pearl
Sago from £n 1 0s. to £l6, and flaked sago
from £lB to £l7. Ceylon plantation coffee,
and American coffee both rose Id. on the
year, the former from Is. Id. to Is. 2d., and
the latter from lid. to Is. Pepper was prac-
tically steady throughout.
WINES AND SPIRITS.
The year, taken as a whole, has been a
fairly satisfactory one in Wines and Spirts,
despite the uncertainty and annoyance at-
tending the introduction of the Federal Tar-
iff. The non-allowance for under-proof spirit
caused a good deal of difficulty when the new
tariff first became law, but it was not long
before merchants began to adapt themselves
to the altered conditions. Now there is but
little difficulty experienced. There is, of
course, some encouragement given to bottling
locally under the new tariff, and no doubt in
time most importers will avail themselves of
this privilege. The imports of whisky in
1902 totalled 878,548 gallons, as against
700,552 in 1901, 598,010 gallons in 1900, and
616,016 gallons in 1899. The tendency now
is for the bottled whisky to fall out of favour
in deference to the bulk. The imports of


Area.
Average
Yield.
Total
Yield.
Acres.
Per Acre.
Bushels.
1870 ...
... 189,452
16.89
3,200 959
1875 ...
166,911
12.87
2,148,394
1880 ...
233,368
15.48
3,613,266
1885 ...
275,240
15.52
4,271,394
1890 ...
419,758
15,65
6,570,335
1895 ...
647,483
10.88
7 041,378
1896 ...
596 684
8 71
5,195,312
1897 ...
866,112
10.52
8,853,445
1898 ...
993,350
10.60
10,560,111
1899 ...
... 1,319,503
7.0
9,276,216
1900 ...
... 1,426,166
9.5
13,604,166
1901 ...
... 1,530 609
10.6
16,173,771
1902 ...
... 1,392,070
10,6
14,808,705
1903 ...
... 1,276,812
1.2
1,589,205
brandy in 1902 totalled 185,087 gallons, as
against 210,258 gallons in 1901 and 179,087
gallons in 1900. Rum remains steadily
in favour among a certain class. In
1902 239,427 gallons of this spirit
were imported against 187,856 gallons in
1901. The imports of Geneva, gin, and
schnapps in 1902 were 226,607 gallons,
against 256,736 gallons in 1901. Old Tom
has been in good request throughout the year
at prices that have varied but slightly. The
usual steady sales have been made of the
leading brands of ales, stouts and lagers, as
well as small sales of imported wines.
OILS.
The Kerosene Oil business has undergone a
complete transformation during the year.
ning of the year to in December. Castor
Oil showed a decline from 3s. to 2s. 4d., and
the same may be said of linseed, boiled fall-
ing from 4s. sd. to 45., and raw from 4s. 3d.
to 3s. lOd. per gallon during the twelve
months. There was a considerable rise in
turpentine from 2s. KUd. to 3s. 3d. for the
twelve months.
JUTE GOODS.
The season has been one full of contradic-
tions, despite the fact that everyone knew
that the wool clip this year would be con-
siderably less in volume than that of many
preceding years. Importers at the beginning
of the year somehow or other sent forward to
Calcutta orders for woolpacks considerably in
excess of the number brought forward during
ket opened at about 2s. Id., and closed at Is.
10id. for Hi lb. loose ends. The comsacks
season last year was not a very satisfactory
one, most importers losing money, and they
carried over heavy stocks to this year. The
opening and closing prices were 4s. 7d. and 4s.
6d. respectively. Bran bags have been alter-
nately good and bad property, according to
the lightness or heaviness of stocks in sym-
pathy with the demand, closing at 3s. 7d. a
Id. higher than the opening rate.
BREADSTUFFS.
The following is a return of the area
cropped for grain, the average yield and total
production of wheat in Now South Wales
since ]B7f) •
THE A. AND A. LINER “SONOMA.”
Now the old days of speculative purchases, of
glutted or bare markets, of high and low
prices seem of the past. Then each distribu-
tor was his Own importer. Now the Standard
Oil Company, under the guise of the Colonial
Oil Company, itself imports all the Ameri-
can oil that Australia wants, and the "Shell
Transport and Trading Co.” imports bulk
oil from Batoum, in Russia. These two con-
cerns compete against one another, so we have
had fairly low prices, but rates have also been
steadier than they would have been under
pristine conditions, and stocks are always
ample. The renewal of the duty on kerosene
was also of direct benefit to consumers, and
prices fell from 101 per gallon at the begin-
the previous year. It would h r. *r
thought under such circumstances that they
would lose heavily on the deal, and so those
did who sold early. Those, however, who
hung on and put their surplus stocks in store,
exnccting to leave them there till next sea-
son, met with a pleasant surprise. The ves-
sel that was to have brought practically the
whole of New Zealand’s requirements for the
season, got on fire at Albany, and, on arrival
in New Zealand it was found that the wool-
packs had been water-damaged to such an ex-
tent as to make them unusable. This threw
an extra and unexpected demand on to the
Sydney market, and those despised surplus
stocks came in very useful. The 1902 mar-
These figures point to an almost total fail-
ure of the 1902-3 harvest, and, in consequence


Wheat.
Flour
1893
14,166
15,912
1891
12,144
16,766
1895
14,654
If. 297
1898
17,654
7,613
1897
27,197
9,597
1898
69,970
23,697
1899
59,162
15,481
1900
... 128,722
25,853
1901
... 243,123
41,657
1902
... 129,915
27,876
1899.
1900.
1901.
1902.
Cheese (loaf), lb. ...
0 5
0 5
0 6J
0 7
liacon, lb
0 6
0 7
0 74
1 1
Hams, lb
0 8
0 8.J-
o 104
1 1
Eggs, doz
0 10
0 9i
1 0
1 4
Lard (bladder), lb.
0 5
0 4i
0 5
0 5
New South Wales had to obtain nearly all
her supplies, both of breadstuff and seed
wheat, from abroad. The State Government
came to the assistance of the farmers, and
commenced the distribution of grain for sow-
ing purposes early in 1903, and, when the
rains of the first months seemed to augur a
more favourable season, applications for large
amounts of the grain were received from all
parts of the State. An indication of
how great has been the deficiency in
wheat and flour for 1902 may be
judged from the following totals of the re-
ceipts of wheat and flour by rail at Sydney,
Clyde, llomebush, Burwood, Ashfield, Peter-
flour, City Roller, £ll 10s. to £l2; Mani-
toba, £l2 15s. The prospects in the wheat
market promised a further rise, and this has
since been realised, but local wheat, though
quoted, was practically unobtainable, and
millers are depending on importations to fill
orders.
MEATS.
In 1902 the absolute dearth of cattle and
sheep available for slaughter in the State com-
pelled the importation of both. At the begin-
ning there were fairly good local supplies at
12s. to 13s. 6d. for shorn merino ewes, while
best beef was quoted at 265. per hundred lbs.
Supplies thenceforward fell away, reaching
rica, and China, but, as the drought increased
in intensity, this condition of affairs was to-
tally reversed, and New South Wales became
a heavy importer from New Zealand, while
even Victoria was drawn upon for a consid-
erable amount. The quotations started at
10|d. for choice quality in January, and fin-
ished at lOd. in December, but between
those two months values fluctuated consider-
ably, advancing to Is 6|d. in August, with
a highest point of Is. 9d., after remaining at
Is. 51d. for the two preceding months. The
average price for the year was Is. 2|d., as
compared with lOld. for 1901, and for
1900. Second quality butter realised B|d.
THE ORIENT LINER “OPHIR.”
sham, and Newtown, during the first 52 stat-
istical weeks of the years mentioned:—
With so marked a scarcity of supplies it
inevitably follows that prices rose consider-
ably during the year. Wheat at the begin-
ning of the year was quoted at 2s. lid. per
bushel, local flour at £6 10s. per ton, and
Manitoba at £l2 per ton. From month to
month the price rose steadily, until, on the
last day of the year, the quotations stood
thus: —Wheat (nominal) ss. 6d. to ss. 7d.;
their lowest level at the beginning of the
September quarter. At the period of greatest
scarcity, mutton rose to fid. per lb., and beef
to 60s. per 100 lbs., and at this time both
mutton and beef in a frozen state were offered
to buyers. The closing months of the year
saw a slackening of the tension to some ex-
tent, but, though supplies were
more equal to requirements, the op-
erations of graziers anxious to re-
stock their lands after the beneficial rains,
kept prices above normal. For the last sales
in the month of December, a line of prime
New Zealand sheep fetched up to 245. Prices
for best merino wethers ranged from 18s. to
245., and the lowest quotation was 9s. for
medium ewes. Best beef was worth 38s. per
100 lb.
DAIRY PRODUCE.
During the early part of 1902 a small quan-
tity of butter was exported to London, Af-
in January, Is. did. in July, and 9d. in De-
cember. Cheese, eggs, and bacon exhibited
the same tendency towards high levels dur-
ing 1902. The closing prices for these com-
modities in the last four years were as fol-
low :
Significant as these figures are, they do
not, of course, represent any idea of the move-
ments during the year, and it may at once be
explained that each of the articles en-
umerated saw a much higher value in some
months of the year. In July, for example,
eggs advanced to Is. Bd. and Is. 9d. per dozen,
and cheese to 9d. With the better prospects
induced by the December rains the market
eased, and in the South Coast Districts, es-


Butter.
Cheese.
Eggsi
Bacon.
Year.
Kegs.
Cases.
Cases.
Cases. Bags.
Sides.
1899 ...
, 12,591
95,640
10128
27,371
802
42,248
1900 ...
. 16,437
172,026
12,367
36,385
985
27,399
1901 ...
. 10,889
181,737
9,478
39,225
782
4 505
1902 ..
. 4,077
82,470
7,414
28,308
327
3,211
Year.
Maize.
Oats.
Bran.
Pollard.
1899
3 0
1 11
0 8}
0 9
1900
2 8
2 3}
0 8
0 8}
1901
2 9
2 6}
0 8}
0 9
1902
4 10}
3 5
1 4
1 4}
Year.
Chaff. Oaten Hay.
Lucerne.
Straw.
1899 ..
3 4|
4
2|
3 3J
2 2i
1900 ..
. 3 li
3 10
2 8|
2 2
1901 ..
3 101
4
7
2 6i
2 Oh
1902 ..
. 5 111
6
9
6 4i
2 101
Number of
Hands
Employed.
Male.
Female.
1899
... 47,063
8,583
1900
... 50,516
10,263
1901
... 54,556
11,674
1902
... 54,326
11,943
Va,lue of Plant.
Average Horse-
and Machinery.
power used.
1899 ...
... .£5,640,381
33 080
1900 ...
5,707,640
35,828
1901 ...
5,860,725
41,585
1902 ...
6,784,734
52,713
Metropolitan.
Country.
Total.
1901
... <£3,175,902
,£1,784,002
.£4,959,904
1903
... 3,398,924
1 681,816
5,080,740
Age of Workers.
Average Weekly Wage.
Males.
Females,
13 years
... Id 6 9
iO 5 0
14 years
... 0 7 5
0 4 8
15 years
0 8 2
0 4 10
16 years
0 9l0
0 6 6
17 years
... 0 12 7
0 8 7
18 years
... 0 16 4
0 10 5
19 years and upwards
... 2 2 0
0 17 3
.£1 15 11
JEO 13 3
pecially, an excellent year is anticipated.
The scarcity of the various commodities usu-
ally considered under the head of Dairy Pro-
duce during 1902 may be gauged by a refer-
ence to the following comparative table, ag-
gregating the return of produce received by
rail (inclusive of receipts at Redfern) during
the past four years;—
GRAIN AND FODDER.
The exceptionally dry weather prevailing
over the agricultural areas in 1902 had a
most injurious effect upon all descriptions of
grain and fodder crons, and prices during the
year reached an abnormal level. The State
itself could supply very little maize for local
requirements, and the shortage was made up
by large importations of American, and es-
pecially of Argentine grain, while shipments
of a considerable quantity were made from
New Zealand and the South Sea Islands.
Quotations, which stood at 3s. 2d. per bushel
in January, rose steadily until October, when
the abnormal price of 6s. 6d. per bushel for
local, and 6s. 3d. for imported maize was
reached. More adequate supplies since that
mouth had the effect of lowering the market,
and it closed at ss. 3d. to ss. 6d. per bushel.
During the early part of the year local varie-
ties of oats were fairly cheap, but, as the sea-
son progressed, values hardened in sympathy
with other grains. Local production was
light, and, owing to the Federal Tariff, New
Zealand importations were not up to the
usual scale. Less fluctuation in price was
observable than in the case of maize, and quo-
tations, which also started at 3s. 2d.,' only ad-
vanced as far as 3s. lOd. in November, as com-
pared with the 6s. 3d. for maize in the pre-
ceding month. Bran and pollard were in great-
demand and very short supply during the
year, and prices in consequence ruled about
Bd. per bushel dearer. Both touched top
level in November, Is. 9d. and Is. lOd. per
bushel being asked, as compared with lOd.
and Is. at the beginning of the vear. The
average prices per bushel for 1902 and the
preceding years were as follow;
All descriptions of fodder showed a marked
advance in 1902 as compared with 1901. Al-
though up to June, the local and interstate
chaff on the market was practically equal to
requirements, supplies became exhausted in
tfie middle of the year, and, as this was just the
period when the needs of starving stock in
the interior were greatest, a very sharp ad-
vance took place, and importations were hur-
ried forward. The inland districts absorbed
largo quantities of Victorian, South Austra-
lian, and Tasmanian chaff, while the New
Zealand product, despite the duty, found a
very profitable market on this side. In Aug-
ust chaff sold in Sydney up to £9 per ton,
and the average for the year shows an ad-
vance of £2 over that for the preceding twelve
months. In hay the same advance on aver-
age prices has to be noted. Only moderate
supplies of the local article werl available,
and Victoria, Tasmania, and New Zealand
made up the deficiency. In August hay rea-
lised up to £lO per ton, with a point or two
rise for September, which, however, was not
maintained. Exceptionally high prices
were asked and obtained for lucerne during
the year, and values more than doubled on
the 1901 figures. Besides the internal de-
mand, export orders were filled for Queens-
land, while, early in the year, a small amount
was despatched to South Africa. For extra
prime samples 10s. Id. per cwt. was asked
in September, and £lO per ton was the
highest price received in August. For der-
rick straw £5 per ton was asked, and accep-
ted in August, that being the highest level.
The average prices per cwt. for 1902 and pre-
ceding years were as follow;
The rains in December resulted in a
marked decline in values, and closing prices
for the year may be quoted as follow;—Chaff,
£5 155.; Hay, £7; Lucerne, £3 10s.; Straw,
£2 ss.
OTHER FARM PRODUCE.
Practically no local potatoes were on the
market from March to October, requirements
being met with Tasmanian and (since July)
New Zealand tubers. Prices for the local ar-
ticle touched £l3 per ton on one occasion,
but the highest monthly average was £lO per
ton for November. Tasmanian Circular
Heads sold up to £9 10s. per ton in Novem-
ber, and in the same month- New Zealand
potatoes reached £9. The averages for the
year were:—Local, 7s. 3d.; Tasmanian, 6s.
7|d.; New Zealand, 6s. 4|d. per cwt., in each
case being well above the average for preced-
ing years. As compared with other lines,
onions were comparatively cheap, and specu-
lators who anticipated a rise lost heavily on
some transactions. The top price for the
year was about £lO per ton, as compared with
£l5 for 1901. From May a decline set in,
and when the local crop made its appearance
at the end of the year, it sold rather cheaply.
The closing price ruled at £4 per ton.
MANUFACTORIES AND WORKS.
Mr. T. A. Coghlan recently issued his
statement of the hands employed and the
wages paid in the various manufactories and
works in New South Wales during 1902. It
is gratifying to find that, notwithstanding
the drought, -the figures show a slight in-
crease over those of 1901, as the employment
afforded was larger than in any preceding
year.
The increase of trade in the metropolitan
area was considerable, and comprised the
establishment of 77 -new factories, and
the employment of 1162 more hands than in
the preceding year—273 being females and
889 males.
The drought appears to have adversely af-
fected the manufacturing works in the coun-
try districts, and Mr. Coghlan’s returns show
that 1123 less persons were employed than in
1901.
Comparing the past four years the hands
employed in the State were as follow:
A considerable increase is noticeable in the
value of the plant and machinery employed
during the past year, also in the engine power
used. The figures for the last four years are
as follow:
The total amounts of wages paid during
1901 and 1902 were as follow:—■
As a rule the factories worked full time,
the average employment during the year
being 47 weeks two days, viz., 50
weeks in the metropolitan factories and 42
weeks in the country. The low average for
the country arose from the stoppage of works
requiring considerable quantities of water.
The average' wages paid in the various in-
dustries was well maintained, what difference
there was bet\yecn 1901 and 1902 being in
favour of 1902. The following is a statement
of the average wages for workers of different
ages during last year:— :
In the metropolitan district all the chief
classes of industries show slight increases. In
tanneries and works treating raw materials
317 extra hands were employed; in brick-
works, glass, pottery, etc., 158; in sawmills
and working in wood, etc., 109; in metal
works, machinery, etc., 360; in the manufac-
turing of articles of food and drink, 208.
Printing works, books, etc., show an increase
of 388 hands.
The clothing factories, which employ 14,497
persons, appear to have about held their own
in both the country and metropolitan dis-
tricts.


Year.
Horses.
Cattle.
Sheep.
Swine.
1894
518,181
2,465,411
56,977,270
273,359
1895
499,943
2 150,057
47,617,687
223,597
1896
510,636
2,226,163
48,318,790
214,581
1897
498,034
2,082,696
43,952,897
207,738
1898
491,553
2,029,516
41,241,004
247,061
1899
482,200
1,967,081
36,213,514
239,973
1900
481,417
1,983,116
40,020,506
256,577
1901
486,716
2,047,454
41,857,099
265,730
1902
450,050
1,737,157'
27.284,587
192,862
As was to be expected, the country dis-
tricts show a falling off in manufactories
treating raw materials—saw mills, metal
works, manufactories connected with food and
drink. The total decrease in the persons em-
ployed was 1123, and in wages £102,186.
Considering the nature of the season this de-
crease was not great, and there is, therefore,
room for much hope that, with the return of
normal seasons, this loss will be more than
made up next year.
EXPORTS.
The exports of New South Wales for the
year 1902 fell off even more than did the
imports, and the drought seriously affected
bring, and thus avoided the dead loss they
would otherwise have suffered. The exports
of frozen meat, butter, and tallow practically
ceased towards the end of the year, while, in-
stead of exporting wheat and flour, New
South Wales was compelled to import the
equivalent of eight or nine million bushels,
Indeed, from every point of view, the di ought
was the one predominant influence in the ex-
ternal trade of New South Wales during 1902.
The detailed examination of the 1902 figures
will be found in succeeding papers of the
“ Review.”
WOOK
Since the drought has been with us the wool
bales, an increase on the figures for 1901-2 of
40,363 bales. From July Ist to December
31st, 1902, the total exported from the State
was 314,968 bales. This included 17,198 bales
imported from Queensland, and the net pro-
duction of New South Wales, therefore.
amounted to 297,770 bales. This total shows
a decided decline on the figures for the cor-
responding period of 1901, the decrease am-
ounting to 198,694 bales. The improvement
in prices, noted above, compensated in part
for this falling off, and, at the end of the
year, growers were able to congratulate them-
selves upon the enhanced prices obtainable in
the markets of the world for their wool.
THE NIPPON YUSEN KAISHA LINER “KUMANO MARU.”
the output of all the State’s principal ex-
ports. New South Wales being essentially
a pastoral country, it is evident that her ex-
ports would be most influenced by the sea-
sons, and the disastrous dryness of 1902 is re-
fleeted in each of the items under this head-
ing. Indeed the only increase—that of
skins and hides—is but another instance of
how the drought wrought havoc among the
flocks and herds. The increase is, of course,
due to the effort made by pastoralists to make
what money they could out of their stock.
Instead of allowing them to die on the run,
they hurried them off to the meat works or
elsewhere, sold them for what they would
market has shown a steady tendency to rise,
and when opening sales of the wool year
1902-03 commenced it was seen that faulty
descriptions of merinos were about 15 per
cent, higher than last year, and best descrip-
tions about 25 per cent, higher. This rise in
prices was most satisfactory from a grower’s
point of view, for it compensated him to some
extent at least for the heavy losses he has
made through the severe drought, and also the
heavy expense he has been under in hand-
feeding his stock.
The export of wool produced in New South
Wales, for the twelve months season ended
the 30th June, 1902, was estimated at 759,536
LIVE STOCK STATISTICS.
The following were the numbers of live
stock in New South Wales at the end of each
of the years mentioned, according to the latest
compilation of the Government Statistician :


1901.
1902.
January
.£851,636
,£965,421
Inc.
.£113,785
February
1,008,083
1,017,590
Inc
9.507
March
875,412 •
995,522
Inc.
120,110
April
925,633
1,055,126
Inc.
129 494
May
1,002,212
1,084,537
Inc.
82,325
June
1,0:16,332
957,092
Dec.
69,240
July
718,735
855,100
Inc.
136,365
August
733,095
787,158
Inc.
54,063
September ...
731,985
873,969
Inc.
141,934
October
933,613
914,989
Dec.
18,715
November
1,042,287
939,305
Dec.
102,982
December
943,178
994,172
Inc.
50,994
£
£
Federal Refunds
1.547,935
Inc.
471,681
Stamps
187,707
Dec.
88,193
Land Tax
22,648
Inc.
6,157
Income Tax
31,308
Inc.
7,857
Licenses
40,133
Dec.
1,205
Land Kevenue
767,283
Dec.
123,868
Railways and Tramways
2,123,336
Dec.
75,291
Water and Sewerage
201,850
Inc.
18,506
Harbour Trust and Re-
sumptions
154,858
Inc.
20,246
Other Receipts
287,544
Inc.
25,821
5,364,602
Inc.
261,709
1902-3.
July
£804,282
Inc.
£46,421
August
857,492
Dec.
174,730
September
1,188,728
Inc.
562,068
October
1,287,627
Inc.
295,349
.November
621,184
Dec.
554,542
December
1,311,585
Inc.
253,283
£6.070,898
Inc.
£427,849
Deficit June 30th, 1902
.£236^781
Subsequent Expenditure
... .£6,070,898
„ Revenue
5,364,602
Half-year's deficiency
.£706,296
In suspense
118,147
Deficit on December 31st
>£1,061,224
Public Debt ou June 30th ... ... .£71,592,485
Subsequent loan receipts (net) ... ... 2,451,127
Trust funds overdrawn to 30th
June ... ... ... ,£4,399,385
Subsequently ... ... 878,718
5,278,103
Due on resumptions (say) ... ... 2,500,000
State indebtedness Deo. 31st ... ....£81,921,715
1901-2.
1902-3.
July
.£250,092
.£345,883
Inc.
.£95,791
August
258,684
308,834
Inc.
110,150
September
204,753
645,657
Inc.
440 904
October
341,416
309,648
Dec.
31,768
November
462,004
286,740
Dec.
175,264
December
309,123
829,553
Inc.
520,430
Totals
£1.826,072
.£2,786,315
Inc.
.£960 243
The figures for 1902 need no specific exam-
ination. Their import seriously reflects the
disastrous drought through which the State
has passed, and the great decline between the
year 1901 and 1902, all too plainly shows how
very severe the losses to stockowners were dur-
ing the twelve months under review.
STATE FINANCE.
On June 30th, 1902, the State’s cash
account showed a debit balance of
£236,781, such balance having increased by
£84,594 in the twelve months, the deficiency
at June 30th, 1901, being £152,187. This re-
presents the excess of expenditure
in the ordinary revenue account,
without taking the loan expenditure
into consideration. In his budget
speech, delivered in September last, Mr. Wad-
dell put forward an estimate of revenue and
expenditure which professed to forsee the wip-
ing off'of this deficiency, and the closing of
the financial year with a small surplus. Since
then the financial year has drawn to
a conclusion, and a comparison of the
figures which have accrued does not
support the assumption then made. An
economical administration, in view of
the severe losses which the drought
would inflict upon the Treasury, was
necessary, and certainly efforts, spas-
modic for the most part, were made by the
State Government to achieve that economy.
But receipts fell away in a marked degree in
the departments whose returns were contin-
gent upon the condition of the country, such
as the Railways and Lauds, and the decrease,
as compared with the corresponding period of
last year, assumed large proportions.
Owing mainly to receipts under the Federal
Tariff, which were largely in excess of those
obtaining under the Freetrade conditions of
New South Wales, prior to October, 1901, the
revenue for the twelve months ending 31st
December, 1902, showed an increase of
£647,690 over 1901, the monthly comparison
being as follow :
Twelve
months £10,79.!,200 £11,439,890 Inc. £647,690
But the Federal Tariff came into opera-
tion on October Bth, 1901, and it is significant
that the revenue for the months of October
and November, 1902, showed a total decrease
of £121,679, which materially overbalances
the £50,994 increase for December. This
means, of course, that when compared on
exactly similar conditions, the revenue of 1902
•s much below that for 1901. The returns
Prior to June, 1902, have been already suf-
ficiently dealt with, but it is necessary to elab-
orate somewhat the figures for the current
financial year up to December 31st. For
the §ix months ended then the principal heads
contributing to the revenue, with their in-
crease or decrease on the corresponding period
in 1901 were:—
The Federal refunds, therefore, increased by
£471,684 on the six months, and, as the total
increase under all heads was, for the same
period, only £261,709, it follows that the col-
lections of State revenue particularly
have decreased by £209,975. For
the September quarter the increase in Fed-
eral refunds was £377,646, and for the De-
cember quarter only £94,038, giving a net de-
crease of £283,608. The State revenue de-
creased £45,234 in the September quarter, and
showed a further decline of £164,741 in the
December quarter. This restriction is, it is
to be feared, likely to continue, and the rail-
way revenue, if we are to judge by recent re-
ports, is certain to contribute thereto.
The expenditure for the six months
amounted to £6,070,898, as against
£5,643,049 for the corresponding period of
1901. The monthly expenditure, with the
increase or decrease on the 1901 figures, is
given as follows;
The expenditure for the half year has,
therefore, exceeded the revenue by £706,296
in the half year, while its increase
of £427,849, as against the 1901-2
fiugures, is £166,140 more than the
increase of £261,709 in revenue. In
addition to this there is a certain amount of
expenditure carried to suspense. The re-
venue account for the half year, therefore,
may be said to stand thus:
LOAN EXPENDITURE..
On the 30 th June last, the com-
parative statement of the State’s debt on
June 30th, 1901, and the same date in 1902
showed an increase for the latter period of
£5,320,258. The Public Debt of the Colony
at the close of the last financial year was
£71,592,485, plus an amount of £4,399,385
representing the uninvested trust funds for
the year, bringing the total indebtedness up
to £75,991,870, as against £70,671,612, the
figures obtaining on June 30th, 1901. This
total does not include the £3,000,000 raised
in London during the year, nor an amount of
£184,390, inscribed stock floated in Sydney at
31 per cent. The State indebtedness on De-
cember 31st may therefore be tabulated as
follows:
This calculation is only approximate, and
the total is expanded somewhat by the inclu-
sion, in the amount of trust funds overdrawn,
of the overdraft, which will be materially re-
duced before the end of the year.
For the half year the expenditure on gen-
eral loan account amounted to £2,786,315, as
against £1,826,072 for the same six months in
1901. The monthly distribution, compared
with the previous corresponding period
was;—
The expenditure on resumptions accounted
for £1,112,757 of this total, as against
£410,476 for 1901-2, so that the outlay on
other works amounted to £1,673,558, against
£1,415,596, a state of affairs which hardly
hears out the assertion that economy would
be practised in the current financial year.
BANKING.
Although the shares of the various banks
■ operating in New South Wales depreciated in
value during 1902, the different institutions
issued satisfactory balance-sheets, and the pro-
fits were well maintained. A policy
of conservatism in business, and a
disposition to refrain from advances
except on unimpeachable security, is
doubtless responsible for this. On
the whole the banks are perhaps less involved
in pastoral properties than was formerly the
case, their place being taken by the pastoral
and land mortgage companies. Consequently
the strain of the drought, though it has been
severe, has been less crippling than it would
have been a few years ago. Deposits; both
current and fixed, during the year have kept
up remarkably well, advances have been re-
duced and business generally at the close of
1902 was on a stable footing. The following


Dec. Qr.
1901.
Dec. Qr.
1902.
Current accounts
12,841,598
12,587,098
Dec. 254,500
Fixed Deposits
20,416,856
20,472,774
Inc. 55,918
Total Deposits
33 258,454
33,059,872
Dec. 198,582
Notes ...
Assets—
1,499,937
1,454,417
Dec. 45,520
Dec.,
Dec.,
Increase or
1901.
1902.
Decrease.
£
£
£
M.S.VV. funded
stocks
5,832,000
5 769,400
Dec.
112,600
Bank shares
8,845 100
7,720,600
Dec.
1,124,500
Bank deposits
(deferred) —
6,650 100
6,151,700
Dec.
498,400
Steamships
581,500
554 300
Dec.
30,200
Insurance
713,800
727.700
Tnc.
13,900
Gas
2,226,000
2,153,300
Dec,
' 72,700
Brewery
1,460 900
1,539,600
Inc.
78,700
Other invest-
ments
5,363,300
5,284,100
Dec.
79,200
31,725,700
29,900,700
Dec.
1.325.000
table gives the banking averages for the De-
cember quarter of 1901 and 1902, with the in-
crease or decrease:—
Coin and bullion 5,985,726 6,552,733 Ino. 567,007
Advances, etc. 34,995,855 34,589,927 Dec. 405,928
The deposits for the December quarter of
1902 were undoubtedly affected by the re-
the fact that Sydney, since the inauguration
of Federation, is fast becoming the
distributing centre of the Commonwealth,
have assisted in part to enlarge the totals for
1902. Last year was the first occasion on
which the Sydney bank clearings exceeded
those of Melbourne.
In any discussion of a country’s ac-
cumulation it is necessary to con-
sider alongside the ordinary banking business
the position of the Savings Banks, which of
late years have grown to be a very important
factor. The high price prevailing for the
household commodities in 1902 naturally af-
fected the business of both institutions, whose
depositors, generally speaking, are of the class
1902. Market values, both of investment and
mining stocks, continued, generally speaking,
to decline on the falling prices which charac-
terised the close of 1901, the only exceptions
to this being in the case of brewing and in-
surance shares, both of which met with a
prosperous year. In investment stocks, banks
which in 1901 made the greatest gain, suf-
fered the most serious loss, though dividends
in all cases were maintained. The market
values of leading representative securities,
while still 55 per cent, in excess of the paid-up
capital, are over a million and a half short of
the value twelve months ago. A prominent
financial authority publishes the following
return of aggregate market value of invest-
THE BARQUE “SHENANDOAH.”
striction in the Government banking balance,
which, on December 31st, was only £60,972
in Svdney hanks. The shrinkage of £405,928
on the advances may he taken as evidence of
the care now being exercised in this branch of
a banking business. In 1902 New South
Wales imported more gold than she exported,
at the same time retaining her internal pro-
duction. About half this amount was stored
in the banks, thus increasing the amount of
coin and bullion held. During 1902 the
clearings through the Svdney Banks’ pool
amounted to £178,637,708 Bs. 6d., an excess
of £10,961,001 over the total for 1901, giving
a percentage increase of 6.5. Under normal
conditions these clearings Provide a fair index
as to the expansion of banking business, but
the advance in the price of commodities, and
who are first to feel a restriction of purchasing
power in this direction. Nevertheless, the
amount of deposits exceeded the amount of
withdrawals at both the Government Savings
Bank and the Savings Bank of New South
Wales. In the former the deposits for the
year totalled £4,496,415 in Sydney, and
£828,941 in provincial towns. With the ex-
cess of deposits over withdrawals, and the in-
terest, the addition to the funds brought these
in round numbers up to £7,100,000. During
the year the funds of the two institutions were
supplemented by about £600,000.
STOCKS AND SHAKES.
The tone of the Sydney Stock Exchange
could hardly have been called buoyant during
merit stocks, and their increase or decrease on
the values at the close of 1901:


Dec.
Dec.
Increase or
1901.
1902.
Decrease
£
£
£
Coal companies
675,000
709,700
Inc.
34,700
N.S.W. gold and
dredge
206,800
158,500
Dec.
48,300
Broken Hill Co.'s
2.079,100
1,897,000
Dec.
182,100
Copper Companies
4,624,700
2,967,800
Dec.
1,656,900
West Aus. gold
9,143,000
7,473,800
Dec.
1 669,200
Queensland gold
5,015,900
5,826,800
Inc
810,900
21,744.500 19,033,600
Dec. 2,710,900
Limited
No
Liability.
Liability.
1900
... 1,836,700
904,750
19 1
... 1,841,541
612,050
1902
... 4,156,707
273,130
Gross No. Net No.
Deficien-
of
of
Liabilities
Assets
cies
Putitions. Petition s. £
£
£
1893
... 1714
1685
1,527,985
905,763
622,222
1891
... 1512
1465
1,852,235
995,935
856,300
1895
... 1280
1219
1,142,637
747,052
395,585
1896
... 1086
940
627,314
409 928
217,386
1897
... 845
826
610,111
347,469
262,642
1893
... 785
754
605,563
263,500
342,063
1899
... 633
612
321,913
175,345
146,568
19C0
... 640
602
743,887
328,052
415,834
1901
... 462
438
207,092
103,477
103,614
1902
... 485
458
281,203
124,426
156,777
The same authority has prepared the table
given below, relating to the aggregate market
values of mining companies:—
Queensland mines, therefore, strengthened
their position during the year to the extent
of £BlO,OOO, but West Australian mines, in
the face of larger dividends, and an enhanced
output, have substantially declined in value
The next largest decrease has been in the cop-
per mines, the improvement of £4 per ton in
panics registered during 1902, while 42 of the
former and 24 of the latter removed from the
the roll. The capital involved was £4,429,837.
Compared with previous years the figures are
as under:—
But a considerable amount of the 1902 total
is represented by the re-registration of exist-
ing firms (three of which alone account for
£1,300,000), with larger capitals and the regis-
tration of private companies. Of the re-regis-
trations Toohey’s, Limited was the principal,
its capital being set down at £550,000, while
the rearrangement of several tobacco com-
panies resulted in the re-registration of Dix-
son’s Tobacco Co., Ltd., and the American
Tobacco Co., of Australia, with capitals of
£500,000 and £250,000 respectively. In all,
able standard. Consequently, throughout
the time of stress and strain, engagements
were, on the whole satisfactorily met. The
gross number of bankrupts for the year was
485, a total somewhat larger than that for
1901, but smaller than for any other year of
the decade. The liabilities on these 485
schedules amounted to £281,203 19s. 6d., and
the assets to £124,426 19s. 6d., the deficiency,
being, therefore, £158,777. The 485 peti-
tions presented included 366 by debtors and
112 by creditors. Of the latter 85 orders
were made, 19 were withdrawn, 3 dismissed,
while 5 are still pending. These 85 “acts of
bankruptcy” may be subdivided as follows:
Failure to comply with bankruptcy notice,
65; departing out of New South Wales, 2;
giving notice of suspension of payment, 13;
departing from dwelling-house, 4 ; failure to
present petition within 48 hours, 1. Seques-
tration orders were made against 32 females.
Certificates of discharge were granted uncon-
ditionally in 59 cases, subject to conditions
TIMBER SHIPS UNLOADING AT THE UNION BOX AND PACKING CO.’S WHARF, ROZELLE BAY, ANNANDALE, SYDNEY.
the price of that metal not having taken ef-
feet. The decline was, perhaps, further in-
tensified by the collapse of certain of the
North Queensland copper mines, and by the
drought which prevented the working of such
well-known New South Wales urines as the
Great Cobar and Burraga properties. The
increase in the value of the coal companies is
adecidedly satisfactory item, considering that
New South Wales is more interested in these,
that is, of course, as a State, than in any other
description of mining stock mentioned in the
table
TRADING COMPANIES.
Under all the circumstances it is not to be
wondered at that investors proved somewhat
. , , , r , . ,
reluctant to promote new enterprises during
the year. Certainly a comparison of the
figures relating to the registration of limited
liability companies at first sight seems to dis-
prove this assertion. There were altogether
107 limited companies and 28 no-liability com-
13 companies, having a capital of £lOO,OOO
and upwards were registered or re-registered
during the year, representing £3,075,000 out
of the total of £4,156,707. This leaves
£1,081,707 of capital to be distributed among
the 94 remaining companies registered during
the year, and this total cannot be said to show
any remarkable desire on the part of pro-
moters to induce capitalists to risk their
money in new ventures.
BANKRUPTCY.
c ■ , . • , ■
Although the financial strain during the
7 ear must obviously have been very severe
indeed, the financial position of traders and
of the community was remarkably steady
throughout . Failures there have been of
0 , , ... , .
course, but neither in number nor in the dis-
crepancy between liabilities and essets was
there any untoward feature. Taught by the
lessons of 1893 monetary institutions, mer-
chants and producers generally had adapted
their business arrangements to a more reason-
in 14 cases, refused in 3, and suspended in 64
instances. Thirty-six estates were released
and four sequestration orders annulled. A
return of the bankruptcy operations in New
South Wales during the last decade gives the
following interesting comparisons:—
A reference to the above figures shows a
most satisfactory diminution, abundantly tes-
tifying to the steadily increasing financial
stability of the trading community during the
past ten years,


Exports.
Excess ok
Country.
iMPoltTS.
Produce or Mann*
facture of N.S.W.
Other Produce or
Manufacture.
Total.
imports
Exports.
Commonwealth of Australia —
£
£
£
£
£
£
Victoria
3,654,873
2,745,301
510,243
3,255,544
399,329
—
Queensland
4,268,906
681,475
1,105,983
146,368
1,787,458
2,481,448
—
South Australia
1,529,302
1,714,412
1,860,730
—
331,478
West rn Australia
352,242
253,6*8
105,263
358,911
—
6,669
Tasmanii
1,144,352
146,544
159,685
306,229
838,123
—
Total
£10,949,675
5,541,380
2,027,542
7,568,922
3,718,900
338,147
New Zealand
£1,195,483
330,179
350,179
680,358
515,125
-
United Kingdom
£8,572,370
5,979,423
1,123,173
7,102.596
1,469,774
-
Other British Possessions—
Aden ...
...
995
—
—
995
British Quiana...
4,909
—
—
4,909
Burmah
664
—
—
664
Canadian Dominion
155,373
19.729
6,322
26,051
129,322
Cape Colony ...
3,516
256,614
17,937
274,551
161,869
271,035
Ceylon
172,372
. 10,180
323
10,503
Fiji
88,465
56,452
139,663
194.115
—
107,650
Hong Kong ... • ...
22,722
28,867
202,399
231,266
—
208,544
Ir.drn ...
233,176
41,022
1,701
42,723
190,455
Jamaica
3,710
—
3,710
Ma'ta ...
1,641
1,764
—
1.764
—
123
Mauritius
80,740
11,892
2,41V
14,306
16,431
Natal ...
32
288,001
163,508
451,512
—
451 480
Newfoundland..
593
5
107
112
481
New Guinea
39,883
11040
16,062
27,102
12,781
Norfolk Island...
1,915
3,716
8,167
11,883
—
9,968
Straits Settlements
37,315
31,663
6,366
38,029
—
714
Trinidad ... ...
1,3 >5
—
—
—
1,395
Total Other British Possessions
£799,418
760,948
564,969
1,325,9.7
523,915
1,049,514
Total British Countries ...
£21,516,916
12,611,930
4,065,863
16,677,793
0,226,814
1,387,661
Foreign Countries- -
Arabia
6,844
5
5
6,839
—
Argentiue Republic
114!174
_
114,174
—
Austria
20,2*9
438
909
1.347
18,902
—
Belgium
76 804
666,883
81,991
748,879
—
672,075
Borneo
68
68
—
Brazil ...
94
94
--
Caroline Islands
755
. 758
379
1,137
—
382
Celebes
56
6,917
142
A059
—
7,003
Chili ...
10,738
239,708
3,701
243,409 '
—
2:12,671
China ...
133,911
16,303
334
16,642
117,269
—
Costa Rica
60
60
60
Corea ...
_
40
91
131
—
131'
Cuba ...
14,232
14,232
—
henmark
2,648
2,648
Equadox
1,785
61
1,849
—
1,849
Egypt
3,785
3,lc0
18
3,178
607
—
Formosa
60
’ 60
—
60
France
278,120
1,518,752
118,485
1.637,237
—
1,359,117
Germany
947,612
1,247,483
86,169
1,333,6*2
—
386,040
Greece
42,910
42,910
Guinea, West Africa ...
17
59.933
17
Hawaiian Islands
232
58,407
1,466
_
59,701
Italy ...
67,343
94,460
23,828
118,288
—
50,945
Japan ...
104,403
63.667
7,267
70,934
33,469
—
Java ...
58,883
63,578
1,119
64,697
_
5,814
Kaiser Wilhelm’s Land
19
1,495
1,447
2,942
2,923
Macao ...
1,010
2
1,008
Marshall Islands
5,576
3,352
6,310
9,662
4,086
Mexico
266 •
14,099
301
14 400
14,134
Molucca Islands
404
17
421
421
Netherlands ...
35,742
24,035
185
24 220
11,522
Neu Pommern (New Britain,
..
3,J34
5,248
8,939
14 187
10,853
New Caledonia
21,638
68,857
79,001
147!858
126,220
Nicaragua
—
667
50
717
717
Norway
105,950
105,950
Panama
—
3,915
71
3 986
3,986
Peru ...
Philippine Islands
35
27,107
28,015
85.970
410
6,641
28,425
92,611
—
28,390
65,594
Portugal
3,510
3 510
Portuguese East Africa
—
5,t26
5
5,631
5,631
Russ a ..
16,716
35
35
16,681
Siam ...
240 j
9
331
South Sea Islands, including New Hebrides
128,415 !
26,576
88,074
114,6*0
13,765
_
bpam ...
19,902
22
22
19,880
Sumatra
8,458
82
82
8,376
Sweden
Switzerland
Tahiti ...
Turkey
30,591
29,251
30,216
22
142
900
87
5
900
109
147
29,691
29,142
30,216
12,832
147
United States of America
Vladivostock ...
...
2,105,327
381,663
3,947
1,710,937
286
2,092,495
4,233
4,233
Total Foreign Countries
£4,457.264
4,636,564
2,229,694
6,866,258
634,116
3,043,110
T*'tal Trade with All Countries
£25,974,210 !
17,248,494 |
6,295,557
23,544,051
6,860,930
4,430,771
Net Excess of Imports
.. £2,430,159
COIN AND GOLD BULLION (included
in above Table)
Commonwealth of Australia
New Zealand
£
3,095,474
458,905
£
27,176
£
434,373
58,186
£
461,549
58.186
£
2,633.925
410,719
£
Unit ed Kingdom ...
143,002
489,798
680,585
1.170,383
375,862
1,027,381
343,243
1,614,157
Other British Possessions ...
32,619
3751862
Foreign Countries...
544
61
1,614!037
1,614,701
—
Total Coin and Gold Bullion
£3,730,544
517,038
3,163,643
3,680,681
3,034,644
2,984,781
Note.—In th
e foregoing Table all descriptions of Coin are included.
In a return published a few days ago, Gold Coin only was taken into account.
Customs and Excise Office.
N. I.OCKYER,
Customs House, Sydney,
3rd March, 1902.
Collector of Customs
OUR FOREIGN TRADE.
The trade of New South Wales with the other States of the Commonwealth and the outside world during
1902 is given by the Customs Department as follows: —


Shipping


The Shipping of N.S.W.
a :
RECORD YEAR!
Fewer Ships, but
'P More Tonnage.
Statistics for IQQ2.
€SINENT amongst the people of the.-o
Southern Seas for commercial vigour, un-
impeachable for the integrity of its busi-
ness relations with others, and by Nature en-
dowed with a rich heritage in the wealth of its
maritime'resources Sydney is incomparably the
mistress in Neptune’s wide domain under the
Southern Cross, brief though the period seems
since the pioneer navigator steered his oaken
walls into the waters of Port Jackson. We
are told as a specimen of what has been, that
the first foreign trading vessel to arrive at
Sydney (at that time the only Australian
Port), was the brigantine “ Philadelphia,” on
the Ist November, 1792, flying the Stars and
Stripes. And, with regard to this first
foreign flagged visitor, we are informed that,
although her cargo realised a high profit,
foreign merchants were chary of forwarding
cargoes to Australia, by reason of the length
of the voyage and the numerous “ sea risks”
—presumably from pirates. It need scarcely
be said that, in the days when Australia was
little better than a terra incog., and its east-
ern half appeared in maps as “ New Holland,”
the voyage of the British ship “ Albion,” oc-
cupying three months and fifteen days, was
deemed a wonderfully rapid passage from
England to Sydney.
Though so remote from the older centres, and
separated from the great marts of commerce
by unsailed oceans, the little settlement was
not long in attracting vessels from Great Bri-
tain and other countries, and, with the in-
crease of settlement and consequent develop-
ment in trade, various lines of clippers gradu-
ally became established by British firms. The
ambition of these earlier shipowners was to
reduce the time of the voyage between the
mother country and these shores, —to bring,
as it were, the youngest of the family nearer
home —to lessen the distance by bridging the
mighty oceans that roll between the mother
and its fair offspring. Thus, it has become a
commonplace to style the once-dreaded sea
voyage a “ pleasure trip,” and the ocean itself
‘‘a highway,” instead of a barrier to commerce
and intercourse. Amongst the better known
of these earlier efforts were the ships of the
Black Ball Line, so named from the distin-
guishing flag carried by the ships of Messrs.
James Baines and Company, of Liverpool,
and Messrs. Mackay and Company, of Lon-
don. But, just as the ships had reached the
highest point of perfection possible with can-
vas alone, those propelled by steam power
began to successfully rival them. We are
told, though there are some that dispute, that
the first steamer that reached Australia from
England was the “ Sophia Jane,” of 256 tons.
She arrived at Sydney on May the 16th, 1851,
and was intended for the trade between this
port and Newcastle. Various attempts to es-
tablish direct communication by steam were
made, but the large quantity of coal required
for the voyage round the Cape of Good Hope
formed a serious obstacle. As we all know,
the opening of the Suez Canal changed all
this by lessening the distance between Europe
and Australia. To the facilities thus created
for rapid, regular, and easy communication,
both internal and external, is traceable to a
large degree the remarkable development
which has taken place in the Australian Com-
monwealth, a development so rapid and yet
so durable as to stand unequalled in the an-
nals of the mercantile world.
The continual improvements which are .be-
ing made in naval architecture and marine
engineering have enabled the leading steam-
ship companies to put on the Australian ser-
vice vessels which may be described as floating
palaces, whose rate of speed must seem almost
miraculous to such as remember the time
when a voyage between the mother country
and Australia was seldom accomplished in
less than 100 days, a much longer period not
being infrequent. Not the least remarkable
feature of the steam services between Europe
and Australia is the regularity with which
they are maintained. The steamers fre-
quently arrive many hours ahead of a stipu-
lated or scheduled date, while their departure
is marked by minute-like punctuality from
the various ports of call. The safe manner
in which the voyages are effected is also re-
markable, the casualties being comparatively
few and seldom of a semational character, or
reaching that description known as a mari-
time calamity.
The records of the shipping trade of New
South Wales, although carefully kept by the
various Governors, are not available prior
to 1822, the earlier registers relating to the
statistics of the State having disappeared.
There are in existence, however, numerous
manuscript returns which record the shipping
trade of the earlier years, and they will doubt-
less some day see publication. During 1822
shipping at Sydney amounted to 71 vessels
entered in, and a total tonnage of 20,793 tons.
Twenty-eight years later, just before the sep-
aration of Port Phillip, and the birth of Mel-
bourne. the figures stood thus:—976 vessels
entered, tonnage 234,215, and 1014 cleared,
tonnage 263,849. In 1851, the year of separ-
ation, the trade fell to 553 entered, of 153,002
tons, and 503 vessels cleared, of 139,020 tons,
but in 1860, or the year following the separ-
ation of Queensland, the shipping had risen
to 1424 vessels of a tonnage of 427,835, and
1438 vessels cleared, of 431,484 tons—a con-
siderable advance on the figures of the pre-
vious year.
From 1860 to the present time, trade has
rapidly increased, and at a greater rate than
has the population. Every succeeding year
has seen an addition to the shipping entering
and clearing the ports of the State, and in
1902 the tonnage of 8,728,144 tons was
reached, for 6166 vessels, as compared with
8,521,234 tons for 1901, the figures constitut-
ing a record. The increase of shipping has been


Teak-
Entered.
Cleared.
Vessels.
Tonnage.
Vessels.
Tonnage.
1822
71
22,924
60
20,793
1825
85
24,559
75
22,688 *
1830
157
31,225
147
28,822
1835
260
63,019
269
66.964
1840
709
178,958
665
163,704
1845
597
105,352
614
103,961
1850
976
234,215
1,014
263,849
1855
1,152
353.323
1,185
362,482
i860
1,424
427,835
1,438
431.484
186)
1,912
635,888
2.120
690,294
1870
1.858
689,820
2,066
771,942
1875
2,376
1,109,086
2,294
1,059,101
188J
2.108
1,242,458
2,043
1,190,321
1885
2,601
2,088,307
2,583
2,044,770
1890
2,889
2,413,2*7
2,777
2,348,625
1891
3,021
2,821,898
3,100
2,872,338
1892
2,960
2,804,549
3,067
2,^42,635
1893
2,914
2,590,371
2,916
2,602,957
1894
3,272
2,859,968
3,291
2,878,586
1895
3,121
2,929,758
3,090
2,930,280
1896
3,224 •
3,080,751
3,208
3.109,009
1897
3,345
3,331,877
3,120
3,412,554
1898
3,316
3,464,867
3,263
3,455,061
1899
' 3,219
3,463,591
3,199
3,526,960
1900
3,626
4,094,088
3,406
3,920,801
1901
3,452
4.1 6,403
3,375
4,824,826
1902
3,164
4,390,086
3,002
4,338.058
Entt&ed.
Cleared.
Vessels.
Tonmge.
Vessels
Tounage.
1901
3,452
4,196,408
3375
4,324,826
1902
3,164
4.390,086
3,002
4,338,058
Tonnage.
Percentage.
1901.
1902.
1901.
1902.
Commonwealth Ports ...
3,462,435
3,371,179
40*63
38*62
United Kingdom
3,224,190
3,407.013
37-84
39*03
Other British Possessions
490,027
604.606
5*75
6*P3
France
231,377
226,975
2*72
2*60
Germany
3< 6,379
451,572
4 65
5*18
Norway and Sweden ..
98,000
63,594
1*11
*73
Japan
114,210
126,096
1-34
1*45
United States
395,185
817,105
4*64
3*63
Other Nationalities
109,471
160,C04
*34
1*83
8,521,234
8,728,144
100*00
100*00
Tonkage,
1892
1902
Commonwealth Pots
2,677,304
3,318,047
United Kingdom
1.265,696
2,697,550
Other Bricish Possessions
—
537,209
167,948
175,046
Germany
119,077
400.793
Japan
—
126,096
United States of America
34,902
138,390
Other National.ties
34,707
26,312
Total ..
4,329,634
7,420,043
COUSTRT.
Vessels.
Tonnage,
En-
tered
frem.
Cleared.
for.
Entered.
Cleared,
Victoria
874
744
841,310
785,433
Queensland
514
447
651,203
564,924
South Australia
287
221
344.3S8
265,505
West Australia
130
120
201,340
188,803
Tasmania
269
187
242,295
166,*‘07
Total, Commonwealth
2,074
1,719
2,280,536
1,971,572
New Zealand
266
299
311.597
386,336
United Kingdom
193
153
590,514
515,774
Other British Possessions
274
167
475,539
340,264
France
19
22
43,379
55,973
Germany
55
39
188,612
143,369
United States, America...
100
88
207.902
192,191
Japan
26
20
60,146
45.283
Other Foreign Countries
157
495
201,862
687,293
Total
3,164
3,002
4,390,086
4,338,058
maintained at a fairly constant rate, though _
checked occasionally by the occurrence of bad
seasons here or the failure of prices in the
European Markets. The following table
shows the quantity of tonnage and shipping
entered and cleared from New South Wales
at intervals of five years from the date of the
earliest records to 1890, and thence for every
succeeding year:—
It will be readily recognised that a tre-
mendous jump in the individual size of ships
has taken place since 1822. The average ton-
nage of deep sea vessels in that year was
about 350 tons register, while in 1902 the
vessels averaged upwards of 1400.
The increased tonnage of individual vessels
is well exemplified in the returns for 1902.
The number of vessels, both entered and
cleared for that year was less than for the pre-
vious year, whereas the tonnage in each in-
stance exceeded the figures for 1901. The
aggregates were: —
The tendency to employ large cargo steam-
ers, and to increase the tonnage of such ves-
sels, is very evident from this table.
The shipping tonnage of New South Wales
greatly exceeds that of any other province of
the Australian group, Victoria stands next,
after which come South Australia, Western
Australia, New Zealand, Queensland, and
Tasmania. Taking the total shipping of Aus-
tralasia last year, nearly one-third entered
and cleared at New South Wales ports.
UNDER WHICH FLAG?
To a very large extent the trade of the
State is carried in British bottoms. The deep
sea trade with the mother country and Brit-
]sh possessions is in the hands chiefly of ship-
owners in the United Kingdom, while the
coasting trade is principally owned locally.
Since 1881, however, there has been a notable
increase in foreign-owned shipping, and at the
present date a very fair proportion of direct
oversea trade is carried in foreign ships. A
good idea of the statistical position is con-
veyed in the following table, which gives the
tonnage and percentage of ships of each na-
tionality entered and cleared, together with a
comparison with the previous year:-
The increase in tonnage of the different
nationalities for the decade may be set down
as follows;
. DIRECTIONS OF TRADE.
The countries from which vessels entered or
to which they cleared from New South Wales
in 1902 may be compared, as regards their
relative importance, in the following table,
giving the number and tonnage of vessels re-
ceived or despatched from the ports of the
State last year.
CIRCULAR QUAY IN 1883.
Looking along the Western Side towards the North Shore Ferry Wharf.
OWNERSHIP AND CREWS.
An idea finds occasional expression that the
tonnage trading in Australian waters is
owned mainly in the United Kingdom, and
that Australian capital forms only a small fea-
ture in ship ownership. But this idea is dis-
pelled on perusal of the Australian Register
of Shipping. Of the tonnage set down as
British in the official shipping returns, a sub-
stantial portion is owned or registered in
Australasia. At the end of 1902 there were
on the Australian Register 523 sailing ves-
sels and 516 steamers. The steam tonnage
was 71,953, and the sailing 57,772, giving
129,725 tons for 1039 vessels.
When the comparative insignificance of the
population of the State, viewed in the light
of populations of old-world countries is con-
sidered, the fact that 120,720 sailors were re-
quired to man the vessels that entered and
cleared from New South Wales ports seems
astounding. Under this headmg the returns


show an increase of 25,792 in a period of 10
years. On board British ships 100,224 men
were employed, foreign ships accounting for
20,49 G.
PROPORTIONS OF STEAM AND SAIL.
Reference to the proportion which sail
bears to steam is desirable as a matter of re-
cord in these fast declining days for the
“White winged messengers of commerce.”
Prior to 1876 the records do not distinguish
steam from sail, but the modern tendency to
supersede sailing vessels by steamers lias been
abundantly apparent since, so that to-day, in
ADVANTAGES OFFERED SHIP-
OWNERS.
The large number of vessels which come to
Vniif ciniitli W'ilps in ballast comnared with
£?£* wZut cargo,
may be taken in support of the assertion that
the Mother State offers to the shipowner
greater advantages than any other in the
Commonwealth. As a fact, a large proper-
tion of the vessels arriving in ballast come
from the ports of the neighbouring States,
where they have delivered general cargoes,
and, having been unable to obtain return
extremely low, owing to keen competition
among the various steamship companies but
present a healthier tone has been leached.
The advances in the rates of wages and in the
cost of coal, have had the effect of biingmg
about an understanding of a more amicable
nature than existed formoi y, wit i t le lesu
that cut-throat competition may be said to
have ceased. It would tae up oo muci o
our space to quote in detail t e coas a axes
prevailing. Approximately tie ra e per
nautical mile for first-class passage by steamer
between ports along the New South Wales sea-
board is Id. per mile or a shade over, and foi
CIRCULAR QUAY, SYDNEY, SHOWING CITY IN THE BACKGROUND.
This photograph, taken by the Exchange Studios, Sydney, is unique in the comprehensiveness of the view it prerents, and reflects great credit on the photographers.
stead of our wool being carried by a fleet of
clippers, there remain but a remnant em-
ployed in the trade, and for these cargo is not
easily secured, even in “ the season.” In 1876
steam was represented by less than a million
tons, while sailers considerably overlapped
that quantity. The relative positions have,
however, long since been transposed, for last
year the tonnage of sail was but 1,308,101, as
compared with 7,420,043 tons of steam—the
latter now securing about 80 per cent, of the
total carrying trade. The increase of steam
tonnage over sail during the past quarter of
century has been 611 per cent,
freight, have cleared for Newcastle to load
coal. In 1902 there arrived in ballast 680
vessels of a total of 1,034,493 tons, or 221,840
less than in the previous year, and there
cleared in ballast 163 vessels of 227,149 tons.
FARES.
Looking at the extensive passenger traffic
and shinning trade of New South Wales, it
would naturally be expected that a liberal
scale of fares and freights would be in force,
and this will be found .o be the case. In
many instances the interstate rates have been
second-class or steerage (only two classes arc
carried) it is from id. to ?d. per mile. For
example, to Newcastle (60 miles) the rates are
respectively ss. 6d. and 3s. To Ballina (Rich-
mond River), 330 miles north, 30s. and 12s.
6d.; to Eden, 210 miles south, 30s. and 155.,
and so‘ on proportionately between ports, with
a few exceptions, where the risks and other
conditions warrant charging slightly higher
rates. The fares between interstate ports
average about the same per mile as the coastal.
To Melbourne (563 miles by water) from Syd-
ney the rates are £2 10s. to £2 and £1 accord-
ing to cabins. To Brisbane (500 miles north)


the fares equal those just quoted for Mel-
bourne. A steady stream of passenger traf-
fic exists between Sydney and Fremantle,
where the stretch of ocean is no less than 2500
miles. Here the rate is reduced to £8 first to
£4 10s. second, with particularly fine accom-
modation. It cannot, therefore, be said that
less than a halfpenny per mile is an extrava-
gant fare over this particular route, with its
excellent food and comfortable sleeping
berths amply provided. The journey includes
stops at Melbourne and Adelaide, and usually
occupies from 12 to 15 days, the fare in the
latter case averaging thus about 6s. per diem
groups are objective points of interest to
tourists, and are catered for by first-class
steamers. To Suva, the capital of Fiji, distant
1743 miles, the fares arc about £lO and £6
single, with substantial rebate on return
tickets. The fares are about the same to the
New Hebrides (1427 miles) and Noumea (1073
miles). To Apia (Samoa, 2400 miles) the
charges are £2O and £lO.
The fares by sailing vessels to the European
and American ports are in nearly every in-
stance a matter of private arrangement be-
tween the captains of the vessels and the in-
tending passengers, but the number of such
India (Bombay and Calcutta) range from £37
to £2B and £l3 10s., and to Colombo £35 to
£26, and £ll. A brisk and increasing traffic
obtains to China and Japan. Here again the
tourist element largely participates at special
rates. Single tickets to Yokohama may be
quoted at £37 10s. to £26 10s. and £l7 15s.
for second and third classes, and to Hong-
kong £33 to £23 and £ls. Some of the most
beautifully appointed steamers afloat are em-
ployed in the services between Sydney, the
chief ports of the Commonwealth, and the
East. The passage occupies about three
weeks, and is made via the Barrier Reef route,
CIRCULAR QUAY, SYDNEY.
Heading from left to right: Showing P. & O. Company’s Whirf (R.M.S. “Rome”), Messageries Maritimes Company’s Wharf (S.S. “Australien”)
Orient Pacific Company’s Wharf (R.M.S. “Ophir”), Burns, Philp and Company’s Wharf (S.S, “Sierra”),
and the Custom House.
This photograph, taken by the Exchange Studio, Sydney, is unique in the comprehensiveness of the view it presents, and reflects great credit on the photographers.
for board, lodging, and conveyance by first-
class boats. Between Sydney and New Zea-
land, £6 to Auckland first and £3 10s. second
are about the rates, distance 1281 miles. To
Tasmania in the summer season a big tourist
traffic sets in, the result being a lowering of
rctuiii fares, which bring them within the
popular reach. Ordinarily the rates are to
Hobart £2 10s. and £1 ss. single, distance 628
miles. A considerable traffic, and one which
is steadily increasing, exists with the Islands
of the South Seas and New Guinea. Fiji,
Samoa, Tonga, New Caledonia, New Heb-
rides, the Solomon Islands, and adjacent
passengers is becoming smaller from year to
year owing to the great decrease made in
steamer fares. From Sydney to London from
£35 to £45 for first, and £lB to £22 for second
class are now quoted. From Newcastle to San
Francisco by sailer they would be from £2O
to £25 and £35. The steamer rates to Lon-
don vary with certain lines, but from £66 to
£77 by mail steamer, and from £45 to £55 by
other lines are about the ruling rates for first
class, with £3B to £44 for second, according to
cabins, and from £ls to £l7 third. To Ant-
werp and Bremen from £ls to £77 are quoted,
and to Marseilles from £2O to £7O. Rates to
one of the most interesting and picturesque
journeys by sea that it is possible to imagine.
In the Trans-Pacific trade two lines of steam-
ships connect these shores with those of the
United States and British Columbia, one run-
ning via Brisbane, Fiji and Honolulu to Van-
couver, and the other under the American flag
to. San Francisco via Auckland, Samoa, and
Honolulu. Fares by these routes are; to San
Francisco £4O to £25 and £l6; to Honolulu
£3O and £l2; to Vancouver £4O to £25 and
£l6.
For some years past a feature has been made
of he traffic (cargo and passenger) to South


Africa. Of those who are voyaging to Europe
also, a proportion is always to be found who
have a dread of the heat in the Red Sea, and
who take passage via Natal and Capetown as
the more invigorating voyage, and added to
these are the still larger number of passengers
booked to Capetown or to the other South
African cities. These latter will of a certainty
become a much more important element in
over-sea traffic now that the war is over.
Several first-class lines compete for this trade,
having fixed sailing dates, and departures are
conducted with as strict an observance as to
punctuality as is observed by the subsidized
mail services via Suez. The rates of passage
range from £3l 10s. down to £l3 135., which
sum for a voyage of 7000 miles on board the
most modern type of steamer cannot be con-
sidered excessive, though it is higher propor-
tionately than £ls is to Antwerp, Bremen, or
Southampton over an ocean distance of be-
tween 12,000 and 13,000 miles.
The inexorable law of supply and demand
applies most potently to the freight
market, a condition which may be de-
monstrated by the case now existing
of an unexampled shortage in the staple pro-
ducts of the State on the ohe hand with the
normal abundance of tonnage here and in
sight on the other, so that quotations cannot
but partake largely of a nominal character.
Freights between the interstate ports by
water where competing with the railways,
necessarily have to be cut down, and it is sur-
prising the measure of success the companies
are able to attain in the battle for supremacy,
if it can be called battle. The bulk of the
carrying trade is done by water between all
the ports, as it pays shippers to use quick
water carriage instead of land.
The freights paid for the carriage of
wool to London really determine with-
in certain limits the freights charged
for most other produce. In 1834
the average was somewhat over 3d. per
lb.—golden days for the ship-owner. Informa-
tion regarding freights is not available for the
very early years, but since 1857 the freights
on dumped greasy wool have fallen from 20 to
25 per cent. It is in comparatively recent
years that wool has been extensively carried
by steamers, sailing vessels formerly being
almost wholly engaged in that trade. A decade
ago, or in 1892, the following rates obtained:
—Wool (greasy), by sailer |d. to 9/16d., by
steam |d. to |d.; tallow, by sail 275. 6d. per
ton to 375. 6d., by steam 455. to 505.; copra,
sail 375. fid. to 425. fid. per ton, steam 40s. to
455.; leather, sail 275. fid. to 405., steam 40s.
to 605.; hide's, sailer, 15s. to 225. 6d., steam
355.; preserved meats (40 cubic feet), sail 20s.
to 275. fid., steam 325. fid. to 405.; measure-
ment goods, sail 275. fid. to 405., steam 40s. to
60s. Last year the averages were (to quote
steam only, as comparatively so little is done
nowadays by sailing vessels); Wool (greasy)
|d. to ; tallow, 20s. to 355.; copra, 21s. to
475. fid.; leather, 255. to 305.; hides, 255. to'
305.; preserved meats, 225. fid. to 275. fid.;
measurement goods, 20s. to 455. Last year for
frozen meat the rates were from id. to |d.
per lb., and for timber from 4s. to ss. per 100
superficial feet. Greasy wool for French, Ger-
man, and Belgian ports by steamer paid to
7/1 fid. per lb.; freight to the Eastern States of
America via London, 7/1 fid. to id., via Liver-
pool 7/16d. to Jd., and via San Francisco |d.
per lb.
COMPARATIVE IMPORTANCE OF
SYDNEY MARITIME TRADE.
By viewing it in connection with the mari-
time trade of the chief ports of the United
Kingdom, the comparative importance of the
trade of Sydney will better be realised. There-
fore it may at once be placed on record that in
absolute tonnage, Sydney is surpassed by only
five English ports, namely, London, Liverpool,
Cardiff, Newcastle, and Hull. But if the com-
parison be drawn with reference to the value
of the trade transacted, it is exceeded only by
London, Liverpool, and Hull. The average
quantity of tonnage of sea-going vessels lying
in the port of Sydney is about 80,000 tons per
diem. The daily average at Newcastle is about
35,000 tons. On the day on which the
greatest number of ships are in port in a busy
wool season the tonnage at Sydney is equal to
about 125,000 tons, and that of Newcastle
84,000. The value of the shipping ordinarily
moored or anchored in the port of Sydney may
be set down at £2,000,000, and of that in the
port of Newcastle at £500,000. The greatest
combined value of shipping afloat in the two
ports on any one day is about £4,500,000.
TONNAGE PER CAPITA.
If one takes a glance at the shipping
master’s return last issued, and measures the
figures disclosed therein by the totals for cor-
responding date of other countries, he will
find that, per head of population, New South
Wales holds a very creditable position. With
over eight and a half million tons of shipping
THE WHITE STAR LINER "PERSIC” LEAVING THE WHARF.
movements during the year, and a population
of but a million and a half, it is readily seen
that her 6 per cent, per head is flattering to a
young country. Of course, the want of popular
tion is to be regretted, nor is it attempted to
disguise the fact that with its increase the
relative positions of tonnage to population
would be diminished when reckoned by per
centage, but one must for existing conditions
use existing data. As a cue, the Dominion of
Canada last year handled 50 per cent, more
tonnage than New South Wales, but there the
percentage per head of population works out
just 2.7. The United States, with over three
times Canada’s shipping, and her enormous


population, stands at 0.6 per head, which is,
with the exception of Germany (0.5) the lowest
average amongst the maritime nations. The
percentage in the United Kingdom was last
year 2.3 on 95 million of tonnage movements.
RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF COM-
MONWEALTH PORTS.
The important rank Sydney holds becomes
evident when we take the relative importance
of the various ports of Australasia in relation
thereto. Melbourne ranks first in the Federa-
tion as to tonnage, but it must be remembered
that her figures represent the tonnage twice
calculated of the great steamers whose ter-
minal port is Sydney, and who necessarily call
in at Melbourne coming to and going from
Sydney, thus doubling the tonnage total at the
southern port. This doubling of the figures
where there are steamers of from 10,000 to
12,000 tons each involved amounts to not far
short of 900,000 tons in the course of a yeai
counted against Sydney. It will hence be
found that, by making the correction, the
shipping of Melbourne is largely exceeded by
that of Sydney, just as the Victorian Fleet is
surpassed by us in the value of its trade.
Newcastle occupies third place in tonnage im-
portance of Commonwealth ports, for Ade-
laide figures are, as in the case of Melbourne,
doubled by the return to that port of the big
liners.
VESSELS BUILT DURING THE YEAR,
It would be idle to argue that Sydney has
attained to any appreciable position as a ship-
building centre on a basis of large tonnage
vessels. That the talent to design gracefully-
proportioned ships is present, and the ability
to construct good ships is with us, can scarcely
be denied us in the face of the fame which Syd-
ney built vessels of small tonnage have achie-
ved. Harbour steamers, schooners and
ketches are the principal classes of vessels
built in the State, the general tonnage of each
class averaging considerably under 100 tons
register. The substitution of iron for wood
for the frames and hulls of vessels, has given
a check to an industry that promised at one
time to grow to some importance. How near
we are with our vast coal and iron resources
to that envied goal of local ambition —the
manufacture of our own steel, with its inevit-
able sequence of ship-building construc-
tion upon a Clyde, a Newcastle, Sunder-
land or Belfast scale—no one can fore-
cast, but at present we must rest
content with very modest pretensions to a
shipbuilding reputation. The 32 vessels
built in 1902 were all of wood, 16 were steam-
ers, and 16 sailers, and the total tonnage of
the lot net was but 1991 tons, barely the size
of a decent sailing ship. The 16 steamers, all
screw, accounted for 1064 tons of this total, 11
ketches for 707 tons, 1 cutter for 32 tons, and
4 schooners for 188 tons.
There has been a sad retrograde movement
in this industry, for, looking back nearly 20
years, we find that in two years, 1883 and
1884, 205 vessels, sail and steam, were built in
this State, representing no less than 15,000
tons. Since those days the growth of con-
struction has been steadily downwards, or
nearly so, only a few weak spurts here and
there occurring. But, while this is to be de-
plored, the figures are constantly expanding
that represent the number and tonnage of ves-
sels built abroad for New South Wales local
trade. No reliable data are available, and
such vessels form an import of large value, al-
together lost sight of in the Customs returns.
Some idea, however, of the large number im-
ported may be gathered from the registration
of the tonnage of other than New South
Wales built vessels, which for the past ten
years has averaged 4500 tons of shipping an-
nually.
VESSELS ON THE REGISTER
At the end of 1902 there were on the
N.S.W. register of shipping the respectable
fleet of 1039 vessels, having a total registered
tonnage of 1,129,725 tons, which, if averaged
at £2O per ton, would represent two millions
and a half sterling of locally owned floating
property. That sum may not seem much when
viewed in the light of the cost of mammoth
liners, many of which cost a quarter of a mil-
lion apiece, but liners arc not reckoned in a
calculation of this kind where only the invest-
ments of a young and small community of ship
owners in shipping designed for local trade are
being considered. In the manning of this
locally owned fleet 5778 seamen find employ-
ment'
STEAM FLEET OF N.S. WALES.
The steam fleet of N.S. Wales is principally
owned by the following Companies:—The
Australasian United S.N. Co., Adelaide S.S.
Co., Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., Union S.S.
Co., Ltd., North Coast S.N. Co., Ltd., Ilia-
warra S.N. Co., Ltd., Geo. W. Nicholl, Allan
Taylor and Co., Newcastle and Hunter River
5.5. Co., Ltd., Bulli Coal Company, Wallarah
Coal Company, Kembla Coal Company, Sou-
thern Coal Owners’ Agency, Howard Smith
Co., Ltd., Huddart, Parker Pty., Ltd., Sydney
Ferries Ltd., Balmain Ferry, Ltd., Port Jack-
son Co-operative S.S. Co., Ltd., Shell Har-
bour S.N. Co., Watson’s Bay, North Shore
5.5. Co., Ltd., and Parramatta River Com-
pany.
CERTIFICATED PASSENGER
STEAMERS.
It will probably surprise many who have
not given the subject much attention, though
they realise that Sydney is a busy port, to
learn that during 1902 no fewer than 281
steamers were granted passenger certificates
DEPARTURE OF A MESSAGERIES MARITIMES STEAMER.
by the Navigation Department. Of this nur-
her 146 were seagoing steamers and 135 har-
hour and river vessels. The ocean steamers
were certificated to carry a total of 5553 pas-
sengers, and had an aggregate of 95,869 tons,
the Sydney Harbour steamers alone register-
ing 5097 tons, were certificated to carry 28,948
persons, 7,000 more passengers being allotted
to the River boats,
SHIPPING OFFICE RETURNS,
The Government Shipping Office in 1902
engaged and discharged at Sydney 27,909 sea-
men—a pretty formidable army of “ salts.”
The same office paid out during thei year-
£ss,los and issued in advance notes £2420.
At Newcastle 5005 seamen were engaged and
discharged, £12,720 paid to seamen, £6433
issued in advance notes, and £6lO m fees paid


£
s.
a.
To Great Britain and Em ope direct ...
4
0
0 per month.
To India or China and Home
4
0
0 „
To West Coast of America and Home
4
0
In the Island Trade and back
5
0
o „
Intel state Trade Steamers
7
0
0 „
Interstate Trade. Sailers
4 10
0 „
Coastal Trade, Steamers
7
0
o „
Coastal Trade, Sailers
5
0
0 „
GOVERNMENT— Length.
Breadth.
Draught of
Vessels,
Sutherland,
Cockatoo Island... 600 ft, .
.. 84 ft. ..
. 32 ft.
Fi'zroy,
Cockatoo Island... 450 ft. .
.. 59 ft. ..
. 21 ft. 6 in.
WORT’S DOCK & E. CO.—
Mort’s, Balmain ... 640 ft. .
... 69 ft. ..
. 18 ft.
Woolwich,
Parramatta River 697 ft. .
.. 100 ft. ...
, 28 ft.
FLOATING DOCKS-
Bountrees’,
Waterview Bay ... ft. .
,.. 43 ft...
. 12 ft.
Drake’s, White Bay ... 150 ft, .
Jubilee, Johnston’s Bay 317 ft. .
.. 60 ft...
. 7 ft. 6 in.
.. 55 ft...
. 15 ft.
Small, Johnston’s Bay 100 ft. .
.. 23 ft. ...
, 7 ft, 3 in.
Mort’s Pontoon, ... 195 ft.
... 56 ft...
. 12 ft.
PATENT SLIPS—
Mort’s No. I")
( 270 ft. .
.. son....
11 ft. i 17 ft.
Mort’s No. 2 > Balmain
Mon’s No. S)
t 200 ft. ,
... 25 ft. ...
10 ft. & 16 ft.
C 80 ft. .
.. 13 ft. 6in
. 5 ft. 3 in.
NEWCASTLE 1IAKBOUU.
PATENT SLIPS—
Length.
Breadth.
Draught of
Vessel.
T. O’Sullivan & Co M
Stockton
. 200 ft. .
.. 40 ft ...
9 ft. & 2 ft.
A. Gallons’ No. 1,
Stockton
. 150 ft. .
.. 30 ft. ...
8 ft.
A. Callens’ No. 2,
Stockton ..
, —
..
into the Consolidated Revenue. Combined,
these figures give for the State 17,875 seamen
engaged, 15,039 discharged, £67,825 paid to
seamen through the shipping office, £8853
issued in advance notes, and £3472 in fees paid
into the consolidated revenue. The fees which
this branch of the Public Service thus earned
and paid into the consolidated revenue
amounted to £2,862. In this connection it
should be mentioned that, conformably with
the traditional policy of this State, the charges
upon shipping have been kept at the smallest
possible scale. T'-e amount of fees payable
for the engagement and discharge of crews is
regulated according to the tonnage of the
vessel. For engagement or discharge of sea-
men separately a fixed fee of 2s. is charged.
SALES OF VESSELS AND MORT-
GAGES.
Naturally amongst a fleet of shipping such
as Sydney possesses there is constantly a
change of owners taking place, these opera-
tions growing in importance and number as
the fleet expands. In 1902, 36 sales of steamers
and 55 sailing vessels were recorded. The
former aggregated 3062 tons register, while the
sailers comprised barquentines, barques, cut-
ters, ketches, lighters, luggers, schooners,
sloops and yawls, with a total of 9268 tons.
Thus, in all 91 vessels changed hands, 5 of
which were sold to foreigners. In the same
period there were registered under the Im-
perial Merchant Shipping Act, 41 mortgages,
22 on steamers for a total sum of £67,651, and
21 sailers for £18,066. As against these new
regulations there were 28 mortgages released
or discharged, namely, 12 on steamers for
£6779 and 16 on sailers for £3745.
SEAMEN’S WAGES.
As a matter of record, it is of interest to
quote the rate of wages paid monthly to able
seamen at this port, as shown by the shipping
master’s records: —
The pay of masters of steamers is as per ar-
rangement with owners or agents. Pay of
mates, first, second, or third, is respectively
£lO to £l7, £7 10s. to £l3, and £7 10s. to
£11; Engineers, first, second, and third re-
spectively, £l2 to £25, £7 10s. to £l9. £7 10 >.
to £l5; Firemen, £7 10s. to £10; Trimmers,
£6 10s. to £7.
CERTIFICATES OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF NAVIGATION.
The Navigation Department was created by
an Act of 1899, and is administered
by a superintendent under the control
of the Minister. Certificates of masters,
mates, engineers, and marine surveyors
are issued by the department. Appoint-
ments to the pilot service are made by the
Public Service Board and all pilots are Go-
vernment officers. Certificates of exemption
from pilotages are granted by the department.
In 1902 the department issued 26 master’s ce.-
tificates for foreign or oversea trade, 8 coast
certificates, and 24 harbour and river certifi
cates. For mates (first) there were granted 10
certificates and 19 second mates, also 9 for
coast. Engineers were granted 13 first class,
28 second and 100 third, while four marine
surveyors took out certificates and 49 pilotage
exemption tickets were granted.
DOCK ACCOMMODATION.
A seaport without possessing ample dock-
ing facilities is ineligible to claim rank with
the first-class ports of the world. In this re-
spect Sydney stands exceptionally high, pos-
sessing as she does several docks in size not
surpassed in any port in either hemisphere.
Moreover, the repairing shops and workshops
which form an equipment of a firsLclass dock
exist here as complete and modern as can be
found anywhere. The following are the prin-
cipal docks: —
There are small Government graving docks,
ranging in length from 100 ft. to 215 ft., at
places on the Tweed, Richmond, Clarence,
Macleay and Manning Rivers up north and at
Shoalhaven on the South Coast.
SYDNEY WHARF OF HOWARD SMITH CO., LTD.


UNION STEAMSHIP COMPANY'S WHARF, DARLING HARBOUR.


The Shipping Industry.
Historical and Biographical Sketches:—Continued.
PASSENGER AND CARGO STEAMERS.
Aberdeen Line.
DALGETY AND COMPANY, LIMITED, AGENTS.
As one of the very oldest shipping firms con-
nected with the Australian trade, the name of
Wales public for a great many years; the establish-
ment of the Aberdeen Liners in the Australian
trade dating back to the period when clipper ships
loaded for Austialia and proceeded thence to the
Ea“t to carry tea to the home market. The vessels
of the Aberdeen Line have always been noted as
symmetrical, fast ships of the extreme clipper
class. Messis. Geoige Thompson and Company
have continued to run their beautiful clippers to
pected liom well-found ships, eoniinanded by mas-
ters of the best type,, and on board of which every
caie is given to the wants of passengeis.
As sailing vessels gradually gave way to stea-
mers, Messrs. Geoige Thompson and Company,
while still sending sailers regularly to Australia,
in an enterprising manner turned their attention
to the building of steamers. The style of the
steamers built for the line has been kept as near as
THE ABERDEEN LINER S.S. "MORAVIAN,"
Messrs. George Thompson and Company's Aberdeen
Line has been prominently before the New South
Australia, carrying, during past years, great uuin-
bers of emigrants, with the full success to be ex-
possible to that of the clipper of earlier times,
with the result that the beautiful green hulls of


the splendid Aberdeen saloon steamers of to-day
are as marked amongst the most up-to-date ocean
liners as were the Aberdeen clippers at the time
when sailing ship communication with England
was the rule.
The first steamer built was the “ Aberdeen,”
which has been followed at shoit intervals by the
■'Australasian” (so well spoken of in J. A.
Fronde's widely read book " Oceana”), “ Damas-
cus,” “Nineveh,” "Moravian,” and “Salamis.”
The “ Sophocles,” formerly the " lonic,” was pur-
chased from the White Star Line; the popularity
of the steamer, earned on the Shaw-Savill and
Albion Line to New Zealand, being continued and
enhanced since running to Australia under the
Aberdeen flag. The above fleet of high-class stea-
refrigerating machinery, the success attending their
efforts to land frozen caigo regularly and in first
class condition being equal to that gained in re-
gard to ordinaly caigo. Beef, mutton, butter, poul-
try, eggs, rabbits, hares, fruit, etc., have all been
landed at their destination in South Africa or in
London in such a manner as to please both ship-
pers and consignees.
The route traversed by the Aberdeen steamers
is via Melbourne and Albany in Australia; Natal
and Capetown in South Africa; Teneriffe and
Plymouth; the final port of course, being London.
Owing to the great amount of attention directed,
to South Africa of late years, the passenger ac-
commodation of Messrs. George Thompson and
Company’s steamers has been always in demand,
to the Soudan, this being the first instance of Aus-
tralian troops being sent to take part in a war
of the nation. The “.Salamis” took the naval
contingents from Victoria and New South Wales
to China, during the late disturbance in the East,
while every steamer of the line has carried de-
tachments to and from England, Australia and
South Africa, without in any way interfering with
the regular service performed by the line,
A feature of the new steamers Messrs. George
Thompson and Company are building will be the
addition of certain saloon cabins containing only
one berth. Thus travellers who often find it
necessary to pay a large sum for the privilege of
travelling alone, will, in the case of the new stea-
SALOON OF THE ABERDEEN LINER S.S. “MORAVIAN.”
Orers has maintained a regular three-weekly ser-
vice between England and Australia, via South
Africa but Messrs. Geoige Thompson and Com-
pany, keeping pace with the general advancement
of shipping, have ordered two new steamers of
nearly 7000 tons each, the first of which, “ Milti-
ades,” will leave London during October of this
year on her maiden voyage.
Throughout their long connection with the Aus-
tralian trade the steamers of the Aberdeen Line
have carried vast quantities of wool and produce
°f all kinds, besides metals and ores, to the Eng-
lish market. Since the advent of frozen meat
carrying, all the steamers have been fitted with
and the line is justly popular with the travelling
public. The saloons of the steamers are very
comfortable, while the state rooms are large, airy,
and rvell appointed, containing, for the most part,
only two berths; travellers are never cramped for
room.
The historic places of the late Boer War no doubt
draw many tourists, and in connection with the
war, it might be mentioned that Aberdeen steamers
have been requisitioned by the Admiralty for the
transport of troops, the vessels being specially
built to Admiralty requirements. The " Austral-
asian” carried part of the contingent from Sydney
tners, be able to secure absolute privacy at a mode-
rate cost. By special arrangement with other piin-
cipal shipping companies, the Aberdeen Line
" books” round-the-world passages at the lowest
possible rates, choice of routes by way of Ame-
rica or the East being thus permitted, and as at-
tention is more and more directed to South Africa,
there is no doubt that these specially arranged
tours, with full “ stop-over” privileges, will be-
come most popular. The Abeideen Line is re-
presented throughout Australia and New Zealand
by Messrs. Dalgety and Company, Limited, who
are able to afford the fullrst particulars on every
matter in connection with the steamers.


White Star Line.
DALGETY AND COMPANY, LIMITED, AGENTS.
The White Star Flag was very well known in
Australia as far back as the days of the celebrated
gold rushes, many hundreds of expectant voyagers
being landed fiom these good ships to begin the
battle for fortune in the new golden country. Dur-
ing the period White Star sailing vessels traded to
the rapid handling of cargo, so necessary where
large quantities have to be dealt with, the steamers
named are able to do all their work in port in an
incredibly short space of time, shippers and con-
signees alike receiving benefit from the despatch
with which goods can be put on board and dis-
charged.
Being of such recent construction, the latest
system of refrigeration has been installed, the fre-
quent notices in the public press as to the perfect
condition of perishables landed in England being
sufficient indication of the high efficiency of the
machinery, and of the care bestowed upon this
class of cargo.
room extending from side to side. The steamers
carry from 360 to 460 persons, a berth being pro-
vided for each, and a seat in the dining saloon, so
that all may dine at one time. Taking into con-
sideration the low fares charged, the advantages
offered to passengers certainly warrant the inte-
rest taken in them, comprising as they do by far
the most extensive passenger decks on any vessels
trading here, as well as library, smoking room,
music room, etc.
Owing to the freedom enjoyed by all passengers,
and the low fares demanded, the White Star Line
steamers have taken a prominent place amongst
Australian lines, but with their unique arrangement
Australia they earned an excellent name for them-
- elves. It was, therefore, only to be expected that
when the same line, under the direction of the
late Mr. T. H. Ismay .whose efforts in the modern-
ising of ocean steamers are so well known) decided
to inaugurate a line of steamers for the Australian
trade, the public, so well served in the past, looked
forward to something which would take a foremost
place among-t steamship lines. Five steamers of
equal size, each approximating 12,000 tons, were
built on a plan which had commended itself to Mr.
Ismay as suitable to the wants of people on this
side of the world.
These steameis (Afric, Medic., Persic, Ttunic, and
Suevic) were built by special arrangement with
the White Star builders, Messrs. Harland and
Wolff, Belfast. With every modern appliance for
WHITE STAR LINER S.S. "SUEVIC.”
The steamers are all propelled by twin screws, now
coming into general use on account of the extra
safety thereby provided. For instance, in case
there should be an accident to the rudder, the vessel
could be navigated to the port of destination with
the aid of the twin screws, and the chance of acci-
dent to both screws is so remote as to rank as an
impossibility. Although the White Star steamers
are notable on account of their great size and facili-
ties for cargo carrying, the section which has occa-
sioned most discussion and interest is that pro-
vided for the accommodation of passengers.
Belying on a wide knowledge of Australian
people and their wants, the White Star Line has
these steamers fitted with only one class of accom-
modation. The whole ’tween deck- from amidships
aft aie taken up with cabins, and a spacious dining
of accommodation, it is perhaps not fair to com-
pare them with others of a radically different
style. Being entirely suitable to the requirements
of Australians,, who for the most part only ask for
cleanliness, comfort, and plenty of room, the White
Star steamers are likely to retain their hold on the
Australian public. A comfortable voyage is as-
sured at a price enabling great numbers of people
to take a voyage to England and back for a cost
quite impossible even a very few years ago, if any
degree of comfort were expected. For those who
are desirous of continuing their journey to America,
the White Star Line presents the best known chan-
nel. Their Atlantic service comprises such speci-
mens of the shipbuilders’ art as the 17,000 ton
"Oceanic,” the most liixuiiously fitted ve«sel ever
launched; the 20,000 ton " Celtic” and “ Cedric,”
Übe Shipping 3nbustn>.
Historical and Biographical Sketches:— continued.
PASSENGER AND CARGO STEAMERS.


besides many other magnificent steamers which
have helped to earn the White Star Line’s enviable
leputation on the Atlantic.
are of the steamer “ Suevic,” and are fairly repre-
sentative of the general accommodation of all the
steamers of the Australian service.
Liverpool the headquarters of the line, and the
starting point for the outward voyage to Australia.
Missis. Dalgety and Company, Limited, who act
LIRRARY OF THE WHITE STAR LINER S.S. "SUEVIC”
PROMENADE DECK OF THE WHITE STAR LINER S.S. “SUEVIC.”
Passages can be booked through from Australia
at a lower cost than by any other route, and with
every convenience that a wide experience in pas-
senger traffic can suggest. The illustrations herein
The route traversed by White Star steamers is
from Sydney by way of Melbourne, Capetown,
Teneriffe, and Plymouth to Tilbury Docks, Lon-
don, where all passengers are landed; thence to
on behalf of the line at all Aust.alian ports, are
always glad to give the public (very opportunity
of inspecting the steamers and to impart any in-
formation desired.


Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt and
Sanderson, Limited.
LUND’S BLUE ANCHOR LINE.
OCEAN STEAMSHIP COMPANY.
There are few lines more closely identified with
the Australian trade than Lund’s Blue Anchor
up sail in favour of steam, and built the “ Yeoman”
and “ Delcomyn.” These were followed by the
“ Eehuca,” " Hubbnck,” “ Murrumbidgee,” “ Wil-
cannia” No. 1, “ Warrnamhool,” “ Woolloomoo-
loo,” and “ Dungaree,” which were considered very
up-to-date vessels at the time they were built, but
the maich of progress was so rapid that they be-
came unsuitable for this trade, and have been dis-
three steamers are all splendidly fitted up for saloon
and third-cass passengers, and are great favourites
with “ those who know” of the travelling public.
An even finer addition to the fleet was the new
twin-screw steamer *' Commonwealth/’ 6611 tons,
launched last year. She is a regular floating palace,
and her passenger accommodation will bear com-
parison with that of any other steamer trading to
GILCHRIST, WATT AND SANDERSON, LTD., SYDNEY OFFICES
Line. The service was originally represented by
the sailing ships " Ambassador,” “ Mikado,” and
" Serapis,” which were well known visitors to
Sydney. Mr. William Lund, however, soon gave
posed of to make room for modern up-to-date stea-
mers. Tire first of the new class of steamers was
the “ Naming,” launched in 1896, and she was fol-
lowed by the “ Wilcannia” and “ Wakool.” These
Sydney. The fleet is now represented by the “ Com-
monwealth,” 6611 tons; “ Narrung,” 5078 tons;
‘'Wakool,” 5014 tons; “ Wilcanuia,” 5000 tons;
“Warrigal,” 4387 tons; " Yarrawonga,” 4011 tons.
Uhc Shipping Jiibusln?.
Historical and Biographical Sketchesi—eontinucd.
SHIPPING AGENTS.


They are all built in accordance with the Admir-
alty requirements for use as transports, and during
the South African war three of them were char-
tered hy the Government for this purpose. In fact,
OCEAN STEAMSHIP CO.’S S.S. “PROMETHEUS.”
one of them, the “ Wakool,” which was taken up
at the commencement of the war, has proved so suit-
able that she has been kept in commission ever
since, and is still on transport service. All these
steamers are insulated for the carriage of frozen
produce, and are fitted with all the latest im-
provements for handling caigo. Electric light is
installed throughout. The steamers sail at monthly
intervals from London via Capetown to Adelaide,
Melbourne and Sydney, and return to London via
Melbourne, Adelaide, Albany, Natal and Cape-
town.
The Ocean Steamship Co., Ltd. (Messrs. Alfred
Holt and Co.) is another fine line of steamers now
well known in Australian waters, but unlike the
" Blue Anchor Line,” they confine their opera-
tions solely to cargo, and there is no doubt that
they have carried their speciality to perfection, for
there is no finer line of cargo steamers in the
world. As far as Australia is concerned, Messrs.
Holt and Co.’s steamers aie comparatively a new
line, but in Eastern waters they are a very old-
e.-tablished institution, and the "Blue Funnel”
boats are noted for the quick and correct deliveries
of their cargoes. Indeed, it is well known that they
] un out so quickly that the mail boats have got to
he kept going to avoid being ovei taken. At one
time the Blue Funnel steamers used to carry a large
number of passengers, but the management have
now given up the passenger trade altogether. These
steamers have become exceedingly popular with
shippers here, partly on account of their speed,
which ensures quick delivery, and partly because
°f the splendid order in which their cargoes are
always landed. The fleet consists of 35 steamers,
ranging from steamers like the “ Jason,” “ Tydeus,”
and " Helens,” of 7441 tons, downwards. The
" Jason” loaded here last year, and holds the
proud position of being the largest cargo steamer
ever seen here, and also of having taken the largest
cargo that ever left Australia in one bottom. In-
cluded in the total measurement of 12,444 tons were
26,290 bales of wool. Three of the steamers, viz..
" Orestes,” “ Hector,” and “ Sarpedon,” are in-
%
sulafed for the carriage of fruit, and since the in-
ception of the line in 1900 they have carried full
cargoes of this highly perishable article, and have
always landed them in the pink of condition. The
Australian steamers sail from Glasgow monthly for
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane, and
return via the same Australian ports to London,
Liverpool, Glasgow and the Continent of Europe.
. Messrs Devitt and Moore’s sailing ships have
been identified with the Australian trade for a great
number of years, and in the old sailing ship days
the names of the " Sobraon,” “La Hogue,” and
“ Parramatta” were household words. The line is
now represented by the “ Derwent,” “ Macquarie,”
and “ Illawarra,” the last two of which each carry
50/60 midshipmen under Lord Brassey’s scheme for
the training of the sons of gentlemen for the mer-
cantile marine. Nowadays, of course, few passen-
gers patronize sailing ships, and Messrs. Devitt and
Moore’s ships are about the only ones in which any-
one wanting a long sea voyage can obtain a pas-
sage.
The agency of these three lines is held in Sydney
by Gilchrist, Watt and Sanderson. Ltd., under the
joint directorship of Mr. C. L, Cowper, who was origin'
ally a partner in the firm of Alfred Lamb & Co., and Mr.
J. B. Milne, who also manages the Sydney office of San
derson & Co. On the death of Mr. Alfred Lamb in 189
the shipping business was taken over by Messis.
Gilchrist. Watt and Co., and Mr. Cowper became
a partner in this firm. In 1901 the shipping busi-
nesses of Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt and Co. and John
Sanderson and Co. were amalgamated and formed
THE LUND LINER S.S. "WILCANNIA.”
into n limited company, under the title of Gil-
christ Watt and Sanderson, Ltd., Mr. C. L. Cow-
per, of Gilchrist, Watt and Co., and Mr. J. B.
Milne of John Sandeison and Co. being the Manag-
ing DLectoiS.


The Branch Line.
W. and A. McARTHUR, LTD., AGENTS.
In the history of marine architecture perhaps no
gi eater change has taken place than that from the
Australian clipper, built 30 years ago, to the steam-
propelled modern carrier. They differ in every re-
spect except in the facts that they are constructed
for the carrying on of commerce between people
occupying both sides of the globe, and for the profit
of those who are engaged in their maintenance.
The “Branch” line of steamers is owned by
Messrs. F. and W. Ritson, of Sunderland. They
have been built by Messrs. William Doxford and
Sons, a firm who have recently carried out improve-
ments in their works that will ultimately place
them in the front rank of ship-building firms. The
fleet consists as follows: —“Poplar Branch,” 5389
tons; “Lime Branch.” 5379 tons; “Almond
Branch,” 3161 tons; “Vine Branch,” 3142 tons;
"Orange Branch,” 3435 tons; “Willow Branch,"
3311 tons; “Laurel Branch," 3308 tons; “Elm
Branch,” 3265 tons; "Oak Branch,” 3258 tons;
“Olive Branch," 2732 tons; "Hazel Branch,” 2623
tons.
For some years past these fine steamers have, dur-
ing each wool season, been well known in Sydney
and Melbourne waters. The “ Oak Branch” last year
took away from Sydney nearly 18,000 bales, and
others of the line smaller quantities. In the early
nart of 1902 the new vessel “ Lime Branch” visited
Sydney. She has a carrying capacity of 8000 tons,
and could stow over 30,000 bales of wool. The aver-
age speed of this steamer is about 11 knots, and she
carries all the latest appliances for rapid loading
and discharge. Her upper deck is specially built to
facilitate the carriage of live stock.
Vessels of (he " Branch” size are very useful for
the average berthing accommodation at the prin-
cipal ports of Australasia, South Africa, and South
America and bulk cargoes can be carried at a good
speed, their bunker capacity being well considered
in their designing. The hatches are of unusual
length and width, and, owing to the peculi-
arity of “turret” construction, they are decidedly
“ self-trimmed," a feature which is most important
in the case of grain cargoes. This peculiar con-
struction makes this type of ship most useful in all
bulk cargoes. Owing to the continuity of the “ tur-
ret” both fore and aft and transverse-wise, enor-
mously increased longitudinal strength is provided.
The fact that vessels of the “ Branch” type have
a large righting angle, whether loaded or in light
trim, is of enormous advantage in regard to the car-
riage of bulk cargoes, especially grain. In the
“ Branch" steamers the danger of cargo shifting is
obviated, inasmuch as that part of a grain cargo
where the momentum is greatest, namely, the too
portion, is, so to speak, bottled in. No space is avail-
able for it to find play in. The great stability of
these steamers is most important in the cattle-
carrying business. The vessels engaged in the Aus-
tralian and South African trade are splendidly
fitted with permanent accommodation for cattle.
This renders them very safe for live stock. The mor-
tality of cattle carried on board the " Branch” ves-
sels figures out at only 1 per cent. This, after two
years' running in the trade, speaks for itself.
A double line of derricks joined by cross pieces on
top, in the new " Branches,” show' that utility is
steadily kept in view in the fittings of the ships.
Prompt loading and quick discharge is therefore
made by vessels which fly the house-flag of the
Nautilus Steamship Company. In the later-built
boats twin-screws will be the rule, an advantage
which allows of their being easily handled in narrow
waters, besides adding to the safety of the vessel in
foul weather, w'hen the racing of propellers is to a
certain extent unavoidable.
Some cargo steamers seem peculiarly suited for
only one kind of cargo, but those of the line under
notice are good all-round cargo boats.
While at the other end the most satisfactory ar-
rangements are made for the transport and storage
of Australian cargo, it is well to note that the ar-
rangements for shipment in Sydney are most com-
plete. Messrs. W. and A. McArthur, Limited, has
for a considerable period paid a laige measure of
its attention to the safe and efficient bei thing of
vessels that come to its agency. At that Company’s
excellent loading berth at Woolloomooloo Bay, the
steamers of the “ Brandi line find good accommo-
dation, and obtain every requisite for quick des-
patch. Details of the results achieved in loading
have alieady been given, and it is accordingly un-
necessary to repeat them.
In the future it may be taken for granted that
such successful ship-managers as Messrs.. F. and W.
Ritson will avail themselves of every opportunity of
strengthening the “ Branch" line wherever such is
deemed necessary.
The owners of the “ Branch” line, being located
in the very heart of the North-Eastern ship-build-
ing trade, are accordingly in the best-possible posi-
tion to advantageously place contracts for additions
to their already noted fleet.
Shippers by their line may rest content with a
knowledge of the fact that they will reap every
existing advantage in the matter of freight that the
fluctuations of the British shipping market will
allow the owners of this line to concede.
It is hoped, by the friends of British enterprise.
that a firm, already so noted as Messrs. F. and W.
Ritson, will long continue to profitably and effici-
ently eater for the shipping requirements of the
pastoral, agricultural, and general interests of New
South Wales.
The controllers of the " Branch” line are to be
congratulated on having, through their capable
local agents, established such good relations with
the exporting interests of this country; and the
latter are also to be felicitated on having their
business conducted so satisfactorily and advan-
tageously.
The Gulf Line, Ltd.
W. and A. McARTHUR, LTD, AGENTS.
Among the many valuable agencies held by
\V. and A. McArthur, Limited, Merchants,
Shipping and Insurance Agents, 13 and 15 Mac-
quarie Place, Sydney, is that for the Gulf Line,
Limited,
This well-patronised line of steamers has been
running out to Sydney for many years under the
auspices of the Greenock Steamship Company of
Greenock, which has lately been merged into (hr
Gulf Line, Limited, six first-class steamers being
engaged in these waters. The names of the vessels
and their tonnages are “ Gulf of Siam,” 3433 tons;
Gulf of Bothnia, 3452 tons; “ Gulf of Taranto.” 3431
tons; “Gulf of Venice,” 2923 tons; “ Gulf of
Genoa,” 3448 tons; " Gulf of Ancud,” 2761 tons,
The Gulf liners are each fitted for the carriage
of 45 000 frozen sheep in the insulated holds. Ves-
sals fitted for such a tiade are of national Import-
ance to Britain,
On their monthly trips to England they carry
frozen meat, butter, cheese, and poultry, the desti-
nation of their cargoes showing the course of trade,
London still absorbs a vast amount of sea-borne
food, but the ancient port of Bristol is now visited
by the steamers of the Gulf Line on their voyages
from Australia. Thus the South-Western counties
of England are served by this line, and the heavy
charges for railway transport from the Thames
obviated.
Besides the large accommodation for cargo in
tlieir insulated holds, th? Gulf Liprrs take 5(*09
THE BRANCH LINE. S.S. “LIME BRANCH.”
Xibe Shipping Jnbustcg.
‘Historical and Biographical Sketches;—continued.
CARGO STEAMERS.


tons of general cargo, as well as a supply of coal in
their bunkers for the long run home. One important
feature of their itinerary is that, in the wool season,
they are laid on for poits on the Continent of
Europe, and this provides for direct shipments to
Dunkirk, Antwerp, and other destinations adjacent
to the great manufacturing centres of France, Bel-
gium, and Germany.
The steamers are shapely and well found, combin-
ing good speed with ample accommodation for cargo
and comfort for all on board.
MR. h. G. JEFFERSON.
(For Biography see page 22D .
One important feature is that their steameis foim
a connection between the Australian Commonwealth
and the South African colonies. During the Boer
War they carried large quantities of provisions fiom
this side to the South African shoie. In order to
historic Woolloomooloo Bay enables Messrs.
McArthur and Co. to give quick despatch, both to
inwaid and outward cargoes.
SIR WILLIAM McMILLAN, K.C.M.G.
(For Biography see page 21D).
It is hoped that a company which has bee!, closely
identified with the progress of Austialia for such
a considerable period will, for a long time to come,
maintain relations that have been mutually pro-
fitable, and that the house-flag of the Gulf Line.
Limited, for many future decades, will be seen in
every port of the Commonwealth, where it has been
a familiar object during many eventful years.
MIL M. F. DAWKINS.
One of the busiest men in Sydney is Mr M. F.
Dawkins, Secretary and General Manager pro tem
of Messrs. IV. and A. McArthur, Limited. Mr.
five of South Australia, and was born in
Adelaide in 1865. lie began his business career in
the Commercial Bank at Adelaide, and in 1837
moved to Melbourne, where he remained for some
fourteen years, seven of which he was associated
with Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co.
He was also with the firm of Mcllwraith,
McEachern for seven years as Accountant, and in
charge of shipping matters in connection with the
Federal and Iloulder steamship lines. In 1902 he
came to Sydney, having accepted the position of
MR. M. F. DAWKINS.
Secretary offered to him by Sir William McMillan
K.C.M.G., Chairman of Directors of Messrs. W.
and A. McArthur, Ltd., Sydney.
During the absence of Mr. 11. G. Jefferson, Manag-
ing Director of the Shipping Department of Messrs
THE GULF LINE, S.S. “GULF OF TARANTO.
ope with present and prospective requirements
iesh capital has this year been nut into the Gulf
me. Ltd., and it is confidently expected that, with
10 f • 6 Company s funds, newsteamers
1 all modern improvements will bs built in the
fut “ re, „. ... .
t he splendid berthing facilities possessed at the
Dawkins is also Secretary to the following com-
panics, which pre under Messrs. McArthur’s man-
agement, viz.:—Wm. Brown and Co., Ltd.,
Stevedores; The Jletropolitan Coal Co., Ltd.,
of Sydney; The Australian South African
Steamship Co., Ltd.; W. and A. McArthur,
South Africa, Ltd, Mr. Dawkins is a na-
W, and A. McArthur, Ltd, who is away in London,
Mr. Dawkins was placed in charge, and has fully
justified the confidence reposed by his directors in
his abilities, having greatly conduced to the success
of the local administration of the affairs of the
famous “Gulf” and "Branch” lines for which the
firm are agents.


Compagnie Des Messageries
Maritimes De France.
It is a fact too seldom remembered in our days
that Australia remains, and will remain, under
a deep obligation to the French nation in the
matter of communication with the old world
centres of civilisation. From them originally
came the stupendous scheme of cutting a waterway
through a bundled miles of dreary desert sand be-
tween the shores of the Mediterranean and the Bed
Sea. It would be idle to dwell upon the wide-reach-
ing results of this great achievement of Monsieur de
Lesseps and his supporters. But it is a fitting cor-
ollary to the accomplishment of their work that
Australia to-day is fortunate enough to boast the
presence of the fast and superbly equipped ocean
palaces of the Compagnie des Messageries Mari-
times.
The company’s terminal port in the Southern
Hemisphere is Noumea, but Australians, of
course, may consider Sydney as the starting
point of the line. Thence the usual calling places
on the Australian coast—Melbourne, Adelaide, and
Fremantle—are touched at, whence a course is
shaped for Colombo. It was formerly the
rule for the Australian liners to call at
the Seychelles, but this route w r as some
years ago abandoned in order to ensure
swifter transit between Australia and
France. From Colombo the steamers voyage to
Aden and up the Bed Sea and Suez Canal to the
Mediterranean and Marseilles, which is the home
port of the company. Passengers can cross France
by rail, and if they prefer it may place themselves
under the guidance of English interpreters, w'ho
accompany them to Paris and Calais. Their lug-
gage is shipped round to London by steamer, and
it should be remembered that while on board their
heavy luggage is available to them every day at
any time.
In 1851 Monsieur Armand Behie recoghiscd
the opportunities that awaited the man enter-
prising enough to equip a passenger and mail
service from the charming Mediterranean
nort of Marseilles. At first the scope was
limited, embracing only the shores of the
Mediterranean and Black Seas, and the early
year s of the company were marked by the strenu-
ous efforts and dogged perseverance of its founder
to secure a footing and lay down the lines upon
which the subsequent development was to be ef-
fected. At length success was assured, and Mon-
sieur Armand Behic lived to witness with his own
eyes the fullest realisation of his aims and objects.
Year by year trade grew', new' routes were add“d,
and new steamers launched, until a map of th»
company’s services shows ramifications in all
directions, and the nroud position won amongst
the maritime companies of the world in the short
space of half a century may well take rank
among the greatest achievements in the domain of
commerce. At the present day the capital of the
company amounts to 30,000,000 francs, and the
chairman of directors is Monsieur Andre Lebon.
who was formerly well known as a statesman, and
at one time administered the portfolio of
Minister of State for the Colonies of Prance.
The fleet now consists of sixty-two steam-
ships, all of modern design and equipment.
The premier line may be perhaps the India, China
and Japan route from the point of view of the
number of the ships engaged in it. Nineteen
steamers, aggregating 82,000 tons, and 74,000 h.p.,
are engaged plying between Marseilles and the
ports en route to Yokohama. The line is headed
by the stately " Annam,” " Tonkin,” " Indus,”
and " Laos,” all of which have a gross tonnage of
over 6,000 tons, while the' smallest boat—the
“ Douro”—is registered at 2,742 tons. The Medit-
erranean and Black Sea lines rank second in im-
portance, employing sixteen steamers', of 62,000
tons and 40,000 h.p., headed by the ** Portugal/* of
5 549 tons and 4,800 h.p. The Fiver Plate and
Brazil lines absorb eight steamers, totalling 42,000
tons and 36,000 h.p On this route the largest
steamer owned by the company—the “ Atlan-
tique” (6,907 tons, 7,200 h.p.—is engaged.
The Colonies of France in the Far East,
stretching from Madagascar to Tonquin, are now
linked together by the M.M. lines, an advantage
which it is unnecessary to dwell upon. Along the
Indian Ocean routes from Port Said down
through the Bed Sea to Zanzibar, the ports of
Madagascar, Reunion, and Mauritius, ply seven
steamers almost as large as those which run to
Australia, totalling 22,000 tons, and driven by
17,000 h.p. The Indo-China lines are in reality off-
shoots from the India, China and. Japan line, join-
ing the latter at Colombo, Singapore or Saigon.
and running from these ports to Calcutta, Ilatavia,
and Tonquin respectively. The first mentioned
line includes in its itinerary Madras and Pondi-
cherry, while the line tunning from Singapore
northwards and beyond does much to assist the
development of French interests in the Indo-
Chinese Peninsula.
It is now about two decades ago, or, to be cor-
rect in 1883, that the flag of the M.M. Comrrany
first floated over the waters of Port Jackson. Since
then the steamers employed on this particular
route have grown enormously itr size, speed, and ap-
pointments. To-day the Polynesian, Armatrd liehie,
Ville de la Ciotat, and Australian lose nothing in
comparison with any of the oversea steamers which
r"ach our shores, and they have one and all a re-
cord for punctuality not eclipsed by any other
line. To speak of being here to-day and in Mar-
seilles 28 days hence is not an idle boast in the
history of the performances of the company’s Aus-
tralian line of steamers, and it is common for Paris
dates to reach Sydney in 30 days by these grey-
hounds of the ocean, and, of course, where mails
are possible passengers have equal facility. The
four ships have been designed with especial at-
tention to the saloon accommodation, and the
state rooms are spacious and exceptionally well
fitted. English is spoken on board, and no ex-
pense is spared, no trouble grudged, to make the
travellers life between embarkation and debarka-
tion pass in the most enjoyable manner possible.
The less attractive, but perhaps more important
trading facilities offered by the company are large
and continuously increasing. According to offi-
cial figures the value of goods purchased by
France in Australia amounts to about
.£2,651,000 per annum. Although it cannot be said
that France responds in any way reciprocally in
this matter-, still, the exports from that country
to Australia have for he past three years averaged
about .£510,000, so that the total trade between
France and Australia must reach, and probably
exceed, £4,000,000 per annum. In addition to the
MESSAGERIES MARITIMES' F.M.S. “POLYNESIEN.”
foul- oversea lineis. which make the trip between
Sydney and Noumea once eveiy four weeks, the
comfortable and seaworthy “ Pacifique” maintains
a monthly service in addition, so that ample op-
portunities are afforded both passengers and ship-
pers for maintaining their connection with New
Caledonia.
One of the fascinating ways of spending an ex-
tended holiday is the enter ing upon a “ Pound the
World Torfr,” and recognising the great possibili-
ties existing in this direction, the company have
long made a special feature of this class of busi-
ness. For the purposes of more efficient ad-
ministration of these tours, the company
has classified the various routes into six subdi-
visions. These subdivisions may roughly be des-
cribed as follows Egypt, Ceylon, Straits Settle-
ments China, Japan, and Canada via Vancouver;
Australia and Canada; Australia, China, Japan
and Canada; China, Japan and San Francisco;
Australia and San Francisco; Australia, China,
TLbc Shipping Jnbustvp.
Historical and Biographical Sketches:—continued.
PASSENGER AND MAIL STEAMERS.


japan, and San Francisco. As the company's
lines branch out in all directions as soon as Aden
is reached by the Eastern bound steamer, it will
be seen that exceptional facilities are offered to
those who, though they may wish to put a girdle
round the eaith have no desire to accomplish their
object by an adherence to the conventional routes,
but prefer rather to extend their knowledge and
experience by visiting the out-of-the-way places of
the world.
A further advantage enjoyed by those who travel
on the M.M. route is the fact that their ticket ex-
tends over a considerable period. Passengers may,
if they choose, break their journey at any of the
intermediate ports, taking it up again by fo’lowing
steamers of the company, always provided that
they complete their voyage within twelve months
Yignon and the freight office at 10 Place de la
Republique. The London agents of the company
are at 97 Cannon-street, E.C., and 51 Pall Mall,
S.W., with Monsieur C. Bertrand as Agent-General
for the United Kingdom. Offices are also located
at Glasgow, Liverpool, and Manchester in the Bri-
tish Isles, and a great number of places in Europe.
The centra) offices for Australia are situated in the
heart of the city, at Queen’s corner, Pitt-street.
At its head is Monsieur Brasier de Thuy, who as
Agent Principal in Australia, has under him a
laig? staff of experienced gentlemen, nearly all
of whom have seen many years of service. The Mel-
bourne Office, which is located at 473 Collins-
street, is under the able control of Monsieur 11. de
Possel, a gentleman of great experience, who has
been for many years connected with the manage-
M. BRASIER DE THUY.
M. Brasier de Thuy, who presides at the head of
affairs in Australia, has won his business laurels
by a lengthy acquaintance with maritime affairs
in almost every part of the world to which the
Messageries Maritimes flag trades. Those who re-
member Mr. Couil as agent years ago will be pre-
pared for the statement that it would take a very
shrewd and capable man to succeed him.
M. Blanc came and proved extremely popular,
yet it is no disparagement to those capable repre-
sentatives to say that the present occupant of the
high and responsible position has, during his
three or four years’ residence amongst us sur-
rounded himself if possible bv as wide a circle of
friends.
SYDNEY OFFICES OF THE MESSAGERIES MARITIMES DE FRANCE.
of embarkation at the port of departure. Return
tickets are issued from Marseilles for the , ports
beyond Suez, and from those ports to Marseilles,
which are available for twenty-four months, in-
eluding the time occupied on the two voyages. The
company for the benefit of its patrons has estab-
fished a very complete system of agents, sub-agents,
and correspondents, who represent its interests not
only on the lines of route followed by the steamers,
ni a^S ° e l se "’h ere > wherever it is thought prob-
able that passengers on the company’s ships may
h u during their land travels. The
bead office is, of course, at Marseilles, passengers
aving access to the company at 16 Rue Canneb-
while general business is transacted at 2
yuai de la Joliette. At Paris the Board of Direc-
Ws and general offices are situated at No. I Rue
ment of the company’s operations in Sydney and
Melbourne. Messrs Dalgety and Co., Limited,
watch over the interests of the company at Ade-
laide Fremantle, Geelong, King George’s Sound,
and Perth. Correspondents at different'towns in
Australia and New Zealand have also been ap-
pointed, and facilities are thus ensured to intend-
ing passengers securing all the necessary informa-
tion regarding the company’s rates and rcgula-
tions, with the least inconvenience and loss of time.
Prom the beginning of their Australian connec-
tion the Messageries Maritimes Company have
won and deservedly maintained an envi-
able reputation for modern methods and
acute commercial knowledge in all the
branches of the great services that are
conducted by them,
Though but a few years here, M. Brasier de Thuy
is an officer of very long standing in the service
of the company. Prior to his appointment to the
Australian position, he controlled the company’s
important agency at Singapore. In the Straits
Settlements the same good feeling which has flowed
towards him in Sydney was prominent, and no
doubt proved a factor with his directors in con-
side: ing the matter of his transfer to Australia,
Ilis cordial relations with the representatives of
rival lines is no less notable than his geniality
with all those who socially have the pleasure of his
acquaintance, and in making the selection of re-
presentative of a national steamship line to Aus-
tralia it is undeniable no better could have pos-
sibly been made than when the directors of the
Messageries Maiitijnes chose M, Brasier de Thuy.


The Norddeutscher Lloyd.
GENERAL MAIL AND PASSENGER
STEAMERS.
Ono of the most interesting and, at the same time,
most gratifying features in connection with the ex-
pansion of Australia's oversea traffic, is the in-
and, though these organisations are sometimes dis-
tinguished, for purposes of statistics, by the epithet
“Foreign,” they have become so intimate a part of
Australasian trade that both commercial men and
the general jiublic have long regarded them as al-
most purely Australasian institutions. From an-
other point of view no one could fail to be impressed
with the fact that the inception and maintenance of
such lines, having their port of anival in Euio-
pean, as distinct from British, shipping centres,
German shipping companies. Not content with
capturing and holding against all competition a
laige share of the trans-Atlantic trade, the N.D.L.
(to use the contraction which has become familiar
to all who have any connection, however slight,
witr wateiside working) turned treir attention to
the East as well as to the West, with the result that
their routes, " somewheres East of Suez,” have be-
come as famous as that followed by their flyers bo.
tween Bremen and New York. A natural conse-
OFFICES OF THE NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD, BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.
creased attention which has, during the past few
years, been paid to this country’s resources, her im-
ports and her exports, by shipping firms whose head-
quarters lie outside the British Isles. Mention
could be made of many organisations which, at one
time or another, during the last score of years, have
f ound a profitable return, both in passenger and
freight carriage for their enterprise in inaugurating
and maintaining a regular service to Australasia,
affords abundant evidence of the expansion of Aus-
tralasian trade, so that it has become imperative
for importers and exporters, the one to obtain
goods, the other to seek a market in countries which,
not so very many years ago, were thought quite
outside the sphere of Australian operations.
One of the most important companies in this con-
nection is undoubtedly the Norddeutscher Lloyd,
which has for long held the premier position among
quence of this expansion of their “sphere of in-
fluence” has been, of course, an increase in the num-
ber of vessels owned by the Company. At the pre-
sent day it holds the distinction of being the largest
passenger and mail-carrying Company in the world,
at any rate when considering the number and ton-
nage of the vessels employed, if not the actual total
of passengers and quantity of goods carried on tfie
various routes. The fleet of the N.D.L..consists' of
Übe Shipping
Historical and Biographical Sketches:—continued.
PASSENGER AND MAIL STEAMERS.


Horse power.
Tonnage
Ocean steamers
Indo-Chinese Coasting Ser-
3C6.260
447,538
vice
39,710
66,017
River steamers ...
9,400
5,386
Steam launches ...
795
390
Training ships ...
—
5,823
Lighters
—
34,431
Total
416 165
559,585
70 ocean steamers, 43 coastal steamers, 29 river
steamers, 16 steam launches, 2 training ships, and
152 lighters. The following table will show the dis-
tribution of the tonnage and horse power of these
different descriptions of steamers: —
In addition to these gigantic totals of 559,585 tons,
and 416,165 h.p., the Company have at present on the
stocks 4 trans-Atlantic steamers, which will add
23,000 tons and 14,000 h.p. to the aggregate, and in
this vast fleet are contained some of the most fam-
ous ocean greyhounds of to-day. We of Australia
certainly know and appreciate to their full extent
the capabilities, both in the matter of speed and
comfort, of such popular steamers as the “ Grosser
Kurfurst,” Freidrich der Grosse,” “Barbarossa,”
the “Konigin Luise,” and others of the Australian
fleet. But, when compared with the leviathans
which race weekly across the Atlantic, it is easy to
distinguish the superiority on all counts enjoyed
by the latter. The principal steamers flying the
crossed anchor and key, which is the distinguishing
flag of the N.D.L., are as follows : —“Kaiser Wil-
helm II.” (40,000 h.p., 20,000 tons); "Kronprinz Wil-
helm” (33,000 h.p., 14,908 tons); “Kaiser Wilhelm
der Grosse” (28 000 h.p., 14,349 tons); “Kaiserin
Maria Theresa" (17,500 h.p., 8,286 tons); “Hohen-
zollern” (6,500 h.p., 6,661 tons); “Lahn” (9,000 h.p..
5,333 tons); “AHer” (8,000 h.p., 5,217 tons); “Trave”
(8,500 h.p., 5 262 tons); “Grosser Kurfurst" (9,700
h.p., 13,182 tons); “Konig Albert” (9,000 h.p., 10,643
tons); “Prinzess Irene” (9,0 0 h.p., 10,881 tons);
"Prinz Heinrich” (5,500 h.p., 6,263 tons); “Prinz
Regent Luitpold” (5,500 h.p., 6 288 tons); "Preus-
son” (3,800 h.p., 5,295 tons;; “Bayern” (3,800 h.p.,
5,034 tons); “Sachsen” (3,800 h.p., 5,026 tons); “Fi ied-
rich der Grosse” (7,000 h.p., 10,568 tons); "Konigin
Luise” (7,001 h.p., 10,711 tons); “Barbarossa” (7,000
h.p., 10,915 tons); “Bremen” (8,000 h.p., 11,570 tons);
“Stettin” (1,600 h.p., 2 478 tons); “Main” (5,500 h.p.,
10,067 tons); “Rhein” (5,50 * h.p., 10,058 tons); “Nec-
kar” (5,500 h.p., 9,835 tons); “Zieten” (5,000 h.p.,
7,900 tons); “Boon” (5,000 h.p., 8,000 tons); “Seyd-
litz” (5000 h.p., 7,900 tons); “ Frankfurt” (3,200 h.p.,
7,431 tons); “Hannover” (3,200 h.p., 7,305 tons);
“Koln” (3,200 h.p., 7,410 tons); "Chemnitz” (3,200
h.p., 8,000 tons); “Brandenburg” (3,200 h.p., 7,532
tons); "Cassel” (3,400 h.p., 7,543 tons); “Breslau”
(3.40. h.p., 7,524 tons); “Schleswig” (4,000 h.p., 7,500
tons); “Wrttekind” (2,500 h.p., 5,640 tons).
Among these steamers the “Kaiser Wilhelm der
Grosse” and the “Kronprinz Wilhelm” have long
been before the world as two of the most prominent
record breakers of the trans-Atlantic lines. Two of
the performances of the latter may be quoted as il-
lustratrng what the N.D.L. can achieve in the way
of rapid transit. The "Kronprinz Wilhelm” left
Bremerhaven on the afternoon of September the
Pth. At 9.10 on tire following evening she steamed
out from Cherbourg on her straight run across the
Atlantic. Sandy Hook (New York) was reached at
4.7 a.m. on September the 16th, the voyage between
Cherbourg and New York thus occupying 5 days, 11
hours, and 57 minutes. On her journey this won-
derful line maintained an average speed of 23 00
nautical miles per hour. On another trip the
‘Kronprinz Wilhelm" landed her passengers and
Mails at Plymouth 5 days 11 hours and 32 minutes
after leaving New York, the voyage of 3,095 knots
being covered at an average speed of 23 53 knot
Per hour.
Ihe records of the “Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse”
are no less remarkable, but the N.D.L. are not even
satisfied with the possession of two steamers of such
wotulnfu! speed. At the present time they are
building the “Kaiser Wilhelm II.” Indeed, she has
already been launched and the finishing touches
are now being put to her. Her registered tonnage
Js 20,000 tons, and her engines will develop 44,000
b-P- She has been designed to maintain a speed of
44 knots an hour at sea, and, when she commences
•uniting, in April of (his year, it is confidently ex-
pected that she will break all previous records.
In the list of vessels given above will be noticed
the names of many of the most popular steamers
trading to Australia. The principal among them
are known as the Ilarbarossa class, the following
steamers being built on her model:—“Grosser Kur-
furst,” “Barbarossa,” “Friedrich der Grosse,”
“Bremen,” and “Ivonigin Luise.” All these vessels
are well over 10,000 tons burden, and are driven by
twin screws. They have the recommendation, also,
of being built in accordance with the highest re-
quirements imposed on shipbuilders by the Ger-
manic Lloyd and other Classification Bureaux.
While the freight-carrying capacity has received
the strictest attention, both as regards the bulk and
also the facilities for rapid handling, the comfort
of the traveller has been especially well looked
after. The first-class passenger accommodation is
arranged amidships, on the upper deck and upper
and lower promenade decks, the dining saloon being
situated on the fore part of the lower promenade
deck. The Smoking lloom and Ladies’ Drawing-
room are situated on the upper promenade deck,
which is about 35 feet above the water line. The
cabins are large and thoroughly well ventilated, the
inside ones being fitted with electric fans. A spe-
cial feature observable in the passenger regulations
of the N.D.L. is the provision that under no circum-
stances are more than two persons to be berthed in
any first-class cabin, although many of the cabins
are large enough for four adults.
The Company’s Australian service is a three-
weekly one, and, as it is under contract with the
Government for the carriage of mails, in addition
to its ordinary passenger and freight business, the
transit between Australia and Europe is expedited
at every point. The ports of call on the route after
leaving Sydney are, Melbourne, Adelaide, Fre
mantle, Colombo, Aden, Suez, Ismalia, Port Said,
Naples, Genoa, Southampton, Antwerp, and Bre-
men. The port of Genoa is usually considered their
terminus by voj’agers whose destination is on the
Continent, and, on arriving there, they leave the
steamer for Ihe train. Passengers booked to Eng-
land travel round to Southampton, and are sent on
to London, free of charge, by the Company. In-
deed, provided there are a sufficient number of pas-
sengers to justify it, ihe Company charter a special
nain to accommodate its patrons between the two
porta. Of course, it is possible for these also to land
at Naples or Genoa, and make the rest of their
journey overland, with the choice of one of many
routes across the Continent. If they do this it is
necessary for them to book only to Genoa or Naples,
the rest of the journey having to be undertaken at
their own expense, though, as a set-off against this
extra outlay, the fares between Australia and Italy
are somewhat less than those obtaining between
here and London.
Passengers by the N.D.L. Steamers enjoy very
many advantages when once they have entrusted
themselves to the care of the Company. If their
point of departure is beyond the terminal port,
they have the benefit of reduced railway and steam-
er fares to Sydney. They are allowed to break the
journey at ports of call along the route, the tickets
being available for six months, that is to say, the
journey must be completed within six months from
the date of departure. A fully qualified doctor is
PORTION OF INTERIOR OF SYDNEY OFFICES.
carried on every steamer, and his services, as well
as any medicine required, are given free of charge,
For (he convenience of passengers a pocket cable
code has been published, which enables them to
communicate with their friends by cable at a mini-
mum cost. In addition, they can arrange in Syd-
ney for the cabling of their safe arrival in London
on the payment of a small fee.
Perhaps no other organisation can offer such re-
markable facilities for round-the-world trips,
without the tourist having to change the flag under
which he sails, as the Norddeutscher Lloyd. A
glance at the following summarised account of the
regular lines manitained by the Company’s fleet
abundantly bears out this assertion. Between
Europe and America (North and South) no less than
eight distinct services are followed. IJetween Bre-
men, Southampton (London), Cherbourg (Paris), and
New York, with the return trip, a weekly express
service is maintained by the best ships of the Corn-
pany, while a mail, passenger, and freight service
between the same ports is carried on from week to
v,eek by steamers of somewhat less speed and ton-
nage. A weekly mail, passenger, and freight service
backwards and forwards between Bremen and Bal-
timore has also been found necessary, and a bi-


monthly passenger and freight service is in opera-
tion between Bremen and Galveston, on the Gulf of
Mexico. From the Mediterranean, with ports at
Genoa, Naples, and Gibraltar, a weekly mail, pas-
senger, and freight service is run to New
York and back. The West Indies are
served by a bi-monthly mail, passenger, and
freight service between Bremen, Antwerp,
Corunna, and Cuba. Two N.D.L. lines ply
from Europe to South America. The first of these
from Bremen to Santos, in Brazil, with ports of
call at Antwerp, Oporto, Lisbon, Pernambuco, Rio
de Janeiro, is a bi-monthly' one for mails, passen-
gers and freight, and a similar service is main-
tained to the River Plate, with ports at Bremen,
Antwerp, Southampton (London), Cherbourg (Paris),
Corunna, Villagarcia, Monte Video, and Buenos
Ayres.
Next in importance to the American are the East
Asiatic services, the principal among which is a
line scheduled to leave Bremen bi-monthly with
mails, passengers, and freight. The route followed
by this, the main artery of the Company’s Eastern
connections, is a various and exceptionally inter-
esting one. Before leaving Europe the ports of Ant-
werp, Southampton (London), Gibraltar, Genoa, and
Naples are visited with the usual run to Port Said,
Snez, Aden and Colombo to follow. Thence the
steamers travel to Penang and Singapore. After
that a tourist with plenty of time and plenty of
money has the doors of the whole East open to him,
the key being the various branch lines which have
before been mentioned in connection with the N.D.L.
service to China and Japan. If he prefers to begin
with studying Eastern manners and customs, still
nearer to Western civilisation, he may continue his
journey' as far as Port Said. There he may disem-
bark in order to pay a visit to Egypt, and, when he
has spent as long a time there as he feels necessary
to thoroughly' acquaint himself with the unnum-
bered attiactions of that land of ancient oivilisa-
tion, he can proceed to Naples or Genoa, whence
his way either to the Old or New World is clear be-
fore him. By following this course on their way to
North America, passengers booking through to New
York can put off as long as possible the necessity for
ehduring the cold of a Northern winter until they
reach the other side of the Atlantic, and, in any case,
they' avoid the European winter altogether. There
are still two routes offered to tourists by the N.D.L.,
which should especially appeal to Australians.
The first of these necessitates transhipment at
Aden into the steamers of the German East Africa
Line. This line, as the name implies, maintains a
coastal service along the whole of the East Coast of
Africa, from Suez in the North to Durban in the
South, the intermediate ports being Dar-es-Salaam,
Zanzibar, Mozambique, Delagoa Bay (Beira). From
upon, relieved by touches of the Old World at the
various ports and trading . stations visited.
The steamers call at Herbertshohe, Ste-
phansort, Friedrich Wilhelm’s Hafen and
Berlin Hafen in German New Guinea.
It would take a. volume to do adequate
justice to the unique scenery of German New Guin-
ea. Through the sunlit sea, the traveller voyages
with an ever-changing panorama unfolding before
him. Sometimes it is a group of coral islands, the
white line of surf thrown up in vivid contrast to
the many hued foliage of the shore. Sometimes the
steamer coasts along at the foot of lofty green-clad
slopes, with here and there a native village peeping
through the trees. Sometimes the steamer anchors
in a deep fiord studded with emerald islands, from
which canoe after canoe manned by picturesquely
adorned natives puts off to trade. At other times
the scene changes, and the scarred grim sides of a
volcano run up thousands of feet to its smoke-
wreathed summit. Round the North-Western ex-
tremity of Dutch New Guinea the steamer trends
away again to the Southward through the no less
picturesque isles of the Malay Archipelago. At
Macassar, the chief town of South Celebes, the ves-
sel makes a stay sufficiently' long for the tourist to
study' its interesting settlement, and the many di-
verse types of men who make it their headquarters,
Malays from all parts of the Archipelago, the crews
NORDDEUTSCHER LLOYD G.M.S. "GROSSER KURFÜRST.”
leaving the latter port, which has not inaptly been
called the “gateway of the East)’’ the route trends
northwards to Yokohama, touching en route at
Hongkong, Shanghai, Nagasaki and Hiogo.
Many branch services diveige from this line.
From Penang the steamer runs to Belawan,
in Sumatra, while from Singapore no less
than four services branch out in different
directions to the East Coast of Sumatra, to Bangkok
in Ssam, to British North Borneo, and to Manila
and Ho Ho in the Philippine Islands. From Shang-
hai, Hangkow, and other inland points on the shores
of the Yaug-tze-kiang are served by a line of speci-
ally built river steamers. In addition to this main
service and its feeder lines, steamers devoted ex-
dusively to freight are regularly engaged between
Bremen, Rotterdam, Antwerp, Port Said, Penang,
Singapore, Hongkong, Shanghai, Kobe and Yoko-
hama.
The Australian voyager, anxious to experience
the undefined fascination which the East (using the
term in its broadest sense) always exercises, has de-
cidedly unexcelled opportunities for so doing if he
entrusts himself to the N.D.L. At Colombo pas-
sengers can tranship into the splendid steamers of
the Company running between China, Japan, and
Europe, the fortnightly mail service of which route
has already been outlined. The principal vessels
mgaged in this traffic are of 10,000 tons burden, and
are similar in construction to the Barbarossa class
described above. Once at Colombo, it may be said
Durban it is, of course, easy to reach Capetown, and
thence the voyage to Europe may be undertaken
via Las Palm is, Lisbon, Flushing, Bremenhafen and
Hamburg. The passenger who tranships at Aden
has also the opportunity of travelling by an alter-
native route as far as Mozambique, via Mombassa,
Kilwa, Lindi, Mikindani, and Ibo, for which pur-
pose the so-called intermediate steamers of the Ger-
man East Africa Line will have to be made use of.
Passengers by this route have certainly the know-
ledge that they have diverged from the beaten
tracks followed by conventional globe-trotters, and
are enabled not only to learn something of
the part of the world, brg with potentialities for
future development, but also abounding in scenic
and ethnological aspects which will more than com-
pensate for any extra time or expense incurred on
the voyage.
There yet remains for consideration a tourist route
which may, with justice, be considered Australia’s
own, at any rate as far as the first section of it is
concerned. From Sydney to Singapore it is no ex-
aggeration to say that a veritable fairyland awaits
the traveller wise enough to make the trip. The
N.D.L. steamers on the route, leaving Sydney at
comparatively frequent intervals, and calling at
Brisbane and Townsville as the last Australian
port, strikes away from there north-eastward to-
wards New Guinea. With the passage of the Bar-
rier Reef civilisation is practically left behind, and
a new world of primitive men and manners entered
of the far-famed Macassar prows, Arabs and Chi-
nese, the representative of each nationality or even
of each tribe clad in his distinctive and often
brightly-coloured dress, jostle one another in the
straggling streets of the town, and, in the study
of Macassar and its inhabitants, the time passes all
(oo quickly. The next port of call is Batavia, the
headquarters of Dutch rule in the Netherlands In-
dies, and here again one may profitably employ his
time, both in visiting the various beauty spots
which are to be found in profusion in and around
the old town, with its quaint admixture of typically
Dutch characteristics, and no less typical native
buildings. From Batavia the last link of the voy-
age connects the line with Singapore, and here pas-
sengers can tranship into the steamers of the N.D.L.
Chino-European services described above. Further-
more, they have a choice of two routes, the one
Westward via the intermediate ports to Europe, or
Northward by way of Hongkong, Shanghai, Naga-
said,' Kobe or Yokohama. From the latter port
they can proceed across the Pacific, either to San
Francisco or Vancouver, whence a selection may be
made of one of the several routes across the Conti-
nerit to New York. Here the magnificent steamers
of the N.D.L. express services are waiting to take
them across the Atlantic.
It is claimed—and claimed with substantial foun-
dation—that the N.D.L. carry more passengers on
their many routes than any other Company in the
world. With such a distinction it is perhaps super


fluous to emphasise the special attention paid by
them to the requirements of their passengers, what-
ever those requirements may be. Nowadays it is
not sufficient for any Company to depend on a re-
putation earned twenty, ten, or even five years ago.
To keep faith with the travelling public of the pre-
DINING SALOON. G.M.S. “GROSSER KURFURST.”
sent day necessitates an incessant watchfulness for
improved methods, a keen alertness for all that
promises to further advance the consistently high
opinion of the Company held by those who have had
experience of its workings, and, above all, a repu-
tation for safety, speed, and comfort, as well as
civility in meeting all reasonable wishes. These at-
tributes are one and all prominent characteristics
of the Norddeutscher Lloyd, no matter in what
phase of the Company’s operations they are sought
for, and it becomes plain to all who have had any
acquaintance with the organisation, that every
one of the employees is imbued with the same
laudable intentions.
With regard to the safety of the travellers who
patronise their steamers, the N.D.L. have set them-
selves an exceptionally high standard, to maintain
"hich every nerve is strained and no expense spared.
When it comes to a question of conserving space or
protecting passengers, the latter consideration in-
evitably receives the first attention. Indeed, it may
with justice be said that the former does not enter
into the matter at all. In all the latest steamers
built and launched for the N.D.L. an improved
system of bulkheads has been adopted, which, for
all practical purposes may be said to be as perfect
as human ingenuity' can devise to meet all manner
of accidents by fire, collision, or other perils of the
deep. The basis of this excellent system is the
installation of automatic hydraulic machinery,
which closes the whole of the bulkhead doors from
the bridge. In order to ensure a still further mea-
sure of security, and to enable the officer in charge
to ascertain that the doors have been so closed, an
electrically connected tell-tale on the bridge regis-
ters, by means of the usual glow lamps, the fact
that everything is all right.
So certain is the N.D.L. of the efficacy of this sys-
tem, and so many have been the eneoniums passed
upon it by experts in marine architecture, that the
Company, at a much-increased cost, are extending it
to their remaining passenger steamers, and, before
very long, it is anticipated that all passenger ves-
sels sailing under its flag will bear this additional
and substantial proof of the anxiety displayed by
the organisation for the complete security of the
travelling public. Still further evidence, if such
c\ idence were needed, of this same anxiety is to be
found in the fact that the number of bulkheads
erected in each of the N.D.L. steamers is in excess,
and sometimes hugely in excess, of the total re-
quired by Lloyds and other kindred as-
sociations, and laws and legulatious ot ditteient
nations governing the construction and outfit of
passeugei steamers. This augmentation of piotec-
tivo devices naturally means that the Company
have had to incur a much enhanced expenditure in
many instances, and also a great loss in the carry-
ing capacity of cargo. But, as has already been em-
phasised, this side of the subject is never allowed
to interfere, however slightly, with the adequate
precautions taken.
Not only is this idea of safety strongly in evidence
throughout the construction of N.D.L. steamers,
but also in the Company’s efforts to have their
ships officered by thoroughly capable, well-trained
men, in whose charge they feel satisfied to have
them placed. With this end in view, and in order
to attract a superior class of men to their service,
the N.D.L. have in commission two training ships,
with the prospect of bringing more vessels of the
same nature into employment. On board of these
vessels young men destined for the Company’s stea-
mers are given instruction by highly qualified teach-
ers in all branches of the complicated science of
navigation, and are also afforded every opportunity
for gaining experience in the command of men,
a branch of their sea-going education which is
certainly not the least important. These training
ships are freighted with ordinary cargo shipped for
oversea markets, and their voyages are undertaken
under conditions similar to those obtaining with
the usual cargo carrier. They visit all parts of the
world, wherever their charter may take them, and
in this way the cadets acquire knowledge of foreign
harbours, and the varying manners, customs, cli-
mate, and deep sea weather which are to be met
with in the different continents and oceans of the
globe. One of these vessels arrived in Adelaide only
last year, and the press and public alike were unani-
mous in their admiration for the smartness of her
complement, the excellence of her equipment, and
the splendid, well-regulated discipline prevailing on
board.
More, indeed, very much more, could be written
on this important subject of safety in ocean-going
steamers, as practised by the N.D.L. But enough
has bien said to show how prominent a place has
been given in the operations of the vast Company
to which this sketch refers. They yield to no one
in this matter just as they yield to no one
in the matter of speed or comfort, and it would, in-
deed, be an extraordinary accident that has not
been foreseen and provided against in the construc-
tion of their ships, or in the selection of their officers
and crews. Small wonder is it, then, that, year uy
year the N.D.L. extends its sphere of operations,
heightens its reputation among foreign-going steam-
SMOKING ROOM, G.M.S. “BREMEN."
ship Companies, and wins an increasing popu-
larity from all sections of those who go down to the
sea in ships.


The P. & O. Company.
A more interesting chapter in the annals of in-
dustrial progress during the last fifty years would
he difficult to write than that which appertains
to the history of steam navigation in relation to its
connection with the commerce of the world.
The evolution of shipping since the days of an-
cient maritime Greece and the times when the
hardy Norsemen pilots steered their cumbersome
galleys between Scylla and Charybdis would, indeed,
be a fitting subject for a volume. The evolution of
marine engines which has brought about the won-
derful changes in methods of transportation, speed
and safety on the world’s waterway dates back to
a period contemporaneous with the foundation of
the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation
Company, which to-day is known through its
branches and agencies in every part of the civilised
globe as the P. and O. Company.
The' people of Australia who to-day enjoy the
luxury and convenience of a fast mail and passen-
ger service between their native land and the Old
World owe much to the enterprise and progressive
methods which have characterised the career of the
P. and 0. Company since its inception in 1837, when
it commenced operations as a packet company run-
ning mail packets from London to Lisbon and
Gibraltar.
During the period between 1837 and 1851 paddle
boats held sway, the fleet of the P. and O. Com-
pany numbering 36 paddle steamers, varying in
size from the “ Fawcett’s” 206 tons to the 2017
tons of the “ S.S. Ilindoostan,” launched in 1812.
In the course of two or three years after the date
of its establishment of a regular and well-equipped
line of passenger and mail packet steamers, the
company in 1810 became incorporated by Royal
Charter under the name of the Peninsular and
Oriental Steam Navigation Company, Limited,
with a view to the extension of its operations to the
Far East, the first steamer despatched to India
by the P. and O. being the “ Hindoostan,” w'hieh
left England in 1812 via the Cape of Good Hope,
her departure being regarded in the light of a na-
tional event.
The success achieved led to an extension of the
service from England to Alexandria, and from
Suez on the other side of the isthmus to Ceylon,
Madras, Calcutta, and later on from Ceylon to
Penang, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Shanghai.
The 100 and odd miles of sandy desert between
Alexandria and Suez, which is now cut through by
the Suez Canal, was for twenty years one of the
gieatest barriers to an Australian Steam Ship
Service.
In 1869 the Suez Canal was opened by the Em-
piess Eugene, and as the Canal transit beat the
camel caravans, much the same as the iron horse
ashore eclipsed the coach, the Overland Route
through Egypt was finally closed. In accordance
w r ith the policy of enterprise and progress adopted
by the far-seeing directors of this even then
mighty institution, new fields w'ere opened up, and
Australia, prominent as the world’s greatest gold-
producing country, at once attracted their astute
attention, with the result that in 1852 steam com-
munication between Australia and Singapore was
established.
The total past and present fleet of the P. and O.
is 199 ships, with a total tonnage of 603,491 tons,
or an average of 3000 tons for eacfi ship in round
figures. The present fleet totals 62 ships of the
latest type, amounting to 365.391 tons, or an aver-
age of 5900 tons for each. These figures include
seven ships now building, two of 10,500 tons, two
of 10,000 tons, and three of 8000 tons each. In con-
nection with their mail and passenger services, the
P. and O. boats touch at Adelaide, Aden, Bom-
bay, Brindisi, Calcutta, Colombo, Fremantle,
Gibraltar, Hongkong, Marseilles, Melbourne,
Nagasaki, Penang, Shanghai, Singapore, Sydney,
and Yokohama, at all of which ports responsible
agents are located, from whom passengers and con-
signees can obtain the fullest information in re-
gaid to fare and freights over the company’s routes.
In connection with their Australian business,
some ,faint idea of the present importance of their
postal work may be gathered from the fact that
the mails sent from Brindisi to the Far East
usually amount to some 4000 bags and boxes. These
are carried by the Indian and Australian steamers.
The income from postal subsidies is from all
sources slightly over .£330,000, whilst in the Aus-
tralian Commonwealth alone the company’s annual
expenditure in the ports amounts to the respect-
able sum of something over .£129,000 per annum.
In Sydney in the purchase of supplies, stores, har-
bour dues, wages, rents, etc., the company spend
close upon .£66,000. As the service between Aus-
tralia and the Old World is a fortnightly one, the
26 visits of the P. and O. steamers to Sydney re-
present the cash value of over .£2500 each to the
Mother State.
In connection with the mileage covered the com-
pany’s ships steamed between three and four mil-
““ ;;" les l“ st yf ar * tbe coa ? consumption costing
.£BL, 8,1. The strong financial position of the i>.
and O is shown in that, after passing A 318.926 to
r,V ± l i d fP re l e,atlo “ account and deducting
.£151,549 for the loss of the steamship Sobnion.
the directors were able to declare a dividend of 5
per cent, on ,£1,100,000 preferred stock and 10 per
cent, on JE1.160.000 deferred stock last year. The
authorised capital of the company is .£3,500.(00, of
which ,£2,320,00(1 is paid up,
The present directorate is composed as follows:
Sir Thomas Sutherland, O.C.M G., LL.D., chair-
man: William Adamson, Esq., C.M.G., Herbert
Brooks, Esq., the Right lion. Lord Burghclere,
Major-General Sir Owen Tudor Burne, C.C.1.E.,
Iv.C.S.L, Samuel Steuart Gladstone, Esq., Sir
Kobert G. W T . Herbert, G.C.8., the Right Hon.
thn Earl of Leven and Melville, William Qair
Rathbone, Esq., Peter Williams, Esq.; Managing
Director, Sir Thomas Sutherland; General Mana-
gers, Franklin Richardson Kendall, Esq., Her-
man Wilmot Uloth, Esq., Henry Hope Joseph,
Esq.; Secretary, George Frederick Johnson,
Esq.; Assistant Manager, J. M. Shields, Esq.
The head office is at 122 Leadenhall-streec,
London, E.C., the telegraphic address being Penin-
sular, London head Office, and Oriental, London.
The Sydney offices are located in commodious pre-
mises at the corner of Pitt and Bridge streets,
where intending passengers may obtain every pos-
sible information.
To the tourist and globe trotter the facilities
for ocean travelling offered by the P. and O. are
unrivalled, as owing to their vast resources, per-
fect organisation, and immense fleet of modern
steamers, replete with every convenience for the
comfort of passengers, the company is in the
unique position of being able to convey travellers
from Australia to any part of the world.
In connection with their fortnightly service to
London via Colombo, Aden, the Suez Canal, Port
Said, Marseilles, and Gibraltar, intermediate stea-
mers connect with the Australian line at Colombo,
where passengers are transhipped for Bombay, Cal-
cutta, and the Eastern ports,
Those who wish to traTel over land can book
from Australian port to Port Said, where they
tranship o ,i boaid the company’s 20-knot express
stea mers running to Brindisi and Marseilles. There
is n 0 challge of carriag es on the overland route
throughout the whole distance from Brindisi to
Calais
m* ’ , , , .. , . ,
f T J' OS< ' hol,l ' n « ™t«rn tickets to or from a port east
° ? u . ez . can break the journey ai any port en route,
and join any other ships in j which the company’s
vf d p,i n „rinrl f n ° fi'ciide vacant berths, pro-
the pci 1011 for which the return ticket is
‘‘ vd,Ub le has not hanspued.
The P. and (). Company have arrangements for
through round-the-world traffic, with the Canadian
Pacific Railway Company, via Vancouver, and with
the Southern Pacific Railway, etc., via San Fran-
cisco, connecting in either direction at Hong Kong.
Shanghai, or Yokohama. In regard to the Cana-
P. & O. R.M.S. “CHINA.”
ITbe Shipping Jnbustv^.
-Historical and Biographical Sketches:—continued.
PASSENGER AND MAIL STEAMERS.


dian route from Australia via Vancouver or San
Francisco, meals and sleeping berths on the rail
journey across Canada may be included in the tours
by that route on prepayment of an addition to the
fare.
Passengers booking from Australian ports to
Eastern ports are transferred at Colombo to an-
other of the company’s mail steamers proceeding
direct to Penang, Singapore, Hong Kong, and Shang-
hai.
Passengers for Japan generally proceed from
Hong Kong by another vessel. Baggage is transfer-
red in one of the company’s launches. Local
can obtain railway tickets to Sydney at reduced
rates, provided they obtain a certificate from the
purser, which must be exchanged at the P. and O.
office in Melbourne for an order on the railways.
Travellers are booked through to Port Darwin,
proceeding from Sydney to destination by the stea-
mers of the Eastern and Australian Company. The
luggage booked through to and from New Zealand,
Tasmania, and Queensland ports is carried round to
the respective wharves at Melbourne and Sydney at
the company’s expense, but at the owner’s risk.
The steamers of the Union Company of New Zea-
land and Messrs, Huddart, Parker and Company
and the machinery on board the mail boats and at
the wharves at which the steamers tie up is fully
equipped with every appliance for the expeditious
and safe handling of every class of cargo. In regard
to frozen meat and other edibles, ample refrigerat-
ing chambers are provided in each vessel.
Goods are conveyed to all porta served by the
company’s steamers at current rates of freight, also
at through rates to Cyprus, Persian Gulf, Indian
Coast ports, British Burmah, the Dutch East Indies,
China Coast ports, Tasmania, New Zealand, Fiji,
and New Caledonia (in connection with the local
mail services).
steamers run from Hong Kong to Canton twice a
day, and to Macao daily. The facilities offered in
the way of transfers for interstate. New Zealand,
and Tasmanian passages are as follows:—Passengers
booked through to Brisbane and Queensland ports
proceed in one of the local steamers from Sydney,
Particulars of which can be obtained from the com-
Pany’s local agent. To those passengers who prefer
travelling by rail to or from Brisbane, instead of
being franked by coastal steamers, the railway com-
pany will allow the amount of the steamer fare off
er ordinary rate on presentation of the coupon.
Passengers arriving at Melbourne by the inward
wail steamer booked through to Sydney and pre-
-erring to perform the rest of the journey overland,
OFFICES OF THE P. & O. COMPANY, SYDNEY.
leave Melbourne frequently for Hobart and Laun-
ceston, starting as soon as possible after the arrival
of the P. and O. mail steamers. The services are tri-
weekly to and from Launceston and weekly to
Hobart.
The ports to which through tickets are issued are
the Bluff, Port Chalmers, Auckland, Nelson, Picton,
Greymouth, Lyttleton, Wellington, Taranaki, Na-
pier, Gisborne, and Tauranga, the New Zealand
rates being to or from any port in that colony. Pas-
sengers for New Zealand, whether single or return,
are conveyed to their destination from Melbourne or
Sydney, as the case may be, by the shortest route.
The arrangements for the carriage of goods ana
general cargo are of the most complete character,
In conclusion, it may incidentally be mentioned
in connection with the company’s Australian busi-
ness that the present superintendent in Australia,
Mr. Edward Trelawny, first joined the P. and O.
in the early sixties, and has spent five of his forty
years’ service in Australia, where his great abilities
as an organiser and manager have won for him the
esteem of the heads of our commercial houses and
the travelling public, amongst whom his charac-
teristic courtesy and integrity have done much to
popularise the P. and O. throughout the Common-
wealth.
Mr. A. Gordon Wesche, during the absence of Mr.
Trelawny administers the company’s affairs in
New South Wales,


Messrs. Moulder Bros. & Co.,
Limited.
STEAMSHIP OWNERS, SHIP, INSURANCE
AND PASSENGER BROKERS, AND
CONTRACTORS TO HIS MAJESTY'S
GOVERNMENTS.
From that distant period when the early navi-
gators with no little skill and daring sailed their
cumbersome galleys over the deep waters of the
Houlder and his brother Augustus F. Houlder, in-
augurated a line of fast clippers between London
and Australia. Their able management and busi-
ness enterprise commanding sucec'ss, the scope of
operations was gradually enlarged, and Argentina,
South Africa, and the principal ports of the world’s
markets were included in their itinerary.
Wherr the steamships gave promise of usurping
the trade of the flying clipper, Messrs. Houlder
Brothers, with characteristic foresight, seized upon
the opportunity the marine engine offered as a
motive power, and established a fleet of steamers in
connection with their passenger and cargo carrying
lines.
Branch offices were also established at Liverpool,
Glasgow, the River Plate ports and Sydney.
ship-owners, steamship owners, ship insurance
and passenger brokers, with head offices at
146 Leadeuhall-street, E.C., London, and at 28 Pall
Mall, S.W., the branches being located at Liver-
pool, Glasgow, Buenos Ayres, liosario, La Plata,
Capetown, Durban, and 63 Pitt-street, Sydney,
N.S.W.
Some idea of the magnitude and variety of the
operations of Messrs. Moulder Bros., Ltd., may be
gained when it is stated that, in addition to their
regular shipping business, they are contractors to
His Majesty’s Government, the War Office, and the
Admiralty. They also hold large contracts with the
Government of the Cape of Good Hope, and act as
shipping agents for the Government of New South
Wales. Another important department undertaken
THE HOULDER LINE S.S. "DRAYTON GRANGE.”
Mediterranean, and thence, becoming better accom-
plished in sea craft, extended their voyages to the
Western Coast of India, shipping has been more of
less closely identified with commercial development :
in fact, the two have always gone, as it were, hand
in hand.
Foremost amongst the great ocean-transport
firms stands the world-famous shipping house of
Messrs. Houlder Bros, and Company, Limited, of
London, whose operations extend to every quarter
of the civilised globe.
The foundation of this colossal business dates
back to the year 1853, when the late Mr, Edwin S.
During the early sixties the idea of carrying
meat, fruit, vegetables, etc., from South America,
Australia, and the far-away ports to England was
first mooted, and Messrs. Houlder Brothers were
amongst the pioneer ship-owners who spent large
sums of money in the endeavour to find a means by
which perishable goods could be carried without
undue loss to the consignor.
The continuous growth of their business,
necessitating the employment of a greater or-
ganisation, the firm was formed into a Lim-
ited Liability Company, under the present
title of Houlder Bros and Company, Limited,
by the firm is that of loading brokers in the Au«-
tralian, South and East African, and River Plate
trades from London, Liverpool, Glasgow Newport
Antwerp, etc. They are also actively engaged in
carrying on a general Brokerage. Chartering, In-
surance. and Forwarding buGness. ’
Messrs. Houlder Bros, and Co Ltd b’ing in clo a e
touch with the shipping interests in the River Plate
South African, Australian, and Californian markets',
act as chartering agents in connection with the
markets of those commercial centres. As steamship
owners who make a speciality of caigo transport
the firm have paid special attention in the equip-
tlbe Shipping Jntmsti’?.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches:—continued.
PASSENGER AND CARGO STEAMERS.


ment of their magnificent fleet of full-powered
vessels, to providing for refrigerated cargoes, and
shippers of meat, fruit, butter, and other perish-
able goods are therefore assured that their con-
signments, when on board any of the Houlder
liners, will receive the strictest supervision and
protection of the owner’s interests, and arrive at the
port of destination in a first-class condition, thus
enabling top prices to be realised.
The route followed by the steamers via Durban
and Capetown to London, is also an important con-
sideration, as the cargoes are only subjected to the
heat of the tropics for a very limited period.
The popularity of the Houlder Line amongst
shippers of live stock is due to the fact that in the
designing of the steamers under their management,
the Directors have devoted great attention to mak-
ing them specially suitable for military transport
and for cattle, horses, mules, etc. For this pur-
The list of steamers of the Houlder Line is as
follows; —“Haversham Grange,” 11,200 tons; “Ever-
ton Grange,” 11,000 tons (twin screw); ‘‘Drayton
Grange,” 10,000 tons (twin screw); “ Oswestry
Grange,” 10,000 tons (twin screw); “Rippingham
Grange,” 9200 tons; “Langton Grange,” 9200 tons;
‘‘Southern Cross,” 7300 tons; “Beacon Grange,”
6400 tons; Royston Grange,” 6400 tons; “Thorpe
Grange,” 6330 tons; "Elstiee Grange,” 6100 tons;
“ Urmston Grange,” 5400 tons; “ Hornby Grange,”
3730 tons; and the “ Oringdean Grange,” 3500 tons.
The vessels, although constructed with a view to
the carriage of cargo, are also fitted out to carry a
limited number of saloon and second class jmssen-
gers, excellent accommodation being provided amid-
ships for travellers. In this respect the Houlder
boats are equal to any of the ocean-going passenger
steamers, as, apart from the fact that all the stea-
mers, because of their construction, are exception-
Messrs. Mcllwraith, McEacharn and Co., Ltd.;
Melbourne, Messrs. Mcllwraith, McEacharn and
Co., Ltd.; Brisbane, Messrs. Birt and Co., Ltd.;
Bowen (0.), Bergl Australia, Ltd.; Rockhampton
(Q.), The Australian Estates and Mortgage Co.,
Ltd.; Gladstone (O.i, Mr. D. Mclntyre; Capetown,
Messrs. W. Anderson and Co.; Durban, Messrs.
John T. Rennie, Sons and Co.; Algoa Bay, Messrs.
Reiners, Von Laer and Co.
Shippers of cargo from Sydney can obtain every
information from the Head Office in Australia, 63
Pitt-street, Sydney.
MR. EDMUND JAMES LAMB.
Mr. Edmund James Lamb, representative in Aus-
tralasia for Messrs. Houlder Bros, and Co., Ltd., is a
gentleman who, by the integrity of his methods, at-
THE HOULDER LINE S.S. “OSWESTBY GRANGE.”
Leaving Table Bay with 2000 Troops for Southampton.
Pose each steamer is provided with permanent fit-
t'ogs, and the quarters for the animals are so laid
out that even in the roughest w'eather and in the
tropics there is ayways ample ventilation.
As evidence of the superior facilities possessed by
this
company for the transport of cattle, horses,
etc., it may be mentioned that during the recent
Boer War the Houlder steamers carried consider-
*bly over 100,000 remounts from various ports to
South Africa, the horses being landed in excellent
Rendition. Of this number over 22,000 were shipped
from Australia. The fleet, which is of the most
Modern type, comprises fourteen magnificent full-
powered steamers of the highest class at Lloyds,
Jfplete with every appliance for the expeditious
handling of cargo, thus ensuring quick despatch and
consequent regular arrivals and departures from
the ports of call.
ally steady, the attention and courtesy shown to
those who travel by them is well known. The route
taken by the steamers enables passengers to visit all
the principal Australian and South African ports,
and also avoid the trying heat of the Red Sea. The
first and second cabins are situated amidships on
the bridge deck. The saloons are artistically fur-
nished, and the appointments include baths (hot
and cold), piano and smoking room. The state
rooms are provided with settees, patent lavatories,
electric bells, and all requisites.
The company does not cater for third-class pas-
sengers. Any further particulars as to fares, etc.,
can be obtained at the Messrs. Houlder Bros.,
Ltd/s, Sydney office, Exchange Coiner, 63 Pitt-
street, Sydney, or at the following principal Aus-
tralian and African agencies of the firm—:Ade-
laide, Messrs. Elder, Smith and Co. ? Ltd.; Albany,
tention to the interest of N.S.W. shippers, has non
the confidence and esteem of all who are associated
with shipping at the Port of Sydney.
Mr. Lamb, who is a native of Adelaide, and was
educated at the North Adelaide Grammar School,
commenced his business career as a member of the
staff of the Adelaide Chamber of Commerce, after-
wards entering the office of Messrs. Elder, Smith
and Co., the well-known South Australian shipping
firm.
Mr. Lamb in his spare hours is an enthusiastic
supporter of manly sport and pastime, having been
at various periods Captain of the Port Adelaida
Rowing Club, the Elder Rowing Club, the Banks
Rowing Club, aud a member of the Royal S.A.
Yacht Squadron. He was also Secretary of the
Sydney Fencing Club, and is a member of the Lind-
field Golf Club,


Birt & Co., Limited.
Foremost amorg the great British Shipping
Companies largely trading with Australian ports
are Messrs. Birt a:d Co., Limited. Other maritime
businesses have made a name for themselves,
either in the piompt and regular carriage of
mails, or in some special department of Austra-
lian trade.
The name of the fiim will always be associated
with many of the striking incidents which marked
Australia’s acknowledgment of the fact that she
forms an integral part, for nearly all purposes, of
the world-wide British Empire, especially with
regard to furnishing military aid to the mother-
land when such help is a matter of considerable
moment.
have a freezing capacity of 2000 carcases per day,
and the storage accommodation is equal to 44,000
carcases of mutton. The two Brisbane works have
a capacity of 1000 quarters of beef per day, and
can store £5.000 quarters, equal to 100,000 carcases
of mutton. Both establishments are most con-
veniently situated near the edge of deep water
for the handling and shipment of the product of
the works. The Company also freeze for the
Board of Exports (operating under the Govern-
ment of New South Wales), very large numbers
of rabbits, hares, and poultry. It says much for
their shipping arrangements, and the methodical
manner in which the Company’s interests are
looksd after both ashore and afloat, that vast
quantities of perishable cargo have been carried
on the long voyage to England without a hitch,
and delivered in the pink of condition, and in as
frigerating plant and insulated chambers. Elec-
tric lighting is installed throughout, and the
hatches, steam winches and derricks are arranged
in such a manner as will conduce in the greatest
degree to the rapid loading and dischaige of
cargo. The steamers are despatched at regular
intervals from Queensland ports, Sydney and Mel-
bourne. to the Continent and London, via South
Africa.
Messrs. Birt and Co., Limited, are also Sydney
agents for the “ Shire Line,” which comprises the
steamers “Banffshire,” “Buteshire,” “Perthshire,”
“ Fifeshire,” “ Morayshire,’’ and “ Nairnshire,”
all regular traders to this part of the world. They
further act for the American and Australian Line
of New York, who run both sailers and steamers
with general cargo from the Atlantic seaboard of
the United States, .and thus are engaged in a very
in the year 1891 the Company was established.
The list of Directors is as follows:—Messrs. F.
Beckett Birt, Allan Hughes, J. Wilson Potter, J.
11. Anderson, Charles Bethell, and E. Owen Cox,
Managing Director in Australasia. The London
office is at 2 Fenchurch Avenue, E.C. The Syd-
ney' Head Office. 7 Macquarie Place; the Brisbane
branch, Stanley Street, South Brisbane; also have
a branch at Invercargill, New Zealand.
The Company have for many years taken a
prominent part in the frozen meat trade, includ-
ing transportation to Britain and South Africa.
The business done has been on a very large scale,
and, notwithstanding the great drought that has
played such havoc with the pastoral industry of
Australia within the last few years, the work will
be persevered in until normal conditions prevail
in this part of the world.
The firm’s wgrks at Darling Harbour, Sydney,
THE FEDERAL LINER S.S. KENT.
good order as on the day they were shipped.
The steamers which they handle also carry a
great quantity of wool, tallow, and general cargo.
Although the vessels are primarily cai go-carriers,
they have also accommodation for first and third
class passengers, and, as will be seen later on,
did good service as trooping vessels at a very mem-
orable epoch in the history of the British Em-
pire.
The name and fame of Messrs. Birt and Co.,
Ltd., are especially connected with the Federal
Line, comprising the following steamers; —• Corn-
wall,” “ Devon,” “ Essex,” " Dorset,” “ Somer-
set,” “ Surrey,” " Sussex,” " Suffolk,” " Norfolk,”
“ Kent,” and " Maori King,” four of which are
new twin screw steamers of 11,000 tons carrying
capacity. The vessels are fitted in the most com-
plete fashion for the trade in which they are en-
gaged, including, of course, the most modern re-
useful direct trade, which is likely to be very
greatly increased with the opening of the Panama
Canal, now one of the certainties of the near
future. Messrs. Birt and Co., Limited, are also
Mananging Agents for the New Zealand and Aus-
tralian Steamship Co., who run a regular monthly
service from New-' Zealand, via Australia to South
Africa. It may be noted that at Bribsane the
Company manufacture from distilled water large
quantities of ice, which find a ready sale during
the tropical weather of the summer months.
Their London House have large interests in the
London meat and produce trades, and have a
branch at the great meat mart at Smithfield.
Consignments are received on this side of every
description of produce for shipment to and sale
in London,
The Federal Line has been historically identified
wjth the despatch of Australian troops to tire
XTbe Shipping Jn&ustn?.
Historical and Biographical Sketches:— continued.
PASSENGER AND CARGO STEAMERS.


,eat of war during the campaign in South Africa.
When things were at their worst in that part of
the Empire* the Australian people considered that
W could render important service to the mother-
and by sending troops, who would be of imme-
and important service in a land where
ohditv and capacity to foil the Boers with their
weapons were absolutely and immediately
necessary P Accordingly, early in November, 1899,
the Federal liner “Kent" was chartered by the
Government of New South Wales in order to
transport of a detachment of mounted men to Cape-
town. The vessel was lying in Sydney Harbour,
loaded and ready for sea, when Messrs. Birt and
Co., Limited, received this special order. The
promptitude with which every arrangement neces-
Fary for the new charter was made was a re-
markable feat in the history of the mercantile
marine. The “Kent's” cargo was discharged, fit-
tings for troops and horses were constructed,
stores were shipped, the equipment of the Armj
Medical Corps was loaded, and the men and
over 400 feet long. The sheds are of considerable
dimensions, and a plant for dumping wool is in
operation there.
There can be no doubt that Messrs. Birt and Co.,
td., who have recently taken so prominent a part
i the shipping trade of Australia, and especially
ith regard to its imperial side, will in the future
lore than maintain the brilliant position which
hey have already justly gained. What they have
Iready attained in Australia is due to a wis»; expen-
liture of laige capital, great retouicefulness, keen
vigilance for opportunities, straight-dealing, and
uniform tact and courtesy on the part of their local
representative, Mr. E. Owen Cox, and their other
officials. With a fleet of splendid vessels, their en-
terprises have* been almost unifoimly successful,
and the firm aiv apparently destined to exercise a
fortunate, and beneficial influence on the laigest
and most important of Australia’s producing inte-
rests.
in London who actively co-operated «ilh them. M
Cox believes m having work done . m,d the most
favoaiable surroundings, and the Company s offices
m Macquarie Place are accoidirg y models of equ^.-
men: for business purposes. As Mi. Cox s com-
paratively a young man, a great business future is
apparently before him, and his many friends hope
that he will be long spared to preside with his accus-
tomed efficiency and credit over the great business
of which he is the managing head.
p ELLIS,
p ElliS( the g3nial and popular Shipping
f th Company, was for some years
SMp p rnrManager for Messrs. W. It.
( , ;n P e y nd Co _ in P Adelaide. In 1899 he joined
Messrs. Birt and Co.'s Brisbane office, and in the
follo wi n g year, the position of Shipping Manager
fallir" vacant in the head office, he was trans-
D
Consignments received of every description
of produce for shipment to Europe in
a refrigerated state.
DAILY SALES
AT N.S.W. GOVERNMENT
MEAT MARKET
NEW SOUTH WALES GOVERNMENT MEAT MARKET,
DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY.
koises were embarked in six days. This smart
piece of work was much spoken of at the time.
and the record then established constitutes one
Tl. IS iv a 1 , ely t 0 be soon broken -
taken mf l?t a /v, St rf mel * was the vessel
Dort Government *° tians-
that i oU^b rm^ ll ?t l idle first contingent sent by
eo ?ny- The time for making arrangements
the fitr o '* that ‘he carpente™ employed to place
at Sydney' so FT'ln o '}! ° U bo ®! (1 . th< : ve f el
warded and time saved''% p j® ! n '" lalles
“ Cornu afr’ * j \ d t-u Bnsb^ e - The
and the 1 continent C'V ‘‘T’
good servFeonF 1 u Ricardo,
Bloemfontein the Fr f n d i' nS th ® “ alch to
ture of Pretoria Th f £X!T 7' ‘*7 CaP ,T
fhwv, l The Fedeial Line continued
of the B “Treo t nile” m reaußed 0 b d0 t a ' oll ". ide ! able par *
South AlwT Ll el? ! between Australia and
carrying fn U he VTi im P ol tan t u° lk of ■
use fKir’ !l ( ‘, ld other suppll ' s fo [ th f
til? entire „ ePga ? ed ° ver alm ‘ , 1 ;- t
fiiiw!« tn fV v, dl . P, ur ‘? g the war the
('0 Lh , ' a lf ’ B [ ,sbape ’ " h ' cb B.rl and
■luinicin.’iit, ° f '" m tbe ® outh lillsbal ‘ e
is 500 A . V’ exceptionally busy scene. It
»hi “tredinl to’ Brisbane the W
cargo fiom fbl t a? 1 ' to „ tak ®
is most re U
suitable tor the f ederal liners, which are
MR. E. OWEN COX.
It is not always easy for a dweller in the mother-
laud to come out to a new country, and in a very
shoit period to grapple successfully with all the de-
tails of a great business, besides making himself
welcomed and respected in every circle where his
interests centre. This has, however, been the case
with Mr. E. Owen Cox, Managing Director and
General Manager for Australia of the firm of Messrs.
But and Company, Limited. Mr. Cox was for years
connected with the Company s business in London,
but 1899 f ' vas dep,lted to . Australia for the
purposes of managing and superintending its inte-
thls pal t of t he "j orld - Although he has
F een on y a four J ears re / ld f nt ° f S A d n ( y. Mr. Cox
has made so good a use of his time and opportum-
ties that he has not only placed tße interests of his
Company m a very high and enviable position, but
has at the same tune made himself hosts of friends.
A S' ea .t oppoitunity was afforded him and the Com-
pan / he s ° abl 3 T - and courteously fepre-
rents in the despatch of troops from Australia to
South Africa. Efficiency in that work was not only
required, but great celerity and work carried out
under severe pressure is often found far from per-
7 he reSU, J 8 * o, . tbe
polt °. f , men horses, material and provisions from
u’ S r”' tO ,, 7 : ' ° k "> a f’ ' VetP as credi [ ab ' e to
Mr. Cox and his sub-officials as they were to those
.erred to Sydney, and appointed to that position,
which he still occupies.
MR. E. C. BECKETT,
Amongst those who may be fairly termed re-
presentative Australian business men the
name of Mr E C Beckett the 'noon
Secretary of Messrs ° Birt and Co
Ltd., isiioldin high e-teem Mre Beckett who
is a native of Sydney, having completed his educa-
tion at the Sydney High School, began his success-
fuj ca reer as a junior in the service of the Austr-
lian Mortgage, Land, and Finance Company, Limi-
ted, where he rose to a position of responsibility,
and finally attained the important post of Manager
0 f the Wool and Shipping Departments of that firm,
After an association of pleven vpai-s with thp Ai.<
tralian Mortgage, Land and Finance Company, he
in 1897 resigned to join Messrs. Birt and Company
as accountant. His abilitv as a business mana-
ger being fully recognised by the heads of the com-
pany, Mr. Beckett eventually attained the high
position he now holds as Secretary of Messrs. Birt
and Company. Limited, Apart from his many
qualifications for the responsible and arduous work
of Secretary to such a large concern, Mr. Beckett
by his courtesy Ld honourable business
methods, has won the respect and esteem of a large
circle °f those engaged in commercial and shipping
pursuits at the port of Sydney.


CARGO STEAMERS.
The Tyser Line, Limited.
The history of the steamship is neither confined
to record-breakers on the world’s greatest passen-
ger routes, nor to the exploits of “ocean grey-
hounds.” The marvels accomplished in the very
highest circles of maritime trade are, however, not
without their uses, even to those who make no ef-
fort to compete with them.
The vast expansion of commerce due in a great
measure to the advances made in manufacturing,
cold storage and packing, has brought into existence
a constant demand for expeditious sea transport,
and to cater for this trade the slow-going tramp is
Their magnificent steamers, owing to their very com-
plete equipment, can, of course, accommodate pas-
sengers to a limited extent, but the general arrange-
ments aboard are made with a view to tonnage re-
quirements rather than the transportation of hu-
man freight. All kinds of cargo are carried, but
frozen products are a speciality of the Company’s
trade. Of recent years, owing to a variety of causes,
chief amongst which may be mentioned the South
African War, a strong fillip has been given to the
frozen meat trade, and the owners of the Tyser Line
have not been slow to recognise the opportunities
that have been presented for the employment of
huge ocean meat and produce carriers.
The Company’s fleet is composed of vessels that
can each give storage room for from 90,000 to
great tonnage and speed upon the Australian berth.
The management of the Tyser Line has been
prompt to discern the class of vessel that was best
adapted to the requirements of this particular line
of business, and no time was lost in building steam-
crs of a highly equipped type to cater for it, so
that now the vessels flying the Tyser flag are re-
garded as belonging to the most effective cargo-
carriers to be found anywhere. 'To be convinced of
the foregoing facts one has only to pay a visit to any
one of the Tyser liners when in port, and observe
for himself the really splendid enterprise which the
Company has exhibited. Cost of construction and
equipment will be seen to have been but secondary
considerations by the management, which has
primarily aimed at securing the finest type of vessel
THE TYSER LTD. S.S. “MIMIRO.”
fast being ousted by cargo steamers of modern con-
struction, equipped with every device for quick
handling of cargo, and in which the essential quali-
ties of laige carrying capacity and high speed are
judiciously combined. Shipowners whose interests
are centred in the maritime carrying trade, have
long since recognised that the steamer which aims
at general usefulness will, everything else being
equal, have work to do so long as bread and butter
are required by the hungry millions of Britain and
elsewhere, who would starve within a month if their
oversea supplies were cut off.
The Tyser Line, Limited, is one of those enter-
prises which, from a utilitarian point of view, is
more to the people of Britain and the Australian
Commonwealth than the latest example of the float-
ing palace. Prom the first inception of the Tyser
Line, the aim of the Directors has been to cater for
cargo transport rather than that of passenger traffic.
110,000 carcases of sheep. This result was not at-
tained all at once, but was brought about gradually
as the trade developed. Since the Company entered
the trade to Australia and New Zealand, in 1886,
they have steadily and surely progressed all along
the line. Their steamers accomplish the voyage
from the United Kingdom to these States in from 42
to 44 days, showing a rate of speed which places
them amongst the fastest steamers trading to Aus-
tralia.
The Company has, from the time it commenced
to trade in these 'Southern Seas, ever been on the
alert to popularise its fleet, and so secure a large
slice of the oversea commerce of the Commonwealth,
and the neighbouring Colony of New Zealand.
How far its enterprise in this respect has succeeded
is testified to by the gratifying expansion that has
taken place in the Company’s operations, which has
necessitated the laying on of additional vessels of
to permanently retain and augment the connection
that has been so successfully inaugurated. What
has already been accomplished is highly creditable
to the energetic management of the line, but the
future looms up full of promise of still greater
advancement.
The fleet consists of the following steamers; —
“Star of New Zealand,” 4712 tons reg.; “Himiro,”
6225 tons reg.; “Star of Australia,” 7198
tons reg.; “Tomoana,” 5987 tons reg.;
“Indradevi,” 5683 tons reg.; “Hawke's Bay,”
4583 tons reg.; “Star of England,” 3782 tons reg.;
"Indralema,” 6669 tons reg.; "Niwaru,” 6443 tons
reg.; “Indraghiri,” 4927 tons reg.; and extra stea-
mers are chartered from time to time as trade may
require.
The latest addition to the Company’s fleet, the
“Marere,” 7000 tons reg., is a magnificent type of
marine architecture, and has been built to meet the
XEbe Shipping Jnbusti’?.
•Historical and Biographical Sketches:—continued.


requirements of a trade that is developing by leaps
and hounds.
Twelve years ago the smallest of the Company's
vessels would have been considered a monster, but
the more recent additions to the fleet overshadow
their earlier rivals in all the essentials of size, ca-
pacity and speed. It will thus be seen that the
vessels of the Tyser Line are great cargo carriers of
modern type, strongly built, shapely, and equipped
omy in working. The "Niwaru” is a specially grace-
ful looking boat, her great beam being lightened by
a ne entrance and well-moulded contour.
The London office of The Tyser Line, Ltd., is situ-
ated at 16 Fenchurch Avenue; the Head Office for
Australasia being located at Napier, N.Z., Captain
Kichard Todd, Colonial Superintendent. Messrs.
Tyser and Co., of 51 Pitt-street, Sydney, are Manag-
ing Agents in Australia.
shed, having superficial floor space of 125 feet, by
42 feet; a store of three floors, each 237 ft. by 43 ft..
also offices and stores for plant and gear. The pie-
mises possess every facility for storing, loading, and
unloading cargo in the most expeditious and effi-
cient manner,
The route taken by the Tyser Line, Limited, ser-
vices areLoudon to Melbourne, Sydney and New
TYSER AND COMPANY’S OFFICES, PITT-STREET, SYDNEY.
"ith every labour-saving appliance. Their class at
Lloyds is of the highest, and they are in charge of
able and experienced Captains and Officers.
The Company have not, in the architecture of
their vessels, committed the mistake of making
ugliness the chief feature, as is the case with many
liners, where those responsible for the design of the
vessels have apparently gone out of their way to
mate their handiwork repulsive to the eye.
The Tyser steamers, though great carriers, are as
handsome as they are useful. Their effective lines
nnd internal design at once suggest good sea-going
qualities, speed and comfort, combined with econ-
The Company’s steamers berth at the Victoria
Dock, London, and load at the Albert Dock.
Messrs. Tyser and Co. are represented in Sydney
by Mr. H. C. Benson, who has been connected with
the business during the past fourteen years.
The Company’s steamers have for eleven years
berthed at Tyser’s Wharf (late Moore’s), where every
convenience for carrying on a large shipping trade
is available. This wharf is situated at Miller’s
Point, and has two jetties and three berths, with a
length of berth ranging from 179 to 452 feet, with a
width of 30 feet. The draught of water at each jetty
is from 25 to 40 feet There is also a commodious
Zealand Ports, monthly sailings; New York to Mel-
bourne and Sydney, via Ports, sailing about every
five weeks. The homeward route is via Cape Horn,
leaving New Zealand every three weeks.
Messrs. Punch, Edye and Co. are Agents in New
York for the Tyser Line, Ltd. Agents are also es-
tablished as follows;—Messrs. Osterineyer, Dewoz,
and Van Kompaey Melbourne; Messrs. Heather.
Roberton and Co. and T. and S. Morrin, Auckland,
N.Z.; Messrs. W. M. Bannatyne and Co., Ltd, Wel-
lington, N.Z.; Messrs. Kinsey, Barns and Co..
Christchurch, N.Z.; and Messrs. J. W. Swift and
Co., Dunedin, N.Z.


MeSSrS. Qibbs, BriSfht & Co.
**
Shipping Agents, General Merchants, and Agents
for the Eastern and Australian Steamship Co.,
Ltd., Anglo Australian Steamship Co.
Amongst the great mercantile houses of Sydney
is that of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Company,
Merchants, Shipping and Insurance Agents.
More than a century ago the firms of Messrs.
Antony Gibbs and Sons, London,, anu Messrs.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., Bristol, were leading
houses in their respective cities, the former ener-
getically pushing business in the Peninsula, and
subsequently in South America, while the latter
were actively engaged in the flourishing West In-
dian trade of those days.
Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co., Bristol, extended
to Liverpool, which practically became their
new anc * desirable channels.
To take one department of their business it will
be interesting to our readers if we trace the de-
velopment of their shipping business, with which
the history of the Colony is inseparably connected.
We have mentioned the “Eagle’’ Line as being
despatched in the early days by Messrs. Qibbs,
Bright and Co., Liverpool, but it soon became ap-
parent that sailing vessels, for carrying passengers
to and from the Antipodes, would have to give
place to the more rapid service of steamers, and
the firm’s “ Eagle” Line, and also the “ Blackball”
Clippers, for which they were agents, gradually
withdrew in favour of steamers.
Following on the "Great Britain” and " Royal
Charter," Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co. accepted
the agency in Melbourne of the “Orient” Line
of steamers, and pioneered them successfully for
the first ten years of their career there, when
agencies gave place to their own offices being
opened in the various ports.
to which arc attached large dumping plant and
sheds for the receiving and shipment of wool and
etcetra in connection with their large export busi-
ness. En passant it may be mentioned that their
steamers and sailers have taken as many as 120,000
bales of wool in one season from New South Wales,
besides other Colonial produce.
In this connection, the firm have also dumping
sheds at Newcastle, and despatch steamers and
sailers regularly from that port, as also from Mel-
bourne, Adelaide and Brisbane.
Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co. are also Managing
Agents for the well-known popular steamers of the
Eastern and Australian Steamship Company, Lim-
ited, known as the “E. and A” Line, trading be-
tween Australia, China, and Japan,
After pioneering this trade through the intri-
cacies of the Barrier Keef, Arafura Seas, and the
Islands of the East for the past thirty odd years,
with different classes of steamers, according to the
demands of the trade, they now run a regular
THE EASTERN AND AUSTRALIAN STEAMSHIP CO., LTD.,
S.S. “EASTERN.”
head office. Always in the front of British trade,
they opened their first house in Australia in 1851,
in Melbourne, under the title of Bright Brothers.
Branches were in course of time opened in Bris-
bane, Sydney, Newcastle, Adelaide and Dune-
din. Their shipping business in connection with
the Colonies had begun considerably earlier than
this, and those Colonists who can go back to the
early days of the gold-fields will remember the
magnificent clippers of the “Eagle Line of Sail-
ing Ships” despatched by Messrs. Qibbs, Bright
and Co., of Liverpool.
In 1881 the firm of Messrs. Antony Gibbs, of
London, joined Messrs. Bright Brothers, of Aus-
tralia, and the firm in Australia henceforth be-
came Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co. Faithful to
the traditions of their progenitors the present firm
have continued in the front of Australian busi-
ness, always ready to lead Australian trade into
Since then Messrs. Qibbs, Bright and Co. have
represented several large steamship lines, among
them being the well-known steamship owners,
Messrs. William Milburn and Co., who will be
remembered as the owners of those fine steamers
“Hankow,” “St. Osyth," and “Whampoa,”
which came out here in the seventies, and have
been succeeded by the well-known “ Port" Line
of steamers to and from Australia—steamers
which have played an important part in the car-
riage of wool and produce to the London and Con-
tinental markets. Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co.
also represent Messrs. Gellatly, Hankey and Sew-
ell’s well-known “Mogul” steamers, and many
other lines and owners too numerous to mention
in this “ Review.” In connection with their ship-
ping trade they have leases from the narbour
Trust of improved wharfage accommodation, situ-
ated in the heart of the City, at Circular Quay,
monthly service with the up-to-date steamers
“ Empire,” “ Eastern” and “ Australian,” and fre-
quent cargo trips by the “ Guthrie” and' " Airlie.”
In the early days the E. and A. Co. carried the
Queensland mails for Europe, via Singapore, and
made that port their terminus in the East.’ Cir-
cumstances arose, however, which afterwards made
Hong Kong the terminal. port, extending to Foo-
chow for China Teas during the season, and for
this trade required a more “cargo” type of stea-
meis.
In those early pioneering days, business was of a
more movable nature, necessitating constant care
and foresight on behalf of the Company, so that
the class of steamer should be obtained to suit the
exigencies of the trade.
Japan latterly became a greater attraction for
the exchange of products, and tourists’ and busi-
ness visits, and an extension was consequently
tTbe Shipping Jnbustrg.
Historical and Biographical Sketches:—continued.
PASSENGER AND CARGO STEAMERS.


decided upon by the E. and A. Co. to the land of
the “ Mikado.”
As it became evident to this progressive com-
pany that it was necessary to improve their fleet
for the increasing passenger trade, the “ Aus-
tralian” was built, having her saloon amidships,
sleeping accommodation luxuriously - fitted up in
two-berth cabins on the upper deck, and the din-
ing and smoking rooms on the promenade deck,
This steamer was followed by the “Eastern” and
“Empire,” and it has become so well known that
it is almost superfluous to mention that no better
passenger steamers are afloat, suitable to the trade
which they have to perform.
The trip to Japan has become very popular,
largely owing to the fact that such splendid
steamers have been provided, and run to regular
time-table dates. Passengers are thus enabled to
make the world’s tour from the large centres of
population in the old world, and to get their itin- .
erary fixed so as to connect to and from Japan,
electric fans. Experienced Surgeons and Steward-
esses are also carried.
GIBBS, BRIGHT AND CO'S MERCHANDISE
DEPARTMENT.
’ '
The Merchandise Department is an important
branch of the business of this firm. Teas are im-
’ported from Ceylon, India, China and Java; Corn-
sacks, Woolpacks, and Ore Bags from Calcutta;
Silk Goods from China and Japan, and Eastern
Produce generally.
They handle the product of some of the largest
sugar mills of Queensland and the River districts
of this State, also import large supplies of Maur-
itius and China sorts at times when local produc-
tiou is not equal to the demand—a very large busi-
ness in the year. ,
As Indent Merchants they have enjoyed the con-
fidence of their supporters; their business in this
direction being conducted on such strict principles
their metal has been used in many of the large
contracts for wharf construction, both for Govern-
ment and proprietary works in the metropolis and
at Newcastle. Their metal enjoys a deservedly
high reputation amongst shipmasters and others,
The Penyrorsedd Slate Quarry Co., Ltd.,
they also represent, and have imported very large
quantities of their slates for many years past, and,
as the quality is highly approved, the business
gives promise of considerable extension.
Messrs. Macfarlane, Strang and Co., Ltd., of
Glasgow, who rank as one of the laigest firms in
that, city as manufacturers of cast-iron vats and
gas pipes, Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co. have
represented for a great many years, and have suc-
cessfully tendered for many Government con-
tracts, besides catering for the usual trade demand,
Edward Hall, of Liverpool, manufacturer of the
well-known Patent Dumping Bands, is another im-
portant firm, for whom Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and
Co. are the Australian representatives.
THE EASTERN AND AUSTRALIAN STEAMSHIP CO., LTD.,
S.S. “EMPIRE."
and make their voyages in whatever direction they
desire.
Ronnd-the-world tours are now booked in con-
nection with the E. and A. Line of steamers, so as
. ® na ble passengers to connect with the voyages
Hi tj *° * n<^a ® as tern Ports and Europe by
P. and 0. and Messageries Maritimes Mail
Bines; via the Siberian Trans-Continental Line to
European Capitals; to Canada and thence Europe
via the Canadian-Pacific Lines, or via the United
states of America by the steamers of the Pacific
ilai * or Oriental and Occidental Lines.
I he great attraction in travelling by the E. and
A- Line of steamers is that for three weeks the stea-
a i e never I° n gev than about 48 hours out of
Aght of land at one time. The track lies through
to 0 }, 6 °/ 1B Inos * : beautiful and picturesque scenery
be found in any sea voyage, and comparatively
mooth water is experienced throughout the whole
soi (g eJ ei le COUISe being mostly direct north and
bv eg * lua t of the tropics is felt far less than
•m. e other routes.
Ue steamers are fitted with cold storage cham-
s . electric light, and in the first saloon cabins,
as to meet the entire approval of their constitu-
ents. Having agents and representatives in every
important business centre of the world, enables
Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co. to undertake com-
missions for every class of goods.
Amongst the many important agencies held by
this firm may be mentioned the following;—
Parkinson and W. and B. Cowan, Ltd., manufac-
hirers of wet and dry gas meters, pre-payment
slot meters, and gas appliances generally.
The head office of this firm is in Lon-
don, with branches established at Edinburgh,
Manchester, and Birmingham. For the past
twelve years a branch has been established in Syd-
ney, where meters of all descriptions are manufac-
tured and repaired. Warner and Cowan’s Patent
is known all the world over, and their name is in
high repute amongst all the Gas Companies and
Gas Works under the control of the Municipal
Councils in this and the other States.
Another important firm they represent is that of
Messrs. Vivian and Sons, of London, manufac-
turers of Yellow Sheathing Metal and nails, also
sheet copper and rods. A very large quantity of
They act as financial representatives of Messrs,
Frederick Stearns and Co., of Detroit, the well-
known Pharmacists, whose specialities in medicines
are of high repute throughout the world.
Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co. have recently been
appointed in all the Australian States the sole
agents of the well-known firm of Dr. R. Nahnsen
and Co.’s brand of “ Phoenix” Nitro-Glycerine Ex-
plosives, which are now regarded by the mining
community as one of the safest and most reliable
on the market. Notwithstanding the strong rivalry
and keen competition which has been recently
developed, this brand is steadily forcing itself on
the notice of those engaged in mining pursuits.
The firm occupies a very important position as
exporters of most of the important Products of
this State, amongst the principal being Shale,
Hides, Tallow, Fur, Skins, and Manures,
In metals and minerals they have important
connections in Britain and on the Continent, and a
very considerable number of contracts are fre-
quently fixed for Chrome Ore, Nickel Ore, Cobalt,
Wolfram, and other descriptions of lesser import-
ance.


MERCHANTS AND SHIPPING AGENTS.
G. S. YUILL AND CO., LTD., HEAD OFFICE, 6 BRIDGE-STREET, SYDNEY.
Übe Shipping Jnbusti^.
Historical and Biographical Sketches ; —Continued.


Messrs. G. S. Yuill & Co., Ltd.
MERCHANTS AND SHIPPING AGENTS.
Amongst the companies which stand in the
front rank of the commercial community of Aus-
tralasia, Messrs. G. S, Yuill and Co., Limited,
Africa, and the East. They are also large ex-
porters of wool, tallow, and other produce.
As Commission Agents, they make liberal ad-
vances against consignments to be sold by them
in London or South Africa, and render final account
sales with due promptness.
Messrs. G. S. Yuill and Co., Limited, are agents
in Sydney and London for the Adelaide Steamship
Co., Ltd., which concern has its head office in
owns a fleet of some 40 magnificent vessels trading
from Hongkong to various parts of the Eastern
world. The four vessels engaged in the Australian
trade are the Taiyuan,” “ Changsha,” “ Ching-
tu,” and tr Tsinan/* all being sister ships of 2269
tons register; the first two steamers have large re-
frigerating chambers.
The service is a three-weekly one, and the ports
touched en route are Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane,
CHINA NAVIGATION COMPANY, LTD., S.S. "CHINGTU.”
Merchants and Shipping Agents, hold a prominent
position. The Head Office is at No. 6 Bridge-street,
Sydney, the branch offices being at 120 Fenchurch-
street, London, E.C.; 515 Collins-street, Mel-
the city whose name it bears, and has branch offices
in all the principal Australian coastal centres.
This company possesses one of the finest fleets of
passenger and cargo vessels in Australian waters,
Rockhampton, Townsville, Cairns, Thursday Ts-
land, Port Darwin, Manila, Hongkong, and thence
to Japanese ports, with occasional deviations as eir-
cumstances may require.
ADELAIDE STEAMSHIP COMPANY, LTD., S.S. “MARLOO."
bourne; 103 Smith-street, Durban; and 11 Watt-
street, Newcastle.
The company have for many years been largely
interested in the frozen meat export trade, and
do a very extensive business with London, South
and its trade covers almost a complete circle of the
Australian Continent.
Messrs. G. S. Yuill and Co., Limited, are also
agents in Sydney, Melbourne, and Newcastle for
the China Navigation Company, Limited, which
AH information regarding the movements of these
steamers is always courteously given by Messrs. G.
S. Yuill and Co., Limited, who have done much to-
wards forwarding the interests of the line.


SHIPPING AGENTS AND COAL MERCHANTS.
W. Scott Fell & Co.,
Limited.
SHIPPING AGENTS AND COAL MERCHANTS.
To the biographer or historian the inditing of a
page of great success is at all times pleasing. It is
true that in many histories the obstacles that are
the natural heritage of mankind figure largely, but
it is equally true that difficulties are made but to
be overcome, and that the able men of a com-
munity are those who successfully grapple with
whatever stands in the pathway to success and move
on from one triumphant stage to another.
The firm of Messrs. W. Scott Fell and Co. pre-
sent a notable instance of what can be accomplished
by the exercise of the faculties referred to. The
business is not a thing of yesterday, neither is it one
of the very olden time. Several years ago the
operations of the firm were carried on in Bridge-
street. Sydney, and as Shipping Contractors a con-
siderable trade was handled by them. As the busi-
ness gradually advanced, those at the head of affairs
were able to extend their scope. The offices in
Bridge-street not proving large enough, a move was
made to more commodious and central premises at
51 Pitt-street. The firm were thus able to add to
their operations of Shipping Agents, those of Char-
terers of Vessels and Coal Exporters. The transac-
tions of Messrs. W. Scott Fell and Co. progressing
by leaps and bounds, another removal was made
a short time ago to the present commodious pre-
mises in Gresham-street. At present the huge
ramifications of the concern, which extend all over
the world, are controlled from the Head Office,
Sydney, by Mr. W. Scott Fell and his partner,
Mr. O. G. S. Lane.
Their business of coal exporters having brought
the firm into close relations with the port of New-
castle, and the certainty existing that the relation-
ship with that busy mercantile centre would in-
crease rather than diminish, it was resolved to es-
tablish a branch there. It was placed under the
charge of Mr. W. H. Dawson, for many years
Deputy Consul for the United States at Sydney
(during the whole period that Colonel Bell so ably
represented the great Republic here). Mr. Dawson
is well acquainted with the business centres of the
Great Republic, and, having a personal knowledge
of affairs not often found in business men outside
the United States, is well able to deal with those
matters which must arise between firms trading
under different flags, and which involve questions
of domicile, naturalization, navigation, and mer-
cantile and tariff laws.
Success in business life, we repeat, is not the
lesult of meie accident. That which has been at-
tained by Messrs. W. Scott Fell and Co. is largely
due to the well-known integrity of the firm. For
the word of a business concern to be as good as
its bond is a prize well worth striving for. and.
when attained, to be rigidly maintained. Besides
their well-known probity the firm are noted for
their up-to-date methods of management, which
not only serve the interests of their large, import-
ant and rapidly increasing clientele, but place their
name in the front circle of houses in the shipping
and coal exporting trade of Australasia.
One of the features of the business of Messrs. W.
Scott Fell and Co. is the time chartering of
steamers. This branch was entered upon some years
ago, and the results have hitherto exceeded all ex-
pectations. They now control a fleet of no less
than 19 steamers, with a tonnage of from 4520 (o
7000 tons each. These steamers are chartered by the
firm in all parts of the world, and have great
cargo-carrying capacity. In compliment to Aus-
tralia they move about the globe under the title and
designation of “ The Commonwealth Line.”
Some idea of the vast extent of cargo handled by
Messrs. W. Scott Fell and Co. may bo judged from
the fact that last year their vessels carried 300,000
tons of merchandise of every kind in the different
oceans. It may, indeed, be said that the smoke
from the funnels of ” The Commonwealth Line”
hovers over every sea. Cargoes are carried to Java,
India and numerous Eastern ports. In the main
the vessels of this line are chartered for Oriental
destinations, and are kept continually employed on
the busy coast routes of the gorgeous and ancient
Fast.
As the “ Commonwealth Line” is solely under the
control of the firm, and its steamers and sailers
proceed to all parts of the world, Messrs. W. Scott
Pell and Co., by reason of these facts, are able
to enter into contracts with Governments and large
corporations in every quarter of the globe,
They have agents not only in every Australasian
port, but at every maritime centre of importance
in the world. Consequently the information which
is absolutely necessary to the successful conduct of
W. SCOTT FELL AND CO., LTD., HEAD OFFICE, 5 GRESHAM-STREET, SYDNEY.
a mercantile tiansaction is always ready (o hand,
and easily available when a decision has to be ar-
rived at.
In London, that great metropolis where such a
vest quantity of the world's meicantile and ship-
ping trade is transacted, Messrs. W. Scott Fell and
Co. are excellently represented, their agents being
Messrs. F. Lenders and Co., Great St. Helens, E.C-
This firm, so well known and old established, is a
Übe Shipping Jnbustn?.
Historical and Biographical Sketches:—continued.


standing guarantee that every item of business en-
trusted to them will be well, faithfully and punctu-
ally executed.
In the export coal trade Messrs. W. Scott Fell
and Co. do business with the Dutch East Indm-
the China coast, Singapore, and other Oriental
ports. Of late years all those places have been
crowded with the world’s shipping, as both men-o’-
war and merchantmen must be supplied with that
great generator of motive power—coal.
It is thus a matter of the greatest importance to
Australia that she has now a big market for h'r
coal at no great distance from her shores. Un-
doubtedly she has competitors in the East, but, if
she be able to successfully meet them in regard to
price, there is a great field for Australian coal in
the polyglot naval stations of China, Japan, the
Straits and the Philippines.
Messrs. W. Scott Fell and Co. have large bunker-
ing contracts for Australian coal in foreign parts.
They are in a position by reason of their very large
connection and intimate knowledge of the coal trade,
to lay down Australian or any other coal at any
port of the world at cheap rates. Recently the firm
secured the Gulf contract for 300,000 tons of coal,
coke, and concentrates, and, under a mutual ar-
rangement, handed it over to Messrs. Howard
Smith and Sons, Ltd. As another instance, it may
be stated that a contract was recently completed
with the British Admiralty to convey coal to the
naval station at Hongkong. In connection with
MR. W. SCOTT FELL.
Iliis contract over 50,000 tons of coal were carried.
Messrs. W. Scott Fell and Co. are one of the largest
exporting firms of coal in New South Wales, as they
huy direct and ship direct; their operations not
only profit the coal-mine owner, but also, by bring-
ing return cargoes to Australia, do much to foster
Australian trade with the East.
One of the important items of return cargo that
the firm arrange for is sugar from Java to Aus-
tralian ports. The terrible drought from
which this country is suffering has stimu-
lated a demand for food-stuffs wherever pro-
curable, and the firm under notice handle
a considerable amount of general produce from the
East. Having their own line of vessels and their
agents everywhere the firm have special facilities
tooffer to Governments, large corporations, indi-
viduals, firms and companies, who may require
considerable quantities of coal, produce, or other
merchandise. As their vessels are all safe, speedy,
and up to date, the conditions for customers are of
the most favourable character.
Altogether, the growth of the business of Messrs.
W- Scott Fell and Co. is a notable feature in the
hrstory of the shipping trade of Australasia, it
shows how opportunities that offer may be seized
and turned to profitable account. The coal
trade is essential'} - one which responds to moderate
freights, and the Australian coal centres have cer-
tainly benefited bv the fact that their product can
be laid down in Eastern ports at rates which suc-
cessfully compete with the local or English mineral.
As a matter of fact. Japan, which can place
a cheap coal on the markets within her
sphere of influence, has now no great im
elination to do so, owing to her recogni-
tion of the fact that it is not a safe policy
to sacrifice material that may at any day be badly
wanted in a big war with a European power or com-
bination of enemies. Furthermore, Japan is now a
great manufacturing nation, which daily requires
a vast quantity of coal for the running of the machi-
nery of steam engines to drive her weaving, spin-
ning, and other factories. To practically give away
its present stock of coal, only to find that purchases
at a greatly enhanced cost must be immediately
made, would be economy of a very one-sided cha-
racter. and such as does not recommend itself to
the astute and far- c eeing brown men who guide the
destinies of " Nippon Maru”—the Britain of Hie
Eastern seas. Consequently Messrs. W. Scott Fell
and Co. have made successful arrangements for
snnnlyinEr from Australia that much and unjve---
sal'v neefhd a’t'cle wither wb'cb ”ot a t'ain e-n
run, not a factory move its wheels, and not a
steamer leave its anchors.
At present Air. Scott Fell is in London on
business of the firm and will obtain every
available 'nformation that can have a bear-
ing on the mercantile and maritime rela-
tions of this country with other colonies and
nations. It is also well understood by the firm, that
a customer, once well supplied, is almost certain
to repeat his order; a fact which is often overlooked
or forgotten by manv. Every one who likes to see
well-directed enterprise in the conduct of a business
will mark with satisfaction the achievements which
are being made bv Messrs. IV. Scott Fell and Co.,
in the export and import trade of Australasia, re-
sulting, as they do, in the employment of a large
number of seafaring people, the welfare of the
mining population, the circulation of large sums in
stores and other necessaries, and the general well-
being of the whole community.
MR. W. SCOTT FELL.
The founder of the firm of Messrs. AV. Scott Fell
and Co. is Air. AV. Scott Fell, a gentleman who is
yet in the prime of life. L ; ko many of the captains
of commerce throughout the world, he is a
native of Scotland, having been bom not far from
that great centre of shipping. commercial, and in-
dustrial activity—Glasgow. He came lo Australia
some 24 years ago and settled in Sydney, where he
has ever since remained. Engaging in commercial
affairs, he, at a comparatively early age, began
enterprise on his own account, the busine’ss founded
by him being conducted under the style which it
still retains. The position to which they have at-
tained in the commercial world of Sydney is mani-
fested by the fact that they run a line of no less
than 19 steamers and sailers, sailing under the flag
of the Commonwealth Line; that vast quantities of
coal are supplied by them from every part of the
world, and that the import trade of Australasia has
recently been greatly stimulated by their far-seeing
and enterprising activities.
The leading position occupied in Sydney by Mr.
W. Scott Fell is evidenced by the general esteem in
which he is held by the mercantile community. He
is a member of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce,
in the transactions of which he ever takes a lively,
leading, and personal interest. As a resident of
the municipality of Alosman, he pays great atten-
tion to all locil matters. Mr. AV. Scott Fell’s fine
mansion, supplied with everything requisite for an
elegant and comfortable home, is an ideal one for a
gentleman engaged in that line of business on which
the prosperity of Sydney so greatly depends. Both
in his private and business capacity Air. Scott Fell
is closely related with Newcastle, New South AVales.
his esteemed partner in life being a lady who claims
that city as her birthplace- His social and
personal qualities endear Air. Scott Fell to a laige
circle of friends, although recently the demands of
a greatly growing business have occupied a large
portion of his time and attention, and in the natural
order of things the results of his journey to London
will be but the prelude to still further develop-
ments along the lines of progress. Mr. Scott Fell’s
business ability, thoroughly combined with indom-
itable energy and unwearied perseverance, is well
recognised in the commercial circles of Sydney.
MR. O. G. S. LANE.
The firm of Messrs. W. Scott Fell and Co. are for-
tunate in having as a partner Mr. O. G. S. Lane.
One of their specialities is a large traffic in coal, a
business which, in combination with shipping, is
the chief one conducted in Newcastle, New South
Wales, of which port Mr. Lane is a native. He is
a son of Mr. J. S. Lane, at one time well known
in Sydney shipping circles. In such a busi-
ness as that with which he is connected, Mr.
Lane apparently finds his true " metier.” Judging
by results, its progress is like that of the marsupial
of his native land—inasmuch as it advances by leaps
and bounds. Mr. Lane is much respected in the
business and social circles of Sydney, his geniality
being as noted as his commercial enterprise and
attention to those details on which the prosperity
of a large and progressive enterprise. such as that
MR. O. G. S. LANE.
with which he is connected depends. What Air.
Lane does not know of the coal and shipping trades
is not worth knowing, and recently the attention of
the firm has been devoted to other lines of raer-
chandis- of considerable importance both to Aus-
tralia and those Oriental places with which the
argosies of the Commonwealth Line trade.
On two occasions he made an extended tour
through the East, first in 1897, and, the results
being fruitful, a second visit was made three years
later. Air. Lane, therefore, has an intimate
personal knowledge of the persons and places
in the Eastern Seas. Air. Lane is a typi-
cal Sydney leader of commerce, and is
esteemed and liked both in his office and in other
places where merchants most do congregate. It is
hoped that the business acumen, progressive spirit,
and personal geniality so manifest in Air. Lane,
and which have done so much in the upbuilding of
the film’s business, will long continue to be exerted,
with results similar to those which have distin-
guished the film’s history during its brilliant and
prosperous career. During his partner’s absence on
a business trip to England, Air. Lane is in chaige
of the firm’s interests on this side of the world,
and is administering its affairs with that keen per-
ception, great foresight, and cool judgment which
have already been so advantageously manifested
since he became connected with the firm,


GRAVING DOCK OWNERS AND MARINE ENGINEERS.
Mort’s Dock and Engineering
Company, Ltd.
MORT’S BAY, BALMAIN, PORT JACKSON.
The New South Wales Government has not been
lacking in enterprise in latter years in establishing
great docks at Port Jackson, wherein the largest
vessels of the world may be accommodated, and pri-
vate firms have followed the lead set them and have
even bettered their instruction. Foremost of these
firms is the Mort’s Dock and Engineering Com-
pany, whose works at Mort’s Bay, Balmain, are
unique in Australasia in importance and extent—
unique because in older countries many branches of
trade are distributed over a number of different
manufactures, which are concentrated under one
management at Mort’s Bay.
Nearly 45 years ago, Mr. T. S. Mort, to whose
memory a statue has been erected in Macquarie
Place, Sydney, .'aid the foundation of the present
business by constructing a Dock and establish-
ing Works at Balmain. Fourteen years later the
first Company was formed, and finally, in 1899, the
present Company, with a larger capital, and. con-
sequently, capable of more important work, came
into existence. The business has grown from one
small dock, employing at the most eight score of
men, to a vast hive of industry, covering an area
of eighteen acres, and equal to anything in the
way of engineering. The steamer “ Governor
Blackall,” which was built for the Queensland
Government early in the seventies, and the “ Cap-
tain Cook,” which was built for the New South
Wales pilot service about ten years ago, are speci-
mens of the work produced from this establish-
ment in the ship-building line. Ship-building and
ship-repairing, however, by no means represent the
whole field of the Company’s labours, which in-
clude foundry .cork and mechanical engineering of
all kinds, notably in connection with the great min-
ing industries of this count)y. At the present time
the number of men employed, though necessarily
varying, may be averaged at considerably over 1000.
Although so large a number of men, as well as en-
gines, whose total horse-power amounts to some-
thing like 750, are at work within a few hundred
yards distance, one is impressed bn entering by the
quietness, and the absence of crowd and bustle.
For example, in the work of riveting, which
takes so large a part in ship-building and
boiler-making operations, instead of ICO clanging
hammers, nowadays we have the noiseless pressure
of the hydraulic riveter. A powerful air compres-
sing plant has been installed for actuating the
various pneumatic tools used for drilling, caulking,
chipping, tube expanding, tapping, and for lifts.
There are many among us who can remember the
time when hauling a vessel on the slip required
quite an army of men, but to-day we see the great
hydraulic rams perform the work,Almost without
tendance, save for the need of removing the coup-
ling rods, as the linked line, from ram to cradle
shortens before the ship’s advance. Huge iron
castings are planed or drilled, great plates are bent
and curved almost without a sound, while the only
labour exerted by human muscles is that which
serves to direct the machinery.
The dry dock is quarried out of solid stone, and
can accommodate a vessel of 4500 tons. The depth
on sill is 20 feet at ordinary spring tides, and the
powerful pumping engines can empty the dock in
about three hours. There are two large patent
slips, capable of taking up vessels of 2000 and 1000
tons respectively, worked by hydraulic machinery
of the most efficient and modern type, besides a
smaller slip suitable for yachts or for tugboats.
The iron foundry is a large and loftv building,
its length being 150 feet, with a breadth of 44 feet.
It contains three cupola furnaces, capable of sup-
plying 20 tons of metal at one cast. Loam mills for
preparing the material of the moulds, and a heated
chamber for drying them, and five overhead cranes
SHEER LEGS, CAPABLE OF LIFTING 70 TONS.
for lifting the ponderous castings, make up the ap-
pointments of a very complete foundry. There are
separate brass and steel foundries, in which cast-
80-TON STEAM HAMMER.
ings np to 4 tons and 35 cwt. can be produced in
Ihe metals respectively. In the boiler and ship-
building departments are three plate and angle iron
furnaces, besides a host of machines for flanging,
punching, shearing, planing and drilling iron in
every possible shape and position, and powerful
plate bending rolls capable of curving plates 16 feet
wide and 11 inches in thickness. There are hyd-
raulic riveters, both fixed and portable, by which
nearly all the work of this description is performed,
and several cranes, as well as an overhead travel-
ler, capable of lifting 20 tons.
ITbe Engineering JniMistq?.
Historical and Biographical Sketchescontinued


The most conspicuous object in the blacksmiths’
department is the large steam hammer, one of the
irost powerful on this side of the line. It strikes
a blow equal to 80 tone, and can forge a shaft 2 feet
in diameter, with a length of 38 feet. There are
about a dozen smaller steam hammers of various
sizes down to 5 cwt., bolt, spike and rivet making
THE LATE MR. T. S. MORT.
machines, saws for cutting hot iron, and no less
than 40 smiths’ hearths.
The machine department is remarkably complete
and extensive. There are 40 lathes, of which the
largest can take in work up to 27 feet diameter and
50 feet in length. Of the planing machines, one
has a table 18 feet long, and can work over a breadth
of 9 feet and a height of 8 feet.
There is a multiplicity of other machines, for
shaping, slotting, drilling, key seating, screw cut-
ting, and other purposes, and a large boring lathe
capable of boring out cylinders 120 in. in diameter.
In the adjoining erecting shop, a roomy building
in which the separate portions of the often compli-
cated pieces of work are brought together, are
three powerful overhead travellers for raising each
part into the necessary position.
The pattern shop, in which the wooden models
for the smaller castings are made, and the copper-
smiths’ and brassfinishers’ department; are no less
completely equipped.
The saw-mill and joinery department occupy the
ground floor of a large building 167 feet long and
52 feet wide, containing all the most approved wood-
working apparatus for planing, mortising, dove-
tailing, and the like. The upper floor forms the
laying off loft, in which is performed the important
work of enlarging the working drawings to full
size. Besides these principal departments are those
of the painters, boatbuilders, and bricklayers, as
well as the opticians, in which nautical and mathe-
matical instruments are adjusted. The offices
form a handsome block of buildings in the centre of
the yard, and are completely appointed for the ac-
commodation of the officers, draughtsmen and
clerks. The wharves fronting the sheltered bay
have a total length of 2000 feet, and are provided
with hand and steam cranes, while, for lifting
spars, as well as for boilers and heavy machinery,
there are lofty sheers capable of raising 70 tons.
It is worthy of notice that, though the greater pai t
of the machines in the various shops, and the numer-
ous engines by which they are driven are of im-
ported make, and bear the names of celebrated
engineering firms in the old country, not a few addi-
tions and replacements consist of local workman-
ship, whose results are highly satisfactory. A strik-
mg instance of this is in the pumps of the hydraulic
cranes, one of the most important pieces of machin-
eiT !n „the wdiole yard, made entirely “on the pre-
mises, ’ and remarkable for efficiency. Even this
f e | no * : mee t the prospective demands of the Port
ot Sydney, and, as a consequence, the Company
as constructed an entirely new Dock on the
Wi 6st; mos t colossal scale at their new
Woolwich Works, opposite Cockatoo Island, on the
Parramatta River, which must be taken into con-
sideration if we wish to understand the true magni-
tude of the Company’s works and the importance of
its operations. In the execution of this great un-
dertaking over three million cubic feet of stone
was excavated. It was opened towards the end of
1901. The result has been to complete a dock
worthy of any port in the world, and so far as
accommodation is concerned the Woolwich Dock
can take in vessels from any size up to the class of
the Norddeutscher Lloyd steamers “ Grosser Kur-
furst” and " Bremen,” and the White Star liners
“ Suevic” and " Runic.” Its length when completely
finished—for though it has been in use since the
above-mentioned date the entire excavation is not
yet complete—is to be 765 feet; its width at entrance
is some 83 feet, and its depth over the sill at high
water at spring tides, 28 feet 9 inches. This latter
dimension allows of the entrance of any vessel that
has ever yet entered, or is ever likely to enter. Port
Jackson Heads. The dock floor is composed of
blue metal concrete of a minimum thickness of 12
inches with camber, and a fall of 9 inches from
centre to each side, a gutter of ample depth and
width being formed along each side of dock and
across front of apron for drainage. On each side of
dock there are six altars for shoring purposes, and
slides are provided on each side for lowering shor-
ing blocks, etc., to bottom of dock. The bottom of
dock is reached by three flights of steps of easy
grade and ample width. The outer caisson quoin
is of Harcourt granite and a second caisson quoin is
provided for at 404 feet from the outer one; this will
allow of the upper portion of dock being shut off
from the lower portion, which is a very essential
feature. When it is necessary to carry out exten-
sive and lengthy repairs on a vessel, the vessel can
be shut off in the upper portion of the dock, while
the lower portion is available for ordinary docking
work. For flooding the dock there is a culvert in
each pier head fitted with penstocks controlled by
hydraulic ram, for opening and closing. The cais-
son is of the floating type, constructed of steel and
designed to raise and lower automatically at any
state of the tide. For the emptying of the dock
there are three sets of powerful centrifugal pumps,
each set coupled direct to a vertical tandem com-
pound surface condensing engine, having cylinders
15 inch and 27 inch diameter, with a stroke
of 20. The discharge pipe from each pump is
33 diameter, and three pumps together are
capable of discharging 3,136,000 gallons of water per
hour. These pumps can either be worked separ-
ately or coupled. In addition to the main pumps
there is a 10 centrifugal pump for drainage
purposes. One separate surface condenser is pro-
vided which is common to the three engines, the
circulating pump being an centrifugal
pump, and the air pumps are of the single acting
double barrel type, driven off the crosshead of eir-
culating pump engine.
In addition to this dry docking accommodation,
the Company possesses at Woolwich a floating dock
MR. J. P. FRANKI, J.P.
which is utilised for vessels of 1500 tons, and 2000
feet of wharfage. With this combined accommoda-
tion at Woolwich and Balmain, therefore, time is
practically no limit to the woik which may be
undertaken by the Company.
Also, in Johnstone’s Bay, on the Southern side
of Balmain, the Company has two floating docks
of 1509 tons and 100 tons capacity ic spec lively,
known as the Jubilee Docks, for the accommoda-
tion of vessels.
The docks and slips can deal with a total tonnage
of 26,000 tons at one time, or ten separate vessels
can be docked in one day.
At any and all of these docks and slips extensive
repairs can be carried out on any vessel, either to
hull or machinery, as they are all provided with
the necessary appliances.
VESSELS ON THE SLIP, MORT’S DOCK.


CARGO STEAMERS.
Deutsch-Australische Dampf-
schiffs Gesellschaft.
GERMAN-AUSTRALIAN STEAMSHIP
COMPANY.
An important factor in the commercial develop-
ment of Australia indubitably is the splendid
means of ocean transport which now brings the
steadily increased, and consists at present of 23
ocean-going steamers, of an aggregate tonnage of
105,045 tons register. The steamers have been
I specially designed for the cargo-carrying trade to
and from Australia, and all the boats built in re-
cent years have been fitted with very powerful
machinery, some of them being capable of steam-
ing 13 knots an hour. The steamers do not cater
for passengers. The undermentioned vessels,
whose registered tonnage is appended, comprise the
company’s fleet: —"Altona,” 4462 tons; “Apolda,”
Capetown, Melbourne and Sydney; homewards from
Sydney via Melbourne or Singapore to Suez, Ant-
werp and Hamburg. Line No. 2, outwards from
Hamburg and Antwerp to Capetown, Algoa Bay
Fremantle and Adelaide. Homewards from Ade-
laide via Batavia, Samarang, Soerabaya, and Tjilat-
jap to Colombo, Suez, Marseilles, Amsterdam, and
Hamburg. Line No. 3, outwards from Hamburg
and Antwerp to Algoa Bay, Sydney, Brisbane, and
Townsville. Homewards from Sydney, Brisbane,
and Townsville via Macassar, Soerabaya, Samarang,
GERMAN-AUSTRALIAN CO.’S S.S. “KIEL.”
Antipodes into close connection with the chief
markets of the world.
Amongd the leading European shipping lines
which have opened up trade with Australia, is the
Deutsch - Australische Dampfschiffs - Gesellschaft
(German-Australian Steamship Company), the
head office of which is at Trostbrucke No. 1 Ham-
burg, the General Agency for Australasia being
located at No. 14 Spring-street, Sydney.
P*"
This company started its service from Ham-
burg and Antwerp to Australia in 1889 with seven
steamers; since then the company’s fleet has been
4950 tons; “Augsbuig,” 4907 tons; " Bergedorf,”
5108 tons; “Bielefeld," 5104 tons; “Chemnitz,"
2758 tons; “Duisburg,” 5155 tons; “ Elbing,” 5587
• tons; “ Essen,” 2939 tons; “ Flensburg,” 4435 tons;
“ Harburg,” 5134 tons; " Itzehoe,” 5134 tons;
“Kiel,” 5143 tons; “ Laeisz,” 5157 tons; "Magde-
burg,” 5154 tons; “Meissen,” 5150 tons; “Offen-
bach,” 5424 tons; “ Ifostock,” 4972 ton's; “ Solin-
gen,” 2814 tons; “ Sommerfeld,” 2606 tons;’“Son-
nebetg,” 4199 tons'; “Stassfuit,” 3231 tons; “Var-
zin,” 5192 ton-; total tonnage, 105,045 tons.
The following is a synopsis of t he company's services;
Line No 1, outwards fropr Hamburg and Antwerp to
Antwerp and Padang to Colombo, Suez, Mar-
seilles, Amsterdam and Hamburg. All the above
lines are four weekly. In addition to the General
Agency of the company at Sydney, the following
firms act as agents in the seaports of the
ither Australian States: —Melbourne, Messrs.
James Service and Co.; Adelaide, Messrs. George
Wills and Co.; Fremantle, Messrs. Strelitz
Brothers; Brisbane, Messrs. Brabant and Co.;
llockhampton, Messrs. John M. Headrick and Co.:
Townsville, Messrs. Samuel Allen and Sons, Limi-
ted; Cairns, Messrs. Jack and Newell; Cooktown,
Messrs. John Clunn and Sons, Limited.
ftbe Shipping 3-nbustn>.
Historical and Biographical Sketchescontinued


Shipping Casualties
IN
New South Wales.
From 1st July, 1901, to 31st December. 1902.
FROM 1st JULY, 1901.
ALEATHEA, ferry steamer, collided in Sydney
Harbour on the 11th instant, with launch No.
19, belonging to the Navy. The launch struck
the Aleathea heavily on the starboard bow,
smashing the planking and carrying away por-
tion of the sponson. The damage extended
almost to the waterline. The launch was also
badly knocked about.
ALEXANDER BERRY, s., owned by Illawarra S.
N. Co., broke her rudder on Ist instant, off
Point Bass, N.S.W., and drifted on to the rocks,
where she was dashed to pieces. Four men
were lost.
ANDES, bq., Fremantle to South Africa, towed
into East London, a derelict, on 16th May, had
lost bowsprit, mainmast, and mizzen topmast.
She also had a hole in starboard bow above the
main deck and 15 feet of water in the hold.
BALMORAL, s., which arrived at Adelaide on 23rd
inst., with sugar from Java, was found to be
on fire on the same night, and before the out-
break was got under considerable damage was
done to the cargo and vessel.
BANFFSHIRE, s„ London to Australian ports,
went ashore on the Black Shelf at Gray's, near
Gravesend, on 13th June. No apparent
damage.
CHITTOOR, bqtne, which left Westport, N.Z.,
on May 20, arrived at Sydney on 9th inst.,
with her foretopmast royal and topgallantmast
gone. She sprung her maintopmast in longitude
163.13 E., latitude 35.40 S. The Chittoor ar-
rived jury rigged and short of provisions.
DUNARD, Nor. bq., Diego Suarez to Newcastle,
sustained such serious damage through strand-
ing that she cannot be repaired.
EARL OF DUNMORE, bq., which left Melbourne
on 25th January, arrived at London on 6th
June, had her cargo on fire during the voyage.
ELLEN, lighter, belonging to the Jolly Company,
went ashore at Port Darwin, on Bth inst., with
100 tons of cargo taken from the steamer Airlie
from Hongkong. The vessel was floated on
9th inst.
FEDE, It. bq„ bound from Venice to St. Johns,
N. 8., to load for Melbourne, stranded near
San Pedro del Pinatar, and on 31st May was
was full of water; afterwards floated.
GADSBY, A. and A. s., which left New York in
May for Auckland, returned to port in a dam-
aged condition, having been in collision with
the schooner Frank A. Palmer on May 26. The
Gadsby sustained serious damage on port bow
and had her lifeboats smashed.
ISLAMOUNT, bq., from Adelaide, grounded at
Easthajn on 27th May. It took five tugs to
float her. She w r as then towed to Runcorn.
Vessel damaged.
JANE GUILLON, bq., at San Francisco from New-
castle, took fire on May 15 whilst discharging
cargo. She had only discharged 80 tons of coal
out of 2937 tons. The damage to the barque
was slight.
JOHN GAMBLES, bq., bound from Peru to Auck-
land with 1610 tons of raw sugar, was wrecked
on Papieti Reef on May 24. The captain was
ashore at the time and the mate was in charge.
The crew were landed in boats, saving all their
effects.
EA BELLA, bqtne, at Dunedin, June 28, from
Hamburg, reports a very rough passage. Sail-
on December 7 she lost nearly all her sails and
gear, and put into Portland to refit. She
sailed again on January 25, and lost her jib-
boom and travellers on the mainmast, also the
cap of the topmast.
LILLIE MAY.—A collision occurred at Hobart on
the 19th inst., between the ketches Lillie May
and Foam, resulting in the latter being con-
siderably damaged.
MAGNAT, bq., ashore at Cape Liptrap, has been
abandoned as a total wreck.
MANLY, ferry steamer, broke down whilst on her
way to Sydney from Manly in a heavy sea.
The steamer Brighton took her in tow and
towed her to Manly, where the tow line broke
and the steamer drifted ashore on to the beach.
The steamer was floated the following day un-
injured.
NORDEN, Nor. bq., wrecked at the entrance of Suva
Harbour on June 27, has been purchased by
the Union S.S. Co. for .£350.
OAKLANDS, s„ collided with the river steamer
Sarah Hixson in the north arm a few miles
above Coraki, on the 28th inst. The latter was
damaged a good deal, and was beached to pre-
vent her sinking. The Oaklauds was not
damaged in any way.
PANIA, s., while en route from Blenheim to Wel-
lington lost her propeller and was towed into
Wellington by the Huia on July 1.
PROTECTOR, p.s., capsized on Ist inst., whilst
attempting to cross the bar at the entrance to
the Richmond River during a south-westerly
gale. The crew of five men and one passenger
were drowned.
ROTOMAHANA, s., broke her crank-shaft on 19th
June whilst on a voyage from the Thames to
Coromandel during dirty weather, but made
___ , unc * ei ! canvas *
SHANNON, river steamer, whilst making her
maiden trip as a passenger steamer, between
Swan Hill and Mildura. struck a snag on
the 28th ult., and founded m the Murray
River. The passengers and crew, with luggage
and deck cargo, were landed. About 40 tons
of produce in the hold was lost.
SOLGLYT, bq., which had completed loading a
cargo of timber at Bunbury for Durban, and
was ready for sea, dragged her anchors during
a heavy squall from the northward on the 10th
inst. and became a total wreck.
VILLE DE BELFORT, bq., bound from Havre
to Gomen, New* Caledonia, in ballast, had
encountered terrific gales off the Australian
coast, during which she was dismasted. The
Saint Louis went to the assistance of the barque,
and towed her safely into Noumea.
FROM Ist AUGUST, 1901.
ALEXA, bq., was wrecked on Surprise Island, one
of the Chesterfield Group, in July. The crew
landed in New Caledonia, having made the
passage from the scene of the disaster in the
ship’s boat.
AVANTI, Nor. ship, bound from Fredrikstadt to
Adelaide with timber, went ashore at Drobak,
but was afterwards refloated.
BLUEBELL, bq., whilst being towed from her
loading berth at Williamstown (Vic.) to the
anchorage on the 16th inst., carried away her
hawser, and getting stern way on, collided
with a Harbour Trust silt barge, doing the
latter serious damage. The barque was not
injured.
BONANZA, bq., at Bunbury, broke the shackle
in the bow-string, during a gale on July 19,
and commenced to drag her anchor, although
there were 80 fathoms of chain out. The Bon-
anza collided with the Norwegian barque
Silas. The damage was somewhat extensive,
the upper gear being a great deal knocked
about. The damage to the Silas will cost .£5O
to repair, and that to the Bonanza about
£250.
BUNINYONG, s„ which left Fremantle on 30th
u i t , for Me i bournej was towed into Albany on
3rd inst., fay the German Australian Com-.
pany’s steamer Essen. The Buninyong broke
her tail-shaft 110 miles to the Eastward of
Breaksea Island on Ist inst., and was picked up
b the Essen the next ( | ay . The propeller was
saved.
_ . ~ , , ~r
C.J.S., bq., whilst lying in the harbour at Maur-
itius on June 14 a fire broke out in the saloon,
which burnt for two hours and a half. The
saloon was gutted, mizzenmast badly charred
below the deckhouse and deck badly burned,
and car S° badl F imaged by fire and water.
COUNTY OF AYR, bq., during a squall on 28th
inst., the stopper of the chain by which the
barque County of Ayr was moored at Port Ade-
laide broke, and the chain paid out. The re-
suit was that the vessel drifted on to the barque
Casablanca, which was lying astern, and
MORT’S DOCK WHARF.


smashed a portion of her stern, besides dam-
aging her rudder and stern post.
DUNBAR, s., which left Melbourne on April 13,
and arrived at Natal on June 18, took fire, and
had to be scuttled. The fire occurred in No. 2
hold.
ELMVILLE, s., struck with considerable force on
a reef at Tokatoka (N.Z), while going at half
speed. A survey showed that three plates had
been seriously damaged, and bolts loosened in
the watertight compartment, while the cement
lining was also damaged.
EMPIRE, American bq., which left Newcastle May
11 with a cargo of coal for Mahukona in the
Hawaiian Group, was burnt (Aug. 6) just before
reaching her destination. The crew were
saved.
lIOLLISWOOD, bq., which arrived at Hongkong
on June 10 from Fremantle, was so badly leak-
ing when she passed Anger on May 22 that the
captain had to take six additional men on
hoard to help the crew pump out water.
JUANA PERAL, Peruvian bq., bound from Cal-
lao to Wallaroo, in ballast, put into Port
Jackson on Ist inst., in distress. Nearly all
the sails were lost. Finding it impossible to
make southward, the captain bore up for Syd-
ney for repairs.
LIZZIE BELL, bq., was totally wrecked on a reef
near Opunaki, New Zealand, on 24th July,
whilst on a voyage from Wellington to New-
castle. The vessel only left Wellington on the
day of the disaster and struck the reef at H
o’clock at night. The captain and crew at-
tempted to land in a boat, which rvas capsized
in the surf and twelve men drowned. The ves-
sel disappeared.
LOCK LONG, sh., which arrived at Glasgow on
June 25 from Melbourne via Hull, reported
that the previous day, when off the Lizard,
she was in collision with an unknown steamer.
MAX, French bq., from New Caledonia via Auck-
land to Glasgow, put into Queenstown (Ireland),
on June 23, with foretopgallantmast carried
away and with loss of all yards on foremast.
OAKLAND, s., while crossing in at Richmond
River, grounded and was swept on to the South-
ern Breakwater. Afterwards floated.
OLIVE BRANCH, London Missionary Society’s
schooner, when leaving Kivato Island, New
Guinea, struck on a reef and became a total
wreck, but no loss of life is reported.
STRATHMORE, s., w-hieh left Melbourne on May
26 with a cargo of hay for Durban, has been
towed into Port Louis (Mauritius) with her
shaft broken. All the cargo was jettisoned
except 213 tons of coal.
THE GHOST, scow, went ashore at Bream Head,
New Zealand, on August 15, and became a
total wreck.
TOMOANA, s„ bumped heavily while lying at
anchor at Poverty Bay, Gisborne, on what
the chart shows to be perfectly safe ground.
The damage was not serious.
WILLYAMA, s., belonging to the Adelaide S.S.
Company, was towed into Albany, W.A., on
July 27 by the same company’s steamer Marloo,
■with the tail shaft broken and the propeller
gone.
FROM Ist SEPTEMBER, 1901.
ACAMAS, sh., Adelaide to Newcastle, went ashore
in Spencer Gun (S.A.), and was floated off with-
out damage.
AMIRAL TROUDE, Fr. bq., Cardiff to Nagasaki,
put into Sydney in distress. Off the Tasmanian
coast she met with some heavy weather, during
which most of her gear was lost.
ANNA SOFIA, hq.. New Caledonia to Philadel-
phia, arrived at Aneud (Chili) dismasted.
ARMADALE, 4-m. bq.. New York to Melbourne,
reports having been in collision and having
three plates damaged.
BALMORAL steamer, from Newcastle to Tjilatjap,
which was reported as having broken her tail
shaft off the coast of Java, was picked up and
towed to Sourabaya.
COLLESSIB, bq., which left Newcastle on July
9 for Valparaiso, has become a total wreck on
Coicoa Point on the South American coast.
Portion of the crew was lost.
CONDOR, barque, Newcastle to Valparaiso, during
the passage encountered a severe hurricane.
Her decks were swept, sails carried away, and
other damage done. Several of the crew were
also injured.
CORIO, s., which arrived at Adelaide on Sept. 26
with the lighter Mangana in tow, in passing
the ship Patriarch at the Semaphore, the lighter
collided with the Patriarch on the starboard
bow, tearing away one of the jibs. The Man-
gana's mizzen mast snapped off close to the deck,
and she carried away a large derrick.
ESTE, bq., Hamburg to Adelaide, during a heavy
gale several sails were blown away, topmasts
carried away, and the decks flooded. Two of the
crew were also badly injured.
HERAT, sh., Newcastle to Junin, in collision with
ship Carnmoney; both vessels slightly dam-
aged.
HERCULES, bq., Rangoon to Talcahuano, put into
Melbourne on the 15th inst., having met with
heavy weather off Cape Leeuwin and lost nearly
all her sails. The water supply was damaged,
and rhe deck repeatedly swept by the seas.
ISLE OF ERIN, bq., Liverpool to Timaru, during
a heavy gale a boat was lost and other damage
done. One of the crew was also knocked over-
board by a flap of the spanker and drowned.
JESSIE NICHOL, sch., which was picked up at sea
by the Gulf of Ancud in a water-logged condi-
THE KIAMA BLOWHOLE.
tion, and was afterwards abandoned, has been,
towed into Lyttleton.
MARGUERITE MIRABRAND, French bq., New
Caledonia to Glasgow, put into Stanley F. I. on
21st July leaking and strained. During heavy
weather the vessel jettisoned cargo to the extent
of 80 tons. The captain recommends proceed-
ing on his voyage with 1500 tons and tranship-
ping the remainder.
MEDEA, bq., London to Adelaide, in collision with
the steamer Nettano at Wishy on July 14. The
Medea was slightly damaged.
MOONSTONE, s„ totally wrecked at Ocean Island
while loading phosphates for Lyttelton (N.Z).
All the crew were saved.
OSBERGA, barque, which left Newcastle for Man-
ila on July 8, reported ashore on Semicolas
Reef, was refloated and towed to Manila.
PAPANUI, s.. New Zealand to London, put into
Vigo, Portugal, with the insulation in No. 3 hold
on fire and her lower hold flooded.
PRETORIA, steamer, when two miles off Terrigal
(N.S.W.) the feed pump carried away. A tug
was sent out and towed her to Newcastle, where
repairs were effected.
PRISCILIA, ketch, capsized in a squall off Woody
Island (Tas.).
RONGA, ioh., capsized in Pelorus Sound (N.Z.).
Crew saved.
ST. JAMES, barque, after reaching Honolulu from
Newcastle, it was found that her cargo of coal
was heated.
STATSMIMSTER SELMER, Nor. bq., when pro-
ceeding from New Zealand to Apia to load
copra for Europe sprung a leak. The captain
immediately bore up for Nukualofa, Tonga, for
repairs, but on entering the harbour there,
crashed on to a reef and became a total wreck.
STAVANGER, barque, which left Flinders Bay
(W.A.) on September 2 for Negapatam, put in-
to Albany on September 14, leaking and strained.
She will probably have to be unloaded before
repairs can be effected.
SURREY, Federal line steamer, to Fremantle from
London, collided with the upper pierhead of
Tilbury Dock on July 15, doing considerable
damage to same. The Surrey was found to have
three plates started on the starboard bow.
THOMAS ANDREA, s., foundered on the 3rd inst,,
close to Heron Island, Daly River. All the
crew were saved.
UKI, s., while towing a punt at Tweed River, was
carried by the ebb tide on the northern training
wall, had a hole knocked in her side, and had
to be beached for repairs.
UNION, bq., whan entering Jaluit Harbor was sent
by a current on to a coral reef. She gradually
settled down and became a total wreck. All
the crew were saved.
WILLOWDENE, steamer, on September 1, when off
Double Island point on the Queensland coast,
her main pump became disabled, and four days
later ihe columns of the main steam pipe car-
ried away. After temporary repairs were ef-
fected the vessel proceeded slowly to Sydney,
where she arrived on the 18th inst.
INVERAMSAY, barque, coal laden for San Fran-
cisco, while being towed stern first from her
berth at the Dyke (Newcastle) on October 4,
drifted out of the narrow channel and took the
ground, where she became fast. After lighter-
ing a quantity of coal she was floated off.
JOHN GILL, barque, Hamburg to New Zealand,
in leaving port, collided with German barque
Visurgis. Former’s foreyard sprung; latter’s
damage insignificant.
LYNALDER, steamer. Port Chalmers to Durban,
arrived at Capetown leaky.
MONOWAI, steamer, which left the Bluff, N.Z., for
Hobart and Melbourne on the 15th instant, when
about two days out from the former port the
propeller struck some sunken wreckage, which
caused complete disablement. After drifting
about for some days she was picked up by the
steamer Mokoia and towed to Dunedin.
OAKLAND, steamer, which went aground on the
rocks at the South Breakwater at Coraki
(N.S.W.), has been found to be seriously injured
on the port side from the bridge forward under
Nos. 1 and 2 holds. All the bilge keel has
broken away. The vessel is also damaged on the
port side, after the under tank, and the
rudder is strained and bent near the trunk,
while the propeller has been stripped by con-
tact with the rocks. The steamer arrived at
Sydney on the 25th instant.
PAROO, steamer, towed into Adelaide on October
7 by the steamer Ismaila with her shaft broken.
POHERUA, Union Company’s steamer, struck a
rock during a dense fog off the Stephens Islands,
N.Z., and put into Wellington slightly leaking.
ST. JAMES, barque, after reaching Honolulu from
Newcastle it was found that her cargo of coal
was heated.
TANIWBA, steamer, in collision with the paddle
steamer Patiki, on the Thames River (N.Z.).
The Patiki, which began to fill rapidly, was
run ashore. The Taniwba w r as very slightly
damaged.
VILLE DE ROUEN. French barque, Cardiff to
Fremantle, ashore 40 miles north of Fremantle,
became a total wreck.
WHAKAPAI, scow, capsized in a squall near Gis-
borne, N.Z. Four of the crew were drowned.
FROM OCTOBER 1, 1301.
CHALLENGER, ship, Newcastle to Manila, ashore
at Pulo Caballo (Corregidor), and will have to
discharge part cargo before she can he floated.
Later. —Floated off, and arrived at Manila next
day.
CITY OF LINCOLN, steamer, Melbourne October
11 to Durban, with 700 remounts for the English
Government, put into Port Adelaide on October
18 with crank shaft broken. On the 15th in


stant, when ICO miles off Cape Borda, terrific
weather was met with. Some of the horse boxes
were swept across the ship, the horses either
going overboard or down into the hold, where
they lay piled up. The sea ran right over the
vessel, smashing the lee bulwarks. The storm
lasier for two days. On the 14th the steamer
Kadina hove in sight, and stood by her till the
weather moderated, during which time several
futile attempts were made to tow her, but
without success. The engineers disconnected
the broken shaft, and fitted it so that it could
work on low pressure, and then succeeded in
making the Semaphore on the 18th instant.
CRIFFEL, barque, from New York to Dunedin,
when leaving the former port it was discovered
that her main hold was on fire. The hold had
to be flooded before the fire could be extin-
guished.
FORESTER, Government steamer, which sank at
her moorings above the bridge at Tocumwal
(N.S.W.), in May last, and was not got afloat
till August, again sank on the 4th instant
where she was moored, over a sandbank, about
. a quarter of a mile below the bridge. The boat
had been pumped, and was free from water
during the day. It is supposed that a floating
log must have knocked a hole in her side.
lIEATHDENE, steamer. New York to Dunedin
and Sydney, had a narrow escape from burning.
On October 17 smoke was seen issuing from the
hold in which 35,000 cases of kerosene was
stowed. A large quantity of water was pumped
into the hold, and the fire was extinguished.
INDRADEVI, steamer, collided with the schooner
Lily in Lyttelton Harbour. The latter vessel
was badly damaged.
FROM NOVEMBER 1. 1901.
ANNA SOFIA, barque. New Caledonia to Philadel-
phia, which put into Ancud on September 26,
dismasted and leaking, will have to discharge
cargo to lepair damage.
ANTIOCO ACCAME, barque, went ashore between
Timaru and Dunedin, and became a total
wreck.
BERNECIA, steamer, which left Melbourne on
September 23 for South Africa via Newcastle,
arrived at her destination with her cargo of hay
heated.
BRUNEL, barque, during a storm at Fremantle on
October 31, broke from her moorings and
drifted into and sank the lighter Jubilee.
CRIFFEL, barque, which caught fire in New York
Harbour, and had to be scuttled, was pumped
out and floated again on October 12.
DANMARK, barque, Antwerp to China, with a
cargo of cement, put into Fremantle on Novem-
ber 13 to replace foremast.
GTJDRUN, barque, Bunbury to Falmouth, beached
at Perron Flats through having sprung a leak.
HILDA, schooner.—See Margarita.
JUBILEE, see Brunei.
LOCH RANNOCH, ship, when being towed down
the river, outward bound from Glasgow to Ade-
laide. ran ashore on Blackwall Point, but floated
off next tide uninjured.
LOCH VENNACHAR, ship, Melbourne to London,
was run into by the steamer Cato in the Thames
and sunk.
LURLINE, schooner, 20 tons, totally wrecked off the
coast of Fiji.
MARGARITA, barque, and schooner HILDA, in
collision at Newcastle Harbour. The former
escaped injury, but the latter had her port
fore-rigging and port cathead carried away.
MINTARO, steamer, which left Newcastle on the
27th ultimo for Ocean Island to load guano for
Melbourne, returned to port on 29th ultimo with
a heavy list to port, having met with a succes-
sion of gales 100 miles off the coast.
NELCEBEE, tug, stranded off Wallaroo jetty on
the 28th ultimo, but was floated off next day.
NICOLO ACCAME, ship, Albany to London, put
into St. Helena on June 21 with rudder dam-
aged, and with a slight leakage.
ROYAL TAR, barque, totally wrecked on Shearer
Rock at Tiritiri, near Auckland, on 21st instant.
The mate of the vessel lost his life.
SAMANCO, barque, with coal from Newcastle,
when entering Guayaquil Harbour on August
25, grounded and remained on the bank for
about seven hours, when she was towed 1 off ap-
parently uninjured.
STORMBIRD, cutter, total wreck on Gabo Island
November 15.
UJINA, steamer, bumped heavily on a rock off
Tuggerah Lakes, N.S.W., while proceeding to
the assistance of a steamer. An examination
of her bottom by a diver show that her plates
aft were dented, and had to be replaced.
WATERLOO, four-masted barque, which left Lon-
don on October 18 for Melbourne, put into Fal-
mouth in a leaky condition, caused through
striking a sunken wreck in the English Chan-
nel, the forepeak being full of water.
WRESTLER, barquentine, Newcastle October 26 to
Kihei (H. 1.), arrived at Sydney on November
20, having lost her foretopgallant mast.
WYONG, tug boat, totally wrecked on South Soli-
tary, on N.S.W. coast, on November 12. No
lives were lost.
FROM DECEMBER 1. 1901.
AIGBURTII, ship, Garston to Adelaide, with phos-
phates, touched the Arkedom Bank, necessitat-
ing her return to port.
ARGUS, steamer, went aground at Bradley’s Head,
Sydney Harbour. She floated off uninjured.
AVANTI, ship, Hudikswall to Adelaide, towed into
Gravesend on November 20, with cargo shifted
and bulwarks started, having met with heavy
weather in the North Sea.
THE HORNBY LIGHT, SOUTH HEAD.
BUTESHIRE, 4-m. barque, W’hich left Glasgow on
December 7 for Brisbane, went ashore at Queens-
town (Ireland), and w-as badly damaged.
CASMA, barque, Noumea to Philadelphia, put into
Auckland December 8 for repairs.
CIMBRIA, barque, Newcastle December 13, to
Acapulco, put into Sydney on December 17 with
her foretopmast split.
DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE, steamer, aground on
Hunter’s Reef, near Hannibals Islands. She
was refloated apparently uninjured.
ERA, steamer.—See Maelgwyn.
FIONA, steamer, when outward bound to Clarence
River, collided with the ferry steamer Lady
Hampden in Johnstone’s Bay (Port Jackson).
The damage sustained by the Lady Hampden
was considerable, and is estimated at anything
up to <£Boo or .£lOOO.
GLENBLG, fishing cutter, totally wrecked on Noar-
lunga Beach. S.A., on December 23.
HANNA HEYE, barque, while on the passage from
Fremantle to Port Germein, grounded at Shoal-
water Point, but was towed off shortly after-
wards.
HELEN, barque, Hobart to Lyttelton, during some
heavy weather had to jettison 2500 feet of tim-
ber which was on board.
KOTUKU, steamer, driven on to the rocks at Jack-
sou’s Head, N.Z. About a dozen of her bottom
plates were stove in, and several plates of the
stern badly damaged.
LADY HAMPDEN, steamer.—See Fiona, steamer.
LADY NAPIER, ferry steamer, in collision with
steamer Lily in Sydney Harbour. The former
vessel was only slightly damaged, but the latter
had her stern badly damaged.
LOCH VENNACHAR, ship, which was sunk while
at anchor in the Thames by the steamer Cato,
has been refloated.
MAELGWYN, barque, while lying at anchor in
Newcastle Harbour, was run into by the stea-
mer Era, which was outward bound to Wallaroo.
The Maelgwyn was severely damaged above the
water line. The Era continued her voyage with*
out communicating the extent of her injuries.
MARY LAURIE, ketch, Melbourne to Tasmania,
wrecked on Stormy Petrel Island on December
22. All the crew are saved.
NEMESIS, steamer, in collision with a dredge at
Albany. The steamer was badly damaged, hav-
ing her frame forward to the extent of four ribs
and four plates dented.
PUKAKI, steamer, fractured her tail shaft while
running between Oamaru and Timaru, and was
towed into port by the Te Anau.
RIPPLE, steam tug, blew up in Sydney Harbour.
Everything above deck was wrecked.
SANTA CRUZ, schooner, trading between Hong-
kong and Yap (Caroline Islands), has been
posted as missing.
TEASER, ketch, while lying at the wharf at Port
Adelaide, was run into by the barque Letter-
ewe, which was being towed into the stream.
The ketch was damaged considerably, and sank
immediately.
UNIQUE, steam tug, in attempting to cross the
bar at the entrance to Camden Haven, grounded,
and became a total wreck.
WAIMATE, steamer, took fire while lying at
Napier. It was suppressed after doing con-
siderable damage.
WEKA, steamer, on fire at Onehnnga. The interior
of the steamer was gutted, and the cargo was
seriously damaged.
WILCANNIA, Lund steamer, while lying at Port
Melbourne Railway Pier on December 26, a fire
broke out in the coal bunkers. The crew and
fire which were called into requisition,
were successful in extinguishing it.
FROM Ist JANUARY, 1902. .
ALEXANDRA, barque, Sydney to Westport, totally
wrecked when about 30 miles off the latter port.
OHEHALIS, barquentine, from Newcastle to
Honolulu, reported on arrival that during a
heavy gale she had carried away foretopmast,
the foretopgallantmast yards, and everything
attached, and the mainmast. A piece of the
foretopmast fell on deck and stove in one of
the small boats.
CRAIGNAIR.—The New Zealand barque Craignair
has been posted missing at Lloyd’s. She sailed
from Noumea for Philadelphia with a cargo of
ore on April 6, 1901, and has not since been
heard of. Captain Murdock was in command
of the Craignair.
ERNEST REYER, French barque, from Hobart to
Astoria, totally wrecked at the mouth of the
Quinault River.
HELEN NICOLL, steamer, broke down in Sydney
Harbour on the 30th ultimo, and was towed to
dock.
INVESTIGATOR, steamer, went ashore between
Port Pirie and Port Augusta, and was floated.
JANE MOORHEAD, ketch, during some rough
weather off the Victorian coast on the 16th
instant, broke her foremast, and was towed into
port.
KURANDA.—WhiIe this new A.U.S.N. Company’*
steamer was being undocked at Dundee on No-
vember 28, she collided with the quay wall,
doing damage to stem and stem plates, also
slight damage to dock wall. The Kuranda was
docked for repairs, w r hen it was fonnd that it
would be necessary to remove eight plates from
the bow in order to allow 1 of'the displacement
of the stem, which was badly twisted.
LADY DALEY, schooner, driven ashore at War-
dong Island, South Australia, and became a
total wreck.
LOUIS, schooner, Eureka to Melbourne, put into
Newcastle on the 6th instant in a leaky condi-
tion, and was afterwards towed to her destina-
tion.


PETERBOROUGH, steamer, Bateman’s Bay to
Sydney, broke down and was towed to port by
the steamer Carbine.
PORT PATRICK, ship, Algoa Bay December 12. to
Newcastle, during a heavy gale off Wilson’s
Promontory on January 13 was driven into shore
and abandoned by captain and crew. The ship
was subsequently picked up on January 15 by
the tug Champion, which was bound from Mel-
bourne to Newcastle, who towed her to Mel-
bourne, arriving there on 16th instant.
QUEEN OF THE SOUTH, steamer, from Foxton to
Wellington, ran ashore at the mouth of the
Waikanae River. She was floated off, and pro-
ceeded to Wellington.
RAS ELBA, steamer, towed into Hobson’s Bay by
Tagliaferro, having broken her tail shaft while
proceeding from Fremantle to Newcastle.
SIAM, steamer, on the 3rd instant, while proceed-
ing down the Port Adelaide River, touched the
ground about 200 yards north of the powder
buoy. The vessel grounded at about 4 o’clock,
and floated off again half an horrr later. She
had proceeded only a short distance further
when she again took the ground at a more
northerly point than on the former occasion.
The vessel remained aground until 6,30, when
she floated clear of the bed of the river and
proceeded to the anchorage without further
mishap,
SKJOLD, Norwegian barque, which was listed to
arrive at Melbourne from Gothenberg, went
ashore before taking in cargo. [She was floated
some months afterwards.]
TANGIER, steamer.—A fire broke out on board
while lying at the wharf at Melbourne loaded
with cattle for West Australia. It was extin-
guished before much damage was done.
FROM Ist FEBRUARY, 1902.
AGAPANTIIUS, steamer, bound from Durban to
Melbourne, arrived at Adelaide on the 18th
instant in tow of the German steamer Kiel.
The former vessel had broken her shaft and
lost her propeller.
ALBANY, steamer, machinery broke down between
Cape Bowling Green and Cleveland, and was
towed into port.
ALICE McDONALD, schooner, Newcastle to San
Francisco, put into Apia in a leaky condition.
After discharging 209 tons coal she resumed
her voyage.
BARRIER, steamer.—When passing through the
Hopetoun Channel, where the dredge John
Nimmo was at work, she ran into that vessel,
and inflicted damage which necessitated the
dredge ceasing operations. It is stated that the
accident was due to the failure of the Barrier
to answer her helm.
BENJAMIN SEWALL, ship, Moodyville to Fre-
mantle, put into Honolulu for a fresh supply
of water. She had nine sails carried away, and
her deck was so washed by seas that her water
supply was partly spoiled. On reaching Hono-
lulu she was found to be leaking slightly. After
being repaired she continued her voyage.
COLUMBIA, ship, from Ballard to Port Pirie, went
ashore at Shoalwater Point, S.A., on February
14. After some of her cargo had been lightered
she was floated off on the 20th inst.
DE RUYTER, ship, which left London on the 10th
ultimo for Fremantle, was towed into Spithead
on the 16th ultimo with the topsailyard broken.
ERA, steamer, Newcastle to Port Pirie, took the
ground when nearing the latter port, but floated
off next iide.
GIFFORD, barque.—When lying at Williamstown
a fire broke out on board. Portions of the cap-
tain’s cabin, the poop deck, and the lamp room
were destroyed, but neither fire nor water got
below deck to the cargo.
GREGORIA PADRE, Italian baique, from St.
John, New Brunswick, to Melbourne, took the
ground while proceeding to an anchorage in
Hobson’s Bay on the 20th instant, but was towed
off next day apparently uninjured.
GUDRUN, barque, as she now lies stranded on
Peron Plats, near Cararvon, W.A., was sold
by auction at Fremantle on the 12th instant
by Messrs. Connor and Doherty for the sum of
.£75. The wreck was purchased by Mr. Davis,
of Davis and Hankinson, of Perth.
HAWKESBURY, steamer, met with an accident to
her machinery in the Hawkesbury River, and
was towed to Sydney for repairs.
HESPER, barque, Hastings Mills to Fremantle,
put into Honolulu in a leaking condition.
LANGSTONE, barque, which left Banbury on Au-
gust 10 for London, struck a reef off Cape
Naturalists and went down in deep water. All
hands were saved but one.
MANDALAY, barque. Wallaroo to South Africa,
put back to Adelaide, having met with severe
weather in the Gulf. Several sails were blown
away, cabin swamped, and other damage done,
which will necessitate cargo being partly dis-
charged.
MELETE, ship. Wallaroo to English Channel,
grounded on Carter’s Patch, near Waterford;
was floated off without injury.
MINNIE A. CAIN, 4-m. schooner, while proceeding
to Chemainus to load lumber for Sydney, was
driven ashore. [Was floated several months
' afterwards.]
OFFENBACH, steamer, which went ashore at Am-
sterdam on the 21st ultimo, has been floated
and towed to Ymuiden.
PORT CARLISLE, barque, which anchored in the
Downs on the 10th ultimo, after having
grounded off Hope Point, while bound from
Hamburg to Sydney with a general cargo, was
surveyed and pronounced perfectly seaworthy,
and sailed again on the 13th ultimo.
PROSPERITY, schooner, Richmond River to Bris-
bane, totally wrecked near Dunwich. Two lives
lost.
THE MACQUARIE LIGHT.
TAGLIAFERRO, steamer, broke her intermediary
shaft, and was towed into Sydney by the steamer
Norkoowa.
THOMASINA McLELLAN, ship, while being towed
from Adelaide to Port Pirie, took the ground,
but floated off shortly afterwards.
TOTARA, scow, Whananuki to Auckland, sprang
a leak, and had to be beached at Kawau; after-
wards floated.
WESTRALIA, steamer, in entering Bluff Harbour
on the morning of the 24th instant, grounded
on a sand patch, but was floated off after six
hours.
WORKFIELD, steamer. New York for Australia,
put into Bermuda on the 16th ultimo with air
pump levers out of order, and with loss of part
of deck load coal.
FROM Ist MARCH, 1302.
ANGLIA, Nor. sh., which left Newcastle on July
7 for Panama, has been posted “missing.”
ANGOLA, steamer, left the Cape on 2nd ult., and
three days after shed a blade of her propeller.
On the 14th ult. a gale of hurricane violence
was encountered. While the turmoil was at its
worst the engineer reported that the broken
propeller had caused the tube to leak, and Cap-
tain Carruthers decided to make the best speed
possible for Melbourne, where he arrived on the
sth inst.
CAPTAIN COOK, pilot steamer, when proceeding
to put a pilot on board the steamer Torgauten,
in Sydney Harbour on the 12th instant, a colli,
sion took place—the Captain Cook striking the
Torgauten forward on the'port side. The latter
steamer was damaged. The Captain Cook es-
caped uninjured.
CHAMPION, steam tug, collided with the barque
Barossa in Port Jackson on the 24th ult. The
tug struck the Barossa heavily, and an examina-
tion showed that three of her plates on the port
side amidships had been broken, one other
dented, and three of the frames smashed. The
tug proceeded to sea. A survey was made of the
barque for repairs. The Barossa arrived in
Sydney on the 14th ult. from Fredrickstadt, and
was anchored in Johnstone’s Bay for the dis-
charge of her timber cargo.
CHAS. G. RICE, bq.—A report from New York
states that the barque Chas. G. Rice, which
left that port on December 22 for Auckland and
• Wellington with the cargo of the barque Criffel,
put into Rio Janeiro on January 20, having
been considerably damaged by storms and with
the loss of several sails.
COUNTY OF CARDIGAN, ship.—A cable to Lloyd’s
from Port Elizabeth, dated January 28, stated
that a f.re had broken out on the ship County of
Cardigan, which had previously arrived from
Melbourne with a cargo of 16,697 bags wheat.
The cable stated that the fire took place in the
forecastle. A quantity of sails were burnt, but
the vessel had received no damage. A survey
had been held, and the cargo, which was con-
siderably damaged by fire and water, was being
discharged.
DALBLAIR, barque, which was listed to arrive at
Newcastle from Mauritius, was totally wrecked
off Point Desny, Mauritius, three lives being
lost.
GENERAL FAIRCHILD, bq.. Port Ludlow to Fre-
mantle, met with very boisterous weather on the
trip, during which she was thrown on her beam
ends and became unmanageable. Besides doing
minor damage to the vessel a greater portion of
her deck load of timber had to be jettisoned.
GLAUCUS, s., en route from Devonport to Sydney,
lost her propeller and was picked up by the
steamer Kittawa and towed to Sydney.
GLENOGIL, ah., reached San Francisco from New-
castle on January 31. On December 23 the ship
was overtaken by severe gales. The waves stove
in the galley and engine room doors, and did
other minor damage, besides blowing away sev-
eral other sails. On January 11 she shipped a
heavy sea over the stern that carried her wheel
away. In latitude 39 deg. south, longitude 152
deg. west, the cargo was found to be heated,
having a temperature of 92 deg. After removing
about 20 tons from the main hatch, however,
the danger from fi|e was removed.
IRRESISTIBLE, steaA tug, whilst entering New-
castle Harbour on Hie 18th instant, with the
four-masted barque Colony, from Melbourne,
in tow, ran ashore immediately under Nobby’s
Lighthouse, and became fast. She was towed
off shortly afterwards.
JESSIE OSBORNE, barque, which was loading
wool, flax, and gum at Wellington for London,
caught fire on the sth instant, while lying along-
side the wharf. The fire was extinguished after
it had burned twelve hours.
PAERO, steamer, when entering the Whakatane
Heads on the 22nd ultimo, broke her steering
gear and ran on the rocks, striking amidships.
After an anxious time the incoming tide floated
her off. One of the boiler tubes burst and the
boiler shifted. The steamer was afterwards
beached.
PHONIZIA, bq., Westport to Haahaj, when enter-
ing the harbour on Jan. 3 at the latter port
touched slightly on a sandy bottom. Survey
was held.
TORGAUTEN, s.—See Captain Cook.
WESTRALIA, steamer, in entering the Bluff Har-
bour on the morning of the 24th ultimo, groun-
ded on a sand patch, but was floated off after six
hours. On examination in Duke’s Dock it wai
found that 19 plates had been damaged and ex-
tensive damage done to the lower part of the
vessel.


FROM Ist APRIL, 1902.
DITTON, ship, inward bound from Melbourne on
the 4th instant, collided with the ship Port
Crawfoid, which was moored alongside the
barque Peeblesshire, in Newcastle Harbour.
The Port Crawfoid received the bulk of the
damage, but both vessels were considerably
injured. The Ditton was in tow of the tug
Champion. When approaching the mooring
buoy she refused to answer her helm, and
crashed stem on into the Port Crawford’s port
bow. The Ditton’s jibboom struck the Port
Crawford’s foremast and snapped it clean off
about four feet from the deck. The Port Craw-
ford’s side was dented in two places. The port
lifeboat was smashed and the forecastle rail-
ing carried partly away. So heavy was the
collision that the Port Crawford’s cable was
carried away, and as the ship surged back her
rigging got locked with that of the Peebles-
.;Shire. The latter’s foretopmast rigging was
carried away, her foretop smashed, and the fore-
yard broken. Her port rail aft was also broken
by the force with which the Port Crawford
was slammed against her.
FEARLESS, recruiting vessel, totally a wreck at
San Christoval. There was no loss of life.
FRANKISTAN, ship, which was bound from New-
castle, N.S.W., to San Francisco, with a eaigo
of coal, caught fire while in mid-ocean, and was
abandoned. The captain and crew were picked
up by an American schooner and taken to San
Francisco.
ILLAROO, steamer.—Early on the morning of the
7th instant a fire was discovered at Sydney on
the collier lllaroo in the sail locker aft. After
an hour’s work the flames were extinguished.
NORKOOWA, steamer, bound from Newcastle to
Melbourne, when 30 miles south of Sydney
Heads, an accident occurred to her machinery.
She was towed into Sydney by the steamer
Albany. An examination showed that the
thrust shaft and block had carried away.
PAOLA MADRE, barque.—The Italian baique
Paola Madre was towed into Port Jackson on
the Bth inst. with her bulwarks almost com-
pletely carried away, and otherwise generally
knocked about. The vessel left Sydney on
March 12 with a cargo of shale for Genoa. On
the 21st a hurricane carried away many sails,
and mountainous seas cut the bulwarks away.
PARQO, steamer.—The A.U.S.N. Company’s stea-
mer Paroo, outward bound from Melbourne to
West Australian ports, went aground near the
Point Lonsdale reef, off Port Phillip Heads,
early on the 9th instant, but floated off with the
assistance of two steam tugs at midday, and
proceeded back to port for examination. Seve-
ral plates were found to be damaged.
PEEBLESSHIRE, barque.'—See Ditton.
PORT VICTORIA, steamer. —A collision occurred
between the Victorian pilot steamer Victoria
and the Port Victoria, bound to Sydney, at
Queenscliff on Thursday, the 10th instant. The
Port Victoria was rather badly damaged. She
was hit on the starboard side, and the stem
was twisted to port, two or three plates also
being smashed. A leak broke out on run
round from Melbourne, and as much as 12 ft.
of water was found in the forepeak at one time.
A dent was knocked in the side of the Vic-
toria, and the boat’s davits were carried away.
PORT CRAWFORD, ship.—See Ditton.
SIR HENRY, schooner, produce laden, from Pic-
ton, went ashore south of the Spit at Kokitik
on the 2nd inst., when endeavouring to cross in.
She was towed off the next morning, apparently
uninjured.
STRATIIGRYFE, 4-m. barque.—On the 10th inst,
the 4-m. barque Strathgryfe, bound from Table
Bay to Sydney in ballast, was driven ashore
near Shellback Island, off Wilson’s Promon-
tory. [She was floated some months later, and
taken to Melbourne for repairs.]
TAKAPUNA, steamer. —A. fire was discovered in
the after hold of the steamer Takapuna on the
4th instant, when between New Plymouth and
Onehunga. Water was poured in and the fire
extinguished. The damage was slight. It is
supposed that a steam pipe ignited some wood-
work.
VICTORIA, steamer.—See Port Victoria.
FROM Ist MAY, 1902.
ADELAIDE, steamer.—A collision occurred in the
Brisbane River on the 13th instant between the
steamers Rilbarra and Adelaide. The Ade-
laide’s stern was broken flush with the deck
and her bow r was bent a foot to the starboard.
The Rilbarra was only slightly damaged.
BOVERIC, steamer, bound from Australian ports
to South Africa, was towed into Fremantle on
the 15th instant by the steamer Narrung dis-
abled, having lost her propeller.
BUCRANIA, steamer, while loading at New York
for Australian ports, caught fire in the lower
hold, but was extinguished with the aid of fire
boats and engines. Loss said to be 50,000 dol.
A survey was held.
BURRA NGAROO, steamer. —A collision occurred
in Sydney Harbour on the 6th instant between
the horse ferry steamer Burrangaroo and a boat
of H.M.S. Royal Arthur. The latter w r as struck
on the starboard side and completely turned
over. All the boat’s crew were picked up. When
the collision occurred a signal was made for
assistance, and in response the steam pinnace
No. 19, attached to Garden Island, went to the
rescue with a new crew aboard, who were anxi-
ous to get to the scene of the accident as early
as possible. The vessel iii crossing near Lady
Macquarie’s Chair was run high and dry on the
r ocks. She was floated off the following day.
CHIPPERKYLE, barque.—The barque Chipper-
kyle, which arrived at Sydney on the 17th in-
slant from Liverpool, encountered a revolving
hurricane on May 4, which continued for 24
hours. A succession of heavy seas swept the
decks, and a good deal of damage was done. The
seas reached the poop, and Captain Wilson had
Wd aCUl ° US eSCaPe f ‘° m ,)Cing washed over '
nvm’ii’nbiv i „ -vr it. , ~ ,
DEI . I ' l Isteam 'ar.-News .lias been received that
tZ-U IT t Del A tf , ord ’ "Inch left London on
f, S^ n i ey V,a /i emantle *
agiound at Las Palmas, and became a total
nTTMxrniiu' „ o t- n .
DUNMORE, steamer.—See Felloe, steamer.
ELVERLAND, barquentine, which left Newcastle
on the 26th ultimo for Lyttelton with a cargo
of coal, returned to the former port in tow of
the steamer Chillagoe on the 13th instant dismas-
ted, having met with bad weather. She was
towed to Sydney on the 16th instant for repairs.
FLORRTE ELLISON, tug, when crossing the bar
of the Manning River, went aground on the
south spit, and remained hard and fast. She
rapidly filled with water, and the crew de-
cided to abandon her. The lifeboat was
launched,' and all hands were saved, and the
vessel became a total wreck.
GLADYS, barque, which arrived at Wellington
from Liverpool on the 21st instant, was very
badly damaged during a gale on 13th May. The
sea ran fo mountainous heights, and a tremen-
dous wave broke over the vessel, battering in the
starboard bulwark. The foretop, maintopgal-
lant, and the mizzentopmast went by the
board, the forecastle head was gutted out, and
the lighthouse and sidelights smashed. Two of
the boats went overboard, while the deck fit-
tings and house were knocked to splinters. The
whole of the seamen’s effects were lost, and
several of the crew were injured. When the
storm subsided tarpaulins were rigged on the
main and mizzen rigging, and a course was
shaped for Farewell Spit, where she was picked
up in her crippled condition by one of the Union
Company’s steamers. Three of the crew were
injured during the storm. The damage to the
ship is estimated at about .£5OOO. [The Union
Steamship Company were awarded salvage.]
KELLOE, steamer, while bound from Bellambi to
Sydney on the 13th instant, came into collision
with the steamer Dunmore, bound from Sydney
to Kiama, off Botany Heads. The former ves-
sel foundered in a few minutes, while the Dun-
more received such serious injuries that she
had to be beached. Temporary repairs were
effected on the 15th instant, and she was
floated and docked at Sydney on the 16th in-
stant.
. -n-n . i „ ~
KOONOOKARRA, steamer.' See Spray, -cutter.
LOCH BREDAN, barque.—The baique Loch Bre-
dan, -which left Sydney on the 25th April for
Liverpool, returned to port on the 25th instant
to ,. I ) ' air lhe damages sustained in gales en-
countered in the Tasman Sea.
MACLEAY, steamer.—A collision occurred in Syd-
ney Harbour on the 10th instant. The steamer
Maoleav was proceeding to the North Coast
Company’s Wharf, when she -was struck on the
port siue by the steamer Sydney, which was
leaving the Newcastle Wharf for Newcastle,
The overhanging bow of the latter vessel car-
ried away several feet of railing on the Macleay’s
main deck. The Sydney was practically unin-
jured.
LIGHTHOUSE AT WOLLONGONG.


MAXWELL, ship.—News was received on the 10th
instant that the ship Maxwell was sunk off
Dungeness last month through colliding with
the steamer Parthenia. The ship's crew were
saved. The Maxwell was under charter to load
rails at Middlesbro for Sydney for the New
South Wales Government.
MOKAU, steamer.—Word has been received that
the steamer Mokau, owned by the Taranaki
Collieries, was seriously damaged by fire at
Mokau on the 27th ultimo. The Mokau was
fully loaded with coal, and was at the heads
awaiting the tide.
NAUTILUS, steamer.—The coasting steamer Nau-
tilus, which went ashore at the Spit at Kara-
mea. New Zealand, has been floated uninjured.
OLDENBURG, G.M.S.—The German mail steamer
Oldenburg, which was reported two days over-
due at Fremantle from Colombo, arrived safely
at that port on the 22nd instant, and reports
that when coming through the Suez Canal a
large steamer, in attempting to pass, crashed
into her stern, carrying away several stanchions.
The other vessel was badly damaged in the
bows.
OLGA, schooner, which arrived at Honolulu on
March 22 from Newcastle, was found to be leak-
ing. A survey was to be held to ascertain the
extent of the damage.
PILBAEKA, steamer.—See Adelaide, steamer.
HAS ELBA, steamer. —The steamer Eas Elba broke
down between Albany and Fremantle owing
to the bursting of a steam pipe, causing a delay
of several hours. On arrival at Fremantle on
the 24th instant the pipe broke again, and the
vessel was towed alongside the wharf.
SPEAY, cutter, which was bound to Launceston
with a cargo of firewood, was struck amidships
by the steamer Koonookarra, and immediately
filled. She was afterwards towed into shallow
water.
SYDNEY, steamer.—See Macleay.
(
FEOM Ist JUNE, 1902.
ABEEGELDIE, steamer, which arrived at Ant-
werp from Port Pirie on April 28, reports hav-
ing met with heavy gales on March 4 and 5,
high seas swooping the decks and carrying away
the tarpaulins. Several rivets were torn out,
and water penetrated through the holes into
the hold. It is feared that the cargo is dam-
aged. When entering the dock at Antwerp she
struck the quay, and sustained damage below
the water line, the forepeak making water.
ADVANCE, schooner, trading between Botany and
Newcastle, went ashore on Henry Head, off
Botany Bay, about 3 a.m. on the 13th instant.
The master was drowned, and the vessel became
a total wreck. One of the survivors stated that
the bolt missed stays when she was on the star-
board tack in a south-east sea.
AHIEL, ketch.—The following message was received
at Adelaide on the 15th instant from Kangaroo
Island :—Ketch Ariel, which had been shelter-
ing under Port Marsden, her sails having
been blown away, dragged ashore in a heavy
gale at midnight on the 14th instant. The pump
was kept going till 4 o’clock the next morning.
when the rudder carried away. The ketch filled
with water, seas breaking completely over her.
The crew came ashore with great difficulty in a
cargo boat. The vessel is completely bedded in
the sand, but there is some hope of refloating
her.
CLYTIE, ketch.—lnformation has been received at
Launceston that the ketch Clytie had gone
ashore during a gale in Surprise Bay, King
Island, and was fast breaking up. The crew
were saved.
ECLIPSE, schooner.—The mission yacht Southern
Cross arrived at Norfolk Island on the 15th
instant from the islands. The captain reports
that the schooner Eclipse is ashore near Wan-
derer Bay. The Southern Cross endeavoured to
tow her off, but the ropes parted. Assistance
was expected from a man-of-war.
GOOD INTENT, ketch, met with a slight mishap
whilst going from Oxford to Triabunna, Tas-
mania. She touched a rock, which put a small
hole in the bilge, causing the cargo to be jet-
tisoned.
JOHN A. BRIGGS, ship, arrived at Auckland in
SMOKY CAPE LIGHT.
distress on the 29th ultimo. The captain re-
ports that on the 10th ultimo a furious gale
sprang up, causing a high sea. The ship stfained
and laboured violently, and he found that she
had 2 ft. of water in the hold. The pumps
attached to the donkey engine kept the water
under.
KANIERI, steamer.—Prior to her departure from
Onehunga on the 21st ultimo, for Raglan and
Waitara, a fire was discovered in the hold of the
steamer Kanieri. No damage was done to the
vessel, but the damage to the cargo is thought
to be considerable.
KANIERI, steamer.—The Northern Company’s
Kanieri ran ashore on the South Spit, off Wai-
tara River, on the 4th instant, when entering
the river; afterwards floated,
KARLSRUHE, steamer.—The German mail stea-
mer Karlsruhe, bound from Bremen to Aus-
tralia, had to put back to Colombo owing to an
accident to her propeller, but continued her
voyage on the 25th instant.
LOCHEE, ship.—The ship Lochee, bound from
South Africa to Newcastle, put into Adelaide
on the 9th instant in distress. The vessel left
Durban on May lin ballast. On May 9 a squall
struck the ship with such extreme violence that
she heeled over until the lee rail was under the
water. The rigging of the mizzen and topgal-
lant masts was cut away, and when the iron
mizzen mast went overboard it lay alongside
bumping heavily, and threatening serious
damage to the ship. The maiutopmast and yard
hung all through the night’s gale over the
ship's side, breaking bulwarks and smashing
the lifeboat and gig.
LOED BOBEETS, cutter. —A report received at
Adelaide on the 15th instant states that early
on the morning of the 14th instant the fishing
cutter Lord Eoberts, when ten miles west of
Willunga, was struck by a terrific squall, which
carried away her mainsail and smashed the
rudder. The boat struck the jetty with such a
force that the whole structure, 360 feet long, was
carried away, and the cutter was dashed to
pieces on the rocks. The two men managed to
get ashore.
MOUNT STEWAET. ship.—A fire broke out on the
Bth instant, in the hold of the Mount Stewart,
lying in Sydney Harbour. She had on board
150 tons of sulphur, and it was in this part of
the ship that the fire was found. Considerable
difficulty was experienced by the fireman owing
to the fumes, but fortunately the flames had
not made much headway, and were soon extin-
guished. A small quantity of sulphur was des-
troyed and several partition boards were burnt.
EAS ELBA, steamer, which left Newcastle on the
14th instant for Geelong, touched a reef off
Nobby’s, and was compelled to return to port.
Abreast of Nobby’s the tug lines were cast
adrift, and the steamer proceeded on her
voyage. A short time after she was seen to
turn round and make back to port, and ap-
peared very low in the water. Opposite No. 13
crane the steamer took a sheer and bumped the
steamer St. Eonald, without doing much
damage. It is stated that soon after the Eas
Elba headed south she bumped on a reef about
300 yards to the eastward of the Big Ben, the
well-known rock situated 600 yards east of
Nobby’s. There were three or four heavy con-
tacts, and the vessel’s bottom was severely
torn. At low water there was 9 ft. 6 in. of water
in No. 4 hold, while in each of the other holds
there was a considerable quantity. The engine
room was clear.
FEOM Ist JULY, 1902.
ANEMONE.—See Ditton.
AEDENCEAIG, sh., from New Caledonia to Eot-
terdam, loaded with nickel ore, was towed into
Eussel, N.Z., in a dismasted condition. On
June 13 the main and mizzen topmasts, with
all the yards, came down, smashing one of the
life boats. H.M.S. Archer picked her up be-
tween Cape Brett and Poor Knight’s. Arrived
at Auckland July 6.
CIVILITY, s.—A collision occurred in Sydney Har-
bour on the 3rd instant, between the steamer
Civility and the brigantine Vision. The latter
vessel had her jibboom and her head gear car-
ried away, and sustained other damage to her
bows. The Civility was badly' battered about
the stern, and a portion of her bulwarks and
four stanchions were carried away.
DOLPHIN, cutter.—The Fremantle Collector of
Customs received a telegram from Onslow on
the 16th instant to the effect that the cutter
Dolphin, of 20 tons, had sunk off Beadong.
EUTHWELL, bq.—A fire broke out at Newcastle
on the 7th inst,, on the barque Euthwell, lying
at Newcastle. Smoke was first observed coming
from the hatchway of the fore peak, and when
the coverings were taken off the flames burst
through, but were eventually subdued.
EOSTOCK, s.—The German steamer Eostock, from
Australia, was towed into Port Said on May 22.
The Eostock left Adelaide on the 9th March
for Hamburg and Antwerp. She left Port Said
for Marseilles in tow of the steamer Augsberg
on May 30.
VBEDANDE, bqtne.—The barquentine Verdande,
from Westport, was wrecked at Tahiti. The
vessel struck a reef at the entrance of Tahiti
harbour, and was fast on the reef for two
hours, was floated, but filled with water, turned
over and sank.
BAEDHANA.—See Ditton.
VISION, brig.—See Civility.
TEINIDAD, bq—The barque Trinidad, Auckland
to New York, has put into Barbadoes, in the
West Indies, for repairs. During a hurricane
she lost her foretopmast, maintopmast, and
sails. She left the New Zealand port on
March 26.


STRATHGRYFE, barque.—The four-masted barque
Strathgryfe, which has been aground at Shell-
back Island since April 9, was successfully
floated off on the 28th ult., and towed to Hob-
son's Bay. The barque was en route from
Table Bay to Newcastle in ballast to load coal
for San Francisco, and was landed high and
dry on a shelving beach.
SOMMERFELD, s.—Advices from Sourabaya state
that the Sommerfeld, after grounding, arrived
at that port on the sth ult., and that she was
leaking, but the damage was not thought to be
serious.
FANNIE KERB, bq., which left Newcastle on Ap-
ril 7 for San Francisco, was burnt at sea and
abandoned. The barque caught fire in mid-
Paeific, and was abandoned by her crew when
the flames proved inextinguishable in north lat-
itude 26 deg., west longitude 160 deg. All hands
were saved and reached Kauai Island, in the
Sandwich Group, in safety.
KADNA, lugger.—Advice was received at Fre-
mantle on the 17th ult., from the sub-collector
of Customs at Broome, that the lugger Kadna
had foundered at the pearling grounds, one Ma-
lay member of the crew being drowned. The
vessel was registered in Singapore.
MAGGIE JOHNSON, steamer. —A fire occurred on
the Lake Macquarie passenger steamer Maggie
Johnson while lying at Cockle Creek. The
whole of the deck and a large portion of the
lining of the hull were destroyed in addition to
other damage.
MARINER, schooner.—The Mariner, a small
schooner of 64 tons, went ashore on the 4th inst
on a reef off the River Le.ven, on the north-
West Coast of Tasmania. Afterwards re-
floated.
DIBO, lighter, with a cargo of 500 cases of benzine
and naphtha, caught fire at Miller’s Point, Syd-
ney, on the 4th instant. After a quantity of
water had been poured into her, she gave a list
to port and sank. Afterwards floated.
DITTON, sh.—A collision occurred on July 3 in
Newcastle Harbour, in which three ships were
involved. The Ditton was loading for San
Francisco at the crane, but, the supply of coal
having run out, the vessel had to make room at
the dyke for another ship. Two tugs were en-
gaged in the work of moving the Ditton out
to the stream, but she swung round and came
into collision with the Anemone, which was
ready to sail. Close to the Anemone was the
Sardhana, also in readiness to put to sea. The
Ditton caught with her jibboom the foreyard
of the Anemone, carrying away the port fore-
brace. The impetus swung the head-yards of
the Anemone on to the Sardhana, fouling her
starboard backstays, and bringing down her
topgallant mast yards and upper gear, and, it
is thought, springing her topmast. The Dit-
tou sustained no damage.
ARIEL, ketch.—The ketch Ariel, which was sunk
some time ago during a storm at Kangaroo
Island, was refloated.
RANGATIRA, s.—A collision occurred between
the Shaw, Savill steamer Rangatira, which
left Lyttelton on May 22, and a barque off
Dover (E.), on the 15th instant. The Ranga-
tira lost her mainmast, and had her port life-
boat carried away. Her bulwarks and hull
were also damaged, and she was towed into
Gravesend for repairs. The steamer was also
injured below the water line, and leaked
heavily, her No. 3 hold being flooded.
HAS ELBA, s..—The steamer Ras Elba, recently
damaged by grounding on an uncharted reef
outside the entrance to the port of New-
castle, had about 25 plates removed during
repairs.
SILVERHOW, bq.—This barque was dismasted in
bad weather off the New South Wales coast,
and the captain was compelled to put back
to Newcastle to effect repairs.
vILLE D’ORLEANS, bq.—The French barque
Gael, which arrived at Hobart on the 21st
instant., from Madagascar, reported that she
had on board the captain and crew of the
barque Ville D’Orleans, which was bound
from Glasgow to Brisbane, and which found-
ered in S. lat. 46deg. Imin., and E. long.
137 deg. 17min.
w - H. SMITH, sh.—The ship W. H. Smith was
towed to Sydney on the 19th inst., to be
docked for repairs, rendered necessary by her
contact with a rock at the entrance to the
inner basin at Newcastle on the 4th July.
ANTARCTIC, bq., which arrived at Port Eliza-
beth on June 18 from Port Pirie, was in col-
lision with the wharf, one plate cracked and
buckled, anchor pierced her side, leaks con-
siderably, the leak was repaired temporarily.
Cargo damaged.
ORONASIA, bq.—A fire broke out on the 23rd
inst. on the four-masted barque Oronasia, ly-
ing at Miller’s Point Wharf, Sydney. The fire
was put out without damage of consequence.
WAIKATO, s.—This vessel was towed into Cape-
town by the steamer Michigan with shaft
broken.
FROM Ist AUGUST, 1902.
ABERFOYLE, sh.—Lloyd’s agent at San Diego re-
ports:—Aberfoyle in entering port, July 19,
from Newcastle, struck on a rock, also ground-
ed when entering port, but has since floated.
ALEXANDRA, sch.—The schooner Alexandra, be-
longing to the German New Guinea Company
at New Ireland, in the Bismarck Archipelago,
and the mission yacht Maria (formerly the
Ceralda) have been totally wrecked.
ALLINGA, s.—A fire occurred on the 28th inst.,
in the afterhold of the Adelaide Company’s
steamer Allinga, lying at Sugar Company’s
wharf, Pyrmont (Sydney). The outbreak was
soon extinguished, a small quantity of cargo
being damaged by fire and water.
APARIMA.—The U.S.S. Co.’s new steamer, Apar-
ima, which left Calcutta July 31, for Welling-
ton, arrived at Albany on the 20th ult. with
cargo on fire, which was soon extinguished.
BALMAIN, steamer.—On arrival of the steamer
Balmain at Auckland from Whangarei on the
13th July, her boiler tubes were found to be
leaking badly.
COROLLA, sh.—A Government lighter collided
with the ship Corolla at Port Elizabeth for
Newcastle, N.S.W., breaking one plate and
frame in the forepeak.
CHATEAU D’lF, bq., arrived at Havre from
Tchio, N.C., with the loss of bowsprit through
colliding with steamer Bjorgvin in English
Channel.
CLONCURRY, s.—During a sudden squall on the
13th inst., the steamer Cloncurry, when leav-
ing Sydney for Newcastle, came into collision
with the Pyrmont Bridge. The Cloncurry had
several of her plates bent.
EARNOCK, barque.—A fire broke out early on the
' morning of the 30th ult. on the ship Earnock,
lying in the river at Brisbane. A quantity of
ship's stores, ropes, sails and other gear was
destroyed.
EMU, ketch.—The ketch Emu was wrecked near
Bridport on the East Coast, Tasmania.
FANNIE KERR, Br. 4-m. bq.—2286, Newcastle
April 6, for San Francisco. Caught fire and
abandoned May 20, in lat. 16 N. long. 149 W.
IRRESISTIBLE, steam tug.—ln collision on 6th
inst. with steam collier Tamar in Newcastle
harbour.
KARAWEERA, s., wrecked at West Australia, was
offered at auction last month at Rockhampton.
The hull, machinery, and masts were offered in
one lot, but there was no bid. All the movable
material in the ship, including winches, tar-
paulins, etc., were sold for .£5B. The life boat
was sold for ,£lO 10s.
KRIMPEN AD LEK, barque.—News was received
on the 29th July from Thursday Island to the
effect that the Dutch barque Krimpen ad Lek,
which left Newcastle on the 2nd inst. with a
cargo of coal for Samarang, had gone ashore
on the 24th July at the entrance of the Fly
River, and had become a total wreck.
LIZZIE JARDINE, cutter, en route from Townsville
to Plantation Creek, with about 23 tons of
general merchandise, went ashore on the 7th
inst., 15 miles south of Cape Bowling Green,,
The cargo was insured for .£450. The cutter
is uninsured, and is high and dry at low water,
There is a possibility of getting her off.
MANLY, s.—The ferry steamer Manly grounded
recently at Manly (Port Jackson). After be-
ing taken into dock for survey, it was found
that both propellers had been stripped, and
also that about 40ft. of keel had been damaged,
ORION, Rus. bq.—ll9o, Flinders Bay, October 2,
1901, for Channel. Posted missing June 4,
1902.
PASQUALE LAURO, barque.—The barque Pas-
quale Lauro arrived at Adelaide on the 31st
July from London with cargo on fire. Exten-
sive damage was done, and only a small por-
tion of the cargo was saved. ■
QUEEN WILHELMINA, s.—The steamer Duke of
Argyll arrived at Albany on the 18th instant
with the New York steamer Queen Wilhel-
mina in tow. The latter was bound to Ade-
laide, Melbourne and Sydney, with a general
cargo. Her tail-shaft broke on the 13th in-
stant.
QUIRAING, s.—The war ship Sparrow returned
to Auckland on the 13th, after eight days of
fruitless searching for the missing steamer
Quiraing.
T , > its. > mri. > n a j
RANGATIRA.-It appears the damage done to the
* teamer Rangatira, die'collided with a
Barque off Dover on the 15th ult. is greater
than "' as at first ex P ected -
ROSE, barque.—The barque Rose, belonging to
Messrs. J. and AV. Bateman, en route from
Vancouver to Fremantle, laden with Oregon
pine, put into Albany on the 23rd July in leak-
ing condition. Repaired. Arrived Fremantle
August 11th.
WARDEN’S HEAD OR ULLADULLA LIGHTHOUSE.


STAVANGER, bq.—The barque Stavanger, Al-
bany for London, which put into Capetown
July 18, leaking, has been surveyed, and it was
recommended to unship rudder, and employ
divers to examine vessel’s bottom.
TARAWERA, s.—The steamer Tarawera, which
met with a mishap at Napier on the 22nd July,
had her bottom sighted at Port Chalmers, and
it was found that over 60 feet of her plates
in that section were more or less injured.
TAVIUNI, s.—The Fiji steamer Taviuni, while en
route from Auckland to Wellington, broke her
tail shaft. The Mimiro was despatched in
search and picked her up.
THE HAHNEMANN, sh—The ship The Hahne-
mann, which arrived at Coquimbo on June 26
with a cargo of coal from Newcastle, went
ashore on July 21 at Tongoy Point, and became
a total wreck.
WAIKATO, steamer, —Advices received in London
on the 30th July from Capetown report the
steamer Waikato was towed into Table Bay by
the White Diamond Company’s steamer Michi-
gan, 5000 tons, with her stern tube cracked.
FROM Ist SEPTEMBER. 1902.
CHARLEMAGNE, sh.—The French ship Charle-
magne, which sailed from Nepoui, New Cale-
donia, for Havre with a cargo of nickel ore on
the 11th- December, 1901, has not since been
heard of, and has been posted missing.
CITY OF LINCOLN, s. s., stranded at Capetown
during a storm on August 13, and became a
total wreck.
CONCORDIA, bq.—During a heavy gale off the
New Zealand coast on the 24th inst. the barque
Concordia, bound from Fremantle to Kaipara
to load timber for London, was driven ashore
to the south of the Kaipara Heads. Afterwards
floated. One seaman was drowned, but the rest
of the crew managed to get ashore.
COUNTY OF AYR, barque.—During a gale at
Wellington recently the coal hulk Gazelle
fouled the barque County of Ayr. A claim
of ,£145 was made by the captain of the barque.
DUKE OF SOUTHERLAND, s.—The steamer
Duke of Southerland went ashore on a reef off
Cooktown and was floated off on the 20th.
During a gale at Port Elizabeth on the Ist inst.
the following vessels, which had arrived from
Australia, were driven ashore and became total
wrecks; —Coriolanus, ship, from Wallaroo;
Nautilus, barque, from Adelaide; Oakworth,
ship, from Port Pirie; Emmanuel, baiaue, from
Port Pirie; Cavaliere Michele Russo, ship, from
Newcastle; Hans Wagner, barque, from Mcl-
bourne; Hermanos, barque, from Bunbury,
Western Australia; Limari, barque, from Al-
bany; Waimea, barque, from Fremantle.
EMERALD, bq,—See Hjertnesa.
HINEMOA, e. —A serious accident occurred to the
steamer Hinemoa on the 30th Sept. The steam-
er was engaged in surveying the south channel
at Kaipara Heads, when she struck on a sand
bank, losing her sternpost and rudder.
lIJERTNESS, bq.—The Norwegian barque Hjert-
ness, from East London, attempted to cross the
Kaipara bar during a heavy south-west gale
on the 19th inst. At about 5 a.m. she was
obliged to let go her anchor or she would have
stranded on the Tory Shoal. The captain
waited until high water, when the vessel floated
over the shoal, and was picked up by the tug
Sterling, after losing two anchors and chains,
and carrying away her windlass. The following
day the barque Emerald, also from East London,
while attempting to cross the bar, grounded on
the South Shoal.
’ ILLAWARRA, steamer. —The coast steamer Illa-
warra came into collision in Sydney Harbour
on the sth inst., with the steam collier Illaroo,
the former having to put back with her port
bow damaged. The Illaroo escaped uninjured.
J. B. BROWN, ship, from Newcastle to San Fran-
cisco. Very heavy gale was encountered, last-
ing five days, which caused the vessel to leak.
JUPITER, ship, expected at Melbourne from
Gothenburg, and which was ashore near Man-
dal, and afterwards floated off with assistance.
Court awarded salvors <£B33.
KIAMA, s.—The new steamer Kiama, bound from
Glasgow to Sydney, collided with the pier at
Gouroek, near Greenock, on the Firth of Clyde,
on the 17th inst., with the result that her bows
were damaged, and she returned to Glasgow for
repairs.
LETHINGTON, steamer.—The steamer Lethington,
a new steamer on her first voyage to Mel-
bourne,, notified to leave New York on August
25, grounded on Eomer shoal. She floated and
returned to New York.
LIBIUS, lighter.—Early on the 11th inst., an ex-
plosion, followed by an immediate outburst of
flame, occurred on board the lighter Libius in
Kerosene Bay, Port Jackson, loading oil.
Nearly 200 cases of oil were destroyed. Only
the deck of the lighter was damaged.
LOTUS, barque.—The Russian barque Lotus, which
left Wallaroo on June 14, for Spain with con-
centrates for the Australian Metal Company,
was dismasted and abandoned. The crew reached
Callao, Peru, in boats.
MAMBARE, steamer.—Messrs. Burns, Philp and
Company, Sydney, on the 4th inst., received a
message from Noumea stating that their Island
trade steamer Mambare had been wrecked at
Tutuba in New Hebrides. All passengers and
crew were saved. Further particulars to hand
show that the wreck occurred during a gale,
The vessel was driven on to the coral reef that
surrounds the Island of Tutuba, in the New
Hebrides. She had on board a large cargo,
valued at about <£4SCO.
MANAPOURI, a.—On the 18th instant a fire broke
out on the steamer Manapouri, lying in Wooll.
oomooloo Bay, Sydney, which was transhipping
a quantity of copra to the German steamer
Darmstadt. The vessel was not seriously dam-
aged, but a good deal of the copra wao de-
stroyed.
NEOTSFIELD, sh.—Captain Rugg, of the ship
Neotsfield, which arrived at Sydney on the 15th
inst., from London, reports that on August 31
a hurricane and huge sea struck the ship, com-
ing over the starboard quarter, smashing the
wheel, and washing it and the steersman over-
board. The steering compass was lost, the sky-
light broken, and the chart room badly dam-
aged. As the ship was straining badly, her
foresail was cut away to steady the ship, and
she was hove to for the night.
NIWARU, steamer. —Intimation of the mishap to
the steamer Niwaru, which has arrived at Lon-
don from New Zealand, has been received. The
message states that the vessel had put into Las
Palmas leaking, and also that a portion of the
cargo of meat was damaged.
PATTERDALE, sh.—The British ship Patterdale,
1169 tons, Captain Lockmann, which left New-
castle on March 24 for Iquique, with a cargo of
coals, and has not been heard of since, has been
posted missing.
SEALDA.—The fire which broke out on the British-
ludia steamer Sealda at Fremantle on the 2nd
instant, was got under control late the next
night.
ST. RONALD.—The St. Ronald, which was ashore
on Cockle’s Spit, Port Pirie, was floated off dur-
ing Sunday morning’s tide, after having been
lightered of nearly 700 tons of lead and ore.
THE HAHNEMANN, sh.—Owners have received
cable from captain of the Hahnemann from Co-
quimbo, as follows: —The ship and cargo have
been sold at auction for .£l2O.
FROM Ist OCTOBER, 1902.
AGE, s.—As Messrs. Howard Smith’s steamer Age
was berthing at Wallaroo on the Ist Oct., she
ran into the jetty, doing considerable damage
to both the jetty and the steamer.
CORONATION, ketch.—The ketch Coronation,
for New Zealand, put back to Sydney on the
9th October in distress. She left Newcastle
on the 6th October, and soon after the main-
boom carried away. Then a leak broke out
in the rudder trunk, and on the pump being
started it was found to be defective.
DUCHESS DE BARRY, French ship, Penarth
to Hobart, put into Table Bay, on September
10 with cargo shifted.. The vessel has also re-
ceived damage.
LUXON, sh.—The American ship Luxon arrived
at Hongkong partially dismasted. The ship
left Newcastle for Manila, as far back as June
17.
MARGA, bq.—The barque Marga, which left Port
Pirie on July 9 for Antwerp, was towed into
Monte Video in a damaged condition. She
had lost several masts. Her master, Captain
1 Wiesse, also died.
MAY, bqtne.—The barquentine May was wrecked
south of Kaipara Heads. The barquentine
left Kaipara in tow of the l tug Pilot, bound
for Onehunga,, timber laden. After leaving
a fierce westerly gale set in, and the vessels
were driven apart. The gale continuing, the
May was driven ashore, and capsized in the
breakers. The vessel broke up quickly.
MYSTERY, cutter.—The cutter Mystery, bound to
Burketown from Sweer’s Island, was wrecked
at Albert Heads.
OCEANA, s.—The ferry steamer Oceana broke her
tail shaft in Sydney Harbour on the 27th Sep-
tember.
LIGHTHOUSE AT TWOFOLD BAY.


PATTBRDALE, Br. s., 1169 tons, left Newcastle
March 24 for Iquiqne with coals. Posted as
missing.
SAMUELL PLIMSOLE, sh. —The ship Samuell
Plimsoll, from Glasgow to Dunedin, was towed
into Gisborne dismasted.
SANTA CHIABA, bq—While the Italian baique
Santa Chiara was being removed from Stock-
ton to No. 4 crane in Newcastle harbour, she
was struck on tho starboard side just below
the break of the poop, by the stem of the tug
Gamecock. Four of the barque’s plates were
dented from under the bulwarks downwards,
a distance of about 7ft., and a ragged hole was
made under the bulwarks by about 2ft. by Ift.
TERESA, sh. —The ship Teresa, which left Fre-
mantle on August 12 for London wUh a cargo
of jarrah, put into Capetown in a leaky con-
dition.
FROM Ist NOVEMBER, 1902.
ABERYSTWITH CASTLE, bq.—The Aberystwith
Castle put into Yokohama dismasted. On the
3rd November the barque encountered a se-
vere typhoon, during which she lost her fore
and main topmasts, and everything attached,
and also the mizzen mast. Sails and rigging
were also carried away.
ASIE, barque. The barque Asie is regarded as
lost. She left Reunion on February 4, 1902,
for Noumea, since which date nothing has
been heard of her.
AUGUST, barque.—The barque August left Syd-
ney on the 13th instant with a general cargo
for the Friendly Islands. When being towed
from the wharf she fouled the steamer Age, of
the Howard Smith line. The August had her
cathead carried away, and the Age sustained
slight damage to one of her plates.
BATTLE ABBEY, bq., San Francisco to Mel-
bourne, when 20 miles east of Deal Island,
lost her deck cargo, consisting of about 150
tons of red gum timber.
COURTNEYFORD, sch.—A cable received at
Noumea reports the schooner Courtneyford,
with a cargo of Oregon for Noumea, totally
lost on the American coast.
DEWDROP, ktch.—Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co.,
at Sydney on the 4th Nov., received a cable-
gram from Fiji stating that the ketch Dew-
drop had been ashore on Keppel Island, in
the Tongan group. The vessel had been got
off, and at the latest advices was being re-
paired.
ELINGAMITE, s.—New Zealand cables report
the total wreck on the Three Kings Islands, off
the North Cape of New Zealand, of Messrs. Hud-
dart Parker and Company’s passenger steamer
Elingamite, which left Sydney on the 7th inst.
for Auckland and other New Zealand ports.
Several lives were lost. The vessel was
wrecked in a fog.
EMU, ketch.—A report received from Eddystone
(Tasmania) on the 13th inst., stated that the
ketch Emu had gone ashore on the North
Beach, and was likely to become a total
wreck.
FIONA, s.—A collision occurred in Sydney Har-
bour about 7 o’clock on the 23rd October, be-
tween the steamer Fiona, which was inward
bound from Auckland, and the steamer Will-
yama, outward bound to Port Pirie.
KORUNNAH.—During the heavy weather on the
N.S.W. coast on the 24th October, the ketch
Korunnah went ashore at Lake Macquarie
Heads, and became a total wreck. All hands
were saved.
kADY’ MUSGRAVE, steamer.—See Taiyuan.
LEON BUREAU, French barque, New York to
Adelaide and Melbourne, put into St. Vin-
cent., C.V., with deck damaged and with loss
of boats.
MOON A, schooner.— The schooner Moona was
wrecked near Bushman’s Bay, on the east side
„ °f Mallicolo, New Hebrides.
URMLEY, s., which arrived at Fremantle on Oc-
tober 18 from New Y’ork, had her deck cargo
- r cai 'bide jettisoned.
LK Y, ketch.—The ketch Ruby was driven
ashore on Kangaroo Island, in Bass Straits, on
the 12th inst., during a gale. The crew and two
passengers were saved.
TAIYUAN, steamer.—A collision occurred in
Moreton Bay on the 12th instant between the
steamers Taiyuan and the Lady Musgrave.
At dusk the Taiyuan, which was en route
from Brisbane to Sydney, loomed up in dark-
ness, and bore straight down on the Lady
Musgrave at anchor, crashing into the port
side, cut her from upper deck to within a
foot of the water, and smashing in the port
boat. The Lady Musgrave at once began to
leak, but the cargo was shifted to the star-
board side, which enabled the rent in the port
side to be raised above the water line.
TINANA, s., scraped on the reef between Evans’
Head and Evans’ Reef, early in October, sev-
eral plates being slightly damaged.
VENTNOR, s.—The steamer foundered after
striking the rocks off Cape Egmont on the
29th ultimo. Portion of the crew succeeded
in landing at Ilokianga Heads. In the state-
ment of the ciew, it appears that after strik-
ing the rocks, the captain managed to get her
off and proceeded on his journey, but the
water gained so quickly that she soon became
unmanageable. All hands were then ordered
to the boats, and they had barely time to get
clear before the Ventnor sank in the vicinity
of Ilokianga Bar. The fourth boat capsized
when leaving the steamer, drowning Captain
Ferry, the third mate, Mr. Ure, and seven of
mrr^r5 l ir'l' „ _.
10na ’
YOUNG RECRUIT, cutter.—The Young Recruit,
engaged in the wood trade, foundered at Port
Gawler, S.A., on the 4th November. The ves-
sel was uninsured
ZELATEUR, bq.—News reached Sydney from the
Fiji Islands that the Norwegian barque Zela-
teur had been ashore on Wallis Island. The
vessel was floated off again, and made sea-
worthy
FROM Ist DECEMBER, 1902.
CHAS. G. RICE, bq.—The barque Chas. G. Rice,
which arrived at New York from Auckland
on the 24th October. While sailing up the
main channel she collided with an unknown
steamer and carried away all braces, and
broke several yards on the port side. Damage
to steamer unknown.
CARTE BLANCHE, bq.—A fire broke out at 2
a m. on the 27th ult., on the Norwegian barque
Carte Blanche, alongside the Railway Wharf
at Auckland. The ship’s pumps and the fire
brigade confined the fire to the store room.
The damage was small. No injury was done
to the vessel.
CLYDESDALE, barque.—Clydesdale, barque, ar-
rived at San Francisco on Nov. 12 from New-
castle after a very protracted passage of 126
days. The report of the captain was that sev-
eral hurricanes were encountered, during
which sails were split and blown away. Se-
vere damage was dons to the cabin and deck fit-
tings.
EiDDERTON, steamer. The steamer Edderton,
bound from New York to Australian ports
with a general cargo, had a collision with an-
other vessel, the name of which was not re-
ported, and was obliged to put into the island of
St, Vincent.
EDEN, barque.—The Russian barque Eden, un-
der charter from Bombay to Melbourne, was
towed into Natal on the 15th ult. in distress,
having lost her maintop gallant mast, mizzen
top mast, and top gallant mast,
RAKAIA, steamer.—On the arrival of the steamer
Rakaia at Plymouth on Oct. 21, from Wel-
lington, it was reported that, shortly before
reaching port signs of fire had been detected,
The flames were completely got under in
about an hortr.
SONOMA, barque.—The barque Sonoma, which
arrived at San Francisco on the 11th instant,
from Sydney, was on arrival found to be
leaking slightly.
. _.
TOMKI, s.—When between the Manning River
aml Crowdy Heads, the steamer Tomki, of the
No^ Ul Coas t Steam Navigation Co. s line, met
with a mishap through striking on some hard
substance. She completed her voyage, and, on
returning to Sydney, was placed in dock tor
examination. The survey showed that the ves-
sel had been rather badly damaged, and she
has been detained for repairs.
VILDANDEN, ship.—The sailing ship Vildan-
den, which left Tampa on 2nd March last for
Adelaide, has been posted at Lloyd’s as being
overdue.
ZVIR, steamer.—A telegram from Perth early on
4th inst. states that the captain and crew of
the Austrian steamer Zvir had arrived at Car-
narvon, and reported that the steamer had
gone aground on the 27th ult. at Point Cloates,
and became a total wreck.
THE “HEREWARD,” WRECKED AT MAROUBRA BAY.


The
Lighthouses of N.S.W.
The coast line of New South Wales, al-
though not very much broken by indenta-
tions, is nevertheless one that calls for the
exercise of great caution on the part of those
whose duty it is to navigate the contiguous
seas. The shore line for the greater part of
the territory is very rugged, and in many
places the land terminates in steep precipi-
tous cliffs, their scarred and weather-beaten
escarpments towering hundreds of feet above
sea level, while their base is washed by water
many fathoms deep. Here and there are to
be found fine stretches of beautiful sandy
beaches, where the long wash of the Pacific
rolls in with irresistible force and breaks upon
the strand with the boom of a distant can-
nonade. In addition to the dangers of the
mainland, there are also a large number of
isolated shoals, patches of submerged rock,
and groups of barren islets which find an abid-
ing place in that portion of the Tasman Sea
which might appropriately be described as the
coastal fairway. Then there are the vagaries
of the currents, and a number of other forces
the operation of which has to be caretully
studied and noted by the mariner who would
avoid mishap, or, peradventure, wreck and
destruction.
Although Captain Cook, in his voyage in
the “ Endeavour” along the coast of New
South Wales in 1770, discovered and named
some of the salient coast marks, it was not
until 1799, twenty-nine years after Cook’s ex-
pedition, or eleven years after the Settlement
had been formed at Sydney by Captain
Phillip, that any attempt was made to ob-
tain a chart of the coast. Commander Mat-
thew Flinders, one of the most daring and ac-
ccmplished navigators of a period which was
prolific of some of the best type of sailormen
the world has known, started out in the sloop
“Investigator” in 1799 to make a survey of
the Eastern coast of Australia from Cape
"Howe on the South, to Cape York on the
North. In those days of primitive appliances,
and exceedingly limited data, the work of the
marine surveyor or hydrographer and charto-
grapher was very different from what it is
to-day. Notwithstanding all the drawbacks
against which he had to contend, Flinders
carried out his task most creditably, and his
reconnaisance surveys were, by his successors,
found to be remarkably accurate and reliable.
As his vessel sailed along the coast the sur-
vey work was done from the deck, while
soundings were effected by heaving the lead
at intervals of about every three miles. In
this way the principal landmarks and various
impedimenta to safe navigation were noted
and charted. The chart was published in
1814, and it might justly be said that the
records he made and the data he collected
formed the foundation of Australian hydro-
graphy. For many years no systematic at-
tempt was made to obtain a detailed chart of
marine dangers adjacent to the coast, and
many of these were unfortunately only dis-
covered when some vessel ran foul of them,
However, in 1889, an arrangement was made
between the British Admiralty and the Col-
onial Government for the carrying out of an
accurate and detailed survey of the coast from
the shore to the 100-fathom contour, shewing
all reefs, shoals, submergences and islands, to-
gether with the nature of the ocean bed, also
the gradations in depth, together with the na-
turc and characteristics of the currents. The
completion of this work gave every satisfac-
tion to all concerned in maritime matters, as
it transformed the character of the Australian
coast from being the least known and most
dangerous, to being the best known, and, con-
sequently, least dangerous.
Up till very recent years, no record ap-
pears to have been kept of the disasters to
shipping off the coast of New South Wales,
but it is well known that there have been
many very calamitous wrecks, involving great
sacrifice of life and loss of property. At the
present time the coast of New South Wales
is about one of the best and most rationally
lighted in the world. There are twenty-four
coast lighthouses, thirteen of the larger class
of harbour light and two lightships, one of
which is moored over the Sow and Pigs shoal,
near the entrance to Port Jackson. Seven
of the coast lights are of the first order diop-
tric, viz.; Green Cape, Montagu Island, Mac-
quarie (Sydney), Sugar Loaf Point, Smoky
Cape, South Solitary Island, and Cape Byron.
Five of these are revolving and two fixed and
flashing. There is one second order dioptric
fixed, viz.: Kiama (Wollongong), and five
fourth order catadioptric, viz.: Crowdy Head,
Tacking Point, Clarence River Head, Rich-
mond River Head and Fingal Head (Tweed
River). There are also five catoptric lights
(one of which is revolving), viz: Point Ste-
phens, and four fixed, viz.: Twofold Bay,
Hornby, Nobbys (Newcastle), and Nelsons
Head (Port Stephens). In the work of light-
ing the coast a wise discretion has to be exer-
cised. While it is expedient that there should
be a sufficiency of lights, it is also advisable
that there should not be more than are abso-
lutely necessary, as too many lights are apt to
lead to confusion, and to precipitate the dan-
gers they should obviate. Another very im-
portant matter is the selection of a site, so
that the best results in every direction may
be attained. The question of deciding whe-
ther a light should be a fixed, revolving, or
flashing, is also a matter that has to be care-
fully considered. Fixed lights, though less
powerful than revolving, have this advantage,
that coloured sections can be thrown from it
to indicate dangers in the neighborhood.
With a revolving light this cannot be effected,
but this class of light possesses a greater
distinctiveness than fixed lights, because the
alternations of light and darkness strike the
eye more readily than a fixed gleam. The in-
creased speed at which steamships now travel
has caused the authorities to advocate short-
ening the intervals of darkness, and, conse-
quently, few revolving lights show a dark
side for more than one minute.
The capital expenditure on lighthouses in
New South Wales up to the present has been
about £210,000, while the expenditure on re-
pairs, maintenance and additions has amount-
ed to approximately between £30,000 and
£40,000, making an aggregate of about a
quarter of a million. The annual cost of at-
tendance, supervision and stores comes to
about £12,000. The illuminants consist of
electric light, as at the Macquarie Station,
South Head; gas, as at Kiama, and mineral
oil at all the others. Following are the es-
sential particulars regarding the lighthouses
of this State :
GREEN CAPE LIGHT.
Green Cape Lighthouse, which was erected
in 1883, at a cost of £19,338, stands on the
extremity of Green or Bundoona Cape, Dis-
aster Bay, 217 miles south of Sydney, and
about a dozen miles below Twofold Bay. The
SEAL ROCKS LIGHTHOUSE.


tower differs from most lighthouses in
that it is octagonal—nearly all others being
circular —standing on a square base. It is
surmounted by a blue stone gallery, carried
on sixteen corbels of the same material. The
column, which is built of concrete mass walls,
battered on the outside and diminishing from
four feet in thickness at the base to two feet
six inches at the top, is sixty-eight feet in
height, which fact gives it the distinction
of being the highest in New South Wales, if
not in the whole of Australasia. On top of
the tower is fixed a glazed lantern, supported
on an iron light room, having a diameter of
12 feet, inside of which is fitted the optical
apparatus, clock-work, machinery etc., which
regulate and reflect across the turbulent wa-
ters, the welcome beam that allays the an-
xiety of the watchful mariner. The light,
which is a revolving white one, flashing every
50 secs., is of the first order dioptric holo-
photal. The flash, which has a duration of
5J secs., has a focal plane elevation of 144
feet, and is visible from a vessel’s deck four-
teen miles distant. This light guards one of
the most dangerous portions of the coast, that
part near the lighthouse having two disas-
trous wrecks to its credit, which have given
the locality the rather unenviable name of
Wreck, or Disaster Bay. The intercolonial
steamer, “ Ly-ee-moon,” a fast and favourite
passenger boat, while on a trip from Mel-
bourne to Sydney, ran on the rocks immedi-
ately under the light, and became a total
wreck one winter’s night in 1886, when no
less than 71 persons lost their lives. The
catastrophe was observed from the beacon
tower, and the principal lighthouse keeper,
Daniel Whelan, who is still in charge, ren-
dered such heroic service in rescuing persons
from the ill-fated ship that he was subse-
quently rewarded with a silver medal from the
Royal Humane Society of Australasia, and a
gold medal from the National Shipwreck Re-
lief Society of New South Wales. The prin-
cipal keeper has two assistants and suitable
living quarters are provided for all, and there
is also a jetty with a storeroom at Bittanga-
bee Bay.
TWOFOLD BAY LIGHT.
The lighthouse at the entrance to Twofold
Bay, the port of Eden, and the outlet for a
rich agricultural district, was built on the
southern extremity of Look Out Point, in
1862, at a cost of £1,143. It is situated 206
miles south of Sydney. The tower, which is
composed of hardwood timber on stone foun-
dations, rises to a height of 28 feet from the
ground, and is surmounted by a lantern of
the catoptric order, showing a fixed red light,
having a focal altitude of 133 feet above high
water mark, and visible from a distance of 13
miles. The lighthouse, which is in charge of
a pilot or harbour master, is provided with
quarters for a boat’s crew, and with offices for
a Customs landing waiter.
ULLADULLA LIGHTHOUSE.
The Ulladulla light, situated at a distance
°f 103 miles southward of Sydney, was origin-
ally displayed from an elevation on the end
°t the pier in Ulladulla harbour. In this
position it remained for 16 years, but in 1889
it was removed to Warden Head, where an
iron circular tower, having a diameter at the
base of 11 feet, diminishing to 8 feet at the
top, and with an elevation of 27 feet from
the ground to the floor of the lantern room,
where the apparatus for displaying a white
fixed light is housed. The beam, which is
visible at a distance of 12 miles, has its focal
plane at a height of 140 feet above sea level.
The light tower, together with quarters for
one keeper, cost the Department ,£3517 to
build.
MONTAGU ISLAND LIGHT.
The lighthouse on Montagu Island, which
lies 4 miles off the coast to the north of
Tathra, is 155 miles south of Sydney. It was
built in 1881 at a cost of £33,304, and is in
charge of a principal and two assistant keep-
ers. The tower, built of local grey granite, is
circular, and has its base on a large granite
boulder on the summit of the Island. Its
height from the top of the boulder to the floor
of the lantern is 40 feet, the boulder itself
being 18 feet high from the ordinary ground
level, and is scaled by a flight of granite steps.
The tower is divided into three storeys, the
walls being 3 feet 44 inches at the base, and
battering to 2 feet thick at the top, the in-
terior diameter of the column being 11 feet,
The tower is surmounted by an iron light-
room, in which is arranged the optical appar-
atus and clockwork machinery of a first order
dioptric holophotal fixed and flashing bright
light, fixed for 33 secs., then a flash of 5 secs.
between two intervals of 16 secs, darkness.
The focal plane of the light, which is visible
at a distance of 18J miles, lias an elevation of
262 feet.
ST. GEORGE’S HEAD.
The lighthouse, erected in 1860 on St.
George’s Head, the prominent headland which
stands like a grim sentinel at the southern
entrance to Jervis Bay—a magnificent sheet
of deep water —was a well-known landmark.
Its tall circular column, which was such an
object of interest to the seafarer by day, be-
came after nightfall an object of even greater
concern, when its scintillating ray served as a
guide to the path of those who go down to the
sea in ships. For nearly 40 years its cheerful
gleam had been eagerly watched for “ o
nights,” but for a long time it was considered
by those best qualified to judge that the pre-
cipitous heights of Point Perpendicular, on
the northern side of the entrance to Jervis
Bay, offered a more suitable position than
Cape St. George for a lighthouse. Gradually
this view gained ground, and eventually the
Government decided to substitute the Cape
St. George beacon for one on Point Perpendi-
cular. The original lighthouse, which cost
£4363, consisted of a circular sandstone
tower 53 feet high from the ground to the
floor of the lantern room. It was fitted with
a catoptric revolving white, green and red
light, alternating every half minute, the focal
plane of which was 224 feet above sea level,
and its range of visibility 17 miles. Since
the inauguration of the new light on the op-
posite point, the Cape St. George lighthouse
has been dismantled, and, in order to prevent
confusion to mariners, the old tower has been
demolished.
POINT PERPENDICULAR LIGHT.


POINT PERPENDICULAR LIGHT.
The new lighthouse on Point Perpendicular
is one of the most modern of its kind, both in
regard to construction and equipment. The
site chosen is a very suitable one, having a
bold outlook almost on the edge of the pre-
cipitous cliffs which rise to a height of 284
feet above high-water mark, and have a sheer
vertical sea wall with deep water at the base.
The establishment, which is 82 miles south
from Sydney, cost about £lB,OOO, and was
completed in 1899. The tower, circular in
plan, and built of concrete blocks, has a
height of 44 feet to the top of the walling,
with an internal diameter of lift. 9in. clear.
It reposes on a bed of concrete let into the
hard rock to secure solidity. The walls, which
are of immense thickness, rise from a bold
moulded surface, and with a concave batter to
the top, which is surmounted by a massive cor-
nice that supports the projecting gallery
round the outside of the lantern. The light-
ing apparatus, which cost £4OOO, weighs
about 33 tons, is of prismatic glass in gun
metal framing, nine-sided, with concave sides
about 9 feet high, and 6 feet diameter, partly
domed at the top. It is a first order dioptric
revolving white light, triple group flashing
every 20 seconds, with an intensity of 40,650
standard candle power, and making one com-
plete revolution in 1J minutes. Its focal
plane has an elevation of 304 feet, and pos-
sesses a visibility from a distance of 20 miles.
Excellent quarters are provided for the head
keeper and his two assistants, and, in addition
to the usual storerooms, etc., a jetty 200 feet
long and 12 feet wide had been run out in
one of the sheltered coves of Jervis Bay.
SHOALHAVEN LIGHT.
The lighthouse at the entrance to the
Shoalhaven River, 63 miles from Sydney, was
established in 1882, at a cost of £BOl. The
light shown is a fixed red, visible at a distance
of about 7 miles.
KIAMA LIGHTHOUSE.
The Kiama lighthouse, 56 miles south from
Sydney, was erected in 1887 at a cost of about
£3OOO. The tower stands on an eminence near
the far-famed “ Blowhole,” a marine cavern
hollowed out of the basaltic formation of the
locality, and possessed of a vertical shaft up
through which during stormy weather the
boiling surge is spouted with all the appear-
ance of a geyser. The tower, built of brick,
is 38 feet high to the floor of the light room,
which is fitted with a fourth order dioptric
apparatus, lit by gas from the town main, and
showing a fixed green light. The focal plane
of the beam has an altitude of 119 feet above
high water mark, and is visible for a distance
of 12£ miles. The lighthouse is in charge of
a pilot. The breakwater which forms the
harbour is also lighted with red and green
colored lamps, which act also as guiding lights
to vessels making port at night.
WOLLONGONG LIGHT.
The Wollongong lighi,, established in 1872,
is shown from a tower 37 feet high, erected
on the extremity of the breakwater which
walls in the harbour basin. The foot of the
tower stands on a base of dressed stonework,
and is fastened to the ground by twelve
wrought-iron anchor rods 12 feet long and 2
inches in diameter, having large washer plates,
the whole being buried in a mass of concrete
12 feet dcp. The tower and its equipment
cost £2251, and is in charge of the pilot. The
light, a fixed white one, is ot the fourth order
diontric, the focal plane being 56 feet above
high water mark, the visibility of the light
being 8| miles. A fixed red light is also
shown from the north-east side of the tower,
from which direction it is dangerous to enter
the harbour. The Wollongong light is 41
miles from Sydney.
THE MACQUARIE LIGHTHOUSE (Old).
The first lighthouse erected in the Southern
Hemisphere was that at South Head near the
entrance to Port Jackson, in 1816, during the
regime of Major-General Lachlan Macquarie,
Governor of New South Wales. The neces-
sity of a beacon to command the entrance to
the port had long been felt, as it was well
known that the shore both north and south of
the entrance to the harbour was an exceeding-
ly dangerous one. Notwithstanding this fact,
nearly thirty years were allowed to elapse be-
fore a light was established. The foundation
stone was laid on the 11th of July, 1816, and
two days later the proceedings wore chron-
icled in the columns of the “ Government Ga-
zette,” the only newspaper of the time, in the
following paragraph:—
“ On Tuesday last, notwithstanding the se-
verity of the weather, His Excellency the
Governor and staff, accompanied by His
Honour the LieutenanbGovernor, the Judge
Advocate, and Captain Gill, the Principal
Engineer, proceeded to South Head, where
(everything being in readiness for the occar
sion) His Excellency was pleased to lay the
foundation-stone of a most useful building,
intended for the several purposes of a signal
and lighthouse, and a guard-house and bar-
racks for a small military detachment. The
centre of this building, wo understand, is to
be raised 65 feet above the level of the emin-
ence on which it is placed, and will form a
square pyramidical tower, on the top of which
a light is to be placed for the direction of
vessels approaching the coast, which from its
elevation "will be seen at an immense distance
at sea, and be an object handsome to behold
from the town of Sydney. The wings of the
building are to form the guard house and bar-
racks. Hugo blocks of excellent stone are
prepared for the edifice, and afford the strong-
est assurance that it will prove a permanent
security for all vessels that may approach the
coast. To this building, which opens the
prospect of a monument for future ages to
contemplate with pride, His Excellency gave
the name of Macquarie Tower, and when
considered with a view to the commercial in-
terests of this colony, it cannot fail of proving
a most valuable and important acquisition.”
A correction of the description appeared in
the “ Gazette” of 20th July, 1816, and ran as
follows:—“ The centre of this handsome build-
ing is to be raised 65 feet above the eminence
on which it is placed, and will form a square
base or pedestal, with a circular tower crown-
ed with a frieze, on which will be carved the
MACQUARIE LIGHTHOUSE, SOUTH HEAD.


four winds in ‘ altro relievo,’ distribu-
ting their good and evil qualities from their
drapery as they appear to fly round the tower,
above which will be a cornice and lantern
with revolving light, the whole forming an
appropriate capital to the tower. On the in-
side is intended to be a geometrical stone
staircase leading up to the lantern, and two
1 basso relievos’ will be on the pedestal. The
wings of the building are to form the guard
house and barrack.”
Francis Havard Greenway was the architect
of the building, which was built by prison
labour under the superintendence of Captain
John Gill, Acting Engineer. The tower, which
was completed in 1817, was, after about five
years exposure to the rude buffetings of wind
and rain upon the open eminence on which it
stood, found to be in need of repairs. Light-
house construction in those days had not
reached the scientific level of later years, and
it was ascertained during the process of re-
pairing the tower that its weakness arose from
the presence of certain structural faults, that
had to be remedied. The tower, which stood
close to the edge of the frowning cliffs, a short
distance to the south of the historic “ Gap,”
and almost on the site of the present splendid
Macquarie lighthouse, had an elevation of 58
feet from the ground to the floor of the lan-
tern. It was cylindrical in shape, with an
interior diameter of 11 feet. It consisted of
three storeys, the bottom floor being domed
over with brickwork and utilised as an oil
store. It was constructed of dressed sand-
stone, the walls being 3f feet thick at the base
and tapering to 2|- feet at the top. The up-
per floors and lantern gallery were
constructed of wood with iron railing.
The lantern was duo-decagonal, and
displayed a white light of the third catoptric
order, having a focal elevation of 346 feet
above high water mark, and a visibility over
21J nautical miles. The original tower was
demolished in 1883, when the present estab-
lishment was opened.
THE MACQUARIE LIGHT (New).
The magnificent light which commands the
entrance to Port Jackson is reputed to be one
of the best in the whole world. It is dis-
played from a massive, well-built tower, hav-
ing an elevation of over sixty feet from the
to- of the perpendicular cliffs, which rise with
a sheer face of over 300 feet in height from
deep water, and constitute a veritable iron-
bound coast line. The present structure was
modelled on the design of the one it replaced,
and has preserved the old designation given
the original by its founder. The tower is
composed of sandstone, the walls being 4 feet
thick at the bottom, and tapering to 3 feet at
the top, the diameter of the internal tube
being 1U feet. A blue stone gallery surrounds
the lantern, and is protected by a gun metal
railing. The engine room, workrooms and oil
stores are located in wings, 24 feet square, on
either side of the tower. The engine room
contains two 8-horse-power Crossley’s gas en-
gines, and two De Meriten’s magneto electric
machines, having a weight of 2£ tons each.
A gasometer capable of holding nearly a
week’s supply of carburretted hydrogen occu-
pies an adjacent position, and is connected
with the mains of the public gas company.
The light, the focal plane of which has an ele-
vation of 345 feet above high water mark, is
visible from a distance of 21 miles It is a
first order dioptric holophotal revolving white
light—electric light, gas, or oil. It shows a
flash every minute, and makes a complete re-
volution in 16 minute's. The work cost the
Government a sum of no less than £19,620,
while the annual expenditure on the salaries
and wages of the officers necessary to ensure
the efficiency of the light amounts to close up-
on £9OO. Quarters are provided for one En-
gineer Superintendent, one Assistant Engi-
neer, and three under Keepers, all of whom
are men who are thoroughly conversant with
lighthouse optics and mechanism.
In connection with the lighthouse there is
a well-equipped signalling station, with a com-
petent staff, whose duty it is to report by tele-
phone or telegraph to the Post Office and the
Observatory all occurrences in the offing. The
lighthouse is also in immediate and direct
communication with the pilot station, and the
pilot steamer “ Captain Cook,” the moorings
of which are in the sheltered nook of Watson’s
Bay, an indentation on the southern side of
Sydney Harbour, and about half a mile dis-
tant from the signal lookout. The safety and
accessibility of Port Jackson to vessels of
every size and description, during all wea-
thers, has always received the first considera-
tion of the Government of the State, and in
point of equipment or efficiency the Macquarie
Lighthouse ranks amongst die foremost of
kindred establishments in any part of the
world.
THE HORNBY LIGHT.
The Hornby light, situated on the edge of
the cliff at Inner South Head, is an old and
familiar danger signal to nautical men visit-
ing this port. It was erecied in 1858, at a
cost of £5833, and throws a fixed white light
of the first catoptric order over a visible hori-
zon embracing 11 miles. The focal plane of
the 'light has an elevation of 90 feet. The
tower, 25 feet in height from the ground to
the floor of the light, is painted externally in
broad red and white stripes. It is circular in
plan, with walls of 24 feet thickness at the
base, tapering in 1J feet at the top, and with
an internal diameter of 10 feet. The lantern,
which is of a very effective mechanism, capable
of emitting a very strong beam of light, was
originally imported for King’s Island, in Bass’
Straits, one of the most treacherous localities
on the Australian coast, owing to the erratic
nature of the powerful currents which sweep
through the great marine gorge separatin'*
Tasmania from the mainland. The shores of
this Island are so bestrewn with the remains
of wrecked vessels that it has earned for itself
the contumelious title of the nautical grave-
yard.
BARRENJOEY LIGHT.
Standing on the heights of Barrenjoey Head,
near the southern end of the entrance to Bro-
ken Bay, the Barrenjoey lighthouse is the first
guiding mark the navigator, who is bound
north, endeavours to pick up. It is situated
17 miles north of Port Jackson, and is a fixed
red light of the second dioptric order, having
a focal height above high water mark of 'dll
feet, with a visibility of 22 miles. The sta-
tion, which was established in 1881, at a cost
of £16,400, includes a circular tower 39 feet
high, built of local sandstone, with walls dim-
inishing in thickness from 3 feet at the base
to 2 feet at the top, with an internal diameter
of 10 feet. The gallery round the lantern is
also of sandstone, supported on massive stone
cantilevers, and having a gun metal railing.
The station is in charge of a principal and two
assistant keepers, who are provided with com-
modious quarters.
BARRENJOEY LIGHT.


NEWCASTLE LIGHT (NOBBY’S).
The important producing centre of New-
castle, on Point Hunter, like the metropolis,
embraces very valuable shipping interests,
which demand that the entrance to the har-
bour, never an easy one to navigate, owing to
its narrowness, should be well lighted and
buoyed. The contiguous dangers of the coast
line, and the difficulties of making the port,
were recognised in the early days of the settle-
ment, as the entrance to the Hunter can lay
claim to having had the second lighthouse es-
tablished in the Austral seas, a beacon light
being erected on the Nobbys Island in the
year 1828. The present modem station was
built in 1858, on the site of its forerunner, at
a cost of £4465, and has proved itself
an efficient “pillar of fire by night.”
The tower, circular in shape, is some-
what squat in appearance, as it has a diameter
of 10J feet, with a height of only 13 feet from
the ground to the floor of the light room. The
light is a fixed white one of the catoptric vari-
ety, and there is a fixed red light thrown over
the breakwater. The focal plane of the light
is 115 feet above high-water mark, operating
in a visible horizon extending 12 miles.
POINT STEPHEN’S LIGHT.
The lighthouse standing at the southern en-
trance to Port Stephens is one of the oldest on
the coast of New South Wales, having been
built in 1862. The tower, which is an exceed-
ingly well-proportioned one, 126 feet in height,
is composed of Sydney freestone, and is sur-
mounted by a catoptric revolving light which
alternately displays a red and white flash at
minute intervals, with a short eclipse "between
each flash. The light has a focal elevation of
126 feet above sea level, and is visible for 13
miles. The lantern consists of a frame hav-
ing four sides, with three lamps to each side,
and revolves upon its centre. The illumin-
ant used is kerosene oil. The lighthouse
stands on a low promontory called Point Ste-
phens, which at times becomes isolated, form-
ing an island, and at others it forms a penin-
sula, being connected with the mainland by a
narrow isthmus of sand known as “Narrow
Gut.” The tower and keeper’s quarters are
all very substantially built, and cost £7400.
The principal keeper has the services of two
assistants, for whom comfortable quarters are
provided.
NELSON’S HEAD LIGHT.
The light on Nelson’s Head, 65 miles north
of Sydney, at the entrance to Port Stephens,
was established in 1872, when the tower was
built of wood. In 1876 this was replaced by an
octagonal brick column of one storey in
height, at a cost of £2837. The light, of the
catoptric class —is a fixed one red and white,
showing bright to seaward, eclipsed over the
shoal at the entrance, and showing red after
the shoal is passed. The height of the focal
plane is 175 feet, and the light is discernable
at a distance of 15 miles.
SEAL ROCKS LIGHT.
The dangerous locality of Seal Rocks, 107
miles from Sydney in a northerly direction, is
indicated by a first-class lighthouse on Sugar
Loaf Point, an abrupt rocky headland about a
league distant from the dreaded “ Seals,” two
isolated rock formations, one of which is sub-
merged at high water, and which lie directly
in the fairway of vessels proceeding along the
coast. The light tower, which forms a prom-
inent feature on the shoreline, has an eleva-
tion of 22 feet from the ground to the floor of
the lantern apartment. The walls, com-
posed of Hawkesbury sandstone, are 2
feet 9 inches thick at the base, and
taper to 2 feet at the top. The illu-
minating apparatus is a first order
dioptric holophotal, sixteen sided, revolving,
throwing a bright light flashing every half
minute, and having a fourth order dioptric
fixed green light, emanating from a point
lower in the tower, throwing a warning sector
over Seal Rocks and adjacent dangers, but not
the Edith breaker. The focal plane of this
light has an altitude of 258 feet, and the beam
is visible at a distance of 18J miles. The sta-
tion, which is under the control of a principal
keeper and two assistants, is replete with
every modern appliance. The main lantern
cost .£3400 in London, and the green sector
£BO, the total cost of the station being
£18,973. The wreck of the fine steamer
“ Catterthun” (Capt. Shannon;, in 1895, while
on her way to China, through striking one of
the pinnacle rocks of the Little Seal, during
the swell caused by a south-west gale, ranks
amongst the most disastrous of marine catas-
trophes on the Australian coast. The vessel,
after striking, continued on her way for some
time, but the Commander, finding her sinking,
changed his course, and headed for a small
bight almost under the lighthouse on Sugar
Loaf Point. Before the steamer could reach
the shallow haven, the inrushing waters ex-
tinguished the fires, and she sank in 39 fa-
thoms, carrying down with her a number of
Europeans, who never left the saloon, and a
large number of Chinese in the steerage. Sev-
eral boxes of gold specie also went down in
the vessel’s strongroom, and the recovery of
most of this treasure some months later by
two divers (Messrs. Briggs and May) elicited
world-wide comment, as it constituted one of
the most, if not the most, successful deep div-
ing accomplishments on record.
CROWDY HEAD LIGHT.
On the forefront of the great bluff headland
designated Crowdy Head, near the embouchie
of the River Manning, 141 miles north from
Sydney, stands limned out in bold relief
against the dark background of Australian
bush, the white circular shaft of the light-
house named after the promontory on which it
stands. The establishment, which was created
in 1879, cost £4365, exclusive of the lantern,
which subsequently brought the total up to
about £7OOO. The light, which is a fixed
bright one, is of the fourth order catadioptric,
showing a red section over the Mermaid Reef,
northward to the land. The light has a focal
altitude of 185 feet above high water mark,
and is visible from a distance of 15i miles.
TACKING POINT LIGHT.
On Tacking Point, a few miles to the south
of Port Macquarie, and 173 miles north of
Sydney, the Government erected a lighthouse
in 1879, at an expenditure of about £7OOO
The light, a fixed bright one of the fourth
catadioptric order, has a focal plane of 195
feet, and is visible from the deck of a vessel
distant 16 miles away. The equipment of this
station is almost identical with that at Crowdy
Head, from which it is distant a little over 30
miles.
“NOBBYS.” NEWCASTLE.


SMOKY CAPE LIGHT.
The lighthouse establishment at Smoky
Cape (Trial Bay), 200 miles north of Sydney,
came into existence in 1891, and cost £12,000.
The tower, which is octagonal, has an interior
diameter of 12 feet, and is 32 feet in height
from the ground to the floor of the light room.
The walls are of mass concrete 3J feet thick
at the base, and feet thick at the top. The
gallery around the lantern is of granite, sup-
ported on moulded granite cantilevers, and
having a gun metal railing. The light is a
bright one of the first order dioptric, which
shows three flashes in 10 seconds, followed by
a 20 seconds eclipse. A real subsidiary light
is emitted from a lower elevation of the tower
to cover the Fish Rock, with one mile clear of
danger in all directions. The altitude of the
focal plane of the principal light is no less
than 420 feet, probably the highest in Aus-
tralia, and the range of the visible horizon is
23J miles. The station is under the care of a
chief keeper and two assistants, who are all
provided with suitable accommodation.
SOUTH SOLITARY LIGHT.
The Solitaries, a group of rocky islets which
lie in the coastal fairway at a distance of
about 250 miles north of Sydney, have always
been regarded with suspicion by’ navigators,
who have, accordingly, given them a wide
berth. In order to minimise, if not alto-
gether avert the danger to shipping, the Gov-
ernment, in 1880, expended no less a sum
than £31,259 in the erection of a first-class
modern lighthouse establishment on the South
Solitary. The light tower rises from a rocky
boulder in the centre of the Island, to a
of about 50 feet. The walls, which are of
mass concrete, have a thickness of 4J feet at
the base, tapering to 21 feet at the top, and
are cemented inside and out. The gallery
round the lantern is of bluestone, supported
on a massive moulded concrete cornice,
and protected by a gun metal railing.
A screen wall - of concrete 4 feet in
height, and having radius of nine feet,
surrounds the base of the tower, which is sur-
mounted by a first order holophotal
eight sided dioptric illuminating apparatus,
producing a revolving -bright light, with
eclipses every half minute. The focal
plane has an elevation of 192 feet,
and the light is visible for a distance of 15A
miles. On the island commodious quarters
are provided for the principal keeper and his
two assistants, a skeleton wharf with tram-
way travelling crane and store room being
constructed at the landing place.
CLARENCE RIVER LIGHT.
On the extremity of the southern head
abutting on the entrance to the Clarence Riv-
er, stands a compact lighthouse and plant,
which is in charge of the local pilot. The
buildings, which were erected in 1866, at a
eost of £1097, are 294 miles north from Syd-
ney- The light, which is a fixed bright one
of the fourth order catadioptric, has a focal
elevation of 35 feet, and is visible from 6|
miles.
RICHMOND RIVER LIGHT.
The entrance to the Richmond River, 328
miles north of Sydney, is guarded by a fixed
bright light of the fourth order catadioptric,
having a focal altitude of 116 feet, and a visi-
bility of 12J miles. The buildings and ap-
pliances, which are similar in all respects to
those at Crowdy Head, were erected in 1866
at a cost of £4112.
CAPE BYRON.
The lighthouse recently erected at Cape
Byron Bay, 345 miles northward of Sydney, is
considered to be one of the most complete es-
tablishments of its kind to be found any-
where. The light exhibited from here is
what is known as a “ feu eclair” catadioptric
group, double flashing white light of the first
order. Its intensity is equal to 145 light-
house units, or 145,000 candles (standard).
With the exception of the electric light in-
stalled at Macquarie Station, the light shown
from Cape Byron is the most powerful on the
coast of New South Wales. The light at
Capo Leeuwin, on the coast of West Austra-
lia, is the only other light on the continent
of Australia which equals Cape Byron light
in intensity. This light has a focal eleva-
tion of 371 feet, and is visible 22 miles dis-
tant. In addition to the main light there is
a fourth order dioptric light on a lower floor,
which throws a red sector over the Juan and
Julia rocks.
FINGAL HEAD LIGHT.
Fingal Head, near the mouth of the Tweed
River, 372 miles north of Sydney, is crowned
by a lighthouse establishment exactly the
same in every respect to those at the mouths
of the Clarence and the Richmond Rivers
and Crowdy Head, the expenditure on the
work totalling £4357. The light, a fixed bright
one, is of the fourth order catadioptric, and
is obscured by Cook Island, between certain
points. The focal elevation is 80 feet above
high water mark, and the visible horizon
ranges to 101 miles.
In addition to the foregoing there are a
number of leading and jetty lights at various
points along the coast. In Sydney Harbour
the lightship and the “Sow and Pigs” shows
a white light, having a focal elevation of 18
feet, and with a visibility over 6 miles. Fort
Denison (Pinchgut) displays a red light.
Telephonic communication has been estab-
lished between the various lighthouses and
Sydney, so that all occurrences along the sea-
board are known of in the metropolis almost
as soon as they take place.
Royal Shipwreck Relief and Humane
Society of New South Wales.
The Royal Shipwreck Relief and Humane
Society was originally instituted on July 25th,
1877, and known as the Shipwreck Relief and
Humane Society of New South Wales. Last
year, however, its subscribers and the general
public were gratified to learn that, through
the instrumentality of its Vice-Patron, Sir
Frederick Darley, His Majesty King Edward
VII. had been graciously pleased to approve
the title “ Royal” being added to its name.
The objects of the Society are: —Ist., To af-
ford relief in cases of distress to Widows, Or-
phans and Aged Parents, or others dependent
on Seamen belonging to New South Wales, or
to vessels owned in any New South Wales
port, who shall have lost their lives, or have
been seriously injured in the performance of
their duty. 2nd., To relieve crews.of vessels
and necessitous passengers wrecked in or near
New South Wales. 3rd., To grant the So-
ciety’s Medals or Rewards to any persons per-
forming acts of bravery in the saving of hu-
man life, as the Committee may think deserv-
ing. As showing the scope of its operations
the following statistics of relief for the past
twenty-five years are of interest: —
Widows and orphans and others depen-
dent on seamen .£12,472 18 11
Distressed seamen who have suffered
loss through shipwreck 4,777 13 5
Awards for merit (cash) 265 0 6
.£17,678 15 1
Awards made for the saving of human life: —Gold
medals, 20; silver medals, 168; silver bars, 3;
bronze medals, 47; certificates only, 31.
Miscellaneous.—Gold watches, 2; piece silver
plate, 1; silver watches, 5; marine binocular
glasses, 6.
Certificates have only been issued since the year
1896.
The Society celebrated its Silver Jubilee at
its annual meeting held in the Town Hall,
Sydney, on Monday, August 25th, 1902. On
that occasion its Chairman, Mr. J. H. Storey,
gave an interesting sketch of its foundation.
Twentv-five years ago the memorable wreck of
the steamer “ Yarra Yarra” occurred off New-
castle. A subscription in aid of the widows
and orphans was started at the Exchange by
the Secretary, Mr. C. H. Hayes, when a con-
siderable sum was raised. Mr. F. H. Dangar,
who contributed liberally, suggested the for-
mation of a Society, with the machinery al-
ways in readiness to be set going with promp-
titude, to relieve the sufferers by such a dis-
aster as the one which had then aroused pub-
lic sympathy. As he pointed out, with the
extensive seaboard, and with the growing
trade of Sydney and other ports in New
South Wales, wrecks and shipping casualties
must be looked for, and that it was the pub-
lic’s duty to create a fund to be administered
by a Committee to deal with these disasters,
instead of making special appeals for particu-
lar cases, causing delay in the relief of suf-
ferers. At Mr. Dangar’s instigation a public
meeting was held at the Exchange, when the
Society was formed, Mr. Dangar being elected
President, and a committee of eighteen gen-
tlemen was appointed. A meeting of the
subscribers to the “ Yarra Yarra” Fund was
held, and a resolution was passed authorising


Mr. Hayes to hand the amount collected to
the Shipwreck Relief Society, to be adminis-
tered by its Committee. Of the eighteen
members of the committee elected at the
meeting when the Society was founded, there
now remains Mr. F. H. Dangar, the Presi-
dent, who takes a keen interest in its affairs,
although residing in London; captain John
Broomfield, who had from the first acted as
Honorary Treasurer; the Acting Chief Jus-
tice, The Hon. M. H. Stephen; Mr. W. S.
Buzacott, the Vice-Chairman; Captain J. M.
Banks, Captain Hixson, Mr. C. H. Hayes,
and Mr. Storey. During that time the Society
has dispensed in relief and rewards the sum
of nearly £IB,OOO, an average of over £7OO
per annum. It is now strong, financially,
and the Committee has learnt by experience
how best to assist those who by misfortune
have lost their bread-winners. The Society
makes them understand that it can only
assist them to help themselves—not keep
them altogether, and, taking the year
1901-2, as an example, it may be mentioned
that in two cases tea and refreshment busi-
nesses were purchased—shops stocked and
rent guaranteed for a considerable time.
One lady was started in a boarding house —
furniture purchased and rent guaranteed.
Another widow had a small cottage and a
piece of ground; with some assistance from
her friends, the Society helped her to build
another cottage, which she now lets, and lives
in her own. In this way it was hoped they
were permanently relieved.
The twenty-fifth Annual Report for the
year ending 30th June, 1902, showed that
the receipts from all sources during the year
(included interest on fixed deposits) amounted
to £1697 os. 10d., and the invested funds now
stand at £17,800. Included among the re-
ceipts, however, was £l9l, the balance of the
“Ly-ee-moon” fund. This fund was got up
to relieve sufferers by that dreadful wreck,
and, fortunately, the resolution moved at the
public meeting concluded with the words—
“ and the balance, if any, to be handed over
to the Shipwreck Relief Society.” The Trus-
tees, therefore, His Honour Mr. Justice
Stephen and Alderman Lees, have been able
to hand the Society the money. The com-
mittee also received £25, balance of legacy
from the late Mr. Wait, making £1125 re-
ceived from that gentleman’s estate, and also
had a small legacy of £lO from the late Mr.
Mcßitchie. The Committee certainly have
to thank the captains and officers of the stea-
mers for the boxes showing such good results;
the R.M.S. “ Moana,” with over £SO, tops
the list, then the S.S. “ Waikare,” £36, and
the S.S. “ Zealandia” nearly £3O. Of course,
the longer the voyage, the more money col-
lected. The expenditure has been:—Relief
to widows and distressed seamen, nearly
£900; awards for bravery, medals, certifi-
cates, etc., £75; and, after paying salaries,
rent and office expenses, the Society has been
able to add to its revenue funds £4OO, which
now stand at £17,800. During the year from
Ist July, 1901, to 30th June, 1902, there had
been 7 wrecks on our coast, 5 steamers and 2
sailing vessels, and several lives lost. In
addition to this the Society have had 6
widows and families to assist, where the hus-
bands were accidentally drowned, and one
was accidentally killed on board his shin. In
July last, the steam tug “Protector” was
totally lost on the Richmond River Bar, with
all on hoard, the crew leaving 5 widows and 9
children. The Secretary immediately wired
the Mayor of Ballina to know what assist-
ance was required, but the residents of the
River started a Relief Fund, and the Com-
mittee were informed that sufficient money
was raised to amply provide for the sufferers.
All other cases arising have been promptly
dealt with.
MR. J. H. STOREY,
Chairman.
The following balance-sheet gives a detailed
account of the Society’s operations:—
iB s. d. £ s. d.
To balance, June 30th, 1901—
Commercial Banking Co.
of Sydney (current account) .£149 13 4
Donation and subscriptions 261 2 0
„ Balance of “ Ly-
ee-Moon” Fund
(per the Acting
Chief Justice,
the Hon. M. H.
Stephen, and
Aid. S. E. Lees) 190 19 0
„ Additional leg-
acy under the
will of the late
Mr. Henry Wait 25 0 0
„ Legacy under
the will of the
late Mr. W.
MoEitchie ... 10 0 0
490 1 0
Boxes and proceeds of en-
tertainments and collec-
tions on board steamships 316 10 8
Interest on fixed deposits 610 9 2
Government grant 250 0 0
£1846 14 2
1901-1902.
By relief to widows and orphans and
and distressed seamen ... .£B9l 15 0
By rewards for merit, medals and
certificates 75 5 9
By salaries 226 10 0
By commission 67 2 8
By rent and office expenses 43 6 7
By printing, advertising and stationery 25 5 0
By travelling and sundry expenses ... 13 11 8
By stamps, telegrams, etc 10 8 5
By telephone charge 4 12 6
By office furniture and fittings 4 10 0
By expenses annual meeting (after de-
ducting collection) 4 11 3
By addition to fixed deposit 400 0 0
By balance, Commercial Banking Co. of
Sydney (current account) 77 14 4
By cash in hand 2 10
For acts of bravery and saving life the fol-
lowing awards were made : —Silver Medals
and Certificates of Merit to S. Green, J. Rob-
inson, G. I. B. Sheridan, S. Ewen, J. Chitts,
G. W. Snowdon, A. F. Stanford, S. Fother-
ingham, E. R. Hughes, J. M. Denmeade, J.
R. Groves, W. A. Windeyer, H. L. Pattison,
H. Cowling, A. Ekebom. Bronze Medals and
Certificates of Merit to Miss G. O. M. Town-
send, R. C. A. Arter, J. Arneil, H. M. Jacob-
sen, J. G. Peterson, P. Ryan, S. J. Coggins,
B. Butterfield, E. B. Morris, R. Stilgoe, M.
McGrath, M. Ryan, J. J. Scully. Binocular
Glasses and Certificates of Merit to E. Dear-
man. Certificates of Merit to F. A. Kiley,
P. W. T. Cree and T. Terry.
It is interesting to note that the only lady
recipient was a Miss Townsend, who rescued
a little girl from drowning near Parkes, while
Joseph Groves, a boy of only fourteen,
had gone down into a burning pit and
rescued a companion. The present office-
bearers of the Society are as follow: —Pa-
tron, His Excellency the Governor of New
South Wales, Sir Harry H. Rawson, K.C.8.;
Vice-Patron, The Chief Justice, the Hon Sir
Frederick M. Darley, G.C.M.G.; President,
Frederick H. Dangar, Esq.; Trustee, oir
James R. Fairfax; Chairman, J. H. Storey,
Esq.; Vice-Chairman, Walter S. Buzacott,
Esq.; Hon. Treasurer, Captain John Broom-
field ; Hon. Solicitor, W. L. Thompson, Esq.;
Auditor, J. Hunter Stephenson, Esq., M.A.,
F.S.I.A. Committee of Management: Cap-
tain James M. Banks, Captain John Broom-
field, W. S. Buzacott, Esq., Captain James
Edie, Sir James R. Fairfax, James O. Fair-
fax, Esq., J. Russell French, Esq., Captain
S. G. Gre.en, C. H. Hayes, Esq., Captain Hix-
son, R.N., Hon. Alex. Kethel, M.L.C., Com-
mander G. S. Lindemann, R.N., Captain T.
O’Sullivan, A. F. Robinson, Esq., The Acting
Chief Justice, The Hon. M. H. Stephens, J.
H. Storey, Esq.; His Worship the Mayor of
Sydney (ex officio). Secretary: Captain A.
W. Webber; Hon Secretary, Newcastle,
Frank Gardiner, Esq.
The good work performed by the Society
in giving aid to the distressed, and in con-
ferring honour upon those who have risked
their lives for the sake of their fellow crea-
tures, is its best recommendation, and fully
justifies a continuance of that public support
which has been so generously accorded it
in the past.


Sydney Harbour Crust.
The harbour of Port Jackson, famed alike
for its picturesqueness and its utility, is in-
dubitably one of the principal assets of the
State of New South Wales and the Common-
wealth. From the dawn of settlement in
these Southern Seas the port of Sydney, ow-
ing to its many natural advantages, was des-
tined to become the great distributing centre
for Australasia and the islands contiguous.
Although Nature had given to the State such
an inestimable boon in the magnificent sheet
of water capable of accommodating the fleets
of the world, the worth of this valuable pos-
session—obtained without an effort —was un-
appreciated until very recent times, when the
authorities awakened to the fact that the
great maritime gateway, upon the proper
maintenance of which so much of both city
and country prosperity depends, had been too
long neglected. In the early times, when the
amount of shipping was very small compared
with what it is to-day, there was little need
MR. J. F. WALLER, J.P.,
Commissioner.
for any oversight in regard to the Harbour
traffic, but as years went on, and the ton-
nage increased, the best and most central po-
sitions along the foreshores became monopo-
lised and gradually congested. For a long
period a policy of drift seemed to be adonted
by those who should have been most keen to
see the port improved. No one appeared to
realise that the resourcefulness of Sydney
Harbour could be overstrained, or that the
time would ever come when the neglected
foreshore, the silted-up anchorage, and the
dangerous fairway would become realities.
The revolution in ship building, which has
given us the mammoth ocean liner and enor-
mous “tramp,” made its influence felt here,
as It was quickly discovered that to ade-
quately accommodate such vessels and provide
suitable berthing facilities for the interstate
and local traffic, while at the same time en-
hancing the safeguards to navigation, an ex-
tensive scheme of harbour and wharfage im-
provement would require to be inaugurated.
Thus it came about that the much-talked-of
project of a Sydney Harbour Trust became an
accomplished fact early in 1901. That the
Trust was created not one day too soon has
been abundantly shown by the discovery of
numerous abuses, involving great leakages in
MR. R. R. P. HICKSON, J.P.,
President of Commissioners.
the revenue that had been rampant for years,
also that many private persons had, without
either right, or authority of any kind, en-
croached upon the Harbour, and set up
vested privileges that—in the absence of any
competent instrument to expel them—en-
abled them to reap a rich harvest. A casual
consideration of the abuses corrected, and
the number of bogus claims rejected during
the brief term of the Trust’s existence, amply
justifies its creation. The basis of the wharf-
age rates laid down by the Act of 1880 was
Is. Bd. per ton on goods inward, and j.od. per
ton on goods outward at any public or pri-
vate sufferance wharf, and these rates re-
mained in force for more than twenty years,
the trade of the port meanwhile increasing in
MR. H. F. NORRIE, J.P.,
Secretary.
1890 to 1523 vessels inward, of 1,644,589
tons; in 1900 to 1819 vessels inward,
with an aggregate tonnage of 2,716,651 ;
and in 1901 to 1,884 vessels inward,
2,953,511 tons, carrying imports to the value
of £22,208,555, while the exports in the same
year amounted to £18,953,664. A marked
source of loss of revenue to the Government
while this Act remained in operation was that,
while the rates were equalised at the two
classes of wharves, the owners of the private
sufferance wharves granted very large rebates
in order to secure business; and the Govern-
ment were compelled to grant permanent
berths and sheds free of rental to some of the
shipping companies in order to secure busi-
ness for the public wharves. For instance,
at the Circular Quay, several berths, with
shed accommodation, were assigned to certain
shipping companies without payment of rent-
al; while at Woolloomooloo Bav one company
held a fixed berth and large shed accommo-
dation for which they paid an annual rental
of £5, while another company held extensive
wharf and shed accommodation, not only
without payment of rental in return for a
fixed berth, but with this additional advan-
tage, that the Government granted a rebate
of wharfage and tonnage dues in respect of
vessels consigned to the agency of the Com-
pany. Such was the position of affairs which
MR. L. BEATON, J.P,
Commissioner.
faced the Commissioners when they assumed
office, and their earliest efforts were directed
to remedying the state of things which exist-
ed.
One of the greatest changes made by the
Act constituting the Trust was the alteration
of the basis upon which wharfage is charged
so that goods which do not use the wharf,
and are lightered overside, shall be subject to
wharfage. Previous to the resumption of the
private wharves in Darling Harbour the fact
that wharfage was only charged on goods ac-
tually using the public wharves was the
means of losing a large amount of revenue to
the Government, for goods were lightered
overside, vessels berthed at public wharves
and taken away to private wharves without
the State being one penny the richer for the
accommodation afforded to the discharging
vessel, with the exception of the very small
amount of tonnage rates, payable under
the Act after the full lie days were deducted.
One of the most important alterations made
regarding wharfage was the abolition
of the outward rates. As soon as possible
after its inception the Board proceeded to


carry out a scheme for the improvement of
the foreshores of the harbour, also for larger
and better harbour accommodation. Ac-
cordingly, that part of the Harbour
embraced between Potts Point, on the
eastern side of Woolloomooloo Bay, and
Darling Island, on the western side of .Liar-
ling Harbour, was mapped out, and the work
at once put in train. At Woolloomooloo
immense improvements have been effected.
The bed of the Bay has been dredged, new
wharves constructed, and commodious sheds
erected.
At Circular Quay, too, the hub of the har-
bour, vast improvement is discernable. The
accommodation for the great passenger liners
has been greatly enhanced, while the organ-
isation of the Ferry Traffic, a matter that had
long been a “ bugbear” to the authorities, has
been taken in hand with foresight and resolu-
tion. There is no doubt that the area
comprised in the Circular Quay is un-
duly small for the enormous amount of
waterborne traffic which plies upon its sur-
face, and it has often been urged that, in or-
der to secure the absolute safety of the ferry
traffic, all the ocean-going vessels should be
removed and berthed elsewhere. This, how-
ever, is a scheme that, under present condi-
tions was found impracticable, hence the
Trust plotted a system by which the course
of the harbour ferries having their terminus
at the Quay should diverge radially, thus min-
imising, if not entirely obviating, the possi-
bility of accident. The removal of the casual
or picnic traffic to Fort Macquarie, where
suitable provision was made for its accommo-
dation, also eliminated an element of danger
from the waters of the Quay. In order to
give still greater security to the public, the
Commissioners devised a code of regulations,
dealing with the several matters within their
jurisdiction, which are most rigidly adhered
to. It will thus be noticed that the Commis-
sioners have made every rational endeavour
to conserve the safety of both life and pro-
perty, without causing any dislocation of ar-
rangements that might prove detrimental to
the shipping companies or the commercial
community. The revenue derivable from the
various wharves and jetties within Sydney
Cove, after the completion of the various
alterations, will amount to £16,500 per an-
num, an increase of £Boou on what was for-
merly collected. The alterations, which are
of a very extensive character, will give the
Quay a very changed aspect, as the shore end
of the jetties will be surmounted by struc-
tures architecturally handsome, and furnished
with waiting, refreshment and other rooms.
The Trust is now occupied in carrying out
very extensive wharfage improvements in the
bight between Dawe’s and Miller’s Points.
Here the Harbour is being dredged to a
depth of 32 feet at low water, and an immense
wharf, with spacious stores thereon, is being
constructed for Messrs. Dalgety and Com-
pany, Limited, The numerous wharves in Dar-
ling , Harbour, which were resumed by the
Government, are still held in occupation by
the former owners and lessees, in terms of an
agreement with the Government, but in the
interests of the port .it has been considered
necessary to carry out a number of improve-
ments. entailing a very heavy expenditure.
Darling Harbour is the terminus of the vari-
ous interstate and coastal steamers, in addi-
tion to a great number of oversea vessels from
all ports of the world. It is here that the
Railway system forms a junction with the
shipping, and it therefore follows that a por-
tion of the harbour displaying such an
amount of maritime activity would naturally
receive prompt and careful attention at the
hands of the Commissioners. The work of
strengthening and reconstructing many of
the old delapidated wharves, and of dredging
the “ pool,” so as to give the large vessels fre-
quenting this part of the port plenty of water
in which to swing, was taken in hand with
energy, and pushed ahead with all expedition.
Darling Island, which lies on the Western
side of the entrance to Darling Harbour,, is
a very valuable site, the improvements to
which having previously cost the Government
about half a million of money, and the Island
is now being further improved. It will be
readily apparent that to provide interest on
the large amount of capital sunk on the sland,
the utilisation of such a valuable site is a mat-
ter of prime importance. The eastern side of
the Island is wholly occupied during the wheat
season—about four months—in shipping
grain, from which, however, the Trust receive
no financial return.
Arrangements have, however, been made
with the Railway Commissioners that, during
the remaining eight months, the sheds are
handed over to the control of the Trust for the
landing of inward cargo, which returns a re-
venue of 2s. 6d. per ton. Owing to the un-
fortunate failure of the last wheat crop, the
sheds for the current twelve months have been
totally controlled by the Trust, and utilised
principally for Government seed wheat and
food stuffs generally.
The streets and wharves under the control
of the Trust are lighted by electricity gener-
ated at three stations belonging to the Com-
missioners. The Trust is charged with the
sole control of the navigation of Port Jackson
and matters appertaining thereto,, with the
exception of the Harbour Pilots, who are in-
structed to obey the orders of the Harbour
Master, but are controlled by the Department
of Navigation, which Department also collects
and retains the revenue that accrues from the
service. This is considered anomalous from
the fact that the cost of dredging the I'ort
and other expenses of maintenance are borne
by the Trust. It is expected in the near fu-
ture that the Pilot Service will be transferred
to the Trust, as, when the proposed Federal
Navigation Legislation becomes law, tire De-
partment of Navigation will be transferred to
the Federal Government, and all revenue col-
lected through its channels will be Federal
revenue. This would be manifestly unfair, as
far as pilotage revenue is concerned, taking
into consideration the fact that the State,
through the Trust, maintains the Port at a
cost of about £40,000 per annum, from which
expenditure no direct return is at present re-
ceived.
In order to carry out dredging operations
the following plant has been transferred from
the Public Works Department to the Trust:
Ladder Dredges, Sydney and Charon; Tugs,
Dawn, Achilles, Dayspring, Scylla, Aurora
and Octopus; Grab-dredges, Pi and Chi;
Launch, Europa; Rock Excavator, Poseidon.
A powerful fire tug, the Pluvius, equipped
with a pump capable of discharging 2500
gallons of water per minute from six If inch
nozzles, jets to a height of 80 feet, has been
secured to act as a fire float in case of con-
flagration in the harbour. At other times
the Pluvius can be utilised for towing the
dredges of the Trust.
Since the Commissioners entered upon their
work they have given the question of lighting
and buoying the port great consideration, and
a large number of improvements and econo-
mies have been effected. The sanitation of
the Harbour is another matter that has re-
ceived careful attention, and strenuous efforts
have been made to prevent pollution of the
waters from any source. No radical improve-
ment can, however, be effected in this direc-
tion until such time as the Department of
Public Works completes the Low Level Sew-
age Scheme. While the Commissioners
have been charged with a utilitarian
mission, they have not been unmind-
ful of the natural beauties of the port,
and, accordingly, steps have been taken to
preserve these, but, as their jurisdiction does
not extend beyond high water mark, they are
unable to reach the vandals who operate out-
side that limit. The Trust has had a career of
only a little over two years, but the record of
work entered upon and completed within that
period is extremely gratifying, especially when
consideration is given to the multitude of
obstacles that have been thrown in the way
of the Commissioners by persons who should
have assisted them. The Commissioners seem
to have entered upon their work in a thorough-
ly practical and common-sense manner, as they
have, while fully recognising the magnitude of
the task they have been entrusted with, con-
sidered it inadvisable to carry out any great
reconstruction scheme at enormous cost upon
which .interest would not be forthcoming for
years, but they have set themselves to see chat
everything needful will be done in the direc-
tion of providing for the growing require-
ments of the trade of the Port as they arise,
and of remedying insanitary conditions as
they exist.
The Commissioners forming the Trust are
Mr. Robert Rowan Purden Hickson, M. Inst.
C.E., J.P. (President), Mr. Thomas Francis
Waller, J.P., and Mr. Mr. Lachlan rseaton,
J. P. Mr. Harold Francis Norrie, J.P., is
Secretary to the Trust, and Mr. E. W.
Austin Assistant Secretary..
The other principal officers of the Trust
are: Mr. H. D. Walsh, 8.A., 8.A.1., M. Inst.
C.E., Engineer-in-Chief; Captain C. E. Bird,
Harbour Master; Mr. S. E. Perdriau, L.S.,
Chief Surveyor; Mr. J. B. Watson, Treasurer
and Accountant; Captain A. T. Pritchard,
Lieut. R.N.R., Deputy Harbour Master; Cap-
tain C. W. Hay, Assistant Harbour Master;
Messrs. W. E. Adams, P. N. Christie, A. C.
Mackenzie, and E. A. Amphlett, Assistant
Engineers; Mr. H. V. Vernon, Architect;
Mr. T. W. Stephen, Surveyor; Mr. James
Johnston, Paymaster; Mr. W. Hibble, Officer
in charge of Wharfage Branch; and Mr. D.
B. G. Sheridan, Chief Clerk.
A very handsome office in freestone and red
brick is in course of erection at the northern
end of Pitt Street, facing Circular Quay, and
here the members of the Trust and its officers
will find ample accommodation for years to
come.
The revenue collected by the Trust from
the 11th February, 1901, the date of the in-
ception of the Trust, to the 30th April, 1903,
amounted to the sum of £488,481 12s. sd.


Navigation Department.
The commercial and maritime expansion of
New South Wales has of recent years necessi-
tated many changes in regard to the authori-
ties which exercise a directing or administra-
tive control over the agencies which materi-
ally assist in promoting such development.
The old Marine Board of Now South Wales
was for many years closely identified with the
advancement of this State, and, during its
career its officers saw the shipping and mer-
cantile interests perceptibly grow from small
beginnings to vast proportions until the
powers vested in the Board became inadequate
to cope with the great and important issues
that had to be decided. When the real cond'-
tion of affairs was thoroughly grasped by Par-
liament a bill was passed abolishing the Mar-
ine Board at Sydney and Newcastle, and con-
stituting in its place-a Department of Navi-
gation and Courts of Inquiry. The enact-
ment effected some very radical changes on
the old system, and, in conjunction with the
Sydney Harbour Trust Act, was a step in the
right direction, as it effectively removed many
obsolete and harassing restrictions, and at the
same time created a new regime more in con-
sonance with the “ spirit of the age,” and its
administration cannot fail to induce greater
confidence amongst those engaged in mari-
time pursuits, while producing more satisfac-
tory results in all directions.
The Department of Navigation, which is
under the aegis of the Treasury, is controlled
by a Superintendent in Sydney, and by a De-
puty Superintendent at Newcastle. These of-
ficials, although not possessing such absolute
power as the old Marine Board, nevertheless
exert control over a very wide zone, which ne-
cessarily is productive of many matters that
require keen, technical knowledge and ma-
tured judgment in dealing with them. The
jurisdiction of the Department extends over
the whole of the navigable waters of New
South Wales, with the exception of Port Jack-
son, which is under the immediate supervision
of the newly-created Sydney Harbour Trust.
The whole coastline of the State—including
indentations measuring considerably over
1000 miles, with nearly a score of lighthouses,
and numerous beacons, buoys and other ad-
juncts to safe navigation, have all to be care-
fully tended and supervised. Pilotage, and
the control of the pilots at the various ports
is another matter that makes a call upon the
energies of the Department, while the grant-
ing and issue of certificates of classification
forms a very important part of the depart-
mental work.
A prominent feature of the Act constitut-
mg the Department is the provision made for
the District Court to Act as a Court of Mar-
me Inquiry to hear and determine matters.
One or more of the District Court Judges sits
as a Court, and is assisted by two assessors,
who have power to advise but not to adjudi-
cate on any matters before the Court. This
provision is o decided innovation, but it is one
that is working well, a fact which alone justi-
fies its permanence. In many respects the of-
ficers of the Department are charged with
weighty and responsible duties. The proper
inspection, surveying and supervision of ships
arriving and departing from the different
CAPTAIN J. EDIE,
Superintendent of the Navigation Department.
ports, particularly those of Sydney and New-
castle, are matters of exceedingly great im-
portance, involving the security of both life
and property. The efficient performance of
such work forms one of the chief functions of
MR. NORMAN C. LOCKHART,
Secretary to the Department.
the Department, which, under the very cap-
able direction of the chief executive officers at
Sydney and Newcastle, has already achieved
for itself the enconiums of those who are best
able to form an accurate opinion on the value
of the work accomplished.
Captain James Edie, the Superintendent of
the Navigation Department, is a bluff, hearty
Scot, with a splendid record of maritime ac-
hievements. At an early age he took to the
sea, and very soon afterwards found himself
at New Zealand, on whose stormy coasts he
spent some years working out his destiny.
When the Union Steam Navigation Company,
one of the strongest shipping Companies
south of the line, was inaugurated, Captain
Edie was offered a highly responsible position
with it. He closed with the offer, and subse-
quently commanded many of the Union Com-
pany’s steamers, trading to Tasmania, Mel-
bourne and Sydney. The last vessel belong-
ing to that Company’s fleet that he com-
manded was the “ Mararoa,” which was char-
tered to run in the San Francisco mail ser-
vice, from Sydney to Auckland. In 1890
Captain Edie settled in Sydney, where he was
appointed to the position of shipping master,
a post he retained until the Government, re-
cognising his undoubted competency for the
office, placed him at the head of the naviga-
tion Department.
Captain Henry Newton, the Deputy Super-
intendent who is stationed at Newcastle, is a
man who has shown himself to be possessed
of every qualification for the position he
holds. His experience and judgment in ship-
ping matters have had abundant exercise,
and those who are brought into business re-
lationship with him have every reason to re-
pose the utmost confidence in his administra-
tion. Captain Newton, who hails from Liv-
erpool (England), is a man in the prime of
life. He has had a long acquaintance with
the port of Newcastle, having graduated in
the pilot service there. Prior to accepting
his present office he occupied the position of
Harbour Master at Newcastle, the duties of
which were in many respects analagous to
those he is now called upon to perform.
The Secretary to the Navigation Depart-
ment, Mr. Norman C. Lockhart, is a Solicitor
of the Supreme Court of the State, and before
entering the Public Service was for some
years Managing Solicitor for a large firm in
this City. He was a successful candidate in
a legal competitive examination held under
the provisions of the Public Service Act, and
was appointed to assist the Commissioners of
Taxation in the legal work of the Department
when the Taxation Acts came into force. .
When the Marine Board was abolished, and
the Navigation Department constituted, he
was appointed Secretary. His legal training
was availed of in this connection, as the
Courts of Marine Inquiry, established under
the Navigation Act, had to be set going, and
there arose many complicated questions of
law in connection with the interpretation and
administration of the new Act. He also
acted as Secretary to the conference recently
held in Sydney for the purpose of drafting a
bill relating to Shipping and Navigation for
the Commonwealth, and his services were
highly appreciated by the members of the
Conference, who placed on record their ac-
knowledgments to him.


The Cable Service.
Of all the agencies that have been pressed
into the service of mankind during the past
half century, it would indeed be difficult to
discover one that has exercised a greater in-
fluence or exerted a more beneficent sway
over the industrial, commercial, social and
political development of the nations of the
earth, that the system of Ocean Telegraphy
carried on through the medium of the Sub-
marine Cable. The advantages which have
accrued to Great Britain and her numerous
co-dominions beyond the seas, since they be-
came linked together by cable, have been in-
calculable, and it is no exaggeration of terms
to say that the credit fo rthis extremely grat-
ifying consummation is in the main due to
the acumen, enterprise and dogged persist-
ency of those far-seeing men who controlled
th destinies of the pioneer cable companies.
The first attempt to give to submarine tel-
egraphy a practical application was made
about the middle of 1850, when a cable was
laid between Dover on the English and Calais
on the French coast, a distance of something
under 25 miles. It was, however, not until
the end of the following jear that the first
message crossed the Channel. Since that
time there has been an amazing development
in submarine telegraphy, as is attested by the
fact that, at the present time, there are nearly
a quarter of a million miles of cable laid
along the “ great, grey, level plains of Oooze,”
costing approximately about £50,000,000.
The lines ramify in all directions to every
important point on the habitable glooe, and
form what might most appropriately be
termed the nervous system of the Empire, as
it is through their wonderful agency that the
most distant outposts of that Realm, “ whose
morning drum beat circles the Earth,” are
brought in simultaneous accord with its pow-
erful centre.
In 1852 and 1853 cables were laid from
England to Ireland, France, Belgium and
Holland, and worked so successfully that a
very few years afterwards, in ioufi, a scheme
for linking the two chief centres of Anglo-
Saxon enterprise and energy—Britain and
America—Ntogether by means of the sub-
marine wire, was projected. The moving
spirits in this great undertaking were Mr.
Cyrus W. Field, an American millionaire,
and Mr. John Pender, a successful Manches-
ter merchant. The sanguine enthusiasm of
. the promoters of this daring project was such
that a company with a strong financial back-
ing was quickly formed to work it, and the
first Trans-Atlantic cable was laid between
Ireland and Newfoundland in 1857.
About 1869, after India had been brought
into efficient cable communication with Lon-
don, a scheme was advanced to carry the ser-
vice further East, and a company was formed
to lay a cable from Singapore to Batavia, on
the north-western end of the Island of Java,
which place was connected by a land line with
Banjoemangie, on the south-eastern coast of
the island, and from there a cable was to
stretch to Port Darwin, in the Northern Ter-
ritory of Australia. This work was brought
to a gratifying completion towards the end of
1871, and within the subsequent couple of
years the companies owning the three Trans-
Indian sections of the cable system were
merged into the Eastern Extension Austral-
asia and China Telegraph Company, with a
capital approximating just on £2,000,000. In
1880 the Company completed the laying of a
duplicate line between Penang, in the Indo-
Chinese Peninsula, and Port Darwin, at a cost
of £537,209. This duplicated cable gave Aus-
tralia a practical immunity from interruption
of communication, and greatly facilitated the
despatch of business.
In order to further improve the means of
rapid and safe intelligence between Australia
and the old world, the Company laid a new
cable between Java and the town of Broome,
on Roebuck Bay, in West Australia, at an ex-
penditure of £120,000. This line gives the
States of the Commonwealth three distinct
routes of communication with Java, and at
the same time brings the land lines of tele-
graph in Western Australia into use as an
alternative system to the overland line from
Port Darwin to Adelaide.
The foregoing, however, does not represent
the whole of the means by which the Com-
pany has exerted itself to place this isolated
continent in speedy communication with the
other great divisions of the globe, for in 1901
it opened an alternative route to Britain and
America via the Cape (South Africa). This
new cable starts from Glenelg (Adelaide), and,
stretching across the Great Australian Bight,
makes a detour to Fremantle (West Aus-
tralia), thence it strikes away in a north-
westerly direction to the Cocos or Keeling Is-
lands in mid-Indian Ocean. From here it
makes a south-westerly projection to Mauri-
tius, where it bifurcates in two nearly opposite
the Seychelles Islands, and then west to Zan-
directions, one line going almost due north to
zibar, thence on to Aden, while the other line
takes a south-westerly sweep to Durban (S.A.),
thence to Capetown, the West Coast of Africa,
and then on to London.
This line from Australia to South Africa is
about 7600 miles in length, and cost
£1,750,000. In places it rests at a depth of
3400 fathoms (20,400 feet) beneath the sur-
face of the ocean. The Cape-Australian cable,
as it is called, has a total length of 15,000
miles, and its entire construction necessitated
the expenditure of £3,150,000, an array of
figures which convey some idea of the character
of the work.
In 1876 the Company entered into a con-
tract with the Governments of New South
Wales and New Zealand to lay a cable between
the two countries, which were separated by
1200 miles of waterway, the New South Wales
end of the wire being landed at La Perouse,
on Botany Bay, and the New Zealand end at
Cable Bay, Nelson. In 1890 this line was
duplicated with a view to increasing the reli-
ability of the service, and providing for an
augmentation of business, which has since
shown a gratifying result. The old cable sta-
tion at La Perouse has done duty for a great
many years, and its substantial proportions is
well known to the great number of people who
now frequent this historical spot. Recently
the Company has erected larger offices and
quarters for its staff on the north side of
Botany Bay.
At the beginning of 1902 New South Wales
was brought into direct cable communication
with Great Britain via Canada, through the
medium of the “ all-British” line of submarine
telepgraphy, which was laid across the bed of
the wide Pacific Ocean from Southport, near
the southern extremity of the Queensland
coast, to Vancouver, in British Columbia,
Canada. This line had been talked of for
many a day, but it w’as only a couple of years
ago that the project materialised. The dist-
ance traversed is just on 7000 miles, and the
cost of the undertaking amounted to nearly
£2,000,000. The laying of this cable was the
biggest work of the kind ever taken in hand,
and completed, as will be appreciated when
one considers the immense stretches of wire
that are laid unterruptedly across the ocean
bed. The great depth of the Pacific Ocean is
a matter that rendered the consummation of
this gigantic enterprise all the more remark-
able. Setting out from Southport at the Aus-
tralian end, the cable sweeps across to Norfolk
Island, a distance of 600 miles. Here it bifur-
cates, a branch line connecting New Zealand,
500 miles distant. The main cable leaving
Norfolk Island, is laid for 1000 miles in a
north-easterly direction, where it touches at
Suva, in Fiji. From this point it continues its
north-west trend for a distance of 1700 miles.
Then it arrives at Fanning Island, one of a
group of small rocky islets belonging to Bri-
tain, in Mid-Pacific. Leaving this isolated
possession, it takes a mighty plunge, and after
traversing another 3500 miles, impinges on
the western coast of Canada. From here, land
lines convey the messages across the Rocky
Mountains and the vast prairies and settled
districts of the Great Dominion—“ Our Lady
of the Snows.”
Arrived at the Atlantic seaboard, the message
is conveyed to its European destination by one
of the great Trans-Atlantic lines of cable that
connect with the British Isles. In its dive
across the Pacific, the cable crosses what is
known as the Tuscorora Deep, where the
plummet of the United States hydrographers
sounded 16,500 feet before bottom was found.
Near Fanning Island it rests upon the bed of
the Belknap Deep, where the soundings aver-
aged 17,500 feet. Between Fanning Island
and Fiji tfie cable lies along the edge of what
is known as Miller’s Deep, where the surveyor’s
lead had great difficulty to find the ooze, at a
depth of 20,000 feet, and which locality is re-
garded as one of the deepest depressions of the
Pacific. This enormous length of cable was
laid by the Telegraph Construction and Main-
tenance Company for the Imperial, various
Australian, the Canadian, and the New Zea-
land Governments, which subsidise the line,
and the work was carried out without a hitch
in wonderfully quick time.
A perusal of the foregoing sketch of cable
enterprise as it affects this part of the world
will show that the insular isolation of Aus-
tralia has, by the application of science in
combination with capital and energy,, been
successfully bridged, and the people of this
continent been brought within earshot of the
busy centres of the other great land divisions
of the globe.


The Importing
Trade.


Importing and Distributing Trade
of “"
u\. New South Wales. x '
(From 1788 to 1902).
Its Past, Present and Future.
A Century of
'P Development.
A Record of
Wonderful Progress.
CHE history of the import trade of New
South Wales emphatically shows that
commerce has played a transcend-
entally important part in the colonization and
civilization of our island continent. When
the first colonists landed on the
shores of Port Jackson they found a land
rich in great potentialities, but poor in imme-
diate products. From the aboriginal inhabi-
tants nothing was obtainable by barter except
the fruits of their fisheries and the chase, and
the natural products of the soil were such as to
provide little palatable food even to those who
had completed a weary journey of nine months
duration over 4,000 leagues of salt water.
Practically the lives of all in the new settle-
ment were dependent on what was brought by
ship, and this state of affairs continued for
years. Ultimately crops were reaped and
cattle were reared, but for a very extended
period a large number of the necessaries and
all the luxuries of the colonists were derived
from abroad. It is no wonder, therefore, that
importing as a business became very lucrative,
as well as necessary, and that the firms who, by
their business relationships, bridged the gulf
that yawned between the old world and the
new one in the South were held in high estima-
tion by those who, without their operations,
would have suffered many privations.
Adam Smith, in his “ Wealth of Nations,”
has a passage which fitly describes the past,
present and future of Sydney, so far as its
opportunities for importations are concerned.
The great Scottish political economist re-
marks : —“ The inhabitants of a City, it is true,
must always ultimately derive their
subsistence, and the whole material
and means of their industry, from
the country. But those of a City, situ-
ated near either the sea-coast or the banks of
a navigable river are not necessarily confined
to derive them from the country in the neigh-
bourhood. They have a much wider range,
and may draw them from the most remote cor-
ners of the world, either in exchange for the
manufactured produce of their industry, or by
performing the offices of carriers between dis-
tant countries, and exchanging the produce of
one for that of the other. Each of these
countries, perhaps, taken singly, can afford
but a small part either of its subsistence or its
employment; but all of them taken together
could afford both a great subsistence and a
great employment.” It will not be contested
that Nature has emphatically marked Sydney
out as one of the great entrepots of the world’s
commerce; and those of its inhabitants who
are engaged in the vast business of importa-
tion undoubtedly obtain a great subsistence
in their great employment.
IMPORT TRADE OF THE PAST.
It seems strange, although it is undoubtedly
true, that in the early years of the
colony, the chief import, next to food
products, consisted of ardent spirits.
While the struggling settlement was often on
the brink of starvation, rum was to be had in
plenty by those who were in a position to bar-
ter their labour for it. Acting on the advice
of Governor Phillip, the British Government
allowed wine, spirits and tobacco to be ob-
tained at cost price by those officers of the New
South Wales Corps who might wish to buy
them for their own consumption. This privi-
lege was so grievously abused that a public
scandal, which gave rise locally to serious pol-
itical complications was created, while many
men who would riot work for wages would work
for rum; the desire to become oblivious of the
misery of their servile condition being the
main cause of this preference.
About the year 1800 the colony’s liquor bill
seemed to he the largest subject which the
government dealt with. In a letter of instruc-
tions given by Governor King to one of the
leading officers the latter is ordered not to de-
mand or sue for more than 20s. per gallon for
spirituous liquors, 20s. per lb. for tea, and a
moderate advance on such bale goods as he
might be possessed of. The Governor com-
plains to the Duke of Portland that their trad-
ing officers charged 400 or 500 and often 1000
per cent, on the prices paid to masters of ships
and that the settlers mortgaged their produce
and farms to these officials to keep themselves
supplied with drink. With regard to the sub-
ject of freight in 1800 an agreement fixes the
rate of £8 per ton for stores and provisions
which might be put on board over and above
the nuantity necessary for the convicts on the
passage and for their subsistence nine months
afterwards.
Ip the Sydney Shipping Lists for the first
quarter of 1810 arrivals of wheat, rice, sugar,
tea and general merchandise are reported from
Calcutta. Large quantities of whale oil and
sealskins, the result of cruises in the Southern
Pacific, also came on to Sydney, which was
then the centre of the whaling industry on this
side of the equator. The following import list,
dated-Ist February, 1797, of goods sent per
Lady Shore, transport, shows the necessities
of the new colony in that early stage of its
producing existence:—
500 sickles.
500 scythe blades.
500 axes, heads, fit for clearing ground.
500 pickaxes, heads, for do. do.
500 spades, for digging, without handles.
2 tons of rod iron (for rails).
Bar iron of different sizes.
| ton of plate iron.
\ ton of steel.
PROGRESS AND DEPRESSION.
Trade in course of time began to seek more
normal channels, and the bills of trading con-
tained other items than those relating to “fine
old Jamaica.” In 1839 the value of imports
of New South Wales was as follows—From
Great Britain, £1,251,969; New Zealand,
£71,709; Other Countries, £504,828; South
Sea Islands, £3,863; Fisheries, £186,212;
United States, £23,093; other foreign Coun-
tries, £194,697; total, £2,236,371. It should
be remembered, however, that all the territory
of Victoria and Queensland was included in
the Colony of New South Wales, and that the
total population of this vast area was then only
a little over 114,000. The vessels inwards at
the port of Sydney for the year numbered 563,
with a total of 135,474 tons. The year 1843
will be memorable in the commercial history
of New South Wales. After a period of high
speculation the inevitable financial crash took
place in that year, and the import trade suf-
fered heavily in common with all other
branches of business. The Bank of
Australia went to the wall, and the
Government was forced to issue rations to the
starving people under cost price. What will
chiefly strike the student of history of these
days was the smallness of the ships in which
the import trade of that time was carried on.
In the Shipping papers of that era vessels of
a little over 100 tons are found as traders
between Sydney and London. A hundred
days was then considered a quick passage. 110
days a fair one, and vessels over that time wore
regarded as having made long passages. The
value of annual imports at the port of Sydney,
taking an average of the five years 1836-1840,
was £1,712,000.
THE GOLD FEVER.
The discovery of gold was another memor-
able event in the import trade of Australia.
The finds at Lewis Ponds and Summerhill
Creeks, and consequent rushes to the fields,


temporarily disorganised the prevailing prices
of the necessaries and luxuries of life. Wheat
rose between 1850 and 1855 from 4s. to 16s. sd.
per bushel, potatoes from 7s. to 21s. per cwt.,
beer from 2s. 9d. to 4s. 6d. per gallon, and tea
from Is. lOd. to 2s. sd. per lb. The “ gold
fever” induced crews to desert their ships
wholesale, and the rise in freights caused by
the existence of that state of affairs, made the
miner’s lot on the goldfields none too rosy, and
his hard-won earnings a rapidly vanishing
quantity. In 1850 the imports of all Aus-
tralasia aggregated £3,889,480; in 1860, they
had amounted to no less than £27,781,448;
the great discoveries in Victoria having stimu-
lated the import trade of that Colony to an
enormous extent.
DECENNIAL RETURNS.
A decennial return of imports into New
South Wales (practically into the port of Syd-
ney) shows the following figures —For
the year 1861, a value of £6,604,069; 1871,
£9,935,067; 1881, £17,587,012; 1891,
£25,383,397 ; 1901, £26,928,218. The value
of imports for home consumption in the latter
year was £19,492,978 and £7,435,240, the
value of goods for re-exportation. This was
out of a total value of imports for the Com-
monwealth of £68,129,455 in that year. These
figures demonstrate in a very marked form the
magnificent position that is held by Sydney,
not only as a destination for the commerce of
the northern hemisphere, but for the products
of the South Sea Islands and those countries
in the East whose importance to the commer-
cial world is increasing by leaps and bounds.
LOCAL AND ISLAND TRADE.
We have shown above that, of the total value
of imports into Australia the Mother State is
responsible for more than one-third. Impor-
tation naturally divides itself into two great
heads—home consumption and re-export. It
says much for the spending power of the people
of New South Wales that they consume two-
thirds of the value of goods which were sent to
their ports. It also says very much for the
energy and enterprise of her business men that
the remaining third for re-export represents so
large a sum. The splendid facilities possessed
by Sydney for the conduct of a large shipping
business has tended greatly to the develop-
ment of its large and increasing re-export
trade. It pays shippers to send large parcels
of goods in the modern leviathans that can find
safe anchorage and every working facility in
what has always been and continues
to be the first port of Australasia.
The goods landed here can be forwarded
as convenience directs by coasting steamers to
the smaller harbours whose bars forbid the en-
trance of even moderately-sized deep-sea
steamers. It is not to be expected that the
big cargo-carriers, which require a great
draught of water, will ever be found crossing
the many bar harbours that stud the coast of
New South Wales, or braving the dangers of
coral reefs in many-isled Polynesia. Mari-
time risks must be run, but there is no need in
undertaking the greater one where a lesser
one will serve all practical purposes. Accor-
dingly, with the development of the outlying
districts of New South Wales, the South Sea
Island, and other territories within easy reach
°f Australia, will be found a corresponding
increase in the importance of the re-export
trade of Sydney. With the addition of an-
other great cable to the list of those pre-
viously existing, the tendency of traders will
be to send their orders to a great commercial
clearing-house, where they can, perhaps, be
better understood and filled than even at the
port of origin of the goods required by them.
CHANGED METHODS.
Let it be further noted that a great change
has of recent years come over Australian
trade. Time was when enormous stocks were
required to be held by wholesale dealers; for
the very good reason that, at all seasons, ship-
ping facilities were not open to them. Now-
adays steam and electricity have so revolution-
ised commerce that it is no longer necessary
to do business after ancient methods, or even
after the modes of fifty vears ago. By the ex-
penditure of a few pounds per annum on cable
MR. NICHOLAS C. LOCKYER,
State Collector of Customs.
messages the large importer here can now
greatly reduce his warehouse room, and the
small one can communicate with the manufac-
turer in a manner that would have been abso-
lutely impossible not many years ago. Not-
withstanding these facilities the magnificent
warehouses that are to be found in George
and Pitt Streets, and the vast and solid temples
of Commerce in York, Clarence, Sussex and
other streets approaching the water-front,
show that all the branches of our great busi-
ness of importation from oversea cannot be
conducted in an eight by eight office, furnished
with a table, a chair and a cable code. In bus-
iness the law of gravitation is as operative as
it is in the physical world, and everything else
being equal, the retail buyer is attracted by a
roomy and well-appointed warehouse to give
his orders to the owners thereof. If he can-
not efficiently deal direct with the manufac-
turers he fully understands the advantages
that attach to the good opinion of
the heads of a solid and prosperous firm
who can recognise merit in those who do busi-
ness with them and who may be able, out of
business considerations, to perform a good of-
fice for him when such is imperatively re-
quired. In the softgoods business the exist-
ence of not a few large firms of wholesalers
shows that many small buyers in the country
do not yet see the necessity of purchasing their
experience as direct importers too dearly. To
inspect your goods before buying them—to
refrain from buying your pigs in a poke—is an
advantage denied to the indentor, who, where
dealing with even the best firms oversea, is
subject to the vagaries of export-room em-
ployees, who do not always succeed in filling
his orders to his liking.
NEW COMPETITORS.
One notable feature of Sydney importation
that has arisen in recent years is the appear-
ance on the local scene of business houses that
formerly made the other great cities of Aus-
tralasia their main fields of operation. The
scale of magnitude on which their Sydney
houses have been designed suggests the idea
that, notwithstanding the event of Federation,
the capital of New South Wales is intended to
ultimately be the head-quarters in Australia
of these gigantic concerns. Another feature
which cannot be overlooked is the increasing
tendency of the large business houses of Ger-
France, Austria, Hungary, Holland,
and Belgium to secure a share of the large
trade obtainable here. At first these firms
were content to establish agencies on a modest
scale, but as they found their operations profit-
able, their business premises were increased
accordingly, until now, firms from the Euro-
pean Continent rival in their business appoint-
ments the firms that had their origin in Great
Britain and appeared at one time to have a
monopoly in their special article of merchan-
dise. The probability, indeed, is that other
European nations will at no distant date estab-
lish linos of steamers for the protection of their
trade. For instance, a commercial agent of
Austro-Hungary was recently in Sydney, and
made no secret of the fact that the establish-
ment by the Government of that Empire of a
line of steamers to promote trade between bis
country and Australia was not a remote con-
tingency. The success of the German Empire
in that direction has evidently stimulated
similar action on the part of other nations.
These new developments will have the effect of
increasing the import trade of Sydney, and of
giving the public here a choice of goods which
would otherwise be beyond their reach. A
similar feature is observable in connection
with the running of the Japanese mail stea-
mers to Sydney. A number of traders from
the land of the Mikado have recently opened
business here, and that such commerce has
more than one side is demonstrated by the
large cargoes of local produce taken away for
manufacture in Japan.
THE COMMERCIAL ELEMENT.
It is difficult to state with precision the pro-
portion which the commercial element in New
South Wales bears to the general population.
Coghlan, in his latest issue of “ The Wealth
and Progress of New South Wales,” gives the
following particulars relative to tha-occupa-
tions of the people throughout the State; —
Professional ... ... 38,065
Domestic ... ... ... 68,825
Commercial ... ... ... 103,185
Industrial ... ... ... 167,890
Agricultural, pastoral, minerals
and other primary producers 175,330
Indefinite ... ... ... 12,745
Dependents ... ... ... 798,550


Imports
V
alue
1901.
Per
Head.
Now South Wales
26,928,218
£19
12
6
Victoria
18,927,340
15
14
8
Queensland
6,376,239
12
12
10
S. Australia
7,478,288
20
11
11
West Australia
6,454,171
34
8
4
Tasmania
1,965,199
11
6
5
That statement would give those connected
with commercial pursuits a proportion of
about one-fifth of the total. In the metropo-
litan district, of course, this proportion of
people, either directly or indirectly dependent
upon the importing business for a livelihood,
is increased materially. In this calculation the
word “ indirectly” must be liberally construed,
for the wharf-lumper who receives the goods
at the ships’ slings, the carter who causes them
to be conveyed to the store, and the porter who
delivers them at their ultimate destination, are
as immediately concerned with the business as
the landlords who derive their revenue from
the importers and their clerks, or the butchers
and grocers who supply their daily require-
ments.
THE RAMIFICATIONS OF IMPORTA-
TION.
When the goods are released from the
ship’s slings they have to be loaded, carted,
and warehoused. Owing to the drought the
item of fodder has recently been a very serious
one to importers whether they keep their own
horses or hire vanmen to perform their work.
The goods have then to be unpacked, com-
pared with invoices, ticketed and cared for
until required by the retailer. An army of
travellers has to be maintained to carry on the
trade campaign in the country. These “ am-
bassadors of commerce” have to be carried,
lodged, fed and salaried, and when they go be-
yond railway lines large sums have to be paid
for the carriage of their samples and baggage.
When the travellers’ orders arrive the execu-
tion thereof gives employment to warehouse-
men, clerks, type-writers, ledger-keepers, finan-
cial managers, and bank employers, besides
the large number of men in the railway ser-
vice concerned with the transport and handl-
ing of the goods. The business frequently de-
mands the services of telegraph operators,
both for local and cable work. What importa-
tion means is further illustrated by the enor-
mous mass of correspondence that finds its way
over the sea every mail day, thus feeding the
revenues of the Post Office. Large amounts of
passage money are annually paid, notwith-
standing the existence of a reticulation of
submarine cables, for principals or confidential
agents bound for purposes of observation to
the principal markets of the world. The train
service is largely used in the initial stages of
the distributing business. When the goods get
into the possession of the retailers additional
activities are created until they embrace, like
the links of a chain letter, almost every mem-
ber of the community.
IMPORTS PER CAPITA.
The average value of imports into New
South Wales for 1901 was £l9 12s. 6d. per
inhabitant. Commenting on this, Mr. Cogh-
lan, the Government Statistician of New
South Wales, states;—“There were years in
which higher value than this was shown, but if
the great fall in the prices of the staple pro-
ducts of the country be taken into considera-
tion, it will be found that both the quantity of
goods imported and the quantity exported are
greater now than at any former period.” The
returns show that New South Wales imported
food and drink for its own consumption to the
value of £3,390,496, or at the rate of £2 10s.
Id. for each inhabitant, and manufactured
goods to the value of £9,694,218, or at the rate
of £7 3s. 2d. per head of population. Iron and
steel, machinery and hardware combined re-
presented £1 Is. Id. per head of population,
wheat and flour Is.' Id., intoxicants 11s. 3d.
(of which the value of spirits was 6s. Bd., of
beer 3s. 7d., and of wine Is.), sugar Bs. 7d.,
tea ss. 7d., paper, books, etc., 6s. 9d., boots and
shoes 6s. 4d.
The position which new South Wales occu-
pies as an importing country in comparison
with other States of the Commonwealth will
be seen by a reference to the following state-
ment :
From the above it will be seen that New
South Wales imports more per inhabitant
than any of the Australasian States except
West Australia and South Australia. The
reason of the exceptional position of the two
latter States is the abnormal importation of
mining machinery, railway material and plant,
in addition to articles of food and drink for
consumption on the gold-fields of the West and
the silver-lead fields of Broken Hill. Much of
the importation in South Australia is really
due to the Barrier Mines, and should be credi-
ted to New South Wales. Many arguments
might be advanced, but the importer can but
deduce one fact from them, viz., the great pur-
chasing power of the Mother State of Austral-
asia.
The strong position held by New South
Wales in this regard will show to those in
other parts of the world, on the outlook for
markets, that she is well worthy of their atten-
tion. The uncertainties that preceded the
framing of a Federal Tariff have been dispel-
led—for how long no one can say —but at all
events the foreign exporter can for a time see
daylight before him, and regulate his action
accordingly. A comparison between Austra-
lian imports and those for other parts of the
world will show that in no other country of
the globe is the rate of import per inhabitant
greater than here. The value of imports per
inhabitant for the United Kingdom slightly
exceeds £l3 18s., France £4 175., Germany £4
125., Austria-Hungary £1 95., the United
States £2 45., Canada imports at the rate of
£6 16s. per head, while India, with its swarm-
ing millions of poorly-paid people, can only
afford importations at the rate of over 4s. per
head. No other land in the world, therefore,
offers better chances to the importer than the
one of which Sydney is the chief port, and not-
withstanding the vicissitudes of Australian
seasons, the ability of the people to buy what
they require is not likely to be seriously
affected by the results of an entirely abnormal
year. Bad seasons have come and gone before,
and years of fatness have returned, and the
marvellous recuperative power of New South
Wales is a factor which has been so often and
so signally demonstrated in the course of her
past history that it were unwise to doubt its
appearance in the near future.
WHAT IS BEFORE US.
Having now dealt with the past and present
of the import trade, we naturally come to its
future. Of events still before us it is impos-
sible to dogmatise, inasmuch as we know not
what a day may bring forth. Like the mate-
rial world, the world of commerce has its
changes, its decays, its resurrections, and its
regenerations. The ravages of aridity are not
wholly unfamiliar to the people of Australia,
but never has so prolonged and severe a
drought as that which afflicted the larger part
of New South Wales in 1901 and 1902, been
experienced since the date of its settlement by
Europeans. One of the groat lessons taught
by the drought undoubtedly is that this coun-
try cannot be so self-contained as it once was
thought to be by many enthusiasts. This land
cannot place itself beyond the pale of its neces-
sities, and to starve on behalf of the most
derr'y held economic principle would be the
height of madness. Why should people be
pinched in a time of general drought when a
simple acknowledgment of their necessities,
accompanied by consequent action, should suf-
fice to tide them over their immediate difficul-
ties. Even at times of such distress as the
year 1902 witnessed, some products can be ex-
changed for those articles that are most needed
here. The importer is now a not less useful
member of society than he was when good sea-
sons and fruitfulness were the chief character-
istics of this State.
THE OUTLOOK.
Foodstuffs have been and are being largely
imported, and considerable imports thereof
will be necessary for some time to come. The
decrease in the earnings of many sections of
the labouring classes will call for clothing to
suit the times and of small luxuries to take the
place of more costly ones. Tea, the universal
beverage of Australia, is not likely to bo dis-
placed from its present position, and the large
importations of the commodity are likely to
continue in the same proportion to population
as of yore. The fairer portion of creation can-
not—or, what is to the same purpose, will not
•—dispense with the millinery and haber-
dashery that it has been accustomed to. France
and other centres that minister specially to
feminine requirements will still be drawn upon
for articles necessary for costuming the'ladies.
Supplies necessary for railway and tramway
work must in the near future bo mainly sup-
plied from oversea sources, for the Common-
wealth cannot yet compete with the United
States, Germany and Britain in mechanical
and electrical equipment. In hardware lines,
generally, imports will be necessary for some
time to come. Though tobacco grows well in
New South Wales, special brands of imported
cigars will be sought here for an unlimited
period, and the fame of the United States in
ordinary smoking brands is a factor in favour
of the importer who ministers to the votaries
of the weed. Such specialises as earthen and
glass ware, which require intricate and elabo-
rate systems of manufacture, must be brought
into this country for many a day to come. Al-
though the local distiller finds it easy enough
to manufacture spirits suitable for the taste
and purse of certain of the community, the
other portions still demand their favourite
beverage of “ Scotch,” or “ Irish,” or
“ Geneva,” as the case may be. Similar re-
marks apply to oilmen’s stores, for which the
prevailing scarcity of choice local food has re-
cently stimulated a considerable demand.
Books and stationery from outside will be in


request here for an extended period, for New
South Wales people require some other litera-
ture in addition to the local production, and
our paper mills cannot yet compete with the
well-equipped establishments on the other
side of the line, with the wealth of American
and European pine forests at their backs.
Jewellery is a line that specially appeals to
the importer, for our stock of native gems is
small, and the jewellery workshops of the
world are not to be found in the cities of Aus-
tralasia. In paints, oils, drugs, chemicals, jute
manufactures and fancy goods, the importer
will stand on a firm basis for a considerable
period; for even in the raw materials of these
articles, New South Wales is, to all intents and
purposes, lacking. In saying this much we do
not seek to depreciate the natural resources of
this State; but everyone will admit that the
work which took other countries centuries to
accomplish cannot be done here in a day.
THE WORLD AS A SUPPLIER.
In regarding our probable sources of supply
from oversea in the near future, we must, at
the threshold, eliminate national prejudice.
We do not say that nationality should not to
some extent guide our business transactions
wherever possible. But practical men will
readily admit that the man who, in the pre-
sent state of the world’s commerce, acts solely
or mainly on national preferences will cer-
tainly go to the wall. Almost every nation has
its acknowledged speciality, and it is the inte-
rest —one might say the duty —of the im-
porter, to do his utmost for his customers in
the world’s markets. Even if he were desirous
of doing otherwise, the demand to have the
best article at the lowest possible price is so
incessant in business affairs that the man who
desires to do the best for himself and those
dependent on him cannot ignore it. Every
part of the globe is now so closely united by
steamship or telegraphic communication that
the importer of New South Wales has the
world before him as the commercial oyster for
him to open.
The recent laying of the Pacific cable brings
him into closer touch than before with the
United States, Canada, South America,
Hawaii and Polynesia generally. There can
be no doubt that in the near future the exten-
sion of that cable’s radius will bring the Far
East nearer Australasia than it has hitherto
been. Reference has already been made to the
probable establishment of lines of steamers by
European nations that have not heretofore
competed in a direct fashion for the import
trade of this State. China and Japan are
rapidly becoming our nexLdoor neighbours,
and are not likely to be overlooked by those
in search of the novelties of Cathay and the
Further Isles. The matter of the Federal
Tariff in connection with the operations of im-
porters need not be touched upon further than
to say that the Commonwealth requires money,
and cannot afford to absolutely kill the busi-
ness bird that lays the revenue eggs. Theories
°f all kinds have a habit of accommodating
themselves to stern realities. The significant
views of Edmund Burke, promulgated in Bri-
tain in 1780, on this subject, are well worthy
of calm consideration in this land to-day:
Commerce flourishes most when it is left to
itself. Interest, the great guide of Commerce,
js not a blind one. It is very well able to find
its own way: and its necessities arc its best
laws.”
Some Leading Lines.
THE SOFTGOODS TRADE.
The item of softgoods has- always bulked
largely in the import trade of New South
Wales. The people of this country have ever
evidenced a determination to be properly
dressed as well as well lodged and well fed.
Visitors from other parts of the world, hearing
the cry of bad times arising periodically, have
expressed their astonishment at the number of
well-dressed people to be seen in the streets
of Sydney on gala days, none but the lowest
stratum of local society indulging in the pic-
turesqueness of rags.
The softgoods trade is responsible for about
one-sixth of the value of the total imports of
this State. The figures speak so eloquently
of the importance of this particular trade to
New South Wales that they need no elabora-
tion. The importations may be broadly
divided into two heads: those that come from
within the Commonwealth, and those that
arrive from oversea. Of the former a consider-
MR. J. BAXTER,
Chief Inspector, Customs Department.
able quantity of cheaply made goods come
from Victoria, especially certain lines of tweeds
and slop-made clothing. Of recent years,
however, Sydney has been successfully able to
cope with these importations, and the ten-
dency is to substitute local makes for indents
from Melbourne. The second large heading
into which the trade may be divided is the im-
portations from Europe, Britain and America.
In this category may be included silks, the
finest makes of dress materials, the highest
qualities of clothes, and the innumerable items
of mercery and haberdashery that are requisite
for men’s clothing and women’s comfort and
adornment. Of late years French and Ger-
man competition in the finest grades of
women’s dress material has been very keen, the
goods turned out being generally of excellent
value for the money at which they could be
laid down. The efforts of Continental ex-
porters to capture local trade did not, however,
in all cases spell profit, and the depression in
many of the centres of the textile industry on
the Continent of Europe, told its sad tale of
over-production, and consequent unprofitable
competition. It may, indeed', generally be said
that the representatives of British houses held
their ground very well during the past year,
and that their local position has not been
detrimentally affected by the struggle for su-
premacy which has taken place, assisted as it
has been by the cheap freights granted by Con-
tinental shipowners. From the consumer’s
point of view, however, competition is the soul
of business, and he has neither time, know-
ledge, nor inclination to enquire why certain
fabrics can be purchased at figures which are
undoubtedly low.
The importance of the softgoods trade to
S} 7 dncy may be illustrated by a few figures.
While the very largo warehousemen in this
city may number 25, the number of drapers in
the city and suburban area that distribute the
goods from those houses is approximately
reckoned at 250, some of them on a very exten-
sive scale. The tendency on the part of many
of these distributors is to indent direct; but
those who know anything of the great markets
of Europe and Britain can readily understand
that the very best arrangements must be made
for buying in those quarters, or the incautious
purchaser may wish he had placed his orders
with a wholesale firm that had better oppor-
tunities than he of seeing all the moves on the
mercantile board. There are very few trades
in which greater expert knowledge in buying
and selling is required than in softgoods; and
the successful retailer is the man who can do
both well. Sometimes the best judge of the
public taste in the matter of costume may fail
to gauge it correctly, and must be content to
cover his error by prompt sacrifices and a quick
turnover. But the man who gains his experi-
ence at his own cost has, in these competitive
times, to run the gauntlet in a very formidable
degree. The considerable number of retailers
in Sydney and the metropolitan area shows
that notwithstanding the heavy artillery of
the very extensive retail houses, the candle of
the small draper is not yet snuffed out, and
that there are still good chances for those who,
working on a fair amount of their own capital,
possessed of a thorough knowledge of the
trade, and having tact, energy, and probity,
arc determined to deserve success even if they
cannot command it in a dazzling degree.
THE HARDWARE TRADE.
The great importance of the hardware trade
to New South Wales is manifested by ancient
invoices as well as by present day returns. At
a very early stage of the colony’s existence, de-
mand existed for tools of various kinds. From
the indent already quoted of a parcel of goods
sent by the transport “ Lady Shore” it would
appear that even at that early stage of the
country’s progress agricultural implements of
the kind then in use by the most advanced
nations wore required in the settlements near
Port Jackson. Times have changed greatly
since then, and we have changed with them,
and the mechanical reaper, worked by horse
power, has taken the place of the men who
bent low to their work over their sickles and
scythes. Galvanized iron has also been substi-
tuted for thatched and shingled roofs, and
steel viaducts, consigned complete in every
part, have largely taken the place once occu-
pied by stone and wooden bridges.


The vast development of the railway, tram-
way, telegraph and telephone systems during
the past quarter of a century is only an ear-
nest of what has yet to come. A
transcontinental railway, which will
join West Australia with the Eastern States
of the Commonwealth is certain to be built
sooner or later. The strong likelihood, indeed,
is that the railway system of New South Wales
will at no distant date be extended to Broken
Hill. That extension will necessitate the im-
portation of a very large amount of railway
iron, plant, rolling stock, and the thousand
and one other articles of hardware required
for a steady march of population across Cen-
tral Australia. The temporary failure of
crops and stock caused by the present pro-
tracted drought has an element of goodness in
it, inasmuch as it teaches the Australian
people to explore and discover other ground
that will help to make up for their present
deficiencies. In all such colonizing efforts the
craft of Tubal Cain must be largely in evi-
dence, as hardware is a necessity in every at-
tempt made to command the vast forces of
Nature.
In the imports of New South Wales for 1902
hardware and ironmongery represented a
value of £300,047, machinery amounted to
£607,573, railway material £619,483, iron and
steel £391,925, and galvanized iron £259,235 ;
the four amounts totalling £2,178,463. There
were, in addition, other lines, and, out of the
total value of imported goods in that year,
about one-sixth was represented by hardware
in all shapes and forms.
The question is often put as to whether New
South Wales will ever be a great manufactur-
ing centre of iron-ware. Undoubtedly in the
large centres of Australian population a con-
siderable quantity of hardware is at present
manufactured. But there are certain broad
facts connected with the iron trade that can-
not be ignored. The industrial excellence of
the United States in the manufacture of iron
in every shape and form is a fact of world-wide
notoriety. There is every reason to believe
that that excellence will continue for many
years to come. Whether that view be correct
or not, however, the eminence of United States
manufactures in this line of industry is a mat-
ter that now concerns every part of the civi-
lised world. While it lasts it will materially
affect the course of the hardware trade in this
country, even if our importers do not indent
from America. The quotations of United
States manufacturers will naturally affect
those of English or Continental makers, and
thus govern the whole range of hardware im-
portations.
So far as can be ascertained, the number of
persons, firms and companies engaged in the
hardware trade in the metropolitan district is
about 125. Some of these are not exclusively
occupied with that branch, as they combine
other lines therewith. Others again arc manu-
facturers as well as importers. It goes without
saying that many of these houses are on a very
extensive scale, and can furnish everything,
from the common needle to the proverbial
anchor. Their travellers are to be found push-
ing trade in every outlying district of the
State, and not a few of the firms are of inter-
colonial renown. Altogether, this State has
reason to bo proud of the scope and magnitude
attained by many of the hardware businesses
of this city. Those at the head of their affairs
are gentlemen renowned alike for their great
mercantile ability, public spirit, and generous
support of every deserving local institution.
” Iron” men are generally of the most solid
and substantial type, and those of Sydney
form no exception to the general rule.
THE GROCERY TRADE.
The grocery trade cannot in these days be
so clearly defined as it once could be. Of
course, the itpm of tea is important enough to
demand a separate notice, as many firms nowa-
days engage exclusively in supplying that
article. Of recent years again the grocery
trade is often carried on in conjunction with
the wine trade. Certain chemicals much re-
quired for household use may also be regarded
as groceries. A great revolution in the gro-
cery trade has also been brought about during
the last few years in the local preparation of
maizena, oatmeal, starch, spices, jams, sauces,
etc. Those firms that aim at being universal
providers, of course include groceries in the
multitude of items they handle. One feature
of the trade unpleasantly manifest during the
past few years is the severe competition and
“ cutting” exhibited therein. Another, which
may be closely connected with the former, is
the entrance of Chinese, Syrians, and other
Orientals into a domain that not long ago was
regarded as exclusively that of persons of
European birth or parentage.
A considerable quantity of imported pro-
duce, such as oatmeal and other foodstuffs,
was finally purveyed in grocer’s shops. The
item of £804,476 for sugar imported in 1902,
less re-exportations, also concerned the grocery
trade. Tea was imported in that vear to the
value of £252,097, but a large quantity there-
of was disposed of by “ tea men” pure and
simple.
The prospects of the trade to men who know
their business are as good as ever they were.
The case of Sir Thomas Lipton may bo in-
stanced as one which ought to be studied by
all who are endeavouring to make their way
in what may be termed the grocery world.
There is always room on the top, for those who
are there do not live for ever, and must, in the
course of years, give place to younger men.
Imported provisions are not likely to lose
favour on this side of the line. Canadian sal-
mon in tins is the ever ready foundation of a
hasty or picnic meal throughout Australia.
The sardine, whose absence this season has
brought starvation to many a humble home in
the fishing villages of Brittany, is a useful
mouthful to occupants of surveying and mining
camps in this country. Herrings, bloaters,
mackerel, cod, ling, crabs, and other fish food
in tins, form a welcome addition to the ordi-
nary Australian menu. There are thousands
of Australians who willingly eat fish on Fri-
days without any religious obligation to do so.
The best brands of British jams, conserves,
marmalade, and meats find ready purchasers,
notwithstanding the variety of tinned articles
locally produced. A well-known brand of im-
ported goods holds its own for a very extended
period, and old customers therefor generally
manifest very little desire to make a change.
Chicago canned goods are still in very great
request, the attractive nature of their get-up,
accompanied by good quality and moderate
price, making a combination favourable to
demand. Of late a good many new articles of
United States production, such as Boston
beans and apple butter, have been placed upon
the local market.
THE TEA TRADE.
About the tea trade a flavour lingers other
than that of the theine which gives the leaf its
characteristic property. “ The cup which
cheers and not inebriates” was in Britain once
the luxury of the rich. These were the days
when the best green tea, brought from China
after a voyage of six or eight months’ dura-
tion, fetched from £1 10s. to £2 per lb. Even
in days not very remote ss. per lb. had to be
paid in Britain for a good class of tea. The
China tea was up to a recent period of so much
mercantile importance in the old country that
the very swiftest vessels, manned by double
crews, earned for their owners valuable
freights for bringing the first teas of the new
season. The sailing records of these splendid
clippers, as they were raced home for glory
and reward, are the most exciting of those
connected with the British mercantile marine,
and the fortunate captain of the first tea clip-
per home was a man deemed of no ordinary im-
portance.
Steam, the Suez Canal, and the inevitable
changes that occur to everything human, have
entirely altered the course of the tea trade.
The exclusive monopoly held for many years
by Chinese growers is a thing of the past. The
tea growers of India and Ceylon have plucked
the leaf of the tea trade so closely that there
is but little left for the China tea-man. The
latter is so conservative in his methods, and re-
fuses so persistently to adapt himself to the
new order of things, that the tea export of
China now represents a small share of the
world’s consumption. There is nothing wrong
with China tea as grown, but in its prepara-
tion for the market much is lacking. Both in
India and Ceylon the coolies who work the
plantations and assist in the manufacture are
very diligently superintended all the working
day by highly trained European overseers. In
the firing, packing and transportation, ma-
chinery and the most up-to-date methods are
used, so that working expenses are cut down
to the lowest possible margin. Furthermore,
both in India and China the Assam hybrid is
the variety grown, the China variety being re-
garded as lacking in bulk.
New methods of distribution have recently
been resorted to owing to the great advance
in the prospects of Indian and Ceylon teas.
Attractive shops are provided wherein the
principal articles of merchandise are displayed
in a taking form. Those merchants undoub-
tedly present severe competition to the general
grocer who sells many other articles besides
tea. This change is one of many
which have arisen in the realm of trade within
a comparatively recent period, and which show
to all concerned that such alterations must be
met by other well-devised ones.
The tea trade, as distinct from the
grocery trade, employs, in Sydney, prob-
ably 100 brokers, dealers, and mer-
chants. Notwithstanding the severe
competition of its Indian and Ceylon rivals,
China tea still holds a place, though an in-
ferior one, in the Australian market. Many
people still prefer it to the others, and owing
to the frequent steam communication


with China, it can he laid down
here at a moderate cost. In
1902 tea to the value of £252,097 was im-
ported into New South Wales. The average
consumption per head of population is notori-
ously high throughout the Australasian colo-
nies. In the country districts especially large
quantities of tea are drunk, men engaged in
hard work quaffing it at every meal. Its stimu-
lating qualities are much appreciated during
the severe heat of the summer months, and
the ease with which it can be carried and pre-
pared is also an additional reason for its
favour among the bush population.
THE LEATHER TRADE.
The origin of the proverb which states that
“ there is nothing like leather” is lost in the
mists of antiquity. Probably it was familiar to
our Aryan forefathers when they dispersed
with their flocks and herds to found new homes
Australian marsupials. This has opened up a
wide field of local enterprise, the only draw-
back thereto being the possibility of the ex-
tinction, at no distant date, of animals that are
peculiar to Australia. If the kangaroo is not
to vanish to the forgetfulness to which the
American bison has gone, it will be necessary
to take steps for his preservation, and if it pays
to breed cattle for what they produce for man-
kind, a similar policy should be carried out
with regard to Australian marsupials.
THE BOOT AND SHOE TRADE.
The boot and shoe trade is one of the many
lines of business that have of recent years been
completely revolutionised by the use of ma-
chinery. The latest machines are indeed won-
derful in the quantity of work that can be
turned out by their use. The pinch caused by
them in the Northampton boot trade recently
gave rise to a very serious state of affairs so
descriptive more of a style than of a designa-
tion of place of origin.
The boot and shoe trade is one of those that
have been amalgamated by some firms with
other branches of business. For instance,
certain persons who deal in clothing keep also
a stock of boots and shoes. In the metropoli-
tan area there are about 140 persons, firms and
companies, engaged in this trade. Some of
these are manufacturers as well as importers.
Needless to say that this branch of business is
vigorously prosecuted throughout Sydney.
Even in hard times people may go without
many things except boots. The old suit or
dress may, oy careful attention, have its life
prolonged beyond its actual expectation, hut
boots and shoes, like leaves, have their time to
fall, and make a silent but eloquent protest
against being trodden upon above the ordinary.
Given business knowledge, a good stand, and a
sufficient amount of capital, a boot importer
should be able to make a fair living. The
trade is emphatically a cash one, and the stock
is not of a very perishable kind. Neverthe-
in the primeval forest. As a matter of fact,
among certain races to this day leather answers
every purpose for which nails, cordage, corru-
gated iron, carpets and furniture are needed
in more advanced communities. Those who
served with our contingents in South Africa
know how largely the universal “ riem,” or
thong of ox-hide, enters into the economy of
travel and domestic life in that country. Even
in the highest civilisation leather is of vast
importance, and if it were possible to elimin-
ate it from our list of products the provision
of a substitute therefor would be a very hard
matter.
In Sydney and the metropolitan area about
50 persons, firms and companies are engaged
in the leather trade. The majority of these
are importers, but some both manufacture
and import. In other cases the leather trade
is carried on in conjunction with the boot and
shoe business. One important feature in the
trade is the attention that has of late years
heen directed to the possibilities of leather
Wade from the skins of kangaroos and other
THE CUSTOM HOUSE IN 1853.
far as the operatives of the great boot and
shoe manufacturing centre of England were
concerned. Nevertheless it is too late in the
day to protest against the use of labour-saving
machinery in any branch of industry. The
million must be shod at the lowest possible
cost, and the units that are in a position to
pay for hand-made foot coverings are willing
enough to support the makers who have sup-
plied them all their lives, and whose fathers
made boots and shoes for their fathers before
them.
In 1902 the value of boots imported into
New South Wales was the considerable one of
£260,436. Local manufacturers produce a
strong and serviceable article at moderate
cost. Nevertheless, the best class of English-
made goods is still in request, as is that pro-
duced on the Continent. The American-made
boot has, however, been recently much fa-
voured here. This model has been copied by
Australian manufacturers, so that the work
“ American” has now come to be regarded as
less, the all-pervading competition affects it
as it does all branches of trade and commerce
in such a big centre as Sydney. The trade is
one of the most historic. An ancient Roman
proverb suggests that the shoemaker should
not go beyond his last, a saying that cmin-
ently justifies the policy of those boot and shoe
importers that stick to their special branch of
business and find that attention to it alone
pays them very well. There is hardly a de-
partment of trade in which skilful manipul-
tion of customers is more requisite than in a
boot and shoe warehouse. The salesman
must know almost by intuition the exact shape
of boot for the would be purchaser, and to
properly fit many feet means the possession of
a considerable amount of anatomical know-
ledge and a close acquaintance with human na-
turc. The work of the boot importer has
very much to do with the comfort and happi-
ness of thousands, and the trade is one of those
in which the room for improvement, notwith-
standing the adoption of many modern de-
vices, is still very large.


Quantities.
Value.
1901.
1902.
1901.
1902.
Ale and Beer—
in wood, gal. ...
800,536
440,229
£
73,475
£
37.585
in bottle ,,
1,076,302
837,077
215,433
155,605
Animals (Live) —
Horses
5,637
3,387
137,657
121,118
Cattle
68.200
40,996
361,410
254,461
Sheep
413,409
360.308
245,469
237,230
Apparel
...
1,176,763
975,073
Bags and Sacks ...
...
208,584
91,337
Boots and Shoes...
426,591
260,436
Butter, lb
1,709,745
4,718,669
78,139
246,328
Cement, brls.
230,365
115,534
111,832
42,567
Cheese, lb
2,260,865
1,243,955
53,154
34,916
Drapery
...
2,04 *>,060
1,714,830
Earthenware
116,389
77,453
Fish (fresh, frozen
and preserved)...
227,759
134,803
Fruit—
Fre-h
280,817
307,722
Dried & Candied
8,660,869
8,767,453
126,440
122,*25
Furniture
135,422
77,606
(jold—
Coin
...
1,265,780
883,231
Uncoined
2,674,482
2,791,719
Grain,Pulse, etc.—
Maize, b’shels...
267,931
1,184,477
35,432
241,054
Oats,
1,190,035
1.688,816
119,310
232,159
Wheat „
40,343
1,142,997
5,227
252,176
Flour, centals ...
184,860
294,806
70,435
136,482
Eice, cwt.
164,349
107,706
110,564
69,042
Hardware & Iron-
mongery
321,869
300,047
Hats and Caps ...
.
226,452
196,195
Hay A Chaff, cwt.
449,518
6,098,246
87,185
1,492,050
Iron and Steel—
Angle, Bar and
Rod, cwt.
309,306
302,462
149,595
134,306
Pines, cwt.
242,506
257,941
136,69/
131,623
Wire, cwt.
320,359
280,414
168,684
125,996
Galv. (sheets and
bars), cwt.
281,097
309,088
240,169
259,235
Jewellery, etc. ..
...
...
218,650
188,7*9
Leather
...
145,170
1*4,668
Machinery
Malt, bushe’s
503,660
356,928
989,113
119,975
607,573
100,320
Meats, etc. —
Bacon & Ham. lb
1,790,747
1,962,157
68,095
71.913
Frozen Beef, cwl
7,713
81,918
5,000
142,721
,, Mutton, „
11,273
20,822
,, Pork „
158
1,590
173
5,445
Preserved, lb....
2,222,655
2,261,311
52,658
57,093
Milk, condensed,
etc. f lb
5,570,293
5,663,440
92,319
106,984
Millinery
...
...
122,204
193,323
Oils—
Kerosene, gal...
8/48,091
2,739,776
276,766
64,038
Linseed ...
427,357
362,641
68,162
52,742
Paper, Books, etc.
Books, etc.
...
201,282
176,897
Printing and
Newspaper ...
216,903
140,093
Potatoes, cwt. ..
1,060,326
1,305,201
253,330
327,391
Railway & Tram-
way Plant—
Loco Boilers,etc.
191,250
179,163
Bails, cwt.
829,408
546,090
297,333
164,3 2
Other Plant ...
210,269
275,718
Silk
199,242
231,2.5
Skins and Hides—
Cattle, No.
272,738
312,146
247,632
271,324
Sheep
49,185
101,810
Kangaroo
57,089
75.504
Other Marsupial
70,998
Spirits—
Brandy, gal. ...
210,268
185,087
109,494
92,212
Geneva and Sch-
napps, gal. ...
256,736
226,607
74,090
56,014
Whisky, gal. ...
7'»0,552
87 *,648
230,009
246,106
Rum, gal.
187,866
239,4 a
29,956
39,222
Stationery (Sim-
dries)
165.981
139,671
Sugar—
Raw, cwt.
1,079,227
1,213,026
749,521
796,241
Refined, cwt. ..
4,905
8,09i
4,869
8,235
Tallow, cwt.
39,493
22,860
41,890
29,605
Tea, lb
13,483,030
9,685,079
401,692
252,097
Timber—
Rough, sup. ft.
91,473,586
73,129,539
474.279
375,953
Dressed „
14,528,098
10,412,468
107,046
86,603
T n Plates
99,7j6
107,384
Tobacco—
Unmanuf’ct’red,
lb
2,866,205
3,029,283
I CO,459
129,080
Manuf’ct’rcd. lb.
1,453,449
J.167,575
105,090
101,387
Cigars, lb.
863,815
251,803
li 5.282
81,731
Cigarettes. Ib. ...
121,917
88,069
36,812
18,315
Wines—
Si-arkling, gals.
20,893
21,723
41,718
£3,073
Other, gals.
108,826
176,175
35,101
42,573
Wool—
Greasy, lb.
9,164,164
5,264.744
254,604
175,960
Scoured, lb. ...
3,060,255
2,750,198
161,766
189,313
Woollen Manufac-
tures
643,197
687,973
Wool Packs, No...
845,562
730,793
74,493
65,951
The Operations in 1902
From January Ist to December 31st, 1902,
the total value of all imports, including Gold
and Bullion, received into Now South Wales
(both Interstate and Oversea) was £25,974,210,
as against £26,928,218, for 1901, a decrease of
£954,008. The value of the Gold and Bul-
lion imported into the State for the two
years, 1901 and 1902, was £4,044,791, and
£3,730,544 respectively, so that the imports
of general merchandise may be set down at
£22,883,427 for 1901, and £22,243,666 for
1902, giving a deficiency for the latter year of
£639,761. More than four-fifths of these im-
ports were handled over the Sydney wharves,
the balance being distributed between the im-
portations borderwise from Queensland, South
Australia, and Victoria, the Newcastle im-
ports, and, thirdly, those into the Northern
River Ports, from Queensland. This latter
branch of the trade only came into existence
during the year, after the imposition of the
Federal tariff had removed the fiscal barriers
which had hitherto been set up, because the
freetrade policy of the mother state allowed
her merchants to quote under the prices of the
houses of Queensland, where more or less pro-
tectionist duties were in force. The mer-
chants of the Northern State were quick to
seize the opportunity, and a company was
formed to exploit the districts, to the trade of
which they considered they were geographi-
cally entitled. Steamers were laid on, and
the residents of that part of the State met
Brisbane efforts in a most appreciative
spirit. The trade with the Northern
Rivers from Brisbane has, however,
not yet reached the stage of serious
consideration, when dealing with the figures
for the whole State. At the same time it
should be pointed out that it behoves Sydney
merchants to make an effort towards the pre-
vention of the business of so large and so rich
a district drifting northward.
A table has been prepared of some of the
principal items in the list of imports, together
with a comparison, both in quantity and value
with the figures for 1901. As the information
under these heads is not yet officially published
in complete tabulation, it must be understood
that the totals under some of the headings do
not account for all the articles usually enumer-
ated under such headings. They must be con-
sidered, therefore, in isolation, and what con-
clusions are made must be drawn with this
reservation. That is to say, for example, the
items under “ Iron and Steel” have been se-
lected from a much larger list, either be-
cause they bulked largely, or because their
fluctuations, in quantity or value, have a direct
bearing upon the conditions prevalent in New
South Wales trading circles during 1902.
Again, the division “ Grain, Pulse, etc.,” can
by no moans be taken as a comprehensive
summary of the amount of agricultural pro-
duce imported to meet the deficiency in local
supplies, but, the headings enumerated have
been chosen, as they most strikingly exem-
plify the character and extent of that
deficiency. It is, however, necessary to ex-
plain that the totals given opposite each item
are official, having been taken out from the of-
ficial returns (yet unpublished) prepared by
the Custom House Authorities. The follow-
ing is the list referred to: —
Aii analysis ol' the above table provides
many details for interesting deductions, and,
taken generally, the first impression gained is
one regarding the serious effects the drought
conditions of 1902 had upon the trading opera-
tions of the year. Pastoral products imported,
for example, showed a decline all along the line
except in the case of the item “ Skins and
Hides,” the figures for which are in advance
of those for 1901. Both shrinkage and in-
crease are, of course, due to the drought, the
former because Queensland, whence the bulk
of the importations come into New South
Wales, was, as much, if not more, affected than
was the Mother State, the latter owing to
more stock being sent to meat works or boil-
ing-down works than would have been the case
had there been any chance of saving them on
the runs. The decline in the output of wool
from the northern province was very notice-
able in the first six months of the 1902-3 sea-
son, and to December 31st only 47,048 bales
had arrived in New South Wales from beyond
the borders, as against 81,099 bales for the
corresponding period last year, a decrease of
34,051 bales. Another telling commentary
on the season lies in the figures for “ Bags
and Sacks,” which fell from £208,584 in 1901
to £91,337 in 1902, This excessive decrease
must be attributed almost wholly to the fail-
ure of the wheat harvest and the fact that
corn sacks, etc., were not wanted, in conse-
quence, through the agricultural area. The
increased importations of foodstuff —especi-
ally of breadstuffs and meats —is yet another
indication of how far New South Wales fell
below the desirable level of a self-supporting
community in 1902. Wheat and Flour, But-
ter, Bacon and Ham, Frozen Beef and Mut-
ton, and Potatoes, all show large increases
due to the failure—in some cases almost total
—of the local supply necessitating the draw-
ing upon other more favoured countries for
the deficiency. In another direction, the list
of the principal imports for 1902 is instruc-
tive, and that is with reference to the influence
of the Commonwealth Tariff upon oversea im-
portations. Perhaps in no case is this more
observable than in “ Boots and Shoes,” the
value of those imported falling from £426,594
in 1901, to £260,436 in 1902. In other
words, the whole of the importations in the
latter year were worth but £60,000 more than
the importations from the United States alone
in 1901. Furniture, too, fell from £135,422
in 1901, to £77,506 in 1902. Furthermore,
the increase in the amount of unmanufactured
tobacco introduced into the State, and the
decrease in the made-up article, demonstrates
that manufacturers have taken advantage of
the difference in duty, operating in favour of
the former, and have set up factories within
the State to deal with the product. Other
salient features occur in almost every line of
the table, and they will be discussed under the
separate headings to follow.
BREADSTUFFS.
The movements in breadstuffs during the
year were most remarkable. At the com-
mencement of 1902, shippers were under the
impression that a large surplus of wheat
would be available for export, but this as-
sumption proved incorrect, and the market,
which in January and February stood at
somewhere near 3s. per bushel, gradually har-
dened and rose. When it became abundantly
manifest that the harvest for 1902-3 would


inevitably bo a failure, fresh impetus was
added to the rise, and, towards the end of the
year, wheat was quoted nominally at over 6s.
per bushel. The fears of traders were con-
firmed when the Government Statist issued
his preliminary estimate of the crop in De-
comber, indicating the smallest area and low-
est yield for many years. The area cropped
for grain was set down at 388,376 acres, and
this was expected to yield only 1,411,219
bushels, or an average of 3.9 bushels to the
acre. This will be barely sufficient for seed
purposes, and for the sunnlv of food New
South Wales will be compelled to import
nearly 7,000,000 bushels, without taking in-
to account the requirements for stock-feeding
purposes . Under these circumstances im-
ports both of wheat and flour show an im-
mense increase, the former rising in value
sible that New South Wales should ever be
called upon to import moat, either as live
stock or frozen produce for her own consump-
tion. And yet, in 1902, the absolute dearth
of cattle and sheep available for slaughter in
the State compelled the importation of both
for that purpose. Surplus supplies from New
Zealand and Tasmania were drawn upon.
From the former colony several shipments of
sheep were sent over, realising good prices
and bringing big profits to the shippers. In
addition consumers had, in some degree, to
content themselves with frozen beef and mut-
ton, both of which were imported to a large
extent in last months of the year. The quan-
tity of frozen beef imported was 81,918 cwt.,
as against only 27,202 cwt. exported, and,
though the exports of frozen mutton exceeded
the imports, the former were confined almost
main range, and the dairy farms commenced
to feel the pinch. Butter, for example, which
in the early part of the year was shipped
away from the State to the extent of
2,939,086 lb., was soon in demand for the sup-
ply of local requirements, and the imported
brands were substituted in a large measure,
The total quantity imported during the year
amounted to 4,718,669 lb., of the value of
£246,328, as against 1,709,745 lb, and
£78,139 in 1901. Bacon and Ham, again,
increased from 1,790,747 lb., and £87,185, in
1901, to 1,962,157 lb., and £71,913, in 1902,
while even fresh milk came into the State in
noticeable quantities during the year. But
the most astonishing increment was in the
figures for Hay and Chaff, which rose from
449,518 cwt. in 1901, to 6,098,246 cwt. in
ISO 2, the corresponding rise in values being
THE CUSTOM HOUSE IN 1833.
from £5227 in 1901, to £252,176 in 1902,
and the latter from £70,435 to £136,482
These importations were shared by South
Australia, the United States, Canada, the Ar-
gentine, and Ind a, while New Zealand later
on will probably he able to spare a good deal
of grain, the area under wheat in that State
having been considerably increased. At the
beginning of this year it was estimated that
Australia had already purchased 130,000 tons
of wheat (equal to five and a half million
bushels) in North America.
MEATS.
Another item worthy of attention in the
foregoing list, especially when estimating the
extent to which the drought affected the busi-
ness operations of the State, is that which
comes under the heading “ Meats.” Essen-
tially a pastoral country, it appeared impos-
wholly to the first six months of 1902. Pre-
served meats also showed an increase from
2,222,655 lb in 1901, to 2,261,311 in 1902.
Some trial shipments of pork were successfully
placed on the market from America, and pre-
served foodstuffs, such as fish of various kinds,
received an impetus, and the lack of local
supplies was accounted for by the augmenta-
tion of the imports of such substitutes
FARAI AND DAIRY PRODUCE.
As with meats, the necessity of New South
Wales importing heavily in farm and dairy
produce seemed very remote, seeing that for
some years now the State has been on an ex-
port basis as regards dairy products, and al-
most, if not entirely, able to suvmort itself in
farm produce. But the drought altered the
aspect of affairs completely when its effect
began to be felt on the coastal side of the
from £87,185 to £1,492,050. It is hardly
necessary to explain what this means, or why
so abnormal an increase was needed. The
facts and the reasons are potent to everyone
who remembers the history of the past year.
SOPTGOODS.
Those importers whose business lays in the
handling of textile fabrics, dross goods and
clothing materials, were perhaps more affect-
ed by the Federal tariff changes than any
other branch of the importing industry, and
the figures for the items in which they were
most concerned show considerable fluctuation
for 1902. This may be attributed to several
causes. In the first place, importers, well
aware that for the majority of the items
heavier duties were to be imposed, stocked
up in 1901 much above the level necessary
for the ordinary trading operations of the


1901.
1902.
Inc.
or Dec.
Apparel
1,176,763
975,073
Dec.
..201,690
Drapery
2,045,066
1.714,830
Dec.
..330,236
643,197
68 <,973
Inc,
.. 44,776
199,242
231,295
Inc.
.. 32,053
Hats and Caps
226,432
196,195
Dec.
.. 30,237
1901.
1902.
£
£
Candles
90,008
33,805
Cocoa
92.392
45.470
Coffee
32,738
11,931
Confectionery
39,179
46,207
Farinaceous Foods
22,01i
28,553
Fruits (dried and candied)
126.440
122,625
Jams and Jellies
32,034
59,631
Matches and Vestas
77,594
58,625
Milk (Condensed)
92,319
106,984
Oilmen’s Stores (N.O.E.)
52,782
59.962
Pepper
10,603
6,554
Pickles and Sauces
61,927
28,103
Preserves
18,759
16,412
Starch and Starch Powders
44.903
12,890
Tapioca nnd Semolina
16,914
7.895
Tea
401,692
252,097
Article.
1901.
1902.
Agricultural Implements
£
83,027
£
75,475
300,047
Hardware and Ironmongery ...
321,869
Gas Fittings
43,7-46
3j,559
Hollow-ware
48,706
27,663
Iron and Steel —
Angle Bar and Bod
149,595
134,306
Plate and Sheet
71.393
93,530
Pipes
136,697
131,623
Bolts, Nuts and Screws ...
56,829
38.73S
Hoops (Black aud Galr.)...
20,483
19,645
Wire Hope
46,765
31,356
Wire
168,684-
125,996
Galv. Sheets and Bars ...
240,169
259,235
,, Wire Netting
29,828
57,028
Machinery
989,113
607,573
Railway and Tramway Plant—
Loco. Boilers
191,250
179,463
297,333
164,302
Other
210,269
275,718
Tools of Various Trades
124,947
133,986
JSOl.
1802.
Inc. or Dec.
£
£
£
Commonwealth—
Victoria
3,411,016
3,651,873
Inc.... 243,827
Queensland
3,954,318
4,268,906
Inc.... 314,588
S. Australia
1,290,744
1,529,302
Inc.... 238,558
W. Austral a
187,620
352.242
Inc.... 164,622
Tasmania
524,283
1,144,352
I»-c.... 620,069
Total, Interstate ...
9,368,011
10.949,675
Inc....1,581,664
New Zealand
953,284
1,195,483
Inc. ... 242,199
United Kingdom ...
10,102,941
8,572,370
Dec....1,530,571
Otier British
Dec.... 258,001
Possessions ...
1,057,419
799,418
Foreign Couut»ies ...
5,446,563
4,457,264
Dec.... 989,299
Total
£26,928.218
£25,974.210
Dec....£954,008
iyoi.
1902.
Gold, Coin
.. £1,265,780
... £883,231
,, Uncoined.
.. 2,674,482
... 2,791,719
Merchandise
.. 22,987,956 ,
... 22,299,260
£26,928,218
£25,974,210
year. This naturally resulted in a cessation
to some degree of importations for 1902. The
situation may be estimated from the follow-
ing table, giving the relative values of some
of the principal lines for 19o± and 1902.
The decrease in these five lines amounted
altogether to nearly half a million, or, to be
more correct, to £485,334 in value. The only
lines to show an increase were Woollens and
Silks, and in each case the increment was
much smaller than the deficiency exhibited
under the headings of Apparel and Drapery.
Indeed, it must be conceded that the pre-tariff
stocking-up could not have made all the dif-
ference observable. Another reason for it is
to be found in the decreased purchasing
power of the community, which influenced
distributors in eeping their stocs down to
the lowest level of efficiency, and in refrain-
ing from any anticipatory augmentation of
them beyond the ordinary week to week sales.
Furthermore, the Federal tariff had another
effect besides the one already alluded to.
Owing to its protective incidence, local pro-
ducers found it possible to compete on fa-
vourable terms with outside manufacturers,
and the output of New South Wales fac-
tories began to make an impression upon the
State markets. It is, however, yet too soon
to speak with authority on this aspect of the
subject, although the official figures relating
to the manufacturing, industry appear to jus-
tify the conclusion.
GROCERIES, TEA, Etc.
Perhaps this branch of the importing and
distributing trade showed the least alteration
during the year. Furthermore, the scarcity
of local foodstuffs was a direct advantage to
several lines, imported stores being brought
into requisition to supply the deficiencies.
This was especially the case with regard to
tinned goods, such as meats and fish, in both
of which sharp advances in prices have to be
noted, while the failure of dairy supplies oc-
casioned a strong demand for condensed milk.
Only about 5000 tons of sugar were produced
in New South Wales, the bulk of the require-
ments being, as usual, imported from Queens-
land. Imports for the year were valued at
£804,476, as against £754,390. Owing to
the accumulation of stocks in anticipation of
the Federal Tariff, the tea market was in an
unsatisfactory condition throughout the year,
intensified at the close by the decreased pur-
chasing power of the community. Ceylon
teas have practically held a monopoly, China
teas to all intents and purposes dropping out.
Foochow advices show a decrease of over five
million pounds in tea exported thence to Aus-
tralia, between the years 1902 and 1900. The
quantity of tea imported during 1902 was
9,685,079 lb., as against 13,483,030 lb. for raul,
the excess of the latter being due in large part
to stoexing up prior to the tariff being im-
posed. During the year Indian teas main-
tained, though they did not materially in-
crease, their consumption, while a much ac-
centuated demand set in for Ceylons, and a
hardening of the market occurred in conse-
quence. Dried fruits, the product of Austra-
lian soil, were materially benefited by the Fed-
eral Tariff, and, with stricter attention paid
to get-up, several brands increased their popu-
larity at the expense of the article imported
from oversea. Tasmanian varieties, and those
produced at the Renmark and Mildura irriga-
tion colonies, replaced the Californian product,
while Smyrna sultanas appear likely to give
way to those grown in Australia. The failure
of the rice crop in Japan had, of course, its
reflex in Australian markets, and Sydney
quotations during the year advanced from £l7
to £22 per ton, or a rise of £5 in the twelve
months. Rangoon rice, on the contrary, re-
ceded in value, the opening and closing quo-
tations being respectively £9 10s. and £8 10s.
The following comparative table shows the
values of the principal importations handled
by grocers, with the corresponding figures for
the preceding year;—
WINES AND SPIRITS.
The Federal Tariff altered the complexion of
the liquor market somewhat during the year,
and now large quantities of spirits are being
bottled locally. The heavy anticipatory pur-
chases made prior to October, 1901, resulted
in a slack market throughout 1902, but stocks
in second hands must now be nearly exhausted.
The value of imports in spirits (Brandy, Gin,
Whisky and Rum) during 1902 was £432,554,
as against £449,549 in 1901. The quotation
for the chief brands showed a slight decline.
Locally manufactured beer is steadily gaining
in favour, and, aided by a heavy duty, is sup-
planting the imported article. Imports dur-
ing the year fell off considerably, the relative
values for 1901 and 1902 being £288,908 and
£193,190.
HARDWARE, Etc.
Like most other lines, the various articles
which come under the generic heading “ Hard-
ware,” felt the drought, and also the changed
conditions which came in with the imposition
of the Federal Customs Duties. The stoppage
of station improvements by pastoralists, who
found it necessary to devote all their money
and energy to the saving of their flocks and
herds, the retrenchment that was found im-
perative in the direction of laying out money,
the increased cost of the necessaries of life, and
the consequent inability to purchase much be-
sides food and clothing, the stocking up of
lines prior to the Tariff charges, and the addi-
tional local production under its protective
incidence, all combined to bring about a de-
cline in the value of many of the articles. A
glance at the following table, giving the com-
parative values for the two years, 1901 and
1902, will serve to illustrate this, and the
conclusions that may bo drawn from its per-
usal are so plain that it is certainly not need-
ful to go into details.
COUNTRIES OF ORIGIN.
The following table distinguishes between
the interstate and oversea imports, and, in ad-
dition, shows the comparative figures for each
country enumerated, for the years 1901 and
1902.
These figures include the import of gold,
coined and uncoined, which amounted to
£3,730,544. Of this total £3,095,474 came
from other States of the Commonwealth,
£458,905 from New Zealand, and the rest from
the United Kingdom and Foreign Countries.
Separating these totals, the imports for the
two years show as under: —
It would thus seem at first sight as though
the importation of general merchandise had
kept up remarkably well, but an examination
of the figures in the two tables given above,
shows that the maintenance is- not altogether a
subject for congratulation. The imports from
the United Kingdom, from other British pos-
sessions, and from Foreign Countries all fell
off considerably, the percentage reductions
being 15.1, 24.4, and 18.2 per cent, respec-
tively. While the main cause of this decline
must be ascribed to the operations of the Fed-


eral Tariff, the fact that the Interstate im-
ports did not make good the deficiency proves
that the decreased spending power of the com-
munity, consequent upon the high price of
local commodities, and the effects of the
drought generally, had much to do with the
falling off. It will bo noticed, also, that,
among the Interstate imports the greatest in-
crease is in the imports from Tasmania, a State
which, broadly speaking, can only supply us
New Zealand was called upon for a part of her
surplus. It may safely be concluded that the
bulk of the increase in Interstate Imports was
in agricultural and dairy produce, required to
supplement the deficiency in the State’s out-
put. This meant, of course, the paying away
to farmers and others outside the State, large
sums of money, which, under normal condi-
tions, would have been available for circula-
tion within our borders, and this aspect alone
confident, and orders were placed with more
regard to future operations, instead of the
hand-to-mouth system which, throughout the
greater part of the year, had characterised the
methods of both importer and distributor.
The tariff has, to all intents and purposes, been
practically settled, and importers know where
they stand—an enviable condition compared
with their position at the beginning of 1902.
Stocks which were unduly enlarged, in antici-
with products that should be grown within our
own borders. The same remark applies to
New Zealand, the importations from which
colony increased in spite of the Federal Tariff,
which in the early months of its imposition
had been a powerful factor in shutting out the
Produce. But the drought created a demand
for fodder and other farm and dairy produce
which had to be met, and, in consequence,
THE CUSTOM HOUSE TO-DAY.
is a serious one. From the importers’ point
of view the year was one—as statistics show —
of quietness and comparative stagnation quite
distinct from the buoyancy of 1901. The
closing months of the year, however, exhibited
a revival, and the December rains created a
better tone in import markets, further intensi-
fied by the prospects of a good season shown in
the early months of 1903. Buyers were more
pation of the Federal duties must now be al-
most exhausted, and, in consequence, most
lines will bo subject to more attention at the
hands of importers during 1903 than they were
in 1902. Altogether, there is every prospect
that 1903 will prove a busy and profitable year
in importing and distributing circles, and will
be decidedly more favourable to the commer-
cial world than its predecessor.


Associated General Merchants and
Importers.
That the present is an age of practical com-
mercialism admits of no possible doubt what-
ever. The time has gone by for slip-shod
methods, involving interminable delays and con-
comitant losses, to be tolerated. In New South
Wales particularly, the system of conducting
businesses of all kinds has undergone consider-
able modification during recent years, much
to the advantage of all concerned. In a
young country, where the conditions of life
were comparatively easy, and where money
was to be made rapidly, it was only to be ex-
pected that, in the feverish pursuit of wealth,
the ethics of commercialism might not be suf-
ficiently studied or adequately understood by
all who elected to engage in trade of one form
or another.
Competition in its worst form made itself
obtrusive, and thus became the parent of many
practices that could not fail to promote vexa-
tious trouble and worrying times for both mer-
chants and traders. While this haphazard
and unsatisfactory system prevailed, no one
benefited except a few who were not above
“ taking the other fellow down.” The mer-
chant, the retailer, and the public were alike
the victims of this want of solidarity in the
commercial community. Happily the mer-
chants had the remedy in their own hands, and
about four years ago there was formed what is
now known as the Associated General Mer-
chants and Importers of Sydney. The ob-
jects of this Association were to watch over
MR. J. T. TILLOCK.
President.
the interests of the merchants, to conserve the
trade of the retailers, and to guard the public
i, as far as possible against imposition or decep-
h
tion of any kind in respect to the lines of goods
operated in by members of the Association.
An important reform which the Association
set itself to accomplish was the regulation
of terms of credit, and it has certainly
been eminently successful in performing
tbis very difficult task. In many
other respects the Association has effected
salutary changes in the conduct of business
generally. Its influence upon trade and trad-
ing operations has been both beneficial and
lasting, and its power exerted with firmness,
equity, and a due regard for the interests of
all concerned has done much to create, develop,
and maintain a healthier tone and more robust
vigor in commercial circles.
The officers of the Association are all men
possessed of the keenest commercial instincts,
combined with a sound knowledge of trade
facts, circumstances, and prospects, and it is to
their mature judgment and wise administra-
tion that the gratifying success achieved by
the Association is mainly due.
The office-bearers for the present year are:—
President, Mr. J. T. Tillock (Messrs. Tillock
and Company). Council—Mr. J. D. Fisher
(Messrs. John Connell and Co.), Mr. N. D.
Cohen (Messrs. D. Cohen and Co.), Mr. P. C.
Mitchell (Messrs. D. Mitchell and Co.), and
Mr. J. Kindle (Messrs. John Bardsley and Co.).
The Secretary is Mr. Albert Borchard, whose
office is situated in the Equitable Insurance
Building, George Street.
THE ASSOCIATED GENERAL MERCHANTS AND IMPORTERS.


Associated Warehousemen of Sydney.
11l January, 1880, the representatives
0 f the principal softgoods firms in
Sydney met in conference, and discussed the.
means of thoroughly and effectively regulat-
ing business methods, so as to conserve the
interests of the warehouses, and, at the same
time, promote the businesses and welfare of
their numerous clientele. In their delibera-
tions the public was not forgotten, as it was
considered that the best guarantee the retailer,
as well as the consumer, could have that they
would be protected, was the comforting assur-
ance that the big importing houses had agreed
upon an arrangement which could not fail to
have a far reaching and beneficial effect upon
the trade —in all its branches. The Associa-
tion, formed 23 years ago, has lived up to the
anticipations of its founders, and, to-day, it is
more robust and vigorous than ever. Two of
the planks in its platform relate to the fixing
of terms of credit and the regulating of the
conditions of sale. These arc matters of al-
most supreme importance amongst traders, and
the manner in which they have been dealt with
has given the utmost satisfaction to all con-
cerned. The success which has attended the
formation of the Association in Sydney led to
the establishment of a similar organisation in
Melbourne, and more recently a kindred society
has been launched in Brisbane. Since the ad-
vent of Federation, these interstate Associa-
tions have been brought into closer and more
intimate relationship. Reciprocity agreements
have been concluded between these three
MR. F. W. STODDART,
Chairman.
bodies, and this arrangement greatly facili-
tates business, and assists in the promotion of
the best relations between the softgoods repre-
sentatives in the three principal States of the
Commonwealth.
The group photograph accompanying this
article shows Mr. John Dibble (Messrs. Henry
Bull and Co., Ltd.), occupying the office of
Chairman of the Association for the year 1902,
and for the present year (1903), Mr. F. W.
Stoddart (Messrs. Robert Reid and Co., Ltd.)
occupies the honoured position as Chairman
of the Association. Amongst the gentlemen
included in the photo-block is Mr. Thomas
Alcock (Messrs. Alcock Brothers), who for
many years was an indefatigable worker, and
a staunch supporter of the movement initi-
ated by the Association. Unfortunately, for
the commercial community, and to the great
regret of his colleagues, Mr. Alcock, a few
months ago, passed to his rest. His demise left
a blank that it will be hard to fill, while his
wise counsels will be much missed at the meet-
ings of the Association.
As an evidence of the importance, stability
and high commercial standing of the Associa-
tion, it is only necessary to mention the names
of the firms constituting it, namely: —Messrs.
Alcock Brothers, W. Gardiner and Co., Ltd.,
Henry: Bull and Co., Ltd., \V. and A.
McArthur, Ltd., Petersen, Boesen and Co.,
Ltd., Paterson, Laing and Bruce, Ltd., Robert
Reid and Co., Ltd., Sargood, Butler, Nichol
and Ewen, and Webster’s, Ltd. Mr. A. F.
Lord, C.A.A., of ,Messrs. A. F. Lord and Co.,
Incorporated Accountants, is the Secretary of
the Association.
THE ASSOCIATED WAREHOUSEMEN OF SYDNEY.


Merchants and Importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.
IMPORTERS AND SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.
Messrs. Henry Bull & Co., Ltd.
IMPORTERS AND WAREHOUSEMEN.
In a growing community such as is gathered to-
gether within the borders of the Australian Com-
monwealth, the field of commerce offers rich re-
wards to those who possess ability, enterprise, and
application. Local commerce commands the em-
ployment of thousands of our citizens, -bringing
happiness and prosperity into their pinny homes,
and building up the financial stability and great-
ness of the nation. It is to the leviathans of our
mercantile trade such as the firm of Henry Bull
and Company, Limited, of London, Sydney, and
Brisbane, Importers and Warehousemen, that we
as a people owe our present high position in the
industrial world. For over a quarter of a century
by an unbroken record of integrity and careful up-
to-date management, this house has held a more
than prominent position amongst the most pro-
gressive and successful commercial enterprises in
the Southern Hemisphere. The foundation of this
world-famous firm was laid by Mr. Henry Bull, a
sturdy Australian, who established a-small whole-
sale and retail warehouse near the corner of Moore
and Pitt streets.
By assiduous devotion to the interests of his cus-
tomers and the maintenance of a uniform high
standard of quality in regard to the goods handled,
Mr. Bull in a few years built up such a large and
ever-increasing business that he was obliged to
take in a partner to assist in its control. A part-
nership which existed over a quarter of a century
was arranged with the late Mr. William Price, a
man of indomitable energy and marvellous faculty
for organisation, the combination of two such mas-
ter minds overcame all obstacles, and placed the
firm in the front rank of Sydney’s mercantile
houses.
In 1880, to keep pace with the demands of the
trade, the home office was reorganised, Mr. John
Dibble being appointed to the important position
of home buyer. In the same year Mr. G. J. Hall,
who has now charge of one of the leading depart-
ments in the warehouse, joined the Sydney office.
During the next ten years the scope of the firm was
further enlarged, and an immense intercolonial
and country trade set. up.
The year 1893 was notable for several events,
brought about by an unparalleled depression in all
branches of trade. The circulation of money, bor-
rowed by an extravagant Government, led to a
false prosperity, and over-speculation following,
many business men and public institutions were
financially crippled.
To add to this untoward hampering of progress,
the firm experienced a very serious set back by
reason of the great fire which occurred in October
of that year. The fire broke out in the neighbour-
hood of Pitt and Moore streets, the latter a mere
lane, and quickly spreading, consumed all the pre-
mises in the vicinity, including the City Bank and
the Warehouse of Henry Bull and Company. The
Government took advantage of this fire to resume
the property, and make Moore-street the widest
thoroughfare in the city, a most wise act consider-
ing the position. So completely did the flames
play havoc that the whole of the firm’s stock was
lost. The resources of the company are evidenced
by the fact that within a week after the conflagra-
tion a warehouse in York-street was fully equipped
and stocked, enabling business to be carried on as
usual.
It was at this critical time that Mr. J. Dibble
arrived from London to assist the resident partner,
Mr. Price, in the .control of the business, which,
owing to the upheaval of trade by the events
stated, needed the most watchful care.
So successfully did Mr. Dibble carry out the
arduous task allotted him that not only were the
effects of the depression bridged over, but the pre-
-mises then occupied failed to meet the demands
made by the increase of trade. Towards the end of
1895 a lease of the two adjoining warehouses was
secured, both the bulk and open stores being
placed under- one roof. In 1898 the business was
successfully floated into a limited liability com-
pany, the following gentlemen forming the Lon-
don Directorate.—Henry Bull, Esq. (Governing
Director), Captain R. G. Svmonds, R.N., and J.
Henry, Esq., w-hile Mr. William Price was Mana-
ger; Mr. J. Dibble, with Mr. W. G. Whiting, as
financial head, controlled the Australian business.
On the death of Mr. Price, Mr. John Dibble was
appointed managing director in Australia, a posi-
tion he so ably occupies at the present time. Later
on Mr. Hall also took up a position on the Board.
Auother important move was made in the direc-
tion of opening up a branch house in Queen-street,
Brisbane to centralise the Queensland trade.
Throughout the various other States, New Zea-
land, and the Islands direct representatives were
appointed.
The present Sydney -warehouse and bonded stores
are of huge dimensions, well lighted, and supplied
with passenger and goods lifts. The area of the
six floors and basement covers many thousands of
square feet. The various departments are ar
ranged as followßasement, entering rooms;
ground floor, managerial offices, Manchester
and Scotch goods, special lines being shown m
“Challenge” prints. Nainsooks, Calicoes, Sheet-
ings, Silesias, Galateas, Drills and Linens,
The first floor displays British and Continental
woollens and locally made clothing, the firm being
celebrated in the trade for the excellence of cut
uud finish of these goods.- A splendid selection m
MESSRS. HENRY RULE AND CO.. LTD., WAREHOUSE, YORK STREET, SYDNEY.


Ladies’, Hens’, and Children’s straw and felt hats
is arranged in this department. On the second
floor many new and pretty designs are shown
in “ Torledo” Hosiery, Gloves and Haberdashery.
Floor number three is stocked with a liberal as.
sortment of English and Foreign dress goods, silks,
mantles, underclothing. Millinery, ribbons and
MR. HENRY BULL,
Governing Director.
laces beautify the fourth floor. On the top are
located the bond and bulk stores.
A bonded store is set up within the warehouse,
with a Customs officer in charge to facilitate the
despatch of intercolonial goods. Although the
premises are of such large proportions the business
has outgrown them, and, in the near future, it is
intended to build a mammoth warehouse, on the
most modern lines, at the corner of Market and
York streets.
The character of the firm may be judged from
the fact that employees are still in the house
who have been with the company for over
twenty-five years. Thus has this great Austra-
lian firm helped by its enterprise and the magnitude
MR. G. J. HALL.
Director and Department Manager.
its manufacturing interests to foster our local
mdustries.
ME. JOHN DIBBLE.
Character tells in all conditions of life. In
every community men of character are the mo-
■'e power of the State—it is they who build up
tile industry, strength and wealth of a nation.
Mr. John Dibble, the Australasian Managing
Director of Messrs. Henry Bull and Company,
Limited, is a man of strong character and a born
organiser.
Mr. Dibble, who is a native of Devonshire, was
born in 1856, and, at the age of 14, left his home
and commenced life’s battle as an apprentice in a
London retail house, where the hours of labour were
long and the encouragement received but meagre.
After a service of four years, spent in mastering
the many details of the mercantile trade, he
entered the famous softgoods house of Cook,
Son and Company, of London, where he had oppor-
tunities of making himself conversant with the pro-
ducts of the world’s best known manufacturers, so
that in 1880 he was offered and accepted the import-
ant post of home buyer for the great Austral
lasian house of Henry Bull and Company.
In this capacity his marked ability and
organising power were such that at the close
of 1891, when the great period of de-
pression in Australia was at its height, and
business was practically at a standstill, he was
despatched to Sydney by the home directorate to
assist the Australian Manager, Mr. W. Price, in
the difficult work of reorganisation.
It was an herculean task, but Mr. Dibble’s great
strength of character, perseverance, and knowledge
of the business beat down all opposition, and he was
able to not only put the business once again on a
sound basis, but increased the volume of trade to
such an extent that two great warehouses, adjoin-
ME. JOHN DIBBLE,
Australasian Managing Director.
ing the firm’s Sydney headquarters, were leased to
accommodate the extra demands of the new trade.
Mr. Dibble, in addition to his many responsibili-
ties, occupies the important position of President
of the Associated Warehousemen of Sydney.
In all matters pertaining to the welfare of his
employees, such as the firm’s annual picnic, etc.,
he takes a leading part. He also takes a keen in-
terest in sport, and is an ardent golfer.
MR. G. J. HALL.
Mr. G. J. Hall is a native of Australia, having
been born at Ballarat, Victoria. In 1877 he came
over to Sydney, his first apprenticeship to the trade
being served in a retail house. In 1880 he
joined the firm of Henry Bull and Company, and
has been with them continuously ever since.
By his unremitting attention to the interests of
his firm, and personal merit, Mr. Hall has risen to
a high position in the company, and is at present a
member of the board and head of one of the haber-
dashery departments in the Sydney warehouse,
which position he has worthily filled for the past
ten years.
MR. W. G. WHITING, J.P.
Mr. W. G. Whiting, who holds the responsible
position of financial head of this immense firm, was
born at Oxford, and came out to Australia with his
parents when only 11 years of age. After some years
of business training, he joined the firm of
Andrew Lyall, with whom he had been associated
as Sydney partner, the firm then being known as
Lyall and Whiting, Public Accountants. Leaving
them he took charge of the Counting-house of the
old-established firm of Prince, Ogg and Company,
in whose service he remained for about 30 years.
MR. W. G. WHITING, J.P.,
Financial Director.
and continued to hold power of Attorney until the
recent demise of Sir W. A. Ogg.
Mr. Whiting has a large experience in the com-
mercial life of this and the adjoining States, and,
on the flotation of the progressive business of
Henry Bull and Co. into a Limited Liability Com-
pany some five years ago, he joined the latter as
Financial Director, with the control of the count-
ing-house department.
Mr. Whiting is a justice of the peace for the
State of New South Wales.
MR. W. BURCHMORE.
In these days of rapid business changes and keen
competition it is a rare experience for a man to be
able to boast that he has spent his life-time in the
service of one employer. Mr. W. Burchmore has
been with Messrs. Henry Bull and Company since
ME. W. BURCHMORE,
The Father of the Softgoods Trade.
the commencement of the firm, and, at the ripe
old age of 84, is still hale and hearty, displaying
surprising vigour in the discharge of his duties, his
forty years of service having dealt but lightly with
him. He is highly esteemed by all who know him,
and, amongst Sydney’s softgoodsmen, is known far
and wide as the Father of the softgoods trade in
New South. Wales. Long may he and the company
flourish.


Messrs. W. Gardiner & Co., Ltd.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.
One of the greatest and most pleasing features
of our mercantile trade is that it brings together
a class of men who are not only in public and
private life the pillars of our State, but by reason
of their close business connections form a combina-
tion whose efforts ever tend towards the improve-
ment of our financial condition as a nation and
encouragement of law-abiding citizenship.
In the early fifties, when the present mammoth
mercantile houses such as that of W. Gardiner and
Company, of York and Clarence streets, Softgoods
Warehousemen, of London, Sydney, etc., were
under the watchful care of their founders, develop-
ing into prominence, the squatters and the out-
back settlers were entirely dependent upon the
integrity and ability of the heads of the commer-
cial houses with whom they did business.
Such was the state of trade in 1856 when the late
Mr. William Gardiner and his brother, Mr. S. Gar-
diner. arrived from the old country, and deter-
mined to win the smile of Dame Fortune in their
new Southern home. They were men who had ex-
perience in the business they undertook, and sense
enough to see that although the erstwhile specu-
lators and squatters occasionally struck it lucky,
permanent wealth could be best secured in legiti-
mate trading operations.
The business was Opened up in Sydney with a
small softgoods stock of excellent quality, and the
founders of the firm .were able to see their output
rapidly increase, until within a few years they
were firmly established, with a growing custom and
a prosperous outlook ahead. The firm at this
period of its history was styled W. and S. Gar-
diner and Company, and for many years carried on
a most successful trading.
The phenomenal progress of the combination is
to-day manifested in the form of their great ware-
houses in York and Clarence streets, and the ex-
tent of their operations throughout the Common-
wealth and South Sea Islands.
In the year 190'. for family reasons, the business
was floated into a private limited company, under
the title of "W. Gardiner and Co., Ltd.” The
directorate at tliQ present date consists of Mr. W.
H. Gaidiner. Governing Director, and Mr. J. Chil-
vers in London, while Mr. W. H. Iloskings, as
financial director, Mr. T. J. Hitchman as business
manager, and Mr. Charles Gosuey as Secretary,
watch the company’s interests in Australia.
From its inception the reputation of the com-
pany in the European markets has been that of
strict integrity. Their strong financial position,
together with the liberal trading policy pursued,
gives them the full command of the world’s mar-
kets, so that it is not surprising that the business
they conduct is one of considerable magnitude.
The London office of the company is carefully
supervised by Mr. W. H. Gardiner, the Governing
Director, and Mr. Chilvers, and they are ably as-
sisted by a competent staff of buying specialists.
The business at the Australasian headquarters of
the company at 71 York-street and 104 Clarence-
street, Sydney, is extending under the careful man-
agement of the Sydney directors. The premises,
which' are amongst the most extensive softgoods
warehouses in the States, are ornaments to the arch-
itecture of Sydney, and their massive proportions
and solidity are an evidence of the determination
to have everything connected with the business of
a stable and substantial character.
No less than six hydraulic lifts are
in daily use. The electric light is in-
stalled throughout the buildings, and all
departments are in direct telephonic communica-
tion with the exchange. The sub-basement, which
is cut out of the solid rock, is used as a bond store.
and a Customs House officer is in daily attendance
to supervise, in the interests of His Majesty’s
Customs, the receiving and going out of packages.
The company’s trade mark is the “ Lion and
Crown,” and were they to adopt a trade motto no
other word would be so suitable as that of
“Solidity.” The articles handled by the company
include Manchester goods. Blankets, Flannels, Car-
pets, and Furnishings, Muslins, Linens, Dress
goods. Silks, Ribbons, Laces, Clothing, Shirts,
Hosiery, Mercery, Haberdashery, and Fancy
Goods, the thousand and one items which add to
our personal or domestic comfort. Some fifteen
travellers carry the company’s samples throughout
New South Wales, and Gardiner’s representatives
may be met in the most outlying districts. Agen-
cies are established in the capitals of the various
other States. The aim of the Directors has always
been to conduct their business on honourable and
liberal jirineiples, and carrying as they do such an
extensive and thoroughly up-to-date stock, handled
by men of experience, and with every convenience
for the proper conduct of the business, W. Gardi-
ner and Co., Ltd., are in every sense of the word a
truly representative Australian firm. They have,
with enterprise, extended their trade to the islands
of the Southern Seas, and have done much to de-
W. GARDINER AND CO., LTD.,
WAREHOUSE, 71 YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
velop business in these parts, thus forwarding the
cause of the Commonwealth outside its natural
limits. In Australia, where expansion is limited
by a scattered population, and the cost of com-
munication with the interior is excessive, it is only
by the exercise of the most careful supervision and
economy in expenditure that the operations of a
business can be carried on to a successful issue.
/ifoerebants anb 3-mpoi‘teus.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches continued.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.


THE LATE MR. WILLIAM GARDINER.
No name is better or more favourably known
than that of the late Mr. William Gardiner, the
founder of the well-known house of IV. Gardiner
and Company, Limited, Softgoods Warehousemen,
Merchants, Importers, and Manufacturers.
Mr. William Gardiner, a fine type of intellectual
Englishman, was born on April 19th, 1831. He re-
ceived a sound commercial education under private
tutors. In 1852 Mr. Gardiner arrived in- Sydney.
His energy and business ability enabled him to ac-
quire such a thorough grip of the trade conditions
then obtaining, that, in 1856, four years after his
arrival in the colony, he started in business for him-
self as a softgoods warehouseman, and for many
years carried on operations in George Street.
Later on he was joined by his brother, Mr. S.
Gardiner, the result of their labours being that the
business was so enlarged that, in 1863, it was neces-
sary for Mr. W. Gardiner to visit London to super-
intend the home buying for the firm.
Since that period, with the exception of several
visits to Australia, Mr. Gardiner resided in Eng-
land, where he married in 1870. In addition to being
a valued contributor to the London “Times” on
Shipping, Postal and Colonial financial matters, Mr.
Gardiner held, among other responsible positions,
that of Chairman of the United Shipping Company
of London, an organisation promoted to counteract
the hampering of trade by the operations of the
ship-brokers’ ring. He was also Chairman of the
THE LATE MR. WILLIAM GARDINER.
Rounder of the Firm.
Sydney Lloyd’s, of London, the Australian section
of the London Chamber of Commerce, a life mem-
ber of the Royal Institute, Albermarle Street, and
the Royal Colonial Institute, Northumberland
Avenue.
Mr. Gardiner was in politics a Liberal Unionist,
and was also a member of the City Liberal Club;
he did not. however, in any way seek public office.
MR. T. J. HITCIIMAN.
Mr. T. J. Ilitchman, the manager for Messrs. W.
Oardiner and Co., Ltd., is a gentleman whose ex-
perience in the softgoods trade extends over a con-
siderable period. His experience as a buyer and his
knowledge of the requirements of the Australian
niereantile trade are amply ■ demonstrated by the
Progress the firm of Messrs. W. Gardiner and Com-
pany, Limited, continue to make. Sir. Ilitchman
learned his business in one of the great English
houses, and in the latter end of the seventies came
°nt to the old-established firm of Prince, Ogg and
Company, under agreement. Remaining with them
lor some four years, he then joined the well-known
hr_m of Messrs. Young and Lark, and after a short
sojourn in their Sydney warehouse, returned to
L °ndou to act as home buyer for various depart-
ments.
Upon the flotation of this business into the Com-
pany of Lark, Sons anil Company, Limited, Mr.
Hitchman was elected a director, and on the busi-
ness being absorbed by Messrs. Paterson, Laing
and Bruce, Limited. Mr. Hitchman made another
change by joining Messrs. D. and W. Murray,
Limited, the great South Australian merchants.
Some two years ago Mr. Hitchman became a direc-
tor of Messrs. W. Gardiner and Company, Limi-
MR. T. J. HITCHMAN.
ted, and, coming to Sydney, took up the position
of manager of the Sydney warehouses; no mean
task, but by persistent energy and business tact
he is winning the esteem and confidence of all who
hare dealings with his company. Having visited
all the important manufacturing districts of the
old world, and made no less than sixteen voyages
to and from Australia, Mr. Hitchman may lay
claim to being a bit of a traveller. Being a keen
observer, Mr. Hitchman must be possessed of such
an experience and knowledge of the world’s ways
as few men have the opportunity of gaining.
MR. CHARLES GOSNEY.
To successfully discharge the manifold duties at-
tached to the responsible position of General Secre-
tary to a firm whose operations are so far-reaching
and of such magnitude as that of W. Gardiner and
Company, calls for an alert brain, and the pos-
session of great force of character. Mr. Charles
Gosney, the Company’s Secretary, who is Mr. llos-
king’s able coadjutor, is a gentleman whose know-
ledge of the N.S.W. softgoods business dates back
many years, in fact, he may fairly claim
to be an old identity, having joined the
firm over thirty years ago. Mr. Gosney has gradu-
ated by merit alone from book-keeper to director
and secretary—a record of which he can well be
proud, and one which also shows plainly that
those who are at the head of the company’s affairs
are quick to recognise and to reward those who
in their service show themselves loyal and dili-
gent in matters pertaining to the firm’s welfare.
MR. W. 11. HOSKINGS,
who is one of the directors of the well-known firm
of Gardiner and Company, is a gentleman whose
reputation stands high in commercial circles as a
past master of finance.
He has spent his life in the midst of business,
having been associated with the firm under notice
since its inception in the , fifties, when he was a
partner with the late Mr. William Gardiner prior
■to the formation of the present company.
Mr. Hoskings exercises control over the counting
house, where his great experience and ability have
proved of inestimable value to the firm whose
MR. W. H. HOSKINGS.
operations, extending, as they do, to every quar-
ter of the world, run into huge figures.
MR. JOHN CIIILVERS.
In the organisation of the great Australian Mer-
cantile firms, which, owing to their large output
and the diversity of the lines handled, are obliged
to gather, in their stocks from all quarters of the
giobe, the position of London representative is one
of great responsibility, as to a great extent,
upon the success of the buying and
other kindred operations Which pass through the
London office, depends the success of the season’s
business in Australia. Thus, to worthily fulfil
the requirements of the position, the London Man-
ager of a huge concern, such as that of the firm
under review, must, in addition to his business
knowledge, be fully conversant of every detail of
trade conditions pertaining in Australia.
Mr. John Chilvers, director and manager of the
London office, has done yeoman service in building
up the firm’s great reputation and business, both
in Australia and England, as manager of the Lon-
don office, and a director. Mr. Chilvers is widely
known in shipping circles as a solid, competent,
reliable man of business, whose untiring energy
and ability is directed towards the furtherance of
the interests of his company and those whom he
acts for as Financial Manager.
Mr. Chilvers has been a member of the firm of
Gardiner and Company for a great number of
years, and has been one of its directors since the
inception Of the limited liability company.


The Manufacturers’ Agency,
Limited.
There are not wanting critics who year after year
tell us that the English Manufacturer is rapidly
losing ground, and that Germany and America have
now gained important interests where British trade
once ruled supreme.
British Manufacturers have, however, still a
great reputation for substantiality, excellence of
material, and high-class workmanship, which it is
not too much to say is seldom equalled or excelled
by foreign goods or manufactured products.
To the alarmist’s cry that the English merchant
and manufacturer lacks energy and enterprise we
need only point out the signal failure of the Trusts
to capture the British market, wdrile subsequent de-
velopments have shown that the great shipping
combine has to a great extent been a commercin'
bugbear.
The Manufacturers’ Agency, Limited, of 67 York-
street, is a commercial body which is thoroughly re-
presentative of the modern manufacturer of Great
Britain, more especially in relation to the soft-goods
trade. The concern is an English Incorporated
Company, which was formed on April 20th, 1900,
for the purpose of carrying on representation
throughout Australasia and New Zealand of large
and important manufacturers. The English head-
quarters are situated at 19 Upton-street, Manches-
ter, while the Australian warehouses are located ip
MR. C. F. BROWN.
Sydney and Melbourne. Some idea of the magnitude
of their operations may be gained from the fact
that the Sydney house has a floor space of over 20,000
square feet, while the Melbourne warehouse at 236
Flinders-lane has an area totalling 25,000 square
feet.
The company carry stock and indent for the fol-
lowing well-known firms; —Messrs. Barlow and
Jones, Limited, Manchester; Wm. Baitleet and Sons,
Eedditch; Brough, Nicholson and Hall, Leek; Bald-
win and Walker, Limited, Halifax; Wm. Champ-
ness and Son, Manchester; Farcy and Oppenheim,
Paris; Hoyle’s Prints, Limited, Manchester; Jar-
rett and Ilainsford, Limited, Birmingham; J. Rad-
cliffe and Company, Pochdale; John Shaw and Sons,
Limited, Halifax; Johnston, Shields and Company,
Ayrshire; Turton Manufacturing Company, Limi-
ted, Manchester.
MR. A. LONGLAND
The Manufacturers' Agency, Limited, have repre-
sentatives with offices in all the various States,
which, in addition to those already mentioned, in-
clude Queensland, South Australia, Western Aus-
tralia, Tasmania, and New Zealand.
The two managers in Australia are Mr. A. Long-
land, who controls the company’s operations in Syd-
ney, and Mr. C. F. Brown, who administers the Mel-
bourne business. Both these gentlemen are also local
directors, and form a local board for the manage-
ment of the business of the company in the colo-
nies, whilst Mr. F. W. Lake has been appointed to
assist in the management. The English directors are
composed of the principals of some of the repre-
sentative firms who form component parts of this
vast concern. Both Mr. Longland and Mr. Brown
are natives of one of England’s most celebrated
manufacturing counties—Lancashire. They have
had considerable experience in the various large
cities at home with the firm of Messrs. Barlow and
Jones, Limited, Manchester. Mr. P. W. Lake, who
is an East Anglian by birth, has acquired a tho-
roughly comprehensive knowledge of the soft-goods
trade during many years’ residence in the British
metropolis.
The Queensland business is under the able man-
agement of Mr. C. G. Chapman, who is so well and
favourably known in commercial circles in the
Northern State. His headquarters are at 7 Com-
monwealth Buildings, Brisbane, where a complete
range of samples for all branches of the soft-goods
trade are kept.
It will be interesting to give here some brief de-
tails of the large manufacturing firms represented
by the Manufacturers’ Agency, Limited, in Austra-
asia.
Messrs. Barlow and Jones, Limited, of Manches-
ter, have been established for considerably over fifty
years, and are known throughout the civilised world
for their Quilts, being the original makers and pa-
tentees of the Satin Quilt. They are equally cele-
brated for their speciality productions in Silvasheen
Linings, etc., and their employees now number be-
tween four and five thousand, while their mills,
which are eight in number, cover a very con-
siderable acreage.
Messrs. Wm. Bartleet and Sons, Eedditch, is a
very old-established concern, with a sound reputa-
tion of nearly two hundred years to its credit. Few
things are more necessary to every-day life than the
diminutive needle, and the " Archer” brand, as
manufactured by this firm, is a guarantee of their
general excellence. The disciple of Izaak Walton
will find his complete requirements amply catered
for with the firm’s well-known “ Archer” brand of
fishing tackle.
Messrs. Brough, Nicholson and Hall, of Leek,
Staffordshire, have their mills situated right in the
centre of the English Silk industry, and they are
makers of the “ Champion” sewing silks. They
also produce every conceivable class of Dress-
makers’ requisites, and their goods carry the same
high-class reputation in the oversea markets as
they do in the home centres.
Messrs. Baldwin and Walker, Limited, are well-
known as the manufacturers of the “ Ladyship”
Knitting and Fingering Wools, having been estab-
lished at the West Croft Mills, Halifax, for over
forty years.
ME. F. W. LAKE.
Messrs. Wm. Champness and Sons are the ori-
ginal makers of the celebrated “ Vi-Vis” Corset,
which has such a tremendous sale in the old coun-
try.
The corset, as its trade mark signifies, is of'
double strength, its title being obtained from the
fact that the very best material has been combined
with the most reliable workmanship, the result be-
ing the production of an article which is in every
way thoroughly satisfactory in build and design.
/Iftevcbants anb importers.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches continued.
MANUFACTURERS’ AGENTS AND SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.


Messrs. Farcy and Oppenheim have been cele-
brated for two or three generations for their French
made corsets. Since the advent of M. 'Worth in the
early days of the Third Empire, France has stood
pre-erainent as the leader of the world of fashion.
Messrs. Farcy and Oppenheim s factory being in
Paris, and thus in the centre of the beau monde, it
is but natural that the firm can fairly claim to be
amongst the leaders of style in corsets. Their brand
—the C.P. a la Sirene —is as equally well known in
America as it is in Paris and Australia.
Messrs. H. T. Greenlaw and Company, London,
are perhaps the largest and best known Tie
Makers in the world. They employ some six hun-
dred hands, and their entire efforts are devoted to
the production of smart neck wear.
Specimens of their very novel designs and colour-
ings in Ties are exhibited by all high-class
Hosiers throughout the Empire, and find as ready
sal® in Sydney, Melbourne, and Brisbane, as in
the West End of London.
Messrs. Hoyle’s Prints, Limited, Manchester, is
a branch of that huge combination of the Calico
Printers’ Association. The original firm of Messrs.
Thomas Hoyle and Sons, Limited, was established
m 1780, so that the productions of this firm have
been before the public during a period covering
three centuries. For any information regarding the
excellence of their goods, it is only necessary to
Question any of the fair sex in Australia.
Messrs. Jarrett and Rainsford, Limited, Birming-
ham, are well known as the producers of the
Sovereign,” “ Hercules," and “ Atlas” Pins, Hair-
Pins, etc. A pin in itself is, of course, a small
'ning, but when we consider the quantity used, and
Probably the equal quantity that is lost, and also
estimate the high position Messrs. Jarrett and
Rainsford, Limited, hold in this particular branch
■a le ra<^e ’ we ma J be able to form some rough
idea of the magnitude of their business.
Messrs. J. Radcliffe and Company, of Rochdale,
have acquired a well-established reputation in the
united Kingdom as one of the most reliable pro-
ducers of Flannels. Their up-to-date and extensive
"oiks are situated in Green Mill, Rochdale.
Messrs. John Shaw and Sons, Limited, Halifax,
lave an excellent position in the fiont rank of the
host known manufacturers of Serges and Woollen
WAREHOUSE, 67 YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
FLOOR SPACE OVER 20,000 SQUARE FEET.
Goods. The product of their works at the Brook-
royd Mills, Halifax, has received a very favour-
able reception in Australia.
Messrs. Johnston, Shields and Company, Ayr-
shire, Scotland, are famous throughout Great Bri-
tain as manufacturers of Lace Curtains and Curtain
WAREHOUSE, 236 FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE.
FLOOR SPACE 25,000 QUARE FEET.
Nets, an enormous proportion of which are yearly
manufactured at their works at New Mills, Ayr-
shire.
The Sydney offices and warehouse of the Manu-
facturers’ Agency, Limited, at 67 York-street, con-
sist of four large, roomy and well-lighted floors. On
the ground floor is situated the manager’s office, in
addition to a liberal display of Manchester goods,
while the basement is responsible for a varied as-
sortment of Blankets, Rugs, and Greys. On the first
floor are the extensive and well-fitted Counting
House and Accountants’ office, where the credit
operations of the firm are conducted, which neces-
sitate the employment of a very large staff of
clerks and typists, and on the same floor also are
shown the Linen, Prints, and Dress Goods of the
various manufacturers interested. Coming to the
second floor, we find the Haberdashery department,
and the large stock of Corsets manufactured by the
celebrated makers previously alluded to. On the
third floor are the Hosiery, Shirt and Tie de-
partments; the indent department also finds
a location in this portion of the warehouse, an ex-
tensive range of samples being held from all makers
represented by the Manufacturers’ Agency, Limited.
The company has made very rapid strides since
its inauguration, and this probably is only natural
from the fact that they bring the retailer into actual
contact with the manufacturer. They now employ
upwards of twenty travellers, who represent them
throughout the various States, while a staff of
nearly eighty is employed in the different ware-
houses. It is the intention of the firm to open up
branches in South Africa, and they have already
appointed two gentlemen to pioneer this important
market in their interests. They also propose to
establish the Agency in some of the other colonies
in the near future.
The success of the firm’s operations iii Austral-
asia is due not only to the able management, but
also to the loyal support of the well-organised staffs
retained throughout these Colonies, whilst that of
New South Wales is due in no small measure to the
ability of Mr. Longland and his able supporters in
Sydney. We have pleasure in reproducing the photo-
graphs of Messrs. Longland, Brown, and Lake, with
views also of the several warehouses of the company
in Australasia.


Messrs. W. & A. McArthur, Ltd.
SOETGOODSMEN.
Commerce ill its higher altitudes is shown in the
gathering together of the products of the world s
industry and setting them in order for the easy
access of mankind. In the early days of Australian
settlement, when the surplus thousands of the old
world poured into the country with one fixed idea
—the thirst for sudden wealth, which one and all
imagined could he acquired with but little trouble
on the goldfields, men scorned the slow money-
making process of trade, and joined in the wild
panic of the gold seekers.
The great firm of Messrs. W. and A. McArthur,
Limited, of London and Sydney, Softgoodsmen,
Shippers, and Insurance Agents, whose operations
extend to every quarter of the civilised globe, owes
its inauguration to the fact that its founder and
those who w r ith him guided its destinies, were men
possessing the ability to create conditions, and
thereby build up and foster a business. Like many
great mercantile concerns, the foundation of this
justly famous house was brought about by a some-
what trifling incident.
Mr. Alexander McArthur, the founder of the
business, who resided in Londonderry, being in
indifferent health, was advised to take a long sea
journey. Being a shrewd man of business, he
brought out with him a small shipment of mer-
chandise, from the sale of which he proposed to
clear the expenses of the trip. On his arrival in
Sydney in 1842 his alert commercial mind was
quick to grasp the opportunities which the colony
offered for mercantile trade.
To think was to act, and within a short period
the passer-by was surprised to see a sign over a
small shop in Pitt-street notifying to all and
sundry that Alexander McArthur, Warehouse-
man, had a tempting display of merchandise to
sell.
Mr. McArthur's business ability and un-
tiring energy secured for him a prosperous grow-
ing trade. The climate of Australia restored him
to health, and he decided to still further extend
his operations by entering into partnership with
two other warehousemen, the new' firm trading
under the title of McArthur, Little, and Atkinson,
in new premises located on the site of the present
great warehouse in Y’ork-street.
The excellence of the firm’s goods, coupled with
their honourable methods of business, so increased
their output, that Mr. McArthur in 1848 returned
to England to confer with his brother, afterwards
Sir William McArthur, who acted as home buyer.
When at home a partnership was formed between
them. On his return to Australia Mr. Alexander
McArthur found Sydney in the delirium of the
gold rush of 1851.
Thousands of men of all nations were arriving
by every vessel. The softgoods trade, by reason of
the sudden abnormal increase in population be-
came a veritable golconda, and the firm of Mc-
Arthur-, Little, and Atkinson, keeping pace with
the demands of its patrons assumed immense pro-
portions, and branches were opened in Melbourne
and Auckland. In 1878 Sir William McArthur
visited Australia, returning to London within the
year.
The next important event in the history of the
firm was its formation into a private limited lia-
bility company, the directorate being as follows: —
London Office, Mr. Alexander McArthur, Chair-
man; Mr. W. A. McArthur, M.P., Mr. G. W.
McArthur, and Mr. W. J. Webster, who has long
been associated with Messrs. W. and A. McArthur,
and for many years, as one of the London buyers,
was largely responsible for the prominent position
held by the firm —latterly both as a buyer and
director he continues' to do much to further the
rnterests of the Co. The Australasian head-
quarters are under the care of Sir William McMil-
lan, K.C.M.G., Mr. J. P. McArthur, and Mr. 11. G.
Jefferson, the new organisation trading under the
present name of W. and A. McArthur, Limited.
The Australasian softgoods business is handled
exclusively from the company’s headquarters at
Y'ork-street, Sydney, with branches at Brisbane,
Melbourne, and Adelaide.
The Directors in Sydney are ably assisted by
Mr. W. M. Alderson, a gentleman well known in
the Sydney trade, who fills the responsible and ar-
duous position of Manager with the greatest skill
and ability. The successful extension of their York
Street business is very largely due to his foresight
and energy.
Some idea of the firms’s operations may
be gained by a mention of the fact that in
addition to their vast interest in the softgoods
trade the company also carries on an extensive
business as Shippers and Marine Insurance Agents,
and Grain and Produce exporters, at their ware-
house in Macquarie-place, the above having been
included at the time of the company’s flotation into
a Limited Company.
The premises occupied at York-street, Sydney,
comprise a handsome warehouse of four storeys,
running through to Clarence-street. The ware-
house is replete with every facility for carrying on
such a large business.
The stock, which is of a most extensive charac-
ter, includes Manchester and Scotch goods. Prints,
Flannels, etc.. Blankets, Carpets, Furnishings,
Linens, Muslins, Clothing, Stuffs and Dresses,
Silks, Mantles, Underclothing, Ribbons, Gloves,
Fancy Goods, Straw Hats, Mercery, Hosiery,
Haberdashery, Boots, etc.
The ground floor is given over to the Manchester
Department, Carpets, Linens, etc. On the second
floor or gallery, English and Foreign Dress Goods,
Mantles, Ribbons, Gloves, etc., are displayed in all
the leading and most saleable lines. A large as-
sortment of Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Boots is aho
located on this floor. On the third floor a care-
fully selected range of choice is given in Straw
Hats specially manufactured by Messrs. McArthur
for the Australian trade. Special attractions arc
also provided in Umbrellas, Shirts, Men’s Mcr-
eery. Hosiery, Men’s Hats, and Haberdashery,
During the last few months another wing h aS
been added to the warehouse by taking in the build-
ing known as “ the old Opera House,” adjacent
to their premises, thus adding another floor of coE-
siderable size. In this new wing the Clothing d®"
partment is located. The great resources of the
company as Shippers and Merchants, and their
strong financial position, enable them to procure
the latest and best products of the old-world manu-
facturers. Messrs. McArthur have extensive fa®"
tories of their own, in which the making of cloth-
ing, shirts, underclothing, and straw hats is cat-
ried on, the industry giving work to a great nuffl-
ber of young men and women.
MESSRS. W. AND A. McARTHUR, LIMITED WAREHOUSE. YORK-STREET, SYDNEY.
/ilbercbants anb importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.


MR. ALEXANDER McARTHUE.
Jlr. Alexander McArthur is one of the veterans
of the Australian trade, being at the present time
"0 years of age. He was born in the North of Ire-
land in 1813, and is a son of the Rev. John
JlcArthur. He commenced his commercial career
in Londonderry. As a youth he did not enjoy very
good health, and when 26 years old he was informed
by his doctors that he could not live another season
in Ireland.
He therefore decided to visit Australia, which in
those days was considered quite an undertaking, and
after a four months’ voyage landed in Sydney in
1812. Having brought some goods out with him,
he opened up a business in Pitt Street. Finding
the climate suitable to his constitution he, within a
short period, entered into partnership with Messrs,
kittle and Atkinson, and moved into larger premises
in York Street.
In 1848 Mr. McArthur went home, return-
ing to Australia in 1851, having visited America
in (he meantime. During this trip he arranged a
partnership with his brother, Mr. W. McArthur,
afterwards Sir William McArthur. He arrived in
Australia at the most exciting period of its his-
tory, when gold was just discovered, but was wise
enough to avoid seeking the goldfields, and devoted
his attention to reaping commercial benefits from
the discoveries.
MR. ALEXANDER McARTHUR, D.L.
Founder of the Firm.
Under the new manager the business of the firm
was greatly increased. In 1854, shortly after his
Marriage, he paid a hurried visit to England, re-
turning the next year. For the next ten years he
resided in Sydney. He was twice elected to the
legislative Assembly, and finally appointed to the
Upper House.
During this time he took a great interest in all
commercial and political matters. He also estab-
ls“ed businesses in Auckland and Melbourne. In
1863 he again left for England, intending to spend
? d," J’ ears at borne, but finally settled down
la ,™ e °ld country, where he has resided ever since.
He became a member of the first London school
°ard, and in 1879 he turned his attention to poli-
os, and was elected a member for Leicester in the
moeral interest, and continued to sit for that
■ f orou Sh for several Parliaments, until just be-
We the introduction of Mr. Gladstone’s Home
w. Dill, when he retired owing to failing health.
'• McArthur is still hale and hearty, and takes a
eu interest in all matters concerning Australia.
Although practically retired from active com-
ercml life, Mr. McArthur is still a director of his
Icompany, Messrs. W. and A. McArthur,
Bn i also on the Star Life Assurance
aid, Chubb’s Lock Company, Mount Kembla Coal
nJDianv, New South Wales Land and Mortgage
»i>? Pa £ y ’ etc ’ is one °f the Surrey Magistrates
u a Deputy Lieutenant of the City of London. ’
MR. W. A. McARTHUR M.P.
The State of New South Wales will always owe a
debt of gratitude to those who, by habits of industry
and enterprise, and in ' the face of great initial
difficulties, laid the foundation of our Commerce
on such a solid basis that to-day great warehouses.
MR. W. A. McARTHUR, M.P.
Chairman of Directors.
stocked to repletion with goods from every port
of the civilised world, are located in all parts of the
capital city, Sydney.
Students of the science of heredity tall us that the
abilities, whether literary, scientific, or technical,
are seldom transmitted from father to son. But
this, like many hard and fast rules, has its notable
exceptions.
In the domain of commerce this is especi-
ally noticeable, and no better instance of in-
herited ability transmitted from father to son could
be given than that of Mr. W. A. McArthur, son of
the founder of the Australian Branch of Messrs.
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd.
Born in Sydney in 1857, the subject of this sketch,
nhen about six years of age, accompanied his
parents to London, where he entered College, re-
ceiving a thorough business education. As a youth
he followed in the footsteps of his father, by evinc-
ing great interest in politics.
In 1878 he accompanied Sir William McArthur
in his visit to Australia, and on his return entered
the business. Mr. McArthur made several trips,
but he never resided in Australia for any length of
time owing to his many responsibilities in Eng-
land.
From his early years he was greatly inte-
rested in politics, and in 1886 stood for the York-
shire division of Buckrosa in the Liberal inte-
rests, defeating Sir C. Sykes by one vote. He was
the first native-born Australian to sit in the Bri-
tish House of Commons.
On this occasion, however, his political career
was cut short, as he was unseated after a scrutiny
of the votes, several given in his favour being in-
formal. The next year, however, he was returned
for the St. Austral division of Cornwall, which con-
stituency he has represented ever since, and at
the last general election he was returned unop-
posed. He was one of the Junior Lords of the
Treasury in the last Gladstone Administration,
and is at present one of the Opposition Whips.
In addition to being acting Chairman of Direc-
tors to Messrs. W. and A. McArthur’s business Mr.
McArthur is on the following boards: —The Bank
of Australasia, Ocean Accident Assurance Com-
pany, Gulf Line Steamship Company, Thompson-
Houstons Electric Company, and the Union
Marine Insurance Company.
sir william McMillan, k.c.m.g.
The history of Australian public men contains
incontrovertible evidence of the fact that our most
successful legislators have been those who at some
period in their lives were engaged in mercantile
pursuits.
The huge commercial house of W. and A. Mc-
Arthur has, from amongst those at the head of
its affairs, supplied men whose services to the
State cannot be too highly estimated. Sir William
McMillan, K.C.M.G., Chairman of the Sydney
Board, is a gentleman who for many years has
figured prominently in Australasian political life.
Sir William McMillan was born at Londonderry
in 1850. His father, the Rev. G. McMillan, being
a firm believer in the maxim that knowledge is
power, spared no expense in the education of his son,
who pursued his studies at Dublin and London.
In November, 1869, Sir William McMillan, then
a youth of 19, arrived in Sydney, and in 1877 he
entered the Melbourne warehouse of Messrs.
McArthur, where he remained for two years, until
the death of Jlr. Jlacafee. In 1886 he became
Chairman of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce,
and in the same year he was chosen to represent
New South Wales at the great conference of
Chambers held in England.
In 1887 he acceded to the request of his many
supporters and entered Parliament, being elected
as a member for East Sydney. In ,1889 he became
a member of the Sir Henry Parkes Ministry, with
the portfolio of Colonial Treasurer. During his
SIR WILLIAM McMILLAN, K.C.M.G.
Chairman of Sydney Board.
tenure of office Sir William proved himself to be an
able financier and a staunch upholder of the doc-
trines of free trade policy. In 1900 he was made
a K.C.M.G., the title being one of the last conferred
by Queen Victoria. In the same year Sir William
allowed himself to be nominated, and was elected,
a member of the Federal Parliament, his advocacy
of wharfage reform and wharf resumption having
won him many supporters amongst those who have
the welfare of New South Wales shipping interests
at heart. In 1891 he acted as Chairman of the
Convention in connection with the Chicago Exhibi-
tion.
In addition to his great responsibilities as Chair-
man of W. and A. McArthur, Limited,
Sir William still retains his position as Local
Director of the National Bank, Sydney; Equitable
Life Assurance Society of U.S.A.; and the Metro-
politan Coal Company; Chairman and Managing
Director of the Farmers’ and Settlers’ Co-operative
Company. Amongst other important public posi-
tions occupied by Sir William McMillan, it may
be mentioned that he was a member of the Federal
Convention held in Melbourne in 1890, the Federal
Convention held in Sydney in 1891, and also a mem-
ber of the Federal Convention held in Sydrrey in
1897-98. On entering Parliament Sir William
McMillan resigned a number of other Director-
ships.
Although his business and parliamentary work
leave him but little time for other matters, Sir
William does not neglect his social calls, and to-
day is one of the Commonwealth’s most popu'ar
legislators.


MR. 11. G. JEFFERSON.
In all laige mercantile houses the head of the
shipping department is an official to whom all look
up as one who bears a great and constant responsi-
bility.
Messrs. W. and A. McAi thur. Limited,
are very- fortunate in having as the Manager of
their Shipping Department so experienced, trust-
worthy and capable a gentleman as Mr. Jefferson.
Ho is a native of England and came out to New-
South Wales, in the year 1834. Shortly after this
he entered the service of Messrs. W. and A. Mc-
Arthur.
After seven years’ strenuous work, M
Jefferson went into the shipping office of the firm,
to assist in the management. In 1891, when he made
that change, the office was situated in King Street.
In 1893, on the retirement of Mr. Finlay-, Mr.
Jefferson was appointed to the position of Manager.
One important result of the change was the removal
of the shipping office to Rridge Street, an alteration
that w-as instigated by the new Manager, who had
long noticed that the centre of gravity ot the ship-
ping business of Sy-dney had moved into a radius
not far removed from Circular Quay-..
During the period betw-een 1893 and 1896, Mr.
Jefferson pushed forw-ard the interests of the portion
of business entrusted to his care with such capa-
bility that the Rridge Street premises became inade-
quate, and the necessity for larger office accommo-
dation resulted in a resolution being arrived at in
MR. H. G. JEFFERSON.
1896 to remove into the fine suite of offices now occu-
pied at Macquarie Place.
The executive ability- displayed by Mr. Jefferson
in the building up of the shipping business was of
such a high order that, in 1900, he was made a
Director of Messrs. W. and A. McArthur, Limited.
As one of the Directorate of this great Company
Mr. Jefferson has done much to promote the growth
of New South Wales Commerce and Shipping, both
locally- and abroad.
In May, 1902, Mr. Jefferson proceeded to London
on the business of the Company-, and had an oppor-
tunity, in the very centre of the world’s trade, of
observing the many- changes which had taken place
in the shipping business during the period of his
stay in Australia.
Mr. Jefferson holds a very high and honourable
position in the business world of Sydney-, and his
views on mercantile matters are much sought after
and valued by his business confreres. As a leader
in all shipping affairs he is regarded with the ut-
most respect. There is hardly a branch of business
in which sudden emergencies demanding prompt
and correct decisions so frequently arise as in the
shipping trade, and Mr. Jefferson is noted for his
great ability to do the right thing at the right time
in his particular department. This was generally-
recognised when he was appointed a member of the
Shipping Committee of the Sydney Chamber of
Commerce, in which position he exercised a very-
considerable and most useful influence.
The demands of business on Mr. Jefferson are so
constant that he has no time to devote to duties of a
civic nature.
MR. J. P. McARTHUR.
Amongst the representative Australians who con-
trol the great Commercial interests of New South
Wales, the name of Mr. J. P. McArthur stands out
prominently as that of a man richly- endowed with
business ability, and those faculties of oiganisation
which make for success in life.
MR. J. P. McARTHUR.
Throughout his long career as one of the heads of
one of our greatest mercantile houses, Mr. J. P.
McArthur has ever been held in the highest esteem
by all who have had business relations with him.
As already- stated, Mr. McArthur is an Australian,
and it is pleasing to note that he is a native of Syd-
ney-, being born in the Harbour City- in 1858. When
quite a lad he accompanied his parents to England,,
where he received a thorough Collegiate education.
Having completed his studies and in order to gain a
practical knowledge of business methods Mr.
McArthur spent a number of years in the famous
warehouses of Messrs. R. Hently and Sons, Cheap-
side, London, in whose employ he received his early
Commercial education. After leaving there
he became connected with W. and A.
McArthur, and for the next two years he joined
their business. About this time he was admitted
as a Junior partner, and paid a short visit
to the Colonies, after which he was sent to Auck-
land to a-ssist in the management of the film’s
business there. The next six years were spent
partly- in New Zealand and partly in London. On
his firm deciding to relinquish their New Zealand
business, in consequence of the developments taking
place in Australia, where they- were now entering
rather extensively- into the Shipping and Produce
business, Mr. McArthur returned to Auckland,
and was occupied for nearly a year in settling
matters in New Zealand.
About seven years ago he came to permanently
reside in Sydney. Upon the conversion of A. Mc-
Arthur and Company-, Sydney, into a Limited
Company, under the title of W. and A. McArthur,
Limited, he became one of the first directors, and
in conjunction with his co-directors, had the
satisfaction of seeing the business of the company-
very largely increased, with most satisfactory
results.
In 1888 and 1889 Mr. McArthur occupied the posi-
tion of Chairman of the Warehousemen’s Associa-
tion. He is now a member of the Council of the
Chamber of Commerce, and during his visit to
England in 1300 he represented the Sydney Cham-
ber at the Triennial meeting of the Associated
Chambers of Commerce,
He takes considerable interest in religious and
philanthropic works, is Honorary Treasurer of the
Women’s Hospital, and one of the Honorary
Secretaries of the ISoy-s’ .brigade, and a Vice
President of the Y.M.C.A. In addition to this he
holds a silver medal from the Shipwrecked Relief
and Royal Humane Society for attempting a res-
cue while a heavy sea was running off Hondi Reach.
MR. G. W. McARTHUR.
Mr. G. W. McArthur, one of the partners in the
firm of Messrs. W. and A. McArthur, Limi-
ted, is a Londoner by birth, and claims 1864 as
his natal year. He was educated at The Leys
School, Cambridge,' where he made excellent pro-
gress, and gave early- promise of thosp abilities which
in after years won him a conspicuous place amongst
the commercial men of the World’s metropolis. At
the conclusion of his scholastic career he spent two
years in a large London office, acquiring a knowledge
of mercantile life, and fitting himself for the impor.
tant part he had to play some years subsequently in
the management of the gigantic concern with which
he is now so prominently- identified.
In 1881 he arrived in Sydney, and for the next five
years assiduously set himself to obtain a complete
mastery- of the numerous details of warehousing in
soft goods by a personal experience in the various de-
partments. Having thus gained invaluable insight
into Australian methods of business, and made him-
self thoroughly proficient in understanding the re-
quirements of the Australian public, he, in 1889, re-
turned to London, where he augmented his already
wide experience by entering the buying department
of the firm, and there obtaining a clear and adequate
conception of the qualifications necessary for the
proper and profitable discharge of the duties im-
posed on those who aspire to the very responsible
MR. G. W. McARTHUR.
position of a buyer for a firm carrying on a business
of such magnitude as is controlled by Messrs.
McArthur, Limited.
In 1892 he returned to Sydney for a period of two
years, which were spent in exercising a judicious
supervision over a large portion of the firm’s Colon-
ial operations. While in Sydney he made many
friends in the business world, and was regarded by
his confreres as a sterling specimen of the younger
generation of Anglo-Australian commercial men.
On the formation of Messrs. W. and A. McArthur’s
business into a limited liability company, Mr. G-
W. McArthur was appointed one of the first direc-
tors. and at the present time he is resident in Lon-
don, assisting in the active management of the
firm’s business at head-quarters, where his world-
wide knowledge and experience is warmly appreci-
ated by his co-directors. Mr. G. W. McArthur is
also connected with the Metropolitan Coal Com-
pany, Ltd., of Helensburgh, Illawarra district, New
South Wales, in the capacity of a director.
Although absorbed in business Mr. McArthur has
played no inconsiderable part in the field of ath-
letics, as his well-knit frame and agile movements,
allied to his energetic nature, abundantly indicate.
When in New South Wales he represented this state
in the Rugby Football Union Team, and proved him-
self to be an excellent sportsman, as well as a
worthy comrade. In the arena of sport he won the
same commendable measure of success and popu-
larity which has marked his career in the domain
of Commerce and Trade.


Messrs. Petersen, Boesen & Co.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN AND
GENERAL IMPORTERS.
The firm of Petersen, Boesen and Company,
Softgoods Warehousemen and General Importers,
of 65 Y'oik-street, was founded in 1855 by Messrs.
John Richard Petersen and Theodor August Boe-
sen. while the proprietaiy was reinforced in 1887
by Mr. Arthur Elliot Hobson, who entered the
service of the firm some thirty-five years ago.
The original premises were situated in George-
street in the year 1855, the business being carried
on under the title of Wholesale and Retail
Drapers and General Merchants. The firm re-
mained here for about two years, when the increase
in business necessitated a removal to a larger and
MR. J. R. PETERSEN.
wore commodious building, which was secured in
York-sheet, the site at that time being known as
Heydon’s old buildings. This was occupied till
1877, when a removal was made to the present
warehouse at the corner of York and Barrack
streets, which has been occupied continuously
e ' - er since.
This building consists of five stories, an addi-
tional four floors having recently .been added
''hich are divided off from the original warehouse
t>y fireproof steel doors.
On the ground floor the offices of Mr. T. A.
boesen and Mr. A. E. Hobson are situated, the
’’emaming space being taken up with a liberal
display of Manchester goods, while the basement
15 responsible for the heavy goods entering rooms
ai ul Manchester Department.
The first floor is reached by a handsome stair-
case. the first portion being occupied by a large
stock of dress materials and costumes, the remain-
s l>ace being given over to a great quantity of
different specialities in Manchester goods, um-
brellas, ties, and silk handkerchiefs.
Dn the second floor is found the shirt depart-
ment, the firm’s own manufactured article—the
“ Gity” brand—being much in evidence. The
Haberdashery department accounts for the remain-
ing section of this floor.
The ready-made clothing occupies considerable
space on the third floor, the firm’s specialty being
MR. THEO. BOESEN.
the proprietary “ City” brand of wearing apparel.
At the back of this are the men’s and youth’s felt
and straw hats, and also a considerable quantity
of furnishings, linoleums ,and floor cloths.
The whole of the top floor contains the bulk
stock, etc. The operations of the firm have always
been conducted on very conservative commercial
PETERSEN, BOESEN AND CO.’S WAREHOUSE,
YORK AND BARRACK STREETS, SYDNEY.
principles, and they do a good sound business
throughout New South Wales, and have also ac-
quired a considerable Island trade. They cater
especially for the requirements of country store-
keepers, and all the latest novelties in softgoods
and other kindred lines are always to be found
among the diversified stocks of their warehouse.
They employ thirty-three hands in the Y’ork-
street premises, and have eight travellers in their
service.
Mr. Petersen has resided for the past twenty
yeais in England, and supei intends the company’s
English and European business, as well as looking
after the home buying at the firm’s London office,
61 Basinghall-street. He is assisted in the work
by his son, Mr. J. R. S. Petersen, and Mr. W.
Punch, a very old employee, who will shortly join
the firm in an administrative capacity. Valuable
assistance is also rendered by Mr. 11. Punch, who
has also been many years in the service of Messrs.
Petersen, Boesen. With the exception of two or
three business visits to the old country', Mr. Boe-
sen has resided continuously in Sydney. Mr. Hob-
son, as previously mentioned, has taken an active
MR. A. E. HOBSON.
part in the management here, and in this he has
been assisted by Mr. Arthur Boesen, who will also
soon acquire a proprietary interest in the concern.
Mr. Boesen, Senior, holds the position of Consul-
General for Denmark, an official position which
he has maintained with becoming dignity, in addi-
tion to discharging his consular duties with every
satisfaction, both to the Danish Government and
to those with whom they have from time to time
brought him in contact. Both in his private
and commercial capacity Mr. Boesen is much res-
pected.
It is a noteworthy fact that the two senior part-
ners have been associated for the last forty-
seven years, during which time the name of the
firm has never altered, a matter which is some-
thing of a mercantile record in its way, and says
much for the harmonious relations which have ex-
isted between the two founders cf the business,
while the development of the firm itself is an ex-
cellent example of the State’s commercial and in-
dustrial progress during the last half century.
/Iftercbauts ant> Jmpoi’ters.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches :—eontmJed.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.


Messrs. Robert Reid & Co., Ltd.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.
The men who in the early days of Australian
commercial life laid.the foundation of the great
mercantile films whose palatial warehouses adorn
the chief cities of our Commonwealth were men
possessed of great piudeuce, moderation and
ability. Amongst the founders of Australian com-
merce the great firm of Robert Reid and Co., Ltd.,
Importers and Manufacture! s, of Melbourne, Syd-
ney, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, and Newcastle,
stands out as a convincing proof of what may be
accomplished by enterprise, integrity, and an un-
flinching adhesion to legitimate trading operations.
In 1874 the founders of this world-famous soft-
goods house commenced business as Warehousemen
at Flinders Lane, Melbourne, under-the title of
Warne, Adair and Reid, the partners being Mr.
Edward Warne, who had previously carried on a
Manchester Clothing and Woollen business; Mr.
John Adair, of Kyneton; and Mr. Robert Reid, for
many years associated with the pioneer warehouse-
men, Messrs. William Watson and Sons, Melbourne.
All three were men of great commercial experience,
and from the outset the combination scored success.
In 1876 Mr. John Adair, for private reasons, retired
from the partnership, and the firm then became
known as Warne and Reid. The progress made
during the next four years was phenomenal, and
to meet the rapid increase of trade new and com-
modious premises were erected opposite to their
old warehouse in Flinders Lane. This warehouse
is now the firm’s Australasian head-quarters. The
firm was pushed forward, until in 1883 they were
able to concentrate their N.S.W. trade by the
establishment of a branch house, under the man-
agement of Sir. F. W. Stoddart, at Wynyard-
street, Sydney, on the site now occupied by the
warehouse of Messrs. Paterson. Laing and Bruce,
Ltd. The Sydney business, under the assiduous
fostering care of Mr. Stoddart, gradually grew into
large proportions, whilst the Melbourne warehouse
continued to prosper, and as an aid to further suc-
cess the stock of the well-known warehousemen,
Thompson and Fleming, was absorbed.
Mr. Warne, who had acted as resident London
partner from flip inception of the firm, retired from
active work, the business being carried on by Mr.
Reid, under the trading title of Robert Reid and
Co. Shortly afterwards the business of the Belgian
Merchants’ Company, Melbourne, was absorbed.
The great responsibility and work entailed neces-
sitated an able co-adjutor, and a partnership was
arranged with Mr. James Wright, who had been a
member of the firm from 1874. Mr. John Hastings,
who, under Mr. Warne had acted as chief home
buyer, took up the duties of management in London,
and became a resident partner in conjunction with
Mr. R. Reid, jun., who went to Loudon in 1888,
Mr. Stoddart taking up the Sydney partnership.
During the years that followed, the firm advanced
its position in a marvellous manner. Some idea of
the progress being shown by the fact that in 1891
Messrs. Robert Reid and Co. were able to absorb
the businesses of Messrs. William Watson and Sons,
Melbourne, and Ross, Robertson and Co., of Syd-
ney, the purchase-money totalling many thousands
of pounds. In 1892 still further additions were
made by the absorption of the immense stocks of
Messrs. Frey and Co., at Melbourne, Sydney and
Brisbane, valued at .£96,000, and Burkitt and Co.,
Melbourne, appraised at .£lO,OOO.
In 1894 Mr. Reid, having previously become part
owner, the whole of that valuable property known
as Mcllwraith-street Wharves, were taken over and
renamed Reid’s Federal Wharves, the latter being
since resumed by the N.S.W. Government in 1900
for .£169,916, this being the valuation of the Re-
sumption Court.
In 1896 the Sydney stock of Messes. Rhodes and
Co., of Barrack-street, Sydney, was secured, and
during the next year Messrs. George Webster and
Co., of Melbourne, transferred their stocks and
interests to Robert Reid and Company.
In 1893 the most important change in the history
of the business took place. Owing to the gigantic
operations of the concern, Mr. Reid and his part-
ners decided to introduce outside help into its con-
1 1 01, and as a result a limited liability company
was successfully floated, having its head office at
18 Chiswell-street, London, E.C., the Directorate
being as follows The Hon. Robert Reid, Mr.
James Wright, and Mr. A. M. Reid in Australia,
and Mr. Robert Reid, junior, Mr. John Hastings,
and Mr. Arthur Bones in London. The capital of
the company was .£500,000, made up as follows:
Debentuies £150,000, Preference Shares £200.000,
Ordinary Shares £150,000. Branches were also es-
tablished at Adelaide, Brisbane and New-
castle, each having complete factories of their
own. The rapid strides made in the volume of the
Aim’s trading operations, notwithstanding the fact
that all the Queensland trade was given over to
the Brisbane house, necessitated further additions,
and in 1900 two more stories were added to their
al ready huge warehouse, making it as it at present
stands eight stories high. The N.S.W. business,
which in 1833 started with but a very small stock,
has grown to immense proportions, the warehouse
at 32 and 34 York-street, Sydney, being one of the
largest in the N.S.W. metropolis. The buildings,
equipped with every modern convenience for the
display and despatch of goods, have a frontage of
87 feet 6 inches to York-street, with a considerable
depth. Hydraulic lifts and an electric lift installa-
tion are in use throughout the various departments.
The stock is of a most varied character, and em-
braces all branches of the Drapery, Clothing and
Mercery, Silk Meicery, Furnishings, Fancy Goods,
Platedware, etc. Messrs. Robert Reid and Co. have
one of the finest clientele in the Commonwealth,
and by reason of their extensive offices and agencies
throughout the world have unlimited resources for
supplying the requirements of their thousands of
Australian customers. In addition to the gieat
soft-goods warehouse in each capital, the firm have
large factories in Melbourne, Sydney, Biisbane and
Adelaide, where the manufacture of clothing,
shirts, and straw hats is carried out on a huge
MESSRS. ROBERT REID AND CO., LTD., WAREHOUSE, YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
Hfteccbants ant) Jinporteis.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches continued.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.


scale, the output from the Sydney factories alone
amounting to many thousands of pounds annually.
The Newcastle branch of the Company has
achieved phenomenal success. To accommodate the
ever-increasing trade new and more commodious
warehouses have been erected at the corner of Per-
kin and King streets. The firm’s wonderful pro-
gress in N.S.W, is a tribute to the business capa-
bilities of the directors and the clever management
of Mr. F. W. Stoddart and his able co-adjutors. Mr.
W. Johnstone, warehouse manager, and the chief
accountant, Mr. C. L. Montague.
It is especially gratifying to note that the busi-
ness of Messrs. Robert Reid and Co., is purely an
Australian concern, which, by careful management,
honest dealing, and the stocking of none but the
MR. ROBERT REID, JUNR.
best linos in each class of goods, has been gradu-
ally developed, until at tire present day it stands
forth as one of the greatest of the Commonwealth’s
mercantile houses, employing in its vast operations
MR. JAMES WRIGHT.
as a wholesale soft-goods distributing and manufac-
turing concern hundreds of Australian-born men
and women, and spending immense sums annually
'n the purchase of Australian-produced material.
SENATOR ROBERT REID.
Senator Robert Reid, head of the great
Australian soft-goods house of Robert Reid
and Co., is a gentleman who has devoted the
whole of his spare time to the advancement of Aus-
tralia as a nation, being an able politician and a
liberal supporter of philanthropic institutions. He
spent his boyhood days in Scotland, having been
bom at Leven, Fifeshire, in 1842. In 1854 his
parents came out to Australia, arriving in Mel-
bourne. As a lad the subject of this
SENATOR ROBERT REID.
sketch accepted a junior position in a large drapery
establishment in Collins-street. It was a far cry
from the bottom of the commercial ladder in ’55
to the position of President of the Chamber of
Commerce, but Mr. Robert Reid, as he w T as then
known, accomplished the ambition of his life in
1888, when he was elected for two successive years
as President of the Melbourne Chamber of Com-
merce. He has just completed another three years
in this capacity, having been President for five
years out of the fifty just celebrated. Senator Robert
Reid w y as one of those patriots who came forward in
1892 and sacrificed much valuable time for the
public weal as a representative of the Melbourne
province in the Legislative Council. During the
regime of the Patterson Government he accepted
tire portfolios of Minister of Defence and Health,
and in the present Irvine Government the office
of Minister of Education and Health.
The business career of Senator Robert Reid from
early boyhood covers a period of 40 years of con-
tinuous toil and effort, made possible only by the
possession of abundant health.
Senator Reid was the first President of the As-
sociated Chambers of Commerce of the Common-
wealth. He is also President of Ihe^JHomoeopathic
MR. MAURICE REID.
Hospital, Melbourne, in addition to many other
important positions. He was recently elected to tha
Senate.
MR. F. W. STODDART.
In the fostering of local industries in the
State, none are more entitled to honour than
Mr. F. W. Stoddart, the resident and General
Manager for N.S.W. of Messrs. Robert Reid and
Co., Limited.
Mr. Stoddart, who is a true and representative
Australian, was born in Melbourne, and educated
at the Hawthorn Grammar School. He joined the
firm of Robert Reid and Co. in 1883 for the purpose
of establishing their business in the New South
Wales capital. In February, 1883, Mr. Stoddart
began operations as the founder of the N.S.W.
Branch.
Under his management the firm at once secured
a good hold on the trade of New South Wales,
MR. F. W. STODDART.
and although established only eight years,
now stands in the front rank of Sydney’s soft-goods
warehouses.
To Mr. F. W. Stoddart’s untiring energy, tact,
and ability' lies the fact of Messrs. Robert Reid
MR. J. HASTINGS.
and Co., Ltd.’s, business holding the very magni-
ficent position it now occupies. Mr. Stoddart’s
business methods are such that his word can be
accepted on any matter as soon as his writings.
As a recognised authority on commercial matters
he has been instrumental in assisting and advising
many, who at the present day are thriving metio-
politan and country merchants. Mr. Stoddart,
who has been a member of the Council of the Syd-
ney' Chamber of Commerce for some years, was re-
cently elected chairman of the associated waie-
housemen of Sydney for 1903.
The ever increasing responsibilities of the man-
agement of so laige a concern absorb his time and
energies to the fullest extent, and preclude him
from taking an active part in public affairs.


Messrs. Rylands & sons
(Colonial), Ltd.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN AND
MANUFACTURERS.
In these days of keen competition, when, manu-
facturers and traders of all kinds among the prin-
cipal nations are elbowing one another for fore-
most positions in the various markets of the world,
it is pleasing to notice that some of the “ old
houses,” who in years precedent built np a name
for themselves, are now fully alive to the commer-
cial “ hustling” characteristic of the present time.
The “ fight for markets” is being waged with
strenuous activity the world over, and amongst the
army of competitors it does not require the eye of
prescience to foresee that the battle must result
in favour of the strongest, best equipped, and
most reliable firms whose names are a guarantee
of the quality of their goods, and whose modern
methods of manufacturing and distributing enable
them to outdistance their rivals in the matter of
both production and cost.
In the economical manufacture and distributing
of diapery and textile fabrics throughout the'
world no name is more favourably or more widely
lands, buildings, and machinery, to the value of
over XI,dOiI.OOO, while in the stimulation of this
vast consolidation of wealth to productive activity.
upwards of twelve thousand (12,000) hands find
remunerative employment.
ifesai’s. I?ylands and Sons, Limited; as the pro-
prietors of one of the largest bleaching and finish-
ing Morks in Europe, hold a foremost position in
cie.«, distribute textile fabrics over the whole of the
inhabited globe, their name being as well known
in Cairo, China, or Japan as it is on 'Change in
Manchester.
“ Dacca” goods, the special product of the Hy-
lands’ mills, are famous all the world over, and
are so sound, honest, and durable, that they bring
credit to both the makers and vendors by reason of
the great satisfaction they give the consumer. The
large capital at the disposal of the firm has placed
it in a decidedly advantageous position, and it is
no secret that the management has never been
known to harass its customers, and that those de.
serving of credit could always depend on the most
liberal terms and generous treatment. Messrs.
Hylands and Sons, Limited, are not only large
manufacturers, but they are also great distributors
to the retail merchants and traders, and this latter
phase of business they have carried on for many
years with a success so gratifying as to prove a
sufficient warranty for the originality and wisdom,
of their venture, outside the established custom of
manufacturers. The business was founded in 1819
by .Mr. John Hylands, and carried on with re-
markable success by him until 1873, when it was
floated into a limited liability company, and since
then it has continued its career of progressive de-
velopment in an ever increasing ratio. The firm
GORTON MILLS, LANCASHIRE.
known than that of Messrs. Rylands and Sons,"
Limited, of Manchester, Liverpool, and London.
To enter into descriptive details concerning the
industrial and commercial operations of this gigan-
HEAREY BLEACH WORKS, CHORLEY,
LANCASHIRE.
tic house would tax more than the space here avail-
able, but some idea of the unparalleled magnitude
the company’s undertakings have attained will be
gleaned from the fact that to carry on this stu-
pendous business entails the utilisation of share
and debenture capital amounting to over
£3, 000,000, together with property, comprising
MARKET STREET AND TIB STREET, MANCHESTER.
the trade, their output being so enormous that the
production of a few days would be sufficient to
encircle the globe.
The firm’s two great mottoes or Trade Marks,
“ Hard to Beat” and “ Not the Last”—the latter
taken from the crest of the late Mr. John Rylands
—are significant and appropriate. In their rela-
tion with foreign countries and with Australra
SWINTON MILLS, NEAR MANCHESTER.
Messrs. Rylands and Sons, Limited, not only draw
supplies of raw and manufactured goods from every
clime, but they also, through their various agen-
GIDLOW WORKS, WIGAN.
possess enormous mills at Gorton, Wigan, Swin-
ton, Heapey, and Chorley, all being located in the
County of Lancashire, while they have also estab-
OIL CLOTH WORKS, CHORLEY, LANCASHIRE.
lished other huge factories at Manchester, Crewe,
and London.
In addition to their large warehouses in London,
Li verpool, and Manchester, which are celebrated
for their imposing display of merchandise, Rylands
and Sons (Colonial), Limited, have offices at
Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Brisbane, and
dfceucbants ant> importers.
■Historical and Biographical Sketchescontinued.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.


MR. WILLIAM CARNELLEY.
Director.
Wellington (N.Z.), also in South Africa j
and the British dependencies in the
East, whence their goods are distri- 1
buted wholesale.
The branch of Messrs. Hylands and f
Sons (Colonial), Limited, established
at Sydney, is located at No. 75 York-
street, and is under capable manage-
ment. Being the head office for Aus-
tralasia, a keen discrimination is
exercised over the multiplex opera-
tions of the firm in this portion of His
Majesty’s Dominions.
As a means of cultivating an amic-
able and social spirit amongst the nu-
merous employees, the house possesses
the usual Cricket, Football, Howing,
and Chess Clubs, Orchestral Society,
Brass and String Bands, and a system
of well organised fire brigades, main-
tained at a high state of efficiency by
constant drilling. The comfort and
welfare of the employees is brought
about by the practical inculcation of
(he virtues of thrift and benevolence,
and it is only necessary to refer to the
liberal patronage accorded (o, and the
beneficial work performed by the
“ Hylands’ Porters’ Benevolent
Fund,” the Memorial Club, Thrift
Fund, and several other cognate in-
stitutions which are highly' appreci-
ated by those for whose benefit they
were established.
MR. EDWARD C. DUNFORD.
Director.
MR. GEORGE W. KIRKHAM.
Director.
MESSRS. HYLANDS AND SONS’ LONDON WAREHOUSES.
MR. SAMUEL BARHATT.
Director.
THE LATE MR. JOHN HYLANDS.
Founder of the Firm.
THE LATE MR. JOHN HYLANDS.
The late Mr. John Hylands (the founder of the
mammoth concern known to-day throughout the
civilised world under the designation of Messrs. Hy-
lands and Sons, Limited), like many more of his
eminent compeers in the commercial world, by un-
flagging industry, integrity, and indomitable perse-
verance won a high and honourable place in the
group of those who have been instrumental in
building up the commercial supremacy of Great
Britain.
In the year 18T3 the huge concern was formed
into a limited liability company, with a capital of
no less than .i‘2,(i0»,()60.
The firm as now constituted is said to have no
equal, and the ramifications of its business extend
throughout the world, while the annual turnover’
is computed at millions of pounds sterling. Sir.
Hylands, with .characteristic unostentation, was a
liberal subscriber to charity.
Throughout his long business career his name
was held in the highest regard, and from his nu-
merous employees won the greatest esteem for his
considerate, kindly interest in all that pertained
to their welfare. Full of years and honoured by
all, he passed away.


Merchants and
Importers.
Messrs. Sargood, Butler, Nichol
& Ewen.
The him of Sa’good, Butler, Nichol and Ewen,
Softgoods Warehousemen, of London, Melbourne,
Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth, was estab-
lished in 1343. The operations of the firm extend
throughout the whole of Australasia. Several of
their principal warehouses are shown in the accom-
panying illustrations.
INVERCARGILL (N.Z.) WAREHOUSE.
Floor Space, 6240 sq. feet.
Established 1832.
MELBOURNE (VIC.) WAREHOUSE. Floor Space, 116,480 sq, feet. Established 1848.


PERTH (W.A.) WAREHOUSE. Floor Space, 32,650 sq. feet. Established 1896.
SYDNEY (N.S.W.) WAREHOUSE. Established 1895.
Floor Space, 50,000 sq. feet.
AUCKLAND (N.Z.) WAREHOUSE Established 1870.
Floor Space, 70,000 sq. feet.


David Storey & Company.
IMPORTERS OF HATS, SHIRTS, ETC.
Speciality is the order of the day. The man who
tries to achieve everything generally finishes up
by having accomplished nothing. To be success-
ful in any particular walk of life, it is desirable
to concentrate one’s abilities entirely to one par-
ticular thing. This is equally true, whether we
apply it to the trader, the artist, or the artizan.
The great Meissonier, by confining his line ot
study exclusively to military pictures of the First
Empire was able to realise practically .£lOOO an
inch for every canvas he painted, while a Dutch
lapidary who devotes himself entirely to gem cut-
ting is able to earn whqt is considerably above the
average working jeweller’s minimum wage.
“ Jack of all trades and master of none” is a
proverb that applies more than ever to the present
day. “In order do lead the trade in these days of
keen competition,” says Messrs. David Storey and
Company’s trade catalogue, “it is absolutely
necessary to be specialists.” This the firm may
well claim to be in the matter of Hats, Shirts,
and Mercery.
Founded as far back as 1879 by Mr. David Storey,
the firm remained in Pitt-street till 1882, when the
increased requirements necessitated a removal to
Barrack-street. These premises were not vacated
till 1896, when a removal was made to the present
imposing and commodious building at 81 York-
street. The firm is now admittedly one of the lead-
ing speciality houses of Australia for Men’s, Boy’s,
and Children’s Straw and Felt Hats, also Caps,
Shirts, Scarves, etc., and they further intend to
increase and maintain their reputation as a pre-
mier house for style, value, and variety.
In addition to their own manufacture and recent
importations, they have still remaining large quan-
tities of leading lines always in demand, which
were imported prior to the imposition of the heavy
tariffs now in force. Although these goods were
secured at the usual cost which is involved in a
serious locking-up of capital, yet fire firm are wil-
ling at all times to share with their customers,
any advantages derived from enterprise and fore-
thought. AVith a view to keeping in touch with
the up-to-date requirements of the Australasian
trade, and securing a facility for buying in the
cheapest markets, Mr. Storey in 1897 established a
London Agency, while a branch office was formed
in Edward-street, Brisbane, in the same year, to
cope with the Queensland trade. As a result of an
enormously increased demand for the firm’s goods,
it has since been found necessary to open bran-
ches at Hobart, Perth, and Adelaide, while the
Melbourne branch, in Flindexs-lane, was inaugu-
rated in February last. By these means the com-
pany are on the spot in the different centres, there-
by avoiding delay in despatch and expense of send-
ing goods for such long distances from their head-
quarters in Sydney.
The York-street premises consist of five stories
and a basement, the interior decorations being car-
vied out in white enamel, the different departments
being lofty and well lighted. On the ground floor
is situated Mr. Storey’s office and the sample stock
of shirts, which comprises all makes in Men’s,
Boy’s and Youth’s.
From a small beginning, some years ago, the
demand, under able encouragement, has gone up by
leaps and bounds, until to-day it is one of the lead-
ing departments of the business. The proprie-
tary’s “ Nonpariel” white shirts are admitted by
the keenest buyers to be one of the best lines for
value in the market. At the rear of the ground
floor are the despatch rooms and goods lifts. Spe-
DAVID STOREY AND CO.’S WAREHOUSE, YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
cial facilities, combined with system and care, are
a feature of this portion of the business.
The basement is occupied by the receiving offices,
bulk stores, etc. The first floor, which can be
reached by a passenger lift, contains the Forward-
/Ifceccbants anb Jmportevs.
Historical and Biographical Sketches continued.
SOFTGOODS WAREHOUSEMEN.


ing Office, Counting house, and Manager’s rooms.
Here are to be seen a splendid assortment of Ties,
Umbrellas, Socks, Gloves, Handkerchiefs,
Japanese and China goods. Studs, Links, etc.
On the second floor there is an exceptionally
large stock of English and Continental framed felt
hats in the leading shapes and colours, all types
of which can be recommended for style, comfort,
durability and value.
Hard felt hats are to be seen in profusion on
the third floor. “He who wears his faith but as
the fashion of his hat” would have his wishes
amply gratified here, for to quote the Bard of Avon
again, he would find " hats with the tune of forty-
fancies pricked in them, for a gold dubloon.” In
connection with the forty fancies, must be men-
tioned “ The Cool Spring Hat.” These hats,
which have a gross weight of 3\ ounces each, are
amongst the most deservedly popular of headgear
in Australia, and all efforts to dislodge them by
imitations have failed.
Last but not least, on' the top floor we have the
Straws. If Straws show which way the wind is
blowing, then it is pretty safe to surmise that a
very prosperous zephyr agitates this portion of
the film’s departments. Here is to be found every
conceivable shape, including Children’s Babettes
and Galateas, Boy’s Man o’Wars, Men’s and Boys’
Boaters, etc. Owing to the large and growing de-
mand for Alpine and other shaped hats in Tus-
can, Pedal, Canton, Palm Leaf, Panama, and
other makes, the firm have stocked very largely to
meet the requirements in these popular classes.
Mention should also bo made of the varieties
manufactured by the firm themselves, which in-
clude such w-idely diversified patterns as “ The
Governor-General,” “ The Commonwealth,” the
“ Salisbury,” and the " Raw-son.” The great suc-
cess of this industry, as well as the growth of the
whole business, is due in no small way to the
founder himself. Mr. Storey looks after every im-
portant matter personally, and much can be at-
tributed to his energy and perseverance.
Owing to increased distributing power, the firm
is enabled to enter into large contracts with manu-
facturers with corresponding advantages. Mr.
Storey’s aim in the past has been to supply re-
tailers and storekeepers with goods which com-
mand a ready sale at remunerative prices, leaving
no bad stock behind.
This has been one of the secrets of his success,
and one which he will always pursue.
MR. DAVID STOREY, M.L.A.
The success and prosperity of a country is as-
sured by the unselfishness of its public men, who
have devoted their energies and brains to an ame-
lioration of its social and industrial conditions.
JU hen the name of a public man is thoroughly and
honourably identified w-ith that of a community,
it cannot be doubted that he has formed a key-
stone in one of the many arches which have
bridged over the abysses of depression and com-
mercial stagnation.
Mr. David Storey is a fitting example of the citi-
zen who, while*keeping an ever watchful eye on the
development and extension of his own particular
business, has yet devoted his well-earned leisure
to a close study of his adopted land’s political and
financial requirements.
The subject of our sketch was born in the County
Monaghan, in the North of Ireland, in 1836—a por-
tion of the Emerald Isle, by the way, which has
been responsible for some of our ablest financiers
and merchant princes. Mr. Storey, shortly after
his arrival in Australia, received his first know-
ledge of local trade requirements w-ith the firm of
Ross, Morgan and Robertson. During the time
he remained with this firm the business increased
considerably, and Mr. Storey was so much im-
pressed with the possibilities of personal advance-
ment that he determined to start on his own ac-
count. A glance at the commodious premise.-,
situated at 81 York-street, will amply demonstrate
how thoroughly justified was Mr. Storey’s faith in
his own abilities, when he laid the foundation
of the present business in Pitt-street close on a
quarter of a century ago.
In 1894 ho entered Parliament for the constitu-
ency of Randwick. Mr. Storey came forward as a
MR. DAVID STOREY, M.L.A.
supporter of the Reid Government, and it is worthy
of note that on that occasion he contested the
seat with the present Prime Minister of the Aus-
tralian Commonwealth, Sir Edmund Barton. The
fact that he headed the poll with 400 votes speaks
much for the successful candidate’s ability and
popularity.
At the general election of 1895, on the dissolu-
tion of Parliament, consequent upon Mr, Reid’s
appeal to the country in connection with-.the land
tax, the suffrages of the Randwick electors were
again sorrght by their former representative, Mr.
Storey being once more returned by a large ma-
jority, defeating Mr. Alexander Wilson,’"formerly
of Bourko.
At the next election in 1898 Federation was in
the air. Mr. Store}' is not one of those politicians
who acquiesce to a measure because it happens at
the time to be a popular but imperfectly under-
stood one. The Randwick representative has been
a strong and consistent opponent of the Federal
Bill, and there is not wanting an increasing ma-
jority now, to agiee that his views at that time
were more than consistent, and displayed consider-
able foresightedness and political acumen.
At the time, however, owing to his connection
with the party who opposed the Bill, Mr. Storey
was only returned by a majority of 34 votes over
his opponent, Mr. G. Baffin. Eighteen months ago
Mr. Storey again contested the seat with Mr. P.
O’Donnell, the nominee of the Lyne-See Govern-
ment, and was elected by a majority of 800 votes.
A competent business training and the know-
ledge requisite for the building up and controlling
of a vast mercantile house are but necessary ad-
juncts to a thorough understanding of the laws
that govern and regulate finance. Mr. Storey has
throughout taken a deep interest and a leading
part in all matters connected with the State’s re-
venue and expenditure. As a caustic critic of what
he terms “ the present wasteful expenditure,” Mr.
Storey has few compeers. lie holds that the fin-
anco of a country should be presented each year
to the people in a thorough businesslike way, so
that the most simple knowledge of accountantship
will enable the average person to comprehend how
matters stand.
Mr. Storey is a man who believes in a straight-
forward policy in all departments of private or
public life, and is a strong opponent of that phase
of actuarial art which, in the case pf.a State bud-
get, is usually so clouded that the ordirlary citizen
is left in doubt as to the actual issue. He has
worked hard in conjunction with Mr. Lee and Mr.
Carruthers, to bring about what he terms the re-
turn of a constitutional and responsible govern-
ment.
The head of David Storey and Company is not
one* of those who thinks that the mind should be
cultivated at the expense of the body, and the
fact that he is a practical exponent of the doctrines
of physical culture and training is to be seen in the
large number of athletic clubs of which he is
President. “ I love a clubable man,” said Mark
Lemon, and the aforetime genial editor of London
“ Punch” would have found a man after his own
heart in Mr. Storey. He is a prominent member
of the Athenaeum, Civic and Masonic Clubs, while
he has been connected with the Commercial Tra-
vellers’ Club for over 18 years, and filled the
Presidential Chair during the year 1893, thus seek-
ing by friendly intercourse to benefit the welfare
of the trade he represents outside his own business.
Though the services of Mr. Storey have been fre-
quently in demand in connection with municipal
matters, he has found his parliamentary duties
absorbing all of his already considerably en-
croached leisure.
The student of history cannot but fail to have
been impressed with the power finance has on the
destinies of a nation. The cynical Louis XV. was
wont to exclaim: “ The finances will outlast my
time”—“ ajrres moi lo deluge.” Able administra-
tors were not found wanting after his death, but
the evil had gone too far, and nothing but a com-
plete reorganisation of State and society accom-
plished by the terrible French Revolution could
remedy the defects of a previous age. In a lesser
extent it behoves the people of the Commonwealth
to be watchful of our national inheritance, and it
is to men like Mr. Storey that we may confidently
look for an amelioration of public affairs.
In conclusion, it may not be idle prophecy to
surmise that he will be included in the next Libera]
Ministry, perhaps in the important position of
State’s Treasurer.


Messrs. Briscoe & Company,
Limited.
WHOLESALE IRONMONGERS AND IRON
MERCHANTS.
combination in the Hardware Trade in Australasia.
Originally started in Wolverhampton, England,
under the name of William Briscoe and Son, some-
where in the latter half of the eighteenth century,
the progress of this business has gone on uninter-
ruptedly, until to-day the record shows Head Office
in London, with warehouses and Ironyards in Syd-
a Limited Liability Company, with a capital of
A6CO.OCO, in 35,000 Preference Shares of AlO each,
with a cumulative dividend of 5 per cent., and
250,000 oidinary shares at JCI each.
The English Directors are Messrs. W. A. Briscoe
and Geoige Briscoe; the Colonial, Messrs. Alexander
Macneil (of Melbourne), Hugh Macneil (of Sydney),
BRISCOE AND CO., LTD., IRON YARDS, ETC., 489 TO 517 WATTLE STREET, SYDNEY.
Messrs. Briscoe and Company, Limited, Hardware
Merchants and General Ironmongers, 56 York
Street, and 489 to 517 Wattle Street, Sydney. This
business is a branch of the strongest and largest
ney and Melbourne (Australia), and Wellington,
Dunedin, Invercargill and Auckland (New Zea-
land).
In 1901 these businesses were converted into
and A. W. Gellatly (of Melbourne). The Sydney
Branch was inaugurated in 1831, and is managed by
Mr. David Black, ably assisted by Mr. T. F. Edgar,
who handles the financial part of the concern.
/Ifoeccbants anb JmporteTS.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches :-eominued.
HARDWARE AND IRON MERCHANTS.


BRISCOE AND CO.. LTD., WAREHOUSE AND SHOWROOMS, 56 YORK STREET, SYDNEY.


Messrs. W. S. Friend & Co.
HARDWARE MERCHANTS AND GENERAL
IRONMONGERS.
From the time when pre-historic man wielded
his rude axe, down to the present date, labour-
saving implements have always been more or less
a necessity to our existence. What would the
early pioneers of New South Wales not have given
for the modern hardware merchants’ supplies that
are so plentiful everywhere at the present day?
Everyone is dependent on the Hardware Merchant,
whether they reside in the crowded city or far
away “ backblocks,” no day passes but the sup-
plies of the Ironmonger are called into requisi-
tion.
One of the largest and oldest established whole-
sale purveyors of these daily wants is the firm of
W. S. Friend and Company, Hardware Merchants
and General Importers.
The firm was originally established as far back
as 1810 by Mr. W. S. Friend, who came out from
Devonshire, and set up business in York-street,
Sydney. The founder of the now immense concern
quickly recognised the great possibilities of the
trade in a young and growing community such as
Australia, with its vast undeveloped territory, and
his sanguine expectations were in no wise disap-
pointed. Twenty years later, his son, Mr. Walter
Friend, the father of the present heads of the firm,
was admitted into partnership, and as an instance
of his persistency and enterprise, it may be men-
tioned that he was the first commercial traveller
to cross the mountains, a journey in those days
undertaken with no little inconvenience and hard-
ship.
In 1887 Mr. Walter Friend’s eldest son, Mr. A. G.
Friend, was admitted as a partner, while in 1900
the latter’s brother, Mr. W. H. Friend, secured a
similar position, and Mr. H. I». Friend, the young-
est son, has just been admitted.
The present premises aro situated at 113 York-
street, and extend right through to Clarence-
street, where the main offices, show and sale rooms,
are located. The Stores, Packing and Forwarding
Departments, are also in Clarence-street, running
from 190 to 198, while the Iron yard occupies the
buildings numbered 251 to 255 in the same street on
the west side. The total floor-space of the offices,
stores, iron yard, etc., being two and a half acres.
The late bulk stores have been vacated, and very
extensive additions made to the old premises, so
that the business may be more condensed. We
have reproduced a photograph, which gives some
idea of the magnitude of the buildings.
The show rooms are lofty, well lighted, and
calculated to show, to the best advantage, the
thousands of articles with which they are filled.
On the ground floor, and facing Clarence-street,
are the Packing and Forwarding Rooms, heavy
and bulk-goods department. On the first floor
York-street every kind of Coachbuilders’ iron-
mongery and wood work is shown, also painters’
materials and goods.
The gallery overhead is taken up by the tool and
electro-plate departments, both of which are very
comprehensive.
On the first floor Clarence-street are Plum-
bers’ and Tinsmiths’ tools and requisites.
Builders’ Ironmongery, Guns, Rifles, Ammunition,
and all sporting goods, Blasting Powder, and other
Mining explosives. The second floor is devoted to
household requisites and general furnishing iron-
mongery. Coming to the third floor, we find a large
show room devoted to Bedsteads, Stoves, and a
comprehensive stock of Agricultural Implements,
Blacksmiths’ Tools and Machinery, Fans, Blowers,
Forges, and Dairy requisites.
The brilliant record of successes and awards
scored by the " Melotte” Cream Separators, extend
from the highest award at the International Exhibi-
tion at Brussels in 1888. The prize of honor. Gold
Medal and 100 francs, at the Rheims Exhibition in
1897 (the only trials of Separators and Dairy
W. S. FRIEND AND COMPANY.
OFFICES AND SHOWROOMS, 113 YORK-STREET, SYDNEY.
Machinery organised by the French Government),
down to 1899, where the Separator secured awards
at Port Elizabeth, South Africa, and the Maidstone
Royal Show. So assured are the firm of the superior
quality of the “ Melotte” that they undertake to
send the separator on fourteen days’ free trial to
any intending bona-fide purchaser.
The Bulk Stores, situated in Clarence-street, ad-
joining the Warehouse, comprise four floors, each
of which is replete with every kind of contrivance
for handling goods; an electric lift does an enor-
mous amount of rvork.
Messrs. W. S. Friend and Company, keep a staff
of Galvanized Iron Workers, and can supply curved
sheets for verandahs, tanks, and material, ridg-
ing, guttering, etc., made on the premises. Chief
amongst the brands of Bar Iron is the “ Nether.
ton” Iron, the most reliable for smithing ana cou-
struction purposes.
The firm does business in every part of Aus-
tralia. and how fully their time is occupied id
meeting the State’s many requirements may he
ascertained from the fact that they employ over 90
hands in their daily business, and keep 10 travel-
lers continually moving throughout New South
Wales. They also have representatives in Queens-
ilfoercbants anb Jmpoiteus.
Historical and Biographical Sketchesi-continucd.
HARDWARE MERCHANTS.


land and the Islands, so that some idea of their
far-reaching operations may be gained.
The general staff of about 90 hands is composed
of mtn of all ages and of considerable ability, and
MR. A. G. FRIEND.
who have spent many years with the firm; some
can look back over 15, 20 and even 30 years of ser-
vice, and, in many instances, lads have entered the
business from school and grown into its customs,
and are now men ranging up to 40 years of age.
The firm manufacture a number of articles in
the trade, so that they not only augment the State’s
revenue by their shipping, importation, and Cus-
toms work, but by the establishment of local in-
dustries, have formed themselves into a competent
part and parcel of our national prosperity.
Mr. Walter Friend purchased the well-known
Bendenine Estate, some 50,000 odd acres, which
now belongs to his family, and is also managed
from the office of W. S. Friend and Company. The
industries carried on are very varied, grazing, wool
growing, dairying, and all classes of farming. The
Dairy is a large concern; about 650 cows are
milked daily, and the pig-fattening, calf-rearing,
and necessary cultivation in connection therewith
are very interesting. The w r ool from the Ben-
lenine sheep is high class and well known, and the
MR. H. L. FRIEND.
valuable property, distant only about nine hours
from Sydney, on the Southern line, is altogether
very highly improved.
MR. A. G. FRIEND.
Many of our prominent business houses are fit-
ting monuments to the zeal, capability, and energy
of our first citizens. It is not an unusual remark
to hear that an individual owes everything to his
progenitors, and that, to use a vulgarism, “He
was horn with a silver spoon in his mouth,” but
this is, in many cases, a fallacy. A commercial in-
stitution continually demands administrative
ability and providential foresight—“ other times
other manners.” If a man comes into a mercan-
tile inheritance and acts on the precept of letting
it look after itself, or neglects its requirements by
improvidence or sloth, he will soon find out his
mistake. Other more enterprising rivals will come
into the field, and he will, at any rate, soon find
himself far distanced in the Domain of Commerce.
The failure of once all-powerful and prosperous
firms is often attributable to this cause.
The successful firm of W. S. Friend and Com-
pany have, however, acted on the wise adage of
training up a child in the way he should go.
The senior partner, Mr. A. G. Friend, is one of
the third generation of this family who have done
so much to uphold its traditions and exemplify
the proverb of “ Like father like son,” and both
are old boys of King’s School, Parramatta. Born
in'Sydney, Mr. Friend, at an early age, set about
mastering the intricacies of the Hardware Trade,
and passed through, all the details during the first
five years.
It is more than probable that the fourth genera-
tion will administer the firm’s city business, and
to show how the hereditary instinct asserts itself,
it may be mentioned that, though the sons of Mr.
A. G. Friend are still at school, there is nothing
they like better than to roam at will through the
premises on a Saturday and read, mark, learn.
MR. W. H. FRIEND.
and inwardly digest everything connected with the
great and ever-increasing resouices of the veteran
hardware firm.
W. S. FRIEND AND COMPANY. BULK STORES, CLARENCE-STREET, SYDNEY.


Messrs. Frank Grimley, Ltd.
MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS OF
SADDLERY AND HARNESS, CARRIAGEWARE
AND BICYCLES.
The student of commercial and industrial affairs
is frequently confronted with the fact that the
economic existence of hundreds, even thousands of
the population is dependent on the bent of genius
of one man. The fact of the arrival of a newcomer
in a large community might appear to be one of
little moment; he is but the addition of a unit to
half a million of his fellow men. But it takes many
men to make a world, and even in caste-bound India,
where every native endeavours to be what his great
grandfather a thousand times removed was before
him, the tendency of the human race to vary can-
not be altogether resisted. In an Anglo-Celtic com-
munity the desire of every true man to do the best
for himself with the talents and education with
which he has been endowed is so persistent, that
the interests of the community are effectually
served by the, varying avenues into which the ener-
gies of the individuals composing it are directed.
One finds one occupation suitable to his tastes
and within the range of his ability, another is
equally satisfied with some other line of action
which to him is a specialty, and thus the whole
community is benefited by the interaction of every
one of its healthy members. Some cater for those
who travel by rail, while others largely serve the
wants of those who use the road: and of the latter
are Messrs. Frank Grimley, Limited.
The business of this company, the headquarters of
which are at 263-265 Clarence-street, in this city,
was founded in 1864 by E. Williams and Company,
of 69 York-street, wholesale saddlers and importers
of coach materials. Mr. Frank Grimley purchased
the business in 1883, but several additional features
have evolved in the course of years, such as tanning
and manufacturing harness and saddlery.
In 1888 the present premises in Clarence-street
were built on land purchased by Mr. Qrimley. The
new edifice was designed in accordance with the
then requirements of his rapidly increasing trade,
and is situated in a locality particularly favourable
for healthy and rapid expansion, it being contigu-
ous both to the water front and the business heart
of the metropolis.
Air. Grimley is one of the best known men in the
commercial world of Sydney. His acumen, integrity,
and organising abilities are well known far beyond
the limits of the company’s premises. The reputa-
tion of the firm stands “four square to all the winds
that blow.” The headquarters, tannery, factory,
iron yard, and bulk store, with the other ramifica-
tions of the business give employment to a large
number of persons. Everything is kept in stock that
is likely to be required by saddlers and harness
makers, carriage builders, wheelwrights, bicycle
builders,’ and dealers. A life-long experience of all
these lines enables the company’s chief adminis-
trative officer to cater for and meet exactly the re-
quirements of a large and growing clientele of cus-
tomers. In commercial and manufacturing centres
of the world, notably in those of Great Britain
FRANK GRIMLEY, LTD.
HEAD OFFICE AND WAREHOUSE, 263 and 265 CLARENCE-STREET, SYDNEY.
/Iftercbants anb importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches t—Continued,
SADDLERY, HARNESS, CARRIAGEWARE, &C.


and the United States, Messrs. Prank Grimley,
Limited, are well known in regions far remote from
the " long wash of Australian Seas.” The success
to which they have already attained may be re-
garded as only an earnest of what is yet to come,
and their career furnishes very clear evidence of the
truth of the good old English proverb that " dogged
does it.”
Notwithstanding the extension of railways to all
parts of the country, vehicular and cycle traffic
must still be conducted on a large scale in New
South Wales, every mile of rail only adding to the
fresh ground which must be laid open by the road-
maker in order to feed that railway, develop the
resources of the country, and enable the settler to
make two blades of grass grow where only one grew
before.
Firms such as those of Messrs. Frank Grimley,
Limited, therefore, have a great field for their ener-
gies for many a day to come; perhaps in no depart-
ment of industry have there been greater develop-
ments within the last half century than in every-
thing relating to transit. If, according to the gentle-
man quoted by Carlyle, the highest certificate of
respectability is to keep a gig, the number of . res-
pectable people in New South Wales is great indeed.
In the country districts, especially, road vehicles
are an absolute necessity, and concerns like that
under notice are largely engaged in supplying the
requirements of the rural settlers, who form the
backbone of the country. In regard to the suburban
resident, sound in wind and limb, the useful “ bike”
which requires no corn is a staunch aid to loco-
motion, and bicycles in great number can be seen,
with many other articles of. utility and hosts of
labour saving appliances, at 263-265 Clarence-street.
The firm’s tannery has a capacity of 300 hides per
week, and is established at Alexandria, some two
miles from the General Post Office, for the manu-
facture of saddlery and harness and shoe leathers.
Only a few years ago a new bicycle department was
added, with full stocks of all sundries and parts for
bicycles, also complete machines. As all the world
and his wife are still awheel, the new departure has
proved eminently successful, and novel ideas with
regard to locomotion per medium of bicycles find a
congenial reception in the establishment.
In December, 1901, the business was formed into
a limited liability company, and registered under
the Companies Act as Frank Grimley, Limited,
with Mr. Frank Grimley as Managing Director.
The capabilities of the various premises are
strained to the utmost, but are still inadequate, al-
though the floor space, exclusive of the tannery,
covers over 24,00'J square feet. The Clarence-street
building has five floors, with every appliance for the
successful and economical handling and despatch of
goods. On the ground floor the visitor finds the
manager’s office, and a portion of the coach and
saddlery departments. On the first floor are the
counting house, offices, colonial-made saddlery,
and bicycle goods. The remaining floors contain
e very class of saddlery, carriage wood ware, harness
leather, and bicycle goods.
It will at once be seen that a business such as
that transacted by Frank Grimley, Limited, can-
not be conducted under one roof, and on one spot.
The manufacture of leather is a trade which it is
impossible to cany on within the walls of a great
city. The tannery at Alexandria employs a con-
siderable number of hands, and its output has met
with great demand, the leather of “ Royal Oak”
brand being a synonym for good quality. In Drnitt-
street the company have a yard for the storage of
iron, and in Harris-street the commodious bulk
stores are situated.
The growth of the business has so steadily kept
pace with the times that larger premises are abso-
lutely necessary, and steps have been taken to
build afresh. The company has no branches in
other States, and ig worked direct from the head
office in Sydney. It ia, however, represented in
South Australia, New Zealand, Queensland, and
Tasmania. It is the local representative of several
English and American firms, the following being
some of the agencies held: —Messrs. Thomas Par-
sons and Company,, manufacturers of varnish,
London; Messrs. Davis and Wilson, whip manu-
facturers, Birmingham; the Buffalo Spring Gear
Company, Buffalo, United States of America.
MR. FRANK GRIMLEY.
As the noblest study of mankind is man, a pe-
culiar interest attaches to the history of those who
have made their mark. The career of Mr. Frank
Grimley affords an illustration of how apparent
disadvantages may ultimately operate to the bene-
fit of those who, in spite of misfortune “ look the
whole world in the face” and go forward with
stout hearts in the path of duty. Many a man
has come to Australia for the betterment of his
health, and has not only secured it, but found
profitable employment into the bargain. That
has been the fortunate experience of Mr. Frank
Grimley.
Born in 1853 at Birmingham, he received his edu-
cation at King Edward’s Grammar School, and in
that famous town, at the early ago of 14, Mr.
Frank Grimley commenced business life with
Messrs. Insole and Grimley, merchants and manu-
facturers. That his commercial school and school-
masters were of a very efficient kind is evidenced
by the fact that in 1874—six years after commenc-
ing business life— l he left the smoke and grime of
the famous Warwickshire town to represent his
employers "on the road.” Thus it came about
that “from Land’s End to John O’Groats” Mr.
Grimley constantly travelled, and took notes of the
requirements of customers, and assisted to keep
MR. FRANK GRIMLEY.
moving the whirring wheels of " the workshop of
the world.”
The arduous nature of the work of commercial
travelling in the severe climate of Britain can
only be fully understood by those who have ex-
perienced it. After six years of this work, being
somewhat run down, Mr. Grimley’s medical adviser
recommended rest and change of climate.
He resolved on coming to the Sunny South, and
having obtained the agencies of several English
manufacturers, visited Cape Colony en route to
Australia and New Zealand. Early in 1831 he ar-
rived in Sydney, and discharged the duties incum-
bent on a representative and agent of his English
constituents, travelling through every colony ex-
cepting West Australia.
Mr. Grimley, in referring to this period of his
life, states that having made careful comparison
of the conditions in the various colonies, it was in
New South Wales “ he found the greatest mea-
sure of political and commercial freedom, the
smallest public debt, and the lowest taxation per
head of any of the whole group, accompanied by
every other sign of prosperity.” and these consi-
derations induced him to establish himself in
Sydney.
In 1882 Mr. Gi imley went on a buisness trip to
England. In the year following he purchased the
business of Messrs. E. Williams and Company, of
69 York-street. Five years later the venture suc-
ceeding to his utmost expectations, the present
premises were built. Further extensions in the
way of a tannery and bicycle business are evi-
dences of the piogressive lines on which the opera-
tions of the company are conducted.
Altogether nearly 200 hands are employed in the
various departments, a fact which places the com-
pany as one of the largest concerns of its kind in
Australasia. The results which have been achieved
show what can be produced by hard work, perse-
verance, and a firm resolve to succeed, combined
with a strong personality, and sound business
methods.
Mr. Grimley in politics is a Freetrader. It would
be, he says, strange if he were otherwise. Cradled
in Birmingham, with John Bright and Joseph
Chamberlain as political mentors, and hearing
from his seniors their experience of the campaigns
which won for the people of England unshackled
commerce and personal freedom, it goes without
saying what kind of political training he received
there. The borough that adopted John Bright
produced Joseph Chamberlain, returned all its
members to support Gladstone’s domestic policy,
and formed the political school of Henry Parkes,
usually turns out men with liberal and progressive
principles and strong in their desires for commer-
cial freedom.
The views of the youth on political economy are
those of the man. And while unremitting in at-
tention "to his own particular business, he has suc-
cessively filled the position of honorary Treasurer
to the Freetrade and Land Reform League, Vice-
President of the Freetrade organisation of 1898,
of the Freetrade and Liberal Asociatioh of Aus-
tralia, and honorary Treasurer of the Federal
Freetrade Association.
In Federal affairs he was strongly opposed to
the Federal Bill, believing that all the advantages
could be obtained without the ponderous machi-
nery and unhealthy conditions set up by the En-
abling Bill.
Mr. Grimley has held office in various organisa-
tions designed for the benefit and upraising of the
less fortunate members of the community. He is
a member of the Executive of the Queen Victoria
Home for Consumptives Fund, was one of the ori-
ginal promoters and organisers of the Hospital
Saturday Fund, and, believing that the
public health is a subject of the first import-
ance, is a supporter of all efforts to safeguard it,
and as becomes a gentleman so closely associated
with the business life of the city, he is a member
of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce.
Fronting the beautiful Lane Cove River, at
Woolwich, Mr. Grimley’s home is situated, and
the sylvan grace of its surroundings is sufficient to
make the dweller forget the inevitable engross-
ments and troubles incidental to business in the
city. His residence is located where the charms of
land and water have been blended by beneficent
nature into one of the most beautiful pictures
around Sydney.
In days like these on which we have fallen in
New South Wales the interests of the country
would be promoted and safeguarded by pronounce-
ments from capable men to whom the public look
for light and leading. It would be well if men
eminent in business affairs would give public ex-
pression to their views on important political
questions in the columns of the daily press. Mr.
Grimley’s name has often appeared under letters
which have struck the political nail on the head,
and driven it home to its proper destination, and
he usually hits straight from the shoulder when
the necessity arises. Nevertheless, he is the most
kindhearted of men, ever ready to do a good turn,
a fact which is exempified by the numerous hon-
orary offices he has held and holds, and the time
he has devoted to the interests of those who from
causes beyond their control, are but feeble folk
and need the helping hand.


The Massey=Harris Co., Ltd.
MANUFACTURERS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
OF REAPERS, BINDERS, ETC., AND
AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY.
That era when man abandoned the chase of land
animals and awakened to a knowledge of the possi-
bilities to be attained by planting seed and reaping
the result is but ambiguously defined. The Homans
gave to the process of gathering crops the name of
“ Ager Cultura,” “ Ager” being a field and " Cul-
tura” meaning cultivation. Even the astute Latin
writers have left us but a hazy idea of the first
attempts at agriculture. It was a far advanced step
towards civilisation when man applied himself to
reproducing the seeds of food plants, an action more
than likely brought about by the concentration of
immense numbers of human beings for mutual pro-
tection, and the necessity for acquiring large quan-
tities of food to appease the hunger of their off-
spring. The discovery in the tombs of the Ancient
Egyptians of indications of earth culture in the
form of flint implements and the actual grain and
corn which was then grown, seems to point to the
fact that the Egyptians share the honour of intro-
ducing agriculture as a national and general voca-
tion with the Chaldeans and Chinese.
Coming to more modern times, we find that pre-
vious to the 16th century England was a wool-pro-
ducing country, the first agricultural methods being
adopted from Flanders, the importation of roots for
fodder being introduced as late as 1633.
In 1833 the first reaper on the principle of the
reciprocating knife made its appearance, and it was
not until 1852, when Mr. Hart A. Massey, of Bond-
head, Ontario, Canada, brought out the “ Ketchum”
mower, that a practical reaper was introduced.
These early efforts were the beginning of the mar-
vellous march of invention as applied to agricul-
tural machinery, and mark an epoch in the world’s
husbandry. It has been truly said that if ever a
people owe an obligation to a man, that debt arises
when an individual, by the introduction of labour
and money-saving methods into any industry,
brings about the development of the resources of a
country, and in doing so enables its inhabitants to
improve their condition and make their lives more
cheerful..
The farmers of N.S.W. who, thanks to the inven-
tive genius of those who control the Massey-Harris
Company’s manufactures of agricultural impjm-
meats and machinery, are enabled to cultivate their
lands with a minimum of expense and labour, and
thus build up a competence, owe a debt of gratitude
to Mr. Daniel Massey and his son, Mr. Hart A.
Massey, the founders of the gigantic industry which
has so girdled the earth with its products, that the
sun never sets on the lands where the Massey-
Harris machines are used.
The vast operations of the Massey-Harris Com-
pany, Ltd., whose warehouses and offices adorn the
cities of Toronto, London, Paris, the European
cap. mis, and the chief trading centres of the Aus-
tralian Commonwealth, are the outcome of the life
work of such prominent Canadians as Messrs. Hart
A. Massey, Alanson, and John Hams, the Patter-
,son Bros., and Mr. J. O. Wisner, who have followed
them, and devoted their whole energies to the inven-
tion and improvement of the marvellous examples
of mechanical genius which the company are plac
ing within easy reach of the farmer of to-day.
From the inception of the original firm at Bond-
head in 1847, of which Mr. D. Massey and his son,
Mr. Hart A. Massey, were the founders, the name
of Massey-Harris has been synonymous for high
quality and honest dealing, and to this solid basis
the success of their operations in every part of the
world has been mainly attributable.
Mr. Hart A. Massey, on the retirement of his
father in 1851, decided to go into the manufacture
of farming implements on an extensive scale, with
the result that in 1852 he made and sold over 200
“ Ketchum” Mowers, the first mowing machine ever
built in Canada. In the same year he also intro-
duced the first reaper under the name of " Burrell."
In 1857 from the Massey shops came the first self-
rake reaper. The progressive changes from the
somewhat cumbersome wood frame twine binder to
the light steel closed-back binders, and thence to
that great power-saving invention—the Massey-
Harris roller-bearing, and the latest wide open
Binders, Self-raking reapers. Horse rakes. Hay
tedders. Cultivators. Grain Drills, Pulpers, Plows,
etc., cover half a century’s perfect combination by
master minds of capital and skilled labour.
The present constitution of the company came
about in 1891, when the business was largely ex-
tended by an amalgamation with several principal
Agricultural Implement Manufacturing Companies
in Canada, and at the time of writing ,in addition
to their leading factory in Toronto, they have large
factories at Brantford, Hamilton and Woodstock,
The President of the concern is Mr. Chester D.
Massey, a son of the founder, with Mr. L. Melvin
Jones as General Manager.
The European Branch is managed and directed
from the London office, sub-branches in the vari-
ous foreign countries being also under the control
of the London Directorate.
The Australasian Branch is in charge of Mr. Al-
fred Spaulding Patterson, on? of the stockholders of
the Company, who controls the various branches
in the different States and New Zealand.
The company commenced operations in Victoria
in 1887, and the wonderful success of their machi-
nery under the most exacting working conditions,
secured for them such a high reputation for excel-
lence of construction, quality of material, and sim-
plicity of mechanism, that to meet the demand
operations were extended to New Zealand in 1890,
and to New South Wales in 1891, but their New
South Wales organisation was not completed and
a branch formed till July. 1897, when it was opened
by Mr. E. G. Grant, the present Manager,
Further extensions in Queensland, South and
Western Australia, and Tasmania were made dur-
ing late years.
MASSEY-HARRIS COMPANY’S N.S.W. HEADQUARTERS, BROADWAY, GLEBE.
/llbercbants anb Jmportevs.
Historical and Biographical Sketches ; — Continued.
AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS AND MACHINERY.


The Head Australasian Office of the company at
670-576 Bourke-street, Melbourne, is one of the most
commodious and handsome examples of modern
architecture as applied to business requiremeu s in
the Southern Hemisphere, and shows plainly the
steadfastness and durability of the firm.
Some idea of the output of this immense concern
may be gained from the following brief description
of the factories at Toronto, Brantford, Hamilton,
and Woodstock, Canada.
The Toronto Factory is situated within easy dis-
tance of the city, and has unexcelled facilities for
the forwarding of merchandise by rail and sea.
Within the great pile of buildings whose floor space
covers an area of several acres are located the gene-
ral agricultural implement factory, steel plant
works, and storage warehouses.
At Brantford the manufactory covers a big
area, and is exclusively devoted to the construction
of self-binding Harvesters, Mowing Machinery, and
Hay Hakes.
The Hamilton, Ontario, workshops make all parts
of, and completely equip Engines of every descrip-
tion, both Traction and Portable, Threshing plants,
and Hoad Machinery.
The Woodstock premises, which are a recent addi-
tion, are entirely devoted to the production of
Farm waggons and goods incidental thereto.
Thousands of tons of the products of Forest and
Mine are annually received into the yards of the
various factories belonging to the company. The
bulk of some classes of raw material being almost
incredible. As scientific construction progresses
each year, the increased use of steel is necessitated,
so that last season considerably over eight million
pounds of crucible cast steel were used. A visit
to the steel plant works at Toronto is an educa-
tion in itself, and one marvels at the extraordinary
facility with which the various parts are cut and
finished by the costly automatic machinery which
is everywhere in use throughout the factories. The
quantity of lumber annually consumed, the greater
part of -which consists of hardwood, is over six mil-
lion feet.
In the making of packing cases for exporting
machines several million feet of soft wood is used
up annually. In the furnaces no less than from
4500 to 5000 tons of pig iron are melted down each
year, whilst from 3500 to 4000 tons of malleables aie
embodied in a single season’s output of Massey-
Harris Machines. The figures for the annual pur-
chase of Bar Iron run from 18,000 to 20,000 tons.
The items nails, rivets, tacks and wire, amounting
to 4C0.C00 lbs., and the painters’ bill to such stag-
gering quantities as 250,000 lbs. weight of colour and
lead. Oils and varnishes totalling fully 50,000
gallons.
In these great workshops, handling, transporta-
tion, and superintendence gives employment to a
very large number of skilled men. The Toronto
shops, employing over 800, Brantford 600, whilst the
officials, clerks, accountants and artisans of the affi-
liated factories swell the total to well over 2500
persons. If we estimate that each of these employees
supports an average of three persons, we will find
that in the one country alone these great works
sustain over 8,000 people, exclusive of those who
earn their livelihood through the transporting and
distributing of the company’s manufactures.
In New South Wales, as in the other States of
the Commonwealth, the stock held is a complete
and varied one, the offices and warehouse at 35
Broadway, Sydney, being well worthy of inspec-
tion. The premises comprise a four-storied ware-
house, built so that a maximum of lighting can be
obtained in the show-rooms and departments in
which the parts of Massey-Harris Machines are as-
sembled and fitted.
Entering from Broadway, the visitor passes the
office occupied by the Manager for N.S.W., Mr. B.
G. Grant, and the counting-house, with its rows of
diligent clerks, whose time is fully taken up in re-
cording the multitudinous transactions of this great
company.
In the basement are to be seen thousands of
Pounds worth of all sorts of farming machinery,
duplicate parts and sundries. The ground floor fac-
lng George-street, and running the whole depth of
the building, is fitted out as a show-room. In this
department the company’s latest Australasian Gang
Flows, from two to four furrows, are on view. These
plows have won numerous medals and other re-
wards at various plowing matches, and embody
JPany advantages in the way of easy adjustment,
handiness in working, and general adaptability to
all kinds of heavy or light soils. The No. 2 two-
lever scufiler is another example of Massey-Harris
inventiveness—a small sweep or steel plate, which
can be easily affixed to this machine enables the
farmer to do excellent work in cultivating young
vegetables.
Amongst the collection of Harrows the most
noticeable include the “ Massey-Harris Drag” and
Lever Harrows, from ten to twenty feet wide. In
Disc Harrows the Company show a marvellous
piece of mechanism; each disc is equipped with a
scraper, and the complete row can be cleaned readily
by a gentle pressure of the foot on a lever provided
for the purpose. This harrow is specially adapted
for Vineyard or Orchard Culture.
The Massey-Harris Cultivators form another in-
teresting group in the ground floor show-room.
These Cultivators are known throughout the world
as absolutely reliable and most economical in work-
ing, their special features being a double acting
coil spring, which raises the sections of the levers
and forces the teeth into the ground.
On the first floor, reached by a broad staircase, an
excellent range of choice is offered in grain and
fertilizer drills of a most advanced type. The work
performed by the Massey-Harris Grain and Ferti-
lizer Drill is truly wonderful; it sows any kind
of grain with or without fertilizers, and it
sows fertilizers with or without grain in
drills or broadcast. It can also be used
for weeding summer fallows or for light
cultivating, such a combination making it
one of the most useful machines that could be in-
stalled upon a farm. The Hay tedder is another in-
genious idea, which operates a number of forks, so
that several acres of mown hay can be turned over
in a day.
The Massey-Harris Reaper (No. 1), although of
recent date, has already acquired great fame in
Great Britain and Europe. Its principal points are
a new finger bar and cutter apparatus, roller bear-
ings at the top and bottom of a rake shaft of naw
design, great steadiness of motion is secured, and
the platform can be raised or lowered easily on the
inner side by lever from the seat. The cutting de-
vice is made in the Company’s own steel plant,
Toronto, with a soft centre and hardened edges.
In Mowers the latest model (No. 7), which was
used for the first time in Australia last season, has
given excellent satisfaction in its practical work.
The bar when folded up does not incline towards
the driver, like many other mowers, or interfere
with the reins, and by means of an automatic
spring coil is returned to the ground as soon as the
lever is released. The pride of the warehouse is the
Massey-llarris wide open,binder, which the firm
justly claims to be one of the most famous binders
of the age. Its special features are its wonderfully
strong steel frame, the absence of nuts and bolts, so
that it looks almost like one solid piece of steel
throughout. There are no awkward angles and no
weak joints in the binder frame, whilst the wheels
which carry the machine are of steel, and so strong
that no amount of rough travelling will cause them
to collapse; in fact, the - wide open binder is, a
triumph of man’s genius. It will do its work well
in any kind of crop, no matter how tall or how
short, fallen or lodged, and saves much of the crop
that with a less perfect machine would be lost.
The various parts, such as the Massey-llarris Knot-
MR. E. G. GRANT. MANAGER FOR N.S.W.
ter, sheaf packers, adjustability fur handling
short grain, improved sheaf carriers, etc., all com-
bine many new and practical ideas not to be found
in other machines.
At the rear of the George-street Building and
running through to Grey-street is the Company’s
Engine Yard, in which several types of the Sawyer
Massey Traction, Portable and Stationary Engines
are located for the inspection of intending buyers,
the whole space taken up covering over half an
acre. In connection with this company, it is but
right to mention that in Australia the progressive
and liberal policy of the Massey-Harris Company,
Limited, and its high reputation for strict integr
rity in its business methods, has secured lasting
confidence of farmers and others throughout the
Commonwealth.
The company, by the employment of over 500
hands in their various Australian depots, and about
1000 agents on commission, many of whom are en-
tirely dependent on the firm, has annually disbursed
many thousands of pounds amongst the citziens of
the various States.


John Bardsley & Company.
MERCHANTS, TEA IMPORTERS, AND WHOLE-
SALE GROCERS.
In the early fifties, when the sudden discovery of
gold caused Australia to be looked upon as a country
of limitless mineral wealth, Mr. J. Bardsley, senior,
to whose energy, integrity, and keen financial
knowledge the foundation of the now huge busi-
ness of John Bardsley and Company is due, left the
homeland and arrived in Sydney, and in 1856
opened up business at the Glebe as a retail grocer
and provision merchant. In 1864 the business con-
nection of the firm warranted Mr. Bardsley in
launching out as a general merchant, tea importer,
and wholesale grocer. A suitable warehouse was
leased in Sussex-street. During this year Mr.
James Hunter, J.P., now a partner in the firm, was
appienticed to Mr. John Bardsley.
Mr. Bardsley’s talent as a buyer enabled him to
extend the operations of the firm in every direction,
and Mr. Hunter was admitted into the business as
a partner. In 1882 another move was made neces-
sary, and the present premises at 93 Bathurst-
street were leased. In 1888 Mr. J. Hindle came
from Melbourne to take up the position of country
lepresentative for Messrs. Bardsley and Company.
In 1898 Mr. Bardsley, sen., decided to retire, his
place being taken by his son, Mr. J. Bardsley', jun.,
as a full partner.
The premises occupied by Messrs. J. Bardsley and
Company comprise a commodious six-storied ware-
house, equipped with all the latest appliances for
the handling, packing, and despatch of the differ-
ent lines carried. There is a fine basement, in
which bulk goods, such as heavy salt, whiting, soda,
etc., are stored. The ground floor is occupied by
the accountants and managerial offices, sales-room
and order departments, also great cases of con-
densed milk from Switzerland, England, and our
local manufacturers. On the first floor is the pack-
ing room, where aril the items are sorted, grouped,
packed, and sent to the suburbs,, country, and the
other States. In this department the firm have won
a high reputation for promptness in the delivery
of goods, and, in fact, in regard to the suburban
trade, a great deal of their latter-day success is
due to the excellent system employed in their des-
patch-room, in which Mr. J. Bardsley, jun., is the
moving spirit.
The second floor is given over to storage and bulk
lines of every description of groceries and provi-
sions.
On the third floor there are the tea mixing, grad-
ing, weighing, and labelling departments.
The firm’s special brands include:—“ Wal-
laby,” " Sampson,” " Tonic Tips,” and
" Ceylon Crown Tips.” All the teas sold by Messrs.
Bardsley and Company are specially selected for
them at the various producing centres by their own
exporters. The coffee grinding mills, etc., also oc-
cupy a certain space on this floor. The firm’s speci-
ality, " Ceylon Plantation,” is well known through-
out Australasia for its purity, fragrance, and de-
licious flavour.
On the top floor there is an interesting iiem in
the firm’s " Wonderful ” brand of self-raising flour.
This flour is a special proprietary line
handled by this resourceful company. Amongst
the sole agency lines are {he famous “ Eglah" cus-
tards, ‘‘ Apex” sauces, picklesi, and candles. In
tinned fish Messrs. Bardsley and Company make a
special line of the Coleman “ Flag” salmon. No
mote appetising breakfast requisite could be
thought of than the dainty packets of
“Wallaby” and “Pride of Scotland” oat-
meal supplied by Messrs. Bardsley and
Company. When we look back to the
early period of the firm’s history and note a
small shop, whose total stock was considerably less
than .£lOO, and then after a comparatively short
period of 46 years behold the present palatial ware-
JOHN BARDSLEY AND COMPANY.
HEAD OFFICE AND STORES, 93 BATHURST-STREET, SYDNEY.
house in Bathurst-street, with its immense stock,
, v i loSe va lue exceeds .£30,000, we cannot help but
, . ~ , . , ,
admire the men whose resourcefulness and eneigy
have accomplished such marvellous results.
/Ifoercbants anb Jmportevs.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches .--continued.
WHOLESALE GROCERS AND TEA MERCHANTS.


MB. JOHN BARDSLEY.
Mr. John Bardsley, sen., the founder of the great
distributing house of Messrs. John Bardsley and
Company, general merchants, tea importers, and
wholesale grocers, was, until recent years, a well-
known figure amongst metropolitan and provincial
traders. His progress in the commercial world is
one of those instances of what it is possible for a
man of fixed purpose and possessed of an extraor-
dinary capacity for work to accomplish. During
the forty-two years spent in building up
the immense concern w'hich bears his name,
Mr. Bardsley displayed great ability, both
as a financier and buyer, and in the general con-
duct of the business won not only the esteem of
those who were directly associated with him, but
also that of his fellow merchants.
Mr. Bardsley is a native of Lancashire, having
been born at Manchester in 1827. He arrived in
Australia in the early fifties, and with character-
istic enterprise established himself as a retail
grocer at the Glebe in 1856. His business methods
and commonsense qualities secured for him many
friends throughout, what at that time was a scat-
tered suburb, and within a short period he was
able to see his business rapidly increase. In 1864,
the operations of the firm became so great that he
decided to launch out as a wholesale merchant. By
dint of hard work and the devising of shrewd and
ingenious methods of affecting business, phenomenal
progress was made until 1898, when he retired from
active participation in the firm’s affairs.
Mr. Bardsley, being of a retiring nature, has
abstained from public life, and at the ripe old age
of 75 enjoys perfect health.
MR. JOHN BARDSLEY.
Mr. Bardsley’s family, of which Dr. E. A. Bards-
ley, of Waverley, is a member, comprises two sons
and a daughter.
MR. J. KINDLE.
One of the great elements which make for per-
manent success in a business career is hard work.
Mr. J. Hindle, the courteous general manager for
Messrs. John Bardsley and Company, who, by un-
tiring zeal, has risen from traveller to manager in
the firm just quoted, has through life made “ at it
and always at it" his motto.
Mr. Hindle, who hails from Rishton, Lancashire,
was born in 1856, and came out to Melbourne in
1870. His first business experience was gained in
the well-known soft goods warehouse of Messrs.
King, Harcourt, and Williams, with whom he re-
mained for seven years, when he established a retail
drapery business of his own at the corner of Lygon
and Swanston streets, Carlton, and carried it on
successfully until 1884, when Mr. J. Bardsley offered
him the position of country representative of his
firm. Being a man of great enterprise and “ go, ’
Mr. Hindle sold out his softgoods business and
made a new home in Sydney. The sterling business
qualities of Mr. Hindle were given full scope, and
within a short period he not only proved himself to
he a valuable acquisition to the firm, but won the
confidence and esteem of the many customers with
whom he iiad business dealings, and this, coupled
with his indefatigable earnestness, led to quick
advancement in position.
MR. J. HINDLE.
In 1888, he had so won the confidence of the heads
of the firm that he was rewarded for his devotion
to their interests by being made a full partner. In
this position his thorough knowledge of the require-
ments of the trade proved of great value to the
directorate. His final promotion came about in
1895, when Mr. James Hunter, the then managing
partner, was granted a six months’ vacation, and
left for a tour through England.
During Mr. Hunter’s absence Mr. Hindle took
over the reins of management, and showed such
marked ability as a manager and organiser that on
the return of the former, arrangements were made
for Mr. Hunter, who is an able financier, to give
his full time to the counting-house, Mr. Hindle
being permanently appointed as general manager—
a position he has held ever since with credit.
Under his capable, far-seeing control, the opera-
tions of the firm have more than doubled.
Although the hard work and supervision
necessary in the management of such a large
concern has absorbed almost the whole of his time,
Mr. Hindle, at the request of his many supporters,
allowed himself, in 1891, to be nominated, and was
elected, a member of Parliament in 1891 and 1894,
during the Sir Henry Parkes and Sir George Dibbs
Governments; and as a representative for Newtown
proved himself to be an able debater and politician.
In commercial circles Mr. Hindle' is well known as
,1 progressive member of the committee of Associa-
ted Merchants of Sydney, with which body he has
been closely connected as a committeeman since its
inception. Mr. Hindle is married to the only
daughter of Mr. John Bardsley.
MR. J. BARDSLEY, JUNR.
ME. J. BARDSLEY, JUNE.
Mr. John Bardsley, junior, is the second son of
the founder of the firm, and was born at the Glebe
in 1866. His education being received at Newing-
ton College, Sydney. In 1898, Mr. Bardsley de-
cided to adopt a commercial career, and entered the
firm of Bardsley and Company as clerk, from which
position he quickly rose to the more responsible one
of traveller. Unlike the majority of young men
when they first enter their father’s business, Mr.
Bardsley took a deep interest in the methods of the
firm, and obtained such a good knowledge of its
working, that within a short period he became one
of the partners, and was assigned the responsible
position of head of the forwarding department,
where, under the kindly guidance of Mr. Hindle, he
has done excellent work, and in no small degree
helped to maintain the firm’s great reputation for
promptitude in the despatch of all orders entrusted
to its care.
Mr. Bardsley, jun., is a most capable athlete, and
in cricketing circles is well known as the champion
bowler of the MacDonald Town Cricket Club.
MR. JAS. HUNTER, J.P.
From apprentice to director, such is the record
that Mr. James Hunter, J.P., and a director of the
old-established firm of John Bardsley and Company,
enjoys. Mr. Hunter, apart from his ability as a
master of finance, is one of those energetic business
men whose methods of integrity and promptitude
MR. J. HUNTER, J. P.
cany them into the front rank, in the face of all
obstacles. A great deal of the early success of the
great business-house with which he is connected is
due to Mr. Hunter’s able managing capabilities.
In 1878, when Mr. Hunter was admitted a partner
of the firm, the business was making such headway
that Mr. Bardsley, sen., and Mr. Hunter were
obliged to literally work night and day to cope with
the orders which rolled in.
In 1895, Mr. Hunter determined to visit England,
and while there did not neglect to further the inter-
ests of the firm by paving the way for the acquire-
ment of new agencies, etc. In 1891, Mr. Hunter
purchased the business of Messrs. Smith, McDonald,
and Company, Limited, soap and soda crystal manu-
facturers, and which, with the aid of his son, he
has successfully carried on to the present time—the
firm being now known as James Hunter and Sons,
Limited.
Mr. Hunter, who is a justice of the peace for
N.S. Wales, was born in Scotland in 1849, and came
to this state so far back as 1853. In 1864 he began
his business career as an apprentice in the retail
shop of Mr. Bardsley, at the Glebe, and, as already
stated, has remained with this firm throughout an
unbroken period of 38 years. As chief of the count-
ing-house Mr. Hunter’s ability as a financier has
been of great value to the firm, while his expert
knowledge of the trade makes him eminently quali-
fied to act as one of the directorate.


W. C. Douglass.
WHOLESALE GROCER, TEA MERCHANT,
AND GENERAL IMPORTER.
Individuality and organising power are two
qualifications which make for success, whether it
be in public or private life. That period when a
merchant might secure a competency by the sudden
cornering of a household commodity is gone. To-
day those who control the great wholesale ware-
houses which adorn our Australian cities must
build up their business in the face of keen com-
petition and the risks attendant to the trade. No
better illustration of what can be done in Aus-
tralia, even in these days of financial crises, burst
booms, and drought, could be given than the phen-
omenal success achieved during the last seven years
by the well and favourably known firm of W. C.
Douglass, Wholesale Grocer, Tea Merchant and
General Importer, 53 and 55 Liverpool-
street, near Sussex-street. This business,
whose output has been doubled every
year, was founded by Mr. W. C. Doug-
lass, a gentleman of indomitable will, per-
severance, and executive ability. It is unusual,
and therefore more pleasing for us, to be able to
chronicle success when it has been brought about
by the exertions and tactful management of one
man. In 1895, Mr. Douglass founded the present
business, taking over the stock of Messrs. Butcher
and Company, Wholesale Grocers. The first ware-
house was located at Clarence-street, and al-
though of fair proportions, the increase in trade
during the first two years necessitated a removal
to larger accommodation. A warehouse was leased
in Kent-street, and here the firm gradually grew
into large proportions.
The honourable business methods employed, and
the large and varied stock carried, soon brought
the firm to the front, and within the short period
of four years the necessity for better means of
storing and handling the goods warranted Mr.
Douglass in taking what might well be called a
bold step.
He determined to build a warehouse on modern
principles, and replete with every convenience for
storage, office and despatch accommodation. The
result is seen in the handsome six-storied ware-
house in which the firm are now located at 53 and
55 Liverpool-street, near Sussex-street.
On the designing of the various interior arrange-
ments much care and attention has been bestowed.
Everything, from floor to ceiling, is the best pro-
curable, and throughout the many departments the
facilities provided for the efficient handling and
speedy despatch of all classes of goods are unex-
celled in any warehouse in the State.
The Liverpool-street frontage, totalling 42 feet,
embodies many pleasing architectural features,
which in a measure foretell the up-to-dateness of
the interior of the building. The ground floor is
approached by a fine flight of steps leading
through a pair of stained-glass folding doors.
On the left a handsome glass-fronted case, filled
with the gaily labelled samples of the world’s pro-
vision producers, covers the wall from floor to ceil-
ing, and gives the firm’s clients an opportunity
to observe at their leisure all that is new in local
and foreign manufacture.
Portion of this floor is also taken up with the
Counting-house, where a host of willing workers
are kept busy recording the many transactions of
the firm.
On the right is the tea sampling room, where the
famous “ ABC” and " Rodova” brands, and the
many other kinds of tea dealt in by Mr. Douglass
can be both seen and tasted.
The tea room equipment, in keeping with every
part of the building, is laid out on new lines, which
not only give the department a businesslike ap-
pearance, but afford extra facilities for the tho-
rough testing of the many blends, which are con-
stantly being asked for. The Manager’s office, a
fine, lofty apartment, is also located on this floor,
and close by is the typist’s room. At the rear, and
divided off from the main offices, that part of the
business known as the despatch department occu-
pies the remaining space of the ground floor.
Special provision for carrying out this important
work has been made by Mr. Douglass. Hydraulic
W. C. DOUGLASS’ WAREHOUSE, 53-55 LIVERPOOL STREET, SYDNEY.
lifts connect each of the floors with the despatch
room, which opens out on to a side entrance, so
devised that three carts can load at once, thus
allowing a sudden order for goods to be got away
in a minimum of time. Under the ground floor a
huge asphalted basement extends the whole depth
of the warehouse—l2o feet. Here methodical
order and scrupulous cleanliness is everywhere
noticeable in the rows of neatly packed bulk goods,
consisting or fruits, currants, sultanas, cordials,
and hundreds of other lines which need cool stor-
age. On the first floor a busy scene is presented,
the front portion of the floor space being taken up
with the sorting and packing department.
The whole wall space is covered with shelving,
divided off into compartments, in each of which
are packed several gross of the sundry lines of
goods stocked, such as Holbrook’s Essence of An-
chovies, and Anchovy paste, Colman’s, Keen’s,
Reckitt’s, and Nixey’s Blue, Chiver’s patent Blanc
Manges, neatly gotten up pots of Bovril, Machono-
dries’ bottled fruits, all the best brands of Cocoas
and Chocolates, Chiver’s Baking powder, " Planet”
Brand Candles, every imaginable kind of tinned
meats, etc., each line being so arranged that the
men who pack can quickly get at whatever they
want to complete the invoice they have in hand.
/Ifoercbants anb importers.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches :-eontinued.
WHOLESALE GROCERS, TEA MERCHANTS, &c.


At the rear of the packing room and on the same
floor a well-equipped factory for the manufacture
of the firm’s widely known proprietary lines is in
full working order. Amongst the principal articles
manufactured, packed, and bottled may be men-
tioned the celebrated “ Planet” Brand Jams,
Table Jelly Crystals, Honey, Baking powder. Cus-
tard powder, Seidlitz powders. Castor and Salad
Oil, Flavouring Essences, and Tomato Sauce,
Lemon Cheese, Candles, Linen Gloss, Lime Water,
Condensed Milk, Cordials, and Vinegar. “ Planet"
Syrup and Treacle is one of Mr. Douglas’s speci-
alities. the output reaching over 1000 cases of 2 lb.
tins per mcntlr.
The various processes of
manufacture and the machi-
nery, etc., in use are of a most
interesting character, the
enormous amount of stuff
put through showing plainly
the popularity of the firm’s
goods and the largeness of
their trading connection. The
tea blending, grading and
packing departments located
on the second floor take up
the whole of the space. In
this department the stock of
Indian, China, Ceylon, Koo-
loo. Scented. Orange Pekoe
and Panyong Brands is a
very large and varied one. Mr.
Douglass, having foreign
agents located at the centres,
who forward regular ship-
meats from Colombo and Cal-
cutta, is able to otfer special
inducements to buyers of
Biitish-grown teas.
The completeness of the
plant installed in the blending
and mixing rooms and the
facilities at hand for quick
packing and despatch en-
ables Mr. Douglass to fulfil
any order at the shortest
notice. To those who desire
to have special labels affixed to
their packets of tea, coffee,
etc., Mr. Douglass offers a
range of most attractive wrap-
pings, and in the case of a
customer requiring a special
brand bearing his own name
or trade mark, arrange-
ments have been made by which any label can be
placed upon the packages without causing the
slightest delay.
Amongst the principal proprietary brands of tea
which command an enormous sale on account of
their uniform high quality and aroma may be
mentioned the " Kodova,” a pure Mountain-grown
Oeylon of delicious taste and fragrance; “Baden-
Powell,” a choice quality tea; “ABC," another
popular blend; and the famous “ Kapai” Tea,
which has won a ready sale throughout Australia
for its excellence of quality and flavour.
In Coffees a big range is offered, the most highly
esteemed being the “Moor” Brand, a fragrant, lus-
cious coffee, which is ground daily on the premises.
On the third and fourth floors pile upon pile of
boxes, containing productions of the old and new
world manufacturers, meet the eye.
What can be done by the practice of industry,
backed up by steadfast honesty and punctuality in
all dealings, is emphasized in the marvellous suc-
cess attained by Mr. Douglass, who, by his own
ability and indefatigable exertion, in the short
space of seven years, covering a period of unex-
ampled financial unrest, aggravated by bad go-
vernment, has built up from a comparatively
small beginning, a business
whose operations now extend
throughout the whole of Aus-
tralasia, with an annual turn-
over amounting to many
thousands of pounds.
TEA PACKING ROOM.
The great variety and number of home and foreign
manufactured goods displayed throughout the ware-
house cause the onlooker to wonder how it is pos-
sible for Mr. Douglass to procure and keep up
regular supplies of such a host of foodstuffs, etc.,
gathered from the four corners of the earth. The
bringing together of the magnificent stock which
Mr. Douglass has stored within the depart-
inputs of bis warehouse has only been attained
through the possession of an absolute knowledge
of the trade in all its branches, unremitting vigi-
lance, _ and a close study of the operations of the
world’s markets.
ME. W. C. DOUGLASS.
The predominating characteristic of our most
able financiers and men of commerce is that of
personality interwoven with ability and persever-
ance.
In connection with the growth of our commerce,
it is pleasing to note that amongst the foremost
merchants of this State are many native-born Aus-
tralians, who by industry have built up large busi-
nesses and scored success where others less gifted
would have failed.
As an instance of what may be achieved by a
man of integrity, ability and perseverance, we
have only to refer to Mr. W. C. Douglass, sole pro-
prietor and founder of the huge Grocery, Mer-
chants’ and General Importers’ business which
bears his name.
Mr, Douglass is a native of New South Wales,
having been born near Newcastle in 1866. Mr.
Douglass, senior, being a firm believer in the
maxim that “ knowledge is power,” spared no ex-
pense in fitting his son for the battle of life by
giving him the advantage of a thorough commer-
cial education. In 1881, Mr. W. C. Douglass en-
tered the old-established Grocery warehouse of F.
Butcher, of Clarence-street, Sydney, where his
MR. W. C. DOUGLASS.
energy and watchfulness of the firm’s interests were
soon recognised, and promotion to a responsible
position followed.
For eleven years Mr. Douglass worked assidu-
ously in the service of Messrs. Butcher and Co.,
and at the close of that period had acquired such
a thorough knowledge of the trade that when the
opportunity offered he was able to take over the
business in 1895, the firm being then known as W.
C. Douglass, Wholesale Grocer, Tea Merchant, and
General Importer. Mr. Douglass reorganised and
improved the old-time methods under which the
business was formerly carried on, and introduced
the progressive policy which has brought about
phenomenal success. Some idea of the progress
made may be judged from the fact that since the
inception of the present management the expan-
sion of trade has been such that the output has
been exactly doubled every year.
The secret of Mr. Douglass’ success in business is
found in his personality, the strict integrity of the
firm in all its dealings, and the careful methods
adopted in the selection of the stock and the ful-
filment of all orders received from customers with
the utmost despatch. Mr. Douglass is a gentle-
man who is never idle, and although business de-
mands the greater portion of his time, he takes
great interest in the welfare of the trade he so
worthily represents, and as a member of the Associ-
ated Merchants of N.S.W. Association, has been an
earnest worker.


Messrs. D. Mitchell & Co., Ltd.
IMPORTERS, MANUFACTURERS, TEA,
PROVISION, WINE AND SPIRIT
MERCHANTS.
In the Australian Commonwealth to-day Com-
merce is no longer an unimportant traffic requir-
ing no apprenticeship, but a matter tasking the
mind to the utmost, to be mastered only by the
highest sagacity and after the most profound
sounding of tacts, circumstances, and prospects. No
one of unbiased mind can review the marvellous
growth and expansion of such a representative Aus-
tralian firm as Messrs. D. Mitchell and Co., Ltd.,
Importers, Manufacturers, Tea, Provision, Wine,
Spirit, and General Merchants, of Sydney, New-
castle, and London, whose directors and managers
are all Australians, without admitting ttiat
amongst the sons of the Commonwealth we have
men whose habits of industry, ability and business
enterprise, entitle them to rank with the foremost
of the old world’s mercantile kings. When in 1866,
Mr. Michael David Mitchell, with that foresight
and acumen which characterised his after career,
foresaw the possibilities of the wholesale Provision
Trade in New South Wales, and seized upon the
golden opportunity offered to found the great mer-
cantile institution which is now known tnroughout
Australasia and the world as I). Mitchell and Co.,
Ltd. The obstacles in the way of success were
many. Unwise shippers had flooded the country
with unsuitable goods, rash speculators had over-
stepped the bounds of legitimate business, and
trade in general was in a disorganised state. Un-
daunted by these conditions and confident in his
own resources, Mr. Mitchell, who had given up a
profitable business at Ipswich, Queensland, in pur-
suance of his scheme, set his shoulder to the wheel,
stimulated by the knowledge that the great prizes
of life were seldom won by those who trusted only
to favourable turns of the tide. Having matured his
plans, Mr. Mitchell boldly began operations as a
wholesale provision merchant, his warehouse being
located on the site now occupied by the Strand
Arcade. His knowledge of the trade and the re-
quirements of his customers gained from his
Queensland experience, enabled him to revolu-
tionize the stereotyped conditions by which the
rival houses were regulated. Under the trading
title of D. Mitchell and Co., Provision, Wine and
Spirit Merchants, he broke away from the old
methods, introduced new lines of goods, adopted a
liberal, honest policy in all dealings, his stock was
constantly renewed, his methods being too wide-
awake and progressive to offer old shop-spoiled and
undesirable commodities to his customers. The
dominant feature of the business was the same as it
is to-day—to continually advance, to do something
more and better than was ever done before. l!e-
-tailers, attracted by the uniform high quality of all
goods supplied, and the greater scope offered them
for expanding their output by stocking new and
suitable lines of provision goods, turned to I).
Mitchell and Co. for their supplies.
SUCCESS SECURED.
Within two years the firm’s name on a package
was taken as a guarantee of quality, and upon this
solid foundation the business increased at a phe-
nomenal rate. The old warehouse became too small,
and a move was made to more commodious pre-
mises at the corner of Wynyard and York streets,
opposite the old Post Office, a land mark long since
disappeared. The facilities afforded by the posses-
sion of extra accommodation for merchandise and
the more expeditious despatch of orders led to still
further developments in the operations of the firm,
and in a brief period they were again compelled to
move. A block of lapd at 153 Clarence-street was
secured and built upon, where the firm has re-
mained ever since, although what in those days
sufficed for their warehouse, to-day with some dif-
ficulty only accommodates the offices, sales-room,
and counting-house requirements of their colossal
business. Mr. P. C. Mitchell, Mr. C. F. Mitchell,
and Mr. I. Mitchell, sons of the founder of the firm,
had by this time been initiated into the ramifica-
tions of the trade, so that in 1888 Mr. Mitchell, Sen.,
was able to leave the responsibilities of manage-
ment in their hands, under the able control of Mr.
P. C. Mitchell, while he went to London to act as
buy r er, and thus place the firm in a position to cater
for its customers in a manner impossible without
the aid of a home connection. Mr. Mitchell, on ar-
rival in London, established headquarters at Fen-
church-street, and bought so well that the
Australasian business was soon trebled. So rapidly
did the trade increase that he was obliged to return
to Sydney in a few.years and arrange for the pur-
chase of a block of land at the rear of the ware-
house then occupied, facing Kent-street, on which
a handsome six-floor store was built.
On his return to London he renewed his buying
operations with even greater vigor, and in addi-
tion established agencies and correspondents not
only in the United Kingdom, in Europe, and on the
shores of the Mediterranean, but also in New York,
San Francisco, Singapore, Calcutta, China, Japan,
and at many other producing centres.
BUSINESS REORGANISED.
In 1892 Mr. M. D. Mitchell, by whose energy and
enterprise the firm had been founded and fostered
until it held a foremost position amongst its Aus-
tralasian contemporaries, died in London, honoured
and respected by the traders of the world. Imme-
diate steps were at once taken to remedy the loss
sustained by the sad bereavement. Mr. P. C. Mit-
chell, who had been the moving spirit in Australia
previous to his father’s death, assumed the colonial
managership Mr. C. F. Mitchell taking control of
the London office, while Mr. Isadore Mitchell di-
rected the Shipping Department, the local sales and
general warehouse supervision being in the hands
of Mr. Thos. Nosworthy, a gentleman of high
standing in the firm. Under the guidance of the
new heads, the firm’s output was not only main-
tained, but so advanced that a second warehouse
adjoining the one in Kent-street was erected. In
1900 the firm had reached that stage when the mag-
nitude of its operations necessitated additional con-
trolling assistance. The business was successfully
floated into a Limited Liability Company, the di-
rectorate comprising Mr. P. C. Mitchell, Managing
Director, Mr. Isadore Mitchell, Mr. S. Mitchell,
and Mr. Thos. Nosworthy in Sydney, and Mr. C. P,
Mitchell London Director, the firm being regis-
tered as D. Mitchell and Co., Ltd., of 153 Clarence-
street, Sydney, and 155 Fenchurch-streot, London,
E.C. The next great forward move was the acquire-
ment of the large warehouse known as “ The Lion
Mills,” immediately opposite their Kent-street
stores. In 1901 Mr. P. C. Mitchell, pursuing the
same progressive policy which dominated his
father’s business methods, anticipated the opportu-
nities of federation, and visited the principal com-
meicial centres of the globe. During his extensive
tour Mr. Mitchell worked assiduously in the rear-
rangement of the established agencies and acquire-
ment of new ones.
His knowledge of the wants of the Australasian
trade enabled him to provide for the future by the
purchase of thousands of pounds worth of the most
modem plant for the manufacture of proprietary
lines which would come within the scope of a pro-
tective tariff. This was a wise precaution, as by
the introduction of new processes of manufacture
and new methods of handling the goods made up in
Australia, the firm’s customers have reaped the
benefit of minimum cost and standard high quality.
In addition to the above, Mr. Mitchell set the
Company’s Indent and Consignment business on a
practically new basis, enabling them through the
medium of their London House and its tributary
agencies at New York, Berlin, Brussels, Antwerp,
Foochow, Colombo, etc. to engage in the large im-
porting and consignment business for which Messrs.
D. Mitchell and Co. hold an unexcelled reputation.
In these operations the company act not only for
branches of grocery lines, but for all classes of mer-
chandise. In regard to consignments, the same
thing applies, as every description of produce is
taken in hand, and under the direct supervision of
Mr. C. F. Mitchell, realised to the best advantage,
the proceeds being applied as instructed by the pro-
ducer or forwarder. The company also make the
necessary advances on goods.
On the return of Mr.. Mitchell still more ware-
house space was needed, and the third section of the
premises in Kent-street was built and equipped as a
tea-packing and blending warehouse, the space at
disposal in the factory allowing of the extensive
use of automatic machines, etc., whereby the clean-
liness, purity', and quality of the company’s manu-
factures have been brought to the highest pitch of
perfection.
PKESENT DAY OPERATIONS.
So much for the past growth and expansion of
this wonderful ever-increasing business institution,
which in the comparatively short period of 36
years has multiplied its operations, until the pro-
ducts of every clime filter through its vast ware-
houses, and are distributed in the fotm of imported
or manufactured articles throughout every part of
the southern hemisphere. The huge warehouses and
factory of the company, located in Clarence and
Kent streets, are in themselves ample evidence of
/IDercbants anb Jmportevs.
Historical and Biographical Sketchescontinued.
WHOLESALE GROCERS, TEA MERCHANTS, &C.


the gigantic business which needs their three acres
of floor space to accommodate its stock.
As with everything in connection with Messrs. D.
Mitchell and Co.’s operations, the buildings and
their equipment are on the most modern lines. The
warehouses are subdivided into three distinct
blocks, each protected from fire and shut pff by
There are ten distinct departments, in which over
1000 entirely different lines are to he seen, each
carefully labelled and stacked away in such a man-
ner that at a minute’s notice the smallest item is
available for the buyer’s inspection.
Apart from the huge bulk stocks of every conceiv-
able description of groceries, teas, and general
ground floor of the old portion of the premises at
153 Clarence-street. Here the eye roams over an
exhibit of the firm's samples, which, by reason of
their great variety and artistic wrappings form a
most attractive display. Mr. T. Nosworthy, who
has charge of this portion of the business, is at
hand to meet the requirements gf the most exacting
MESSES. D. MITCHELL AND CO.’S WAREHOUSE.
The view presented is the Kent Street frontage of Messrs. D. Mitchell and Co., Ltd., Bulk Stores and Tea-House.
The sections 1,2, 3 (mentioned in the letterpress), run from the left. The buildings comprise six floors and basement, with a frontage of over 200 feet,
and a floor-space of 125,000 square feet.
Passive iron doors. Fire hoses are placed at vary-
ln K intervals, and throughout the floors electric
telephones and communication buttons connect the
rarious departments with the head office, the tele-
phone exchange being reached by four tiunk lines.
goods, there are many items which are in them-
selves an education, so that a description of the
principal attractions which meet the eye of the
visitor will prove of interest.
The offices and sample rooms are located on the
buyer. The tea sampling room, with its odd cups
and utensils, with which the whole ot the many
varieties of tea handled are analysed, checked, an
tested, and its hundreds of parcels ot tea, ma e an
interesting collection. In this room, presided over


by Mr. J. Parker, the firm’s well-known expert, all
negotiations in regard to the metropolitan and pro-
vincial tea sales are conducted. The offices of the
cashier and secretary, entering rooms, invoice
postal, and typist departments are located on this
floor, whilst at the rear Mr. Isadore Mitchell and
Mr. Thos. Nosworthy have their private offices.
Next to these are the strong rooms built into the
solid masonry. On the first floor Mr. P. C. Mit-
chell's luxuriously-fitted private office overlooks
Clarence-street. From here the managing direc-
tor controls the vast transactions of the firm. So
well organised is the system in use that the smal-
lest detail of each day’s business is personally
supervised by the principals, and as a further safe-
guard against mistakes and an assurance of the
fulfilment of the wishes of each customer, all orders
and letters are perused by the directors.
Behind the offices are the
HUGE WAEEHOUSES STOCKED TO THEIE
FULL CAPACITY
with goods ready for the packing rooms. From
the front portion of the premises, which gives but
a poor idea of the proportions of the business, the
visitor ascends to the sixth and top floor of the
warehouse, where he receives his first impression of
the vastness of Messrs. D. Mitchell and Co.’s opera-
tions. On this floor, 150 feet in width, subdivided
into three compartments by fireproof doors, the
stranger is bewildered by piles upon piles of mer-
chandise. At the extreme end of this flat, which
runs the whole length of the Kent-street frontage,
the six hydraulic lifts, which connect with the
basement, work noiselessly, reducing and enlarg-
ing stocks, and keeping the firm’s 30 teams con-
stantly employed in supplying and delivering goods
for Interstate, New Zealand,, or Over-sea require-
ments.
Descending to the fifth floor, tke delicious aroma
of the thousands of cases of tea gives a pleasing
sensation, and causes the uninitiated to calculate
how many hundred thousand afternoon gossips
could be accommodated with a cup of " MYFA”
(the firm’s speciality), or of the different
brands of high-grown, blended China, Ceylon,
Indian, and scented teas, and buds from the bulk
stocks, which reach to the high ceilings in their
closely-packed department. Amongst the many
packages are to be seen the choicest Panyongs, fine
collections of buds, scented, and fancy teas, special
crack chops and extra curio leaf for special blends.
Once again descending to the fourth floor, the
visitor is struck with the
SCEUPULOUS CLEANLINESS
which prevails. The walls and ceilings are a dazz-
ling white, whilst afoot the polished surface of the
parquet flooring radiates back the sunbeam shafts
which peer through the great windows of the blend-
ing room. In this great space skilled men of life-
long experience deftly combine the various kinds
of leaf, until the flavour demanded by the most
fastidious customer is secured. There is another
feature about this tea department which appeals
to the onlooker who indulges in the favourite
beverage. It is a fact that from the time when
the sealed-up case enters Messrs. Mitchell and
Co.’s warehouse until the packet of tea is opened in
the home of the consumer, no human hand touches
the tea as it goes through the many departments.
Every process of blending, grading, storing, weigh-
ing, and packing being done by costly automatic
machinery actuated by electro motors.
Briefly, the method is as follows; —The great
chests of tea are opened with a specially construc-
ted apparatus into great heaps beside a huge
machine called a grader, which picks out all in-
equalities and automatically passes the selected
leaf down a shoot into a marvellous piece of
mechanism known as “ The Mixer; this mixer is in
the form of a cylinder, inside of which are a num-
ber of revolving fans driven by electricity, as
much as three tons of tea being mixed at one time.
From the mixer the tea is run down a number of
shoots into huge bins, each holding three tons, the
vents at the bottom being operated in the weighing
and packing rooms on the second floor.
The weighing and packing rooms are a revelation
in cleanliness, and the perfection to which inven-
tive genius has brought automatic machinery. The
AUTOMATIC ELECTEIC WEIGHING
MACHINES,
specially imported by Mr. P. C. Mitchell at a huge
cost, are the best of their kind in Australasia. They
weigh up to any required standard, and so accurate
are they that they will on an average weigh at the
rate of 400 one pound lots per hour, and never vary
their quota a fractional part of an ounce. The loose
bulk tea drops from the bins into a receptacle at the
top of. the weigher, which has been adjusted for
one, two, or three pound lots as may be required.
The operator places the tin, canister or carton in
position to be filled, presses the electric button,
and the machine goes on weighing and depositing
its weight of tea so long as required.
The mechanism is so constructed that when the
tea which pours through three shutters into the
weighing dish reaches a certain weight, first one
and then another of the shutters is closed by
electro magnets switching off the electric current
which operates them. As the weight approaches
its limit the third shutter gradually closes, until
only a tiny stream of tea remains to make up the
full quota, when it in turn is cut off by the electro
magnet. Instantly, by automatic action, the weigh-
ing dish turns a somersault and deposits its load
in the waiting canister, carton or tin, while at the
same time the weighing dish which has replaced it
MR. DAVID MITCHELL,
Founder of the Firm.
is being filled. Prom the weighing machine the
filled tins canisters, or cartons pass to the packing
machines, which press down the tea, and in the
case of .cardboard boxes, square off the package.
After being wrapped, the lots of tea go to the label-
ling rooms below, where deft fingered operators
receive the packages, and with surprising quickness
place the various labels upon them. The buyers
for the most part have their own special labels,
storekeepers and others are thus able to obtain any
blend their customers like, and also get the advan-
tage of having their own names upon the packets.
Messrs. D. Mitchell and Co., Ltd., having a com-
plete printing office installed within the factory,
are able to supply any design required.
The stock within this warehouse, apart from that
kept in bond for export purposes, comprises not
only goods coming under the familiar designation
of “ groceries,” but hundreds of lines calculated to
meet the wants of the storekeeper or retailer, who
has, in many instances, to stand as the "universal
provider” for his surrounding district. Amongst
the sundries may be enumerated chemicals, wool-
packs, stationery, tarpaulins, calico tents and flies,
patent medicines, water tanks, tinware, axle grease,
cordials, butter and cheese coloring, and other dairy
preparations, mixed paints and varnishes, white
and red lead, brushware, galvanised ware, tinplates,
twine, etc.
•
Across Kent-street, and facing the great ware-
house just described, Messrs. D. Mitchell and Co.,
Ltd., have located their factory in a huge four-
storied building known as
THE " LION MILLS.”
Here the firm’s well-known proprietary articles
such as Tomato Sauce, Pickles, Arrowroot, Concen-
trated Essence of Vinegar and Malt, Vinegar, Curry
Powder, Honey, Castor Oil, Salad Oil, Baking Pow-
der, Pepper, Eice, Coffee, Icing Sugar, Paragon
Cocoa, Extract of Meat " Eradico,” are manufac-
tured and packed. Here, too, under the supervision
of an analytical chemist, the various goods handled
in the general warehouse are carefully analysed and
tested.
At the rear of the building a 32-horse power en-
gine provides the motive power for driving the
machinery which grinds the spices, coffee, cinna-
mon, etc., and also that used in the manufacture
of blue, vinegar, and similar items. On the first
floor there are some wonderful machines, foremost
amongst which are the grinders, which revolve at a
speed of 4500 revolutions per minute, and patent
automatic weighing machines invented by one of
the employees of the firm. There are also several
Chilian mills, whose rollers weigh 15 cwt. each.
On the secTond floor of this building castor and salad
oil are prepared, clarified, refined, and bottled. The
manufacture is also carried on of " Good Shot” Bak-
ing powder, rice and curry powder. Sauce and
vinegar are packed on this floor, the last two men-
tioned being handled in a separate department.
On each of the floors the visitor is attracted by the
sight of an army of bright, intelligent girls, neatly
attired in white aprons, busily engaged in packing,
wrapping, labelling, and otherwise putting up the
company’s numerous lines of proprietary wares in
saleable form. The whole of the factory, like the
warehouse, is scrupulously clean, and its method of
working up-to-date in every particular.
In this great business 41 clerks and 170 hands are
employed, in addition to seven country travellers,
five town travellers, and a host of out-door men,
such as carters, etc., whose work is in connection
with shipping for whom the company act as agents.
The phenomenal growth and progress, expansion
and wealth of this gigantic Australasian firm within
the comparatively recent period of 36 years is evi-
dence of the great opportunities which Australia
offers to those who possess the qualifications which
make for permanent success. Progress is the only
healthy law of life, and in the case of a young
nation such as is gathered together within the Aus-
tralian'Commonwealth, the rate at which it pro-
ceeds is largely dependent upon the assistance af-
forded in the fostering of our industries and com-
mercial pursuits by our legislators, the ship owners,
and those whose duty it is to care for and build up
the prosperity of the people as a whole.
ME. DAVID MITCHELL.
FOUNDED OF D. MITCHELL AND CO., LTD.
Mr. David Mitchell, the founder of D. Mitchell
and Co., Ltd., whose death occurred in 1892, was a
gentleman of rare ability and great resource. lie
was born at Posen, Prussia, in 1829, and arrived in
Sydney in the early part of 1850, establishing him-
self in that city as a wholesale jeweller and fancy
goods merchant. When the financial crisis subse-
quent to the gold discovery caused stagnation in
business he removed to Ipswich, Queensland. Ee-
turning to Sydney in 1866, Mr. Mitchell laid the
foundation of the immense firm which now bears his
name. Mr. Mitchell being a man of untiring in-
dustry, devoted his whole energies to the interests
of his business. As an alderman of the Glebe, where
he resided, Mr. Mitchell did good work. Although
repeatedly asked to engage in political affairs, he
steadfastly declined to be nominated for Parlia-
ment.
In Masonic circles under the old English consti-
tution, Mr. Mitchell proved himself an earnest hard
worker, and successfully filled several District
Grand Offices. His great experience of the trade
conditions of the local and foreign markets enabled
him to introduce many new ideas into the conduct
of his business, which from its inception became
known far and wide for the integrity of its founder
and the high standard of honour maintained in all
his dealings.


MR. P. C. MITCHELL,
MANAGING DIRECTOR OF D. MITCHELL AND
CO., LIMITED.
To achieve success in the competitive arena of
commercial life a man must have either great men
or great objects before him. The successful mer-
chant who controls the destinies of the huge mer-
cantile houses which distribute the products of
every clime throughout the Australian Common-
wealth would be an impossibility without the aid
of education and practical experience.
Mr. P. C. Mitchell, Managing Director for the
world-ienowned firm of D. Mitchell and Co.,
Importers, Manufacturers, Tea, Provision, Wine
and Spirit Merchants, is a gentleman who by un-
remitting toil and the devotion of a lifetime to
the requirement of a mastery of the trade in
which he holds such a prominent position, has
achieved results which entitle him to rank as one
of the greatest Australian born organisers and
financiers in the State. The subject of this sketch,
who is the eldest son of the late Mr. David Mit-
chell, the founder of the firm, was born at Sydney
in 1858. His education, which was of a strictly
commercial character, being completed under the
able guidance of a private tutor.
In 1873 Mr. Mitchell was taken into the busi-
ness by his father, who, determined that his son
should acquire a practical knowledge of every
detail, placed him in the office as an ordinary-
junior clerk. His natural ability and rare faculty
for acquiring knowledge, ripened by a tour of the
MR. ISADORE MITCHELL.
world in 1886, made him indispensable to the busi-
ness, and having done yeoman service in the
capacities of traveller and foreign correspondent,
he was handed the reins of management in 1888
on the departure of his father to London to open
up the home buying office. The wisdom of this
selection is amply verified by the fact that under
his masterly guidance, the operations of the firm
during his fourteen years at the head of affairs
have more than Quadrupled.
In 1901, in pursuit of the progressive policy
which has won such success, he went home with
the intention of obtaining a complete equipment
of the most modern and up-to-date appliances for
his factories. While away he also made a personal
acquaintance with the whole of the firm’s foreign
agents, and on his return via America set about
further enlargement of the company’s manufactur-
ing and trading interests to which the present day
output of the warehouses bears solid testimony of
success.
Apart from the furtherance of his own business,
Mr. Mitchell has worked assiduously to promote the
welfare of his fellow merchants and traders, the
Associated General Merchants’ and Importers’ As-
sociation, of which he was Chairman for two
Tears, being founded by him, the objects of this
Association being to protect the wholesale and
retail grocery trade against illegitimate competi-
tion, the abuses of credit, etc., and, in addition,
give assistance to kindred trades not directly con-
nected with the wholesale grocery business.
In the political world he has been an active
worker as a champion of federation and the wel-
fare of the community as a whole, especially as a
member of the vigilance committee during the
MR. P. C. MITCHELL.
plague scare. Although often requested to stand
for parliamentary honours, he has never identi-
fied himself with any one party nor held public
office.
In the realm of sport Mr. Mitchell is a clever
exponent of swimming, and has been for years an
ardent supporter of athletics, being a member of
the Sydney Rowing Club, and one of the founders
of the Glebe Rowing Club.
Mr. P. C. Mitchell, by energy, enterprise, and
business acumen, has helped in no small degree to
build up the fame of New South Wales as a com-
mercial centre, and initiated many profitable indus-
tries which would have otherwise been non-
existent.
MR. THOS. NOSWORTHY.
Amongst Sydney’s well-known commercial men
Mr. Thos. Nosworthy, Director and New South
Wales Sales Manager for Messrs. D. Mitchell and
Co., Ltd., is a prominent figure. Through his long
connection with this great firm his name is a
household word in metropolitan and provincial
business circles, where he is held in high esteem
as a man whose word is his bond.
Mr. Nosworthy is a native of Goulburn, New
South Wales, and began his career in the service of
MR. SYDNEY J. MITCHELL.
the firm of Davis, Alexander and Co., who, in 1870,
were traders in his native tow-n. For five years
he worked hard in their interests, and with cha-
racteristic ability mastered every detail of the
retail provision trade. His knowledge of the busi-
ness was so thorough that in 1875 he was able to
secure the position of Customs Clerk to Messrs. D.
Mitchell and Co. In this important though some-
what minor office he displayed such marked capa-
bility that the firm promoted him to the post of
traveller. Here again his zealous care of the firm’s
interests, his capacity for business, and his popu-
larity with the metropolitan and provincial traders
secured further promotion.
On the flotation of the company in 1900, he was
made a director, and gi%-en control of the New
South Wales selling and buying operations, a re-
ward his long and faithful service richly merited.
Mr. Nosworthy finds time to take interest in muni-
cipal affairs, and, until his election as present
may-or of the Glebe, occupied the position of aider-
man of that borough for a period of five years.
He is a believer in athletics and a patron of many
of the numerous clubs in and around the Glebe.
ME. ISADORE MITCHELL.
Mr. Isadore Mitchell, who has charge of the mul-
titudinous duties connected with the firm’s ship-
ping operations, is the fourth son of the late Mr.
David Mitchell, founder of the present mammoth
firm. He is a native of Queensland, • having been
born in 1867 at Ipswich. His educational studies
were completed at the Sydney Grammar School.
MR. THOS. NOSWORTHY.
In 1884 Mr. Isadore Mitchell came into the busi-
ness, and by industry and ability worked his way
up until in 1892, on the death of the head of the
firm, he was able to take up the responsible post
he now holds as head of the company’s shipping
department.
In the same year Mr. Mitchell became a direc-
tor, a position his long experience and hard work-
ing qualities made him well qualified to fill. Al-
though the demands of his firm absorb almost the
whole of his time, Mr. Mitchell takes great interest
in athletics, and as a cricketer and oarsman has won
several competitions. Amongst rowing men he is
known as a prominent member of the Glebe Row-
ing Club.
MR. SYDNEY J. MITCHELL.
Mr. S. J. Mitchell, the youngest son of the late
Mr. D. Mitchell, was born in 1876 at Sydney. Be-
ing originally intended for the medical profession,
he visited the old world, and spent some time at
one of the large educational establishments in
Hanover, and also at Ealing College, London, where
he passed several examinations. On his return
to Australia four years ago, the prospects offered
were so alluring that he chose a commercial career
and joined the firm as traveller, in which position
he proved himself so able that he was appointed
Manager at Newcastle when the present warehouse
was opened in that city eighteen months ago.


Messrs. Tillock & Company,
TEA MERCHANTS AND GENERAL IM-
PORTERS
To men possessing the sterling qualities of in-
tegrity, ambition and industry, no country offers
better opportunities for the amassing of wealth
than Australia. Although but an infant amongst
nations, our commercial progress, aided by the al-
most illimitable natural resources of the country,
has been so rapid as to be without a parallel. In
all the States of the Commonwealth prosperous in-
dustries have been established, and in the capital
cities, scores of costly warehouses, teeming with
the representative products of every civilized
country adorn the principal streets. Situated
thousands of miles from the old world centres of
manufacture, it is no wonder that the importer
and general merchant has, since the advent of set-
tlement in New South Wales, taken a more prom-
inent part in the building up of our pastoral,
farming, and commercial prosperity in every part
of this State.
Deprived of the enterprise and thoughtful pro-
vision of the merchant, who gathers together from
the four quarters of the globe all that is neces-
sary for the home, the farm, and the station,
and distributes it thioughout the territory, the
pioneer and the man on the land upon whose suc-
cess in crop and stock raising, our commercial
greatness, to a great extent depends, would, like
Othello, find their occupation gone, and the broad
acres dotted with sheep and cattle and waving heads
of corn, be once more a tang’ed forest of giant gum,
creeper and wattle bough.
Amongst the wholesale merchants and importing
firms, the old-established firm of Messrs. Tilled;
and Company, Wholesale Grocers, Manufacturers,
Tea Merchants, and General Importers, of Kent
and Liverpool Streets, Sydney, is an example of
what can be accomplished in Australia by able
management and unflinching adhesion to a policy
of strict integrity in all business dealings.
The foundation of this representative firm dates
back to 1875, when'Mr. .1. T. Tillock, a native of
North Shields, England, estab’ished a wholesale
Grocery and General business in premises located
in that portion of Sydney known as the Hay-
market.
The operations of the founders met with early
success, and within a year a removal was made to
another and larger warehouse, on the opposite side
of George Street, where a phenomenal develop-
ment in town and country took place. In 1890 the
operations of the firm had assumed such large pro-
portions that provision had to be made for the im-
mense stocks necessary to cater for the demands
of future trade. The choice of location occa-
sioned much thought, and eventually an advan-
tageously-situated block of land was purchased at
the corner of Liverpool and Kent Streets, on which
the commodious and handsome building at present
occupied, was erected.
During this period Messrs. Tillock and Company
acquired the sole agency for New South Wales of a
number of firms with a world-wide reputation.
No agencies or branches were established in the -
other Colonies, all business being done direct with
the head office, the results being of a most sub-
stantial value. At the present time the home buy-
ing is done through the London House, situated in
Billeter Street, Messrs. A. Levy and Company act-
ing as representatives.
The present warehouse comprises five floors in
the front portion, while the recently added part
consists of several stories. The basement of the
warehouse, erected in 1890, takes the form of a
comprehensive bulk store. On the ground floor,
fronting Kent Street, Mr. T. E. Tillock, a son of
the founder, and one of the partners, has his
office, while, directly opposite, a spacious sales
room is located. The walls of this department
are lined with handsome show cases, filled to re-
pletion with innumerable samples of the diversi-
fled goods stocked by the firm. Coming further
MESSRS. TILLOCK AND COMPANY.
WAREHOUSE AND STORES, KENT AND LIVERPOOL STREETS, SYDNEY
along, we get to the Cashier’s and Accountant’s
offices and Travellers’ rooms. The strictest at-
tention is given to all communications received
fiom customers, and a large staff is employed at-
tending to the heavy daily correspondence. At
the rear the forwarding operations are carried on.
Goods lifts run from the basement to each of the
various floors, thus facilitating the despatch of
goods per the medium of the delivery waggons
which have access to them, by three gateways.
Everything quoted in the firm’s list is forwarded
free to any wharf or railway station within the
city boundaries, carefully packed. A large staff
of outside workers is kept constantly employed.
On the first floor, Mr. J. T. Tillock’s office occu-
pies the front of the right hand corner facing
Liverpool Street. At the rear of the general offices,
also located on this flat, the Tea Sales Department
takes in a large space. Here the purchaser of the
new Season's Indian, China and Ceylon Teas can
sample the many blends, and be initiated into the
mysteries of the tea-taster’s art.
When treating on the subject of Teas,, the pro-
Auction of India and Ceylon call for special no-
tice, particularly in this country, where their
value has been only of late years recognised.
Scientific and practical research has placed the
relative values of teas of all producing countries
on a fair footing, and, while Indian Teas are highly
useful for blending purposes, they are not gener-
ally suitable to drink alone. This cannot be said
of Ceylon Teas, as the large demand they have
obtained is a proof of their general favour, and
the h'gh-class grades grown only on the mountain
slopes, as imported by Messrs. Tillock and Com-
pany, can be used independently of any other tea,
possessing in themselves that rich, delicate flavour
which makes tea so enjoyable and refreshing.
The difference which exists between the teas pro-
duced in China and Ceylon is readily noticeable.
/Iftercbants anb Jinporteus,
•Historical and Biographical Sketches continued.
TEA MERCHANTS AND GENERAL IMPORTERS.


There are many kinds or subdivisions of quality,
whose proportional value is estimated by its de-
grees of strength, character, flavour, and general
appearance of the leaf, the distinction between First
Crop and Second Crop Teas being at once evident
when tasted side by side—the one, brisk, pungent,
and juicy, the other, flat and almost tasteless.
There is also a great diversity even in the first
crop teas, some crops possessing much more
strength and finer, delicate flavour than others,
Panyong. Sanchong, and Ching-Wo growths, when
really fine, being beyond comparison with other teas.
In keeping with the liberal policy pursued
throughout their business dealings, Messrs. Til-
lock and Company forward samples, with very low
quotations on import cost to the trade, giving all
overweight (if any) to buyers. In no case is
more than import weight charged, and in regard
to the various grades and choice displayed, it will
be found by comparison that the prices quoted
have been fixed at the lowest possible margin.
The third floor is taken up by the tea packing
department, where the firm’s numerous teas are
done up in cartons, tins, and packets, attrac-
tively labelled. Amongst these must be men-
tioned the Kwanloo Blend, a selection of choice
Indian, China, and Ceylon growths, unrivalled
in quality, and possessing all the rare and high
MR. J. T. TILLOCK.
grade qualities of the finest imported tea. The
H. 0. B. brand produces a liquid of a malty
character and delicious flavour, and, owing to its
great strength, is a most economical tea. A pleas-
ing fragrance and stimulating quality is to be
found in the "Sensation” blend by those who have
acquired a taste for Ceylon Teas. The "Tourist,"
“U Kan,” "Acme,” "Poona,” "Defiance,” and
"Tricolor” brands complete the firm’s group of
specialities.
On the top floor is the tea-blending room, where
a great improvement has recently been made, the
most modern machinery having been imported at
considerable cost, and the department entirely re-
mndellsd and placed under the supervision of a
London tea expert of great experience.
Within the past few years the importation and
manufacture of grocery lines has assumed consider-
able proportions, especially in this State, and a
glance at the firm’s price lists is sufficient to amply
demonstrate that the operations of such concerns
as Tillock and Company are of a vast and compli-
cated nature. Nowadays, in fact, wholesale im-
porting has almost been reduced to a science, and
d is necessary for the merchant to have a special
training in the mechanical department of his busi-
ness, and a thorough knowledge of the growth and
nature of the many foods represented, so that the
chief productions of each country, whether it be
China, India, or Ceylon, can be secured and placed
in tempting array before the local buyer. This
can only be done by those who have a large stock
at their disposal to select from, together with spa-
cious premises filled with up-to-date manufactur-
ing appliances with which to manipulate large
quantities at one time, and thus ensure uniformity
of character and quality.
At the present time Messrs. Tillock and Company
hold enormous stocks of every description of Pro-
vision Goods, bought at the lowest point of the
market, and are thus able to offer their customers
the benefit of these purchases.
The recently acquired premises made necessary
by the ever-growing trade connections in New'
South Wales and elsewhere face Liverpool Street,
and are divided off from the main building by iron
doors. The basement is occupied with bulk stocks
of foods required for the daily output—the balance
of stock being housed at the general stores in Ba-
thurst Street The succeeding floors of the new
building are occupied with the packing and manu-
facturing departments of the firm’s proprietary
goods—chief amongst which must be mentioned the
famous "Aunt Mary” brand, including such widely
diversified articles as Baking Pow'der, Egg Pow-
der, Self Raising Flour, Chemicals, Preserves, Cor-
dials, Jelly Crystals and Tablets, Vinegars,
Sauces, etc.
The firm’s proprietary lines, which have been in
use some years, have met with phenomenal suc-
cess. The high standard of quality maintained,
and the attractive manner in which the goods are
put up, make them ready sellers from the retailer
to the consumer. Another reason for their popu-
larity is to be found in the fact that the most es-
sential elements of strength and purity are pre-
served in all manufactures turned out in this por-
tion of the firm’s business.
Apart from the articles which are stocked in
connection with other wholesale houses, mention
should be made of the special manufacturer’s sole
agencies which are held for New South Wales.
Foremost amongst these comes that of R. S. Hud-
son, of extract of soap fame, whose agency Messrs.
Tillock have held for close upon a quarter of a
century. Goodhall, Backhouse and Company,
whose Yorkshire Relish and household specialities
are so well known as to need no description, and E.
Lazenby and Son’s table delicacies. Many advan-
tages are derived by the use of the celebrated
Vickery’s "Ovo” egg preservative, for which
Messrs. Tillock have the sole New South Wales
agency. This excellent preparation enables a
dealer to buy eggs when the market is glutted and
prices low, and hold them until there is a scarcity.
The cost being under one halfpenny per dozen,
allows of a big profit on eggs that are so treated.
It does not corrode the shell, which will come
out as fresh in appearance as when put
in, the qualify of both yolk and white
being preserved intact. A. C. Wil-
kin’s Strawberry Conserve is another special line
that is extensively handled. This delicious whole
fruit conserve retains in a large degree that per-
fection of flavour which has gained for the best
English strawberries a world-wide renown. It is
prepared with great care in the fields by the
growers, and every genuine tin bears the signature
of the Managing Director of the Company.
In closing a review of this house, the observer
cannot fail to be impressed with the
magnitude and variety of the stock
handled, and the energy and commer-
cial acumen of the senior partner and his sons,
who have been instrumental in the building up of
such a large institution, whose presence in our
midst is not only an adornment to the city’s archi-
tecture, but a source of revenue to the State .and a
benefit to the private citizen as an employer of
local labour.
MR. J. T. TILLOCK.
Mr. J. T. Tillock, the founder and senior partner
of the firm of Tillock and Company, came to Aus-
tralia forty years ago. He is a native of North
Shields. England, and though only a boy on his
arrival in Australia, he quickly went into busi-
ness, and learnt the requirements of that branch
of commerce of which he is now such a thorough
master.
His interest in the industrial and commercial
factors of Australia is not by any means confined
to his own particular business. He has been
Chairman of Directors of the Haymarket Building
Society since its inception, twenty-one years ago,
while in addition to being a Director of the New
York and Brooklyn Tobacco Company, he is Direc-
tor of the Colonial Salt Refining Company, whose
head office is at Adelaide, and a company which
has done much to increase the prosperity of one of
South Australia’s native industries. His interest
in the welfare of the wholesale and importing trade
is shown by his directorship of the Merchants and
Traders’ Association.
Mr. Tillock has no desire for parliamentary or
municipal honours, his public duties being con-
fined to the Consul-Generalship of the Argentine
Republic, an office in itself demanding no incon-
siderable administrative ability, and a consequent
encroachment on his already minimised leisure.
MR. THOMAS EDWARD TILLOCK.
Mr. T. E. Tillock is a native of Sydney, and after
his collegiate education, entered the business of
Messrs. Eylands and Sons. Here Mr. Tillock re-
ceived a good grounding in trade matters, his tech-
nical training standing him in good stead when he
entered his father’s business some years after. Mr.
Tillock acts in the important capacity of buyer
of the Liverpool and Kent streets warehouse, and
about three years ago his energy and zeal were
rewarded with a well-earned partnership.
Mr. Tillock is an enthusiast in aquatic matters,
being a member of the Prince Alfred Yacht Club.
MR. F. K. TILLOCK.
The youngest son of the founder is at present in
the Sales Department of his father’s house. He
received his first insight into (business matters in
the shipping office of Messrs. McArthur and Co.
He remained here for some years, the diversified
knowledge he gained being of special use to
him when he entered the service of Tillock and
Company. It is not unlikely that Mr. F. K. Til-
lock will shortly emulate his brother’s example
by becoming a partner in the firm.


General Merchant and Importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.
DRUGS AND CHEMICALS.
The Australian Drug Co., Ltd.
WHOLESALE AND MANUFACTURING
CHEMISTS.
If a history of all industrial trades were to be
taken, few would be found more interesting than
tralian synthesis being found in the growth and
operations of the Australian Drug Company Limi-
ted
This busines may be said to be one of the oldest
in Sydney, or indeed in Australasia, being founded
abou: seventy years ago. In 1881 it passed into the
hands of Messrs. E. Prosser and Co., and a year
latei premises in O’Connell-street were taken. In
1886 the Australian Drug Company was founded,
and took over the business from the previous pro-
it would be difficult to find a building more
suitable to the company’s large and diversified re
quirements.
The basement is taken up with bulk goods, a
comprehensive stock of chemicals, proprietary
articles, druggists’ sundries, and heavy goods being
stored here. The second entrance on the ground
floor leads to the packing and forwarding depart-
ment, where a busy scene is daily enacted. On the
left of the main entrance we find the offices of Ur.
AUSTRALIAN DRUG COMPANY’S SYDNEY WAREHOUSE AND LABORATORY.
INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR VIEWS.
the history of the drug trade. Its early origin is
buried In the dim and misty aeons! of pre-historic
t imes, when doubtless the medicine man and witch
doctor flourished, as they do at the present day
among savage and uncivilised races. The latter.
however, have contributed their quota to the science
of materia medica, for to them we owe such valu-
able drugs as quinine and cinchona bark.
Thousands of years before the. Christian era we
find medicine a recognised profession among the
EgypUans, ancient papyri on the preparation of
medicines having been discovered in the ruins of
that wonderful civilisation. The documents con-
tain prescriptions for various maladies and direc-
tions for the compounding of herbs and drugs.
Though necessarily obscured in the dark, middle
ages, the progress of medical science gradually
advanced to the time of the discovery of chloro-
form and ether, which have done so much to allevi-
ate human pain and suffering. Since that period the
development of the pharmacist's art has been both
aonderful and rapid, a good example of its Aus-
prietors. Under the title of wholesale and maim-
facturing chemists, a limited liability company was
floated, with a capital of c £63,650 in ordinary shares
and <£9,000 in preferential shares.
The directors now comprise Sir William MtALI-
lan as chairman, and Mr. A. L. Silly as managing
director, Messrs. D. Beath, H. 11. Kemp and John
Macpheison being the remaining members of the
board. The warehouses are located at 19 and 21
O’Connell-street, the bulk warehouse at 14 Spring-
street, and the English office is situated at 50 Lime-
street, London, E.C. The Company has no other
branches, all its extensive operations throughout
Australasia being worked from Sydney head-
quarters. Under the present regime the operations
of the company have been considerably enlarged and
the business extended so much that the building
space was doubled in size five years ago. The
O'Connell-street building extends to Spnng-streec,
and has a frontage of 180 ft. The premises are lofty,
well lighted, and admirably adapted to their pur-
and present an imposing front of four storeys;
A. L. Silly, the managing director, and on the rigid
are the quarters of the accountant and clerks,
Ascending the stairs by a handsome staircase we
come to the first section of the first floor. Here
are showcases filled to repletion with samples of
diugs, patent medicines, perfumery, toilet requi-
sites, brushware, etc.
The dental portion is responsible for every r®*
quirement of the dentist's profession. Over 100,000
aitificial teeth are stocked, as well as a varied as-
sortment of dental chairs, engines, cabinets, alloys
and amalgams, mallets, gold fillings, gas bags, rub-
ber dams, vulcanisers, perforators, cements,
annealing lamps and trays, modelling wax, ana
instruments.
The second section of this floor comprises the
drug room, where are to be seen the thousand ana
one adjuncts of the science of materia medica, in
addition to which are to be found the imported pro-
ducts of firms with such a world-wide reputation
as Burroughs, Wellcome, and Co., Alfred Bishop
Ltd., Fletcher, Fletcher and Co., E. Merck,


Frederick Stearns and Co., Howards and Sons,
Parke, Davis and Co., and others. The showcases on
this floor are filled with the latest inventions in
surgical instruments and appliances, as well as a
large variety of antiseptic dressing, including oil
silks and muslins, anti-septic gangee tissue, moist
gauzes, etc.
The first section of the second floor is filled with a
varied selection of aerated water manufacturers’
MR. A. L. SILLY,
Managing Director.
goods, corks, and bottles. The latter include
“Wood’s” dispensing flats, American shop sets in
stoppered round and square patterns, labelled com-
plete, Homoeophatic, French, white, blue, glass
stoppered and narrow mouthed vials. A special
feature is made of the bottles manufactured by the
company at its glass works at North Botany. The
second floor is also set apart for the storage of origi-
nal bulk packages of jjatent medicines, perfumery,
fancy goods, and druggists’ sundries.
On reaching the top of the staircase, which leads
to the third floor, we come to a particularly import-
ant part of the business of this company—that of
manufacturing pharmaceutical j)reparations, pills
and tablets, and jnoprietary articles. This portion
of the business is under the management of Mr. W.
Short, president of the Pharmaceutical Society.
The laboratory, with its scientific plant for the
MR. D. BEATH,
Director.
JBanufacture of pharmaceutical products, is on a
ar ge scale. A largo tubular boiler provides the
necessary heat for the steam-jacketted pans, perco-
lators, stills, etc., with which it is fitted. Here
jhe company manufactures fluid extracts, concen-
rated tinctures, infusions and decoctions, chemical
‘■quors, syrups, ointments, and similar products.
Adjoining the laboratory is the mill room, fitted
with the crushing, grinding, and mixing machineiy
necessary to the varied operations conducted in this
department.
The next section is set apart for the manufacture
of pills, under the supervision of Mr. A. F. Thomas,
late of Reynolds and Branson, Leeds, England.
Various rooms are fitted fpr the mixing, massing,
rounding and sorting, coating, polishing and drying
of pills. The company has made extensive arrange-
ments to meet the increasing demands of the colo-
nial pill manufacturing trade. The latest improved
machinery and plant have been imported and erec-
ted for this purpose, at considerable cost. The
various operations in connection with turning out
the finished article are performed by special
machines, except the rolling and cutting, which is
done by hand.
After the ingredients have been thoroughly mixed,
the compound is cut to size and taken to the round-
ing machine, and thence transferred to the picking
or sorting machine. This is a particularly in-
genious piece of mechanism, which automatically
separates the imperfectly rounded pills from the
perfected ones. After leaving this machine the
pills are collected in trays, dried, and are then
ready for coating. This is principally effected with
what is known in the trade as “saccharine pearl.
Special appliances, however, are fitted up for coal -
ings in sugar, gelatine, silver, or gold.
After this process is completed the pills are
polished and sent to the drying room, the tempera-
ture of which is regulated at 90 degrees by a special
SIR WILLIAM McMILLAN, K.C.M.G.,
Chairman of Directors.
heating apparatus. With a view of showing the
different kinds manufactured it may be mentioned
that 498 different formula! are in use. A speciality
is also made of dog pills and horse balls, which
are made in accordance with the prescriptions of
established veterinary specialists.
Adjoining this department we find extensive ar-
rangements in connection with the manufacture of
headache, quinine, anti-febrin, sulphur, and anti-
pyrine tablets, and others too numerous to mention
—private recipes are also made up where the
amount equals 1 lb. in weight. The company has
in use one of Colton’s improved tablet machines,
which makes the tablets in a number of different
sizes, and is capable of stamping off 110 tablets
every minute, also a McFerran’s machine is in use.
When this is taken into consideration with the fact
that the pill-coating machine is capable of coating
a hundredweight of pills at one time, it will be
seen that the appliances of the Australian Drug
Company for the manufacture of these articles is
abreast of anything yet attempted in this direction
in Australia.
The “ proprietary ” section until recently was
also on this floor, but the increasing demands of
trade necessitated additional space, and this has
been met by acquiring the first floor of the Spring-
street warehouse, consisting of two lofty rooms, 90ft.
x 30ft. each, which have been fitted in an up-to-date
manner as work-roorns for the manufacture and
packing of the firm’s popular proprietary lines.
Entrance to this section is from the ground floor
of the O’Connell-street warehouse, this entrance
being protected by two fire-proof doors.
The first room is fitted tip with the necessary ap-
pliances and apparatus for the manufacture of the
various lines, which is all done by or under the
direct supervision of specially trained chemists. On
one side are arranged shelving and counters for
storing the finished stock and executing orders for
the firm’s goods—both pharmaceutical and proprie-
tary. Here also Mr. Short has his office, from
MR. JOHN MACPHERSON,
Director.
which he directs the various sections under his con-
trol, each being connected with his office by tele-
phone. Adjoining his office is the printing room—
a necessary adjunct to the department, considering
the volume of trade done in “ own name ” speciali-
ties—and the analytical section, where the pharma-
ceutical preparations are examined and standard-
ised before being placed into stock, the firm taking
every precaution that experience and skill can de-
vise to assure every batch being of uniform excel-
lence.
The second room is devoted to the bottling, label-
ling and packing of proprietaries and perfumery,
A large staff of specially trained girls do this, under
the direction of a forewoman, and the high-class
style in which the lines are turned out is a credit
to them and the firm.
This room is very lofty, well lighted, and fitted
MR. H. H. KEMP,
Director.
with electric fans, everything being done to make it
as healthy and comfortable for the staff as pos-
sible.
On the second floor of the Spring-street frontage li-
the occupiers’ bonded laboratory, where all spiritu-
ous lines are prepared, such as tinctures, spirits,
fruit essences, perfumery, etc., the remainder of
the floors being used as a bonded warehouse.


Messrs. Dalgety & Co., Ltd.
GENERAL MERCHANTS, SHIPPING AGENTS,
WOOL AND PRODUCE BROKERS, STOCK
AND STATION AGENTS, &c., &c.
Australia in the early thirties and Australia to-
day present a great contrast. To the native of the
present day Australia, who looks upon a sketch of
any portion of the continent of some seventy years
ago, the scene is quite as strange as though it were
a foreign country.
Among the many changes that have taken place
those connected with the commercial life of the
community are not the least important. As an ex-
ample of the strides that have been made in recent
years, the well-known house of Dalgety and Com-
pany, Limited, may be instanced. The founder of
the firm, the late Mr. Frederick Gonnerman Dal-
gety, landed in Sydney from England in 1833, carry-
ing with him a valuable capital in the shape of Bri-
tish energy, pluck, and ability, which he was
not long in investing to good advantage. Passing
the early years of his experience, part of which were
spent in the mercantile house of Montefiore and
Company, he went over to Melbourne about 1813,
and in conjunction with Mr. Harry Gore, son of
Mr. John Gore, of the firm of John Gore and Com-
pany, of London, founded the house which is now
so well known throughout Australasia.
Successful as the house was in its early transac-
tions in wool and merchandise, it was not until the
famous days of the “ gold fever” in Victoria that
Mr. Dalgety and his partners were able to lay the
foundation of that substantial fortune which so
rapidly carried their operations, not only through-
out Australasia, but to all parts of the world. In
those days—owing to the absence or inadequacy of
banking facilities—it was the custom of the miners
to dispose of their “dust” and “nuggets” to firms
of recognised wealth and character, by whom the
gold was paid for and shipped to London in pay-
ment for goods received by them. Such firms took
the risks, to which the Australian banks objected,
and, needless to say, in many cases reaped a golden
harvest as their reward. The first purchasers of
gold in Mr. Dalgety’s interests were his partners,
Messrs. Burnett and Ibbotson, during his absence
in England in 1852. On his return he was not slow
in taking advantage of the new possibilities thus
opened up. The operations of the firm in gold-buy-
ing were, therefore, considerably extended, and con-
tinued until the banks at length took up the business.
About this time Mr. Gore retired from the firm,
and in 1853 Mr. Bui nett died. Mr. Dalgety, looking
about for new partners, then proposed to Mr.
Frederick A. Du Croz, of the firm of William Jack-
son and Co., at Launceston, Tasmania, that he
should join him. Air. Du Croz agreed to proceed to
London with Air. *Dalgety, leaving his brother Ger-
vase to take the position of partner in Tasmania.
This was in 1854. On arrival in London an office was
opened by the two gentlemen, and the London firm
of Dalgety and Company came into being, with Air.
Dalgety and Ala. Du Croz as resident partners. It
is unnecessary to follow the various changes among
the widely scattered partners in the firm. A few'
points of interest in this history may, however, be
inferred to here. The firm, besides its headquarters
in London, in 1854 was then established in Alel-
bourne, under the style of Dalgety, Cruikshank and
Company; in Geelong under the style of Dalgety,
Ibbotson and Company; and in Launceston, Tas-
mania, as Du Croz and Company, the respective
resident partners in these cities being Air. Andrew
Rosa Cruikshank, Air. Charles Ibbotson, and Air.
Gervase Bedford Du Croz, brother of Air. Dalgety’s
London partner. Three years later—in 1857—Air.
Cruikshank, head of the Alelbourne business, died,
and Air. Dalgety proceeded to that city to find a
man worthy to be his successor. This he did in the
person of Mr. James Blackwood, the inspector of the
Union Bank of Australia, without reference to
whom no account of the rise and progress of the firm
.would be complete. Mr. Blackwood brought with
him to his new sphere of activity a large and valu-
able connection. The style of the Melbourne
house now became Dalgety, Blackwood and Com-
pany.
About this time also—lBs6 and 1860—branches
were established in New Zealand, at Lyttelton and
Christchurch, in Canterbury, and at Dunedin, in
Otago. These New Zealand branches were dis-
tinct from the older firm, which, however, acted as
their correspondents at all points where they had
establishments. Meanwhile Sir. Dalgety, who had
returned to London in 1859, took from that time a
less active part in the business, which passed under
the general control of Mr. F. A. Du Croz, whose
position became much more onerous after the es-
tablishment of the New Zealand branches. The
style of the London firm then became Dalgety, Du
MESSRS. DALGETY AND CO., LTD., SYDNEY BRANCH, 15 BENT STREET.
Croz and Company. On his return to England, Mr.
Dalgety purchased the estate of Lockerley Hall, in
Hampshire, and devoted himself thenceforward to
the quiet pleasures and beneficent activities of a
country gentleman, although he maintained to the
last a warm interest in the fortunes of his great
enterprise in the final capacity of chairman of the
board of directors of the present limited company.
When nearing the allotted span of life Mr. Dal-
gety eased some of the burden of office from his
shoulders, and chose his successor with the same
perspicuity that he brought to bear upon all his
affairs. After a long, honourable and successful
career, Mr. Dalgety’s death took place at his own
home on March 21, 1894, at the age of 77 years, for
nearly 50 years of which he had controlled the des-
times of the firm he himself had founded.
Alluding to the work of the founder, Mr. Edmund
T. Doxat, managing director, in an address deli-
vered at the tenth annual meeting of the company
in London, October 16th, 1894, said:: “Let me ex-
press a hope, gentlemen, that, although our old
friend and colleague is no longer amongst us, his
name will not suffer at our hands, and that not only
the present board of directors, but their successors,
may be able to hand down the name of Dalgety and
Company, Limited, to future generations as hcu-
cured and stainless as it has been transmitted *o
us." That expresses the sentiment animating the
directors and various staffs of the company,
The leading facts in the history of the house i.i
connection with its conversion in 1884 into a limited
liability company, with a subscribed capital of
414,000,000, and a paid-up capital of 411,000,000, may
be stated in a few words. Four years previously
(1880) Mr. Edmund T. Doxat had joined the firm,
assuming the chief management in London in suc-
cession to Mr. F. A. Du Croz, who wished at that
time to be relieved from the arduous responsibiii-
ties of the position. At about the same time Mr.
Arthur R. Blackwood, son of Mr. James Blackwood
was admitted a partner in Melbourne, and a new
branch establishment was opened in Sydney and
placed under the management of Mr. F. 11. Moore,
who was transferred from the house at Dunedin,
Prior to the conversion of the company, Mr. Jaims
Blackwood died, having held the reins of manage-
ment in Melbourne for nearly a quarter of a cen-
tury.
Mr. James Aitken, who joined the firm as paitner
in 1881, is now managing director in Melbourne,
The managing directorship in Sydney is in the
hands of Air. T. F. Knox, who joined the service
of Dalgety, Blackwood and Company in 1881, be-
coming a partner in the following year.
(General dfterebants anb importers.
•Historical and Biographical Sketches -continued.
GENERAL MERCHANTS.


Imports into
Sales in
London.
Australasia.
Total.
Bales.
Bales.
Bales.
1898-9
.;.... 102,000
109,111
211.111
1899-1900
83,000
126,632
209,682
19C0-1
75,000
91,616
166,616
1901-2
113,361
129,810
243,171
373,361
457,219
830,580
Average ...
93,340
114,305
207,645
Sheep in
Australasia.
1892
... 122,591,984
1897
... 103,256,399
1893
... 120,010,588
1898
... 98,899,920
1891
... 120,432 019
1899
... 92,408,896
1895
... 110,432,817
1900
... 88,404,263
1896
... 110,823,976
1901
... 90,990,761
Bales.
Bales.
1892-3 .
. 1,807.348
1897-8
1,718,720
1893-4
. 1,898,618
1898-9
1,664,517
1894-5
. 1,959,811
1899-1900 ...
1,594,464
1895-6
. 1,851,573
1900-1
1,609,713
1896-7
. 1,848,509
1901-2
1,659,392
Bales.
.New South Wales
629,353
Victoria
403,096
South Australia
111,676
Queensland
77,348
Western Australia
26,180
Tasmania
14,790
New Zealand
396,949
1,659,392
Bales.
New South Wales
760,000
Victoria
225,000
South Australia
104,500
Queensland
118,000
Western Australia
27,000
Tasmania
28,000
New Zealand
397,000
1,659,500
We may now turn to a consideration of the chief
departments of activity in the great and many-
sided business conducted by the Company. Before
doing so, however, a word must be said regarding
one of the most distinctive features in the general
scheme of management. This is the institution of
local boaids of advice in the various colonial bran-
ches. These were established when the company
was formed, and were rendered necessary by the
exigencies of one of the most important departments
of the business. The periodical valuation of securi-
ties in properties and stock, owned by the Com-
pany throughout Australasia, forms the basis of the
intricate calculations rendered necessary by the
scope of its activities. These securities being scat-
tered all over Australia and New Zealand, their
valuation is, of course, no light or easy task. To
meet this difficulty an elaborately organised system
of inspection and accounts were devised, including
the formation of local boards of advice at the dif-
ferent centres. By such means the interests of the
company receive the closest and most careful at-
tention, and the yearly balance-sheet, by these
sound and conservative financial methods, becomes
a model of what such accounts should be. In view
also of the extent to which the prosperity of such a
business is affected by the fluctuation in values of
all kinds of property and produce, such methods go
a long way to explain the ability of the company
to show a clean bill of health and an 8 per cent,
dividend, which it did without a break for 14 years,
despite all the vagaries of the Australian climate.
The sale of wool, Australia’s staple product, has
always been of the first importance with Dalgety
and Company, Limited. When seasons are good
their imports nto London exceed 100,600 bales an-
nually, while a further 100,000 to 150,000 bales are
disposed of by them during the twelve months iu
Australasia, where selling centres have been estab-
lished at Sydney, Melbourne, Geelong, Brisbane,
Christchurch, Dunedin, Napier, etc. The figures tf
the company’s London imports and their Austial-
asian sales for the past four seasons have been as
under; —
Transactions in wool naturally led to extensive
dealings in other station produce. Among such, the
chief items are tallow, hides, and sheepskins. Large
quantities of tallow are sold yearly by the company
in London and on direct orders.
How the seasons vary and how the flocks have in-
creased and diminished in Australia and New Zea-
land during the past ten years is shown in the fol-
lowing table:—
Here follow the shipments of wool from Austral-
asia for the past ten years.—
Shipments of Wool from Australasia.
The frozen meat trade is an industry which has
Made remarkable progress in Australasia of recent
years. During the past few years, owing to a suc-
cession of bad seasons, the Australian States have
not been able to increase their output; but in New
Zealand, on the other hand, the export of frozen
Meat, chiefly mutton and lamb, has assumed enor-
Mous proportions. The company has from the
“Ist taken a great part in the development of the
frozen meat trade, and also of the allied trade in
■neat extracl and preserved meals. Its trausue-
fMns in this department through the London office
are of constantly increasing size and importance.
Another avenue in which there are great possibili-
ties. and in which the company has greatly inte-
rested itself from the outset, is that connected
with butter and other dairy produce, the annual ex-
portation of which is now assuming very large pro-
portions.
Sales of stock and stations throughout Australia
and New Zealand have long been an important part
of the company’s business, and in this connection
it may be noted that the various activities grouped
under the head of commission business have been
gradually increased by the company in recent years.
The shipping departments of the Australian bran-
ches are kept busy during the year in despatching
the wool, wheat, tallow, and other produce for
which the company is responsible; and, in addition,
the company acts as agent for a number of import-
ant passenger and freight- lines, among these being
Messrs. Ismay, Imrie and Co.’s White Star line,
Messrs. George Thompson and Co.’s Aberdeen line,
the steamers of the Ocean (llolt-Bethell) S.N. Co.,
the Shaw, Savill and Albion Co., the Japanese
Koyal Mail line, and the Messageries Maritimes Co.
As mentioned in an earlier part of this article,
the managing director of the Sydney Branch is Mr.
T. F. Knox, the manager Mr. William Kilgour. The
Local Board of Advice for New South Wales is
composed of such well-known names in the pastoral
world as the Hon. Sir John Lackey, K.C.M.G.,
M.L.C. (chairman), and Messrs. E; H. Mackay and
George Mair; while the managing director at New-
castle is the Hon. Alexander Brown, M.L.C. Across
the Southern border Mr. James Aitken is managing
director, and Mr. Charles H. Campbell manager of
the Melbourne office, with a Local Board of Advice
for Victoria of Messrs* George Fairbairn, Bobert
Power and A. It. Blackwood; the manager at Gee-
long being Mr. David Aitken, jun. The South Aus-
tralian management is in the hands of Mr. E. W.
Van Senden, at Adelaide. At the Queensland
centres the manager at Brisbane is Mr. A. D.
Walsh, at Rockhampton Mr. F. H. B. Turner, and
at Townsville Mi*. James Macintosh. In Western
Australia the Local Board of Advice comprises the
Hon. Sir James G. Lee Steere (chairman) and Mr.
F. F. B. Wittenoom. The manager and general
superintendent for Western Australia is Sir Edward
H. Wittenoom, at Perth, with whom are associated
Mr..A. G. Leeds (manager at Fremantle), Mr. G. J.
W. Blom (manager at Albany), Mr. T. Carter (mana-
ger at Geraldton), Mr. P. Macnish (manager at Car-
narvon), and Mr. F. W. Teesdale (manager at Roe-
bourne). The control of the New Zealand branches
is exercised by Mr. F. A. Archer (manager at
Christchurch), Mr. J. Lethbridge (manager at Dune-
din), and Mr. J. K. Goudy (manager at Napier).
There are also sub-branches at Balclutha, Clinton,
Gisborne, Gore, Oamaru, Timaru (New Zealand),
Beachport, Kingston, Millicent, Naracoorte, Robe
(South Australia); Bunbury, Cossack, and Port Hed-
land (Western Australia).
The Sydney offices are situate at Bent and O’Con-
nell streets, within a few hundred yards of Circular
Quay; they are in a commanding situation, and
designed to give ample room for the transaction cf
every department of the business.
The two wool stores are at Miller’s Point, along-
side the company’s wharves. Both the old and the
new stores are spacious, well lighted, and well
situated, but they are apart; the intention, there-
fore, is to supersede them by one.central store in
the near future. Great changes in the wharfage
arrangements of Sydney Harbour are being made
by the Harbour Trust, and a new wharf for Dalgety
and Company, Limited, capable of accommodating
the 12,000 tons White Star line steamers, Messrs.
George Thompson and Co.’s Aberdeen line, and
other steamers and sailers, at the same time forms
part of the Harbour Trust scheme. Immediately
facing this new wharf is the site for the company’s
new wool store, which, when finished, will be one
of the finest wool and produce export stores in the
southern hemisphere. When completed, the
wharf and store will put an entirely different aspect
on this part of the harbour. The old wool
store consists of five floors, with a floorage
space of nearly four acres, and a cubic capa-
city of 35,000 tons. There are large hydrau-
lic lifts, six hydraulic wool presses, capable of
dumping 2000 bales per day, and shoots by which
the wool can be lowered from floor to floor and on to
the wharf within a few yards of the ship. On the
top floor of tire store is the showroom, and the
fourth floor, level with the street, is the receiving
room for wool and skins for shipment and sale.
Here the bales are weighed and passed on. Nor is
all the space devoted to wool; there are on the
ground floor, level with the wharf, two new refriger-
ating chambers for the storage of butter and cheese.
The “new wool store” is as capacious as the old;
adjoining it are the free and bonded warehouses,
with wharves for berthing several vessels at one
time.
Eighteen yoars ago auction sales were conducted
in a room at the Sydney Exchange, Bridge-street.
About 1891 a new room was built at the Wool Ex-
change, Macquarie Place, and auctions were held
there for some ten years The importance of Syd-
ney as a wool-selling centre increased, and a fine
spacious room was built at the Koval Exchange,
Bridge-street; this was completed in January, 1901,
and the various firms sell there. Samples of the
clips are displayed in the showrooms on the day
of sale, and buyers come to the room with their
prices marked down in their catalogues. Without
such complete arrangements the business could not
be got through so expeditiously as it is; 100 lots are
sold in from 10 to 12 minutes, the buyers shouting
their bids in a babel of tongues that only auction-
eers can comprehend. The saleroom is 37
feet high, has a very prettily decorated
ceiling, very roomy and comfortable seats, and
is well lighted from the rostrum to the
end of the gallery. The auctioneers and buyers
enter the rostrum and floor from the second floor,
while visitors go up to the third floor. As all the
floors are approached by hydraulic elevators, with
lifts carrying 20 persons each, the floor height is no
inconvenience to buyers; 40 persons can ascend and
descend in one minute. At the back of the wool
auction room on the third floor is a smoker’s bal-
cony; it is at the southern end of the building, over-
looking the northern parts of the city.
The Sydney produce stores of the company for
the sorting, classification, and display of sheep-
skins, furred skins, hides, tallow, horns, bones and
other station by-products, are situated in Mac-
quarie-street, with a frontage to Circular Quay.
There is good light, plenty of room, and a very ef-
ficent system for buyers to view the various lots
prior to the hour of sale. The sheepskins are well
sorted and lotted, the furred skins are classed and
trimmed, wet or green hides salted down and after-
wards bundled and classed, so that every consign-
ment is presented for sale in the best manner.
Wool shipments from Australasia for the twelve
months ended June 30th, 1902, total 1,659,392 bales,
an increase upon the total of the preceding year of
49,679 bales, particulars being as under:—
The production of'each State as closely as it can
be given was :
The total sales of wool in Australian markets for
the year ended .Tune 30th, 1902, amount to 934,660
bales, as compared with 718,677 bales in the preced-
ing 12 months, an increase of 215,983 bales. This is
in the aggregate and percentage to the total clip by
far the largest total recorded. New Zealand sales
for the same period were 100,850 bales, against
90,235 bales in 1900-1901.
The story of the rise and progress of the pastoral
and agricultural interests is one of the most strik-
ing pages in Australian history, and with anything
like favourable conditions in the near future, the
growth during the next few decades promises to
eclipse even that disclosed by the events of the past
half century.


Messrs. J. I. Falk & Co., Ltd.
AMERICAN TRADING COMPANY.
The main elements required in building up a pro-
sperous and powerful nation are indomitable will,
combined with individuality and industry on the
part of its citizens. It was attributes such as these
that marked the characters of the hardy Pilgrim
Fathers when they embarked on their adventurous
journey in the " Mayflower,” and no better pioneers
could have been found to lay the foundation-stone
of that great republic of the West —the United
States of America.
Eddy, Falk and American Trading Company are
but a natural outcome of the great industrial syn-
thesis that has been going on since the birth of the
first New England States. .
The firm’s Australian branch was established thir-
teen years ago in Sydney by Mr. J. I. Falk. An in-
spection of the offices at 32 O’Connell-street will
easily demonstrate that the period has been one of
steady and ever-increasing progress in the firm’s
commercial relations and ramifications.
The list of agencies and depots are almost oewii-
dering in their diversity. In addition to such well-
known commercial and industrial centres as San
Francisco, Loudon, New York, Hamburg, Buenos
Ayres, Calcutta, China, Yokohama, Rio de Janeiro,
they are represented in such widely separated coun-
tries as the English and French West Indies, Straits
Settlements, Mexico, South Africa, Central Ame-
rica, Colombo, etc. No sooner does a place spring
into prominence than, to use the Yankee vernacular,
the enterprising proprietary set about establishing
themselves “ right away there.”
This can be Seen in the agencies at Tien-Tsin,
which came into prominence in the late Boxer Re-
bellion; Port Arthur, rendered famous by the
Japanese bombardment in the Chino-Japanese war,
and its subsequent annexation by Russia; and 110
Ho, which has become an historic landmark in the
present Philippine war. Indeed, to quote Bishop
Hebei’s words, the firm might well claim to be re-
presented “ from Greenland’s icy mountains to
India’s coral strand,” seeing that the Eastern
Agency extends from Vladivostock to Bombay. An
inspection of the catalogue of trade lists will amply
satisfy the intending customer that he will find
everything to suit him, from a tin tack to a motor
car, or from chewing gum to printer’s ink.
A great trade has been done in timber, including
Oregon, Sugar Pine, Yellow Pine, Spruce and
Cedar, but more especially Californian Redwood.
The grand forests of this wood are one of the dis-
tinguishing features of the three Northern Coast
counties of California. It is this wood which has
brought that portion of the State prominently be-
fore the world, and made it of particular interest
to everyone identified with lumber. The recognised
fact that Redwood possesses many meritorious fea-
tures has produced a rapidly increasing demand for
its various products. Besides being practically fire-
proof, the timber is entirely immune from the rav-
J. I. FALK AND COMPANY, LTD.
OFFICES, O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.
ages of white ants, and is specially adaptable for
building purposes, in countries where this insect is
dominant.
The following incident may be cited as an illus-
tration of this fact. The master mechanic at the
Depot O. M. Shop in Manila discovered that his
trunk (made of American Spruce) had been invaded
General /Ifoeucbants anb importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches :-eontinued
GENERAL MERCHANTS.


by white ants, and was almost entirely destroyed:
the clothes contained in the trunk were also eaten.
He placed the trunk on the ground, and beside it
the following woods; Oregon, Ball Pine, Spruce,
and Californian Red Wood. All were more or less
readily eaten by the ants except the latter, which
they had tried, but discontinued their efforts after
a slight attempt. It may be truthfully said that for
all practical purposes redwood never decays. Stumps
of trees felled fifty years ago are as good to-day as
they ever were. The magnitude of the company’s
timber trade may he gauged from the fact that
they had eleven vessels loading or chartered to load
for Australian ports at the beginning of the present
half-year.
Inspectors are employed to pass judgment upon
all cargoes - . These inspectors are personally pre-
sent while lumber is being loaded at the mill, and
are armed with authoi ity to reject everything hot
fully up to grade.
The witticism that the Americans “Eat what
they can and can what they can’t,” is sufficiently
in evidence when scanning the price list of canned
goods. First we have the “ Hume,” “ Alaska,”
“ Pioneer,” “ Primer,” “ Jubilee,” and many other
brands of Salmon, of which the firm are sole sel-
ling agents for the Orient, India, and Australia.
Vegetables range from Asparagus, Artichokes, Suc-
cotash, Beans. Sweet Corn, to the Tomatoes. A
speciality is, of course, made of Californian Canned
and Dried Fruits.
The firm during the past twelve months have done
considerable business in wheat and flour. They are
sole agents for Australasia for the “Gold Crown”
Brand Hard Wheat Flour, Starr’s Bakers Extra
Flour and Mac William’s Flour.
Leather is an article upon which the firm speci-
ally prides itself. On application they quote for
anything in the line of Russet, Sheep Skins, Shoe
Upper Leather, Black and Russet Kid Skins, Shoe
Findings, and all lines of Shoe, Harness, or Trunk
Manufacturing. Each is stamped with their own
"Amtiaco” Brand, and all leather is put up to
meet the regulations of steamship companies, thus
securing minimum freight chaiges.
The establishment of such films as J. I. Falk and
Company, Ltd., has done much to increase the
“ entiente cordiale” between this country and the
United States, and in a way unite “ those crimson
threads of kinship” which our veteran statesman,
the late Sir Henry Parkes, so eloquently des-
cribed.
ME. J. I. FALK.
One of the most important aids to the growth of
Australian commerce has been the intermingling
of the solid traditions' of the Englishman and the
alert keen business acumen of the American trader
m our everyday mercantile life.
Amongst the enterprising American leaders of
commerce in New South Wales are to be found
many gentlemen of special character and special
culture, who have by example and precept brought
about great improvements in Australian business
methods and quietly yet resolutely succeeded to a
very great extent in impressing colonial character
with much of their vigorous individuality.
The name of Mr. J. I. Falk, head of the well-
known Australasian house of J. J. Falk and Com-
pany, of Sydney, is one that expresses a deep influ-
MR. J. I. FALK.
ence in the commerce of our Commonwealth. Sir.
Falk, born in New York in 1860, and educated with
a strict regard for a commercial career, is a gentle-
man who in every way is representative of that en-
terprising, hard-working class of American traders
who, by tact and business energy, have overcome
the prejudice of opposition, and with that heai ti-
neas which characterises the American people as a
whole, joined in doing all in their power to further
the commercial interests of the State in which they
have centred their capital and their warehouses.
In 1883 Hr. Falk arrived in Sydney with a number
of valuable agencies, and with characteristic
energy laid the foundation of the present great
business which bears his name. The heavy res-
ponsibilities undertaken in the management of a
concern of the magnitude of J. I. Falk and Com-
pany, Limited, has necessitated his sticking closely
to business, so that although in every way qualified,
Mr. Falk has not entered into public or political
life, but through the medium of his trading rela-
tions with the Old World centres, has done a vast
amount of good to the State as a world-wide Im-
porter and Exporter, and helped to draw closer the
bonds of sympathy which exist between the mem-
bers of the Anglo-Saxon race in the Old and New
Hemispheres.
Mil. H. A. EVERS.
One of the striking features of present day
methods is the self-assertion of individual merit, be
it in the domain of commerce, politics or literature.
The class distinction which gave a man standing
in any particular walk of life, whether by' influ-
ence or family name, are gone, and nowadays noth-
ing will avail a man but hard work, faculty of
01 grnisation, tact, and subtlety of perception.
“ 'Tis not in mortals to command success, but we’ll
do more, Sempromius, we’ll deserve it!’’
These are the words which Addison puts into the
mouth of the Roman Cato, and the truth of the
quotation is particularly applicable to the modem
conditions of life.
No counterfeit mark of ability will pass in the
present day: there must exist genuine talent,
wedded to the faculty of unceasing energy, before
success is achieved. There are now too many com-
petitors in the field to peimit of the false creden-
tials of unmerited influence, and he who seeks to
win the prize must be possessed of the natural
qualifications which entitle him to it. Fixity of
purpose and sedulous application for the develop-
ment of the gifts of nature are the only ways to the
distinction of public life.
The energy, tact, and business instinct of the
young Australian, are showing themselves more
plainly every day. Mr. 11. A. Evers, who was born
in Sydney in 1876, is a good example of what these
qualities can accomplish. He has been connected
with the firm for twelve years, the last five under
the administration of J. I. Falk and Company,
Limited, and now occupies the responsible position
of Manager.
Mr. Evers has at all times displayed a keen into
rest in public matters, while in the field of sport he
MR. H. A. EVERS.
has on several occasions represented the State o!
New South Wales as a cricketer. In 1901 he visited
Brisbane as Captain of the New South Wales team,
thus showing that his administrative abilities are
not confined to one sphere of action —an excellent
example of the many-sided qualities of the modir’l
business man.


Messrs. Q. Johnson & Sons.
LEATHER AND GRINDERY MERCHANTS.
Leather consists of the skin of animals chemic-
ally modified by tanning, so as to arrest that prone-
ness to decomposition which characterises unpre-
pared skins, and to give the substance greatly in-
creased strength, toughness, and pliancy, with in-
solubility and inalterability in water. Some
methods of preparing skins so as to make them
wearable must have been known from the earliest
times, and there yet exist remains of tanned
leather made in Egypt not less than 900 years be-
fore the Christian era. In modern times the
methods and principles of leather making have
come to be well understood; but the processes em-
ployed in the manufacture have not been seriously
modified. The improved methods of manufacturing
boots and shoes have naturally given an enormous
impetus to the leather industry. The imports of
leather into the United Kingdom in 1889 were
valued at six and a half million sterling, and since
that time there has been a large increase, a remark
which applies in a corresponding degree to Aus-
tralia.
The firm of Messrs. G. Johnson and Sons may be
taken as a good example of the development of the
Australian leather trade, because they occupy the
unique position of being the oldest leather store in
Australia, and of also being instrumental in the
manufacture of footwear by supplying the trade
with the latest and most ingenious mechanical
devices connected with that industry.
The business was originally founded in Eng-
land in 1852 by the late Mr. George Johnson. The
firm for some time had considerable commercial
relations with Australia, and recognising the possi-
bilities of the Australian business, the founder’s
sons, Messrs. John Johnson and Frank Johnson,
came out to Sydney in 1880. Here Mr. John John-
son purchased and revived the leather and grind-
ery business originally established and carried on
by Mr. Thomas Hall, one of the oldest pioneers of
the leather trade in Australia. He was shortly
afterwards joined by Mr. Frank Johnson, now prin-
cipal proprietor and Sydney manager. The success
attending their efforts was so considerable that Mr.
Johnson, senior, with his sons, Messrs. Leonard
Johnson and George Johnson, junior, came out from
England and joined the company. Mr. Johnson,
senior, returned to England in about two years,
and though the business at that time was not a
particularly large one, the up-to-date methods and
business acumen of his sons soon made a consider-
able difference, so much so, that it was found neces-
sary to remove from the old premises at 15 Park-
street to larger and more commodious ones at 27,
29 and 31 Park-street.
Here the business and commercial relations of
tire firm extended so rapidly that these offices were
also found insufficiently large for their require-
merits, and the firm’s next move was made to their
present premises, situated at 203 Castlereagh-
street. This large warehouse consists of four floors
MESSES. JOHNSON AND SONS’ WAREHOUSE, 203 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY.
and a basement, the latter being occupied with a
large stock of sole leather. On the ground floor
are the offices of the accountant and clerks, and
the private offices of Mr. Frank Johnson. Here are
to be seen a large stock of leather goods, finished
articles, and dress goods. A large number of as-
sistants are busily employed attending to the re-
quirements of the many customers in the retail de-
partment, which is also situated on this floor. At
the rear of this is a spare store-room, from which
the stock of light sundries is replenished as re-
quired. Coming to the first floor, we find it divided
into the eyelet room and boot-looping department;
provision is also made for the storage of very large
stocks held of Messrs. Watkin and Company, the
well-known English boot-upper manufacturers of
Wellingborough, who have the reputation of being
the largest boot upper manufacturers in the world.
General /llbercbants anb importers.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches :-contmued.
LEATHER AND GRINDERY MERCHANTS.


One of the largest stocks of English Boot Uppers
in Australia is to be found on this floor, a large
variety of different qualities are stocked, being
suitable for the lowest as well as the highest class
of trade.
Coming to the second floor, we find many diversi-
fied specialities in imported and colonial dress
leathers, amongst which mention should be made
of the fine quality Glace Kid manufactured by the
Quaker City Morocco Company of Camden, New
Jersey, U.S.A., one of the largest and best known
firms in America, whose goods have a world-wide
reputation for quality and durability, being especi-
ally popular in England and on the Continent.
A special feature is made of the various importa-
tions of French Calf. The excellent quality of
these goods can be thoroughly guaranteed when we
take into consideration the fact that they are pur-
chased in Paris under the personal supervision of
Mr. Leonard Johnson, the firm’s London Manager.
The manufacturing room on the third floor is
daily responsible for a busy scene. Here the firm’s
employees are to be seen busily engaged in turning
MR. LEONARD JOHNSON.
out the various goods manufactured, principal
among these are the uppers and general find-
ings for the retail trade, while the output from
the clicking and closing departments is a very
considerable one. An admirable display of shoe
mercery and trimmings is to be found in the general
finding room, a remark which also applies to the
wooden and iron lasts of English and German
make, the stocks being thoroughly representative of
every conceivable design and pattern adapted to
modern footwear. Large stocks of blackings, dres-
sings, tannery bark, oils, glucose, and tools are
held, the firm being contractors to the New South
Wales Government for grindery, boot uppers, etc..
The heavier kinds of the latter article are stored
at the capacious premises in the Sussex-street bulk
store.
The London offices are situated at 2 Beech-street,
E-C„ and; as previously mentioned, are under the
able management of Mr. Leonard Johnson, he hav-
ing exchanged this position with Mr. George John-
son, now in charge of the Queensland branch. He
happily combines the onerous duties of home-
huyer with the administration of the firm’s English
and Continental business ramifications in a tho-
roughly efficient manner.
In 1895, the Queensland trade having by that
time assumed large proportions, it was decided to
open a branch in Brisbane. With this object in
MR. FRANK JOHNSON.
view the business carried on by Mr. L. F. Schoen-
heimer at 106 Elizabeth-street, was purchased. The
expectations of the firm in the matter of the
Queensland branch were speedily realised, their en-
terprise being rewarded with a considerable increase
in their trade operations throughout the Northern
Stated, so much so that a removal had to be made
to the present premises at the corner of Edward
and Mary streets, Brisbane. This handsome build-
ing consists of three stories and a basement, and
may justly claim to be considered one of the finest
warehouses in the city, and in itself an ornament
to the Northern States capital.
Up to this time the commercial operations of
Messrs. Johnson and Sons had been confined to the
business of leather and grindery merchants, and
that branch of the leather trade known as factoring,
which consists in selling large quantities of that
article entirely on commission. However, after the
inauguration of the Queensland branch they fore-
saw great possibilities in the tanning industry, and
putting their ideas into practical use, they entered
into negotiations for the purchase of a large and
convenient tannery at Ennoggera, near Brisbane.
This purchase has now been completed, and a con-
siderable trade is done in their manufacture of
finer kinds of dress leathers, sole leather, and har-
ness leathers.
These are tanned on the old-fashioned English
principle, the main object being to produce a good
wear-resisting leather. The hides are kept in the
tan pits for a lengthy period. The consequence is
they find a ready and increasing sale for their
several specialities in the Northern Colony,, so
much so that extensions and alterations are con-
tinually being made to keep abreast of the grow-
ing demand.
Messrs. Johnson and Sons are also the Australian
agents for the Standard Engineering Company,
Limited, Leicester, England, manufacturers of
modern boot machinery. This well-known firm are
ever on the look-out for up-to-date and new
machines with which to benefit the trade, and Eng-
lish shoe manufacturers have much to thank them
for. By their inventions many operations have
been simplified, and the quality of the workman-
ship considerably improved by the firms using
their different machines. They are, moreover,
built in a simple and thorough manner, and of
such substantial materials that their reliability is
well known throughout the trade. A well assorted
stock of their different machines is always on
hand at 203 Castlereagh-street, and machinery pur-
chasers will do well to examine these when putting
down new plant.
Since the inauguration of the Sydney business
twenty-two years ago by Mr. John Johnson, the
firm has kept thoroughly abreast of the times, its
progress being synonymous with that of the
Mother Statei. The credit of this is due in a large
measure, primarily to the founder, who, though
now retired as far as any proprietary interest is
concerned, is to be still found daily on the Sydney
premises, taking the same active interest in the
MR. GEO. E. JOHNSON.
development of the business as he has done in pre-
vious years. His younger brother, Mr. Frank
Johnson, is now the principal proprietor and Syd-
ney manager, and to his energy and business acu-
men the fact is due that the firm still keeps its
pride of place among kindred organisations, a
matter by no means easy, as it demands consider-
able administrative ability in these days of keen
competition.
By the establishment of the Brisbane Kelvin
Grove Tannery, the firm have done much to foster
and promulgate one of our important native indus-
tries, and in addition to their Sydney and Brisbane
warehouses, have, by the expenditure of large
amounts of capital, given employment to a consider-
able amount of labour. Their popularity with
their various hands and employees may be gauged
from the fact that many of them have been in
their service for a period of nearly twenty years.
The phenomenal progress and expansion achieved
by this highly reputable firm is but a fitting re-
ward for the enterprise and untiring zeal which has
characterised the business management throughout
its long and successful career.


Messrs. W. & A. McArthur,
Ltd.
MERCHANTS, IMPORTERS, AND EXPORTERS
OF GRAIN AND PRODUCE.
One of the strongest, most energetic, and best
known firms engaged in the New South Wales grain
and produce trade is that of Messrs. W. and A.
McArthur, Limited, whose ramifications extend
throughout the entile State, and it is thus armed
with unique facilities for disposing of all business
entrusted to its care. Though the firm under its pre-
sent title dates from 1900, yet the very old and
honoured name which its principals enjoyed as pio-
neer traders throughout Australasia provided it
with a reputation which gave it an advantageous
claim upon the confidence of its patrons.
Through its agency the farmer has been brought
into communication with the world’s markets in
the most direct and economical manner, thus pro-
viding a regular channel for the disposal of his
produce, and ensuring for him a certain and speedy
financial return for his labour. The enormous
stocks which the firm has handled since its incep-
tion bear testimony to the popularity of its methods
of business with the producing community, which
has been prompt to recognise the commercial in-
trepidity and far-sighted enterprise that are the
dominating features of W. and A. McArthur,
Limited. As an instance of the firm’s originality
and boldness, it may be mentioned that a couple of
years ago it tried the experiment of carrying wheat
in bulk from Sydney to the United Kingdom, ten
thousand bags of wheat being placed on board the
White Star Liner “ Persic,” one-half of which was
bulked diiect into the vessels hold. The result of
the experiment was such as to justify the motive
which prompted it. The lines on which Messrs.
W. and A. McArthur, Limited, conducts its busi-
ness are of the most comprehensive and up-to-date
description. The firm has, through its capable
officers, made close study of all the essen-
tials of the export business. The company not
only purchases direct from the producer, but ad-
vances money to the farmers on their crops, etc.,
thus conferring beneficial accommodation to many
who otherwise would not be able to utilise their
lands to advantage. It will thus be apparent that in
many ways Messrs. W. and A. McArthur assists very
materially in developing the resources of the Com-
monwealth, and in piomoting the best interests of
those who engage in the primary industries.
Throughout all the country districts of New
South Wales the firm has agents stationed, whose
duty it is to secure fresh business and extend the
existing connection in every way compatible with
mutual benefit. At many of the country railway
stations, the Company has erected private sheds for
the accommodation of its products, and in many
places in the open country private stores have been
built to facilitate the collection and housing of
supplies. In the metropolis and port of Sydney the
Company also has commodious warehouses for the
storage of products of all kinds, the grain store at
the Darling Harbour Government wharves being of
enormous dimensions.
In consonance with the firm’s method of arrang-
ing its administrative departments so as to achieve
the best results, the grain export and import section
is kept distinct from the rest of the Produce De-
partment. Mr. S. C. Lindley, a gentleman excep-
tionally well qualified for the position, is manager,
and is assisted in Sydney by Mr. A. Pardey, whose
experience in cereals is also very large. Like all
other branches managed from Macquarie Place, this
department is under the supervision of Mr. M. F.
Dawkins.
The Grain Department was started in 1900, and
during that and the subsequent year it made
gigantic strides. In those two years a great quan-
tity of wheat was exported through it to different
parts of the world, and at the same time city and
country millers were supplied to a large extent.
®? mell^ a of ) he m i>guitude of the export trade in
wheat alone from Sydney to oversea ports during
the year ended June, 1901, may be gleaned from the
fact that 158,513 bags were sent away, and in addi-
tion the company expoited 3266 bags of flour, 5812 of
bran, and 955 bags of oats. During the season 1901-
1902 W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., was the largest
exporter of wheat from New South Wales, the
quantity sent abroad totalling over 1,000,000
bushels.
The dairying industry also owes a debt of grati-
tude to Messrs. W. and A. McArthur, Limited, for
the excellent support that has been given, and for
the highly creditable manner in which the company
has succeeded in bringing Australian butter into
prominence, both in London and elsewhere.
A few figures in this connection will show
at a glance the extent of the Company’s
export operations during the 1901 season.
Butter 5798 boxes, 360,813 carcases of mut-
ton, 11,673 crates of hares, rabbits and poultry.
During he same season the Company shipped away
no less than 107,651 bales of wool, and during the
following season the wool shipment foimed a very
considerable portion of their export.
In accord with the Company’s watchfulness for
new avenues for trade, an effort is being made to
open up a permanent and remunerative business
with South Africa, and to this end large quantities
of hay and other fodder, wheat, butter, leather, etc.,
were exported thither last year, and realised good
prices.
Sinee a blanch was opened in Adelaide in No-
vember last an extensive business has been done in
supplying Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane millers
~l th South Australian wheat,
One great advantage possessed by this Company
consists in the regularity and frequency with which
it can transfer its products from one country to
another through the agency of its fleets of steamers
and sailers. With buyers and agents in the Argen-
tine, San Francisco, and all the principal ports
throughout the world, the Sydney office is kept in
touch with every phase of production and distribu-
tion in every quarter of the globe.
W. AND A. McARTHUR, LTD. OFFICES, MACQUARIE PLACE, SYDNEY.
In addition to the business of wool and produce
merchants, Messrs. W. and A. McArthur, Limited,
also enjoys a large connection as Shipping and In-
surance Agents, thus placing the Company in a posi-
tion par excellence for formulating and controlling
business of almost every description and of every
dimension,
The head office of Messrs. W. and A. McArthur is
situated at No. 150 Leadenhall-street, London, with
Australian offices at Macquarie Place, Sydney, the
“ Olderfleet,” Coll ins-street, Melbourne, and at
Ware’s Chambers, Adelaide, while the local South
African business is controlled from Capetown.
(Seneral /Tbercbants an£> importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches :-eontinued.
GENERAL MERCHANTS.


Messrs. W. & A. McArthur,
Ltd.
ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT.
In the importation and distribution of raw
material for engineering construction and the
supply of finished products in the form of rail-
way locomotives, portable and stationary steam
engines and hydraulic machinery, pumping gear,
bridge material, and the thousand and one duplicate
and other parts required for mining equipment, the
world-renowned firm of W. and A. McArthur, Ltd.,
through their Engineering Department, have built
up a business whose scope of operations throughout
New South Wales and the Australian Common-
wealth, is of a very wide and varied character. Their
unrivalled facilities, locally and abroad, and the
fact that their Engineering Department, located in
commodious offices at 15 Macquarie Place, Sydney, is
under the control of a highly qualified Consulting
Engineer, assisted by an able technical staff, enables
them to maintain a high standard of quality in all
work undertaken, and to supply raw material in any
quantity at lowest rates.
The agencies held by Messrs. Wi and A. McArthur,
Ltd., are of a most comprehensive character. In
every department of Engineering a long list of the
leading English manufacturers is presented. The
following brief summary of some of the world-re-
nowned firms for whom Messrs. W. and A.
McArthur, Ltd., act as Australasian agents will
give the reader an idea of the firm’s opera-
tions on behalf of the home firms for whom they
indent and carry stocks. The finished products of
the great works of Messrsi. Dubs and Co., the famous
Glasgow firm, whose speciality lies in the construc-
tion of every description of railway locomotive, are
well known in this State, Messrs. W. and A.
McArthur having supplied a number of the Dubs’
passenger and heavy-goods locomotives to the New
South Wales Government.
Hathorn, Davey and Co., whose workshops at
Leeds, England, cover an immense area, and w'hose
waterworks and sewerage pumping engines and
allied hydraulic plant have gained for the makers a
world-wide reputation for solid and good work, are
also well and favourably known amongst experts in
the Australian States. As agents for this Company,
Messrs. McArthur have fitted up engines for the
Marrickville sewerage scheme. Hay water supply,
and the Spottiswood (Melbourne) sewerage works.
The special features claimed for Hathorn, Davey
and Co.’s engines are steam economy and economy
in first cost of machinery foundations and
buildings, and what is also of vital importance,
simplicity of working parts. Amongst the many
engines made by this firm, the following, which
have given good results in Australia, may be men-
tioned the “ Widness” type of compound high-duty
pumping engines, with bore-hole and force pumps.
Engine No. 1 will raise 1560 gallons of water per
minute from a bore-hole 200 feet deep, and force
this water forward to a further height of 260 feet.
Other engines of this type run up to a lifting
capacity of 1300 gallons per minute to a height of
seven hundred feet.
For colliery and mining work the Company’s com-
pound differential condensing underground plunger
pumping engines are a useful type. For sinking
operations the Hathorn Davey patent lowering
tackle is extremely useful. This tackle enables the
man in charge of the engine to lower or raise the
pump work with the greatest possible, facility, to
suit the operations of the sinkers.
For large pumping works the firm supply vertical
triple expansion three-crank rotative pumping en-
gines, a type from which some of the highest duties
ever recorded have been attained in Australia, as
well as in Europe. A number of other pumps, such
as boiler feeders, ram pumps, bucket pumps, feet
water heaters, etc., are also manufactured.
Another important agency is that of Joshua Buck-
ton and Company, Ltd., Leeds, England, makers of
all kinds of machine tools for engineers, ship and
bridge builders, iron and steel works, locomotive
railway carriage and wagon works, boiler makers,
etc. All the above lines Messrs. W. and A. Mc-
Arthu r are in a position to supply and deliver at
any Australian port.
Messrs. Fielding and Platt, Ltd., of Gloucester,
England, makers of every description of modern
hydraulic tools and appliances for land and marine
work, are also represented. This Company has
always been identified with Mr. Tweddell, the pio-
neer in all the industrial applications of hydraulic
power.
Messrs. R. G. lioss and Son, Glasgow, steam-
hammer and pneumatic machinery makers, are well
represented by Messrs. W. and A. McArthur,
through whose efforts a number of steam hammers,
etc., have been supplied to the New South Wales
Government.
The introduction of Portland cement concrete for
protective sea works, has added greatly to the de-
velopment of harbour construction, and the hand-
ling of the concrete, in the form of blocks, has
rendered necessary the building of powerful steam
cranes, overhead travellers, etc. In this special
line of engineering, Messrs. Stothert and Pitt,
Limited, of Bath, England, for whom Messrs. W.
and A. McArthur are the Australasian agents, have
brought the manufacture of harbour-making plant
to a science. Amongst the. principal machinery made
by Messrs. Stothert and Pitt, Ltd., may be men-
tioned concrete mixing machines and steam Goliath
cranes up to almost any capacity. Floating cranes,
concrete boxes, patent block-tilting gear, ore, brick
and stone-crushing machines, contractors’ skips,
etc. In dredgers the firm supply “Grabs,” which
can be used with any style of crane for sinking
cylinders, taking out the core from coffer drains or
docks, picking up rock, etc. For colliery proprietors
and ship owners, shipping and discharging coal,
these patent grabs are eminently suited.
Amongst other specialities of Messrs. Stothert
and Pitt, Ltd., are portable and stationary steam
engines, for diving, grinding machinery and crush-
ing mills, pumps and circular saws, as well as for
the general work of builders, contractors and others.
Messrs. W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., do a large
business in mining machinery, outside of railway
requirements, as agents for Hadfield’s Steel Foiin-
dry Company, Ltd., Sheffield. England, manufac-
turers of Hadfield’s patent manganese steel and
other special steels for the wearing parts of grind-
VERTICAL TRIPLE EXPANSION PUMPING ENGINE.
Made by Hathorn, Davey and Co., Leeds, England.
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., Australian Agents.
ing and crushing machinery. For resistance to
abrasive action, manganese steel possesses, m a
unique degree, the qualities of extreme hardness
and great toughness, ensuring a maximum of t
bility with the minimum of breakage risk. The
lladfield castings for gyratory crushers,
links, buckets, elevator s, conveyers and “ corve
wheels, are supplied by Messrs. W. and A. McArthur
to almost every mine in Australia, and the experi-
ence of the experts in charge of the varrous plants
where the manganese steel castrngs have been
installed in the first instance or as duplicates, rs,
that they are. much superior to any of the chilled
iron wheels ordinarily in use. Brown Bayley’s steel
works, Sheffield, makers of springs, axles, tyres, etc..
and John Wilkes, Son and Mapplebeck, Birming-
ham, copper and brass tube,, wile and rods are also
amongst the valued agencies. In regard to the
latter, Messrs. McArthur, Ltd., have placed very
valuable contracts for the supply of copper wire,
eto., tj the Postal Department of the Common-
wealth A. Handyside and Co Ltd of Derby, Eng-
land, designers and builders of steel, swing and bas-
cule bridges have, through their Austiahan agents
been successful in regard to tendeis fortheron
and steelwork used in the construction of a number
of bridges m New South Wales, including the Glebe
Island Bridge and the Pyrmont Siiing Bridge,
Sydney. The list of agencies could he £°“ tinue i
definitely, but enough have been quoted to show
that the Engineering Department of Messrs. W.
and A. McArthur, Ltd., is able to cope with almost
any demand made upon it for engmeeiing supp 1
in the form of the raw material or finished pioduct.
. , ,
The great reputation of the firm for honouiable
business methods and the admirable administration
of its affairs by Mr. Jefferson and his co-directors
and managers, entitle Messrs. W. and A McArthur,
Ltd., to be included in the front rank of Australia s
greatest commercial concerns.


Messrs. Warren & Strang.
MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS’
AGENTS.
The growth of the Australian leather trade is a
particularly interesting one, because it is more or
less bound up with one of our most important in-
dustries. In the matter of its relation to the boot
and shoe industry, the development has been little
short of marvellous. History is full of instances
of the important part foot-wear plays in the
determination of human destinies. The Pioneer
of the early Australian days who had to
depend largely on the itinerant cobbler for
the replenishing and repairing of his foot-
gear would be considerably surprised if he were
to inspect the various stocks and samples of
Messrs. Warren and Strang, Importers and Manu-
facturers’ Agents, Barrack-street, Sydney. Here
is to be found every kind and variety of leather
and everything in boots and shoes that cannot be
produced locally, from a dainty ball slipper to the
finest heavy shooting boot.
The Sydney business was founded in 1879 by
Mr. Thomas W. Warren, who came from England
in 1878 to superintend matter s in connection with
the boot and shoe exhibits of prominent English
manufacturers. Seeing what chances there were
for a keen and enterprising business man, Mr.
Warren in that year commenced business as a
Manufacturers’ agent and merchant. The first
premises were situated at 56 Clarence-street, and
here the founder, being a popular man, who soon
adapted himself to local trade requirements, did a
thriving business as a boot and shoe importer. The
rapid increase in business soon necessitated a re-
moval to 85 Clarence-street, and there the leather
agency was added.
In 1891 Mr. W. S. Strang came into the busi-
ness as a partner; the latter, a native of Glasgow,
was a particularly shrewd business man, and did
much to increase the firm’s business operations
abroad. A branch was soon formed in Melbourne,
and commercial operations were quickly developed
throughout New Zealand, Queensland, South Aus-
tralia, Tasmania, and Western Australia, where a
considerable trade is done in Australian and im-
ported leathers, American and English boots and
shoes, boot mercery, findings, polishes, dressings,
etc. The firm’s are thoroughly cosmo-
politan in their character: among the first ac-
quired were the goods manufactured by A. and W.
Flatau, London, and E. West and Company, Ltd.,
Northampton, whose products are still in demand.
After Mr. Strang had joined the firm the ad-
vance in American boot manufacturing caused the
partners to turn their attention to American goods.
Beginning with the agency of Laird, Sehober, and
Company, of Philadelphia, it was soon discovered
that the American business equalled the English in
importance, and at the present time surpasses it.
Messrs. Laird, Sehober and Company are one of the
largest manufacturers of ladies’ high-class boots
and shoes, and are famous for the extremely fine
quality of goods they produce, tneir taste and in-
ventive genius keeping them well in the forefront
of the trade. The wealthy Americans demand
very fine footwear, and their tastes are admirably
catered for by this firm, their goods being unsur-
passed for style and finish in any country.
Australians have appreciated these articles to a
surprising extent, considering the short time that
has elapsed since their introduction. In spite of
the high duties the Australasian trade has been a
constantly increasing one, and the output of the
factories has been doubled to meet the augmented
demand throughout the world. Amongst other
boot manufacturers represented by the firm are
P. W. Wadleigh and Tliayre, McGuire and Field
of Havenhill, the Tilt Shoe Company, Chicago,
and many other manufacturers of fine foot wear of
which they have the sole control in Australasia.
An important agency held by the firm is that of
R. H. Foerderer, of Philadelphia, manufacturer of
the well-known Vici Kid. This is the form of kid
leather most universally used throughout the
world. Mr. R. H. Foerderer puts through 50,000
skins per day, and the buildings cover 13 acres of
ground. This kid is light, durable, and handsome
in appearance. Another new and important line
is their boot polishes and dressings, which meet
with an enormous demand in America. Vici
Dressing in bottles and bulk for manufacturers
can also be supplied in large quantities.
Mr. Strang’s father was the head of the firm of
Messrs. William Strang and Son, Glasgow, and
the latter are the principal suppliers of the Aus-
tralian firm’s demands for cotton goods. These
include plain and fancy muslin and cotton piece
MESSRS. WARREN AND STRANG’S WAREHOUSE AND OFFICES.
BARRACK STREET, SYDNEY.
goods, also fancy materials for artistic draperies,
curtains, art muslins, and other household effects.
Other firms represented are Messrs. Watson and
Company, Leek, whose widely known boot silks,
sewings, and trimmings are so well adapted to the
requirements of the trade; Tebbit Brothers, lea-
ther manufacturers, London; William Barbour
and Sons, Limited, Goodyear threads, Lisburn;
and D. C. Rebhun and Company (late Dayton Ball
and Company), Albany, New Fork, whose specia-
lities include fine lasts and other appliances of
the bootmakers’ trade.' A large business is done
with the firm of Carl Paas and Son, of Barmen,
Germany. This firm is the largest on the Conti-
nent, and their boot laces find a ready sale in
Australasia.
In addition to the articles mentioned above,
large stocks of American best Russia calf (in
newest shades), Cuban and Maceo calf, vestings,
(3enei-al /ifcercbants an£>
Historical and Biographical Sketches Continued.
MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS’ AGENTS.


drills, and cotton linings are kept in the Sydney
and Melbourne Warehouses. Mr. W. Mayor is the
manager of the Sydney house in the absence of the
partners. Mr. Warren, the founder, has just re-
turned from a trip to the old world. The firm
always endeavours to keep in touch with the
latest developments in the English, Continental,
and American trade. With this object in view
the partners visit the chief manufacturing centres
in Europe and the United States periodically.
The Melbourne business, situated at De Graves-
street, Flinders-lane, is presided over by Mr. F.
Giey, while Mr. E. Warren looks after the boot
and leather business side of the house. Travellers
operate through the various States extensively,
Western Australia and South Australia being
worked from the Melbourne centre, while the
Queensland and New Zealand trade is administered
from the Sydney side.
Since the inception of the present firm there has
been a marked change in the boot, shoe, and leather
industry; indeed, the introduction of Viei Kid and
Chrome Tannage may practically be said to have
revolutionised boot-making.
At first the great bulk of boots were imported,
but gradually the local manufacturer has supplied
most of the requirements, until with the help of
high tariffs only the fine goods are imported.
This has led to increased business in light leathers,
and a large impetus to local production was given
MR. THOMAS W. WARREN.
by the arrangement made by this house for the
distribution of Vici Kid on terms almost as good
as American manufacturers obtain.
The existence of tanneries are in themselves of
great benefit to land owners, who can supply them
with bark, lime, hides, skins, etc. There is no
doubt that a close study should be made of tech-
nical and experienced methods. In the old days
members of the tanning trade had not much
technical education in order to fit them for their
business; now it is a business of experts and
trained chemists. The American manufacturer
only produces one or two articles, and pays his at-
tention to producing those in the cheapest and
most practical form.
Messrs. Warren and Strang show many lines in
which the Americans are supreme, and local fac-
tories cannot yet produce, though they recognise
that gradually much of the imported trade must
pass to the Australian Manufacturer.
In conned ion with their extensive business
Messrs. Wa nen and Strang act as exclusive selling
agents to r
Messrs, j. bayley and sons, limited,
of Lord-street, Botany, New South Wales, and
Burnside, Dunedin, New Zealand. The well and
favourably known firm of Messrs. J. Bayley and
Sons, Limited, tanners and dressers of light and
fancy leathers, was established by the late Mr.
John Bayley at Giltbrook Tannery, Nottingham-
shire, after his retirement from the old-established
firm of T. J. and T. Bayley, Lenton, Nottingham.
The business at Giltbrook was established for the
benefit of the three sons, members of the present
firm, who gained a thorough practical experience
of leather dressing in England, and on the expira-
tion of the lease of their works in 1881, decided to
emigrate to the colonies, and selected New Zea-
land as offering a suitable opening, being tempted
bj r seeing the splendid class of raw material from
that colony just then finding its way into the old
country.
Works were at once erected at Burnside, Dune-
din, where they have treated a very large quantity
of pelts, doing a steadily increasing trade with
America, Great Britain., and Australia.
Keeping well up with the times, this firm was
one of the first to apply the process of chrome
tanning to their business, and have succeeded in
perfecting the tannage on sheep skins—a success
not yet attained in older countries.
The Australian trade had developed so rapidly
under the energetic agency of Messrs. Warren and
Strang, Merchants, Barrack-street, that after
federation it was decided to remove the principal
factory to within the Commonwealth, and the pre-
sent company was formed and a site secured on
the Botany water reserve, where a thoroughly up-
to-date factory has been erected, with a full supply
of pure water —such a necessary element in the
manufacture of good leather.
The main building of this factory measures 120
feet by 50 feet, giving in the three floors a super-
ficial area of 18,000 square feet, fitted with one
of the most perfect light-leather dressing machi-
nery plants in the Southern Hemisphere, with a
capacity of from 500 to 600 dozen per week.
An important development has been the erec-
tion in one of the adjacent buildings of a com-
plete modern plant for decreasing skins and
leather, the value and importance of which to the
practical sheepskin tanner is obvious. This plant
increases the value of sheep pelts by enabling much
more regular and reliable leather being produced.
Messrs. Bayley are to be commended for their
enterprise in adding this very expensive up-to-date
auxiliary process to their business. Messrs. Bayley
here convert the pelts they receive from their New
Zealand factory into all grades of high-class lea-
thers, and already orders are arriving from Eng-
lish leather merchants for some of their products,
which include glace, sheep, mock kids, glace wal-
laby, high-grade roans and skivers, box calf, and
a start has been made in the production of glace
kid,, both from local and imported goat skins.
Messrs. Arthur and John Bayley are the manag-
ing directors, and Mr. Walter Bayley the New
Zealand Manager, while associated with them and
occupying seats on the directorate are Messrs. T.
W. Warren and W. S. Strang, of Warren and
Strang. It is the intention of the company to
double their present capacity in the near future.
ME. THOMAS WILLIAM WAEREN.
Amongst those whose names are familiar in re-
gard to the importation of boots, shoes, and
leather, there is none better known than that
of Mr. Thomas William Warren, one of the part-
ners of the well and favourably known firm of
Messrs Warren and Strang, Manufacturers’
Agents and Merchants, of 14 Barrack-street,
Sydney, and Melbourne. Mr. Warren was born
in Bridport, Dorsetshire, England, in October,
1843, receiving his education at a public school in
his native town, and subsequently at a private
Grammar School in the county.
He began his business career with his father,
who was a Leather Merchant and Shoe Manufac-
turer in Bridport, and when he had gained suffi-
cient experience he was chosen to represent seve-
ral well-known English shoe manufacturers
through the West of England and South Wales.
In the position of traveller he was very successful
for many years.
In 1879, owing to failing health and on the ad-
vice of his doctor, he accepted a proposal from
Messrs. Cove and West, of Northampton, to repre-
sent them at the Sydney Exhibition, as he had
had considerable experience in connection with
the Philadelphia Exhibition of 1876, as well as that
of Paris in 1878.
Mr. Warren arrived in Sydney on 7th August,
1879, and on 10th December the same year he mar-
ried Miss Alice Strutt, second daughter of Dr. C.
E. Strutt, the popular Police Magistrate of Vic-
toria.
In July, 1880, Mr. Warren returned to England,
and made arrangements with several other im-
portant firms to represent them in the colonies.
In January, 1881, he returned to Sydney, and with
characteristic energy laid the foundation and built
up the present extensive business, which is now re-
cognised as one of the leading wholesale shoe and
leather firms in the colonies.
In 1891 Mr. Warren amalgamated his business
with that of Mr. Walter Strang, who was estab-
lished in Sydney, and in the same year a branch
was opened in Melbourne. Mr. Warren, in addi-
tion to organising the New South Wales business
on a firm basis, visited New Zealand and all the
diffeient colonies in a business capacity. lie has
also paid six visits to America, where he is well
known in the great leather and shoe centres.
He has also visited England and Europe many
limes, and has just completed a ten months’ jour-
ney, having left Sydney in February, 1902, for San
Francisco, returning in December last by the Suez
route, this last trip making the nineteenth time of
his crossing the Equator.
MR. W. S. STRANG.
The value of a thorough commercial training is
evident in the success which has been achieved by
MR. W. S. STRANG.
Mr. Walter Strang, of the firm of Warren and
Strang, Merchants and Manufacturing Agents, of
Sydney. Mr. Strang, who is a native of Glasgow,
was born in that famous city in 1857, and was edu-
cated at the Glasgow Park School under Dr. Col-
lier, celebrated "as the author of a number of
scholastic works.
As a young man Mr. Strang had every oppor-
tunity of acquiring a comprehensive knowledge of
the Manufacturing, Importing, and Exporting
business, being trained in fine cotton manufactur-
ing under the supervision of his father, who had
large interests in the cotton industry, as head of
the firm of Messrs. William Strang and Son, Glas-
gow. The fact that his father’s business was
closely connected in trade with India and the East
resulted in Mr. W. S. Strang being despatched on
a business trip through India and a number of the
Eastern settlements. ■
In 1882 Mr. Strang came out to New Zealand,
coming on from there to Australia. He then re-
turned to England, making subsequent visits to
New South Wales in 1884 and 1885. Deciding to
settle in Sydney, Mr. Strang opened up and estab-
lished business in 1886. Five years later, when
business had grown to considerable proportions, he
entered into partnership with Mr. T. IV. Warren!
who had been established in business for several
years in Sydney. The amalgamation of the two
concerns advanced the interests of the new firm,
with the result that to-day the importing house
of Warren and Strang occupies a foremost position
in Sydney commercial'circles.


Messrs. Cooper, Nathan & Co.
IMPORTERS OF SPIRITS, BEERS, AND HIGH-
CLASS WINES.
The introduction of the Wine and Spirit Trade
into Australia goes back to that pioneer period
of New South Wales history when Governor
Phillip, with his four ships, dropped anchor in
Sydney Harbour, and the wearied passengers who
had braved the dangers of the six months’ voyage
set up their rude log huts and founded the white
settlement established in the Southern Hemisphere.
The first great trade was done with the blacks by
dealers in wines and spirits, the Australian natives’
thirst for “ Devil water” being insatiable, and on
many occasions thousands of acres of land were
handed over by dusky chiefs for a bottle of rum.
In fact, it is recorded that a large portion of the
land now known as Cameron’s Walk, near Mac-
quarie Point, Sydney, was sold by a man to whom
it had been “ granted” for a gallon of rum.
As the settlements progressed, and population,
both forced and free, increased, a reign of military
despotism came into being, wherein the exploits of
the officers and men of the notorious regiment
known as " The Rum Corps” astonished the world.
During ,the period just mentioned the party in
power brought in an iniquitous law by which they
and the heads of the Rum Corps, a military oigani-
sation composed of a band of money-grabbing
officers and privates of doubtful antecedents, re-
served to themselves the light to buy liquor from
the ships arriving in the Harbour of Sydney, and to
retail it as they thought proper, the result being
that officers, when paying their men, obliged them
to take out their wages in Rum; in fact, more
goods were exchanged for Rum and illicit-stilled
spirits than per the medium of coin of the realm.
It was hot until Lieutenant-General Macquarie
took over the reins of government, and completed
the labours of his predecessors. Governors King and
Bligh, who had unsuccessfully striven to stamp out
illegal liquor selling, that any recognised and
settled policy was adopted. The first move in the
direction of the establishment of the Wine and
Spirit business on honourable lines ivas in the form
of a monopoly granted to three Sydney citizens,
whereby in exchange for their undertaking to de-
fray the cost of the building of the Sydney Hospital
the exclusive privilege of dealing in liquors in New
South Wales was granted them. From 1821, the
time of Governor Macquarie’s departure for the
“ Home-land,” the trade, unfettered by the designs
of schemers, commenced to thrive, and many in-
fluential gentlemen became associated with the busi-
ness, and what was formerly a source of irritation
and usury became a large and prosperous addition
to the commercial interests of the colony.
In 1815, Mr. A. Cooper, w'ho had had great experi-
ence in the Wine and Spirit business in England,
foresaw that there was a great opportunity for a
wholesale house handling only first-class lines, and
within the year Mr. Cooper had established himself
in business in premises at the Haymarket, and in
doing so, laid the foundation of the great Importing
house now known as Cooper, Nathan and Co., Im-
porters of Spirits, Beers, and High-class Wines,
whose warehouse is located at 201 Clarence Street,
between Market and King Streets.
Mr. Cooper, by close attention to business, and
careful study of the requirements of the trade, so
developed his business that in five years it had out-
grown his personal control, and Mr. A. Nathan,
father of the present sole proprietor, Mr. Chas.
Nathan, entered into partnership with Mr. Cooper,
the name of the firm being altered to Cooper,
Nathan and Co.
The introduction of Mr. Nathan into the business
was responsible for a great increase in the firm’s
output, and in addition, a number of valuable
MESSES. COOPER, NATHAN AND CO.’S WAREHOUSE, CLARENCE-STREET. SYDNEY.
agencies were secured. The progress made during
the period between 1850 and 1860 was remarkable.
The honourable business methods adopted and the
quality of the liquors handled by the firm earned
for them the confidence of both town and country
(3eneval /Iftercbants anb importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches :-eontinued.
WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANTS.


buyers, so that throughout New South Wales the
name of Cooper, Nathan and Co. became a house-
hold word for quality and purity in Wines, Spirits,
and Beer.
In 1877, Mr. Cooper died, and Mr. A. Nathan, as
the surviving partner, carried on the business on
his own account, until, owing to the further increase
of trade consequent upon the progressive policy
adopted by the head of the firm, who was a man of
untiring industry, additional help in the manage-
ment of affairs was rendered necessary. Mr.
Charles Nathan, who, having had a thorough train-
ing in the wine and spirit trade, had acquired a
practical knowledge of the ramifications of this
somewhat intricate business, joined his father as
one of the heads of the firm, where his ability, capa-
city for hard work, and personal popularity won
him many friends amongst the city and country
retailers.
In 1891 the old premises were found to be too small
to accommodate the immense stocks necessary to
carry on such extensive operations, and the hand-
some wai-ehouse at 201 Clarence Street, now occu-
pied, w-as leased and fitted throughout with every
modern convenience for the storage and expeditious
handling of the various bulk lines of whisky, wine,
beer, and other merchandise, whose importation was
greatly increased.
Owing to advanced years Mr. A. Nathan, sen.,
shortly after removal to Clarence Street, retired
from active business life, and the sole control of the
huge operations of the firm devolved upon Mr.
Charles Nathan, who, in the conduct of the multi-
tudinous duties connected with the management
of so large a wine and spirit business, has displayed
organising and administrative abilities of a high
order.
Under his unceasing care the high standard of
perfection in imported and proprietary lines was
fully maintained, and new and valuable agencies
constantly added.
In 1900, Mr. Nathan, sen., who was in failing
health, died, respected and esteemed, by all w-ho
knew him, for his integrity and kindly disposition.
Mr. Chaides Nathan, who then became sole proprie-
tor, with characteristic acumen, adhered to the
policy his father had laid down, and to-day there is
no more favourably known firm in the wholesale
wine and spirit trade than that of Cooper, Nathan
and Co.
The commodious warehouse at present occupied
at 201 Clarence Street comprises four immense
flooi s. A run through the huge cellarage accommo-
dation, at once impi-esses the visitor with the magni-
tude and world-wide scope of the firm’s operations in
all matters pertaining to the Whisky, Brandy, Wine
and Beer Trades.
On the second floor on the left of the entrance
doors, Mr. Nathan’s well-appointed office is located,
equipped with all the appurtenances for the test-
ing, tasting, and grading of every kind of liquor,
while in the handsome glass-fronted show cases,
which line the walls, sample bottles and decanters
of whisky, brandy, wine and beer, each attractively
labelled, make a most interesting exhibit. Cham-
pagne bottles, large and small, w-ith their golden-
tipped corks, peep out of the mahogany racks, and
hue the onlooker to throw discretion to the winds,
wade in, and have a good time.
At the rear of the manager’s office are the count-
ing house and general business offices, in charge of
Mr. Christie, a gentleman w-hose connection with
the Wine and Spirit trade runs back to the early
days, he having spent the greater part of his life in
the seivice of this old-established firm. The re-
maining floor space, shut off by partitioning doors
from the offices, is taken up by the bottling, for-
warding, and receiving departments. Here thous-
ands of orders are made un annually, and sent to all
parts of the Commonwealth.
The bulk stocks of Whisky,Brandy, etc., neatly
stacked, subdivided and classified according to
their age, quality, and the country from whence they
come, occupy the whole immense floor space of the
three upper stories. Amongst the most prominent
of the specialities imported by this up-to-date
house, the following lines for which Messrs.
Cooper, Nathan and Co. hold the sole agency, by
reason of their purity, distinct character, whole-
and exquisite flavour, merit more than
parsing attention.
An important agency is that of the “ White Horse
Cellar” Whisky, one of the purest and best ever
imported into Australia. This Whisky, which is
manufactured in the Great “ White Horse” Cellars
in Glasgow-, Scotland, has won the highest awards
in all parts of the world, its quality being fur-
ther augmented by the fact that the Whisky- is
kept for ten years before being bottled. The famous
“ Talisker” Whisky is another popular brand, pos-
sessing a rich, distinct flavour, exceptionally pleas-
ant to the palate and pure in quality. It hails from
the Isle of Skye, and is the only whisky manufac-
tuied on the Island.
In England, on the Continent, and in Australia
“ Talisker” Whisky is consumed in all the leading
clubs.
Wilkinson’s " Canny Scot” Grand Liqueur.
Special Liqueur, Gold Medal Whisky in bottle and
in bulk, is recognised by connoisseurs as an extra
quality spirit, one of the finest exported from Glas-
gow-, and is the whisky supplied to the Eoyal and
Imperial Yachts, the Officers’ Mess of His Ma-
jesty’s ships, and the principal Clubs in England
and Scotland. “ Glenguid,” known as the Doctors’
special whisky, and “ Eoyal Cellar,” stocked in
bulk and case by Messrs. Cooper, Nathan and Co.,
command a large sale.
No more pleasant wine than that known as “ Pol
Eoger Co.” Champagne is to be found on the Aug.
tralian market, whilst in Clarets, Ports, and Sher-
ries the high-class productions of Journu Fi-eres and
Kappelhoff, Ofiley-, Forrester and Co., and F. W.
MR. CHAS. NATHAN.
Cosens and Co., provide a range in table luxuries
whose body, aroma, and flavour are sufficient to
satisfy the palate of the most fastidious epicure.
In Brandies, the firm stock two excellent brands
known as De Laage Fils and Cie’s " Cognac” and
'Montdoucet and Cio’s “ Cognac Brandy.” These
Brandies possess great medicinal properties, in ad-
dition to those mellow, full-tone qualities so much
sought after by judges of this class of spirit.
The “ Chateau Tahbilk” Brandies, manufactured
in Australia, and many other varieties, are also
handled.
Coate’s Plymouth Gin, which secured the Gold
Medal at the Health Exhibition, London, and Kider.
leu’s Geneva and Schnapps, are two lines which
have caught popular favour in Australia. Messrs.
Cooper, Nathan and Co. make a speciality of Bass'
Ale and Guiness Stout, bottled by Cameron and
Saunders, a very old London firm, who have the
reputation of being amongst the best bottlers in the
world.
Although they do not go into the tobacco trade,
the firm do a large business in Henry Clay, Hav-
anna and Gomez Eothschild Cigars.
Many other lines could be mentioned, did space
permit. The agencies ,as will be noted, are all ol
the highest class, a guarantee of the quality of the
goods bottled by this up-to-date firm, whose un-
blemished record, extending over a period of 5"
years ,has been one of continual forward progress,
brought about by the careful management of Mr.
Nathan, the present sole proprietor, and those who
founded the business on the broad and lasting basis
of honour .in.all dealings, and a strict attention to
the requirements of the local markets and the firm’s
numerous clientele.
ME. CHAS. NATHAN.
In reviewing the commercial history of New
South Wales, the mother State of the Common-
wealth, it is with a sense of satisfaction that we
note that within her territory are to be found the
largest number of Australian natives who, by quiet
deeds, unselfish spirit, and keen commercial abi-
lity, have attained to high positions in Australian
Mercantile circles.
In every walk of life Sydney-born men are to be
found whose force of character, habits of industry,
and unflinching probity has brought them almost
imperceptibly to be esteemed and respected by their
fellowmen.
Amongst Sydney’s leading native leaders of com-
merce, the name of Mr. Chas. Nathan, sole pro
prietor of Messrs. Cooper, Nathan and Co., is one
which expresses a great influence in the Wine and
Spirit trade of New South Wales.
Mr. Nathan’s personality is an impressive one,
conveying at once strength, decision, and will
power.
Born in 1860, at Newtown, Mr. Nathan passed his
youthful days in the acquirement of knowledge at
one of the Sydney schools, and began the battle of
life well equipped with a sound commercial educa-
tion.
His first initiation into the intricacies of a busi-
ness career was as an employee of Messrs. Gilchrist,
Watt and Co. in 1877, a firm whose history dates
back to the earliest days of Sydney commercial life.
Whilst employed in this old established business,
Mr. Nathan, with that zeal which characterises
his business methods, applied himself diligently to
the task of acquiring a thorough and practical
knowledge of the multitudinous details which ap-
pertain to shipping and customs work. The posses-
sion of this knowledge has proved of inestimable
value to Mr. Nathan, as in his position of head of
a great wine and spirit importing house his deal-
ings with the shipping community amount to a
\ery large sum annually. In connection with
the customs, the nature of this business makes it
imperative that he should have an intimate know-
ledge of the intricacies which surround the import-
ing and exporting of alcoholic liquors.
In 1879 he made another move, and entered the
firm of Harbottle, Biddulph and Alsop, Wine and
Spirit Merchants, and began to seriously study
everything pertaining to the trade. His natural abi-
lity and retentive memory enabled him to gain a
thorough insight into the working of the business.
When in the early eighties the business of Cooper,
Nathan and Co. became too large for Mr. A.
Nathan's personal supervision, he was ready to take
up an important position with his father, where
his experience and capacity for organisation made
him invaluable to the business.
In 1895, owing to failing health, Mr. A. Nathan,
senior, retired from active management, and Mr.
Chas. Nathan assumed control, and on the death of
his father in 1900, became sole pioprietor. The
splendid Jesuits achieved by Mr. Chas. Nathan aie
evidenced by the fact that under his able manage-
ment the scope of the business has been greatlj
expanded, and the output more than doubled.
So much of his time is absoibed in business that
Mr. Nathan, who is of a retiring natuie, has not
taken any active part in public affairs, but as one
deeply interested in the commercial welfai'e of the
State, he has given his fullest support to all move-
ments having for their object the betterment of
Hading conditions in connection with the whole-
sale and retail Wine and Spirit trade. It is to such
men as Mr. Charles Nathan, who, by reason of their
commercial operations with the traders of other
countries and the disbursement of large sums an-
nually in wages and other expenditure, that New-
South Wales has become so well and favouarbly
known as a commercial centre, and that wonderful
progress achieved which has made Australia the
gieatest mercantile country in the Southern Hemis-
phere.


Messrs. G. H. Adams & Co.
WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANTS, INDENT
AND MANUFACTURERS’ AGENTS.
Amongst the many progressive commercial con-
cerns which have found an abiding footing in Syd-
ney, that of G. 11. Adams, Wine and Spirit Mer-
chants, Indent and Manufacturers’ Agents, stands
out conspicuously. Twenty years ago it began its
existence at Melbourne, where Mr. G. 11. Adams
first opened, and assumed the charge of affairs. Al-
most simultaneously a branch was started in Syd-
ney, where Mr. Robert Forbes, who was admitted
as a partner, took command. Subsequently an office
was opened at number 101 Leadenhall Street, Lon-
don, where a large amount of business is transacted.
The firm’s first location was in Pitt Street, where
from the outset, business developed with such won-
derful rapidity that at the expiration of two years
the premises were found to be too small. Adequate
accommodation was then secured in Clarence Street,
and the same story of phenomenal progress became
the order of the day. The firm is now housed in
commodious quarters specially built to suit the ad-
vancing requirements of the trade at No. 129 York
Street.
The new building is a very handsome structure in
brick and freestone, presenting a very fine front
to one of the principal streets of the city. Intern-
MR. G. H. ADAMS.
ally it is splendidly equipped with every modern
appliance for handling the various lines included in
the firm’s catalogue, and for facilitating the dis-
patch of business. The firm has branches in all the
States, and its travellers continually visit all the
towns of importance, building up fresh business and
consolidating the old connections.
Messrs. G. H. Adams and Co. engage in both the
wholesale and retail trade, on behalf of their valu-
able agencies and well-known proprietary lines.
They represent some of the most famous houses in
Britain and on the Continent, as the following
will show: —Messrs. Kirker, Greer and Company,
Limited, who export the well-known Shamrock
brand of Whiskey; Messis. William Greer and Com-
pany, Limited, Loch Dim and 0.V.11. brands of
Scotch Whiskies; Messrs. Rheinstrom Bros., the
exporters of the noted “ Jed Clayton” Rye
MESSRS. G. H. ADAMS AND CO.’S
WAREHOUSE, 129 YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
Whisky; Pure Grape Brandy, a product of Mr.
Hans Irvine’s celebrated Great Western Vineyard
in Victoria.
Other lines are the Amalgamated Vineyard
Society’s Three Star Brandies, Charles Lecoq
(Cognac) Brand} 7 , Gordon and Ramirez (Jerez)
Sherries, Stone and Sons, Guinness’ Stout,
Benedictine Pepsine Bitters, Kronenbran Lager
Beer, “ Limonis” Pure Lemon Juice, Colin Mc-
Arthur and Co , Montreal, Wallpapers, Canada
Paint Co., Ltd., Montreal, Paints, varnishes, etc..
Co-operative Tea Gardens’ Company “ Bee” brand
Ceylon teas, Marshall’s “ Shamrock” brand seam-
ing, roping and counter twines, Neustadter Bros.,
San Francisco, “ Boss of the Road” Denim Clothing.
In addition to their many agency lines, Messrs. G.
11. Adams and Company are also manufacturers of
proprietary lines of various kinds. Furthermore,
they execute indents for all classes of British,
Foreign, and American merchandise. A speciality
of the firm’s business is its promptness in all mat-
ters, especially in regard to account sales, a subject
always of great importance to those having mer-
chandise to dispose of. Mr. G. H. Adams, who is
the resident partner in Melbourne, exercises juns-
diction throughout all parts of the Commonwealth
except New South Wales, over which branch of the
business Mr. Robert Forbes has, from its inception,
had full control.
MR. G. 11. ADAMS.
Mr. G. 11. Adams, the founder of this flourishing
business, laid its foundation originally in Melbourne
in 1880, and subsequently at Sydney. At the same
time he took into partnership Mr. Robert Forbes,
who was entrusted with the establishing and man-
agement of the Sydney branch. Mr. Adams having
graduated in commercial knowledge early in life,
started out on his business career fully equipped
with all the qualities essential to success.
Throughout the whole of his career he has main-
tained a watchful supervision over the many aft'aiis
which in a business of such magnitude requires the
attention of a strong.shrewd, and withal thoroughly
up-to-date overseer.
MR. ROBERT FORBES.
Mr. Robert Forbes, the junior partner in the firm
of G. H. Adams and Co., is a native of Sydney, who
began his commercial career in Victoria. Quick to
perceive openings for trade, and energetic in push-
ing his way to the front, Mr. Forbes has earned a
high reputation for his integrity and generosity in
MR. R. FORBES.
all his dealings with his fellow traders and the pub-
lic generally. At the age of eighteen Mr. Forbes
took to the road, in a commercial sense, and in the
pursuit of his calling travelled all over the Austra-
lian States, gaining a wide and unique experience,
which has been of inestimable service to him since
he became associated with the firm of G. H. Adams
and Co. At the inception of the business twenty
years ago he took up the arduous duties of manager’
and resident partner in New South Wales, assuming
sole control of the firm’s interests in this State.
(Senei’al /Ifoercbants ano Jinporters.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches ;-eontinued.
WINE AND SPIRIT MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS’ AGENTS.


Messrs. Curcier, Adet & Co.
AUSTRALIAN WOOL, FRENCH WINES, AND
SCOTCH WHISKY, ETC.
The cosmopolitan nature of the persons, firms
and companies engaged in Australian trade strikes
the most unobservant stranger on his arrival at
any of our great ports. Australia offers a career to
persons of all friendly nationalities, and it will be
long before the time-honoured relations which exist
between the great nations of the Continent of
Europe and the people of this island will be ter-
minated. We go further, and say that that day
will never arrive, and that, notwithstanding the
exigencies of levenue raising, the best interests of
our people are consistent with the development of
commerce between this country and the great out-
side world.
Australia needs customers as much as elimi-
nations require them, and the exchange of com-
modities is too much ingrained in human nature to
be eradicated by legislation which is almost leav-
ing that disposition of human nature out of view.
The fiim of Messrs. (Juicier, Adet and Co., wine,
spirit, wool,, skin and hide merchants and im-
porters, of 105 Pitt-street, Sydney, although inti-
mately related with the great and beautiful land of
Prance, is nevertheless a very old-established Aus-
tralian house. It was founded in 1851, when the
“good old times” of the golden age of Australia were
in full swing. In those days enterprising men from
all parts of the world set sail for the shores of
Australia, eager to take a part in the rich harvest
that was then being reaped by many. "La Belle
Prance,” like every other nation, sent her stal-
warts to take part in the great work of building
up the commercial and industrial fabric of Aus-
tralia. The firm from the first did a large business
both in Sydney and Melbourne, and prospered ex-
ceedingly. In the early days of the firm’s history, it
was believed that an age of unruffled peace was
about to dawn on the world, and that the great
Exhibition in Hyde Park, London, would teach the
nations to turn their swords into pruning hooks,
and study war no more.
The Crimean War rudely shattered those ideas,
but it found the French and British allies. The
later tariff arrangements, for which the late Mr.
Gladstone, when Chancellor of the British Ex-
chequer was largely responsible, gave light wines
an open door, of which the French vignerons did
not fail to avail themselves. French houses estab-
lished in British colonies, found the new tariff
arrangements advantageous, and all the more so as
at that time the great potentialities of Australia for
wine-growing were inadequately estimated.
Before dealing with other departments of the
business of Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co., reference
may conveniently be made to the important export
business they transact in produce, which we are ac-
customed to regard as typically Australian.
They are large exporters to France of sheep-skins,
two large and important houses being their con-
signees. Since 1888 this department of their business
has been vigorously conducted, and employs a con-
siderable portion of the firm’s time and energy.
That the results are satisfactory, both to them and
their French friends, goes without saying. The
splendid position attained by the woollen manufac-
turers, glove makers, and shoe manufacturers of
France creates a great demand for material suitable
for their requirements, and Australian wool and
felts are accordingly much sought after, at a price.
The firm are agents for all kinds of Australian pro-
duce.
Another considerable branch of the business of
Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co. is their wholesale
trade in French edibles and specialities. They
deal largely in sardines, and stock the brands of
Phillipe and Canaud, de Launay, Pascal-Sardou,
etc. The failure this year of the fisheries, bringing
starvation into thousands of humble homes in
pious, old-world and Celtic Brittany, has but in-
creased the local value of the king fish smothered
in oil, that is so often the “ piece de resistance” at
down-the-harbour picnics.
In prunes, that exceedingly healthy and tonic
fruit, they do a large business. "Petits pois” is an-
other of their specialities, and a good demand
exists for these succulent peas when the seasons are
adverse to the local efforts of John Chinaman.
Truffles—that extraordinary and costly vegetable
peculiar to France, where pigs are specially trained
to discover their whereabouts—are also handled by
the firm. Asparagus—which is commonly but er-
roneously termed "sparrer grass” by the average
London coster—is another important line in the
business. Champignons—although not unknown in
Australia after a shower of rain—are largely im-
orted from France, and serve to suggest to dwel-
ers in our back blocks the succulence of French
neadows. The attractive manner in which French
,‘xporters of canned provisions make up their goods
greatly enhances the local demand for the lines
above mentioned, and many more,
The firm had its origin in Bordeaux, that ancient
and great seaport, the capital of the Gironde, which
is so closely associated with many stirring scenes
in English and French history. It is the most im-
portant seaport of France, and the centre of a wine
industry which has its ramifications throughout the
world. So renowned a city was a fit place for the
foundation of a firm like Messrs. Curcier, Adet and
Co., who were destined to carry on'their business
in countries far remote from the shores of beautiful
France. The evolution of the firm may be thus
stated;—Messrs. Leverrier, Curcier and Co., Messrs.
Curcier, Hawke and Co., Messrs. Curcier and Adet,
Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co.
In the great wine producing country of the
Gironde, claret occupies a very prominent position.
Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co. handle the following
brands of clarets, for which Messrs. Adet, Seward
and Co., of Bordeaux, are their agents, viz..—Verg-
niaud ; Y.D.O. Chateau Margaux ; V.D 1. Chateau
Haut Brion; V.D. 2. Haut St. Emilion; V.D. 3. La
Rose; V.D. 4. St. Julien; Fronsac Claret. The
names of these, the oldest Bordeaux vintages, are
so world renowned, that the good wines in this case
needs no bush to notify their many excellences.
In brandy the lines of the following firms are
handled:—Otard, Dupuy and Co. * and *** (Cog-
nac, 25 years old); Associated Vineyard Cultivate:s
(A.V.C.); P. B. Maury (ordinary bulk); Boisson
Freres; Jonsac Freres and Laurent, flask and half-
flask. Notwithstanding the ravages of pests in
French vineyards, large quantities of French bran-
dies still find their way to the market.
In Champagne, Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co. are
agents for Messls. Krug and Co.’s Private
Cuvee, 1893, which is now of an extra dry type, and
is greatly favoured in the leading London clubs.
The following brands of burgundies are imported
by them, viz, J. Josephins, Chambertin, Pommard,
Beaune, and sparkling Burgundy. Of hocks, the
following lines are imported : —Rudesheimer, Stein-
wein, and sparkling. Lovers of good old port have
the choice of the following:—Hamilton’s, Warre’s,
Guede’s, and Carvalos. The following sherries are
kept in stock: —Garvey’s, Marquis de Segovia’s,
Whittaker’s. In gin, Vaughan-Jones’ London dry
unsweetened is imported by the firm; also Vanden
Burgh’s Geneva, Yellow-seal, square bottle. Old
Jamaica rum is also one of their prominent lines.
The manufacture of certain world-famed brands
of French liqueurs, notably Grande Chartreuse, is
at present seriously affected by the political fight
which is being waged between the French Qoverp-
(seneval /Ifcevcbants anb importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches:-continued.
WINE, SPIRITS, WOOL, SKIN AND HIDE MERCHANTS AND IMPORTERS.


ment and certain religious orders. The following
news item shows how industry is being affected in
France by those disputes,—“ The threatened de-
parture of the monks of the Grand Chartreuse is
causing great anxiety to the glass workers of Saint
Qalmier. The glass companies of St. Galmier hold
monopoly for supplying liqueur bottles to the
monastery, and employ 300 men and women in this
branch alone. There is not the least chance of these
workmen, who are now employed in making
2,000,000 bottles annually for the Chartreuse, being
able to find other work in the neighbourhood.”
Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co. hold the agency for
the world-renowned La Grande Chartreuse. Among
other liqueurs which they handle may be mentioned
Benedictine, Lafaurie’s Curacoa, Maraschino, Kum-
mel, Cherry Brandy, Apricot Brandy, Noyeau, and
Absinthe. Of Vermouth, the Noilly Prat and Co.
and Italian brands are stocked.
On© of Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co.’s leading
lines is their agency in New South Wales and Vic-
toria for the great Scotch distillers and merchants,
Messrs. James Buchanan and Co., of Glasgow,
Leith, and London, whose whisky, bearing the
“House of Commons” brand, is a great favourite
throughout the Commonwealth of Australia.
Among the multitudinous brands of whisky on the
market, that of Messrs. Buchanan and Co. finds a
leading place. A legend is still very current that
the whiskies distilled a century ago in the Scottish
Highlands, and that never underwent the honorrr
of being inspected by the exciseman, were, in some
occult fashion, infinitely superior to the whisky
manufactured in these modern days, in the full
glare of excise publicity. There is much reason to
believe that distance in this matter has lent en-
chantment to the view. A large number of people
who take their whisky in moderation are as great
connoisseurs, in everything that relates to their
favourite stimulant as the most cultured of wine
drinkers. They do not believe in compelling their
palates to undergo torchlight processions, and
fiery, untamed, and new liquor is not in any way to
their taste. There can be no doubt that the modern
methods of whisky manufacture are not only more
in keeping with modern tastes and ideas than the
’ougher modes of making which prevailed, but
afford guarantees for purity which formerly could
not be given. A reputable and well-known house
has a character to maintain, and cannot send to the
market liquor which will not stand the general ver-
dict of the consuming public. The distillers of
whiskies for general consumption take the whole
■world for their market, and all their arrangements
for production and distribution are based on the
most modern linea. Their product must from the
beginning receive the stamp of public approval; and
then only can a firm engaged in that business hone
to command a remunerative trade. In the capable
hands of Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co., whisky sent
cut from the great distilleries of Messrs. James
Buchanan and Co. obtains a large and consistent
distribution throughout. Australia, notwithstanding
the fact that the Commonwealth tariff greatly
favours local distilling. The “House of Commons”
whisky is supplied in hogsheads, quarter-casks,
octaves, cases, flasks, and half-flasks. The firm
report good, general, and steady business in both
case and bulk. And here it may be incidentally
stated that in the consumption of alcoholic liquors
Australasia is much below other countries. This is
notable, especially if the arduous nature of the toil
which men have to perform in these colonies be
taken into consideration. Latest figures show that
less alcohol is consumed in Australasia per head
of population than in any other country in the
world, with one exception. It is to be further noted
that of the seven States of Australasia, New South
Wales consumes less alcohol per head than any
other, with the exception of New Zealand and Tas-
mania.
m
The operations of so old-established and reputable
a firm as Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co. are of much
importance to this young Commonwealth. ' Their
exports are in close relation, and greatly stimulate
one of our great producing interests. The “ golden
fleece,, will for many a year to come fill our argo-
sies, and tend to the settlement and well being of
the hardworking settlers who people the vast in-
terior of our island continent. Their food imports
from France and other countries of the old world
tend to the health, comfort and sustenance of this
community. The wines, spirits and liqueurs depart-
ment caters for those of the public who are in a
position to demand what are in effect to them the
concomitants of every meal. The duties on these
articles furnish both the Commonwealth and State
the largest item of their revenues. While we
derive so much of our national income from the
Custom House, the operations of great firms like
Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co. are of great general
interest and significance, and their well-being and
development stand hr close relation to the pros-
perity and advancement of both the State and the
Commonwealth.
MR. COLMAN BURKE.
For a cosmopolitan firm, having a close relation-
ship with the European Continent and Britain, Mr.
Colman Burke, resident partner in Sydney of the
firm of Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co., is an ideal
partner. Mr. Burke is a thorough Australian. He
MR. COLMAN BURKE,
Resident Partner in Sydney of Messrs. Curcier,
Adet and Co.
was born at St. Kilda, Melbourne, in 1865. He is
the worthy son of a worthy sire, his father being
the late Mr. James Louis Burke, formerly a leading
figure in Melbourne commercial centres, where he
was held in the highest respect as a merchant and
shipowner. Mr. Colman Burke is a nephew of the
late Mr. Curcier, and to this family relationship
was due the former’s first start in the serious busi-
ness of life. The subject of this sketch was, in
educational matters, thoroughly well equipped for
his future career. Ho left Australia at an early
age, and in course of time was sent to Bordeaux,
that great French seaport, which is so intimately
connected with some of the greatest events in Euro-
pean history. He studied at the historical semi-
nary of Tivoli, where young men from all parts of
the world received the elements of a careful train-
ing. The young scholar was then sent to Old Hall
(Ware, Herts), where, amid typical British sur-
roundings, Mr. Burke received a culture which com-
bined the most modern training with the best tra-
ditions of old English life. His next “ Alma Mater”
was Ushaw College, that renowned seat of learning,
religion and refinement, situated in the heart of the
hill country of County Durham, and in the close
vicinity of the great collieries and coke ovens that
furnish employment to hundreds of thousands of
stalwart workers in one of England’s great hives of
industry. After a scholastic training specially
adapted for his future career, Mr. Colman Buike
returned to Bordeaux, and entered the office of
Messrs. Adet, Seward and Co., of which his uncle.
Mr. Harry Seward, is a partner. And here, in pass-
ing, it may be mentioned that the latter gentleman
is a native of Australia. Four busy years were
passed by the subject of this sketch in the Bordeaux
office, a period which was in the highest degree
fruitful to the young Australian. Every branch of
the business received his close attention. Book-
keeping, office routine, the course of trade, the
growth of the vine, wine-making, and the distil-
lation of brandy, were successively mastered. In
keeping with his aims in connection with an Aus-
tralian business, Mr. Burke acquired a large know-
ledge of the wool trade and its ramifications—the
art and mystery of fellraongering also received his
close attention. It will thus b© seen that the future
partner of Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co. received a
grand training in one of the best schools of the
world for the business career before him, and that
every item of his prospective work was diligently
studied during the fruitful years spent by him at
Bordeaux.
On returning to Australia in 1888 Mr. Burke ac-
cordingly found his diligently acquired business
knowledge of the utmost value and utility. His
acquaintance with the requirements of French im-
porters of wool and skins, and of the consignments
most favoured by French manufacturers, was im-
mediately turned to valuable account. The great
strides made in French woollen manufactures dur-
ing the last two decades are contemporaneous witn
the increase of local buying and of direct shipments
to Continental ports. The cheapening of steamer
freights also conduced to the prompt export of
choice lines to European ports. In this particular
department of the firm’s business Mr. Colman
Burke took a very prominent and highly advan-
tageous part. He was greatly assisted therein
by his brother, Mr. G. L. Burke, who now resides in
Melbourne.
Two years after his arrival in Melbourne, the
young .merchant proceeded to Sydney for twelve
months, and took the direction of the selling de-
partment of his firm. On the expiry of the period
he returned to the southern capital. The Christ-
mas season of 1893 was a sadly memorable time to
Mr. Burke, for a week before the arrival of the great
festival of Christendom he sustained an accident
in the cricket field which nearly proved fatal. The
results have since proved of much inconvenience,
but his Australian pluck has triumphed over what
might otherwise have been a great impediment to
his business career. In the following year he paid
a visit to Europe. In 1896, his brother, Mr. G. L.
Burke, also proceeded to the same destination. Mr.
Colman Burke in 1899 again visited European
centres. The nature of his firm’s business is such
that close touch, both for buying and selling pur-
poses, must be kept with European markets and
the courses and currents of business enterprises in
the great centres of commerce and civilisation of
the old world. That necessity was the " raison
d’etre” of the several journeys referred to.
In personal characteristics as well as in business
ability, Mr. Colman Burke is a gentleman excel-
lently fitted to take a commanding position in a
great, growing and international business. His
Australian birth, Celtic lineage, first-class training
in England and France, and constant contact with
the business circles of Melbourne and Sydney, have
imparted an acuteness of temperament, alertness of
intellect, and capacity for taking great pains, that
are the greatest qualifications for permanent suc-
cess. With the name of Mr. Colman Burke may he
bracketed that of his brother, Mr. G. L. Burke, who
has inherited the family gifts of geniality and popu-
larity. With such principals at the head of '-ts
Australian affairs, it is no wonder that the business
of Messrs. Curcier, Adet and Co. continues to
greatly flourish, and that all who regard with sati--
faction progressive business measures combined
with personal attraction and worth, hope for its
continued advancement and pronounced success,


The Kauri Timber Co., Ltd.
The developers of native industries are perhaps
in a larger extent the State’s benefactors than any
other members of the community. They it is who
find work and wages for the artizan and promulgate
the circulation of that most desirable commodity-
good money. “ Labor omnia vincet” is a fitting
motto for those great institutions where “ the clang
of the workman’s hammer and the rattle of the
iron wheels” is heard from morn till dewy eve, and
to use the words of the Latin poet, they stand forth
as “ monuments more enduring than brass” of our
national progress and extension.
No more fitting example of one of these colonial
bulwarks could be mentioned than the Kauri Tim-
ber Company. The business was founded many
years ago, and was formerly known as the Auckland
Timber Company. The organisation had immense
tracts of country in the North Island, and here, by-
the-way, the observer of industrial progress com-
bined with modern scientific methods, must notice
the vast strides that have been made in what is
now known as forest conservation. A recent Eng-
lish magazine writer awards the pride of place to
the methods adopted in the Russian Empire. The
Ciceronian adage that “ the husbandman sows the
seeds of trees the fruit of -which he himself will
never gather,” is particularly appropriate in con-
nection with this matter. The father of the pre-
sent Tzar, recognising that a source of great na-
tional wealth was being rapidly destroyed, set him-
self to obviate previous mistakes. The great
Southern Slavonic Steppes are now the nursery
ground of embryo forests, while every care is taken
to prevent ruthless destruction of the vast timber
tracts that already exist. The British Indian Go-
vernment have wisely followed suit, while the crea-
tion of Forestry Departments in New Zealand and
the Australian States has been of incalculable good
in preserving and formulating a national asset.
Having acquired timber preserves in the North
Island, the establishment of mills to cope with the
output of the rough product on the spot was but a
natural sequence.
Sixteen years ago the increased operations of the
old company warranted further extension, and the
present company was formed, with a capital of
i 250,000. The steady growth and development have
yearly increased, till the capital was enlarged to
nearly twice that amount, viz., .11450,000, while the
proprietary is now known as the Kauri Timber
Company, Limited, of Melbourne, Sydney, and
New Zealand. The Melbourne Directorate Board
is comprised of Messr s. G. Luth, Esq. (Governing
Director), Senator Robert Harper, and Messrs.
McDougall Thompson, 11. R. Harvey Pat-
terson, and W. G. Scharp. The head
office is in Queen-street, Melbourne, where large
yards are located, and where the timber is disposed
of as it is imported from foreign countries- and
New Zealand. In the latter colony, in addition to
the large tracts of country already mentioned, the
company have now twenty-eight mills in operation.
By these means they are enabled to supply material
direct from the producer to the consumer, a very
desirable matter in their large wholesale and retail
trade, as there are of necessity no middleman’s
profits.
No less than twenty-five vessels are chartered to
carry timber from various American, European,
and New Zealand ports to Sydney, Melbourne, and
other Australian shipping centres.
A laige export trade is done to the United King-
dom, British and German New Guinea, the Solomon
Islands and Fiji, the principal export variety being
the famous New Zealand Kauri.
This excellent pine is found only in the North
Island, and attains a height of 200 ft., with a base
of 12 ft. diameter. Deck planking of all sizes can
easily be produced up to 50 feet long, whilst for
cabinet work planks 60 inches wide are obtainable.
No timber has been found in soft wood so durable
or proof against white ants. Furniture and cabinet
work is extensively manufactured from this timber,
its natural colour being of golden hue, and capable
of maintaining a high degree of polish. Railway
and other Public Departments almost inclusively
adopt Kauri, pine for fittings, etc., due, no doubt,
to its strength, clearness, and durability, its cost
admitting its use in the most humble structure.
Another product indigenous to New Zealand is
the Kahikatea, or White Pine. Its peculiarity is
•being tasteless and odourless, consequently it is the
only known timber suitable for butter boxes.
The company stock a number of the Hard Woods
of New South Wales. Tallow Wood is found in the
No! thorn part of the State only. It is a heavy
dense timber of a somewhat oily nature, most suit-
able for ballroom floors, door fittings, etc., on which
intricate work is to be executed.
Recent tests have proved Ironbark only slightly
inferior to iron, and superior to it for girders, .
story posts, sleepers, etc. It is undoubtedly the
strongest timber in Australia. There are several
species, the grey being considered the strongest and
the best known. Then we have Blackbutt, Blue
Gum, Spotted Gum, Colonial Pine, and Colonial
Beech. The latter, obtainable from the Northern
districts, is highly prized for its durability and non-
liability to warp or shrink, Last, but not least,
must be mentioned the Cedar. This timber is one
of the most valuable, beautiful, and durable soft
woods in Australia.
The Sydney Brandi, with a central office at 42
York-street, City, was established sixteen years ago
under the management of Mr. K. Walker. The
huge works are at Blackwattle Bay, Glebe, and cover
about five acres of ground.
Mr. Walker is a man of great energy, enterprise,
and experience, who, by the introduction of new
ideas, has done much to advance the company’s in-
terests in New South Wales.
It was he who instituted the Modern Ideal Cot-
tage Homes, which have proved so beneficial to the
working man and the way-back selector, who has
the additional advantage of only paying freight for
MODERN IDEAL COTTAGE HOMES.
Exterior view of a 5-roomed Weather-board Villa. All the materials, morticed and tenoned by machi-
nery, are supplied by the Kauri Timber Co., Ltd., the studds, joists, and rafters being fitted in por-
tion and numbered, and the iron for hips and valleys cut to requisite angles.
exact weight. The weatherboard buildings range
from a one-roomed cottage to a seven-roomed house,
including hall, bath and store-room, with or with-
out verandahs, A handsome catalogue has been
issued in connection with this branch of the busi-
ness. Here the intending purchaser will find artis-
tic wash drawings of the various buildings, in addi-
tion to the ground plans and specifications. The
designs are from the pen of a prominent architect,
The drawings are all to |th inch scale, the per-
spective is true in detail, whilst special attention
has been devoted to semi-tropical requirements.
The cottages, as shown, are all morticed and tenoned
by machinery, the studds, joists, and rafters are
fitted into position and numbered, the iron for hips
and valleys is cut to requisite angles. Floorboards,
General /Ifoercbants anb Jinporters.
Historical and Biographical Sketches :-eontinued.
TIMBER IMPORTING AND DISTRIBUTING TRADE.


lining, and weatherboards are supplied in sufficient
quantities, while everything is constructed of best
materials and workmanship, and can be easily
erected by inexperienced persons. Designs, plans
and specifications are also submitted for chui'ches,
stables and coach-houses.
Mr. Walker also initiated the rope-driven friction
travelling cranes, which save a great deal of labour,
do a vast amount of work, and are very safe to
handle.
The machinery in Sydney cost over .£15,000
alone, and a new Babcock and Wilcox engine, with
water-tube boiler, of 250 horse power, has been in-
stalled to cope with the increased motor power re-
quired.
Other machinery includes immense Band Saws for
cutting logs, vertical frames of various sizes and
kinds. Circular Saws, Planing, Mauling, Mortising
and Tenoning Machines are amongst the other in-
genious and labour-saving devices.
The Tonguing and Grooving Machines can get
through 15,000 running feet of flooring a day, where
it would be only possible to manage 100 ft. by hand
in the same time. Everything, in fact, is of a most
up-to-date nature, strict accuracy being obtained
by reason of the Automatic Machines, while good
finish and design are also assured.
Duplicating machines have now been laid down
in connection with the Ideal Cottage Homes, as it
has been found impossible to make them quick
enough to meet the Country and Suburban demand.
The company supply every class of timber for the
trade, and every requisite for Joinery, Turning,
etc. They are in continual receipt of large orders
from the various States, Governments, Railway
Contractors, Public Works Department, Harbour
Trust, Water and Sewerage Board, and, if neces-
sary, are able to supply the total requirements of
the State, a recent large order being the complete
stock of timber used in the construction of the
Tramway Power House.
The plant in connection with the Box-making is
a wonder in itself. The factory’s capacity is 1000
boxes a day, the machines doing the work of hun-
dreds of men. Special care and cleanliness is de-
voted to the manufacture of the butter boxes, the
timber used being odourless and tasteless, so that
the o:iginal flavour of the article is retained. Other
lines include Soap, Candle, Tea, Fruit, and Whisky
cases and boxes. Eveiy description can be made
and branded with the latest printing machines.
Any design can be obtained, and printed in dif-
ferent colours if desired.
The total stock of timber is never less than
.£50,000 to .£60,000 in value, there being over
6,000,000 feet in reserve, the imports of American
timber being a special item. Amongst the various
kinds may be mentioned the Sugar, Tallow, and
Michigan Clear Pine, Spruce, Walnut, Oak, Hick-
ory, and Ash, while Tasmania is represented by its
Blackwood, a remarkable imitation of Amercian
Walnut, but somewhat lighter in colour.
Every description of Joiner’s work is quoted in
Pine, Cedar, Walnut, Oak, etc., on receipt of draw-
ings. The entile Joinery required on any building
can also be supplied. A special line is also made of
Counters, Bar Fittings, Fancy Show Cases, etc.
Now that the tariff is in force it is proposed to make
all lines of doors, which are stocked, and thus sell
at a less cost to the buyer. Many handsome designs
are shown in Enamelled, Embossed, and Cut-glass
specimens, a remark which also applies to the
Mantlepieces, Fancy Gates, Church Seats, and
School Desks, Balusters, Newels, Barge Boards,
Stair and Verandah Brackets and Carved Trusses.
Apart from such technical requirements of the
trade as Architraves, Bolection and Transom
Mouldings, Nosings, Jamb Linings, Surveyors’
Pegs, the householder will find his wants tho-
roughly gratified in the large stock of Ladders,
Step Ladders, Wheelbarrows, Venetian Blinds,
Awning or Cut Blinds, and Lattice work. The com-
pany also supply every requisite in the way of
Painters’ materials. Glass, Builders’ Ironmongery,
Galvanized Iron, Sash Weights, and Wire Nails,
while their comprehensive catalogue includes such
diversified items as Cyanide Plants, Store Trucks,
Wharf Trucks, Garden Seats, etc.
Two hundred and forty to two hundred and eighty-
men are employed at the Sydney works, the total
number of hands in Australia running into over
four figures, though, of course, these vary according
as to when ships arrive or are being loaded.
In connection with the Sydney carrying trade, it
may be mentioned that fifty horses are alone em-
ployed there in the Company’s operations.
Enough has already been shown the reader to
demonstrate that the Sydney works practically par-
take of the nature of a small village. The ship-
ping operations have a world-wide importance in
themselves.
The company have done much to supply the ar-
tizan and labourer with a home that is at once ar-
tistic, healthy, useful, and durable. "An English-
man’s home is his Castle,” and a comfortable and
happy home must of a necessity have a reflex action
in making a people thrifty and prosperous. For
thus contributing their share to communal welfare
the Kauri Timber Company deserve every credit,
and a further success and extension will be con-
fidently looked for in the future.
MR. R. WALKER.
The great Pro-Consul of the First Empire once
remarked " that every soldier carried a Field Mar-
MODERN IDEAL COTTAGE HOMES.
Plan of interior arrangements of a 5-roomed Cottage supplied by the Kauri Timber Co., Ltd.
Exterior view shown on preceding page.
shal’s baton in his knapsack.” Similarly in a
young country like Australia there are opportuni-
ties for advancement open to every one. If the tide
be taken at the flood it will lead on, if not to great-
ness, at least to wealth and distinction. The men
who of their own accord left their native land to
seek fresh fields and pastures new must of a ne-
cessity have been enterprising, and it was but
natural they should succeed.
Mr. R. Walker, Sydney Manager Kauri Tim-
ber Company, is a good representative of this
class of successful colonist. A' native of the great
commercial and shipping city of Glasgow, Mr.
Walker left his native Scotland many years ago to
carve his way in the then little known Australia.
Sixteen years ago he started business in Sydney
with his father as Builders and Contractors. After
this he joined Mr. Allen in the timber industry, and
the firm carried on business under the title of Allen
and Walker, Druitt-street, city. After a prosperous
association, the junior partner sought a wider scope
for his administrative abilities, which had become
widely recognised throughout the trade, and in 1891
he accepted the position of Manager and Supervisor
of the New South Wales Branch of the Kauri Tim-
ber Company, Limited. Much of the success of the
company’s operations must be credited to its pre-
sent manager. Not only is he is great organiser,
but is also a thorough expert in the various intric-
ate details of every form of the timber trade, from
the rough unseasoned product down to the highly
finished and ornamental article.
The company’s many labour-saving appliances
owe no little to the ingenuity of their manager,
who is always on the look out for a fresh idea or the
perfecting of an old one.
Mr. Walker has taken an active part in municipal
and civic government, having been an Alderman in
the Enfield Council, while his deep interest in the
welfare of the timber business outside his own con-
cern, has led to his accepting the position of Presi-
dent of the City and Suburban Timber Merchants’
Association,
Possibly no one confers a greater benefit to
humanity directly or indirectly than the scientist
and inventor. From the time of Archimedes down
to Edison and Marconi of the present day, we find
the roll of fame emblasoned with such human bene-
factors as Newton, Spinoza, Kepler, Arkwright,
Watt, Stevenson, and Armstrong. The banks of the
Clyde—that classic haunt of the engineer—have
been responsible for many formidable names in
this long list, and Mr. Walker is hut another of
Scotland’s sons who have kept alive the best tra-
ditions of the artificer and craftsman.


flessrs. Q. E. Crane & Sons.
IMPORTERS AND MANUFACTURERS OF
GENERAL BUILDING MATERIAL, PROPRIE-
TORS OF MARBLE. SLATE, METAL CEILING,
AND LEAD WORKS.
Amongst the old-established, best known, and
most progressive businesses in the Commonwealth
of Australia stands that of Messrs. Q. E. Crane
_and Sons, 19 to 31 Pitt-street, Sydney, who are
Importers and Manufacturers of general building
materials, also the proprietors of marble, slate,
lead and metal ceiling works.
In 1867 Mr. G. E. Crane, who had for some years
successfully followed the occupation of a builder
and contractor, purchased the business of the late
Mr. Richard Wynne, who was an importer of
general building material in what was then known
as New Pitt-street.
Under his wise control the business took on an
impetus, the effect of which has continued up till
the present, with every prospect of being main-
tained. Mr. G. E. Crane, being a thoroughly prac-
tical mau, conversant with every detail of the
business, clearly foresaw that in a city possessing
such potentialities for advancement as Sydney
there must necessarily be a great expansion in
building, consequently when the tide set in in this
direction he was able to take it at the flood, which
led to fortune. During the years he was actively
associated with its direction the business steadily
grew, and when he retired from it twenty years
ago, he left his four sons an industrial endowment
of an exceedingly valuable nature.
This extensive concern still remains a family
affair, and is jointly managed by his four sons,
Messis. Frederick, Henry, Alfred, and Walter G.
Crane, all of whom have a wide experience of the
business, and are familiar with all its minutiae.
During the past few years the operations of the
firm have greatly expanded, the keen discernment
and intelligent oversight of the four partners, com-
bined with their vigorous enterprise, being the
principal levers which have brought about such a
virile development, as is manifested to-day.
The head office of the firm and the show rooms
are at No.’s 19 to 31 Pitt-street, Circular Quay,
where the firm started in 1867. The Steam
Marble Works are situated at Nos. 100 to
112 Harrington and Essex streets, and the Syd-
ney Lead Works, Limited, in which the firm is so
largely interested, is located at Park-road, Black-
wattle Bay.
A visit to these extensive and well-planned
establishments serves to convey an excellent idea
of the extensive trade which is dominated by the
firm.
The Show Rooms in Pitt-street are excellently
suited for their purpose, and the display made
there is of a most comprehensive character, em-
bracing every requisite for the building and cog-
nate trades in apparently illimitable quantities.
A great number of side lines are carried in
builders’ hardware and the thousand and one
articles that go to beautify a home.
Originally the firm were importers only, but per-
ceiving an excellent opening in the manufacturing
trade, they established the factory in Harrington
and Essex streets, and (he success of the venture
has abundantly justified their intrepidity.
The marble works were started about ten years
ago, and are equipped with a most valuable and
up-to-date plant to cope with every phase of
marble cutting, dressing, and ornamentation. The
imported marble comes chiefly from Italy, Bel-
gium, and America, but, true to their principle of
assisting to develop the latent resources of the
State, the firm also utilises marble quarried in
New South Wales, of which there are many excel-
lent varieties.
The stone arrives at the factory in rough blocks
and slabs, then it is subjected to different pro-
cesses by which it is shaped into ornamental
designs for mantelpieces, baths, tables, lavatories.
columns, and a variety of other purposes required
for building, house decoration, and other uses.
In 1892 extensive lead works were opened at
Blaokwattle Bay under the title of the Sydney
Lead Works, Limited. Mr. Walter Crane is the
Managing Director of this concern, in which
Messrs. John Mcllwraith and Sons, of Melbourne,
are also interested. Since these works were estab-
lished an immense volume of trade has passed
through them, the output finding a ready and pro-
fitable market throughout Australia, New Zealand,
China and Japan.
The steam marble, slate and sheet metal works,
situated at the corner of Harrington and Essex
streets, Sydney, have a main frontage along Har-
rington-street of 224 feet. The principal building
is three stories high, fronting Essex-street, and
provision has been made for extending the three
stories over the whole area, which would give a
floor space of 60,000 square feet.
At present the front building is used for the
storage of steel, zinc, grates, stoves, baths, sani-
tary fittings, and a very extensive stock of orna-
mental tiles and other material. On the ground
floor, entering from Essex-street, are seen stocks
of sheet metal, cornices, ceilings, panels, embossed
plates, etc., for house decoration, while on the
first floor, which, owing to the dip of the hill, leads
out on a level at Harrington-street, there is an
immense stock of enamelled baths, cooking ranges.
and stoves. On the second floor is a magnificent
show of every class of tiles for hearths, walls, and
floors.
The metal works comprise a stamping room,
where the steel, zinc, and compo plates are
stamped out into the required patterns for ceiling,
wall, and cornice decorations of all kinds, some of
the most beautiful designs being turned out.
The designs made are first of all drawn by artists,
then modelled. An impress or mould is made of the
model, and a metal replica made from that. This
metal stamp is placed in the pressing machine
and cast as a die. The reverse half of the design
is in relief, and is placed on the bed of the press,
so that when the weight of the press passes upon
the warm zinc metal, or in other cases cold metals,
the plate is stamped or embossed with the re-
quired design.
These appliances, which press out ceilings.
wall linings, cornices, centre-pieces, panels, and
other decorations in some instances are of immense
power. One of the presses at Messrs. Crane’s fac-
tory strikes a blow of 84 tons, and can stamp out
designs of between three and four feet in width,
in either zinc, steel, tin, or copper,
CRANE AND SONS’ STEAM MARBLE, SLATE, AND METAL WORKS,
HARRINGTON AND ESSEX STREETS, SYDNEY.
Painting machines are used in the paint room,
where the metal sheets are passed through some-
what in the same fashion as ordinary mangling,
The double-action beading and corrugating
machine, which puts a bead on sheets of metal ten
feet in length, is a most ingenious piece of mechan-
ism, and consists of two separate presses acting
automatically. When the sheet to be beaded is
placed in the machine, the press descends and
holds the metal firm in its place, while press No. 2
descends and imprints a beading upon the sheet,
In order the impress metals with that fine ornate
crimp or twill which is so mucn admired, the
sheets are passed through the crimping machine,
consisting of two grooved steel cylinders, which
exert great pressure upon the sheet as it is passed
between them. The crimper has the effect of
giving strength and a taking appearance to the
metal sheeting. Cornice-making machines are run
on the same lines as those previously spoken
about, being of the very latest patterns, and cap-
able of an enormous output per day.
To facilitate the cutting of sheets into lengths
the firm have several guillotines, cutting up to 8
feet in one stroke. These cut the sheets of metal as
if they were so much paper. There are also a
number of small machines of different kinds
which do the minor work in connection with the
stamping and polishing off of sheet metal work,
This part of the firm’s works is most complete,
and any designs submitted by architects and
others can be faithfully reproduced in any quan-
tity and on the shortest notice,
In the stock rooms the firm have some hundreds
of dies for turning out different patterns of steel
and zinc ceilings, and steel wall linings, cornices,
centre pieces, etc.
The firm claim that the pronounced success that
has attended the introduction of their patent steel
ceilings, side walls, cornices, and mouldings is a
clear indication of the many advantages they pos-
sess over plaster, wood, or other material. The
special advantages that modern steel ceilings and
walls possess are their safety, lightness, and dura-
bility, combined rvith their ornamental appear-
ance and fire resisting qualities. They are most
valuable in a hygienic sense, as they do not hold
disease germs or encourage vermin, and they can
be easily cleaned and renovated. They afford a
wide scope for the decorators’ art, and improve the
acoustic properties of public halls, churches, and
other places of general resort.
The marbie and slate works are carried on in
the same premises as the metal ceiling works,
only at the rear portion. In the working of
marble a number of machines are used which re-
quire considerable horse power; the firm have,
therefore, fitted up a verjrfine power plant, driven
by a 30 horse-power engine, ancj this engine-roqip
General /Ifoercbants anb importers.
Historical and Biographical Sketches t-eontinued.
IMPORTERS AND MANUFACTURERS.


separates the marble works from the sheet metal
works.
The first thing to direct attention on entering the
marble machine room is the lathe for turning
marble columns, balustrades, and other ornamen-
tal marble work, a most ingenious piece of mechan-
ism, which works with great accuracy. A drill for
drilling holes in the marble, a machine for sawing
out the marble into round tables and circular basin
holes, also claim attention. There is also a
machine for polishing marble columns and other
ornamental work. In the process of marble mak-
ing the raw material is fashioned to sizes of the
slab or other work in hand, and then taken to
what is known as the rubbing tables or floats.
These immense machines consist of large revolv-
ing circular iron plates 8 feet in diameter, which
are spun round at great speed, whilst at the same
time they are automatically fed with a specially
selected sand, the solid marble is fixed so that
the revolving plate touches its surface, and by
means of friction is toned down to an equal
smoothness. In the case of small slabs, of which
a number may be required: of similar size, the
pieces, are fixed together in plaster of paris, mak-
ing them into one solid square. When the rough
surface of the marble has been got rid of it is sent
to the polishing machines, one of which is capable
of polishing 80 square feet of marble at one time.
The polishing machine is operated by heavy
bevelled gearing, driven by pulleys of large dia-
meter, and is set in a square enclosure, in the
centre of which there is an absolutely level raised
platform about 9 feet square.
The marble to be polished is first set in a mas-
sive frame, which is encased in an iron banding
or chaise, and which, when filled with the slabs
of marble, is of great weight.
The engine lifting plant runs through this de
partment, and the chaises when filled are lifted
and placed in position on the bed or platform in
the centre of the machine tank. It is laid mathe-
matically true, and in such a position that the
different appliances bear perfectly evenly on the
marble in the successive processes of polishing,
and travel over every part of the surface.
The processes are as follows: —The marble is
laid with its surface ready to be polished, and the
revolving apparatus which we have just mentioned
is fitted with an iron disc of a special kind, from
which sprays of water are turned on to the sur-
face of the marble, and a special sand directed on
to it. The iron discs are set going, and they
travel over every part of the marble surface until
it is reduced perfectly true and even. When they
have done their work, another appliance fitted
with special rubbing stone called snakestone is
made to traverse the surface of the marble, which
has the effect of closing all the pores in the
marble, preparing it for the final operation. The
finishing polish or gloss is obtained by a lengthy
application of a heavy wooden octagonal frame,
fitted with a felt rubber and coated with putty pow-
der or oxide of tin, which imparts the beautiful
gloss which makes marble so valuable. When this
machine has done its work the surface of the
marble has assumed a smoothness and polish that
brings all the latent qualities of the grain out
with great distinctness and beauty.
In another department a host of men are seen
busily polishing the parts of moulded work, etc.,
which the machine cannot get at. The next item
of interest is a powerful steam-driven frame saw,
which cuts the immense blocks and slabs of
marble into the required pieces for making the
parts of mantelpieces and numerous other articles
for which marble is so eminently suitable.
The firm import their slate in immense sheets
or slabs. These are lifted by the aid of a travel-
ler and placed upon the travelling bench, which
conveys them to the large circular saws to be
operated on and cut into the : various sizes re-
quired. Within the yard enclosure are the bins
in which the specially prepared grinding materials
and sands are kept; extensive stables and stock
of timber, also immense stacks of marble and
slate slabs, some of them up to 14 feet long by 6
feet wide, and varying in thickness from J to 6
inches.
Across the yard or centre of the premises there is
a 5-ton traveller, with a scope of 170 feet and a
span of 33 feet. This is so built that it can handle
any of the stocks in the yard and whisk them from
one place to another with the greatest ease and
despatch; in fact, throughout the whole factory
the excellence of the labour-saving appliances is
everywhere manifest.
The Lead Works, which are situated at Park-
road, Blackwattle Bay, have a handsome front,
standing a little way back from the road, and
with the enormous shot tower, form a conspicu-
ous land mark. They have a frontage of 170 feet
to Park-road. The factory part consists of a capa-
cious ground floor, and the upper storey is used for
storing all lead articles, etc., manufactured by the
firm.
The ground floor of the factory furnishes accom-
modation for the offices, etc., and on entering the
lead works the reverberatory furnace, in which the
oxide and dross materials are melted and runs off
as lead ingots, first comes under notice. Adjoining
is the magnificent Galloway Boiler, which sup-
plies the steam power. In the centre is the machi-
nery room, in which there are three engines, two
of 40 horse power, and one 20 horse power, also
three hydraulic pumps of great strength.
The first process of sheet lead making commences
with the melting pot. This immense furnace is
capable of melting ten tons of lead at one time.
and is built on the wheel system. The lead is run
off into a casting pan of 8 feet square by 6 inches
deep, and when cooled forms what is known as a
easting plate, the weight being about 8 tons.
When the plate of lead is sufficiently cooled it
is lifted by means of a powerful traveller and con-
veyed to the rolling mill. This huge contri-
vance is 100 feet in length, taking up the whole
of one side of the building, and con-
sists of a number of rollers placed on a
massive iron frame, while in the centre is the
rolling mill itself, comprising two steel cylinders
of immense strength, actuated by the two 40 horse
power reversing engines, and so geared that a pres-
sure of 900 tons can be obtained by the simple turn-
ing of hand wheels acting on four threaded columns
passing through solid stocks.
The piece of lead to be rolled through is drawn
up to the cylinders, between which it passes a
number of times under an enormous pressure, and
is squeezed out each time, until the required
thickness has been obtained. With this mill, a
solid piece of lead 8 feet square by 6 inches thick,
can be rolled down to 50 feet long by 8 feet wide
and } of an inch thick in twelve minutes. This
immense sheet is then taken to the powerful guil-
lotine at the end of the rolling table, and there
chopped into such pieces as will make the thick-
ness of sheets required. These several pieces are
then taken to the rolling mill and rolled out to
whatever gauge required, usually 32 feet long by
about 8 feet wide.
When the lead has been rolled to the required
thickness it is passed through another machine
without pressure, and is cut by knives on the other
side of the cylinders to the required width for
strips, etc., the usual for export being 7 feet 6
inches wide. When made into sheets the lead is
rolled up on the end table and then passed on to
the weighing machine, where it is examined,
stamped with its individual number, size, and
weight, and then by means of a crane hoisted to
the forwarding department and made ready for
the market.
The rolling of thin sheets of lead and tin for tea
casings and other uses is done by a smaller rol-
ling mill, which will roll lead or tin foil to the
five-hundredth part of an inch.
The making of lead pipes is another interesting
process, and as with the sheet lead making, begins
with the melting pot. The lead is run down from
the surface into steel containers of different sizes.
These are made of solid steel with a hole bored
down the centre to contain the lead, the outside
walls ranging from 8 inches to 1 foot thick. The
container is fixed upon the hydraulic press, whilst
immediately above it, and directly opposite to the
bore in the container is a powerful steel ram con-
taining the die which regulates the outside dia-
meter of the pipe. The inside or bore of the pipe
is formed by a steel rod or mandril, which fits into
the hole in the centre of the container. When
set in motion the hydraulic press lifts up the
container very slowly, the ram meets it, and the
lead in a half-cooled state is forced up by pressure
between the mandril and the die, the lead passing
on to the floor above in the shape of a pipe, where
it is wound into coils on steel drums and after-
wards cut off to the required length.
On the first floor of the building there are im-
mense stores, where every description of lead,
tin, compo piping, glazing lead, solid drawn sash
weights, tin-coated pipes, and tin pipes encased in
lead, the whole forming a most interesting exhibit
indicative of the resources of the firm and their
solid connections. On the same floor are a number
of self-acting washer-making machines, lathes,
and weighers.
Down stairs at the entrance there is a fine 10-
ton weighbridge that is constantly in service. This
automatically prints its own weight, thus obviat-
SYDNEY LEAD WORKS, PARK ROAD, BLACKWATTLE BAY, SYDNEY.


ing any possible mistake. A little to the side of
the main building is the Shot Tower, which is a
handsome structure, and the only one of its kind
in New South Wales. This tower is nearly 200 feet
high, with walls about 4 feet thick at the bottom,
and a diameter of 24 feet, being gradually tapered
MR. FREDERICK CRANE.
to the summit, with an excellent circular iron
staircase leading to the intermediate and top floor.
In the making of the shot the pig lead is taken
up to the top of the tower by a lifting apparatus.
At 100 feet high there is what is known as the first
floor or level, where a metal furnace is located,
and where the manufacture of the smaller shot is
carried on. On this floor the lead is melted, mixed
with certain ingredients, and poured through the
different sized sieves or collanders, whence it
falls down the core of the tower into a water tank,
having become globular during its passage
through air.
At 150 feet there is another platform with fur-
nace and appliances, and from here the larger
shot is poured in the same manner as from the
lower distance.
The reason for having the two floors is, that
according to the height of the drop, a certain size
of shot is made, the largest size shot being made
when the lead is dropped from the greater height.
The largest sized shot or bullets is first made by
the hydraulic press into lead rod, afterwards be-
ing passed through a special machine, which con-
verts the rod into small bullets,
MR. ALFRED CRANE, J.P.
When the shot has been received in the tank at
the bottom of the tower, it is lifted with special
appliances to the top of the main building, where,
by a very interesting process, it is passed through
numerous drying, polishing, and ingenious separat-
MR. HENRY E. CRANE.
Mr. Henry E. Crane claims the Auckland Is-
lands as his birthplace, he having been born there
in 1850. After leaving school, he spent some time
in a Sydney merchant’s office, acquiring the nidi-
MR. HENRY E. CRANE.
ments of a commercial education. He was in.
ducted into his father’s business in the seventies,
and since then has had the supervision of the
warehouses, the receipt and despatch of goods,
and general oversight of the men. For a number of
years he was a member of the Kogarah Borough
Council and the St. George’s Hospital Committee.
MR. WALTER G. CRANE, J.P.
Mr. Walter G. Crane was born at Sydney in
1856, and completed his education at the Sydney
Grammar School. He began a mercantile career
at the age of sixteen years, when he entered a
shipping and general merchants’ office at Sydney.
There he gained a sound practical insight into
business, and thus equipped he entered his father’s
firm in 1878. Upon him has devolved the
initiation and development of the various
building and manufacturing enterprises -of the
firm of which he has the general supervision. He
is also the Managing Director of the Sydney Lead
Works, Limited.
He is a Justice of the Peace for the State, a
member of the Burwood District School Board,
the Western Suburbs Hospital, and for
MR. WALTER G. CRANE, J.P.
nine years has been an Alderman of Burwood,
of which Council he held the honourable position
of Mayor for 1901-02, rendering very valuable help
to the Borough. He has always taken a great inte-
rest in educational and philanthropic work.
ing machines, which are revolved by the smaller
engine, finally all the numerous sizes of shot find-
ing their way automatically into the various sized
boxes, all defective shot having been eliminated
during the process.
The tower is constructed entirely of brick,
cement, and iron, and is therefore thoroughly fire
proof. It has a wide balcony around the top,
from which a magnificent view is obtained of the
surrounding suburbs.
ME. G. E. CRANE.
Mr. G. E. Crane, who might be fairly regarded
as the founder of the firm, is a native of London,
England, where he was born on 2nd January, 1826,
yet despite his nigh four score years he is still
in the full possession of his faculties. He left
England in 1849 under engagement with the Great
Southern Whale Fishery Company to take charge
of the building operations of the proposed new
settlement at the Auckland Islands., South of New
Zealand, but seeing the inevitable collapse of this
gigantic but ill-conceived scheme, he decided to
proceed to Sydney, where he arrived in 1852, and
commenced business as a builder and contractor.
Among the first buildings which he erected was
the handsome edifice for the Bank of New South
Wales at Bathurst. He established the present
business in 1867, and when he handed the reins
of management over to his sons, it boasted a very
large and remunerative connection.
Mr. G. E. Crane retired from active partici-
pation in the business nearly twenty years ago. He
was one of the first alder men elected for the Borough
MR. GEORGE E. CRANE.
of Redfern, and when Ashfield was incorporated
he was elected a member of the first Municipal
Council. He in years gone by took an active inte-
rest on the Directorate of the Children’s Asylum,
Randwick, the Sydney Benevolent Asylum, and
various other philanthropic institutions.
MR. FREDERICK CRANE.
The eldest son, a Londoner by birth, but an
Australian in all other respects, is Mr. Frederick
Crane, upon whose shoulders falls the manage-
ment of the departments that include the general
articles pertaining to the building trades. He was
born in 1848, and educated at Mr. Chapman’s, a
well-known private school, and during the early
existence of the firm was his father’s right-hand
man. Throughout his whole career, which has
been a singularly busy one, he has applied him-
self with energy and concentration of purpose to
the advancement of the business.
MR. ALFRED CRANE, J.P.
Sydney claims Mr. Alfred Crane as one of her
sons, he having been born here in 1854. After com-
pleting his school course he was taken into the
business early in the seventies, and since that
period has been engaged building up the many in-
terests included within the firm’s jurisdiction.
His special work has been the supervision of the
shipping and financial side of the firm’s business.
He is a Justice of the Peace,


Messrs. E. Rich & Co., Ltd.
GENERAL MERCHANTS AND FORWARDING
AGENTS.
That “history repeats itself” is evident in almost
all the walks of life from historical epochs in Na-
tional and State affairs down to manners, customs,
and even fashions in the dress and etiquette of in-
dividuals. And so it has been in the ex-
perience and history of Messrs. E. Rich and
Co., Ltd. “ Great oaks from little acorns
grew.” The little acorn planted in the year
1872 way out in the back blocks, and under what
appeared to be the most unpropitious circum-
stances, has grown up, until to-day it is a tree of
noble proportions. At the commencement of opera-
tions the firm contented itself with much smaller
premises (in Pitt Street, and, subsequently, in
O’Connell Street) than the handsome building
which they now occupy, and to which they were
actually driven by the volume of business with
which they found it impossible to cope in the
smaller premises. Some few years ago Messrs. E.
Rich and Co. incorporated the business of the well-
know-n Queensland Mercantile Company, Ltd., of
Brisbane. They also established branches at
Bourke, Brewarrina, Brisbane and Cunnamulla,
IRONMONGERY DEPARTMENT.
from each of w-hich they derive a very laige trade.
The establishment of their London, Continental,
and American connection, which, in conjunction
with the personal experience of their management,
gained right amongst the homes of the Pastoralists
of New South Wales and Queensland, has given
them superior facilities for serving their ever-
increasing connection with the squatters of at least
two of the most important States of our Common-
wealth. Entering from O’Connell Street, the
visitor is impressed by the great improve-
ment which has been effected in their sales
department and sample room. On the right
hand side are show cases galore, display-
ing samples of a multitude of articles which
cannot fail to attract all interested in squatting
pursuits. On the left hand side are the desks and
tables of the salesmen, and that portion of the staff
whose duties are connected with this department.
The fittings are of polished cedar, and the general
appearance elegant. The Managerial Department
and the Secretary’s rooms are also located on the
ground floor. At the rear of the premises, on the
way to the bulk store, is a department where the
multitudinous correspondence of the Company is
handled,
The Accountant’s Department, located on the
first floor, is devoted to the Accountant and his
numerous assistants.
On the second floor the open stock of hardware,
ironmongery, etc., selected with the special aim of
catering for every requirement of station and farm,
makes an interesting exhibit. In the tea depart-
CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT.
SAMPLES AND MANAGERIAL ROOMS.
merit, presided over by an expert,
a scion of a family whose name is
a household word in the trade, are
to be found representative teas
grown in India, China, and
Ceylon (Including the choicest
Darjeeling) of a quality which challenges compari-
son with any Indian tea ever sent to Australia.
On this floor are teas in original packages of all
descriptions, curious chests covered with mystic
characters from China, larger and less ornate, but
more business-like packages, from Indian and Cey-
lon plantations. Here, also, are made up the
blends for which the firm is so justly famous. Any
lover of good tea can be suited, for the best teas ob-
tainable are secured by Messrs. Rich and Co.’s
agents in the country of production.
The receiving and forwarding in connection with
this large business is a department in itself. The
ground floor of the bulk store at the back of the
building in O’Connell Street is devoted to this im-
portant duty, every load of goods which arrives
being duly entered and checked on one side, whilst,
on the other, equal care and attention are bestowed
upon the orders sent away. There are also four
additional storage floors, but, spacious as these
warehouse floors are, they are not sufficient for the
quantity of goods w-hich is continually being turned
over, and storage in other parts of the City is
exten-ively utilised. The total floor area of the
Sydney warehouse and its branches, exclusive of
the space occupied in the various bonds for stor-
age purposes, is over 304,030 sq. feet, or nearly seven
acres. The services of a fleet of steamers and
barges are called into requisition to cope with the
firm's western trade. These, when the seasons
serve, ply on the great waterways of the Darling
and the Murray. So that, in at least two other
States, the Company is as well known as in Syd-
ney. Prom the time that Mr. E. Rich commenced
business, and during all the period of the opera-
tions of the Company, of which he is the head,
the supply of station requirements has been made
a speciality, the markets of the world being con-
tinually visited by Mr. Rich in quest of every
kind of commodity, and the thousand and one
items which make up the equipment of a station
or farm. Foremost amongst the firm’s special
lines may be enumerated: —General Shearing Sup-
plies, Jute “Federation” Fencing Wire and Drop-
pers, Cement (Tower Brand), Ruberoid Roofing,
P. B. Dampcourse, Building Paper and Preserva-
tion Paint, Sheep-dip, Poison Distributors, the
Anchor Fence, Robinson’s Cocoa, “ Puriri ” water,
“ Woolpack” Whisky, White Ant Destroyer (Av-
enarius).
Messrs. E. Rich and Co., Ltd., also hold the sole
agencies in Australasia for
many important lines,
among which may be men-
tioned such well-known
firms as tin Standard Paint
Co. (New York), the Par-
affin Paint Company (San
Francisco), the Cleveland
Stamping and Tool Co.,
Burr Safety Lifts, Mel-
rose Drover and Co.,Leith,
Campbell, Ehrinfried and
Co., Ltd., Auckland, Cen-
tral Queensland Heat Ex-
port Co., Pen Carbon Mani-
GENERAL SELES DEPARTMENT.
fold Co., R. Avenarius and Co., Joseph Pearson
(Pollard Distributors), Felton, Grimwade and Co.
(Kemps Sheep Branding Fluid), Sea Dog (patent)
Safety Matches. They also hold the agency for
the Central Queensland Meat Export Company, of
whose tinned and potted meats and other pro-
ducts they have a large assortment. Other ar-
ticles which they can offer with special ad-
vantage will be found particularised in their
price list and their special quarterly maga-
zine, a work of an educational and political
character, well worthy of perusal. The brief sum-
mary here given conveys to the reader some idea
of the magnitude of Messrs. E. Rich and Co.’s
operations in New Sorrth Wales,
(senecal /llbeicbants anb Jinporters.
Historical and Biographical Sketches :-eontinued.
GENERAL MERCHANTS AND FORWARDING AGENTS.


Manufactures.


The Manufacturing Industry
& 0f.... <~>X
New South Wales. '
= A :
Year of Development. *
~ Progress, in the Face
|| of Disadvantage.
TJLTHOUGH the past history of the manu-
Fl facturing industry in New South Wales
presents no striking features in respect
of rapidity of growth, monopoly of markets, or
phenomenal success, yet the experiences and
developments of the years 1901 and 1902
indicate that, in the near future, a good deal
more capital will be invested in manufacturing
enterprises under conditions which promise
manufacturers every chance of making fair
profit.
Amongst the foremost of the favourable
conditions referred to may be placed the estab-
lishment of interstate free trade, which opens
to our manufacturers, markets for supplying
the wants of communities of Australians num-
bering about two and a half times the popula-
tion of New South Wales, while at the same
time the federal tariff places more or less re-
striction on the importation of competing
goods, the product of other countries.
Another cause for satisfaction from the
manufacturers’ point of view is the establish-
ment of the Arbitration Court, which, under
the regime of a wise and just Judge,
assisted by two lay colleagues, must
exercise a highly beneficial influence in settl-
ing on satisfactory terms, disputes between
employer and, employees, besides continually
exercising a deterrent influence resulting in
the still more satisfactory prevention of dis-
putes.
That manufacturing in New South Wales
has not proved more popular with capitalists
may be accounted for in a variety of ways. For
instance, the community, comparatively
speaking, is small, and therefore the home
market for New South Wales manufactures
has been very limited, the other States of Aus-
tralia, and the Colony of New Zealand, hav-
ing placed more or less heavy duties on over-
sea products. Then the outside markets,
however open they may be for the reception of
our raw material, have been for generations
exploited by the various nations of the world,
and they have in no sense been waiting to see
what we could send them in the shape of
manufactured goods.
Again, Australian manufacturers have
been generally handicapped by the relative
dearness of money, which is not only not
available at rates prevailing in the old world
and America, but is not readily obtainable for
manufacturing enterprises in Australia at per-
haps double the old world rates.
Another and still more controlling factor,
militating against industrial development
here, as compared with older and more popul-
ous countries, is the higher rate of wages that
has to be paid. It is, of course, not difficult
to account for this feature of the industrial
situation. For its age and the numerical
strength of its population few countries of the
world have been brought more thoroughly
under the influences of trades unionism than
has New South Wales in common with the
other States of Australia, where, as every one
knows, a strong political influence is con-
stantly being exerted in favour of the main-
tenance of a high standard of wages.
It is no part of the mission of “ The Annual
Review” to discuss the rights or wrongs in-
volved in political questions, but in dealing
with the manufacturing interests of this State
it is impossible to overlook the causes which
tend to make them less attractive, because less
profitable, to capitalists here than elsewhere.
Although, as we have indicated above, some
of the disadvantages which have so long
handicapped our manufacturers have been, or
are in course of being removed, there are some
which will have to be reckoned with for many
years to come; while at best the disadvan-
tages arising from climatic uncertainties and
geographical situation can but bo reduced to
a minimum. At the fag end (as everyone
hopes) of a seven years drought it is not
necessary to descant on climatic uncertainties,
as factors militating against manufacturing
enterprise. These are all in the Australian
programme, and must be made the best of, but
good seasons are quite as certain as droughts,
and the recuperative powers of the Australian
States under favourable weather conditions
are too well known to need discussing. It is
not as generally recognised that Australia is
relatively at a disadvantage because of its geo-
graphical position, but it is a fact nevertheless,
though one that the advancing years will make
less and less prominent.
From the manufacturers’ point of view the
population of a country can hardly be too
dense, nor can it increase too rapidly, seeing
that the manufacturers’ ability to supply
human wants is ever distancing the power of
the consumer to absorb all that is offering.
Hence the spectacle of a continent nearly
three million square miles in extent, having
less than four millions of inhabitants, or about
1.25 to the square mile, is not altogether en-
couraging after 114 years of colonisation.
It cannot be denied that Australian states-
men have been too unmindful of this geogra-
phical handicap, if it may be so called, and
have for at least a quarter of a century done
nothing to attract the overflowing population
of the old world to Australia. The stream has
flown steadily to the United States of America
as it is flowing now towards Canada, because
the Governments of those countries have of-
fered and are offering inducements to immi-
grants to found homes there. Australia’s turn
may perhaps come when America, North and
South, shall have secured all the population
deemed necessary, but meanwhile the efforts of
Australian statesmen are being exerted more
in the direction of driving people away from
our shores than of attracting them hither.
Having shown that those enterprising men
engaged in building up the manufacturing in-
dustries of New South Wales have had much
to contend against, it goes without saying
that the success which they have so far
achieved renders them all the more entitled
to hearty congratulations, not only on what
they have done, but on their improved pros-
pects of reaping bettor rewards in the near
future.
We propose to supply in the following pages
some carefully condensed statistics of the prin-
cipal manufacturing industries of New South
Wales. From these it will be seen that an era
of progress has already commenced, and for
the reasons stated above the improvement
may bo expected to continue at an accelerated
rate when good seasons shall once more pre-
vail, and the disturbing influences connected
with the early stages of federation disappear.
The latest available figures obtainable from
.the Government Statistician arc those for the
year 1902. In former years the industries of
this State were classified under eleven differ-
ent heads, but in January, 1901, at a confer-
ence of Statisticians held in Hobart, a new
classification, embracing nineteen different
heads, was agreed upon, and Mr. Coghlan has
adopted that plan in dealing with the figures
for 1901 and 1902. The method of classifi-
cation and the subdivisions in each class, with


the numbers of the establishments, and the
hands employed, will be learned from the fol-
lowing summary: —
Class I. Treating Raw Material, etc.
Boiling-down and Tallow Refineries, 22 ■ Bone
Mills, • —; Tanneries, 106; Wool Scouring and
Fellmongering, 74; Chaff Cutting, 46. Total
248, employing 3187 persons. The bone mills
were, for the 1902 classification, transferred to
another section.
Class 11. Oils and Fats, Animal, Vegetable, etc.
Oil and Grease Factories, 5; Soap and Candles, 40.
Total 45, employing 533 persons.
Class 111. Stone, Clay, Glass, etc.
Asphalt Works, 5; Bricks and Tiles, 182; Glass,
including bottles, 9; Glass (ornamental), 8;
Lime, Plaster and Cement, 16; Marble and
Slate, 9; Modelling, etc., 3; Pottery and
Earthenware, 10; Stone Dressing, 6. Total
248, employing 3293 persons.
Class IV. Working in Wood.
Boxes and Cases, 14; Cooperage, 13; Joinery, 50;
Sawmills, 331 ; Wood Turning, 13. Total 421,
employing 5175 persons.
Class V. Metal Works, Machinery, etc.
Agricultural Implements, 9; Brass and Copper,
14; Cutlery, 2; Engineering, 105; Galvanised
Iron, 24; Ironworks and Foundries, 61; Lead
Mill, 1; Railway Carriages, 2; Railway and
Tramway Workshops, 23; Smelting, 30;
Stoves and Ovens, 9; Tinsmithing, 26; Wire-
working, 6 ; Other Metal Works, 7. Total
322, employing 13,724 persons.
Class VI. Food and Drink, etc.
Bacon Curing, 17; Butter Factories, 125; Cheese
Factories, 18; Condensed Milk, 3; Meat Pre-
serving, 15 ; Biscuits, 6 ; Confectionery, 19 ;
Corn Flour, Oatmeal, etc., 9; Flour Mills, 81;
Jam and Fruit Canning, 9; Pickles, Sauces,
and Vinegar, 6; Sugar Mills, 8; Sugar Re-
finery, 1; Aerated Waters, Cordials, etc.,
201; Breweries, 46; Condiments, Coffee,
Spices, etc., 15; Distilleries, 2; Ice and Re-
frigerating, 34; Malting, 4; Tobacco, Cigars,
etc., 13. Total 632, employing 11,244 per-
sons.
Class VII. Clothing and Textile Fabrics and
Materials.
Woollen Mills, 4; Boots and Shoes, 102; Slop
Clothing, 29; Clothing (tailoring), 188 ; Dress-
making and Millinery (makers’ material), 56;
Dressmaking and Millinery (customers’ ma-
terial), 132; Dye Works and Cleaning, 7;
Furriers, 4; Hats and Caps, 10; Waterproof
and Oilskin, 7; Shirts, Ties, and Scarves, 19;
Rope and Cordage, 5; Tents and Tarpaulins,
0. Total 569, employing 14,357 persons.
Class VIII. Books, Paper, Printing, etc.
Electrotyping and Stereotyping, 7; Paper Boxes,
Bags, etc., 11; Photo-engraving, 4; Print-
ing and Bookbinding, 292. Total 314, em-
ploying 5936 persons.
Class IX. Musical Instruments.
Musical Instruments, 4; employing 202 persons.
Class X. Arms and Explosives.
Explosives, 3; employing 12 persons.
Class XI. Vehicles, Saddlery, Harness, etc.
Coach and Waggon Building, 176; Cycles, 9;
Perambulators, 3; Saddlery and Harness, 40 ;
Spokes, etc., 6; Whips, 3. Total 237, employ-
ing 2135 persons.
Class XII. Ship and Boat Building and
Repairing.
Docks and Slips, 8; Sailmaking, 4; Ship and Boat
Building and Repairing, 14. Total 26, em-
ploying 1474 persons.
Class XIII. Furniture, Bedding, etc.
Bedding, Flock and Upholstery, 22; Billiard
Tables, 2; Chairmaking, 3; Furniture and
Cabinet Making, 78; Picture Frames, 7;
Window Blinds, 3. Total 115, employing
2019 persons.
Class XIV. Drugs and Chemicals.
Chemicals, Drugs and Medicines, 15; Fertilisers,
6; Paints, Varnishes, and By-products, 10.
Total 31, employing 036 persons.
Class XV. Surgical and Scientific Appliances.
Surgical, Optical and other Scientific Instruments,
0; employing 65 persons.
Class XVI. Time-pieces, Jewellery and
Plated-ware.
Electroplating, 7; Manufactured Jewellery, 12.
Total 19, employing 243 persons.
Class XVII. Heat, Light and Power.
Coke Works, 10; Electric Apparatus, 2; Electric
Light and Power, 59; Gas Works, 44; Lamps
and Fittings, etc., 4; Hydraulic Power, 1.
Total 120, employing 1545 persons.
Class XVIII. Leatherware (n.e.i.).
Leather Belting, Fancy Leather, Portmanteaus
and Bags, 5; employing 97 persons.
Class XIX. Minor Wares.
Baskets and Wickerware, Matting, etc., 4;
Brooms and Brushware, 15; Rubber Goods,
2; Toys, 2; Umbrellas, 3; Other Industries,
5. Total 31, employing 392 persons.
The total number of manufacturing estab-
lishments in New South Wales on 31st Decem-
ber, 1902, thus amounted'to 3396, employing
66,269 persons, including 911 children (660
males and 251 females).
SAMPLES OF AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURE BY MESSRS. WUNDERLICH AND CO.


1891.
1893.
1902.
Number of Establishments ..
3,056
2.428
3,^90
Hands employed—Males
42,203
37,832
56,326
,, ,, Females ...
Power of Engines—
7,676
4,225
11,943
Full capacity
36,618
35,203
75,907
Average used
29,801
27,162
52,813
£6,795.843
Value of Machinery and Plant
£4,386,475
£4.425,083
o b»
3 i_(0
P P S’
s
00
-V
<P E3
a
p £,
3 £
cc
C5
M
to
■'i
CO
cn
S5
employed.
i
Ox
U>
o
S
Horse pow-
no
8
to
2
er used.
N-
Oi
4-
Cl
Vi
to
Value of
o
05 J*
Machinery
8
to
05
ci
8
and Plant.
Ox
CO
00
Value of
to
GO
To'^
Materials
W
in
or
p
used.
05
co
Cl
C5
Ci
to
05
CO
Value of
c
00
-1
o.
Fuel used.
ci
CO
4.
4*.
05
to
to
Amount
Cl
JO
Ci
io jft
of Wages
to
O
a
paid.
to
— J
to
35
fl
si
Cn
s
X
Value of
Ci
CO
kj L J
Output.
to
to
Class.
Country Districts.
Metropolitan Districts.
Number
of
establish-
ments.
Hands employed
Number
of
establish-
ments.
Hands employed.
Males.
Females
Males,
Females.
I.
149
1,478
6
99
1/95
8
II.
25
184
5
20
296
4?
III.
177
1,310
32
71
1,939
12
IV.
329
3,218
13
92
1,939
5
V.
126
5,710
2
196
7,905
27
VI.
479
4,486
364
153
5,175
1,219
vi r.
172
1,023
1,186
397
4,62 i
7.526
VIII.
179
1,388
50
135
3 529
969
IX,
4
189
13
x.
3
12
XI.
153
1,190
2
84
930
13
X I.
(5
127
20
1 335
12
XIII.
17
159
3
9S
1,705
152
XIV.
11
69
2
20
416
149
XV.
6
49
16
XVI.
. 1
8
18
227
8
XVII.
76
054
44
854
37
XVIII.
5
95
2
XIX.
4
23
27
307
62
1,904
21,027
1,665
1,492
33,299
10,278
The following table shows the fluctuations,
both decreases and increases, that have taken
place in three of the eleven years covered by
two census periods: —
The minimum of hands emjiloyed during
the eleven years was reached in 1893, the
disastrous year made memorable by the
THE DOIG NAILER.
Used by the Union Box and Packing Case Co. for
nailing up all descriptions of boxes and cases.
numerous bank failures and the financial panic
which resulted therefrom. In the following
year there was a marked recovery num-
ber of hands employed, and the total has con-
tinued to increase ever since, the figures for
1902 being more than 50 per cent, greater
than those for the panic year 1893.
Thus, despite this temporary check, very
substantial progress has been made by the
manufacturing industries of the State, as will
be more clearly seen from the following table,
in which the returns of the last two census
years are more fully compared: —
The increase of 22.90 per cent, in the added
value compared with the smaller increase of
15.69 per cent, in wages indicates, according to
Mr. Coghlan, the great change that has taken
place in the methods of production —the more
extensive use of machinery and the employ-
ment of machinery of a better class.
The actual increase in the number of males
employed was 11,733, or 27.45 per cent., and
of females 6,444, or 123.21 per cent.
Of the great relative increase in the number
of female workers, the principal portion is ac-
counted for by three out of the eleven groups
of industries in which under the old classifica-
tion, female labour was employed. These are
as follows: —“ Clothing and Textile Fabrics,”
“ Food and Drink,” and “ Books, Paper and
Printing.”
It is interesting to compare the metropoli-
tan district with the country districts as fields
for manufacturing enterprise. Of the nineteen
groups of industries specified above four have
no representatives at all in the country dis-
tricts, namely, classes IX., X., XV., and
XVIII. Of the other fifteen, eight are repre-
sented by establishments ranging in number
from 126 to 479, and in eight of them the
WOOD CARVING AT MESSRS. BEALE AND CO'S PIANO AND SEWING MACHINE FACTORY.
country outnumbers the metropolis. The fol-
lowing table shows the relative positions more
clearly:—
When it is remembered that more than one-
third of the population of the State, or 38 per
cent., is located in the metropolitan area,
which has so many natural advantages favour-
able to the growth of manufacturing indus-
tries, in addition to its unrivalled port, and its
being the birthplace of Australian colonisa-
tion, this comparison is by no means discredit-
able to the country districts. When the long-
promised measure for the establishment of a
sound and progressive system of local govern-
ment shall have been given to the country
districts, bringing in its train more induce-
ments to our people to settle themselves in the
provincial towns and cities, there may certainly
be expected a considerable growth of manufac-
turing industries throughout the State.


New South Wales
Chamber of Manufactures.
New South Wales, in general, and Sydney
in particular, have both made tremendous
strides in the manufacturing industry within
the last decade, and already returns show
that the pre-eminence of Victoria is be-
ing threatened by another competitor, whose
strength is not by any means to be slightingly
reckoned. These splendid results, which are
a testimony to the progressiveness of our man-
ufacturers, have been greatly aided bv the
sound practical work and unremitting watch-
fulness of the New South Wales Chamber of
Manufactures, which, as an organisation es-
tablished to foster and promote the develop-
ment of the manufacturing, producing, and
industrial interests of this State, is entitled
to be considered in every way up-to-date and
representative.
The establishment of the Chamber under
its present constitution was initiated on the
3rd of July, 1895, the first President being
Mr. C. H. Hoskins, of the well-known firm
of G. and C. Hoskins and Co., Engineers, etc.,
who occupied the position for two years. The
succeeding Presidents were as follow: —Hugh
Dixson, J.P., 1897-1898; C. E. H. J. Ludo-
-1900-1 ; and J. P. Wright, J.P., 1901-2; O.
C. Beale, J.P., 1902-3.
The governing council of the Chamber is
composed as under;—O. C. Beale, J.P., Presi-
dent; J. P. Wright, J.P., and Jeffrey Deniss,
wici, J.P., 1898-1900; William Vicars,
MR. O. C. BEALE,
President Chamber of Manufactures.
Vice-Presidents; J. 11. Grey, Hon. Treasurer.
Council Members Alderman J. C. Beer,
Messrs. E. Braby, W. W. Campbell, W.
Christie, Hugh Dixson, J.P., J. R. Firth,
J. P. Franki, J.P., A. W. Gilles, G. Abrams,
Dr. R. R. Hardman, P. W. Berne, C. H. Hos-
kins, Alderman J. Jackson, J. T. Juleff, C. E.
H. Ludowici, J. P., D. J. Monk, James Muir,
H. E. Pratten, B. D. Scarth, A. W. Scott, S.
P. Simpson, W. Vicars, James Ward, J.P., R.
Wilkinson, A. Wunderlich, and John Young,
J.P. The permanent secretary is Mr. George
T. Clarke, who has been associated with the
Chamber since its inception in 1805.
The work accomplished by the Council of
the Chamber in regard to the safeguarding of
the interests of Manufacturers and others di-
rectly or indirectly concerned with the pro-
ducing industries has been of a beneficial char-
acter. Apart from a number of minor inno-
vations, brought about by the persistent ef-
forts of the Chamber, may be mentioned the
appointment of Commercial Agents in Lon-
don, South Africa, and the East. In connec-
tion with the introduction of the Industrial
Arbitration Act, which came into force at the
end of 1902, the Council got up many meet-
ings, deputations and petitions, and zealously
protected the interests of the industries con-
cerned. The formation of a Federal Chamber
of Manufactures was broached during the sit-
tings of the Interstate Chamber of Manufac-
tures held in Sydney, with the result that, at
the present time, the various Chambers of
Manufactures throughout the Commonwealth
are federated, and, when the occasion arises,
conferences are held and action taken by the
joint chambers.
COMMITTEE OF THE CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES.


The Manufacturing Industry.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.
THE MANUFACTURE OF BOOTS AND SHOES.
Messrs. Enoch Taylor & Co.
BOOT AND SHOE MANUFACTURERS.
The true prosperity of an industry is best evi-
denced by the amount of capital invested, the labour
it employs and the total of its output.
In New South Wales the presence of a number of
boot and shoe factories has done much to promote
the well-being of the community’ by giving remune-
rative employment to some thousands of young
men and women who would otherwise find life a
very’ hard struggle for existence.
Some i'iea of the advance made may be gathered
from the fact that in 1890 there were factories in
New South Wales employing 2806 hands, and pro-
ducing 2,634,251 pairs of boots.
The figures for 1900 show 94 factories in operation,
employing 3953 hands, and having a total output of
3,269,935 pairs of boots, an increase of 635,680 pairs
per annum, to which must be added 387,156 pairs of
slippers and shoes.
The reason for this all-round progress is to be
found in the fact that large New South Wales manu-
facturers, such as Messrs. Enoch Taylor and Co.,
makers of the famous “ T” boots and shoes, have
raised the standard of quality of material used and
workmanship to such a pitch of perfection that the
consumer has a confidence in their goods which are
fast ousting the imported article. The great firm
of Messrs. Enoch Taylor and Co., whose warehouses
and offices are located at 22 York-street, Sydney,
with factories at Botany, which rank amongst the
finest in Australia, was founded in 1851 at Bourke-
street, Melbourne, by the late Mr. Enoch Taylor,
who carried on business for a number of years as a
boot importer. With the advance in population
and the provision for more speedy transportation
between- the old world and Australia, competition
became keener, but Mr. Enoch Taylor, by the main-
tenance of a high quality’ in all lines sold in his
stores, not only held his own, but increased the
scope and output of his business to such an extent
that he was able to establish a partnership with the
late Mr. Fielden Wilson. The operations of the
firm under the management of the two gentlemen
named were greatly extended, and throughout Vic-
toria and the other colonies their goods acquired a
high reputation for quality, durability, and style.
In 1875 Mr. Alfred Lee, the present managing
partner of the firm, became associated with the
founders of the business. In the same year a branch
was opened in Sydney, and a profitable trade built
up throughout the Mother State.
In 1887, on the death of Mr. Fielden Wilson, Mr.
Alfred Lee assumed the managership of New South
Wales, and in a very short period revolutionised
the whole of the firm’s business in this State.
A branch was established at Elizabeth-street,
Brisbane, which is at present under the manage-
ment of Mr. G. Kibble, one of the partners.
Agencies were also established in South Australia,
West Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand. On
the death of Mr. Enoch Taylor at an advanced age.
Mr. Alfred Lee, who had become a partner with the
deceased gentleman, formed the concern into a pri-
vate company, the partners being Mr. Alfred Lee,
managing partner, Mr. Q. Kibble, Mr. G. Dean, and
Mr. J. Howard, the latter being a London partner,
who superintends the home buying at the company’s
office and store rooms, Suffolk House, Cannon-strett,
London.'
The factory at Botany was purchased, added to
gradually, and brought up to its present perfection.
In addition to the lines of their own manufacture,
Messrs. Enoch Taylor and Co. are sole agents for a
number of the best known old-world manufactureis,
including those of C. F. Bally and Sons, of Swit-
zerland, and the Canadian Rubber Company.
A large quantity of the necessary raw material
and the more expensive classes of American and
English boots and shoes are also imported by the
firm.
MR. ALFRED LEE.
The Sydney warehouse at 22 York-street. is a most
commodious building, containing five floors, and
fitted throughout with every modern appliance and
convenience for the expeditious handling and quick
despatch of the thousands of lines dealt in. Enter-
ing from York-street, the visitor passes along an
avenue, enclosed on each side by handsomely ap-
pointed offices, and a show-room which is unsur-
passed in New South Wales.
In this show-room the many hundreds of samples
representative of every size, quality and brand of
Messrs. Enoch Taylor’s celebrated “T” boots and
shoes are ranged in a tasteful and methodical
manner.
The first floor embraces the packing and open
stock department, the second, third and fourth
floors being given over to the bulk stocks of ladies’,
men’s and children’s boots and shoes of colonial
and imported manufacture, from the lightest ladies’
slipper to the heaviest navvys* blucher.
MR. ALFRED LEE.
In the development of the industrial resources of
New South Wales it is impossible to withhold ad-
miration for the men who have by their unremit-
ting work and progressiveness introduced into Aus-
tralian manufacturing all that is latest and best in
the way of methods and machinery.
In connection with the manufacture of boots and
shoes, no one has done more to foster the Austra-
lian manufacture of these articles of universal use
than Mr. Alfred Lee, managing partner of Messrs.
Enoch Taylor and Company. Mr. Lee, who is a
native of North Ireland, came to Australia in 18(19
when he was quite a child, and spent his boyhood
in New Zealand with his parents, his father being
a military man.
After being educated at Wellesley College, Auck-
land, Mr. Lee joined the firm of Messrs. Enoch Tay-
lor in 1875, and so marked was his ability, that on
the death of Mr. Fielden Wilson in 1887 he was ad-
mitted into partnership, and took over the control
of the N.S.W. business.
When Mr. Taylor died Mr. Lee was instrumental
fTr-4ha_fprmation of the private company which
forms the present constitution of the firm.
Being a man of progressive ideas and thoroughly
conversant with every requirement of the trade,
Mr. Lee foresaw the advantages that would accrue
from the manufacture of boots and shoes on a large
scale, by the aid of the most modern labour and
time saving machinery.
With the object of obtaining the necessary plant
Mr. Lee visited all the large American and Conti-
nental factories, and adopted the appliances best
suited to the Australian trade.
On his return ho set about reorganising the whole
methods of the firm. It was not an easy task to
reorganise such a vast business and turn it from an
importing to a manufacturing house, but Mr. Lee,
with characteristic pertinacity, achieved the
wished-for change, the success of his efforts being
evidenced to-day by the fact that the factories,
warehouses, etc., of Enoch Taylor and Company in
regard to machinery, methods and organisation are
unexcelled by any of their kind in the world.
The great responsibilities and the arduous work
entailed in the management of the huge concern, of
which he is the head, leaves Mr. Lee very few spare
hours, nevertheless in his favourite pastime—golf
—he finds recreation, and is able to follow up what
is his chief hobby, the collection of Australian
manuscripts and books, of which he has one of the
finest and most complete private libraries in the
Bout hern Hemisphere.


MESSRS. ENOCH TAYLOR AND CO.’S BOOT
AND SHOE FACTORY, BOTANY.
The factory, which is located in a healthy position
in Botany, is one of the finest of its kind in the
Southern hemisphere, and when it is stated that in
its equipment over .£lB,OOO has been spent in the
acquirement of the latest and most modern labour-
saving boot and shoe making machines, some idea
of its magnitude and output may be gained. Nearly
400 hands are employed daily, 120 of whom are girls,
terest to those who are concerned in the industries
of New South Wales. The factory, whose floors
cover an area of several acres, was purchased as a
going concern, the present additions being built
by Messrs. Enoch Taylor and Co. some years ago.
The departments are lofty, well lighted and venti-
lated, and the arrangements for the protection and
safety of the employees manipulating the numbers
of machines have been most carefully thought out.
To gain some idea of the size and the multitudinous
operations which are employed in the manufacture
Persians, Mock Glove, White Calf, Tan Calf, and
Roan. There are also great bales of specially im-
ported Ribbon Silk and Calico linings. From the
stock room the hides for sole leathers are sent to
what is known as the
ROUGH STUFF ROOM,
where they are deftly passed through machines,
which cut them into different sole lengths, accord-
ing to the size of the boot for which they are in-
tended. The next process is that of the " Beam
MESSRS. ENOCH TAYLOR AND COMPANY. CLICKING ROOM.
The conception of this factory, with its hundreds of
throbbing machines, in a great measure owes its
establishment to Mr. Alfred Lee, who foreseeing the
advantages to be gained by the employment of
Machinery in the manufacture of every part of a
boot or shoe, made it his business to visit the Ame-
■dean and European centres, and after having made
a careful study of the best methods and machinery
employed in the various great factories, he pur-
chased the machinery which is at present in use in
the Botany factory. A brief outline of the many
Processes and machines employed may prove of in-
of boots and shoes, we might mention that the com-
monest made boot goes through 41 processes ere it is
ready to be placed in its neat carton, and forwarded
for shipment. In the higher class lines, such as
ladies’ and gents’ walking and evening
boots and shoes, over sixty processes are
gone through. Commencing with the ini-
tial stage of manufacture, we must visit
the great bulk stores, where hundreds of neatly
arranged bales of “ upper” and “ bottom” goods
are slocked, prominent amongst the most univer-
sally used leathers being Calf, Glace Kid, Basils,
Press.” For this work the company has provided
a special set of machines, which are the only ones
of their kind in Australia, and are so constructed
that the operator cannot under any circumstances
be injured by the presses or the knives. These
presses, which cut out the soles, are capable of an
immense output per day, and every shape of sole,
for narrow, broad, long, or short lasts, can be made
by the simple change of a knife, hundreds of which
are to be seen in this department. When the soles
are cut they go through the process of rolling, which
reduces the leather to an eoual flatness of surface,


and, in the case of the inner sole, a cunningly de-
vised grooving machine is used to give extra flexi-
bility. Should the sole piece be of irregular thick-
ness, a splitting machine at once remedies the
defect. From the Rough Stuff Room the materials,
all neatly arranged on movable racks, and num-
bered and branded ,are passed on to the Assembling
Room, where all the work is collected, checked and
forwarded on to the next batch of machinists. An
important department is
THE CLICKING ROOM.
Heie, on an immense floor miming half the length
of the factory, a great number of men and youths
are kept busy cutting out, by the aid of carefully
prepared patterns, the various pieces which go to
The Glace Kid and other leathers, which are em-
bodied in the uppers of boots and shoes, after being
cut to pattern, are sent to the “ Skiving" machines,
which trim the edges so that each piece of leather
when it meets its fellow makes an equal thickness.
An interesting souvenir of an old-time fashion, and
one which still finds its votaries, is to be found in
the men’s heavy elastic-sided boots. For the manu-
facture of these relies of our granddad’s days,
machines of a unique type are used, which turn out
some hundreds of moulded elastic-sided boot uppers
per day. The eyelet machines for putting the lace
eyelets in boot uppers do their work so expeditiously
that a boy with one machine can hook and eyelet
sufficient uppers for from seven to eight hundred
The " Reece” automatic buttonholers, which cut
out and stitch the buttonholes in boot uppers at one
operation, are marvellous pieces of ingenuity and
precision. To ensure a perfect fitting and oomfur-.
able heel upper, “ Trimming” machines are used
which trim up all seams, so that there shall be
no roughness to annoy the wearer. J.n the depart-
ments just described we have noted the preliminary
processes of cutting out the soles and sewiag to-
gether the pieces which form the uppers, and
preparing the latter for the lasters. This brings
us to the
MAKING ROOM,
into which the sewn uppers and cut-out soles find
their way as two separate parts of a boot or shoe. We
MESSRS. ENOCH TAYLOR AND COMPANY. MACHINISTS’ ROOM.
make up the upper portion of a boot or shoe. As
the firm manufacture close upon eight hundred dif-
ferent patterns of footwear, it may be easily under-
stood that to provide for the cutting out of uppers,
etc., a great number of patterns are required. To
meet their present requirements, Messrs. Enoch
Taylor and Co. have over 12,000 patterns in their
Clicking Room, so arranged that they run in
groups, every degree of size being included in each
special pattern. Thus, the firm are able to supply
buyers with a complete range of sizes of every boot
on their list, in either light or heavy goods, ensuring
harmonious uniformity. In the pattern room many
interesting processes are to be seen in operation.
pairs of boots per day. It is noticeable that
throughout the factory the heavy and light work is
kept separate, so that the more delicate materials
may not be damaged or soiled. Coming to the third
important department, that of the
GIRLS’ MACHINE ROOM
we find a large healthy work-room, in which ire
seated 120 young women, all busily engaged at
their machines. In this part of the factory over 20
processes are in operation, amongst the most in-
teresting mechanical contrivances being the “Vamp-
ing” machines, which, with the speed of lightning,
sew the toeeaps on to the uppers of boots an ! shoes.
will deal first with the finer classes of boots and
shoes. The uppers are put on lasts and held by
tacks, the “ last” with the boot-upper attached be-
ing taken in hand by the men who control the mar-
vellous movements’ of the “ Consolidated” hand
method lasters.
These machines pull the lower surface of
the upper over the " last” and tack on the
sole by automatic action. With regard to pump
soles, a pump turning machine is brought into use,
the uppers of the pumps being worked round by the
needles of this machine, and the sole thus attached.
In welted goods the welt is sewn on to the upper
by what is known as the “ hand-sewn principle.


which is as follows;—The upper is attached to a
last, and the latter, with the welt in position, is
handled by a machinist, who sews the welt to the
lower portion of the upper.
A channelled sole is then sewn on to the welt by
a rapid welting machine. In the case of children’s
boots, “ Blake” machines tack and sew on the soles.
The pneumatic sole layer is of novel construction,
its woik consisting of pressing the soles of pump
shoes so as to give them a perfect shape and springi-
ness so highly esteemed in dancing shoes.
On leaving the making room the engineers’ shops
al e passed through. Here all repairs are at once
attended to.
THE MAKING OF ROUGH GOODS
includes men’s strongest boots, shoes and slippers,
whose manufacture, as we have already stated, is
Another process—that of nailing—is accom-
plished by an automatic machine with
wonderful celerity. A number of small
operations are comprised in what is known
as counter-moulding, that is stiffening the back of
the boot, sole moulding, moulding the heavy sole
into the shape of the last, skiving, heeling, dress-
ing, gauging, etc. The “ Heeling” machines, which
are each capable of heeling 1200 pairs of boots per
day need only two boys and a man to work them.
A formidable and noisy contrivance known as the
“ Slugger” hammers on the soles and heels of boys’
and meps’ medium heavy boots, and to ensure com-
fort a metallic fastening machine puts a strip of
leather on the top of the heel inside of the boot,
thus making a seat for the foot of the wearer.
FINISHING DEPARTMENT,
where the waist, sole and heel of all the boots are
buffed. After being smoothed the boots are
blacked, the waists browned, and the soles top-
ironed, the latter being accomplished by a small
but ingenious piece of mechanism, which runs a
thin line of colour round the outermost edges of
the sole.
Having been through the various processes,
and the tops having been ironed, the final
stage in the making is reached, when the completed
article is passed by the scrutineers, who thoroughly
examine the finish of each boot, and should any
fault be found to exist in the shape, size, or general
make-up of a boot or shoe, no matter whether it be
of the common or higher quality, such boot or shoe
is put aside and re-made.
MESSES. ENOCH TAYLOR AND COMPANY. FINISHING ROOM.
kept apart from that of the finer classes of goods.
Prominent amongst the labour-savers are the
" Standard Screw” machines. These travel at an
immense number of revolutions per minute, and
screw in the rivets which hold the leather sole to
the uppers of the heavy blucher boots. .
Close beside this is the " Pegging machine,
which can peg the soles of an almost incredible
number of boots per day. The greatest mechanical
triumph to be seen in this hive of industry is the
McKay Lasting Apparatus. These automatic
Machines cost .£5OO each, and have over 400 work-
ing parts.
The uppers of the bluchers are placed in a recep-
tacle in this machine. A last is laid in the upper,
and by the simple pressure of the foot
°t the operator upon a lever the edges of the
thick upper are drawn over the last and held in
accurate position for pegging.
One of the last stages through which the boots
pass before leaving the Making Room is that of
channel-closing the soles. The channel, as we have
already explained, being a grove cut round the rim
of the sole to allow of its being sewn or tacked on
the welt or upper.
Having had the soles and heels attached
to the uppers, the boots and shoes begin to assume
the usual appearance of made-up goods, but there
are still a number of processes to be gone through
in the
FINISHING ROOM
ere they are ready for the wearer. The heel paring
and smoothing is done by sand-wheels driven at
immense speed, a draught of air taking away all the
dust. Power-driven emery wheels polish the soles,
edges, and bottoms of the boots before they are
sent on to the
In the Branding and Packing Department
a number of tying, branding, and sock-
ing machines are in use. The final stage
of all is reached when the boots bearing their dis-
tinctive mark are placed in the neatly labelled car-
tons, and forwarded to the company’s Central
YVarehouse in York-street, Sydney.
During the whole of the processes we have en-
deavoured to describe, one of the most
noticeable features is that nothing but
solid leather is used in the making up
of the boots, even to the inside packing and
inner sole pieces.
In fact, in a factory where every pro-
cess is accomplished by machinery it would be
impossible to advantageously use any other sub-
stance than leather. Thus, buyers of the "T” boot
brand are assured that the many parts embodied
in their shoe? arc Die ical, genuine article,


John Hunter & Son, Ltd.
BOOT AND SHOE IMPORTERS AND MANU-
FACTURERS.
Not so very many years ago the epithet “ Colo-
nial” as applied to boots and shoes, was considered
to stamp them with a reputation for durability the
reverse of favourable. This reflection on the out-
put of Australian factories was due', not to the in-
trinsic defects of the goods supplied, which were,
though of medium quality, strong and well made,
but rather to the conservative prejudice enter-
tained by Australians for the imported article. It
was, therefore, fortunate for the industry that its
leading representatives were men of acumen and
foresight who, from the beginning, were deter-
mined that the unjustified stigma should be re-
moved. and set to woik, with wholesouled energy,
to accomplish this very desirable end.
In no State was this admirable trait more pro-
nounced than in New South Wales, and, as a conse-
quence, the manufacture of boots and shoes has
made tremendous strides within the last score of
years. Today the industry employs more hands
than that of any other devoted to the supply of
primary necessities, such as food and clothing;
and from being a struggling trade, scarcely able to
compete against the influx of foreign footwear, it
has of recent years reached a capacity which en-
ables it to supply the major portion of the State’s
requirements, and to maintain a satisfactory ex-
port trade with those States of the Australian
group, such as Queensland and West Australia,
whose secondary production has not yet expanded
in this direction to the same extent. . The statis-
tics of the manufactories of New South Wales for
1901 give the number of hands employed in boot
and shoe factories at the end of that year as 3979.
The factories totalled 100, in which 2,821,724 pairs
of boots and shoes, as well as 512,584 pairs of slip-
pers and canvas and cloth shoes, were made. A
decade ago, in 1892, the corresponding figures were;
factories, 66; hands, 2708; boots shoes and slippers,
2,500,000. A comparison of these figures shows a
most gratifying all-round increase, and, indeed,
one on which the State may warmly congratulate
itself, not only in the broader national aspects of-
fered by the increase of employees and the general
evidence of the move towards a self-supporting
community, but also in the possession of men whose
strenuous perseverance and dogged determination
have lifted the industry to its progressive and up-to-
date standard. Among such men, Mr. John Hun-
ter has for many years stood well to the front.
Commencing some twenty-five years ago as an
importer and retailer of boots and shoes, in a shop
which, however strange or incredible it may sound,
adjoined a vacant piece of ground at the
corner of George and Market streets, he has
steadily worked up the business to its present
gigantic proportions, now incorporated under the
style and name of John Hunter and Son, Limited.
Soon after starting, Mr. Hunter, with that keen
grasp of business opportunities which has all
MR. JOHN HUNTER, J.P.,
Founder of the Firm.
through boon one of his most marked characteris-
tics, realised that his scope was too restricted, and,
about eighteen years ago, launched out as a manu-
facturer, this extension of his trade necessitating
the acquisition of premises in Douglas-street, Red-
fern, near the Redfern Park. The old premises,
which adjoin the. site of the present huge block of
buildings, were about one-tenth the size of the
latter, and are now overshadowed on all sides by the
subsequent additions which from time to time were
found imperative.
Mr. Hunter is evidently a firm believer in cen-
tralisation as regards the executive portion of his
business, for he lost no time in bringing all his
distributing and manufacturing business under
one roof. The wholesale business, which had
hitherto been carried on at Pitt-street, has now
been removed to the present building in Castle-
reagh-street, Redfern.
Three years ago the concern was formed into a
limited liability company. No shares were allotted
to the public, however, and it remains practically in
the hands of its original founder and his sons. Mr.
John Hunter is the Managing Director, and with
him, as Director, is associated his son, Mr. Alex-
ander A. Hunter, Mr. H. Wickham being secretary.
MR. JOHN HUNTER, J.P.
Mr. John Hunter, who was the founder, and to
whose business acumen the concern owes its con-
tinued success, is a native of Kent, England, and
left there for Australia about 38 years ago. Some
time after his arrival his venturesome spirit im-
pelled him to seek his fortune on the goldfields,
which were in full swing at that time, and he there-
fore opened premises for the sale of boots and shoes
at what was then called Lambing Flat, now practi-
cally known as the town of Young. Later on he
established businesses at Forbes, Grenfell, and Qul-
gong.
About 1878 he came to Sydney, and was not long
here before his keen perception realised what
chances there were for the success of a high-class
boot and shoe trade. He began operations in this
business by opening a shop then known as 451
George-street, adjoining the store on the corner then
called the Waterloo Warehouse, the property of
the late Sir Daniel Cooper. His enterprise quickly
met with, its due reward, and rapid extension fol-
lowed, the popularity of his goods growing
steadily from year to year. How the demand was
met has already been described, and the success
achieved is strikingly emphasised by the fact that
during the brief period of 25 years the business
commenced in this shop has expanded until there
are now about 75 shops in full swing, supplied from
a factory and warehouse with 120,000 square feet of
floor space, and an equipment which includes all the
most modern machinery, all worked by electricity.
Mr. Hunter attributes no small measure of his
success to the fact that the system of plain fig ore
tTbe /Ifoanufactudng Jnbustr^.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-eontinued.
THE MANUFACTURE OF BOOTS AND SHOES.


prices was adopted by him, and has since been imi-
tated by others.
He thoroughly deserves his success, for throughout
his whole life he has been a man distinguished by
his attention to business, his strict integrity, his
unbounded enterprise, and the care and attention
he has at all times lavished upon the welfare of
those employed under him.
Mr. Hunter is a Justice of the Peace for the
State, but has not occupied any municipal or other
public position, feeling that if he did so he would
be unable to do justice to the great business whose
erected a spacious building of five stories, rvhich is
used as a wholesale warehouse. Fire escapes are
provided upon every floor throughout the buildings.
The whole floor space has a superficial area of well
over 120,0(1(1 square feet, and the whole building is
splendidly lighted and ventilated, while its internal
arrangement shows throughout the care lavished on
its design and construction, in order to secure all
facilities in the special industry for which it was
constructed. On the ground floor of what may be
designated “ the front offices” are the general goods
and forwarding departments. Electric lifts connect
these departments with every floor in the building
the doors until the lift arrives there and automatic-
ally frees the clutch. On the first floor are the
sample rooms and the offices of Mr. John Hunter.
Mr. Alexander Hunter, Mr. H. Wickham, and Mr.
W. Drew, who has been the manager and buyer of
the hoot department for the last 25 years.
THE FACTORY.
The factory, which is in charge of Mr. W. P.
Baldry, a gentleman of great experience, is entered
through two spacious doors on the ground floor, and
its six immense floors are subdivided into many de-
JOHN HUNTER AND SON, LTD., WAREHOUSE AND BOOT AND SHOE FACTORY,
CASTLEREAGH STREET, REDFERN, SYDNEY.
ramifications he so ably controls. His private resi-
dence is at ‘ Toftmonks,” Elizabeth Bay.
THE WAREHOUSE
John Hunter and Son, Limited, erected on its
•arge block of freehold land in Castlereagh-street,
Kedfern, is certainly one of the most imposing of
Ike business premises in New South Wales, its mas-
sive front embodying many handsome architectural
features. The factory consists of four portions. The
first part is three storeys, the second four, the
third five, and the fourth six storeys high,
’chile in addition to these there ha? been recently
for the collection of the finished boots and shoes
which are wanted for despatch to the various
depots.
These lifts are automatic, of a unique and abso-
lutely safe pattern. At the side of each lift door is
a switch which indicates the position of the lift.
When one of the employees wishes to forward goods
he touches the button, the lift comes to the floor,
and by an electrical connection shows a light at
night, and also starts a bell ringing until it has been
again sent away. The entrances of the lift-shaft
are electrically closed, so that when the lift is
away from any one of the floors no one can open
partments, all of which are replete with the most
modern machinery. To trace the evolution of a pair
of boots or shoes from the side of leather as it
arrives from one of the many tanneries supplying
Messrs. John Hunter and Son, Limited, one must
commence with the rough-stuff room, in which all
the bottom stuff is cut out and prepared by im-
proved sole-cutting presses recently imported for
that purpose.
Machines for shaving the soles to the required
thickness and removing all inequalities, moulding
them to shape, skiving, channelling, and other auxi-
liary processes, are here at work- The pld-fashioned


method employed by the shoemaker of by-gone
years, who hammered his leather laboriously on the
lapstone to knit it together, has been superseded
by the rolling machines to be seen at work in the
press room, where soles are passed under rollers to
firm them up and knit them in the same way, but
with far less expenditure of human energy. While
this work is being performed in preparing the bot-
tom stuff for the boots or shoes, in the clicking
room, another large and lofty apartment, possessing,
like the rest, absolutely perfect sanitary arrange-
ments, there is a busy hive of workers engaged in
cutting out the uppers according to the carefully
designed patterns, some hundreds in number, which
are used for the widely different types of boots and
shoes turned out by the firm. Adjacent to the click-
ing room is the store room for the various upper
leathers. Thousands of packages of tan, glace kid,
widlow calf, and other fine leathers, imported from
oversea specially for working up into the firm s
“ Celebrated J.H.” boots, are stacked here, as well
as a very comprehensive assortment of colonial
leathers, representing the product of tanneries situ-
ated in all parts of the Australian Commonwealth.
The visitor to the factory of Messrs. J. Hunter and
Son, Ltd., only commences to understand the won-
derful ingenuity which has of late years been pro-
fitably expended on the invention of labour-saving
machines for the boot and shoe trade when he
reaches the machine and making rooms. In these
two rooms all the most modern appliances for the
mechanical construction of footwear seem to be
grouped together, and though it is as yet impossible
to put a side of leather in at one end of a machine
and turn it out at the other a ready-laced and
polished pair of boots, anyone whom Mr. Baldry has
taken round can quite imagine an evolution on
these lines in the near future. It would be impos-
sible within the limits of this article to enumerate
the whole of the wonderful contrivances to be here
seen at work, but a few may be mentioned.
There are two large machine-rooms, in one of
which the uppers are put together. For stitching
together the various parts of the uppers there are
all the latest and most up-to-date sewing machines
used in the trade, all the old-style type having been
put on one side to make room for the latest high-
speed machines. Many of these sewing machines
work with three needles and five spools, each spool
carrying 12,000 yards of thread, or a total of 60,000
yards.
The Leader and Rapid toe-cap machines are clever
pieces of mechanism, which punch out the designs
for the toe-caps of all classes of boots. Before the
uppers are put together, the edges of each piece are
thinned and smoothed by being passed through the
" Amazeen skiver;” this allows all seams to be
neatly made. Buttonholes are put in by a new and
improved buttonhole machine, which cuts out the
buttonhole in the upper and stitches it with such
rapidity and accuracy that the finished work can-
not be distinguished from ordinary hand work—un-
less, indeed, an expert gave it most careful scrutiny.
The finishing machine takes up all the ends of the
button holes, and finishes them off. This is a mar-
vellous patent, and is worked under a royalty, a
charge being made for every thousand stitches made
and registered on an indicator. Buttons are also
sewn on by an automatic machine at a tremen-
dous rate, and a number of combined punching, eye-
letting and hooking machines are in use for the
purposes indicated in the titles. Improvements on
the older systems of flat-bottomed machines are to
be noticed in the many cylinder, golosh, and vamp-
ing machines.
The vast extent of the operations of Messrs. J.
Hunter and Son, Limited, may be gathered in
part from an inspection of the two large making
rooms, each as big as an ordinary factory, splendidly
lighted, safe, and what is of equal importance, ex-
tremely well ventilated. As the name suggests, the
making rooms are devoted to the as ambling of the
various parts, and are all full of the most intricate
machines for the expeditious manufacture of boots
and shoes. Uppers are joined to the soles by vari-
ous methods, according to the class of boots which
is being made. There is also an improved pegging
machine, which takes the coils of prepared wood,
cuts them to the proper length, punches the holes
A WORLD-WIDE TRADE MARK.
to receive the pegs, and, by automatic action, drives
them into the sole leather in their proper position,
at the same time cleaning off the ends of the pegs
inside the boot at the rate of a hundred pairs per
hour.
For heavy work, such as bluchers and navvies’
boots, the standard screwer, a wonderful machine,
has been devised. This machine feeds the brass
wire on a large spool, which revolves at great speed,
driving the wire through the soles of the boots, cut-
ting the wire off at the required length, and leav-
ing the insole of the boot perfectly smooth. A steel
disc round the rotary portion of the machine pre-
vents accident. So firm and lasting is the work done
on this machine that a boot screwed by it never
comes to pieces. Incidents have occurred in the fac-
tory, where, for testing purposes, efforts have been
made to pull a boot to pieces, a feat which it was
found an impossibility to accomplish without cut-
ting the parts asunder. Several designs of stitch-
ing machines for the lighter classes of boots are to
be seen in the making room. The Keat’s stitcher,
which lock-stitches, and is specially adapted for
water-resisting boots, is generally used in conjunc-
tion with the Standard screwer, the work turned out
on the machines being quite equal in solidity and
durability to the best hand-sewn work. The lock-
stitch welter stitches the welts to the uppers, and
works with the Empire Stitcher in the production
of high-class boots. The lasting machines in use in
this department do their work in a very rapid and
effective manner, while that accomplished by the
hand-method lasting machines being claimed to be
equal to the best hand labour. The boot, after pass-
ing through the making room, assumes a definite
shape, but it is still far from being a marketable
commodity. Before it is ready for distribution it has
to undergo several processes in the finishing rooms,
where heeling machines of various patterns and
strengths put on the heels of the many types of
footwear made by the firm, while a universal slugger
drives the nails into the top piece or lift of the
heels. The overlaying edges of the different pieces
of leather which make up the heel are smoothed
off by a heel trimmer, the breasting machine per-
forming a like office for that part of the heel which
is usually concave, leaving this most important
part of the boot trim and neat, and ready for the
heel scourers. The latter are fine emery wheels,
which, revolving rapidly, smooth off the last traces
of roughness and level them up. Polishing machines
called heel-pads are next called into requisition.
These are worked under a new method, and quickly
put that familiar gloss and finish on the heel which
is always an attractive feature of “ J.H.” brand
boots and shoes.
It remains to put the same polish on the soles,
and this is done by the " Globe” buffers and the
pneumatic cleaners, which give the glass-like sur-
face to the sole. This particular branch of the
bootmaking is under the control of an expert, who
is thoroughly experienced in the mixing and man-
ipulation of every shade of colour used by him.
A number of minor processes are gone through
before the boot reaches the “ Treeing” room. Every
boot is treed-up, dressed and stamped, prior to
being placed in the special cartons, neatly labelled
with the firm’s trade mark, the size of the boot,
and so on. In concluding the description of the
general factory, reference must be made to the
welling room, where the highest classes of ladies',
men’s, and children’s boots are made from the best
imported leather. It may be said, without fear of
contradiction, that the standard of work in this
department is equal in every way to that of the
best hand-sewn and imported articles procurable in
Australia.
In addition to the ordinary making of boots and
shoes, there is a complete factory organised exclu-
sively for the manufacture of pumps and kindred
descriptions of shoes. An improved turn-shoe
machine is in use here, as well as other interesting
pieces of mechanism, such as straight-needle
machines, and the loop-lock machine. The special
feature of this machine is the solidity of the work
it turns out. The finishing room for pumps is the
same as that for boots, and employs the same
machinery, but, of course, lighter work is put
through. Another room, distinct from the rest, ie
used for the last touches on the pumps and treeing
them up.


All this vast organisation, employing so many
scores of admirable machines, necessitates, of
course, the employment of a considerable expendi-
ture of power. This very important factor in the
making of boots and shoes is supplied by an elect-
ric installation, another instance, if such were
needed, of the enthusiastic enterprise of Mr. John
Hunter and the up-to-date methods employed by
the firm of which he is the head. The engine-room
is at the rear of the ground floor, and houses two
immense Babcock boilers, providing steam sufficient
to drive motors accumulating 135 h.p. From the
motors the current is switched to all parts of the
building. Not content with this, the firm has had
fitted up in each department subsidiary motors, so
that any one lot of machines can be worked inde-
pendently, thus enabling repairs to be effected in
one room without inconvenience or loss of time to
the other divisions of the factory. These motors
number about 30. The factory is lighted with about
600 arc and incandescent lights connected with the
generator, which is one of Siemen's multipolar
dynamos, direct coupled to a compound self-lubri-
cating Beilis engine. About 350 tons of scrap
leather, gathered by forced draught from the many
rooms, are burnt in the furnace every year. The
largest motor in operation in the factory is one of
20 h.p., driving about 200 feet of shafting, actuating
nearly 70 machines. All belting, shafting, etc., runs
overhead and well out of the way, obviating all
possible chance of accident. The whole of this large
installation has been designed and installed by Mr.
A. J. Jessop, who superintends the electrical staff.
The firm’s engineers and electricians are located on
the premises in the engineering rooms, which are
completely fitted with all necessary machinery, ap-
pliances, and tools for coping with any kind of
breakage and repairs.
Impressive as is a tour (one can hardly call it by
a minor term) through the factory, it must not be
forgotten that the manufacture of boots and shoes
is not the only commercial enterprise in which
Messrs. John Hunter and Son are engaged, and that
there are other branches of industry demanding
almost as much consideration. Very large stocks
of imported boots and shoes, products of the in-
dustry in all parts of the world, are handled and
sold by the firm, while the leather and grindery
stocks are among the most comprehensive in the
Commonwealth.
The imported lines handled include every
description of boots and shoes —English, Ame-
rican, Continental, and Australian make. In
the front portion of the warehouse in Castle-
reagh-street, Redfern, are immense storage
rooms, the contents of which comprise the products
of oversea and Australian manufacture, placed in
special racks and on tables in such a manner that
they can be easily handled, packed, and despatched
for distribution. Mr. S. Shaw r has the management
of the imported goods department, and Mr. J. Simp-
Wn that of the colonial manufacture^
The warehouse and factory in Castlereagh-street
keeps a large staff constantly engaged in the pack-
ing and distribution of goods throughout New
South Wales and the other States. The firm are
ready at very short notice to fill any wholesale
order they may receive, and in addition they keep
stocks up in their numerous shops in the metro-
polis, suburbs, and country districts of the State.
In all there are about 75 retail depots bearing the
name of John Hunter and Son, Ltd., each of them
fully equipped with up-to-date stocks of every des-
cription of footwear. The company has a wholesale
warehouse, also retail branches, in Queensland, and
until recently ran a factory there. Owing, how-
ever, to the erection of large additions to the cen-
tral establishment, it was thought more expedient
to do all the manufacturing in Sydney and forwaid
stocks to Brisbane. Travellers are, of course, em-
ployed throughout New South Wales, Queensland,
and Tasmania. The city office and sample rooms,
under the charge of Mr. Wadley, are at the corner
of King and York streets, Sydney, the firm’s London
office being located at 44 Bow Lane.
A conception of the output of the firm maybe
gauged from the fact that when the new additions
are in thorough working order (which will eventu-
ate very shortly), Messrs. John Hunter and Son,
A FAMOUS BRAND.
Ltd., will be able to manufacture from twenty to
twenty-five thousand pairs of boots per week, an
average which would be sufficient to fit each inha-
bitant— man, woman and child —in the State of
New South Wales with one pair of boots in the
year. The number of hands employed total over
1000, and it is to be expected that when the factory
is in full swing several hundreds more will be put
on.
THE LEATHER AND GRINDERY DEPART-
MENT.
The rough-stuff room of this department occupies
a very large space, the whole being under the able
control of Mr. C. B. Hunter. Here the leather is
ranged and cut into squares, full soles, half soles, in-
soles, outsoles, lifts, top pieces, etc., according to
its quality and the particular requirement for
which it is designed. A large stock of boot furnish-
ings is also kept on hand here. Adjoining the rough-
cut room is the press room, where the sole leather,
drawn from English, American, and Australian
tanneries, is dealt with, a great number of sides
being put through in the year. Huge presses, elec-
trically driven, and necessitating the constant em-
ployment of numbers of hands, are here to be seen
cutting out the various shapes for soles by
means of dies, the total number of which is 500, all
of different shapes and sizes.
This department has always on hand for its ex-
tensive clientele sole leather in sides from the
English, American, Canadian, and the principal
Australian tanneries, and the same leather cut
into ranges and squares for half-soling. Half soles,
outsoles, top pieces, and all other parts of the boot
cut to shape and ready to be made up are kept on
hand, as well as English and Colonial uppers of
every style, either in stock lines or made to mea-
sure. A customer can procure in this portion of the
firm’s business all the tools and grindery used in the
trade, such as hammers, knives, irons, brass and
iron rivets, flax and hemp threads, bristles, wood
and iron lasts, cork soles; in fact, everything that
is used in the manufacture of boots and shoes. A
very wide range of boot polishes is available, in-
cluding the famous black or tan “ King” polish,
made specially for the firm in England; the “ Cin-
derella” black or tan Liquid Lustres; and a score
of other polishes. There are also to be seen in this
department travelling trunks of every description,
from the cabin trunk to the bonnet box, in mild
steel, hide-leather bags, gladstones, portmanteaux,
brief and school bags, leather leggings, waterproof-
cloth leggings, rug straps, belts, footballs, and a
hundred and one other articles of leather in com-
mon use.
MERCERY DEPARTMENT.
There is also the mercery business to be
reckoned with, in which again large stocks are car-
ried. This branch is in charge of Mr. C. H.
Hunter, a son of Mr. C. B. Hunter, and is very
adeqrrately stocked with all descriptions of shirts,
men’s underwear, ties, hosiery, hats, etc., all of
the same excellent quality which marks the whole
range of goods sold or distributed by the firm.
The necessarily brief outline above given will
convey some idea of the most extensive nature of
the business of Messrs. J. Hunter and Son, Ltd.
Considering that this wonderful development is
due in a large measure to the many splendid busi-
ness qualities possessed by one man, every confi-
dence can safely be expressed in the future of New
South Wales as an industrial centre, and in the
wealth of Australia in general, so long as she has
citizens of the calibre and temperament of Mr. John
Hunter.
The employment of such a large number of work-
ers can be easily understood when it is remembered
that in connection with the firm’s operations there
are no less than 75 separate branches located in the
city, suburbs, and country. The registers for the
whole of the branches are made up at the head
office, over 30 clerks and bookkeepers being kept
busy in the counting-house. The Customs work
also necessitates the employment of a very large
staff.
The firm’s proprietary lines are the widely known
and exceptionally popular " J.H.” and " Kangara”
brands of boots and shoes, the reputation of which
has long since spread from the parent State, to all
the other States of Australia.


Messrs. McMurtrie & Co., Ltd.
BOOT AND SHOE MANUFACTURERS.
To the superficial observer who makes no effort
(o draw conclusions from comparative statistics, it
is sometimes a matter of wonder that the foremost
boot and shoe manufactories of the State are of
such immense capacity and so exceptionally well
equipped. At first sight there does not seem suffi-
cient population in the whole of Australia to ab-
sorb the output from them, without taking
into consideration the many imported lines which
still receive a very fair share of the public patron-
age. But a glance at figures at once dispels this
illusion. It is estimated that, in the Common-
wealth, there are eight million feet that “wear out
shoe leather,” that is to say, four million persons
whose footgear has progressed beyond that of baby-
hood.
At a conservative estimate each of these four
million persons requires two pairs of boots a year,
and the annual requirements of Australia thus
amount to eight million pairs. Probably this total,
in actual practice, would bear increasing by at
least fifty per cent, and it is safe to assume that
the figures represent not the aggregate sale of
boots and shoes, but that portion of it which is
entirely of Australian manufacture. Thirty years
ago the latter factor in the boot trade was to all
intents and purposes non-existent, and the people
of Australia were forced to expend large sums for
the benefit of English or European factories, and
to depend entirely on the importations of foreign-
made goods for their footwear. But it seemed
somewhat anomalous with such a sufficiency of
raw material, capable of being supplied from the
vast flocks and herds of the Continent, that this
should be the case, and, as the leather was ready to
hand, it was not long before business men keener
than the majority, and alive to the immense future
of boot and shoe making, began the work which,
to-day, considering its comparative youthfulness,
has grown to such immense proportions.
Among the pioneers of this most important
branch of secondary production were the two bro-
thers, John and George McMurtrie, both hailing
from that training school of successful commercial
men—Glasgow—who, in 1864, laid the foundations
of the present business in Goulburn Street. Busi-
ness in the “sixties” was not on the scale that it is
to-day, and the two brothers were’ content with a
humble beginning. But so strict was their atten-
tion to business, and so deservedly popular was
their work, that, after a lapse of some three years,
they found their premises altogether too small
for the satisfactory fulfilment of their ever-increas-
ing orders. Accordingly, they removed to larger
premises in Pitt Street in 1867, but these premises
only sufficed for another period of three years, at
the end of which time, in 1870, a second removal
was rendered imperative by the enhancement of
the firm’s reputation, and the consequent augmen-
tation of the demands made upon them. Clarence
Street was the locale chosen, and as the brothers,
taught by experience, had made better provision in
selecting their new quarters, they were enabled
to remain there undisturbed for seven years.
Up to this time the Messrs. McMurtrie had con-
fined themselves exclusively to manufacturing, and
it speaks volumes for the character of their work
that they were able to maintain and strengthen
their position in the commercial community of
Sydney in the face of the then existent prejudice
in favour of the English-made article. In 1877,
however, the inclusion in their business of an im-
port trade was decided upon. Mr. Kellermann
joined the firm, and, as a result of this change of
McMURTRIE AND CO.'S OFFICES AND SHOWROOMS, 76 CLARENCE STREET, SYDNEY.
policy, brought a large experience to bear upon
this new branch of the firm’s activity. The addi-
tion again rendered a change of quarters desirable,
and the Clarence Street factory was abandoned for
larger and more suitable premises in King Street
Shortly after this the firm lost one of its founders
in the person of Mr. John McMurtrie, whose death
brought Mr. James McMurtrie, another brother,
into the concern.
Übe flfoanufactiuing snbusti^.
•Historical and Biographical Sketches.-eontinued,
THE MANUFACTURE OF BOOTS AND SHOES.


The now familiar experience of a business ex-
pauding beyond the accommodation afforded by
its building was enjoyed by Messrs. McMurtrie for
the fifth time, and in 1880 an additional warehouse
was established in York Street, the Clarence Street
premises being retained as a factory. But time
had more changes still in store, and the prospects
for the partners were so bright that they felt
abundantly justified in putting more money into
the business. The increase of capital was in part
devoted to the purchase of the land at Eveleigh
upon which the factory now stands, and the erec-
tion of the first section of that building in 1883.
The York Street Warehouse was then vacated for
se new premises, and a central office was taken in
Eldon Chambers, Pitt Street. In 1887 Mr. Keller-
maun retired from the firm, and in the same year,
land in Clarence Street was purchased where the
an enviable reputation and a long record of useful-
ness. The deceased gentleman was succeeded by a
son, Mr. Willie MeMurtrie, and Mrs. McMurtrie.
The latter still retains her husband’s interest in the
firm. Mr. Michaelis was appointed to his present
position of Secretary and Managing Director on
the retirement of Mr. W. McMurtrie, having
worked his way upward by dint of outstanding
merit and wholesouled devotion to the interests of
the firm.
MESSRS. McMURTRIE AND CO.'S FACTORY,
EVELEIGII.
The firm's factory, wherein nearly four hundred
hands are employed, is situated at the corner of
Wells and Abercrombie Streets, Eveleigh, on the
spot where, twenty years ago, the first courses
A guiding hand of more than usual eminence is
noticeable everywhere in the interior management
of the factory. Mr. G. Michaelis came to the work
fresh from a visit to the old world factories and
his exceptional commercial instinct had enabled
him while there to retain in his memory all the
most important points regarding labour-saving ap-
pliahces. and disposition of rooms that had found
favour in liis eyes. Ably seconded by Mr. W. F.
Bailey, the Factory Manager, who has had many
years' experience with the firm, Mr. Michaelis
madp (and indeed if hu KiUinocc fr»
that different* operations which involve the
manufacture of a pair of boots are so systemati-
cally co-related that no time is lost in the transit
from one room to another.
Furthermore, he is ever on the alert for new and
improved machinery, and the firm, of which he is
McMURTRIE AND CO.'S BOOT AND SHOE FACTORY, EVELEIGH.
present offices and warehouse stand, the foundation
of which was laid by Sir Henry Parkes, and the
warehouse completed in 1889.
Death was again busy with the firm in 1891, when
.' .George McMurtrie, the second and last of the
original founders, passed away, after a lifetime ot
strenuous endeavour. A year later the character
and appellation of the firm was altered to that of
a _limited liability company, with a capital of
■£"6,000, under the title of Messrs. McMurtrie and
Company. It still remained a private concern,
and there were yet two men connected with it who
bore the time-honoured name, but Mr. W. McMur-
trie retired in October, 1898, and some fifteen
Months ago Mr. James McMurtrie, who, since 1878,
had been at first the factory manager, and later a
director of the Company, died .leaving behind him
were laid. But since then alterations, additions,
and improvements have been the order of the day,
and those who knew it then would scarcely recog-
nise the old building in the spacious solid-looking,
but withal architecturally handsome premises from
which flows Messrs. McMurtrie’s huge output to-
day. The factory is 64 feet high, 220 feet to Ivy,
and 100 feet Abercrombie Street, and each flat, with
its" superficial area of 6000 square feet, is 14 feet
from floor to ceiling, while tne rooms are spacious
and well lighted throughout. t»nile the additions
were in progress, the opportunity was taken to
have a lavatory fitted on each floor, and an outside
staircase built for use in case of fire, both adjuncts
being obviously a decided advantage, and bearing
abundant evidence of the care the Company exer-
cises over the well-being of its employees.
the head, have, mainly through his exertions, made
it a special care that the latest and most approved
machines should be installed in their factory as
soon as ever their worth had been demonstrated.
As a natural consequence the factory has now a
splendid plant, constantly being added to when-
ever such addition promises an increase in output,
and at the present moment the machinery employed
is larger than that of any other institution of a
similar kind within the Commonwealth, while it
compares most favourably with that of factories in
older centres of civilisation.
During the process of manufacture into one of
the very many types of hoots or shoes bearing the
famous brand of the firm, the leather passes in a
complete circuit from one room to the other. There
is no delay, no loss of time occasioned from the


time the leather arrives from the tannery to the
time when the finished article is despatched to the
warehouse. The sides of sole or other leather are
received from the carts in the basement of the fac-
tory, and immediately pass to the rough stuff room,
where experts rapidly sort it out into the various
qualities, and the leather is then rolled and put
through various machines to bring it to the neces-
sary consistency and durability.
It passes thence straight to the sole leather room,
where there is to be seen a new and improved type
of sole-cutting presses, which rapidly stamp out
the soles. They are constructed on an entirely new
principle, and are capable of a much greater out-
put than those in ordinary use. All the latest
kinds of machines for rounding, skybing, counter-
cutting, and moulding, are in use, as are also the
necessary plant for sole moulding, chanelling, chan-
nel openers, and heel builders. In the general stock
room, which is in direct connection with the rough
stuff room, the upper leather is handled. In this
room are to be found every description of leather,
such as Glace kid. Tan Glace calf, American buff,
Tan, Tweeds, and all imported leathers, as well as
silk linings, and other material.
From these rooms the sole and upper leathers
take a divergent course. Swift elevators convey
the latter to the clickers’ room, where over fifty
men are at work on specially devised tables in a
well-lighted room, engaged in the cutting out of the
uppers in the hundred and one shapes required. In
American parlance the leather is then passed
“right away” by elevators to the sewing room, an
immense apartment running the whole length of
the building, and tenanted by a number of girls
who, seated at the various machines, sew up the up-
pers which pass from one to the other so quickly
that it seems as though a continual stream of lea-
ther was flowing along the tables. Skybing, French
stitching, fancy-stitch cording, trimming, sewing,
heel sewing, eyelet punching and eyelet insertion,
vamping, capping, quartering, and other opera-
tions are carried out here. The greatest care has
been exercised in this room, as indeed it has
throughout the building, to have the shafting and
belting necessary for the supply of power so placed
that it is absolutely impossible for any employee
to meet with an accident.
No one, after visiting this room, can fail to be
impressed with the stage of perfection reached by-
Messrs. McMurtrie and Company in the direction
of the expeditious handling of their product. The
stuff comes in at one side, where it is immediately
taken in hand by the busy workers,( each of whom
performs her allotted task upon it and then trans-
fers it to another. In this manner it traverses the
whole length of the room, arriving at the other
end in a very different condition to that in which
it commenced its journey-. It is then put into lots
called “case lots,” the parts for each boot and shoe
being assembled, checked, and examined before be-
ing despatched to the maicing room.
The arrangement of the making room, where the
soles and uppers are again brought together, is as
perfect as experience could devise, the machines
being placed so that the stuff is handed on with a
minimum loss of time. In no case is this perfec-
tion of arrangement better emphasised than in that
part where the consolidating lasters are
at work, a number of men being here employed in
pulling over the uppers on to the lasts. By a spe-
cial disposition of the tables, the lasts as they
come from the hand method consolidated lasting
machines return by gravitation to the men who are
chaiged with this important work. A number of
Goodyear welters and Blake sewing machines are in-
stalled in the turn shoe department, where ladies’,
gentlemen’s, and children’s shoes are made, and
which is a branch of the making room.
In the finishing room, “the last stage of all”
reached by the boot or shoe, the same orderliness
and rapidity of execution which characterises the
working of the whole factory is noticeable. The
boots, now in a state somewhat resembling the
trade article, go through a series of trimmings and
polishings in such machines as heel buffers, edge
trimmers, forepart trimmers, burnishers, painting
and staining soles and w-aists, and go on until they
are deemed fit to be put on the market as footwear
worthy of the high reputation in which Messrs.
McMurtrie are held. Even then care is exercised
that nothing inferior should be issued, and from
the finishing department the boots or shoes go to be
exsmined. Should any defect be found in the mak-
ing or the article considered to be below the high
standard set by the firm, the pair is at once rejected
and sent back to be remade. The forwarding and
packing departments where the boots and shoes are
packed in elegant cartons, each bearing the famous
“ McMurtrie” brand, which is known all over the
continent, is situated on the ground floor, so that
the time occupied in loading the cases and cartons
on to the carts for conveyance to the warehouse is
as short as possible.
As machinery is employed wherever jiossible by
Messrs. McMurtrie and Company, it follows that
the engine-room of the factory is a most important
section of it. A huge Hoskin’s boiler is set up
there for the supply of power, which is transmitted
to the various floors by means of the customary
shafting and belting, while the up-to-date elevator
system is run by hydraulic pumps developing 100
h.p. Machinery and carpenters' shops are at-
tached, where the company, strong in the know-
ledge that it pays to have everything done on the
premises, do their own carpentering, blacksmith-
ing, and general repairs.
The actual headquarters of the company are at
76 and 78 Clarence-street, where the offices and
warehouse are situated in a handsome building of
four floors. Practically speaking, the warehouse
occupies two buildings, an alley way running be-
tween the ground floors, on one side of which are
MR. GEORGE MICHAELIS,
Managing Director.
the manager’s office and sample rooms, the other
being occupied by another firm. On the three floors
above, however, the whole space, running from out-
side wall to outside wall, is devoted to the hous-
ing of the immense stocks of boots, shoes, and slip-
pers carried by the company. About sixty hands
are employed in the warehouse, in attending to the
immense volume of business handled. The company
has a branch in Queensland, and agencies in all the
other States of Australia and New Zealand. Seven-
teen travellers are constantly employed, twelve be-
ing engaged in New South Wales and live in
Queensland.
Messrs. McMurtrie and Company manufacture
every kind of boot, shoe, or slipper, and the pre-
sent output exceeds the half million per annum.
Significant as is this statement in judging the
scope of the firm, it is by no means all. The com-
pany is also interested in various other factories,
and does an immense importing trade, acting as
Australian agents for some of the principal British,
Continental and American Manufacturers. At some
of the factories in which the firm has an interest
the American plan of specialising the work is
already being followed. That is to say, the pro-
duction is confined to special lines in the manufac-
ture of which the greatest care is taken to keep
abreast of the best work turned out in other coun-
tries.
Such, in brief, is the past record and present posi-
tion of Messrs. McMurtrie and Company, certainly
one of the most up-to-date and best-equipped firms
engaged in the manufacture of boots and shoes.
From every point of view, especially from that
aspect which appeals most strongly to the commer-
cial community, the rise and progress of the com-
pany deserves every commendation. In the face of
all obstacles, overriding all bias. Messrs. MoMur-
trie and Company have developed and expanded
their immense business, ignoring the adventitious
aid granted by a protective tariff, untroubled by
the foreign competition set up by free trade condi-
tions, triumphing over everything, and standing
to-day a pre-eminent example of what dogged per-
severance, acute business instincts, and progressive
methods continually practised will do.
Jill. GEOBGE MICIIAELIS.
The present managing director of McMurtrie and
Company, Limited, Mr. George Michaelis, has
climbed rapidly to a leading position in the manu-
facturing world of Australia, for he is yet com-
paratively speaking a young man, having been
born in 1867 at St. Kilda, one of the most popular
of Melbourne’s many beautiful suburbs. Educa-
ted chiefly at Wesley College in the days when
Professor Andrew was Principal, and finishing his
studies after a two years’ course under Mr. Thomas
(a former senior master of the college), Mr.
Michaelis bade farewell for a time to city life and
began his researches in the school of colonial ex-
perience.
He followed station life for some three years in
the Seymour or Goulburn Valley District of Vic-
toria. Leaving pastoral pursuits in 1886, he joined
the firm of Michaelis, Hallenstein and Company,
the well-known tanners and leather merchants, of
Melbourne. Six months sufficed to initiate him so
far into the mysteries of this business that he was
promoted to the position of traveller for the firm
throughout Victoria and Tasmania. This work
gave Mr. Michaelis an intimate knowledge of his
native colony, for while “ on the road” it was his
duty to “do” the whole of it from one end to the
other. Several years having been spent in this way,
with mutual benefit to himself and his firm, Mr.
Michaelis, a little before the opening of the Paris
Exhibition in 1889, went on a visit to the old coun-
try. Before he reached there, however, he spent a
little time in Europe, where he visited some of the
principal factories.
Though his business in England was of a private
character, the great English factories were also
visited, and much useful information and insight
obtained relative to the modern methods and
machinery employed in the various trades of which
leather forms the principal raw material.
Beturning by way of America, Mr. Michaelis
pursued his investigations still further in the same
direction, and visited most of the principal facto-
ries of the great republic. After an absence of
fourteen months, on his return to Australia, Mr.
Michaelis found a ready opening for his energies.
The firm of McMurtrie and Company then was ex-
tending its operations throughout the States, and
Mr. Michaelis, on joining the firm in 1890, re-
ceived the appointment of sub-manager.
During the next year the film was converted into
a limited liability company, and Mr. Michaelis was
chosen as one of the directors, Mr. W. McMurtrie be-
ing the managing director. On the retirement of
the latter in 1898, the important post fell to Mr.
Michaelis, whose successful discharge of the oner-
ous duties of his position is best proved by the
flourishing state of the company under his regime.
Mr. Michaelis immediately brought his extended
experience and unbounded energy to bear upon
the affairs of the firm, and the result was a marked
expansion in its operations during the ensuing de-
cade. Organising, rearranging, and pushing his
connections wherever possible, the present head
has steered his ship most successfully through the
troubled waters of the last decade, and looks for-
ward with the utmost confidence—a confidence
which is shared by all who know him—to a long
term of progress and prosperity in the future. An
excellent type of the busy man, Mr. Michaelis is
always ahead of his work, and therefore' not wor-
ried by it, takes great interest in military affairs',
has charge of the 6th Begiment, and when these
notes were penned was due for a lieutenant-
colonelcy as the distinguishing rank of the officer
commanding a regiment.


R. A. Hervey.
MANUFACTURER AND MANUFACTURERS’
AGENT.
The subject of our sketch is the fourth son of
James Hervey, of Bradford, and was born at Light-
clifie, near Halifax, Yorkshire. He has had varied
commercial experience in England, The United
States, Canada, and the East. Prior to settling in
Australia he served as Purser in the Eastern and
Australian Mail S. S. Co., when that Company had
the contract for carrying the Queensland mails to
and from Singapore. After leaving the sea he en-
tered the office of Bright Bros., Melbourne. He
left that firm to take up a position with Henry
Cave and Co., Fiji, returning to Sydney in March.
MR. R. A. HERVEY.
’8? ha entered the service of James Moir and Co., as
Managing Clerk, and in August, ’B4, he commenced
business on his own account as a Commercial
Broker at 46 Pitt-street, a little one-storied building
of 4 rooms long since demolished, but at that time
occupied by S. Samper, Farmer Bros., W. 11. Lacey,
and himself. From there he moved to larger pre-
mises at 14 and 16 Bond Street, and thence to 144
Clarence Street, again to 28 Pitt Street, opposite
Gibbs, Bright and Co., and finally back to 171 Clar-
ence Street, near the corner of King Street, where
he has now been about six years.
In ’B5, in conjunction with E. G. Rand and A. G.
Whipple, representing the Rand Drill Company,
and the Remit ock Powder Co., of New York, he
successfully introduced the Rand Rock Drills and
Compressors, and the well-known explosive com-
pound, Rackarock, which latter he still manufac-
tures.
He represents the following well-known firms;—
The Globe Oil Co.; Cleveland Ohio Lubricating
Oils, etc.; D. Anderson and Son, Ltd., Belfast
makers of the “Red Hand’’ brand of Silicate Got-
ten, Insulating Materials, Roofing, Sheathing, and
Sarking Felt, Hair Fabric and Dampcourse; the
Rurimachos Works, Bristol “Purimachos” Fire
Cement for Retorts, etc.; George E, Woodbury.
San Francisco, Ore Concentrators, The Williams
Patent Crusher and Pulveriser Co.; St. Louis,
U. S. A., Disintigraters and crushers for all pur-
poses; Gritliths liros. and C 0.,; Bermondsey, Lon-
don; “Ferrodor” anticorrosive Paints; Joseph Dee,
Manchester, “Jodelite,” for preserving timber
against the action of the weather and attacks of
White Ant, Teredo, etc.; The Campbell Gas Engine
R. A. HERVEY'S WAREHOUSE, 171 CLARENCE STREET, SYDNEY.
Co., Halifax, Yorkshire: the “Campbell” Gas and
Oil Engines; the United Flexible Metallic Tubing
Co„ London, Steel, Bronze, and Copper Patent
Flexible Tubing for all purposes; the Mica Lubri-
cant Co., of South Shields, Mica Packings and
Greases, the American Emery Wheel AVorks, Provi-
dence, R. IT, makers of all kinds of Emery AVheels;
Kynoch, Ltd., Birmingham, Gelignite and other
explosives; P. K. AVood, Los Angelos, California,
Patent Deep Well Propeller Pumps; The Tucking-
mill Foundry Co., Camborne, Cornwall. “Little
Hercules” Rock Drills and “Economic” Air Com-
pressors; the Burt Manufacturing Co., Akron,
Ohio, “The Cross” and “American” Oil Filters, and
the Burt Exhaust Meads; Easton and Co., Ltd.,
Erith, London, Electric, Hydraulic and General
Engineers and Makers of “ The Schmidt” Super-
heaters and the Easton Electric Lifts, etc.; Charles
A. Scheiren and Co., New York, Tanners and Lea-
ther Belt manufacturers, and makers of “Proofine,”
for preserving belts and preventing slipping, etc.
He makes a speciality of Explosives, Machinery,
and General Supplies used in mining, contracting,
dredging, sluicing, irrigation, building, engineering,
etc., and in the placing on the market of patented
articles and goods of special manufacture,
Übe /IbanufactiiiTiiG Jnbusti^.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
EXPLOSIVES AND MINING MACHINERY.


Messrs. Farleigh, Nettheim & Co.
TANNERS, LEATHER MERCHANTS, ETC.
Volumes have have been written on the rise of
small States to the status of great Empires, but
the history of the growth of a firm from modest
beginnings to a position of great influence and pros-
perity. is, in its way, quite as engrossing as the
historical work of the publicist. Indeed, the story
of a nation’s progress would be quite unintelli-
gible if the readers were ignorant of the chief char-
acteristics of the units of which that community is
composed. And it ought to be remembered that be-
hind the politician, the civil servant, and the sol-
dier, are the men who have assisted to build up
that commercial fabric, without which the State
would be poor indeed.
The rise and progress of the business of Messrs.
Farleigh, Nettheim and Company, the well-known
and enterprising firm of leather merchants, tan-
ners, etc., who have their headquarters at 78 and 80
Clarence Street, in this City, is well worthy of the
attention of all who are studying the problem of
how to achieve commercial success. When the
film commenced business in 1876 their establish-
ment was situated on the same site in Clarence
Street as that now occupid by them. But w r hat a
change in other respects! Many things have hap-
pened, and several changes of address taken place
in 27 years, and the contrast between the single-
storied buildings of 1876, and the grand four-storied
edifice of to-day is great indeed.
A desire to obtain a position nearer their fac-
tories at Waterloo, and yet not too remote from
shipping facilities, induced the firm to remove to
George Street, Haymarket. generally acknowledged
to be a live and bustling neighbourhood, but in the
records of the firm it is stated that they found it
much too lively. With every disposition to do
justice to Waterloo, other claims could not be
totally overlooked. Business was increasing, and
it was accordingly resolved to move to No. 32
O’Connell Street, where the firm made a local
habitation for about two years.
In 1879 the ever-increasing requirements of their
business bompelled Messrs. Farleigh, Nettheim and
Company to remove to Nos. 14 and 16 York Street,
which had just been vacated by the “Daily Tele-
graph” Newspaper Company. A glance at the ex-
terior of that building would lead to the belief that
a considerable business could be conveniently car
lied on within its walls, but even in these huge pre-
mises the space was not sufficient, and in 1893 the
firm found them unequal to their demands. Not-
withstanding the proverbial trouble attaching to
removals, it was again made necessary to “move
camp,” this time, as above stated, to the same site
as that occupied by the firm 26 years previously.
The adage as to returning to our first loves has,
in the case of the firm under notice, been fully
justified, although the modest building formerly
occupied by them has given place to a com-
modious warehouse replete with every facility
for carrying on a great business. An in-
spection of the premises demonstrates the com-
pleteness of the firm's business arrangements. The
well-lighted basements give storage to Colonial
leathers, all grades of sole, kip, tweed, etc. The
celebrated “King of Mimosa” brand being well to
the front. Big parcels of the "Monarch of the Oaks ”
a special line in American sole leather, are also
held in stock. Mr. T. J. McCabe, who has been in
the service of the firm since 1889, is in charge of
this department.
On the ground floor are the private offices and
counting house. The first floor is used as a general
sales-room, fancy leather, grindery, etc., being
stocked in all grades and varieties. This portion
of the business is under the sole control of Mr.
Richard Farleigh, who dates his service with the
firm from 1877. Bulk stock is kept in the upper
floors of the warehouse.
All business in connection with Jones’ Sewing
Machines, the agency for which is held by Messrs,
Farleigh, Nettheim and Company, is transacted
here. The mechanical department also finds a lo-
cation in this part of the building. An important
part of the firm’s business is the Boot Upper Fac-
f , , 0 , i. j i.u . .
tory at 337 Kent Street, under the management of
Mr. Richard Steele, who was born on the Northern
side of the Tweed, in the old land. The latest ap-
pliances are here to be found, and intelligence and
MESSRS. FARLEIGH, NETTHEIM AND COMPANY.
OFFICES AND SHOWROOMS, CLARENCE STREET, SYDNEY.
eneigy in combination with these have achieved re-
suits of a very remarkable kind,
The firm’s tannery at Concord, one of the largest
of its kind in New South Wales, is replete with
every modern device for the work handled, and,
under the skilful management of Mr. John Lawson,
turns out a tannage of unexcelled quality and
finish.
A branch of the business was established in
Brisbane in 1833, but sample rooms being fount*
insufficient, the present warehouse in Edwar
Street was leased Mr Charles Gibbon who come*
from the land of the leek and St. David, being the
manager A of this firm - s operations, and
t h e extensive trade attained by them, will show
that there is something in the tanners’ belief as VC
there being "nothing like leather,”
tlbe /Ibamifactuvmg Jnbusti^.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-contmued.
TANNERS AND LEATHER MERCHANTS.


Messrs. Farleigh, Nettheim and Co. probably
consider that there was some solid substratum of
truth in this dictum, and the sound footing of their
fortunes, as illustrated by many years of prosperity
and profitable development, speaks on this point
with an eloquence that cannot be disputed. It will
not be denied that a great and profitable field for
the extension of local industries exists in New
South Wales. Whatever people may do without,
they cannot dispense with foot-gear, even in the
hardest times. Both the millionaire and the swag-
man are at one with regard to this, whatever dif-
ference may exist in the style and quality of their
pedal coverings.
The demand for boots, shoes, etc., is not occa-
sional, but constant, though the volume thereof
varies according to the seasons. Great changes
have occurred in the trade within the last few
years, and, although competition has become
phenomenal, local manufacturers being well in-
formed as to outside movements, make their ar-
rangements accordingly. Messrs. Farleigh, Nett-
heiiu and Company have, throughout their long car-
eer, more than held their own against all competi-
tive activity and vigour. In every combat the vet-
erans in the campaign know where and how their
energies can be best directed, and this fact is well
understood at the establishment whose address is 78
and 80 Clarence Street.
MR. COSMANN NETTHEIM.
In the “good old days” of 1866 there came to the
shorts of Victoria, as a very young man, Mr. Cos-
<nann Nettheim, to take part in the development
of the great city on the banks of the Yana. Pos-
sessed of a good physique, a sound education, and
indomitable energy, the young colonist discharged
the duties at once entrusted to him by the well-
known firm of Messrs. Michaelis, Hallenstein and
Company, in a manner that attracted the atten-
tion and received the approbation of his superiors.
Mr. Nettheim early displayed that attention to
detail which is generally acknowledged as being
akin to genius, and, by unwearying industry, greatly
promoted the business.
His conduct in time received its due reward, and
he was honoured by being admitted as a member
of the new firm. Almost needless to say that, as a
partner, Mr. Nettheim’s energy showed no sign of
slackening, and that his business acumen was not
blunted by fresh responsibilities and rewards. It
is necessary to mention that one of his
comrades and friends in the business in Melbourne
was Mr. John Farleigh, and, when Messrs. Mic-
haelis, Hallenstein and Company resolved to es-
tablish a branch of their business in Sydney, it
Uaturally came about that the two young friends,
whose ability and industry were fully recognised
by their employers, should be selected for the carry-
ing out of the new venture. The selection of men
to work in double harness is often difficult, and
many mistakes on that important subject have
been made.
In the case under notice the choice was an excel-
lent one in every respect. Each of the partners
had his own recognised sphere of work, and there
was from the start co-operation of the most loyal
kind. Mr. Nettheim’s strong genius for finance,
which the course of years has strengthened, served
the busine-s in good stead when the foundations
thereof had to be laid by new builders in land com-
paratively strange to them.
Thus the firm of Messrs. Farleigh, Nettheim and
Company was founded in 1876, with business prem-
ises in Clarence Street. The branch proved so
successful that it subsequently developed into a
separate business, in which the Melbourne firm re-
tained a considerable interest. Mr. John Farleigh
died in 1885.
Those nine years had been a period of prosperous
development, and Mr. Nettheim was then left alone
to manage a business that had all along demanded
the work and judgment of two partners. In the
business life of Sydney he is highly re-
spected, and holds an influential position. As an
authority on all matters of finance his opinion is
greatly valued, and he might have occupied the
position of a public financial expert had he so de-
cided. His own business, however, has always
taken up such a large portion of his time that it
has been impossible for him to devote his energies
to other matters.
It is, nevertheless, an open secret that he repre-
sents large European monetary interests in this
part of the world. Certainly, in Sydney at the pre-
sent moment, when so many empires are to be
found dabbling in matters affecting the sinews of
war and peace, men with Mr. Nettheim’s grasp of
financial problems of the State, the Commonwealth,
and the world, are very much required.
It is a source of great satisfaction when men
with so sound and accurate a knowledge of the
principles and movements of the wealth of nations
as that possessed by our subject, are found at
the head of large mercantile and industrial pro-
jects, for they furnish a guarantee that the prin-
ciples which actuate them when dealing with their
business affairs, will guide them in the conduct of
all matters pertaining to the common weal, and to
the lasting benefit of the people. Mr. Nettheim is
much respected in the commercial world, and, in
the path of life of a private citizen, he
has troops of friends, whose esteem is worth hav-
ing, and far outweighs that meritricious homage
which is all the reward that a civic or political
career often gives to those who pursue it.
MR. JOHN GIHSON FARLEIGH.
This gentleman is a nephew of the late Mr. John
Farleigh. and entered the service of the fifra of
Farleigh, Nettheim and Company in a junior ca-
pacity as far back as 1877. Mr. ,T. G. Farleigh,
though comparatively young in years, is, never-
theless, a veteran of 25 years’ service in the busi-
ness. Through all grades of the trade Mr. Far-
leigh worked his way, until, in 1891, he was ad-
mitted into partnership.
The personal relations obtaining in the business,
between the junior partner and the employees, are
of a most cordial character. That there is some-
thing in a name is evidenced continually, and no-
where more prominently than in the realm of
commerce, and when that name is borne by one
who has thoroughly identified himself with every
detail of a business, and whose working life has
been spent in promoting its welfare, nothing could
be more fit and proper than that advancement
which should be the reward of faithful and indefat-
igable service, irrespective of family considera-
tions. and here reference may be made to the late
Mr. John Farleigh, one of the original founders of
the firm. This gentleman received the rudiments
of his learning in the leather trade as an appren-
tice to the late Mr. Woods, of Sligo, Ireland. After-
completing his indentures, accompanied by his
brother, Mr. E. M. Farleigh, he landed in 1864 at
Melbourne, to push his way under the regions bea-
coned by the Southern Cross.
Messrs. Michaelis, Hallenstein and Company, be-
ing ever on the lookout for “new blood,” Air.
John Farleigh was not long in Melbourne before
he secured an appointment in the business of that
firm. The young man soon showed the good mettle
that was in him, and was soon acknowledged to be
a "leather man” in the most emphatic sense.
American leather was of such a fine quality that
buff sides were called by Mr. John Farleigh “satin
leather,” a name which still clings to them, and
now that the buffalo are practically gone, the ad-
vent of the goods known as “branded sides” is pos-
sible. Air. John Farleigh became so great a favour-
ite in the business that when, in 1876, Messrs. M ic-
haelis, Hallenstein and Company resolved to es-
tablish a branch in Sydney, the young Sligo man
was selected as a partner in the new venture.
The original partners worked in the utmost har-
mony, but, on (he 17th of July, 1885, Air. John Far-
leigh’s career was closed by the cold hand of death,
to the great grief of his partner, and the regret of
the large circle of business men who formed the
firm’s clientele.
Let us now return from the uncle to the nephew.
Air. J. G. Farleigh is essentially a worker to his
MR. JOHN GIBSON FARLEIGH.
finger tips. When duty has to be done he never
spares himself, and his vigorous enthusiasm spurs
all who are under him to fresh activity. He,
however, does not ask from anyone what he
himself would not do in similar circumstances. He
has thus the happy knack of putting himself in a
mental sense in the place of others for the time
being. This is the chief characteristic of those
who manifest to a considerable extent great execu-
tive ability.
AH orders issued are gauged with fairness, and
with an unswerving regard to the varying charac-
teristics of those whose duty it is to execute them.
Mr. Farleigh’s methods are thus cordially ap-
proved by the employees, and that in the best pos-
sible way, viz., prompt and intelligent execution
of them.
The firm’s customers, too, find, in the junior
member of the firm, a gentleman with whom it is
a pleasure to do business. Outside the operations
of his firm, Mr. Farleigh has a large circle of per-
sonal friends who predict for him a life of great
usefulness and benefit to the community. Cer-
tainly his past career is an excellent augury for
brilliant and prosperous future,


Messrs. Beale & Coy., Ltd.
MANUFACTURERS OF BEALE PIANOS AND
SEWING MACHINES.
That the metropolis of the oldest and richest
State in the Australian Commonwealth is, at no
distant date, destined to become a great centre of
manufacturing and industrial activity, rivalling in
this respect, perhaps many of the cities of both
the old and the new world, is a fact accepted by all
who are arvare of the immense facilities Sydney
presents to men of enterprise and capital to launch
out on industrial projects.
Among the many industrial concerns finding a
congenial home on the confines of the harbour of
Port Jackson, that of Messrs. Beale and Company,
Limited, takes a place in the front rank and means
to hold it. It is characteristic of the Australians
that as soon as they settle down to the serious busi-
ness of life—housekeeping—the possession of a sew-
ing machine and a piano becomes at
once a sort of crowning ambition. In
former years this laudable desire could
only be satisfied through the agency of an
imported article, but since Messrs. Beale and Com-
pany came on the scene, the position has undergone
a radical change, as this firm has been able to put
on the market a locally manufactured article of
the highest grade, and at a price which brings it
within the reach of almost everyone. In under-
taking to cater for the wants of a comparatively
small community, in the face of the fierce com-
petition of the long-established factories of the old
world, Messrs. Beale and Company set out with the
conviction that success could be achieved only by
merit, and it is owing to their steadfast aim to
produce a high-class article, that they have won
the confidence and support of the public, in a de-
gree that is truly remarkable.
The firm is fully entitled to the highest praise for
the excellence of its productions, and the fact that
everything of a second-rate character is tabooed,
amply justifies its claim to superlative merit in
respect to its goods.
Messrs. Beale and Company’s manufactory is sit-
uated at Trafalgar Street, Annandale, where over
two acres of ground are covered by the extensive
works which give employment to a large number of
hands, the wages bill amounting to fully .£40,000
per annum. The above facts indicate in bold re-
lief what a patent factor this enterprise is in the
industrial life of the parent State.
The business was originally founded by Mr. O.
C. Beale, in 1879, at Sydney, where he started as an
importer of sewing machines and pianos. Under
his careful management the business rapidly in-
creased, and then the founder decided to strike out
as a manufacturer.
First of all he undertook to manufacture the
stands and cabinet work of sewing machines, a line
of business that proved highly successful. Then,
after gradually feeling his way, and assuring him-
self of the prospects, he launched out as a manu-
facturer of pianos. The gratifying results that
have since been achieved abundantly prove the wis-
dom of his choice.
It was in the year 1892 that he first commenced
to manufacture sewing machines as above, and,
like most men who have attained success, he began
in a small way and gradually forged ahead. Feeling
(he ground beneath his feet secure, about seven
years ago he started and made his first piano, and
since that time the name of the Beale piano has
become a household word throughout the Common-
wea'th. The business so auspiciously begun, made
such progress that about a year ago the factory
had to be greatly extended, and an addition having
a superficial area of 60 feet by 120 feet, and com-
prising no less than four floors was erected.
The factory is a handsome brick structure facing
Trafalgar Street. On the ground floor are located
the offices of the Managing Director (Mr. O. C.
Beale), the Factory Manager (Mr. Vader), the ac-
countaut, anu the office staff. These are well
lighted and ventilated, while no expense has been
spared to make them as convenient and
comfortable as possible. The remainder of
this floor is occupied by the completed
pianos and machines. The remaining three
floors of the building are utilised for manufactur-
ing purposes, and some of the intricate processes
of piano anu sewing machine making can be wit-
nessed.
Part of the building is fireproof, and is so ar-
ranged architecturally as to admit of two or more
storeys being added, and, if necessary, of a 40 feet
extension on the southern side.
Starting on a visit of inspection, the first place
to engage attention is the foundry, where the mak-
ing of piano frames is in progress. It may be news
to many to be told that one of the most difficult
things in the manufacture of pianos is the mould-
ing and fashioning of the frames, and, conse-
quently there is only one firm in Europe (Beeh-
stein) who cast their own frames. In the United
States of America nine-tenths of the frames used
are cast by one firm, and in Germany there is only
the one above mentioned who moulds his own iron
frames.
Messrs. Beale and Company, however, are not re-
stricted in this respect, as they are able to prepare
all the frames required by means of a special pro-
cess patented by them, and known as the Beale-
Vader system.
By this special method they are enabled to cast
a frame of which the Wrest Plank is a part, the
whole stress of the strings being taken up by the
iron structure. Some idea of this strain may be
gauged from the fact that the aggregate pull of
BEALE & CO.’S FACTORIES, ANNANDALE.
Xlbe /Ifcanufactunng Jnimstn?.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
PIANOS AND SEWING MACHINES.


the 216 strings is about fifteen tons. Another ad-
vantage which this firm's system of moulding and
casting posesses is that by which the hitch pins are
cast with the frames, and Messrs. Beale and Com-
pany claim that theirs is the only process in the
world by which the frame is cast with hitch pins
of a malleable character.
These frames are all designed in the Company’s
workshops, by an expert in this particular branch
of the trade.
In casting the frames the first half of the mould
is laid down, while the second half is lifted by ma-
chinery and lowered into its proper place with pre-
cision. The molten metal is poured in, and then
allowed to cool, after which the moulds are lifted
and the newly-formed frame taken up and ranged
alongside its fellows in readiness for the next oper-
ation, which consists of their being dressed with
Corundum, a process which smooths off any
roughness or inequalities on the ironwork.
The sand used in moulding is specially ground
by mills made—as is the case with a great portion
of the machinery—by the firm.
In the foundry are two special melting furnaces,
which are used for brass, bronze, aluminium and
iron castings.
The blast is generated by an engine specially
adapted for the work.
Following the process of manufacture, the visi-
tor steps into the Iron Shop where the piano
frames are taken and finished by, machinery de-
signed and made by Messrs. Beale and Company
for their own peculiar use. This specially con-
structed machinery is rendered necessary owing l o
the fact that the Company manufacture under
unique conditions in regard to patents connected
with the manufacture of their patent Iron Wrest
Plank.
A drilling and reaming machine of marvellous
ingenuity is used to bore the requisite 216 holes 'n
the Iron plate, to take the pins which fit into the
Iron Wrest Plank. These holes are drilled both
parallel and vertically with absolute precision, so
that the holes in the Wrest Plank bear a perfect
mathematical relationship to each -other, a most
important consideration in the construction of a
first-class instrument such as is turned out by this
Company.
The tapping machine, which was also locally de-
signed and constructed, is a wonderful piece of
mechanism, and is used to put a thread on every
one of the 216 holes made by the driller and reamer.
This tapping machine is practically an automaton,
the manual assistance necessary being of a very
limited character. The workman guiding it
simply turns a handle, directs the tap to the hole
in the West Plank, and the machine does the rest.
When the tap enters the aperture in the iron
plank it is spun round at a good speed, and when a
sufficient depth has been attained, the tap auto-
matically stops, reverses its action, and returns.
The Chuck is a very ingenious mechanical de-
vice, consisting of a casing enclosing ten pins,
which, when the hole is threaded to sufficient depth,
are gradually displaced in their sockets, and, by
automatic action, fall into adjoining receptacles,
and, by doing so, relieve the Chuck of pressure,
causing the taj) to come up of its own accord.
The Automatic Pin and Screw Cutting Machine
takes a steel rod of 11/32 in thickness and cuts it
down to 17/64. It also cuts the wire to the re-
quired length for the steel Wrest Pins for the
Beale pianos. The action of the machine is very
cuiious. A turret advances to the length of steel,
which is held in position by the jaws of the ma-
chine, and trims the barrel and conical shoulder,
then flies back, allowing a knife to come up and cut
off the length behind the shoulder. These pins
having had. facets ground on them, the hole is
then drilled through, and they are finally polished
and nickel plated.
There are a number of powerful grinding ma-
chines to be seen, fitted with " Corundum”
wheels, which are capable of doing any class of
work. In another part of this big machine room
is a five-headed automatic drill used for drilling all
the holes in the stands, treadles, etc., of the sew-
ing machines. These contrivances drill eight holes
at the same time, each bore being exactly parallel,
so that when the machine is put together every
part fits with neat accuracy. All sawing work iu
connection with the cutting of iron, etc., is done
by a power-driven automatic saiv, which will go
through any thickness.
After the piano frames come from the drilling ma-
chine, they are in a somewhat dirty state through
filings and grease. To get rid of this they are sub-
PATENT WREST PLANK.
jected to a strong jet from a live steam pipe, which
thoroughly cleanses all parts. From here they go
to the enamelling room, where they are enamelled
and coated in aluminium, and, later on, sent up to
the finishing rooms. In that portion of the manu-
factory devoted to the casing and woodwork of
pianos, is displayed the great stores of timber,
wdrich come from America, Italy, France, Germany,
and other parts, a slight proportion of Australian
walnut being also used.
In addition to the ordinary storage, the firm
have what is known as a Drying Kiln, in which a
large amount of timber is stacked. After having
been kept some years it is subjected to the drying
process, by which a moderate heat is kept up in
the kiln, into which a certain amount of steam is
driven, thus taking out all sap from the wood in a
way which no amount of outside storage could do.
These stocks of timber are used for the Cabinet-
making in connection with detailed parts and or-
namentation and mouldings of pianos and sewing
machines. All the cases of the Beale pianos and
tables of sewing machines are made of plies of
Bass, Oak, Walnut and other woods.
The next department is that of veneer cutting,
where are seen the designs which come from var-
ious parts of the world, and are of most beautiful
Marquetry, or wood mosaic. These are known as
" slice out veneer,” and are used in thickness
from J a millimeter, or 1/50 of an inch, up to
5 millimetres, or 1/5 of an inch. The veneers are
cut to pattern and size with due regard to the
markings, so that, when they are joined together,
the ivhole makes one harmonious design in the
marking of the wood. This matching process is
performed by skilled artisans. All mouldings are
tongued and grooved, and fitted together with
invisible mitres.
In order to set off the veneer panel designs, a
special bordering of most beautiful design is used,
and in the making up of which many different
woods are employed. In the manufacture of
pianos, the cases are built up of many plies of
wood of varying thickness. Thus the cabinet work
of the Beale pianos is able to resist climatic in-
fluences, and will not warp under any exposure.
In the veneer laying room the lengths of board
which have been prepared by toothing and heating
are taken in hand, glued and laid one upon another
by experienced men. When a sufficient number of
plies have been pieced together, the whole is placed
under what are called the veneering presses, large
pieces of zinc being inserted between the various
sets or panels, and great pressure applied. This
squeezes out the glue from between the plies, and
makes the whole into one solid piece with the grain
running crosswise, so that it is impossible for the
wood to warp or split. In this way the top and
bottom doors, key board falls, panels, top-lid and
jambs of a piano are made. Some of these consist
of ten and more thicknesses of timber. A peculiar
glue-boiling apparatus is used in this department.
The smaller pieces of wood and battens which hold
the veneers at the back and give them extra
strength, are of picked Californian red wood.
In the wood carving department the engraving
and carving of piano fronts and ornamental pieces
are designed and made by a number of artists who
have given much time and attention to this branch
of the work. When the various designs of panels,
carvings, etc., have been made up, they are sent
to french-polishers, and there the brilliant lustre
for which the cases of Beale pianos are so justly
famous is put on them.
In the polishing and grinding room all the iron
and brass-work, etc., has the rough edges taken off
and is buffed up ready for the Electro-plating
Room, whore the metallic parts are plated
in nickel and aluminium. When all the
parts which we have described in their various
stages of manufacture have been completed, they
are sent to the finishing room, -where skilled work-
men of life-long experience are engaged in fitting
up the mechanism and encasing the pianos in their
beautifully inlaid and veneered cases. In this de-
partment the manufacture of sounding boards and
bridges, to which the wires are attached, is carried
on. The wood used for the bridging and sounding
boards is heated so as to ensure effective glue joints,
when it is taken in hand by the artisans.
The making up of the sounding board is a very
particular process. The wood is specially selected
so that the board used for the treble is of a very
fine grain, and about 3/8 in thickness, while that
for the bass is a 3/16 thickness, and of a coarse
grain. Thus the sonorous quality is obtained.
To attain this required perfection in the sounding
board, a bevel of 3/16 inch has to be taken right
across the board, which is 3 feet 6 inches wide.


The various planks of which the sounding board is
made up are "cut on the quarter,” and are in
widths ranging from 4 to 6 inches.
All these planks are screwed us well as glued to
the ribs of tne founding board, thus obviating all
chance of the pieces separating, no matter in what
climate the instrument be used, and in fact there
is not a single instance of the sounding board of r
lieale piano ever having cracked.
The jointing of the planks for the sounding
board is done with a piece of plate glass for the
plane to run upon, so that absolute accuracy re-
sults in regard to this very important point.
The sounding board is made of Kedwood in the
atmosphere that it is to be used in, great accuracy
as well as extreme delicacy being needed in its
construction.
The Bridge, which is one of the most important
parts of a piano consists of European Beech,
which, after being "chamfered” and drilled with
about 350 holes, is placed upon the sounding board,
or stand, so that both the sounding board and
frame arc properly tensioned. The works, so far
as they aie completed, are then enclosed, the piano
case being built round them. When properly en-
cased the actions and hammers are fitted, and the
keys and the whole of the parts brought into ef-
ficient and harmonious working.
A device in piano construction in the direction
of permanence in pitch and tone is the lleale-
Vader Patent, a superior innovation, of which the
firm is deservedly proud. This patent, though of
immense value in enabling the piano to be accur-
ately and easily tuned, and to remain in tune for
a long period, is simplicity itself. In all other
systems the wrest pin, which takes the tension of
the wires, is screwed into a wooden wrest plank,
which in time must sag, and so cause the pins to
lose some of their bite, thereby permitting the
strings to lower their tension, and so get out of
tune. The Beale-Vader Patent effects quite a re-
volution in this respect, as, instead of introducing
Beale-Vader patent consists in the ease with which
the pin can be turned during the operation of un-
iug, so that the tuner experiences no jerkiness in
manipulating it, but can arrive at the required
pitch with ease. As the tension screw absolutely
and perfectly contiols the pin, which it touches
oalv at a point, the latter will remain permanently
at any strain desired, thus conferring a lasting and
correct pitch, and, at the same time, imparting an
enhanced quality of tone. As all piano strings may
be said to stretch at first, all the lieale pianos are
allowed to stand for some months at full strain be-
fore being issued. Under the Beale-Vader patents
the piano receives a complete internal iron frame
above and below, the instrument being, therefore,
rendered eminently durable in all essential re-
spects.
The motive power applied to the different de
partments is obtained from two Westinghouse en-
gines, each of 43 horse power, one delivering its
potential through dynamos, and the other driv ; a?
FITTING THE ACTION INTO CASES.
Pins are then driven into this bridge at a certain
angle, and so arranged that the poition of the wire
strings which vibrate do not touch the wood of tin
bridge.
In the copper-covered strings of the Beals'
Pianos hexagonal wire is used as a core. This pre-
vents looseness, gives a fine tone, and dispenses
with that irritating rattle so noticeable in the bass
notes of a piano not fitted with this ingenious de-
vice. The iron frame which we have already de-
scribed is so strong that with the Beale Piano it
can be tuned to English Philharmonic or Concert
Pitch. When a piano frame comes into the finish-
ing room it is fitted with Wrest Pins and Tension
Screws, and then laid with cement upon the wooden
body, to which it is held by a number of screws
44 inches long. By using the cement a positive
attachment is secured. The frame is then over-
strung with wires, 216 wires being required for the
bass and treble. The sounding board and frame,
with the wires attached, are put into a large holder,
(he wrest pin from the front, driven into the wrest
plank like a nail, a steel pin is introduced from the
back, fitted accurately into a hole drilled in the
solid plate of the metal wrest plank. This feature
is embodied in all Beale pianos.
The pin has a conical butt exactly fitting a coni-
cal shoulder in the drilled hole. A tension screw,
or stud, presses against the butt of the pin, which
is thus forced tightly up against the shoulder of
the drilled, aperture, thereby controlling the pin
and imparting the requisite tension to the wires.
The strain upon the strings is borne by the metal
wrest plank, which preserves such rigidity as to
cause the whole of the vibrations to be transferred
to the sounding board, and further developed. The
Beale-Vader method of fixing the steel pin into the
metal wrest planK prevents any of the vibrations
being lost, as: is the case when the pin of a wooden
wrest plank becomes loose, and thus the full vol-
ume of sound is conveyed to the ear with greater
purity and firmness. Another advantage of the
the shafting under the timber machining shops,
Though there are a number of moulding, planing,
sawing, and other machines at work, no shafting is
visible, the necessary power being transmitted by
motors attached to shafts all covered in under tin
floors.
The saw-dust ejected by the various wood-work-
ing appliances is not allowed to fall about, but is
drawn into suction pipes and whisked off to the
furnace, thus diffusion of dust particles through
the workshops is effectively avoided,
~
THE BEALE SEWING MACHINES.
In the new building forming the recent addition
to the factory there is a large space devoted to
the fitting up of the celebrated Beale Sewing Ma-
chines. The various departments into which it is
subdivided consist of the part store (where all the
duplicates are kept, and served out to the fitters),
and the fitting and show rooms, The tops of the


LAYING DOWN FRAMES.
tables are all made under the veneering process,
and, in order to bring up (he fine grain of the wool
they are freneh-polished, and, as in the case of the
piano flames, each separate piece is dovetailed in-
to the other. Great skill is needed in the work of
fitting up the head pieces of the machines.
The firm’s greatest triumph in the way of machine
building is called the “ Torpedo.” This machine is
of very handsome type, highly attractive in its out-
lines, strong in all its parts, and an absolutely silent
runner. The latest development in sewing machine
manufacture, known as the “ drop-head pattern,”
whereby the machine sinks below the level of the
table, making a handsome and useful article of
furniture, is embodied. Another strong character-
istic feature of the Beale Sewing Machine is that it
can be used with the backward and forward stitch
at will. The designs for the frames, stands, treadles,
and other work connected with the Beale Sewing
Machines are first of all carved out in wood in the
carver’s shop, then the moulds are fashioned in
the foundry whereby the castings turned out aie not
only free from ragged edges, but what is of even
greater consequence—they possess a uniform
strength throughout. Every department in the fac-
tory is under the immediate supervision of a fore-
man, who is directly responsible to the manager,
Mr. Carl Vader, a gentleman of ripe experience and
sound judgment.
Messrs. Beale and Company deal direct with the
public, and are thus enabled to place their pianos
and sewing machines before their customers without
the intervention of middlemen. Their system of re-
tail shops located in Sydney and Suburbs, as well
as in all the principal country towns, is one which
offers excellent facilities to intending purchasers,
and experience has demonstrated its advantages and
popularity.
MB. O. C. BEALE.
The founder of the firm and present Managing
Director of Messrs. Beale and Company, Limited, ;s
Mr. O. C. Beale, who hails from Queen’s County,
Ireland, where his father was a manufacturer of
woollens. lie was born in 1850, and comes of an old
Quaker family, descendants of which are to-day en-
gaged in manufacturing in both the North and
South of the Emerald Isle. Mr. Beale made his
first acquaintance with Australia in 1864. It was
not long before his energetic nature found scope
for exercise. He first entered into business by join-
ing the Melbourne office of Henry Brooks and Com-
pany, of London and Australia, where he later be-
came a partner. With true commercial foresight
he quickly perceived that Sydney presented a rich
field for enterprise, and in 1879 struck out on his
own account in this city as an importer of pianos
and sewing machines. Bringing the whole of his
intense business capabilities to bear on the field of
work before him, success was soon achieved, and
ere long he was able to open up branches through-
out New South Wales and solidify hrs position in
Sydney. Under his judicious direction business in-
creased, and he decided to manufacture. M ith the
object of making himself conversant with all the
latest methods, he visited Europe and inspected the
principal manufactories, where he made a diligent
study of piano and sewing machine making.
On his return to Australia in 1892, he commenced
making sewing machines, and six years later the
manufacture of pianos was entered upon, and- the
venture proving successful, a new factory was es-
tablished at Annandale, which was the foreiunner
of the present extensive premises.
In 1894, owing to the great expansion of trade,
the business was formed into a Limited Liability
Company, Mr. Beale being Managing Director and
Mr. Carl Vader Factory Manager. Under the new
regime the interests of the Company continued to
grow, and, under Mr. Beale’s fostering contiol,
spared neither time nor money in effecting improve-
ments, which have made the Beale Piano one of tile
most perfect instruments in the world. In collabo-
ration with Mr. Vader, he evolved the invention
known and patented as the " Beale-Vader Iron
Wrest Piano Pin,” a device which is acknow-
ledged to bo one of the greatest things
of the age, and destined to revolutionise
the ait of piano construction. Mr. Beale,
to whom the flourishing condition of this ex-
tensive business is due, has long held a prominent
position in the commercial world, where he is re-
garded as a gentleman of sterling and forceful
character, and an ardent champion of every phase
of manufacturing interests. ,-\s President of the
Chamber of .Manufactures, he has shown himself
to be an uncompromising opponent to (lie policj
MR. O. C. BEALE.
which declines to give prefeience to focal industries,
and contends that all the experience of the past Has
demonstrated that it is to the stimulating of her
industrial enterprises that Australia must look for
the maintenance of her piosperity.
Notwithstanding the demands which his large
business makes upon his time, he has shown himself
to be a thoroughly public-spirited citizen, and his
elec'ion to the position of Chairman of important
associations is an evidence of the esteem in which
he is held by those who are earnest in their en-
deavours to promote the welfare of the State.
TUNING THE FINISHED ARTICLE.


The Dixson Tobacco Co., Ltd.
TOBACCO MANUFACTURERS.
Tobacco next to salt is undoubtedly the article
most universally consumed by man. There is no
by sage”. In a great continent such as Australia
whose agricultural resources are limitless, it is
somewhat surprising to find that the cultivation of
such a saleable commodity has not been more suc-
cessful. but by dint of patient and persistent
experimenting on different soils, undaunted by
years of continuous drought and failure, it must be
only a matter of time when Australian-grown to-
bacco will find a place in the world’s markets, and
when this end is accomplished, to no one will this
Manufacturers, of Park Street, Sydney, whose opera,
tions extend throughout Australasia, smokers in all
parts of the Commonwealth ow r e a debt of gratitude,
for it is by their exertions and enterprise that the
lonely settler and hardy toiler in the City is able to
purchase a plug of his favourite weed at a price
within his slender means. There is another item
in connection with the operations of this great firm,
and that is the.fact that the money expended in the
purchase of Australian-made tobacco is not lost te
THE DIXSON TOBACCO CO., LTD.
FACTORY AND OFFICES, CORNER OF PARK AND ELIZABETH-STREETS, SYDNEY.
inhabited climate in which it is not in common use,
no nation which has not adopted it either in one
form or the other. In the words of Pope it may be
s iid to be partaken of “by saint, by savage, and
country be more indebted than to the firm now be-
fore us.
To such firms as The Dixson Tobacco Co., Ltd. (all
the members of which are Australians), Tobacco
the State, but filters back into circulation per the
medium of wages, etc., paid by the Company to its
employees, and those local firms with whom the Dix-
son Tobacco Co,, Ltd., has commercial dealings.
Cbe /Ibanufactunng Jnbustv^.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
THE MANUFACTURE OF TOBACCO.


The introduction of locally manufactured tobacco
upon the Australian market was at first a difficult
task, but, by the maintenance of a unifoimly high
standard of quality’ and value, made possible by the
expenditure of capital in the latest and most modern
factory plant, the firm mentioned overcame the old-
time prejudices and achieved such phenomenal suc-
cess that, in the near future, the manufacture of to-
bacco bids fair to become one of the greatest of our
local industries.
So far back as the year 1839 the late Mr. Hugh
Dixson, who had, in his native Scotland, acquired
a knowledge of the manufacture of tobacco, landed
in Sydney with a quantity of machinery, with which
he purposed setting up the industry in this new
land.. He bided his time, and the opportunity he
required was given in the total derangement of the
tobacco trade in America, consequent upon the in-
ternecine war between the Northern and Southern
States, and the concession about that time made
by the Colonial Government in fixing a less duty
on the leaf than on the manufactured article.
This left a margin of sufficient induce. tn
tempt, him to embark in the business.
Since the time when, in his factory’ in Wynyaid
Lane, Sydney’, he made about half a ton a week, the
business has progressed to its present proportions.
MR. HUGH DIXSON,
Chairman of Directors.
The death of Mr. Hugh Dixson left his son head
of the business. In 1899 it was formed into a Limi-
ted Company, with a large paid-up capital, Mr.
Hugh Dixson being the president, and Mr. W. E.
Shaw the Managing Director.
Their block of six-storey buildings, bounded by
Park, Elizabeth and Castlereagh streets, is one of
the largest and most prominent business pemises in
the City. The output of the Sydney factory for the
State of New South Wales alone totals many hun-
dreds of tons of manufactured tobacco per annum,
in addition ,to which the Dixsons are associated
with large tobacco factories in each of the other
Australian States, and each supplying a very large
proportion of their respective State’s requirements.
The Sydney factory engages about 300 hands, all
male labour, no females being employed in any of
the departments.
The Park Street frontage is devoted to ware-
house and office accommodation, the remainder to
manufacturing purposes. Steam power is supplied
by Babcock multitubular boilers, two powerful en-
gines which run the great length of shafting within
the building, as well as supplying power to dynamos
and electric motors by which are driven the ma-
chinery in the different parts of the buildings, in
addition to electric lighting.
All the pressing machinery and lifts are run by
hydraulic power. The workmen’s rooms are im-
mense, with lofty ceilings, while the light, ventila-
tion. sanitary arrangements, external fire escapes,
and other appliances, are of the most modern and
perfect order.
The basement is large and lofty, with concrete
floor, portion of which is devoted to workmen’s
mess-rooms, in addition to which it is the Com-
pany’s intention to add further comforts for their
employees.
The new chimney shaft, which forms so promin-
ent a feature, is built on the most modern prin-
ciple. The shaft, together with the fumaces with
which it connects, and on which no expense has been
spared, has been constructed with the object of con-
suming the smoke to the fullest degree; in addition
to which all fumes and smells, arising from the
manufacturing, are conveyed by flues and driven by
forced draught into the boiler fires.
For the prevention of fire the whole of the build-
ings are installed with the “ Grinnell Automatic
Sprinkler” service. Tobacco, in all stages of manu-
facture, is to be seen in the various processes. The
Dixson factories have always aimed at the produc-
tion of the very highest grades of tobacco, and, in
consequence, have to draw on America for the great
bulk of their leaf requirements, but, while making
that their staple of consumption, they are also en-
abled to work up considerable quantities of Austra-
lian leaf, which is more or less mixed in with the
American, and. so forming tobaccos of lower grades,
which, while not possessing the smoking qualities
of their well-known brands, are nevertheless whole-
some goods and serve the demand of those less for-
tunate amongst us, whose tastes are, perforce of
circumstances, subservient to their pockets.
The brand of tobacco to which most attention
seems to be paid is the well-known and advertised
Yankee Doodle, and as this brand is so largely sold
in every city, town and hamlet, the public must be
the best judges of its virtues, but to non-smokers it
will be interesting to learn that at no time of the
country’s history has a brand of tobacco taken so
phenomenal a position in the favour of the public
as this same " Y’ANKEE DOODLE."
The dark kind, although to appearance strong, is
in reality not so, but is peculiarly rich and mild,
and although intended for the hardier out-door smo-
kers, is, as often as not, preferred by those who fol-
low a more sedentary life, and for which the light or
bright Yankee Doodle is especially made. For
those who desire a particularly mild and rich
smoke of natural flavour, and confined chiefly to
those who must have their tobacco in cut-up form,
" Champion” fills the bill.
Both " YANKEE DOODLE” and “ CHAMPION”
are in either plug or cut; the cut in most elegant
and convenient hermetically sealed tins; for
under this process of packing the cut to-
bacco remains imperishable for any length of
time and in any climate. Then in the
opposite extreme the well-known " CONQUEROR”
brand is also a very popular tobacco amongst
working men, those who represent the bone
and sinew of our people, and who can ‘stand a
heavier grade of tobacco. There are munerous
other brands of intermediate quality, and tho-e of
lower grade. Thus the demands of all, from the
most fastidious down to the smoker who wants
plenty for his money, are fully catered for.
Cigarette making has long since passed away
from the Dixson factory', they’ having disposed of
their interests to another Company. Also, in like
manner, they have within the year just closed dis-
posed of that portion of their business comprising
the Cigar Manufacturing and the handling of to-
bacconists’ goods to the recently formed States To-
bacco Company, Proprietary, Limited —a large con-
cern operating in all the Australian States. So
that now the manufacture and disposal of their own
tobaccos occupy their whole attention, and take up
the entire block of buildings.
At the close of last year, Messrs. Dixson and Sons,
Limited, amalgamated the whole of their Austra-
lasian interests with a capital of half a million
pounds sterling, believing in the old adage that
"L’Union fait la force,” and, when the present
name, the Dixson Tobacco Co., Limited, replaced
the old designation, the uniform high standard of
merit would be fully maintained.
With this combination of interests under one
Directorate, the advantage of concerted action is
amply’ demonstrated. Tasmania and New Zealand
have been brought within the scope of the new
Company’s influence, and the Australian Tobacco
Export trade is passing through its birth throes.
The firm is confident in anticipating a steady and
increasingly beneficial growth in their trade in the
immediate future, and are sparing no efforts to
hasten such good times, as well as making all need-
ful preparation for greater and more telling strokes
as their anticipations become realities.
The amalgamation of the different Dixson inter-
ests means that the Factory in Sydney becomes the
distributing centre for all the States of the Com-
monwealth (all the tobacco being made and packed
here), thus conserving the high standard of excel-
lence which characterises their various brands, and
preserving the needful uniformity throughout.
In rapidly going over the above facts it is impos-
sible to convey any adequate idea of the magnitude
of the work which has been done, or the results
gained, in view of the fact that the public preju-
dice for so many years has been, and in some iso-
lated places still is, strongly in favour of the im-
MR. W. E. SHAW,
Managing Director.
ported brands; but the fact remains, nevertheless,
and is patent to any observant man that the exten-
sive and imposing factory, a photograph of which is
reproduced in this article, could only be the out-
come of years of hard and strenuous labour, and
which bids fair to yet eclipse former efforts when
renewed prosperity again blesses this large con-
tinent.
The Dixsons have always interested themselves
very largely in the cultivation of tobacco in Aus-
tralia, spending considerable sums of money and
time in co-operation with the farmers in their en-
deavour to produce a suitable class of leaf, but, un-
fortunately, from one cause and another, the pro-
gress has not been satisfactory, although large sums
of money have been spent in the enterprise, but
they hope eventually to prove that tobacco can be
grown in this country, of a character suitable for
export, and, if that end can be attained, it will open
up a vast field for wealth, second only to our great
wool and wheat producing.
The N.S.W. Government has made considerable
efforts towards the cultivation of tobacco in this
State, but has not succeeded, and it seems that, like
our great wool industry, this must be left to private
enterprise, and to those who can feel their way
gradually, and who, being, moreover, pioneers, are
accustomed to meet and overcome all obstacles as
they present themselves.


Messrs. J. S. Fry & Sons, Ltd.
FRY’S COCOA AND CHOCOLATE.
Australians are lovers of good things, and, in
common with their prototypes in the old-world
countries, are great consumers of such articles of
food or drink which please the eye and delight the
palate.
The great facilities for transportation which
exist for the interchange of the world’s commodi-
ties provide a ready means by which the traders
of every clime are enabled, through their agents
or direct representatives, to present before us in
tempting fashion those articles which civilisation
and its refining influences have made necessary to
our comfort and the welfare of our health as a
community.
Unlike the great centres of civilisation of the
Eastern and Western Globe, whose industries
reach back into the almost forgotten past, we in
Australia live in a young country dependent by
reason of the climatic and industrial conditions
upon the manufacturers of the older established
commercial centres for the luxuries of life, which,
owing to the limited means of manufacture at our
disposal, would otherwise be denied us. To the en-
terprise and scientific discoveries of such firms as
Messrs. J. S. Fry and Sons, of Bristol, London,
and Sydney, whose celebrated concentrated and
malted cocoas and preparations of delicious choco-
lates have made them famous all over the world,
and caused their manufactures to be universally
used, not only wherever the British flag flies, but
in every part of the globe where civilised commu-
nities exist, humanity owes a debt of gratitude.
In the home the tired, nerve-wearied husband
or wife finds in Fry’s cocoa a beverage remarkab’e
for its purity, nutritive value, and energy-produc-
ing constituents.
For the invalid. Fry’s Chocolate provides a re-
freshing, strength-giving, easily-assimilated food,
of a most appetising character, whilst to the nur-
sery the various sweetmeats and other delicacies so
daintily packed bring happiness and health.
To the ordinary man of business and all in whom
the wear and tear of daily life causes a natural
desire for something to aid jaded nerves and de-
pressed spirits, Fry’s Cocoa and Chocolate pre-
parations come as a boon and a blessing. The his-
tory of this old and honourably known firm ex-
tends over a period of one hundred and seventy-
four years, the founder of the firm having begun
operations in 1728. The marvellous growth of the
business is attested by the fact that the acres of
floor space now’ occupied by the company’s huge
factories and offices at Bristol were at the incep-
tion of the firm covered with the dilapidated
houses of the lower classes of the town’s inhabi-
tants.
The wonderful scientific processes for securing
extreme solubility and developing the finest flavour
of the extract of the cocoa-nut, discovered and
perfected by this firm, have arrested the attention
of the greatest minds in England, whilst the mar-
vellous medicinal properties of the preparations
manufactured have secured the universal endorse-
ment of physicians and others in every part of
the world. For more than 10.) years Messrs. Fry
and Sons enjoyed a monopoly for their cocoas and
chocolates throughout the United Kingdom, and it
is only of recent years that competition has sprung
up. Notwithstanding this, the firm’s output, owing
to the modern processes adopted having so much
improved the form in which the cocoas and choco-
lates are placed before the public, increases every
year. The figures relating to consumption show
that in 1820, 267,000 lbs. of cocoa were consumed,
and in 1875 9,900,000 lbs. were used, the world’s
consumption at the present lime being close upon
30,000,000 lbs. per annum.
The first to recognise the value of cocoa were Cor-
tez and Pizano, who found it largely in use amongst
the Mexicans and Peruvians, and introduced it into
Europe, the West Indian drink being fashionable
in London under the name of Chocolate as early
as 1656. Nowadays cocoa and chocolate are no
longer a luxury indulged in by members of the
aristocracy, but are important and valuable
articles of food for all classes of the community,
either as a beverage or in the form of sweets. In
the treatment of Cocoa as a drink, Messrs. J. S.
Fry and Sons have not only succeeded in making
it perfectly soluble, palatable, and digestive, but
have developed its peculiarly attractive aroma to
the greatest possible extent. •
The immense works of Messrs. J. S. Fry and Sons
at Bristol have grown iii magnitude since 1728, and
at present consist of a series of lofty factories 80
feet high, each possessing its own steam power. The
various floors are supplied throughout with ade-
quate’fire and electric appliances. Every conveni-
ence for the comfort of the employees is provided,
and a large and well-lighted meeting room has also
been erected, where each morning the whole of the
7000 employees (half of whom are girls) attend a
short service.
The works now comprise seven factories, num-
bered 1,2, 3,4, 5,6, and 7, in the order in which
they have been built. To these factories come the
bags of Cocoa beans, of the shape of ungainly thick
almonds, from Brazil, Surinam, Grenada, Vene-
zuela, Trinidad, and other of the West Indian
Islands and Ceylon, the last a new and much
esteemed source of supply. At the top and eighth
floor of No. 3 Factory is the roasting-room, where,
ranged along the sides, o .3 at least a score of roomy
revolving cylinders hung over coke fires. In these
the beans, from which all palpably imperfect
specimens have been picked, are carefully roasted.
a process upon which very much depends. The
nuts are shot into hoppers and crushed and win-
nowed in order to remove the thin adhesive shell,
the c.usning reducing the nut itself to the form of
the familiar cocoa nibs. Both shell and nibs are
articles of commerce, the former being used in Ire-
land and on some parts of the Continent for the
manufacture of a cheap drink. The clean nuts are
then ground. In No. 3 Factory there are a number
of grinding mills. .The mills being warm, the fatty
part of the Cocoa-nut or Cocoa-butter is partially
freed, and the hard dry nut is thus reduced by
grinding to an oleaginous paste, which is further
ground to a finer paste of a cream-like consistency,
For storing purposes this paste is poured into cold
moulds, from which it emerges in solid blocks of
pure cocoa. To prepare their celebrated " Pure
Concentrated Cocoa” the solid blocks of pure cocoa
referred to are broken, ground many times, and
passed through sieves with 3,600 holes to the inch,
securing perfect fineness. The most scrupulous
cleanliness prevails in every stage of its prepara-
tion, and it consists, as will be seen, of the finest
and most valuable constituents of the bean de-
prived of the superfluous richness, but possessing
all essential virtues, with an aroma developed by
careful selection and accurate judgment. By a
new and scientific process extreme solubility is
secured, the finest flavour of carefully blended
Cocoas is developed, and the resultant is an
article which claims to be the "most perfect form”
in which Cocoa can be taken as a beverage.
There are also various fancy preparations, such
as the well-known and popular Caracas, Iceland
Moss, Homoeopathic, Pearl, and the Malted Cocoa,
GRINDING CHOCOLATE.
Xlbe /IfoamifactimnG Jn&ustil?.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
THE MANUFACTURE OF COCOA, CHOCOLATE, &c.


a combination of the “Extract" with Allen and
Banbury’s Concentrated Extract of Malt.
Perhaps the most striking department of the
manufactory is the manufacture of Chocolate, as it
is known to the lover of sweetmeats. Cake Choco-
late, such as that heralded by the famous Church-
man’s Chocolate in 1798, consists of the simple
mixture of the pure Cocoa with finely ground white
sugar. On one floor eight rotary machines are at
work mixing sugar and cocoa-paste. The particular
form in which the mixture is issued to the public,
whether as plain Chocolate, Spanish Chocolate,
Barcelona Chocolate, Diamond Chocolate, or Rock
Chocolate, is easily determined by the use of specific
mixtures or of certain moulds.
The Fancy Confectionary department is more
complicated. We will take the well known “creams”
as typical of more classes than one. The chocolate
used for covering these " morsels of delight” is re-
duced to a thin and workable paste. To prepare
the " cream” pure boiled sugar is poured into an
open pan and allowed to cool. It is then efficiently
stirred till it assumes the opaque cream consist-
ency so much desired. By means of an adaptation
from the printing press, hundreds of tiny moulds
are “ dabbed” out on trays of powdered cornflour,
and into these moulds the sugar, with any flavour-
ing or colouring required, is rapidly poured by
dexterous assistants. Thence the tiny globes are
taken to the covering rooms, where scores of young
damsels, with trays of thin prepared chocolate,
perform their part. Here again it is only neces-
sary to change the mould and the particular flav-
ouring to produce vastly different forms of sweet-
meat. “ Dancing tables” serve by their incessant
motion to shake the thin paste well dnto the
moulds, and to produce accuracy of detail.
The firm keeps its own tinsmith, carpenters and
fitters, has specially prepared papers for fancy
receptacles, and does no little of the work con-
nected with making and blocking fancy boxes on
the premises. As an extensive export trade is done,
special rooms are set apart, where tin-lined cases,
water-tight and air-tight, are prepared. Messrs.
,T. S. Fry and Sons., Ltd., have won the
highest honours, including 275 medals, at the lead-
ing International Exhibitions in all parts of the
world, for the excellence of their productions.
In the days when Australia was but little known,
and the great cities of our Comonwealth were in
•their infancy, the name of J. S. Fry and Sons, Ltd.,
Cocoa Manufacturers, was a household word.
Gradually the Australian business grew in size,
until its proportions warranted the appointment
of a direct branch. In 1877 the firm’s Australasian
head-quarters were established at Sydney, with
branch distributing houses in the various other
colonies. Under the careful guidance of the hard-
working manager, AD*. F. H. Thatcher, who came
out from the company’s home works some 17 years
ago, the output has been an ever-increasing one.
Some idea of the magnitude of the Australasian
business may be gained from the fact that Mr.
Thatcher, on behalf of his firm, imported over 84
tons of Homoeopathic Cocoa since the first of
January last year. This, of course, is only one of
the hundreds of different lines manufactured by
this famous house.
The malted and concentrated Cocoas supplied
by Messrs. Fry and Sons, Ltd., command a great
sale throughout the States, their beautiful fancy
boxes of chocolates. Nougat, Nougatine, Bonbons,
Creams, Sticks, Drops, etc., being familiar to
everyone throughout the Commonwealth.
As Australian manager for Messrs. Fry and Sons,
Ltd., Air. Thatcher has devoted the whole of his
energies to (he study of the wants of the firm’s
multitude of clients, and the popularity of Fry’s
products and the increasing trade are excellent
testimony to the honourable and businesslike
methods employed by their Australian represen-
tative.
The Sydney headquarters, handily located at 421
Kent-street, are equipped with every convenience
for the efficient handling and quick despatch of
goods, for which the Sydney depot has earned a
well-merited reputation. Owing to the imposition
of the tariff most of the stock is kept in bond
until wanted for distribution. The present ware-
house consists of three stories and a basement. In
the basement cases of block chocolate and cocoa in
tins take precedence, the ground floor space being
occupied by the Counting-house, Sample, Delivery,
and Despatch Rooms, the Alanager’s office, a plain,
businesslike apartment, being situated at the rear.
The first floor is in use as a sorting and packing
room. Here the system in vogue is well nigh per-
fect, and cases of merchandise in the form of
MR. F. H. THATCHER.
Cocoa, Chocolate, and sweets, in plain and fancy
boxes and tins, are sent to every part of Austral-
asia. extending from Fremantle to Brisbane.
Auckland to the Bluff, and the far-away island
towns, such as Suva, etc.
On the top floor the bulk stocks are held, the
diversity of the lines handled and the excellent
and dainty manner in which they are gotten up
making them a most interesting collection from an
artistic as well as commercial point of view. The
Australian business has forged ahead, and whilst
building up its own success, has conferred a boon
upon the citizens of every town throughout the
Commonwealth, by placing within easy reach life-
sustaining and health-giving delicacies for the nur-
sery the home, and the sick room.
MR. F. H. THATCHER.
The supervision and management of the distri-
bution of the thousands of different lines which
make up the Australasian stock of Messrs. J. S.
Fry and Sons, Ltd., Cocoa Makers, of Bristol and
London, is no sinecure.
Mr. F. H. Thatcher, the firm’s Aus-
tralasian Manager, who controls the Syd-
ney Branch of the firm’s business, is a gentle-
man of sound business and religious principles
a vigorous, persistent worker, and an organiser of
great ability.
Mr. Thatcher, who was born in 1864, is a native
of Bristol, where his father for many years occu-
pied a high position in the police department.
Having received a thorough education at the Bris-
tol Cathedral Grammar School he entered the
service of Messrs. Fry and Sous in 1879, and
by diligence and perseverance, worked his way
through the many departments, until in 1886
the directorate despatched him to Sydney.
At the time of his appointment as Manager in 1892
the trade of the colonies was in a bad condition ow-
ing to the financial crisis, but by the exercise of
great prudence and those qualities of organisation
which he possesses in such a marked degree, Mr.
Thatcher not only overcame existing difficulties, but
vastly increased the volume of the output, and,
what is of equal importance, has maintained the
position of the firm as the greatest distributor’s of
Cocoa and Chocolate, etc., in the Southern Hemis-
phere, as statistics so convincingly show.
Although a very busy man, Mr. Thatcher has
found time to take a deep interest in church work,
and as President of the News Boys Club has done
good work in promoting their welfare. He is a
firm believer in athletic recreation, and is the
popular President of the Killara Cricket Club,
and Vice-President of the Stedman Imperial
Cricket Club.
A PAN ROOM.


The Union Box and Packing
Case Company.
In discussing or describing the production and
distribution of any marketable commodity, one is
rather apt to leave out of the reckoning a branch of
the latter portion of the work, which, in recent
years, has grown to be a very important factor—
one that claims almost equal consideration with
the other processes which convert the raw material
into the article as it reaches the consumer's hands.
In the early days Australian merchants, who had
occasion to use packing cases were content to utilise
such as were obtainable at second hand, and any
excess of space was counteracted by an excess of
straw, paper, shavings, or some other kind of
packing.
Those who kept abreast of the times soon recog-
nised that such practices were alike damaging to
themselves and to their customers, and the expedi-
ent of making their own boxes and packing cases,
(o suit their own requirements, was next resorted
to by distributing houses.
That likewise was abandoned in favour of the sys-
tem of having them made to order by outside firms,
and thus the making of boxes and packing cases
grew' to be a vital element in the commercial life
of the community.
Perhaps the most important among the concerns
which make this business their sole object, is the
Union Box and Packing Case Company, the works
of which are situated at Johnstone Street and Roz-
elle Bay, Annandale. The concern was founded in
1835, less than twenty years ago, and its subsequent
extension and development has been of the most
gratifying description.
Hutchinson's wharf, Balmain, was the name giv-
en to the locality where the business first found ac-
commodation, its title being the Union Box and
Packing Case Company. The late Captain Thomas
Scott, who died in 1891, was its first manager, and
with him, from the initiation, was associated Mr.
Albert Guthrey, who succeeded to the management
on the decease of Captain Scott.
The Company was exceptionally fortunate in the
men it had secured for the control of its opera-
tions, and it is largely to the business ability and
keen enterprise of Mr. Guthrey that it owes its
present sound and influential position.
Successive additions were made to the old pre-
mises in order to cope with the increase, but before
long it W'as apparent that the space at their dis-
posal at Hutchinson's Wharf was altogether too
small for their Company’s trade. In 1898, there-
fore, a block of land with a frontage of 450 feet to
Johnstone and Crescent Streets, Annandale, was
purchased, and there the present spacious fac-
tory, which is one of the finest and most up-to-date
in Australia, and, 'indeed, on this side of the equa-
tor, was erected.
An almost new plant was installed, and in 1899
the Company began work on the new site, under
the most favourable auspices. Wot content with
this, however, an employee of the Company, Mr.
A. E. Brayne, was, in 1901, despatched to England,
the Continent, and America, in search of all the
latest and most modern box-maxing machinery.
The factory of the Union Box and Pack-
ing Case Company consists of a building of
two floors, with a frontage of 130 feet to Johnstone
Street, and a depth of 93 feet. A uip in the level
of the thoroughfares bounding the property has
been utilised to give the building a street entrance
to its basement, and also to its ground floor, an
arrangement which ensures the quickest and most
efficient handling both of the raw material brought
to the factory and the finished article when sent out.
The superficial area occupied by the works com-
prises over two acres, while the water frontage to
Kozelle Bay, Annandale, is ample enough to afford
a length o| 150 feet wharfage, freehold, and at the
same time additional leasehold area gives a further
accommodation in this direction. At their own
wharf, that is, the wharf on their freehold property,
the Company can berth three ships of 500 tons
each, and unload them simultaneously.
The timber used in the making of butter boxes
and so on is drawn principally from the forests of
pine and hardwood in New Zealand. Sawn by the
mills there into huge baulks and flitches, it is
shipped across the Tasman Sea in vessels chartered
by the Company, and brought to its destination in
Kozelle Bay. There the unloading appliances whip
it out of the holds in double quick time, and it is
stacked in the storage yards in order that the seas-
oning of the freshly felled and sawn timber may be
effected.
To handle the stuff on land some twelve
or thirteen carts are kept constantly going, and
the hands engaged on this section of the work num-
her about 100 on the average. The storage yards
are extensive enough to allow two or three million
feet of timber to be always in suock.
From the storage yard the timber, after it has
lain there a sufficient length of time to rough sea-
son, is conveyed to the mill yards. Here it is
placed under cover in large sheds, so that when
once dried it has no further chance of again being
wet and w'arped by the weather.
So far the timber has remained in the state in
which it left New Zealand, but, on its removal
from the mill yard its metamorphosis begins. It
is taken cut of the shed to the mill floor, which is
situated in what may be termed the basement of
the factory, that is, the floor under the ground
floor, which faces Johnstone Street. The plan of
the floor is an excellent one, arranged so that the
timber moves forward through the various changes
it undergoes, in a straight line.
It will be interesting to follow the evolution of a
square log, say, into a butter box. The big baulk
is, first of all, placed on a bench where band or
circular saw rips it up into lengths of the required
thickness and width. A planing machine, capable
of dressing all four sides at once, next takes these
lengths and smooths off all rough saw marks and
ridges that the saws have left. The long lengths
of timber are handed over to a man in charge of
the inside cross-cutting circular saw, which divides
up the long planks into box lengths of the required
measurement.
The timber is now beginning to assume definite
shape, and the shocks, as the box lengths are called,
are passed on to be printed. The Company have a
special printing machine which embosses the wood
in one or two colours at the rate of 60 a minute,
The box lengths that require printing are fed in
at one end of the machine in a similar manner to
that employed with paper fed to the ordinary
platen press.
In ordering the boxes, a client .is not
bound down to accept, perforce, a stock
pattern for the printing, but, if he desires it,
he may have his own designs, blocks, etc., which
can be put on the machne and printed on to the
boxes just as if they were ordinary bill heads or
circulars for which he had given his instructions,
Instead cf laboriously stencilling their trade
mark, or directions, on the box when it
comes to their own factory, customers can procure
them stamped and printed from the works of the
Union Box and Packing Case Company, quite ready
for receiving the particular commodity for which
they are intended.
UNION BOX COMPANY’S FACTORY, ROZELLE BAY.
TLhc /Ifcanufactiumg Jnbusti'g.
Historical and Biographical Sketchcs.-eontinued.
BOX AND PACKING CASE MANUFACTURERS.


The last piece of mechanism operating on the mill
floor is the cornering machine, which takes the
wood as it comes from the length-cutting machine,
and trims off the sharp corners.
The shooks, or box lengths, are then taken to the
second floor in a lift furnished with sliding doors,
which prevents any chance of handling. On this
floor is the box-framing room, where tile putting
together of butter boxes, confectionery boxes, and,
indeed, every kind of wooden box used in trade is
carried out. To the outsider the mechanism on
this floor is perhaps the most fascinating of all the
ingenious devices used on the premises. The Com-
pany have the Doig nailing machines in operation,
wonderful pieces of machinery which are capable
of driving one to eight nails simultaneously, and
work with such accuracy and speed that, during a
visit of our representative, the expert in attendance
framed twenty-eight boxes in five minutes, driving
twenty nails into each box.
The Doig Nailers are made in various sizes for
the different classes of boxes used in trade, and
range from the No. 1, suitable for confectionery
boxes, to No. 4, used in the framing of heavy work
and big boxes such as tea, starch, and bulk goods of
all descriptions. All the machines are fitted with
the only automatic adjustable feeders on the mar-
ket, which supply any length and gauge of nail to
the channels, from the big nail magazine attached.
MR. A. E BRAYNE.
The No. 1 machine will feed and drive four nails
fiom J to tj inch in length of any gauge, and nail
up boxes of very light material, such as those used
in confectionery. The machines known as No. 2,
No. 3, and No. 4, are all fitted with automatic cut-
off feeders, which may be adjusted so that different
numbers of nails may be fed at different revolu-
tions. There is also an automatic in-and-out at-
tachment for nailing in different thicknesses of
stock at different revolutions, as is required when
nailing on bottoms of boxes which have thick and
thin sides.
It may be mentioned that the Company has the
sole agency for the Doig nailers throughout the
Commonwealth, and, at the Royal Agricultural So-
ciety’s Show last year, two of the machines which
were exhibited proved a constant source of attrac-
tion to crowds of spectators. So pleased were the
show authorities with this exhibit and the interest
it provided for visitors, "that they awarded the
Union Box and Packing Case Company a certifi-
cate and a gold medal. When the boxes are nailed
together they are finished off by the vertical planing
machine, which takes off the rough edges and
smooths the completed box into a neat and work-
manlike article.
The ordinary box or packing case cf commerce
is now ready for delivery, and after being checked
by an excellent system they are put on the carts
and forwarded to their destination by road, rail, or
steamer, whether that destination be in New South
Wales or any other State of the Commonwealth.
Boxes required for special purposes are, of course,
subjected to additional processes.
All this complicated machinery, as above des-
cribed, naturally needs driving power, and this is
supplied by a compound 150 h.p. Euston and Proc-
tor engine, working in the basement. The power
is transmitted to the floor above by means of right-
angled shafting, actuated by rope gear, which takes
MR. ALBERT GUTHREY, J.P.
the place of belting, and ensures a smoothness of
i tinning which cannot be surpassed.
The plant is equal to supplying a demand
from 150 to 200 thousand boxes per month,
as many as 7, 00 being turned out in one
day. Big as this number is, the boxes are handled
expeditiously, and, as nine carts can be loaded in
the forwarding department at one time, there is no
congestion of the finished cases on the premises.
In short, from the day the timber reaches the
wharf in the hold of the ship, to the uay in which
the cart takes the box away to the purchaser, no
time is lost, and, in every department of its com-
prehensive business, the Union Box and Packing
Case Company demonstrates its tnorough efficiency,
up-to-date methods and eager anxiety to meet the
wishes of its wide and ever-increasirg circle of cus-
tomers.
MR. ALBERT GUTHREY, J.P.
The controlling power in the Union Box and
Packing Case Company is Mr. Albert Guthrey, the
manager, who combines in a pre-eminent degree all
the qualities which are essential to the successful
commercial man of to-day. Me may be claimed by
New South Wales as a true product of her soil,
and a sterling example of the calibre of her own
sons in the wide field of business enterprise. Born
at Braidwood in 1861, Mr. Guthrey came to Sydney
in 1877 to seek his fortune, and entered the em-
ployment of John Booth and Company, ‘Balmain.
With this firm he spent six years, devoting all his
ability and energy to the mastering of the many
details in connection with the box-making
business. The thorough acquaintance with
the practical side of the manufacture of
boxes, which he thus gained, has stood
him in excellent stead, since not a little of
his great managerial success now-a-days is due to
the fact that, in his younger days, he, literally and
metaphorically, “went through the mill” himself.
In 1885, when the Union Box and Packing Case
Company was formed, Mr. Guthrey became assis-
tant manager, and his wide experience was of much
moment in the upbuilding of the new concern.
When Captain Thomas Scott died in 1891, Mr.
Guthrey succeeded him in the management of the
business, which was then at Balmain. With the
reins in his hands, he quickly gave additional evi-
dence of his admirable facilities of progressiveness
and oiganisation, and the expansion of the Com-
pany’s business was so rapid that, as has already
been related, new and larger premises became ab-
solutely necessary.
Mr. Guthrey was entrusted with the responsi-
bility of choosing the site, and his selection of the
present exceedingly' suitable location was the re-
sult. Despite the fact that his time in business
hours was fully occupied, Mr. Guthrey, who is a
resident of Annandale, on its formation into a muni-
cipality, became an Alderman. This dignity he re-
tained for four years.
He was appointed to the Commission of the Peace
about two years ago, and still takes a keen interest
in the affairs of the borough, among the residents
of which he is as popular as he is in business
circles. Mr. Guthrey is a member of the Sydney
Chamber of Commerce, and also on the Committee
of the Sydney Timber Merchants’ Association.
MR. A. B. COOPER.
The Chief Accountant of the Company', Mr. A.
B. Cooper, is a native of Sydney', having been born
here in 1874. He gained his first commercial ex-
perieuce in the employment of the Australian In-
vestment Corporation, with which association he
was connected for seven years. At the end of that
time he left it to join the Union Box and Packing
Case Company about six years ago, and, by his
strict attention to his duties and his more than
ordinary grasp of the financial details of the con-
MR. A. B. COOPER.
corn, has worked himself up to his present impor-
tant position. lie resides at Campsey, and, as he
is still a comparatively young man, can confidently
look forward to a big future.
MR. A. E. BRAYNE.
Mr. A. E. Brayne, who has charge of the internal
work of the factory, and, consequently, superin-
tends the whole of the practical side of box making
is, like his chief, a native of Braidwood, and was
born there in 1869. He came to Sydney at the age
of twelve, and, when still a youth, joined the
.Union Box and Packing Case Company the year
after its formation. With them he soon gave
abundant proof of marked aornty, and rose rapidly
in their service.
When the Company, at the beginning of the new
century, realised that extensive additions to the
machinery would be necessary in order to keep pace
with the expansion of business, Mr. Brayne was
chosen as their representative tor- a tour through
the old world in search of the latest appliances.
He travelled via New Zealand, and visited the
United States, Canada, England and the Continent.
In the various centres of these countries, he thor-
oughly investigated all the best methods of box
making, and, on behalf of the the firm, ordered the
fine, modern plant which is now to be seen at ti.e
works.
In addition, he secured for his principals the sole
agency of the Doig nailing machines, and in every
way during his connection with the Company, has
shown that he is fully alive to their interests.


The Wunderlich Patent Ceiling
and Roofing Company, Ltd.
Tho art of metal embossing is a very old one, and
the Eastern traveller will find its votaries prac-
tising the same methods that their predecessors
did thousands of years back. The credit of being
the pioneers in the manufacture of embossed metal
work in Australia undoubtedly belongs to the
Wunderlich Patent Ceiling and Roofing Company,
Limited, whose city office and warehouse is situated
at the Eo3 r al Exchange Buildings, 56 Pitt-street,
Sydney, the head office and factory being located
at Baptist-street, Eedfern, off Crown-street.
Taking advantage of the climatic conditions of
Australia, which have made imperishable work an
absolutely necessary substitute for the dangerous
use of plaster and other crumbling material, they
have endeavoured to foster in the colonies a desiie
for something better than the ordinary four bare
walls and still barer ceilings.
Above all, they have adhered to the high quality
rejaousse style in preference to the cheaper impress
work put forwaid in America. The latter methods
may be good enough for enamelled advertising
sheets, but can in no way be compared with the
highly wrought and sharply defined results which
Messrs. Wunderlich and Company are able to
achieve with their present elaborate plant and
perfected machinery.
The business under review was founded at Syd-
ney in 1885 by Mr. Ernest Wunderlich. The first
factory was situated in Jvent-street, and though
the space was small and the original operations of
a somewhat limited nature, the enterprise, pluck,
and business energy of the founder amply compen-
sated for these deficiencies.
The first important contract which the firm se-
cured was the manufacture of the metal ceilings
for the Centennial Hall.
In 1887 Mr. Alfred Wunderlich came into the
business, and the increased operations of 1890
eventually led to the occupation of the present
manufacturing premises. Two years later the
business was formed into a limited liabilrty com-
pany, Mf. Ernest 11. C. Wunderlich occupying the
position of managing director in conjunction with
his brothers, Messrs. Alfred Wunderlich and Dr.
Otto W’underich, and Messrs. 11. B. Allard and W.
Uensham, who form the present directorate. At
the commencement of its operations the company
were obliged to bring out European artisans, who
in turn instructed our Australian workmen.
The factory and buildings, exclusive of the w'harf
and the tile yard, now cover a space of over one
acre. The handsome city showrooms contain many
artistic and exquisite designs for metal ceilings,
and every description of stamped and cast metal,
also brass and copper work, . including centre
flowers, wall linings, architraves, capitals, con-
soles, overdoors, entablatures, finials, friezes, ad-
vertising plates, counter fittings, and wainscoting.
There are also some ingenious specialities in metal
spinning, Louvre ventilators, patent glazing bars,
and a comprehensive assortment of Marseilles roof-
ing tiles.
The firm’s Eedfern factory, which is laid out
with two large floors, is large, airy, and well
lighted. On the ground floor are the offices of the
directorate and the counting house. In the design-
ing room all working drawings are prepared, and
provision made for carrying out architects’ own
details for any class of sheet metal work.
After the designs have been approved of, they
are sent to the modelling room, a very important
department in the factory’s organisation, as the ar-
tistic character of the finished work depends upon
the expertness of the modeller. Only the best
sculptors are employed, who are able to carry out
in every detail the requirements of architects and
designers. All work is first modelled in clay and
cast in plaster prior to its being reproduced in
metal. The plaster casts are then sent to the die
foundry, and after casting are stored for future
use. The stock of dies now contains several thou-
sands of patterns.
The plaster models being received in the stamp-
ing room and die foundry from the modeller's
shop, are cast into metal dies of various degrees
of hardness, according to the class of work to be
produced, and from these again the matrices are
made. After die and matrix have been fixed to the
stamping machinery, plain sheets of zinc, steel,
copper or other metal, previously annealed in the
oven and brought to the highest degree of malle-
ability, are placed between die and matrix and
stamped with powerful half-ton drop-hammers,
striking a blow of several tons in weight.
T I, n . ~ ~ , , . c
In the finishing room the embossed parts from
~,°, , 1 , ,
the stamping room are built up and prepared for
erection on buildings by a great number of bench
hands, who are most skilled metal workers trained
in carrying out architectural plans and details and
m dealing with the endless variety of work the
firm are called upon to execute. Previous to
stamping, the metal sheets pass through the paint-
mg machines which are capable of painting a
thousand sheets of metal a day.
In this portion of the factory 8 feet guillotines
snip the metal sheets into the required widths and
lengths, band-saw machines being used to cut out
mitre leaves and other fancy pieces of metal work.
Immense quantities of cast ventilators, cowls,
finials, lamps, centre flower pieces, and cornices
are stored at the works, twenty miles of the latter
having been turned out in the course of the year.
In the bulk yaids the stocks of steel, copper,
zinc, and brass sheets are valued at many thousands
of pounds. Passing the storekeeper's office and
engine room, we come to the packing and forward-
ing departments. From here the finished goods
are sent out to the customers, either by the firm’s
own carriers or, in the case of country and inter-
state orders, delivered in case on truck or ship.
The company propose in the near future to exten-
sively increase their factor}' premises and commer-
cial operations generally to cope wdth the large
A CORNER IN THE STAMPING ROOM.
WUNDERLICH FACTORY. BAPTIST-STREET, REDFERN, SYDNEY.
business done in connection with their various in-
terstate agencies in Victoria, Tasmania, South Aus-
tralia. Western Australia, North, South, and Cen-
tral Queensland, and New Zealand,
The company, with justifiable pride, emphasise
the fact that the artistic and unique products of
ii c „
tneir workshops are throughout ot local manutac-
ture_ N t ou] were t! t \ B pioneers of embosse d
mehl , wor] . jn Austl . aHa , but, since their establish-
ment in lgBs> the or g an i sation has so deve l o ped
that th are ahead of any gimilar class of decora-
Hve wolk duced either in Europe or in Amer ica.
Not onl ale the firm ivi constant employ-
ment to a „„, at mxmbt , r of jjritish and colonial
, vorkraen iu New South Wales and elsewhere, but
they are supplying and encouraging the use of ar-
tistic interior and exterior fittings and roofings
which beautify our cities, suburbs, and homes of
Australia.
Tlbe /IDanufactimng Jnbustr^.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
PATENT CEILING AND ROOFING.


The importation of the world-famed Marseilles
terracotta roofing tiles, the sole agency of which is
held by Messrs. Wunderlich, has been of immense
magnitude. The amount of these products im-
ported into the Commonwealth and New Zealanc
during the last three years exceeded 8J million
tiles, representing a dead weight tonnage of 22/00
tons or fifteen full cargoes per sailing vessels, and
valued at considerably over .£70,000, a sure evi-
dence of the popularity of the tiles in Australia.
As a convenience for the unloading of the many
ships chartered, the firm has its own commodious
wharf at Careening Cove, Neutral Bay, where its
ships can go alongside to discharge in perfect
safety. The tiles, as they leave the hold of
the ships, are placed on skids on which
they slide down to the wharf, some thirty
men being required to control the work. The
business is conducted on the broadest lines, the
public reaping the benefit accruing from small ex-
penses and charges in connection with the importa-
tion of the raw material and made-up goods.
MR. E. H. C. WUNDERLICH.
managing director, Mr. Wunderlich paid a lengthy
visit to the Continent, and secured special machi-
nery for more efficiently carrying on the process of
which he is the original patentee. Mr. Wunder-
lich is greatly respected in commercial circles as
one of our foremost amateur musicians, and takes
a deep interest in musical matters, having been
until lately on the committee of the Sydney Or-
chestral Society.
MR. ALFRED WUNDERLICH.
Mr, Alfred Wunderlich is a Londoner, having
been born within sight of St. Paul’s in the memor-
able year of 1865. lie was engaged in business in
London for some years, but in deference to his
brother’s wishes came to Sydney in 1887, and en-
tered into partnership with Mr. E. H. C. Wunder-
lich in the same year.
Mr. Alfred Wunderlich has twice revisited the
old country on business and pleasure combined.
No one can claim to be more sincere in their
efforts to push forward the industrial development
of New South Wales than the subject of this
sketch, who is on the Council of the Chamber of
Manufactures, in addition to being a member of
the New South Wales Chamber of Commerce and
the French Chamber of Commerce. As one of the
managing directors of the Wunderlich Company
he dischu ges his important duties in a particu-
larly businesslike and industrious manner.
DR. OTTO WUNDERLICH.
Dr. Otto Wunderlich is one of those rare in-
stances where the disciple of Aesculapius has not
only adopted a commercial occupation, but has
gained a great distinction in it. Born in London
in 1861, after taking his degree of M.D., he secured
a lucrative and lengthy practice in that city-.
The possibilities of the Australian business, and
the fact of his possessing a rich scientific know-
ledge, induced the doctor to come out to Sydney
in 1900 and join his brothers in their successful
venture as one of the directors of the company.
In this position, needless to say, his knowledge of
health and hygienic matters is of great value and
assistance to the firm in their business operations.
DR. OTTO WUNDERLICH.
which are so largely connected with the building,
ventilation, and the acoustic properties of houses,
hospitals, factories, and public buildings gener-
ally.
The Marseilles Company, which was established
in 1840, has now thirty-five steam factories. Then
manufactures comprising airbricks, skylights, ter-
minals, ridges, enamelled, glazed and flooring
tiles, finials, and finial caps. Cheapness and
economy are the most important factors in these
goods, combined with simplicity of fitting. Being
perfectly watertight and fireproof, the tiles ensure
safety and durability as a roofing material.
MR. E. H. C. WUNDERLICH.
Mr. E. H. C. Wunderlich, to whom the honour of
founding the widely and favourably known firm of
Wunderlich and Company, Limited, is due, is a
gentleman whose energy and inventive genius has
not only benefited his firm, but, by introducing
into the construction of our hsuses and workshops
artistic and healthful surroundings, has conferred
a boon upon the people of the Australian Com-
monwealth.
Mr. Ernest H. C. Wunderlich was born within
the sound of Bow Bells in 1859, and thus acknow-
ledges London as his birthplace. Mr. Wunderlich
made good use of the high educational opportuni-
ties placed at his disposal, which included several
years of practical work and technical training as
an engineer.
In 1884 he decided to come to Australia, and at
Sydney in the same year laid the foundation of the
great manufacturing firm which bears his name.
In his venture he was successful as an importer
and general merchant, and in the conduct of busi-
ness his knowledge of engineering and architec-
tural construction gave him the idea of making
use of metal sheets for ceilings, roofs, and wuiins-
coting, which would be peculiarly suited both for
the purpose of safety and to the climatic condi-
tions prevailing in Australia.
In 1892, on the conversion of the firm into a
limited liability company, with the founder as
WUNDERLICH CO.’S WHARF, CAREENING COVE, NEUTRAL BAY.


Wade & Company, Ltd.
MANUFACTURERS OF WADE'S CORN FLOUR.
One of the most notable features that has marked
the development of the Australian community dur-
ing the last quarter of a century has been the pro-
minence to which secondary productions have
attained. Year by year local production has
become increasingly important, and Australian-
made goods have been accepted and patro-
nised by Australian people to an extent that can
only evoke the liveliest gratification.
In New South Wales especially this growth of
the manufacturing industry has been very notice-
able in the direction of the preparation of food-
stuffs, and, in fact, nowadays in almost all the
necessaries and many of the luxuries of life this
State supplies its inhabitants, and in many in-
stances those of the other States of the Common-
wealth.
In this connection no better example could be
found than the firm of Messrs. Wade and Com-
pany, engaged exclusively in the manufacture of
corn flour in their admirably appointed and com-
modious factory, situated in Church-street, New-
town. Wide as is the popularity of Wade’s Brand
of corn flour, it is no more so than is deserved, and
housewives throughout Australia have long been ac-
customed to depend upon its many splendid
qualities.
Mr. Wade, Senior, the Managing Director of the
firm, has had a wide experience. Twenty-five years
ago, while in business at Dungog, he realised the
opportunities that were then offering in the State
for anyone enterprising enough to begin the manu-
facture of corn flour.
Mr. Wade started the making of the corn
flour in the little township, with the late
Mr. R. L. Alison as his partner. The fac-
tory, known locally as Wade’s Mill, soon built
up a reputation for the quality of its product, and
after several years at Dungog, during which the
demand for the corn flour steadily increased, Mr.
Wade came to Sydney that he might the more
efficiently superintend the distribution and benefit
the domestic community further by arranging
facilities for obtaining the flour on a larger and
more ample scale.
The corn flour was still made and packed at
Dungog, but Mr. Wade was so successful in the
metropolis that it at length became evidenced that
a removal to the distributing centre of the State
was inevitable. Consequently a site for a factory
in Newtown was chosen, and Mr. Wade, Junior,
was despatched to America in order to secure the
most modern machinery and acquire a knowledge
of the most up-to-date methods of manufacture in
operation in those countries.
The business was formed into a limited liability
company, Mr. J. AVade becoming managing direc-
tor, Mr. R. AV. Alison a director, while Mr. D. C.
AVadc was entrusted with the responsibilities of
secretarial and managerial duties. In August,
1902, a start was made in the new factory, which
had been specially designed so that the handling
of the corn flour in its several stages of manu-
facture might be most expeditiously carried out
and with a plant that had found favour with Mr.
D. C. Wade'; daring' his" trip.
The first impression formed by the visitor when
he enters the factory is the absolute cleanliness
that is the characteristic of all he sees, and fur-
ther investigation strengthens and augments that
impression. Rrom basement to roof, from engine-
room to forwarding department, everything is spot-
less, the smooth white powder of the corn flour
being scrupulously protected from contact with
anything which might sully its purity.
In the large majority of the various processes
ingenious machinery" takes the place of manual
labour, and where the latter is inevitable every
precaution is taken to ensure that this human con-
tact should be as little and as clean as possible.
Wade’s Corn Flour Mill is a square-built struc-
ture of massive proportions, in no instance sacri-
ficing utility to effect, but combining in full mea-
sure all the characteristics which mark the up-to-
date factory. It was specially built for the work,
the contract price amounting to .£6OOO. In every
blanch the latest pattern of machinery, person-
ally selected by Mr. D. C. Wade during his trip,
has been installed, and every artifice that modern
ingenuity has invented for the more economical
treatment and the cleanlier handling of the pro-
duce has been adopted.
The building consists of three floors and a base-
ment. In the latter the corn meal, which is the
chief by-product of the manufacture, is dealt with,
and there also is located the engine-room. On the
first floor are the offices and the settling runs.
WADE AND COMPANY’S FACTORY,
NEWTOWN.
Above that again on the second floor are the pack
ing and forwarding departments, the mill stones
and grinding machinery, the drying room and the
soaking vats, while on the topmost flat the raw
material is stored ready-for use when required.
A 40-horse power engine, built by the Mort’s
Dock Company, with a Hoskins’ boiler, supplies
(he power, which is transmitted from floor to floor.
The conversion of the maize of the primary pro-
ducer to the cornflour of commerce involves a num-
ber of processes more or less complicated, which
to the outside observer are full of interest. No
better idea of the nature of these processes could
be gained than an inspection of the mill of AVade
and Company under the guidance of its courteous
and obliging manager. The, building has been
planned with the sole object of corn flour making,
and no manufacture of unrelated commodities in-
tei feres with this single purpose.
The career of the maize from the time it is
brought to the mill as raw material to the day
it is issued from the distributing department in
the neat packages of the firm might justly be
styled as one of “ ups and downs.” The material
is continually passing from one floor to another
by means of an ingenious arrangement of shoots
and elevators or the utilisation of the force of
gravitation.
On delivery, the maize is at once hoisted to the
top floor, where the storing room is situated, and
there it remains until required. The initial pro-
cess comes when the maize is run by gravitation
into the soaking vats full of pure water. In these
vats it remains for twenty-four hours, until tho-
roughly softened and saturated with moisture,
when it is transferred to the grinding mill, where
it is passed through the mill stones.
Each set of “ stones” is of a particular make
specially adaxrted to the manufacture of corn
flour, and capable of crushing 30 bushels an hour.
Upon them a stream of pure water is constantly
pouring, and when ground the meal flows away
to the separators in the form of a thick “ mash.”
Then occurs the separation of the corn meal
from the corn flour. The thick pasty fluid is first
of all run through a brass wire sieve, the screen of
which is large enough to allow the particles of
corn flour to pass, but retains the bran on the
surface. This sieve is shaken by machinery in
such a manner that the bran is all collected at one
point, from which it is mechanically cleared and
dropped down shoots to the hoppers in the base-
ment. The separated corn flour is also collected
in a hopper and subjected to a second grinding,
which further reduces it to the consistency of a
thick golden liquid. From the grinder the corn
flour, mixed with particles of bran, water, and
gluten, flows over and through a silk sieve, the
interstices of which, being smaller than those of
the brass wire cloth already described, are conse-
quently capable of retaining the specks of bran
which escaped the first'separator. This sieve is
similar in construction to the wire sieve, and the
bran is shaken to the edge and removed in the
.same way.
The coin flour is now in the form of a thick straw
coloured liquid, and the next requirement is that
it should be recovered from the gluten and water
with which it is in solution. For this purpose it
is allowed to flow on to the settling runs, as they
are called. These runs consist of rows of troughs
measuring in their total length between 200 and
300 feet, and having a very slight incline. They
occupy the four sides of a room nearly 100 feet long
and 40 feet wide, and act in a corresponding man-
ner to the amalgam tables of a crushing battery.
The viscid fluid in which the corn flour is held
in suspension passes slowly along these runs, and
in its passage the corn flour is deposited on the
bottom in the form of a white paste, while the
gluten and water are run off into vats. Here the
gluten is allowed to settle to the bottom in its turn,
and when the water is quite clean again it is emp-
tied from the vats, the gluten being utilised in the
production of bran.
In the ‘‘Run-room” large holes or shoots are cut
in the floor, and down these the corn flour taken
from the runs is ladled with huge wooden spoons
directly into the washing vats placed in the base-
ment, This method of handling emphasises anew
the extreme care exercised in the factory to obvi-
ate any chance of the introduction of impurities.
In the washing vats, large enough to hold 2500
gallons each, the paste remains six days, during
which it is subjected to three washings, one every
second day, fresh water being, of course, used
every time. To ensure the perfect cleansing of the
corn flour, agitators are used in each vat; these
stir up the contents thoroughly, and drive any
extraneous matter to the surface, which as it
wises to the top, is skimmed off by the employees
who are continually in attendance during the
washing. The vats are on brick foundations, and
the surroundings are kept scrupulously clean.
After the third washing the corn flour is allowed
to settle, and, when the water has been drained
Gbe /Ifoamifactuvmg Jubustri?.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
THE MANUFACTURE OF CORN FLOUR.


off, is dug out and lifted mechanically to the
second floor, where the drying room is located.
Here, in a room some 70 feet by 20 feet, it is
spread out in comparatively thin layers on wire
screens, elevated two or three feet above the floor,
and subjected to a dry heat, approximating to 140
degrees Fahrenheit. Fifteen rows of steam pipes
ranged, one above the other along the walls of he
room, are used to obtain this temperature, the
coin flour, beautifully white, and looking like a
snow bank, quickly yields up its moisture.
When all the water has been completely evapor-
ated, the corn flour, which is in the form of thick
clods similar in formation to starch, is removed
by elevators and sent to be reground between sets
of mill-stones, which reduce it to the very fine
powdery substance so familiar to every housewife.
From these grinders the flour is elevated to “ the
dresser,” a huge box-like structure, in which there
slowly rotates a large silk fan. This fan acts as a
winnower, and removes the last trace of extraneous
matter which the flour may contain, leaving it
absolutely pure and ready for the consumer.
In the packing room the corn flour is boxed up in
attractive half and one pound cartoons and packed
in cases holding 40 one pound, or 80 half-pound
packages. These boxes are stamped with the firm’s
name and their trade design. Messrs. Wade and
Company deal directly with the wholesale and
retail houses throughout New South Wales and
the other States.
For their by-product, bran, Messrs. Wade and
Company enjoy as wide a popularity as is the por-
tion of their corn flour, and, indeed, so great is
the demand.for it as a food for stock and poultry
that they frequently find the greatest difficulty in
MR. R. W. ALISON.
filling all orders. It will be remembered that the
bran is extracted from the corn flour in two sepa-
rators, through which the product passes after
being ground. It is then shot down to the hoppers
in the basement, where it is bagged and packed, to
get rid of all moisture, and rough dried before
being put through the desiccator.
This ingenious machine is in the form of a
double boiler over 30 feet long. The bran is taken
up from a hopper by an elevator and placed in the
inside boiler, in which a knife worm revolves, chop-
ping it up to fine particles. The space between
the inner and outer boilers is really a steam
jacket, the heat from which completes the process
of evaporating the water contents of the material.
The bran as it leaves the desiccator is ready for
market, the operations of the knife woim doing
away altogether with the necessity for regrinding.
This method of treating the bran is a decided
improvement on the usual way, as by it there is a
total abstinence of the musty sour smell which is
s o disagreeable to stock.
In this, as in other directions,Alessrs. AA’ade and
Company furnish a further example of the way in
which they strive—and successfully strive—to pre-
serve " cleanliness” as the watcbwqrd of their
worlv.
With such laudable objects always in view, a
factory fully equipped with all modern machinery,
laid out in the most approved manner, and with
such sterling men of business and experience in
charge of its affairs, it is unnecessary to further
emphasise the prospects of increased prosperity
and widening clientele and customers which is
the enviable possession of the company at the pre-
sent day.
MR. JOHN WADE, J.P.
Mr. J. Wade, Managing Director, to whose enter-
prise and foresight the present influential position
of the company is due, is a colonist of many years
standing, his knowledge of Australia dating back
to 1858. In that year, while still a young man, he
MR. JOHN WADE, J.P.
came out to this country from Leeds, his native
town. He entered into business at Dungog as a
storekeeper, and there lie settled down, carved
out a home for himself in the new land of his
choice, and took up his rightful position as a citi-
zen of the community.
As far hack as twenty-five years ago his energy
pointed to him a way whereby his wealth could
be increased, and in conjunction with Mr. K. L.
Alison he started at Dungog the business of mil-
ling and packing corn flour, relying on the crops
of the local farmers to supply the raw material.
The business developed steadily along sound
lines, and for a number of years Mr. Wade
was satisfied with his first selection of a
mill site, but the industry expanded so
rapidly and the demand for the product became so
insistent that some time back Mr. Wade found it
necessary to remove to Sydney, where he'could
better watch over his interests and the interests
of his fellow partner.
He therefore came to the metropolis and took up
his residence at Ashfield. The mill still continued
to manufacture corn flour at Dungog, but at the
beginning of 1902 it was decided to transfer the
centre of operations to Sydney, and in August of
that year the business of Wade and Company was
started in the present premises. Though sixty-
one years old, Mr. Wade is still hale and hearty,
carrying the burden of his years lightly, and his
energetic efforts towards the advancement of the
company remain unimpaired. Mr. Wade has been
a Justice of the Peace for the past 20 years.
MR. ROBERT WILLIAM ALISON.
“ The younger generation,” says Ibsen, “ are
knocking at the door,” and it is to her younger
sons that the newly inaugurated Commonwealth
must look for the furtherance of her social, indus-
trial apd financial affairs. Mr. Robert WiUiani
Alison, who is a director in the firm of John Wade
and Company, is the eldest son of Sir. R. L. Alison,
one of the late partners, and was born in 1873.
On the formation of the concern into a limited
liability company in 1896 Mr. R. W. Alison became
the first secretary, and, on the death of his father,
Mr. R. L. Alison, in 1899, was made a director, Mr.
D. C. Wade taking up the reins as secretary.
Mr. Alison is possessed of a thorough business
knowledge, and on His estate at Cooreei, Dungog,
where the mill was formerly located before its
removal to Newtown, he carries on the business of
a grazier combined with dairying. Being a man of
energetic temperament and progressive ideas, it is
characteristic of him that he should take a lively
interest in such essential institutions as the Dairy-
men’s Union of Sydney, N.S.W., of which he is
an executive member, and in the Durham Agricul-
tural and Horticultural Association, in which he
holds the important position of hon. treasurer to
the latter society.
Although a very busy man, Mr. Alison is an
ardent upholder of the interests of the community
amongst whom he resides, and in February, 19(H),
was elected as an Alderman of the Municipal Coun-
cil of Dungog, a position he worthily fills at the
present time.
MR. D. C. WADE.
Mr. D. C. Wade, the son of the founder of the
firm, has had ample opportunities for the acquire-
ment of a knowledge of the milling and prepara-
tion of corn flour for the market. Born in Dun-
gog some thirty-three years ago, Mr. Wade, Junior,
MR. D. C. WADE.
has, so to speak, been reared in an atmosphere of
corn flour. After a four years course at Newington
College, Air. D. C. AVade came into his father’s
business about fifteen years ago, and went through
all departments in order that he might secure a
thorough knowledge of every detail.
He has had full charge of the mill for the past
ten years, and in 1901 he visited the United States
for the purpose of making a personal inspection of
the best methods of manufacture, and choosing the
most up-to-date machinery and appliances for
dealing with maize in the many processes of its
conversion into corn flour. AA’hen the business was
formed into a limited liability company in July,
1896, Air. D. C. AVade was appointed to the dual
position of secretary and manager.
The onerous duties attendant on these two posi-
tions he has carried out with characteristic ability,
and by the employment of the practical and theo-
retical knowledge acquired at home and abroad,
he has established a system of working the mills
which is unexcelled in its business thoroughness
and cleanliness. Air. AVade has not so far inte-
rested himself in public affairs, but as he is, com-
paratively speaking, a young man, there is no rea-
son why he should not do so at some future time


Biddell Brothers, Ltd.
WHOLESALE MANUFACTURING
CONFECTIONERS AND PRESERVERS.
Whether as juveniles, or as "children of a
larger growth,” there are few people who have
not at some time or other experienced that pe-
culiar physiological craving known as “ A Sweet
Tooth.” In some few the sensation may not be
of a very pronounced character, but their num-
lerhas no comparison to the vast majority of the
race in all climes, whose sense of taste includes a
decidedly natural appreciation of whatever is in-
herently luscious and dainty.
To anyone desirous of obtaining some idea of
the extent to which confectionery figures in the
domestic economy of the people of this State, and
of Australia, no better opportunity could be af-
forded for the gratification of his wishes, than a
tour „through the premises of Alessrs. Biddell
Brothers, Limited, Wholesale and Manufacturing
Confectioners and Preservers, whose extensive works
are situated at 6 Lackey Street, Darling Harbour,
Sydney.
The business, which ranks amongst the fore-
most of its kind in the Commonwealth, and has
been recently enlarged and re-oiganised, has a
trade connection which carries it back to the year
1850—a period antecedent to the discovery of gold
in Australia. In that year Air. Rowland Biddell,
with commendable commercial acumen, embarked
on an enterprise as a Manufacturing Confectioner
in premises located on Brickfield Hill. In 1863
his brother Henry, who had joined him in the co-
partnery, died, and in the same year the business
was removed to Waterloo, which, in those days,
afforded better facilities for manufacturing pur-
poses than did . the more congested part of the
City adjacent to the main thoroughfare.
After remaining there some years, daring which
the business increased to considerable proportions,
it was decided to seek a more central location,
and, accordingly the present site at Darling Har-
bour was selected.
The founder of the firm, Air. Rowland Biddell,
died in 1882, and, on the death of the surviving
partner, Airs. Henry Biddell carried on the busi-
ness in his own name, with Air. J. Louden under-
taking the practical part in the management
Under careful and discriminating control highly’
satisfactory progress was recorded, and, in 1893,
Air. William Thomson arrived from Scotland, and
assumed managerial charge.
Under his able supervision and wise fore-
thought advancement continued all along Ihe line.
In order to bring the business abreast of the most
up-to-date methods, and to enable it to cope with
the ever-increasing development of the trade, it
was decided to form it into a proprietary com-
pany’. This was successfully accomplished in 1896,
Air. Thomson being appointed Alanaging Director,
while Air. A. J. Cook acted as Business Alanager.
Since then the development of the business has
been eminently gratifying to all concerned, its
ramifications now extending throughout the dif-
ferent States of the Commonwealth, where its
travellers, aided by the eloquent testimony of the
superiority of the firm’s goods, are daily pushing
the name of Biddell Brothers, Limited, into still
greater prominence and favour, particularly in
New South Wale-, Queensland, and Tasmania.
In February, 1902, the business of Alessrs. C. B.
Tuckett and Co., the well-known manufacturing
confectioners of Leichhardt, was purchased, Air.
Tuekett taking up the responsible position of Gen-
eral Manager of Messrs. Biddell Brothers.
Notwithstanding the substantial advancement
that had been made in the past, the present ener-
getic and enterprising management determined to
resolutely pursue a still more forward and pro-
gressive policy, and, with that end in view, set
about rebuilding the greater portion of the prem-
ises, the result being that, to-day, the manufac-
tory occupied by Messrs. Biddell Brothers, Lim-
ited, is without doubt one of the finest of its kind
in Australia, both in regard to size, suitability to
the trade, and, what is equally important, ventil-
ation, cleanliness, and central location.
The building, in which the operations of the
firm are carried on, is a substantial brick struc-
ture, two stories high, and within its walls is
included one of the most modern and complete of
confectionery and preserving plants.
The visitor, on entering the establishment, no-
tices on his right an ornate and tempting display
of sugar dainties, enclosed in air-tight tins with
patent tops, cartons, and fancy' boxes, ranged
round the sales-room, in cedar glass-fronted cases.
while on his left is seen the counting house, fitted
with all the appurtenances necessary to the carry-
ing out of the clerical details of the management,
with precision and promptitude.
Handily located on the ground floor, are to be
found the Alanagerial Offices, the latter being in
close proximity to a large apartment devoted to
the storage of the raw material. Here all the ele-
ments which go to make up the many delicacies
manufactured by Alessrs. Biddell Brothers, Lim-
ited, are centred, and are distributed to the vari-
ous parts of the Factory.
THE FACTORY
of Alessrs. Biddell Brothers, as has already been
stated, is of a most up-to-date character, the
MESSRS. BIDDELL BROS., LIMITED,
Manufactory, 6 Lackey Street, Darling Harbour, Sydney.
various rooms in which the many piocesses of Gen-
feetionery making are gone through being lofty,
well lighted, and having throughout a pleasing ap-
pearance of scrupulous cleanliness,
Commencing with the initial work of manufac-
ture, the visitor enters what is known as the Pan
Room. Hew, in a spacious department, are to be
seen a number of copper revolving pans of huge
dimensions, these, which are machine driven, be-
ing connected with the 100 horse-power engine
which provides the motive power for the whole of
the factory.
The baking of the sugary material is, to the
ordinary observer, highly interesting, as serving
to show the great advance that has been made in
confectionery making machinery, and the great
facilities of Messrs. Biddell Brothers. Here are
concocted the ingredients for the making of
“ Scotch Mixtures,” and every description of pan
goods,
Proceeding onward, the sugar-boiling room
comes into view, where the process of sugar boil-
ing can be studied with safety and convenience,
The molten sugar is lifted from the pans by ma-
chinery, and spread out on a revolving table of
immense diameter, where it is cooled sufficiently
to enable it to be manipulated by the operators,
who deftly spin it out into long hank-like shapes,
in preparation for future processes, such as the
making of “ Love Rock,” “ Satin Balls,” “ Alixed
Lollies,” etc. In commodious bins along the walls
are large stocks of mixtures, bearing a variety
of nomenclature ’that would tax the memory of a
specialist to particularise.
Leaving this room, a department devoted to
toffee making is entered. In this is to be found
a number of useful machines, while on the tables
are to be seen neatly arranged piles of delicious
“ Devonshire Butter-Scotch” (a sweetmeat of lux-
uryl. “ Cocoanut Jack Bars,” “ Tuckett’s Tab-
lets,” etc,, etc.
Xlbe /tfoanufactunng Jnbustv^.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches.-eontinued.
THE MANUFACTURE OF CONFECTIONERY AND PRESERVES.


On the opposite side of the building is the
Chocolate Room, where the different methods of
delicate treatment required by confections of this
class can be followed, until the finished articles
are taken away and placed in trays in the drying
racks. In summer the newly-made chocolates are
placed in a huge refrigerating chamber, where,
under a freezing temperature, they are dried to
the requisite hardness. Amongst a host of choco-
late items stocked by Messrs. Biddell Brothers
may be mentioned “ Chocolate Cream Cakes,”
“Chocolate Mixtures,” “Chocolate Creams,”
“ Nougats,” etc.
In addition to the manufacture of confectionery,
from the humble “ toffee’’ cake to the highest
grade article of the French Confectioner’s art,
packed in its daintily planned and decorated sa-
chet, the firm are engaged in the manufacture of
" Candied Peel.”
Special attention has been given to this branch
of the business, the raw material, imported from
Italy in a salted condition, is first put through a
soaking process, to eliminate the salt, and, when
candied, the peel is neatly put up in cartons,
boxes, etc. In this speciality Messrs. Biddell
Bros, do a very extensive trade, and, with the
new facilities granted by the recent additions to
the factory, are now in the position to still fur-
ther augment their output of candied peel and
other necessary household requisites of a like na-
ture.
Leaving the basement, a wide staircase is as-
cended, and the first floor reached. The Starch,
MR. CHARLES B. TUCKETT.
Moulding and Colouring Rooms, with their drying
chambers, handily adjoining, are entered, and the
interesting processes which are undergone by the
hundred and one specialities tnat are classed un-
der the heading of “ Gelatine and Bright and
Crystalised Gums,” “ Crocodiles,” “ Navy Cut To-
bacco Bars,” “ Table Jellies,” “ Shivery Shakers,”
etc., and w-hich have in no small measure con-
tributed to build up the great reputation of the
firm, are to be seen in full swung. To enumerate
all the varieties of goods connected with this sec-
tion of the firm’s manufacture, would entail a
great expenditure of time and energy, so that we
will pass on to the “ Conversation Room,” where
a large machine, fitted w-ith sets of rollers, is kept
busy flattening out the “dough” into sheets of a
definite thickness, prior to their being passed un-
der the presses, w-hich punch the material out into
the well-known designs, that are afterw-ards em-
bellished with mottoes and sentiments that fre-
quently serve as a means of communication be-
tween love-lorn and bashful couples. Here, also,
is what is known as the Lozenge Department,
where the “dough” for the making of lozenges is
mixed, broken down to the required thickness,
and the finished article sent to the drying rooms,
in the form of medicated and scented lozenges.
In a portion of another room adjoining, is to be
seen a machine at work turning out yards of
coloured sugar-stick, resembling thick wire, and
intended to be cut up in lengths and sold as lolly
cigarettes. In another room, on the first floor, is
located the “ Caramel” Department, where ma
chinery of the most approved type again presents
itself, doing its work with an exactness and speed
that compels more than passing attention. Bid-
dell’s Caramels, owing to the fact that nothing
but the best materials are employed in their man-
ufacture, are of uniform high quality, and com-
mand a ready sale.
Steam mixing pans, whose contents are con-
stantly stirred by means of polished copper
screws, are here to be seen at work, perfecting
the quality of all material entrusted to their care.
The Cream Room, which has been recently re-
fitted up, is most commodious, and so located that
the " Cream,” when prepared, is run right away
to the moulds, thus effecting a great saving of
time, and ensuring the requisite cleanliness.
A special department, devoted to the manufac-
ture of what are known as Trench goods, also at-
tracts attention. In this room, all the finest class
of confectionery work is manufactured, and en-
cased in dainty wrappings, which take the form of
glove boxes, handkerchief sachets, fancy baskets,
etc. One of the largest rooms in the factory is
that devoted to wrapping. Into this department
the various descriptions of confectionery find their
way, and are sorted and packed into boxes, car-
tons, etc., ready to be delivered into the despatch-
ing and forwarding rooms, where the orders are
labelled and sent to all parts of New South Wales.
A very noticeable feature of the Factory and
Warehouse is that machinery is made to do the
principal handling of the materials, thus securing
extreme cleanliness, and making certain that every
class of goods manufactured by Messrs. Biddell
Brothers, Limited, is put on the market in the
best and most attractive condition and style. In
all the departments the employees are attired in
overalls and aprons, and as they flit about in the
pursuance of their various duties, the scene inside
the factory is a decidedly animated one. It only
remains to be said that the presence of such an
industry in the State is of almost incalculable
benefit, as it assists materially in the building up
of the revenue, while, at the same time, it gives
employment to a large number of persons, whose
weekly wage list aggregates a very considerable sum.
MR. WILLIAM THOMSON.
Mr. William Thomson, Managing Director of
Messrs. Biddell Brothers, Limited, is a gentleman
who, born in that great Scottish centre of trade,
Glasgow, imbibed in his youth the capable busi-
ness methods which have enabled him to do yeo-
man service for the firm. At a comparatively
early age, Mr. Thomson entered into business on
his own account. In 1885 he came to Australia,
and, soon after his arrival in Sydney, became as-
sociated with Messrs. Biddell Bros., where his
ripe experience, tact and courtesy, quickly mani-
fested themselves, his valuable seivices in push-
ing the business into a foremost place amongst
the industries of the State being promptly Te-
cognised when the proprietary was remodelled in
1895.
From being Manager under the old regime, he
was, on the formation of the new Company, ap-
pointed to the position of Managing Director, an
office which he still retains, and in which he has
secured the confidence of his co-partners, as well
as the confidence and esteem of the firm’s many
employees.
MR. A. J. COOK.
Mr. A. J. Cook hails from the town of Kiama,
in the far-famed Illawarra district. In his young
days Mr. Cook betook himself to New Zealand,
where he gained the valuable commercial experi-
ence which has since found a congenial field for
operation, since he became associated with Messrs.
Biddell Brothers, Limited.
Starting as representative of the firm in New
South Wales, he soon made himself intimately ac-
quainted with every phase of the business, and
the knowledge thus gained he has so applied to
the firm’s interests, with credit to himself and to
the satisfaction of his employers, as well as to
their numerous customers throughout Australia.
MB. CHARLES B. TUCKETT.
The lives of our prominent and successful citi-
zens furnish many interesting points to the bio-
grapher. The business career of Mr. Charles Ber-
nard Tuckett, Manager of Messrs. Biddell Bros.,
Ltd., is a striking example of how in some fam-
ilies, a genius for a certain trade is often handed
down from one generation to another. Mr.
Tuckett’s connection with the manufacture of con-
fectionery, dates back to his earliest boyhood, the
family, for a period embracing four generations,
having been actively engaged in the trade as Con-
fectioners at Plymouth, England.
Born at the historical seaport, Plymouth, in
1861, Mr. Tuckett first acquired a knowledge of
the business as a lad of fifteen, in the factory
owned by his father, Mr. William Henry Tuckett,
who died in 1899, and whose life-work was eulo-
gistically commented on in the columns of “ The
Confectioners’ Bakers’ and Pastrycooks’ Union,”
the official organ in Great Britain of these trades.
Prior to his father’s death, Mr. Tuckett, in
order to get an insight into the methods employed
by the world-celebrated confectioners in the Eng-
lish and French capitals, became connected with
the famous firm of Pascall and Co., of London,
and subsequently visited the Parisian and other
European markets, where, as a buyer and seller,
he was initiated into the mysteries which sur-
round the art of Continental confectionery mak-
ing.
MR. A. J. COOK.
In 1889, owing to the failing health of his wife,
and with the intention of combining business with
pleasure, Mr. Tuckett set out for Australia,
where, with characteristic energy, he hoped to
introduce the products of his father’s factory.
However, shortly after his arrival in Melbourne,
he changsd his plans, and accepted a responsible
position in the service of Messrs. Crawford and
Blair, the well-known Melbourne firm of Confec-
tioners, and, in the capacity of Manager of their
Biscuit and Confectionery business, spent two
years, during which he acquired a thorough know-
ledge of the conditions pertaining to the colonial
trade.
In 1894, as the result of a disastrous fire, which
destroyed his father’s manufactory at Plymouth,
Mr. Tuckett paid a short visit to England, and,
after a brief stay, returned to Australia, to estab-
lish the well-known firm of Messrs. Tuckett and
Co., Confectioners, at Leichhardt, near Sydney,
where he continued to conduct a prosperous and
growing business until the beginning of this year,
when an amalgamation of Messrs. Tuckett and Co.
and Messrs. Biddell Bros., Limited, was effected,
Mr. Tuckett taking over the control of the latter
manufactory.
Mr. Tuckett, whose ability is fully recognised by
the Trade of N.S.W., is a man of energy and en-
terprise, and is thoroughly qualified to cope with
the vigorous policy which the great increase in
the firm’s business has called forth.


Resch’s Waverley Brewery.
MR. EDMUND RESCH, J.P.
Mr. Edmund Eesch, the proprietor of Eesch’s
Waverley Brewer}', is a man of strong personality
and commanding physique. Although a native of
Germany, he has spent so many years under the
Southern Cross that he may justly lay claim to be
an Australian in all except the accident of birth.
His initiation into business was effected twenty-
six years ago, when he established at Wilcannia a
brewery that is still in active running. After a
successful career in the Western District he, in 1895,
came to Sydney, where in 1897 he bought out Allt’s
Brewery Company, and in 1900 purchased the plant
of the Lager Beer Company.
MR. EDMUND RESCH, J.P.
In the Rtter part of the year 1900 he secured the
site of the present brewery, and on the completion
of the spacious building installed therein a magni-
ficent plant, equal to anything to be found any-
where. Previous to erecting the extensive premises
in Bowling-street he carried on his brewery business
at the establishment purchased from Allt’s, and
which constituted what was originally known as
Burrows and Gleeson’s Waverley Brewery.
As a business man Mr. Eesch is widely known and
highly respected. In the domain of sport, too,
he is exceedingly popular, his interest in the healthy
and invigorating pastime of yachting amounting to
enthusiasm. His liberal patronage of this popular
branch of aquatics ha= been productive of the best
results, while bis generous bonhomie and genuine
sporting proclivities have seemed for him an hon-
oured niche in the esteem of his fellows.
Mr. Eesch is a Justice of the Peace in New South
Wales, and he has also been signalled out for in-
MR. EDMUND RESCH, JUNR.
ternational distinction on account of his well-known
qualities as a business man, the Government of the
Netherlands having appointed him to the position
of their Consul in Sydney,
MR. ARNOLD RESCH.
His private residence, which was purchased some
time ago, and greatly added to by him, is known
as “ Swifts,” a castellated mansion situated at
Darling Point.
HR. J. H. ALVAREZ. J.P.
Mr. J. H. Alvarez, the Manager of Resch’s Waver-
ley Brewery, is another native of the Common-
wealth, he having been born in Tasmania. He was
originally in business 20 years ago with Messrs.
Burrows and Gleeson, who were amongst the lead-
ing brewers in Sydney, and subsequently took an
important part in the conducting of Allt’s Brewing
Co. When Mr. Eesch took over the late Allt’s
Brewery, with which Messrs. Burrows and Gleeson
had amalgamated, Mr. Alvarez accepted the post of
manager for Mr. Eesch, and has worthily filled the
MR. J. H. ALVAREZ, J.P.
position, as the prominence Reach's Brewery ha?
attained testifies. He is a man of genial tempera-
ment, organising ability, and one who, as a leading
member of the beer, wine and spirit trade, has ever
held the esteem of commercial men throughout
the State.
His is an instance of hard working and consistent
endeavour achieving its due reward in early years.
By his employers he is held in the greatest regard
and confidence and by the numerous employees he
is looked upon as one who has made their interests
his own, while among the firm’s numerous clientele
he is deservedly popular for his straight going,
shrewd and eminently just principles.
He is also a Justice of the Peace, and in all walks
of life is spoken of as a highly estimable and valu-
able citizen.
tTbe /Ifoanufactunng Jiibustvip.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-contmued.
LAGER BEER, ALE AND STOUT.


MR. EDMUND EESCH, JUNIOR.
Mr. Edmund Eesch, Junior, is a native of Wil-
cannia, where he first saw the light 23 years ago.
He was educated at the Church of England Gram-
mar School, North Shore, and atterwai (Is at Scot-’
College, Melbourne.
About seven years ago he went home and studied
in England, Germany, and America, where he put
in five years acquiring knowledge of all that per-
tains to brewing and the brewing business. Hav-
ing obtained his diploma, Mr. Eesch returned to
Australia, and about two and a half years ago
joined his father in their present gigantic enter-
prise.
He is at present joint brewer of the concern with
his brother, and his success in that line is shown
by the fact of the popularity of Eesch’s produc-
tions.
BOUND AND ABOUT
EESCH’S WAVERLEY BREWERY.
Amongst the many men of energy and enterprise
who have during the past decade done so much to
develop the industrial life of the State, Mr. Edmund
Eesch is entitled to rank with the foremost.
Twenty-six years ago he started in the brewing
business at Wilcannia, one of the most Western
towns in New South Wales, and here his go-ahead
disposition quickly asserted itself to such an extent
that he soon became one of the leading townsmen.
Like all men of a sanguine temperament, domin-
ated by an ambition to achieve success on a large
scale, he soon found that the small Western settle-
ment did not afford a sufficient field for the exer-
cise of those robust business ideas which were up-
permost in his mind.
His initial success, which was the result of close
application to business, encouraged Mr. Eesch to
made all his calculations beforehand, and weighed
the consequences carefully in his mind, he possessed
absolute confidence in his ability to ultimately
secure it.
Money he spent freely, but nevertheless he was
aware where it went to. Some there are who would
be disposed to call the phenomenal progress made
“ sheer luck,” but in reality there was nothing of
this vague and untangible quality in its composi-
tion. It was Pluck—spelled with a capital P—
backed up by intelligence and unremitting indus-
try that produced such a desirable result.
Success followed upon success, and now Mr.
Eesch has the gratifying pleasure of knowing that
his unaided efforts have been crowned with well-
merited triumph.
Although he has won for himself a prominent
position in the commercial world, where his worth
is amply recognised, his innate preference for a
strenuous life forbids his retirement from the busy
ME. ARNOLD EESCH.
Mr. Arnold Eesch, like his elder brother, is also
a native of Wilcannia, where twenty-one years ago
he was introduced to this world. After receiving a
sound educational grounding at the Church of Eng-
land Grammar School, North Sydney, and Scots’
College, Melbourne, he proceeded to England, Ger-
many, and America, where he underwent several
years technical training to fit him to take a res-
ponsible position in the brewing business.
On his return to Sydney, after having become pro-
ficient in all that pertained to the brewing business,
he put his knowledge to practical account by enter-
ing his father’s business as one of the principal
brewers, and in that capacity has, like his brother,
I'ealjsed a success,
still further enterprise, and with characteristic
faith in his own resources he lost no time in launch-
ing out on larger schemes which promised greater
returns. Hence he turned his attention to the
metropolis, wdien his keen perception quickly re-
cognised the latent opportunities that were await-
ing the application of money and brains to start
them into activity. Sagacious, shrewd, and deter-
mined, Mr. Eesch was not long in finding an open-
ing that to his mind was rich in prospective advan-
tages, and grasping the occasion with both hands, he
assiduously set to work to build up
A Large and Prosperous Trade-
The obstacles Mr. Eesch encountered were neither
diminutive nor isolated, but instead of proving
impediments to his progress they appeared only to
inspire greater resolution and spur him on to more
vigorous effoit. lie had before him a goal which
he had made up his mind-to win, and as he had
plane on which he has spent the whole of his
existence, and consequently Mr. Eesch, at an age,
and under circumstances, when most men are in-
clined to seek rest and change, is still engaged with
the hundred and one problems that waylay the path
of the man who bends his energies to the develop-
ment of industrial enterprise.
In 1897 Mr. Eesch purchased from the Allt’s
Brewing Company the extensive biewery, origin-
ally founded by Messrs. Burrows and Gleeson,
situated in the Edgecliffe-road, and known as the
Waverley Brewery. Subsequently he purchased the
property of the N.S.W. Lager Beer Company, and,
after making extensive alterations, in pursuance of
his policy of centralisation, removed the plant from
Waverley to Dowling Street.
These premises cover about two acres, and being
constructed on modern, up-to-date lines, comprise


one of the most complete brewing establishments
to be found in the Southern Hemisphere
The Plant
is of the most modern type, all the latest
appliances for the making of ale and lager
beer of the finest quality, having been adopted ir-
liberally those who supply them with a high-class
article.
The plant used in the Brewery, together with the
buildings, cost .1:150,000, and, as the amount of busi-
ness necessary to produce even an ordinary return
on so much expended capital must be great, it will
his two sons, Messrs. Edmund and Arnold Resoh,
who, after having gained an extensive technical
experience on the Continent, now fill the important
and responsible positions of brewers in their
father's works.
The manager of these huge works is Mr. John 11.
respective of cost. This is one of the characteristics
of Mr, Resell s enterprise. The best and nothing
but the best will suit him, and in order to attain
, , ,
that end he has spared no expense. It is a good
policy to pursue, as the public, who can be relied
upon as excellent judges of what is good, patronise
TWO OF RESCH'S SPECIALITIES
at once be appoint that the volume of trade an-
nually passing through the firm s hands must swell
to enormous proportions.
The whole of this immense concern is controlled
by Mr. Reseh, as the sole proprietor, and associated
with him in the practical part of the business are
Alvarez, who has identified himself strongly
vith Mr. Resch's enterprises, and in no small mea-
sure contributed to the gratifying result that has
been acllleve(l - His many strong points it would
be difficult to individualise, suffice it to say that


in the business world he is regarded as the personi-
fication of administrative ability.
The "firm brew Eesoh’s beers, sold in bottles and
in bulk. They also handle Resch’s select stock
ale in bottles, and "brew English Ale, which is sold
and known as Resch’s English Ale. This latter is
of very fine quality, and before being sent out from
the brewery is stored for eight or nine “months in
special chambers. Bull Brand Stout is another nf
the high-class lines, and they hold the following
agencies:—James Watson and Company, Dundee
Whiskies, amongst which is included the famous
Three Star selected old blended Glenlivet Whisky,
also Sazerac de Forge and Fils. This is one of the
oldest Cognac firms in France, whose immense cel-
lars are at Angouleme, France. Jubilee Schnapps
is another of the film’s imported lines, which com-
mand a large sale throughout New South Wales.
Henry Goulet Champagne completes the list of
agencies, but in addition the firm carry immense
stocks of all descriptions of Wines and Spirits in
connection with their large hotel and wholesale
trade. Messrs. Eesch claim for their beers that
they are absolutely pure, the lager being manufac-
tured under the Munich system, Vienna malt and
Bohemian hops being exclusively used.
The Waverley Brewery Building
has a noble frontage to Dowling-street. It
is built of brick and iron throughout, and
finished in castellated design. On the ex-
treme right, facing the building, is a two-
storey wing containing the offices. At the en-
trance is a counting house and general offices, while
>m the right is the manager’s office. On the first
floor are the offices of Mr. Edmund Eesch and his
two sons, handsomely appointed and luxuriously
furnished.
At the rear of Mr. Edmund Resch’s office is the
laboratory and analytical rooms. There is an im-
mense store, consisting of two floors and a base-
ment ; at the rear of the offices are bulk stores, the
first floor being taken up with the packing and for-
warding departments, whilst the basement is given
over to the bulk wines and spirits, etc. This por-
tion of the building is worked entirely separate
from that of the brewing, but the operations here
carried on form no inconsiderable portion of the
firm’s business.
All the floors in the brewery are cement, and very
noticeable throughout the whole interior is that ab-
solute cleanliness so essential to successful brew-
ing.
Commencing with the first processes of brewing,
it is necessary to begin at the stores. Here, in a
special department, which is a model of cleanliness,
there are a number of binns for the storage of malt.
As these binns are capable of holding 5000 bushels
each at one time, some idea of the great output of
this model brewery can be ascertained.
The raw material when it comes into the brewery
is raised by elevators to the storage binns described,
which are located on one of the top floors of the
central building, known as the brew house. This
brew house has three floors. In rne first process the
malt goes through the cleaner, an immense cylin-
drical appliance, inside of which there is a large
power-driven screen, which thoroughly removes all
dust or deleterious particles from the malt.
The cleansed malt is then shot into a hopper,
and fiom thence finds its way through an auto-
matic weighing machine to the crushing mill, from
which it again is elevated to another hopper which
feeds the mash tun. In this mash tun the malt
is mixed by means of revolving rakes with a cer-
tain proportion of filtered water, and when ready
the liquid is drawn off into what is known as the
kettle, the residue consisting ol the used-up malt,
being shot out by machinery to the outside of the
building direct into carts, where it is taken away
and used for feeding cattle and other purposes.
The Kettle,
which consists mf a huge copper cauldron
capable of holding 120 hogsheads at one
time, is kept at boiling point by means of a steam
jacket. The liquid from the mash tun, which, as
we have already explained, is drawn off into the
kettle, is then kept on the boil, and to it the brewers
from time to time add a certain proportion of hops,
the whole being boiled together. When the hops
and the liquid obtained from the malt have been
brewed for the required time, the beer, then in its
first stage, is pumped to another building of six
storeys known as the Cooling Tower, where an im-
mense steel cool ship is situated. This cool ship
consists of a tank about three feet in depth, and of
such size that when filled over 200 hogsheads can
be contained in it.
After cooling in this chamber the beer passes
over a refrigerator. This appliance takes the form
of a number of copper pipes, inside of which is ice-
cold water. The beer runs over the outside of
these copper pipes, being thoroughly cooled in the
process. From the refrigerator it finds its way by
gravitation to the fermenting vats. These are of
immense size, and have in their centre a coil of
piping through which cold water is forced to pre-
vent the beer from getting too warm. The vats
reach down to the next floor, known as the bottom
section. Here the liquid is allowed to stand for
/
about a fortnight, and in some cases longer, then
run off into the racking cellar, where it is run into
hogsheads, barrels, etc., these in turn being stamped
and got ready for distribution to the firm’s cus-
tomers.
In the case of Resch’s select stock ale and other
bottle beers, the liquor finds its way to the bottle
department, where it is bottled off, pasteurised,
labelled, and capsuled, then placed in readiness in
the adjoining store-room for distribution.
This
Bottle Department
is most complete, and is equipped with
every appliance for the cleansing and steri-
lising of the receptacles, as they come from
the bottle yard, so that the purchaser of Resch’s
bottled beer is assured that when purchasing
Resch’s ales and stouts he is getting an absolutely
pure a: tide.
Adjoining the bottle department there is an im-
mense building given over to the storage and clean
sing of the barrels, and known as the cooperage.
In the piocess of cleaning the barrels a most scrupu-
lous care is exercised to see that the work is car-
ried out in a thorough and scientific manner. Every
cask before being utilised is subjected to the action
of specially equipped steam cleansers.
In the brewing of lager, the process is somewhat
more complicated than that of making ordinary
beer. After the lager has been brewed it is sent
to the special cool ship, and from thence is trans-
mitted to the vacuum cellars. In these cellars.
which are of great extent, a mean temperature of
about 32 degrees is continuously maintained. Ar-
ranged round are a number of specially constructed
steel vats, each of which is lined with glass enamel,
ensuring absolute cleanliness.
In the vacuum cellars the lager beer is stored for
a long period to allow it to settle and improve in
quality, etc.
The carbonic acid gas, which has accumulated
during this process, is taken off from the vats by
exhaust pipes and conveyed to accumulators in an
adjoining department, the gas thus obtained being
used in the preparation of aerated waters. Adjoin-
ing the vacuum cellars is a complete refrigerating
and ice-making plant.
■Handily located in the centre of the works is the
engine-room, whence the necessary driving power is
transmitted to the many'•machines and other ap-
pliances in use throughout the works. In this
building there are two very fine engines of the most
up-to-date type, one of 120 h.p. being in use in con-
nection with the brew house machinery, the other
of 90 h.p. driving the refrigerating plant. In addi-
tion to the above a host of smaller accessory en-
gines are at work in connection with the elevators,
pumping, etc.
Whilst speaking of the machinery, it is neces-
sary to state that throughout every process of
brewing, cooling, racking, bottling, etc..
Everything Is Accomplished Mechanically
so that from first to last no human hand comes into
contact with the productions from Eesch’s Brewery,
and any chance of impurities finding their way into
the famous brands of this company is thus made
absolutely impossible.
In the spacious yards a model stable has been
erected by Mr. Resch, in which the 35 to 40 horses
constantly in use are housed. As necessary adjuncts
to the carrying on of such a huge concern there are
fully equipped plumbers’, carpenters’, and coopers’
shops and bottle and coal yards.
From the foregoing it will be easily seen that the
business carried on by Mr. Resch and his able as-
sistants is one of great magnitude, and is a distinct
advantage to the commercial development of the
State. The purity and high quality of all the firm’s
pioductions have won for them an enviable reputa-
tation throughout the Commonwealth, where
Eesch’s beer is regarded as a popular synonym for
all that is best amongst liquors.
The establishment of this business provides pro-
fitable employment for a great many hands, and the
weekly wages bill, amounting to a good round sum,
is a factor that operates beneficially upon the pio-
sperity of the city.
Men of Mr. Eesch’s calibre are a distinct acquisi-
tion to any community, as they quicken the pulse
of enterprise, which is the life blood of indus-
trial existence. It is to be hoped that the estim-
able commercial principles of which Mr. Eesch
is the living embodiment will still further develop
in our midst, and that the splendid example he has
so courageously set will be abundantly copied with
the best results, both to individuals and the State.
The highest appreciation of the people is worthy
to be expended on those whose discernment and in-
trepidity in business promote the welfare of the
community, and it is no exaggeration to say that
such men as Mr. Eesch and his able coadjutors in
industrial development are deserving of popular
commendation.


THE CARRIAGE OF WOOL. FROM SHEEP'S BACK TO STEAMER.


Wool.


1891
61,831,000
1892
58,080,000
1893
56,980,000
1894
56,977,000
1895
47,617,000
1896
43,318,000
1897
43,952,000
1898
41,241,000
1899
36,213,000
1900
39,612,000
1901
41,858,000
1902
26,187,000
The Wool Trade of N.S.W.
A Review...
To 31st Dec., 1902.
Our Staple Industry.
TN our last special issue it was said that “a
good wool year means prosperity, while a
poor one means something akin to depres-
sion,” which is but another way of stating that
all wealth comes from the soil, and that, when
those who derive their principal incomes from
grazing, agriculture, or mining are doing well,
their prosperity is reflected on, and their sur-
plus cash disseminated amongst the other sec-
tions of the community, causing what are
promises to come to the rescue of the country,
and make up to a considerable extent, along
with the high prices obtainable for wool and
mutton, for the comparatively low level to
which the pastoral and agricultural sections
have descended.
Our present purpose is, however, with
sheep and wool only, and both have passed
through very trying times of late. As some
evidence of this, it is only necessary to glance
NEW ZEALAND LOAN AND MERCANTILE AGENCY CO., LTD.,
WOOL STORES, PYRMONT.
called and welcomed as “ good times.” It is
a feature of Australian life, however, that
what may be termed her primal or funda-
mental industries are never all suffering at
the same time. When a depression takes
place in, say, mining, the grazing and agri-
cultural departments arc probably doing well.
At the present time the mining industry
at the following table, which shows the num-
ber of sheep in the State of New South Wales
from the year 1891, when she attained her
record position as a sheep-raising country,
and had in round figures 62 million head to
her credit, to the present time, when official
returns to 31st December, 1902, state the
number at 26,187,467 head.
As these latest figures are practically based
on shearing returns, and the mortality had
not then ceased, it is a certainty that, with an
allowance for the sheep killed for food, there
is not that number in the State now. At
the same time prospects are brighter than


Feom.
Destination.
19 01.
1901-2.
By Ska—
Sydney
Newcastle ..
United Kingdom and
Foreign Porta
M II M
Hales.
530,736
54,555
Bales.
590,827
38,382
Total
585,291
629,159
Sydney
Newcastle ..
Victoria
22,310
3,313
19.892
3,712
Total
25 623
23,604
Sydney
Kew Zealand
Queensland
Tasmania
South Australia
49
**53
120
"ie
Total
102
136
Total by Sea
611.016
652,899
Borderwise —
Albury
Cobram ,. fl
Corowa
Enston
Howlong
Moama
Mulwala
Swan Hill
Tocumwal ...
Wentworth
Victoria
•j ••• ••• •••
29,289
1,102
13,667
2,602
20
23,92-3
3,802
30,142
6,606
6.526
32.923
1,373
12,086
2,244
24
24,316
3,180
80,066
7,135
4.958
Total
117.769
118.305
Wentworth...
Willy ama ...
South Australia
15,624
12,554
12,848
9.920
Total
28,178
22,768
Boggabilla ...
Wallangarra
Queensland
263
Total
163
Total Borderwise ...
146,210
141,073
Total expo
Less impo
rted from the State
'•ted from Queensland, etc...
757,226
38,053
7 3.972
34,436
NET PRODUCTION or N.S. WALES
719,173
759,536
Increase ... 40,363 bales.
they have been for some considerable time
past. Recent rains, though not sufficient to
warrant the statement that there has been a
complete breakup of the drought, go to
strengthen the hope that we are on the eve of
better conditions for the pastoral and agri-
cultural industries. The rains which have
fallen have benefited a very large area of the
State, in fact it may be said that only in
South-western Riverina has there been insuf
ticieut to do appreciable good. Coming at a
time when the sun’s heat is still retained in
the ground, and before frosts are likely to
make their appearance, grass and herbage are
making, and will make, great headway,
and, with the reduced number of stock
to depasture, it is safe to say that
there will be no scarcity of feed
during the coming winter, whilst there is
every appearance, from the manner and di-
rection of the rain, after heavy gales in
Queensland and the north of Australia gener-
ally—that there will soon be an unmistake-
able break-up of the drought, with every
probability of a series of wet, and, therefore,
prosperous, years. Apart from all this, how-
ever, the lessons of the past, learnt at great
cost, will not be without effect on our graziers
and farmers. Already the irrigation of land,
both for stock-feeding and crop-growing pur-
poses, is engaging attention, and successful
experiments have been made in the Forbes,
Narrandera, and other districts, where the ef-
fects of drought have been very severely felt,
which have demonstrated the possibilities of
irrigation in relation to stock-feeding, and it
is reasonable to expect that no matter how
severe future droughts may be, they will never
catch pastoralists so poorly prepared to meet
them as in the past.
It has to be recognised that the bulk of
Australia is a dry country, and that, though
good seasons do occur, sometimes a succession
of them, —bad years, from a rain point of
view—are more frequent than good ones, and
the sooner such facts, unpleasant though they
be, are realised, the better.
For the wool year ended 30th June, 1902,
197,638 bales of wool were received by rai
into Sydney, 82,188 bales reaching the port
by sea, a total of 579,827 bales. For the six
months, July 1 to December 31, 1902, 305,622
bales arrived by rail, and 4,691 bales by sea,
the total amounting to 350,313 bales, or a
grand total for the eighteen months of 9d0,140
bales. Of course, this does not by any means
represent the total output of New South
Wales, as a large proportion of her produc-
MESSRS. DALGETY AND CO.’S WOOL STORES, MILLER’S POINT.
tion, for geographical reasons, finds its way
to the seaboard by the avenues of Victoria
and South Australia. The extent and direc-
Lon of this exportation will be best realised
MESSES. GOLDSBROUGH, MORT AND CO.’S WOOL STORES AND OFFICES, CIRCULAR QUAY.
by the publication of tbe Customs figures,
which are as follow :


From.
Destination.
1901.
1902.
By Sea—
Sydney
Newcastle ...
United Kingdom and
Foreign Ports
»i *« >»
Sales.
334,288
28,450
Balks.
214,712
17.009
Total
802.738
231,721
Sydney
Newcastle ...
Victoria
18,239
3.712
8,439
905
Total
21,951
9,344
Sydney
New Zealand
Queensland
Tasmania
South Australia
43
' K
96
15
Total
48
in
Total by Sea
884,737
241.176
Bordkrwise —
Albury
Cobram
Corowa
Euston
Howlong
Moama
Mulwala
Swan Hill ...
Tocumwal ...
Wentworth ...
Victoria
30,760
1,87*
12.039
2,214
24^255
3,144
29,779
7.135
4.958
23,425
1,415
9,575
*
"51
14,269
2,972
, 5,875
5,507
487
Total
115.C87
63,576
Wentworth...
Willyama ...
South Australia
12,848
9 377
1,846
8,370
Total
22,225
10,216
Boggabilla ...
Wallaugarra
Quecuslind
Total
Total Border wise ..
187,912
72,792
Total expc
Less imi o
jrted from the State
rted from Queensland, etc...
522,649
26,185
314.968
17,198
NET PRODUCTION of N.S. WALES
496,464
297,770
Decrease ... 198,694 bales.
• Included with Swan Hill.
d.
d.
Greasy Merino Skirted—
Extra light, bright, good staple
8.1
to
■Si
Good condition, good staple
71
to
Medium condition, fair staple
61
to
71
Heavy condition, fair staple
51
to
61
Greasy Merino Pieces —
Extra light, bright, free
8
to
81
Good condition, slightly burry
71
to
7.
Medium condition, slightly burry
6
to
65
Heavy condition, slightly burry
5
to
55
Greasy Merino Bellies —
Extra light, long, slightly burry ...
61
to
7
Good condition, slightly burry
5.1
to
55
Medium condition, burry
4
to
45
Heavy condition, burry
3
to
31
Greasy Merino Locks—
Extra light condition, fair staple
3|
to
4.1
Medium condition
2i
to
31
Heavy do.
u
to
•>i
"4
Greasy Crossbred, Pine Skirted —
Extra light, bright, good staple —
6i
to
7
Good condition and staple
51
to
6
Medium condition
41
to
5
Heavy condition
31
to
4
Greasy Long-wool Skirted, 2 to Puiebred—
Extra light, lustrous, free ... 4
to
41
Medium condition
31
to
31
Heavy condition
21
to
os
“4
Scoured Merino—
Extra light, bright, good staple
161
to
18
Good condition, good staple
141
to
155
Medium condition, good staple
13J
to
141
Heavy condition, good staple
121
to
13
Scoured Merino Pieces—
Extra light, bright, good stajde
Hi
to
152
Good condition, good staple
13f
to
14 i
Medium condition, good staple
to
13
Heavy condition
1()|
to
Hi
Scoured Merino Bellies—
Extra light, bright, good staple ...
12|
to
132
Good condition, good staple
m
to
112
Medium condition, good staple
n
to
10i
Heavy condition
8i
to
9i
Scoured Merino Locks:—,
Extra light, bright, fair staple
loj
to
112
Good condition, fair staple
9i
to
10
Medium condition
~i
to
81
Heavy condition
6i
to
7
JULY Ist, 1902, to DECEMBER 31st, 1902.
From the above it will be seen that the
total production of the State for the eighteen
months ending December 31st, 19"2, was
1,057,306 bales, which, taken at the average
value per halo in 1901-2 of £lO os. 6d. per
bale, and of the succeeding six mouths, July
to December, 1902, at, say, £l2 10s., gives a
total money value of £11,336,473 for the
eighteen months.
In the middle of 1901 quotations for the
various classes of wool were officially stated
as follow:
Note. —Unskirted or burry, Id. to l}d. per lb. less
for all descriptions.
In September, 1901, the instalments of the
new clip then forward for sale, sold at an im-
provement which marked 10 to 15 per cent,
on extra fine merinos, 71 to 10 per cent, on
good to medium descriptions, and 5 to 71 per
cent, on the more inferior and faulty sorts.
Greasy merino selling to 9d., and scoured to
17d. As sales progressed most descriptions of
merino further improved until the full en-
hancement of 10 to 15 per cent was reached,
the best qualities, however, not going any
higher. Crossbreds, on the other hand, were
not easy of sale, values showing a decline of
5 to 10 per cent, for the finer qualities, 10 to
15 per cent, for medium, and up to as much as
25 per cent, for the coarser grades.
In merinos there was very soon a slight
retrograde movement, which, however, only
registered about 2J to 5 per cent., and at this
new level, which was little altered during the
remainder of the season, business proceeded on
a satisfactory basis, both as to quantity dealt
with, and prices realised.
WOOL STOKES OF THE PASTORAL FINANCE ASSOCIATION, NORTH SYDNEY.


Greasy.
Season
Season
1901-2.
1900-1.
Fleece, merino—
d.
d.
New South Wales ...
... 12|
101
Queensland
... Ill
91
Tasmania
... 10
11
Black
... 12J
101
Pieces
... 91
8
Lambs
... 91
8f
Necks
... 9
91
Bellies
... 7i
71
Dead
... 41
6
Locks
... 41
41
Fleece, crossbred
... 9}
81
Lambs, crossbred
... 61
61
Scoured.
Fleece ...
... 21
19
Lambs
... 201
161
Skin
... 20
12J
Pieces
... 19
161
Bellies
... 171
141
Looks
. 15
101
Dead
... 131
13
Crossbred
... 16
Hi
Washed.
Fleece
... 11
10
Pieces
... —
61
Greasy Merino Pieces —
d.
d.
Extra light, bright, free ...
93
to
10
Good condition, slightly burry
83
to
9
Medium condition, slightly burry ...
7
to
8
Heavy condition, slightly burry
53
to
63
Greasy Merino Bellies—
Extra light, long, slightly burry ...
7
to
73
Good condition, slightly burry
6
to
63
Medium condition, burry
4}
to
5}
Heavy condition, burry
3}
to
43
Greasy Merino Locks —
Extra light condition, fair staple ...
4}
to
5}
Medium condition
3i
to
4
Heavy do.
li
to
23
Greasy Crossbred, Fine Skirted—
Extra light, bright, good staple
7}
to
8
Good condition and staple
6
to
7
Medium condition
5
to
5}
Heavy condition
33
to
4}
Greasy Long-wool Skirted, 3 to Purebred—
Extra light, lustrous, free ... 4
to
4}
Medhim condition
3
to
3}
Heavy condition
2i
to
23
Scoured Merino—
Extra light, bright, good staple ...
18J
to
20}
Good condition, good staple
17
to
18
Medium condition, good staple ...
16
to
163
Heavy condition, good staple
14
to
14}
Scoured Merino Pieces—
Extra light, bright, good staple ...
17
to
18}
Good condition, good staple
16
to
16}
Medium condition, good staple
14i
to
15
Heavy condition ...
12i
to
13}
Scoured Merino Bellies—
Extra light, bright, good staple ...
143
to
15}
Good condition, good staple
12i
to
133
Medium condition, good staple
11
to
11}
Heavy condition
93
to
10
Scoured Merino Locks—
Extra light, bright, fair staple
12
to
13}
Good condition, fair staple
10}
to
11}
Medium condition
8}
to
93
Heavy condition
7
to
8
Greasy Merino Skirted—
d.
d.
Extra liglit, bright, good staple .
.. 10
to
11
Good condition, good staple
8j
to
9i
Medium condition, fair staple
.. 7J
to
8i
Heavy condition, fair staple
.. 6
to
73
With the opening of the new year, 1902,
the 21 to 5 per cent, decline above referred to
was retrieved, and values remained practically
unchanged till May, when an average advance
of 10 to 121 per cent, was established, and
rates then current were maintained, with a
quieter tone, however, up to the end of the
wool year on June 30th, 1002.
The average value of the greasy bale during
that year was £9 9s. 4d., and of scoured
£ll ss. 6d., and the average for greasy and
scoured £lO os. 6d.
The following table shows the highest
prices realised for the various descriptions
during the year 1901-2, in comparison with
those obtained during 1900-1.
The closing quotations of the 1901-2 season
were as under: —-
CO-OPERATIVE WOOL AND PRODUCE CO.'S WOOL STORES, PYRMONT.
Note. —Unskirted or burry, Id. to IJd. per lb. less
for all descriptions,
HILL, CLARK AND CO.’S WOOL STOKES, CIRCULAR QUAY, SYDNEY.


Selling Brokers.
Cata-
logued.
At
Auction.
Sale
Privately
ex Cata-
logue.
8.
Uncata-
logued.
Total.
Previous
Season.
Bales.
bales.
Bales.
Bales.
Bale*.
Bales.
Australasian Mort.and A. Co., Ltd. ...
23.123
18,420
2,434
1,827
22.681
13,104
John Bridge and Co., Ltd
61.114
45,463
12,376
8.047
65,886
50,517
Co-operai ive wool and Produce Co.
48.323
36,411
6,727
2,206
45,314
42,919
Da’gety and Co., Limited
47,831
37,529
5.142
434
43,105
28,781
Goldsbrough, JlortandCo., Lid.
64,422
52.875
4,698
1,040
68,613
46,502
Harrison, Jones andHevUr, Ltd.
52,779
43.528
4,803
18,042
66,378
50,033
Hill, Clark and Co.
29,861
23,443
3,653
731
27,827
16,866
New Zealand Loan and H. A. Co., Ltd.
40,544
33,375
2,670
1,239
37,284
26,792
Pastoral Finance Association, Ltd. ..
57,002
45,163
7,381
3,153
55,697
39.064
Pitt, Son and Badgery, Ltd
30,963
23,351
3,887
1,035
28.273
17,645
‘Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd. ...
55,031
43,611
8.096
19,8€9
71,576
46,757
J. C. Young and Co.
8,378
Total, Season 1901-2
511,503
403,169
61,872
57.623
522,664
Season 1900-1
400.031
301,046
52.407
33.905
387,358
Increase ’
111,559
102,123
9,465
23,718
135,306
-
Bales.
Season 1901-2
... 629,159
Season 1900-1
... 585,291
Increase
... 43,868
Greasy.
Season
Season
Season
1902-3.
1901-2.
1900-1.
Fleece, merino—
d.
d.
d.
New South Wales
14
12J
10i
Queensland
12
11J
9i
Tasmania
12i
10
11
Pack ...
16
m
105
Greasy Merino Skirted—
d.
d.
Extra light, bright, good staple
Good condition, good staple
10 to
.. 8J to
14
9i
Sold.
Total
Sales.
Previous
Season.
Brokers.
Offered.
At
Auction.
Privatelj*,
ex
Catalogue
Un-cata-
logued.
Australian Mort. and A Co., Ltd.
John Bridge and Co., Ltd.
Co-operative Wool and Produce Co., Ltd
Dalgety and Co., Ltd....
Goldsbrough. Mort and Co., Ltd.
Harrison, Jones, and Devlin, Ltd.
Hill, Clark)and Co- ...
New Zealand Loan and M.A. Co., Ltd...
Pastoral Finance Association, Ltd.
Pitt, Son, and Badg«ry, Ltd. ...
Wincbcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd.
Bales,
10,463
24,650
15,043
21.745
24,221
22,817
10,041
16,026
22,994
13,493
25,407
Bales.
8,309
16,057
11,989
16,654
18.993
19.110
7,434
12,801
17,025
9,886
19,836
Bales.
838
2,218
«*40
2,733
1,008
934
509
821
2,056
802
2,035
Bales.
1,032
2,829
468
158
210
13,816
738
319
2,744
41
10.555
Bales.
10,179
21,084
13,097
19.546
20,211
33,860
8,681
13,941
21,825
10,729
32,426
Bales.
14,991
36.143
29,478
31,847
37,384
41,196
17,050
21,984
36,429
16,120
38,361
Total ...
206,900
158,074
14,594
32,910
205,578
330,985
Season
Season
Season
1902-3.
1901-2.
1900-1.
Necks
12i
9
9i
Pieces
US
- 9|
8
Lambs . .
11
9J
8 1
Bellies
95
1 5
U
Dead
8}
41
(>
Locks
6J
4i
41
Fleece, crossbied
io a
... ... 1-4
95
81
Lambs, crossbred
8
6.1
61
Scoured.
Fleece . .
221
21
19
Skin
"! "! 22
20
12|
Necks
21 i
—
Pieces
20 i
19
161
Lambs
19
201
161
Bellies
18i
Dl-
Hi
Locks
Ui
15
101
Dead
13
131
13
Crossbreds
161
16
111
Sales by the various brokers were as fol-
low :
The percentage of sales to offerings showed
an increase of 6.93, that of sales to arrivals an
increase of 6.95, and the percentage of sales
to shipments an increase of 7.99, in each case
evidence of the fact that the local market con-
tinues to advance in favour with those having
wool to sell, being afforded.
For the wool year 1901-2 the exports of
wool from Sydney and Newcastle to British,
Continental and other ports were: —
The 1902-3 season was inaugurated on Oc-
tober 7, and in the presence of a very large
attendance of buyers, and under good compe-
tition an improvement in values was estab-
lished which reached 25 per cent, in the best
qualified and conditioned wools, of which,
however, during the season the selection was
limited. Medium to good descriptions im-
proved 15 to 20 per cent., inferior, faulty,
and badly got-up parcels only benefiting to
the extent of about 10 per cent. On account
of the general poor growth and consequent
want of body in the merino clip, crossbred
sorts, especially when at all fine-haired, came
in for increased attention, and in their case
the rise was greater than in merinos, their
previous position having been very low.
The highest prices obtained up to Decem-
ber 31st, 1902, were as under:—
To the end of the year, that is to say, for
(j 10 f irs j, i la ]f 0 f tl lc statistical twelve months,
the percentage of sales to offerings was 97.7,
as against 95.6 in 1901-2, the percentage of
sales to shipments being 78.0, as compared
with 78.3 the year previous. The market of
Sydney as a realising centre is thus holding
its own, though in such a season as has been
passed through, when wools were so disap-
pointing in condition, and prices for faulty
sorts correspondingly so, it would have been
cause for no surprise had growers been tempt-
ed to try their fortune beyond the sea, though
as events have turned out, it is just as well
they have not done so.
As at the 31st December values for the
various descriptions were quoted as follow :
WINCHCOMBE, CAISSON AND CO.’S WOOL STORES, BRIDGE AND YOUNG STREETS, SYDNEY.
For the six months ended December 31st,
1902, offerings and sales by the various wool-
selling agencies were as follow:


d.
d.
Medium condition, fair staple
7i
to
8i
Heavy condition, fair staple
Greasy Merino Pieces—
6
to
71
Extra light, bright, free
91
to
111
Good condition, slightly burry
81
to
9
Medium condition, slightly burry
7
to
8
Heavy condition, slightly burry ...
5|
to
6i
Scoured Merino—
d.
d.
Extra light, bright, good staple .
.. 18J
to
22
Good condition, good staple
.. 17
to
18
Medium condition, good staple .
.. 16
to
163
Heavy condition, good staple
.. 14
to
Ui
Scoured Merino Pieces—•
Extra light, bright, good staple .
.. 17
to
18J
Good condition, good staple
.. 16
to
16i
Bales.
231,721
Corresponding period (six months), the
previous year
362,738
Decrease
131,017
A fitting conclusion to this review is
a com-
Greasy Merino Bellies—
Extra light, long, slightly burry ..
. 7 to
83
Good condition, slightly burry
6 to
62
Medium condition, burry
. ih to
Heavy condition, burry
3i to
44
Greasy Merino Lodes —
Extra light condition, fair staple ..
4| to
Medium condition
3J to
4
Heavy do.
If to
‘>3
"4
Medium condition, good staple
... 14*
to
15
Heavy condition
... 12*
to
13 i
Scoured Merino Bellies—
Extra light, bright, good staple
- 14*
to
16
Good condition, good staple .
... 12*
to
13J
Medium condition, good staple
... 11
to
Hi
Heavy condition
... 9*
to
10
Scoured Merino Locks—
Extra light, bright, fair staple
... 12
to
131
Bales Sold.
Market.
1901-2.
1902-3.
12 Months.
6 Months.
Sydney
522,664
177,540
Greasy Crossbred, Fine Skirted—
Extra light, bright, good staple
.. 9
to
1U
Good condition and staple
... n
to
8S
Medium condition
.. 6i
to
7
Heavy condition
.. 5J
to
52
Greasy Long-ivool Skirted, | to Pm
Extra light, lustrous, free
ebred—
.. 5i
to
6
Medium condition
.. 4i
to
ii
Heavy condition
.. Si
to
4
Good condition, fair staple ... 10^
to
Hi
Medium condition ... ... 8£
to
9i
Heavy condition ... ... ... 7
to
8
Note.—Unskirted or burry, Id. to IJd. per
lb. less
for all descriptions.
Melbourne
. 236,960
143,050
Geelong
. 87,490
80,281
Adelaide
. 65,261
59,514
Brisbane
. 25,936
7,992
Total sales in Australia
... 938,311
i
' 468,377
HARRISON, JONES AND DEVLIN’S WOOL STORES, MACQUARIE PLACE, SYDNEY.
parison of Sydney’s position as a wool-selling
centre with other Australian markets, as
shown in the attached table:—
J. BRIDGE AND CO.’S WOOL STORES.
From July 1 to December 31, 1902, the ex-
ports of wool from Sydney and Newcastle to
British, Continental and other ports were:—


The Coal Industry of N.S.W.
A Great and Growing
Industry. >J» v}?
The Northern, Southern
and Western Fields. >?
A Review to 31st Dec., !
[ -1902. I
TN comparing the resources of various coun-
tries with the relative importance of the lat-
ter to the world we shall find that the
nation which possesses an ample supply of car-
boniferous fuel is the one which, sooner or
later will distance all competitors. For years
the trade of Britain, which far exceeded that
of any other individual nation, was based
largely on the extraordinary wealth of its
coal measures. The industry, energy and enter-
prise of her people were, doubtless, great fac-
ters in the splendid result, but without coal
ever ready to hand in her greatest manufac-
turing districts, what was accomplished cer-
sensible diminution of Britain’s coal resources
is jet apparent.
The fact remains, however, that another
great coal-bearing country—the United
States of America—is showing the world what
a plentiful supply of coal, combined with
great working capacity, ingenuity and capi-
tal, can accomplish. Britain is no longer the
iron mistress of the world. The United
States controls the world’s iron market,
and is rapidly outbidding Britain in
very many branches of industry. It
is needless here to make a comparison
between the carboniferous wealth of one
and in. these places pieces of coal are fre-
quently strewn along the beaches. The
early records go to show that the first offi-
cially reported discovery of the precious fuel
took place in August, 1797. It seems that
the ship “ Sydney Cove, while on a voyage
from Calcutta to Sydney, went ashore on
some part of the Australian coast. The crew,
17 in number, endeavoured to get to Sydney
in a boat, but were driven ashore. Their
small craft having been destroyed, they en-
deavoured to reach Sydney by land, but only
three succeeded in.the attempt, the remainder
either perishing by exhaustion, or from the
tainly could not have been done. The com-
bustion of coal drove the machinery which
carded, spun and dressed her textile fabrics,
it smelted her ores, propelled the ships which
brought raw materials to her shores, carried
away the finished products, lighted the na-
tion’s homes, and warmed its hearths. It
should be remembered that the use of coal
in Britain is not a thing of yesterday. It
has been going on for many centuries, and as
one coal-field becomes exhausted, it has hit-
herto been possible to find another. The sub-
ject of the exhaustion of British coal-fields is
certainly one of the most practical of the
day; but, as the aids to science and mechan-
ical ingenuity enable colliery experts to delve
still deeper into the bowels of the earth, no
NEWCASTLE HARBOUR.
and that of the other, seeing that
we have only incidentally brought them
in relation to the coal-bearing deposits of
New South Wales in order to show that if
Britain is quickly using up her underground
stores of fuel, there are in this part of the
Empire vast deposits of coal which will serve
to redress the depletion of the British Isles,
ITS DISCOVERY IN NEW SOUTH
WALES.
It is little over a century since coal was
discovered in this country. The discovery
could hardly have failed to he made soon
after the country’s colonization. For the
seams outcrop on many parts of our coast,
attacks of the aboriginals. One of the three.
Mr. Clarke, a supercargo of the wrecked ves-
sel. stated that three days before being suc-
coured they met with large quantities of coal,
with which they had been able to make fires
on the beach, thus keeping themselves from
perishing. Enquiries were instituted, and
the report was substantiated. The place was
then named Coal Cliff, a very simple and ap-
propriate one, which it bears to this day.
The cliff is formed of the upper coal mea-
sures, overlain by the Hawkesbury series, and
its base is washed by the waves of the Pacific.
In this way was the great Southern coal-field
of New South Wales discovered.
The Northern coal-field was found in a
similarly accidental fashion in the same year,


and only a month later. It is quite possible
the existence of coal in that part of the coast
was known to some persons before that time,
but their discovery thereof had no practical
results. However, a boat returning from an
unsuccessful cruise in search of runaways put
into what is now Newcastle Harbour, and
discovered coal on the beaches. The officer
in command, Lieutenant John Shortland,
junior, officially reported his discovery. The
report was not pigeon-holed; a fate which
has befallen too many valuable discoveries
made by junior officers. On the contrary, it
was acted on, with the result of making the
Northern coal-field the hive of mining in-
dustry it is to-day.
These discoveries of 105 years ago have suf-
ficed for the supply of carboniferous fuel in
this country to the present day. The south-
ern district has expanded, coal has been dis-
covered in the Western region of the State,
and, with the exhaustion of collieries near
only satisfactory in quantity and excellent in
quality, but economically obtained.
A GEOLOGICAL STATEMENT.
The geological surveys of New South Wales
conducted over a series of years, have resulted
in massing facts and figures, which enable a
clear statement to be made of the nature and
extent of the coal-fields of the Mother State
of Australia. Briefly stated, the measures
are as follows:—(1). A deposit of brown coal
or lignite, about 101) feet in thickness, classed
as of the tertiary age, and found at Kiandra,
Gulgong and elsewhere in deep alluvial leads,
covered by basalt. Owing, however, to the
great plentifulness of better fuel, no serious
attempt has been made to turn this deposit to
commercial account.
(2). Next comes a series of measures in the
triassic deposits, with a maximum thickness
of 2500 feet, forming what are known as the
may turn out better than hitherto imagined.
The fact that the Hawkesbury series of
shales and sandstones in the neighbourhood of
Sydney are regarded as the equivalents of the
Clarence River series may be taken reversely
as an argument for the probability of an im-
mense improvement in the series and
North, For, in these shales and sandstones
near the metropolis, the coal deposits are re-
duced to thin seams of less than an inch in
thickness.
(3). The great coal-fields at present mainly
worked, however, are principally in the
Permo-carboniferous deposits of the geological
age known as the Palaeozoic. The maximum
thickness of their strata is about 13,650 feet.
In these measures the colliery proprietors of
the Northern, Southern and Western districts
work. While the coal of the Clarence series
is suitable for local use only, that of the series
geologically beneath it is good, and is suitable
for household, gas-making, and steaming pur-
Newcastle fresh land has been taken up for
mining purposes south and north. But in
the main the colliery districts of New South
Wales are still those which were found in so
accidental a fashion by the early settlers. No
great credit can be taken by them in connec-
tion with these discoveries, for any man with
eyes in his head would have done similarly.
EXTENT OP THE COASTAL FIELDS,
The coastal coal-fields now being wrought
in New South Wales extend over 140 miles.
But, owing to the dip of the seams only the
two end portions thereof are at present work-
ed. The field is thus similar to a great cup
or basin, with the coal at its greatest depth
at Sydney. Hence the collieries are most nu-
merous at both rims of the saucer, where the
coal outcrops. That coal exists under dyd-
tiey has been demonstrated, and it is actually
mined in large quantities 30 miles distant
from the metropolis, but at the extremities
of the field the scams are proving to be not
DYKE. NEWCASTLE.
Clai’ence River seams. These extend to
Queensland, and the Ipswich seams are re-
garded as their equivalents. In the Northern
Colony, however, they are of far greater com-
mercial value than they are in this State. It
is found that the Clarence River coal con-
tains so many bands and other impurities
that to work it is not commercially profit-
able when so many other better kinds are in
the market. These seams outcrop on the
Western side of the Dividing Range, and
their presence is manifested in the Western
Plains by the fact that parties engaged in
boring for artesian water frequently encoun-
ter them, although no serious attempt has yet
been made to test their thickness. It is pos-
sible that the seams may improve further from
the coast, for Queensland geologists assert
that the great Western Plains of that Colony
form a vast coal-field. Further, it is well
known that a seam poor in every respect at
one place may enormously improve within a
comparatively short distance, so that the hit-
herto lowly-estimated Clarence River scries
poses. More information on the subject will
be found later on.
(4). Another and a lower series of carbon-
iferous rocks is found at Stroud. The maxi-
mum thickness of strata is about 10,000 feet,
but the coal is classed as very inferior, con-
taining many bands, and is regarded as value-
less.
THE PERMO-CARBONIFEROUS.
Our chief interest in this article will centre
on the third of these deposits, viz., the Permo-
carboniferous. They have attracted the
scientific attention of a number of able men.
The great pioneer in this field was the Rev.
W. B. Clarke, M.A., whose discoveries and
deductions formed the groundwork of such
able geologists as Messrs. C. S. Wilkinson,
John Mackenzie, Edward F. Pittman, and
Professor David. By the last-named scieu-
tist these rocks have been classed as follow,
as from the surface:—(l). The upper, or New-
castle coal measures, containing about a total
of 100 feet of coal; 1150 feet in thickness.


(2) The Dempsey series, containing no pro-
ductive coal about 20u0 feet in thickness.
(3) The Middle, or Tomago, or East Mait-
land measures, containing altogether about 40
feet of coal; 570 feet in thickness. (4). The
Upper Marine series; 5000 feet in thickness.
(5). The Lower or Greta coal measures, con-
taining a total of about 20 feet of coal; 130
feet in thickness. (6). The Lower Marine
series; 4800 feet in thickness.
In the excellent publications issued from
the Department of Mines of New South Wales
much minute information of specially scien-
tific nature will be found regarding the coal
measures. The fossil plants found in the vari-
cus seams have been figured, and will well re-
pay the perusal of those who have to trace
Nature’s handiwork in the bygone ages, as
evidenced by “ the testimony of the rocks."
We question if in any other part of the world,
better State publications will be found than
the reports annually published by our im-
partment of Mines. That section of it for
which the Chief Inspector of Collieries, Mr.
A. A. Atkinson, is departmentally responsible
is specially informative, even to the non-
technical reader; and it is only just to ac-
knowledge our indebtedness to the mines re-
port and Mr. Pittman’s splendid work on the
mineral resources of this State, for not a few
of the facts and figures contained in this ar-
ticle.
Referring to the first of these divisions of
the Permo-carboniferous deposits (viz., the
Upper Coal Measures), it should be noted that
these measures are found in great develop-
ment under and around Newcastle, in the
Northern coal-field; in the vicinity of Bulli,
in the Illawarra, or Southern coal-field; and
at Lithgow, in the Western coal-field. In-
deed, the greater part of our present coal
supply is derived from them. The seams, are,
as a whole, easily accessible, and in many
parts outcrop, and are worked by adit.
NORTHERN SEAMS,
A statement of the various seams, in de-
scending order, may be found useful:—The
Wallarah seam, 11 feet thick; the Four-feet
seam, about 4 feet thick; The Catherine Hill
Bay seam, about 14 feet thick; The Great
Northern seam, about 20 feet thick; The
Burwood seam, 6 to 8 feet; The uirty seam,
6 to 10 feet; The Yard seam, 3 feet; and The
Borehole seam, 4 to 22 feet thick,
As may be imagined, the coal from all
these seams differs in more than one respect,
The Wallarah seam is regarded as the equiva-
lent of the Bulli seam in the Southern dis-
trict. Except in the few collieries near Lake
Macquarie, where it is worked, it is not found
elsewhere in the Newcastle District, having
apparently been removed by denudation.
The seam almost exclusively worked in the
Newcastle coal-field is the Borehole Seam.
The quality of coal in this seam all through
is not similar. In parts it is tender, in others
medium, and, as it dips South, the coal be-
comes hard. Although it varies in thickness
from 4 to 22 feet, it averages over its entire
extent about 8| feet. Altogether the Bore-
hole seam has proved a mine of wealth to all
interested in coal-mining in Newcastle, and,
although it has been greatly drawn upon for
nearly a century, it will not be totally ex-
hausted for years to come. It is the seam on
which the A. A. Company, Stockton, Hetton,
Wallsend, and other proprietaries are work-
ing, and it is also worked in the Minmi Dis-
trict by Messrs. J. and A. Brown,
An average has been taken, compiled from
77 analyses of the composition of the coal
from the Northern or Newcastle District of
New South Wales. The results are as fol-
low:—Hygroscopic moisture, 1.92; volatile
hydrocarbons, 35.09 ; fixed carbon, 54.08 ;
ash, 8.91; total, 100.
The proportion of sulphur was but .541.
SOUTHERN SEAMS.
The seams of the Southern, or Illawarra
District, in descending order are: —(1). The
Bulli seam, from 2 to 11 feet thick; (2). The
Four-feet seam, about 4 feet thick; (3). the
Thick seam, about 14 feet thick (4). the
Eight-feet seam, 7 to 9 feet thick; (5). the
Bottom seam, about 6 feet thick.
Of the above it may be remarked that the
first mentioned, the Bulli seam, is the only
one which is worked to a large extent in the
Southern field. The coal in the other seams
is regarded as somewhat inferior. It has to be
said, however, that the latter have ~een pros-
pected to only a very slight extent. The
fact would appear to be that the Bulli seam
is regarded on the whole as so workable that
little attention will be paid to the others be-
fore the necessity to do so arises. It is usu-
ally found to average 61 feet in thickness.
The No. 3, the Thick seam, is found split up
into a number of small seams. The No. 5,
the Bottom seam, contains a number of
bands.
The average composition of the coal from
the Southern, or Ilawarra district of New
South Wales, taken from 21 analyses, was
found to be as follows :
Hygroscopic moisture, .97; volatile hydro-
carbons, 23.10; fixed carbon, 65.26; ash,
10.67; total, 100. The sulphur was re-
presented by .462.
THE WESTERN SEAM.
In the Lithgow, or Western District of
New South Wales, the seam of coal worked
by all the collieries is uniform. It is regarded
as the lowest one in the Upper Coal Meas-
ures. It is often called “ Mountain Coal,” is
of a splinty nature, and is used for all pur-
poses. The seam is from 10 feet to 11 feet
in thickness, is free from “ faults,” and lies
almost horizontal. Being of a hard nature it
bears transportation and shipment well, and
the thickness of the seam enables it to be
economically worked. Its average composi-
tion calculated from 13 analyses, is as fol-
lows:—Hygroscopic moisture, 1.87; volatile
hydrocarbons, 31.49; fixed carbon, 52.61;
ash, 14.03; total, 100. Sulphur, .626.
KEROSENE SHALE.
In the Upper Coal Measures a substance
known as kerosene shale is found at Hartley
Yale, Katoomba, Capertee, Joadja Creek
and elsewhere. It is somewhat like cannel
coal, and is used not only in the process of
gas making, but as the basis in the manu-
facture of kerosene. In general, good prices
are obtainable for this substance, although its
irregular deposition makes all industry wholly
dependent upon it somewhat precarious.
THE EAST MAITLAND FIELD.
The Middle, or Tomago, or East Maitland
Coal Measures, are very valuable. Their ag-
gregate thickness is about 40 feet and half
of this has been pronounced workable. They
dip under the Dempsey series, and, conse-
quently, under the Dpner or Newcastle Coal
Measures. They are not found in either the
Southern or Western coal-fields. It is
not known how far they extend to
the South or West. But, from some
deep bores put down by the Australian
QUEEN’S WHAEF, NEWCASTLE.


District.
Total of
Persons
Employed.
Tons Coal
and Oil
Shale.
Value at
Mine.
Northern
0,730
3,000,208
£
1,633,064
Southern and South
Western
2,5fa‘5
1,500,41-4
461,762
Western
I Cl
514,179
171,489
Totals
113,114
6,001,801
2,266,315
Agricultural Company on their ground, it is
known that the East Maitland measures, if
they exist at Newcastle, are at a very great
depth. Beyond the range of their present
site they have apparently been removed by
denudation. These valuable measures, which
are of the utmost importance to the port of
Newcastle, contain the following seams: —
The four-feet seam, about 4 feet thick; the
seven-feet seam, about 7 feet thick; the six-
feet seam, about 6 feet thick; the three-feet
seam, about 3 feet thick; the two-feet six
inch seam,, about 3 feet thick; the Rathluba
seam, about 5 feet thick; the Morpeth seam,
about 5 feet thick. The Rathluba seam
varies from 4 feet to 8 feet in thickness. The
Morpeth seam varies from 4 feet to 6 feet in
thickness. It is, however, vitiated by bands,
and is considered barely workable. The aver-
age composition of the coal from the Middle
Coal Measures brings it within the classifica-
tion of that of the Upper coal Measures.
THE GRETA SEAMS.
Leaving the Upper Marine Series, which are
5000 feet in thickness, we come to the Lower
area of 20,000 acres, with a mean thickness of
15 feet of workable coal, an aggregate value of
over £132,000,000 is obtainable. This amount
exceeds the aggregate value of all the minerals
unearthed up till now in New South Wales,
including gold, silver, copper, tin, etc.
FORMER VOLCANIC ACTIVITY.
In all the coal fields of New South Wales
evidences of former volcanic activity are fre-
quently found. Intrusive dykes are met with,
the substances being dolorite or basalt. In
the vicinity of these dykes the coal seams are
frequently transformed into what is termed
natural coke, or are rendered useless by
having been completely burnt by the molten
stuff from Nature’s laboratory. In some seams
hot stones appear to have been propelled later-
ally into the coal. The explosive force that
produced this result must have been consider-
able. Volcanic action must have been very
great in bygone ages in what is now the en-
trance of the harbourof Newcastle. A very
large dyke can be discerned at Nobbys, and
borings and workings in that vicinity demon-
strate that the strata were considerably dis-
Department of Mines, makes his basis of cal-
culation that a thickness of only 10 feet of
workable coal underlies an area of 16,550
square miles. On the usual basis of 84 lb. as
the weight of a cubic foot of coal, and deduct-
ing one-third for impurities, loss in working,
etc., a total quantity of 115,346,880,000 tons
of coal are available. These figures would, of
course, have to be increased proportionately
with an increase in the thickness of workable
coal. Estimates are proverbially uncertain,
owing to the fact that their bases can at the
best be only approximate; but that New
South Wales has a store of carboniferous
wealth that will not be exhausted before the
lapse of centuries cannot be doubted. It is,
in fact, the greatest mineral asset of the
Mother State of Australasia.
COAL AND SHALE MINING
RETURNS.
Figures are subjoined for the year ending
31st December, 1902, from official sources, re-
lative to the coal and oil shale industry in this
State.
HETTON COLLIERY, NEWCASTLE.
or Greta Coal Measures. These also are ex-
ceedingly valuable. They are composed as fol-
low:—The Upper seam, varying from 14 feet
to 32 feet in thickness; the Lower seam, vary-
ing from 3 to 11 feet in thickness. The average
thickness of coal in these measures is 20 feet.
The coal is excellent in quality, and in some
parts of the field deposits of the valuable sub-
stance known as “ cannel coal,” has been
found. The Lower Coal Measures have been
noted in the most Southern portion of the
Illawarra coal field, and the coal measures of
Inverell, which extend to the Queensland bor-
der, are believed to be of the same geological
age as the Greta measures. One of the peculi-
arities of the seams is their great dip. ' Some
of the pits near South Maitland operating
these measures have their workings at an angle
of 45 degrees.
The exploitation of the East Maitland field
has actually added another great coal-bearing
district to New South Wales. Professor
David, of Sydney University, has made an
official statement regarding this area, the im-
portance of which is well worthy of note. That
great geological expert estimates that from an
rupted by plutonic force. Similar action
doubtless took place in Sydney Harbour, and,
indeed, all along our coast line. But it is in
the Southern or Illawarra district, that old-
time volcanoes appear to have had a great
theatre of operation. Their results are readily
seen in the vicinity of Bulli, where the breadth
of these intrusive dykes, forced up in a molten
condition from the earth’s interior, is fre-
quently 100 yards.
The existence of coal under Sydney Har-
bour cannot be doubted, the operations of the
Sydney Harbour Collieries Company, Limi-
ted, having demonstrated that fact. The
problem, however, of economically working
seams that are some 3000 feet deep is acknow-
ledged a great one, even if coal was won much
less easily than it is in New South Wales.
PROBABLE SUPPLY.
Various estimates have been made of the
quantity of coal available in New South Wales.
The subject is a very interesting one, and a
volume could easily be written on it. Mr. E.
P, Pittman, now Under Secretary for the
These figures show a decrease in output and
an increase in employment and value on those
for the preceding year, the increase in value
being £45,896 over that for the year 1901.
The quantity of coal alone produced in New
South Wales during the year 1902 was
5,942,011 tons, valued at £2,206,598. This
shows a decrease of 26,415 tons, but an increase
of £27,669 in value, as compared with the re-
sults for 1901. The decrease in the output
arose from a slackness in the export trade
from the Northern district. Satisfactory in-
creases have to be recorded in the Southern
and Western districts. -The total quantity of
coal produced in this State to th? end of 1902


Destination.
1901.
1902.
Tons.
Tons.
Victoria
801,181
762,663
Queensland
33,190
54,123
South Australia . .
476,548
417,817
Western Austral in
215,286
148,389
Tasmania ..
87.275
84,459
New Zealand
242,176
244,033
Hongkong
9,056
25,432
United States
205,364
180,299
Java
83,219
95,867
New Caledonia . ,
20,573
10,182
India
30,293
34,843
Philippine Islands
106,416
128,639
Fiji
18,311
25,209
Mauritius
9,980
8,636
Peru
47,912
50,147
Chili
415,167
428,299
Straits Settlements
36,257
33,152
Sandwich Islands
168,869
105,680
New Hebrides
2,250
—
Ecuador
3,887
3,215
Panama
7,394
7,614
Mexico
17,320
24,174
Celebes Islands
—
11,974
Great Britain
4,390
3,600
New Guinea
2,320
5,100
Cape Colony
8,170
6,302
China
1,600
3,130
Natal
... 25,199
23,086
Ceylon
3,200
1,100
Canada
6,500
4,450
Gilbert Islands
6,008
7,585
New liritain
2,550
—
Nicaragua ...
891
1,213
South Sea Islands
888
5,847
Society Islands
1,345
—
Germany
750
—
Eleele Group
•••
457
Total
... 3,104,735
2,866,764
COMPARATIVE
RETURN.
1901.
1902.
Tons. Value.
Tons.
Value.
3,104,735 ,£1,528,121
2,966,764
£1,484,954
Decrease, 137,971 tons
£43,167 value.
is estimated at 103,387,070 tons, valued at
£41,701,443.
The value of kerosene shale produced in
New South Wales during 1902 is £59,717.
showing an increase of £15,227 on the results
for 1901. The export trade in this article
showed considerable briskness during the
year. Up to the end of 1902 the total value of
the kerosene shale produced in this State is
£2,030,340.
COAL EXPORT.
Taking coal alone, we find that in 1902 the
exports from New South Wales to Intercolo-
nial ports amounted to 1,929,604 tons, valued
at £926,902, and that the exports to foreign
ports and United Kingdom and other British
possessions amounted to 1,321,304 tons, valued
at £692,444, together making a total export of
3,250,908 tons, valued at £1,619,346. This
works out an average value of over 9s. lid.
For the year 1902, 24,219 tons of that pro-
duct, valued at £22,423, were made in the
Northern district, and 102,653 tons, valued
at £67,182, in the Southern and Western dis-
tricts, making a total of 126,872 tons, of a
total value of £89,605, working out at a value
of 14s. 1 Jd. per ton at the ovens. The value is
less by £16,060 than the figures for 1901, the
cause of the decrease being the closing down
of several metalliferous mines and the conse-
quent cessation of smelting operations.
The export of coal and coke together was
conducted from the following ports, 'as follow,
during 1902: —Newcastle, 2,971,098 tons;
Wollongong and jetties, 287,176 tons; Syd-
ney, 108,493 tons. Of course, Newcastle and
Wollongong are respectively the ports of the
Northern and Southern districts, while Syd-
ney, strictly speaking, is not a coal port. The
coastwise shipments are not included in the
above figures.
NEWCASTLE AND HARBOUR.
The sister State of Victoria is the largest indi-
vidual customer of New South Wales in regard
to coal.
The annexed return shows the quantity of
coal exported from the port of Newcastle dur-
ing 1901 and 1902, and the State or Country
to which supplies were sent. The returns for
1902 show a decrease of 137,971 tons as com-
pared with the figures for 1901. The explana-
tion is that 1901 and 1900 were extraordinary
years owing to the war in South Africa.
Though the total quantity exported in 1902
was less than that of 1901, it was, neverthe-
less, greater than that of any other year, ex-
cepting 1900, and it was only about 55,000
tons below the last named year. From a nor-
mal standpoint the export of coal from New-
castle during 1902 showed a substantial aug-
mentation. The chief falling off in that year
was in the trade with the other Australian
States. The increase of exports to Oriental
Countries showed a satisfactory development.
COKE MAKING.
Another industry closely connected with
that of coal mining is the manufacture of coke.
COAL MINING LEGISLATION.
It may here be remarked that the coal in-
dustry of New South Wales is conducted
under legislation of a very stringent charac-
ter, the preservation of life being regarded as
a matter of the greatest possible importance.
A benevolent fund for the benefit of widows,
orphans, and dependents of those killed in
the execution of their duty in the mines, is in
existence. Provision is made under it for sup-
porting miners who have been accidentally
disabled. Under statute the employees, the
employers, and the State contribute to the
fund. For the year ending 31st December,
1901, a total of £19,022 was contributed by
the employees.
NORTHERN DISTRICT MINES.
There were, in 1902, 63 collieries under in-
spection in the Northern district, employing a


number of 9730 persons for a total out-
put of 3,900,298 tons, valued at £1,633,064.
Of these a number were small, while others
were only in the prospecting stage. Subjoined
(in alphabetical order) are the names of the
principal mines and their output for 1902,
giving such other particulars as are available
regarding them.
Australian Agricultural Company’s New
Winning. Persons employed, 698 output,
380,830 tons, valued at £152,925. The A.A.
Company was one of the pioneers of the coal
industry. It was incorporated in 1824 by
Royal Charter, under very influential aus-
pices. The grant of land received by it was of
very large area. In the early years of the
Company’s existence returns were small, but
of recent years dividends have been great.
Altogether an aggregate of £2,445,250 has
been paid in dividends to shareholders. For
1900 the dividends were at the rate of 17J
per cent, per annum. The Company, however,
does not obtain its income from coal alone, as
it operates in wool, and derives considerable
revenue from land.
Brown’s, Duckenfield and Pelaw Main.—
Together, these mines employ a total of 1165
persons; combined output for 1902, 434,534
tons, valued at £208,775. The property of
Messrs. J. and A. Brown, a well-known pion-
eering firm, who are also steam-tug proprie-
tors, and do a large general shipping business.
Burwood and Lambton Pits. —Total per-
sons employed, 645; output, 228,988 tons,
valued at 104,757. Operated by the Scottish
Australian Mining Company, Limited. The
Company paid very large dividends in its
early days; dividend in November, 1901, was
at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum. The
Company has for some time nast been engaged
in developing new property. The capital of
the Company authorised and subscribed is
£250,000, in shares of £1 each, all fully paid
up.
The Co-operative Company, Plattsburg,
owned by the Laidley Proprietary. Number
of persons employed, 379; output, 150,864
tons; value £66,060. Privately owned.
Dudley Colliery.—Number of persons em-
ployed, 350; output, 166,388 tons, of a value
of £60,000.
Fast Greta Colliery, West Maitland. —
Number of persons employed, 430 output,
156,148 tons, valued at £57,399. The pro-
perty of the East Greta Coal Mining Com-
pany, Limited ; capital authorised and issued,
£75,000, all fully paid up.
Hetton Colliery.—Number of persons em-
ployed, 440; output, 172,689 tons, valued at
£78,744. Capital authorised and subscribed,
£123,665. Report presented July 25th, 1901,
states that the mine has been constantly at
work, and that, in addition to writing off vari-
ous amounts, the sum of £3091 has been dis-
tributed, being half-yearlv dividend at the
rate of 5 per cent, per annum, while £3573
has been carried forward.
Killingworth.—Persons employed, 225 ;
output, 5238 tons, of a value of £2357.
Newcastle A and B Collieries.—Persons em-
ployed, 869; output, 330,258 tons, valued at
£151,633. Owned by the Newcastle Coal
Mining Company, Limited. Capital sub-
scribed, £IIO.OOO, in 10,000 shares of £ll
each. The Company has regularly paid large
dividends. Dividends declared July, 1901,
and January, 1902, at the rate of 30 per cent.
per annum.
New Lambton.—Persons employed, 111 ;
output, 27,750 tons, valued at £12,214. Capi-
tal authorised and subscribed, £150,000, in
15.000 shares of £lO each, all issued fully paid.
Northern Extended.—Persons employed,
98; output, 40,066 tons, valued at £14,720.
Privately owned
Pacific-Persons employed, 221; output,
111.000 tons, valued at £38,850. Property of
Pacific Co-operative Steam Coal Company,
Limited. Capital, £30,000 capital subscribed,
£12,360, of which £10,239 is fully paid up.
Seaham.—Persons employed 470 ; output,
270,206 tons, valued at £123,281. Worked by
a Scottish syndicate, who operate other pits
in the district.
Stockton.—Persons employed, 389 ; output,
170,955 tons, valued at 74,560. Property of
Stockton Coal Company, Limited. Capital
subscribed, £98,373. Dividend in January,
1901, 5 per cent.; in January, 1902, 3 per
cent.
Wallarah.-—Persons employed, 306 ; output,
147,935 tons, valued at £55,475, The pro-
perty of the Wallarah Coal Company, Limi-
ted. Capital authorised and subscribed,
£lOO,OOO.
Wallsend.—Persons employed, 759 ; output,
313,100 tons, valued at £130,559. The pro-
perty of the Newcastle Wallsend Coal Com-
pany. Capital subscribed - and fully paid up,
£lOO,OOO. o-ias paid large dividends for many
years. The dividend paid in January, 1902,
was £1 15s. per share, being at the rate of 35
per cent, per annum.
Waratah.—Persons employed, 284 ; output,
106,790, valued at £48,101. Property of the
Waratah Coal Company, Limited. The paid-
up capital, £30,000, has been returned to the
shareholders. The freehold land in possession
consists of 1800 acres at Waratah.
, T , , ttt -, J -D 1 J 07K
J V< f I
output 188,5!2 tons, valued at £85,000. Pro-
perty of West Wallsend Company.
Wickham and Bullock Island.—Persons
employed, 273 ; output, 87,958 tons, valued at
£38,995. Company’s capital paid up,
£103,078. Dividends in April and October,
1901, 6 per cent.; in April, 1902, nil. Report
stated that new ground had to be opened out
WESTERN DISTRICT.
Lithgow Valley.—Persons employed, 78;
output, 95,375 tons, valued at £26,640.
Capital authorised and issued is £60,000, all
fully paid.
Oakey Park.—Persons employed, 100; out-
put, 70,688 tons, valued at £19,408.
Vale of Clwydd.—Persons employed, 90;
output, 78,789 tons, valued at £20,682.
7 /j: Zag ;“^ e ™/™P loyed ’ 102 ’ ° utput ’
75.513, valued at £14,850.
The larger of the Western Collieries are
u " der c ° nfcrol of alocal Sales AsSOCl '
atlon ’ whlch oranges the output.
SOUTHERN DISTRICT.
Bellambi—Persons employed, 108 ; output,
84,525 tons, valued at £21,835. Company’s
capital subscribed, £55,000, fully paid up.
Area of mine, 820 acres leasehold.
Bulli.—Persons employed, 154; output,
114,816 tons, valued at £45,926.
Corrimal.—Persons employed, 240 ; output,
167,738 tons, valued at £48,224. Capital paid
up, £45,000, representing 18s. per share, of
which ss. 61d. is credited as paid. In all divi-
deids have absorbed £13,394, being ss. 4|d.
per share.
Metropolitan,—Persons employed, 483;
output, 291,720. tons, valued at £98,455.
Company’s capital subscribed is £300,000, of
which £200,000 is preference. In 1901 there
was a balance for distribution of £7953. The
Company holds a coal mining lease of over
20,000 acres at Helensburgh, 28 miles from
Sydney
Mount Kembla.—Persons employed, 266;
output, 182,856 tons, valued at £44,160.
subscribed, £lOO,OOO, in 5000 A and
? 000 B s V ares of £l ° each i the B shares hav ‘
m g priority over the Ato the extent of 5 per
t 6! om *" , * e w^°^e are f uß y Pa'd-
n 1"91 a dividend of 8 per cent, was paid;
r n c ®f for contingencies and depreciation,
£25,000; undivided balance, £7117.
M ° Unfc Hensant-Persons employed, 209 ;
output, 116,304 tons, valued at £29,221. Capi-
tal authorised, £50,000.
Osborne Wallsend.—Persons employed,
305 ; output, 166,698 tons, valued at
South Bulli.—Persons employed, 448; out-
put, 332,612 tons, valued at £85,924.
South Clifton.—Persons employed, 199;
output, 106,292 tons, valued at £27,119,
NOBBY’S, NEWCASTLE.


The Bellambi Coal Company,
Limited.
Among' tin. principal features of the coal-mining
industry ir New South Wales which strike a
stranger is the proximity of the fields to the sea. In
both of (he t'outhein and northern colliery districts
this tact is very marked, and it holds good even in
the central coast areas, though the coal seams
dip in the last-named district to a great depth. It
would seem as if Nature, in her lavish bounty, had
laid the precious seams of carboniferous deposit in
the places where, in ages to come, they will be most
useful. The original discoverers of the precious
mineral had no dilficulty in finding coal; it literally
stared them in ihe face, small seams were found
out-cropping on the beaches, the coal separated
SOUTH BELLI COLLIERY ADIT.
from them by the force of the waves strewing the
strands. In the southern district the seams out-
crop from the mountains facing the sea, conse-
quently the majority of the collieries possess adits
instead of shafts. This system greatly assists the
working and drawing of coal, while the high seams
without band are a further advantage to the mine
in the hewing down of the mineral.
Large, and by reason of the advantages stated,
casily-won coal seams are found in a very mar ked
fashion iu the magnificent property of the Bellambi
Coal Company, Limited.
The mines comprise Bellambi and South Bulli,
situated in the Illawarra district of New South
\V ales. The total area of the property is 3,000
acres. The company, which was registered in Vic-
toria in September, 1888, with an authorised capi-
tal of .£60,000, was originally formed to work the
Bellambi seam, and for a number of years the pro-
prietors bought the output of the South Bulli mine,
which was then the property of the Hon. E. Vickery,
M.L.C. Two years ago the Bellambi Coal Com-
pany, havirg largely increased its capital,
purchased the South Bulli mine outright, and since
that time have spent large sums in increasing its
output and iu pvoTiding a magnifiC entiy-equipped
haulage, traction, and general plant. The coal is
conveyed from the mine by gravitation over seif-
a<ltin 8 incl j nes - "l )on "’hich as the fully laden wag-
f, ons 111,1 f OKn th? - v <lra "' the em l ,ty ones back to
the seam race.
The company own two private lines of railway,
one from each mine, which have their terminus at
the shipping port of Bellambi, where there is a fine
jetty, 1,300 ft. in length, affording a very safe berth-
age to all classes of vessels up to 3,500 tons. The
harbour is so well protected by the Bellambi Beef
that, except in very bad easterly weather, the load-
ing of vessels, is not interfered with. The rolling
stock, which represents a carrying capacity of over
2,600 tons, consists of 100 new 8-ton hopper-waggons,
which were only constructed this year, and built
to run over the Government railways. There are
also 40 other hopper-waggons, and 300 large “ box ”
waggons, capable of carrying from 5 to 8 tons each,
Six powerful locomotives are in constant use. The
bunkering capacity represents a further storage of
1,400 tons.
The thickness of the valuable seams now being
worked in both mines is almost identical, varying
from 6ft. 6in. up to 10ft., without band or any im-
purity. A solid roof, principally composed of sand-
stone, adds to the stability of the mine and the
safety of the workers. If there is one condition above
another which makes for comfort during the life
of a colliery, it is having a sound roof, especially
when it possesses the complement of a sound floor,
Without these the working of the valuable seam
gives anxiety to every person who has business to
do in the mine. To constantly fear a “crush” is
a misery to the mine manager, who must be pre-
pared ever and anon to suddenly withdraw the
workmen from threatened portions, and to remove
the rails and skips to prevent their being buried
under the avalanche of “ tops ” or broken roof. In
Bellambi and South Bulli the frequent source of
trouble which we have indicated is comparatively
rare. The miner with a clean seam before
him, has little to do except to bring down the face
of coal and fill his skips without being troubled, as
is the case in many collieries, to separate the im-
purities from the mineral.
The coal is of the highest quality steam and coke
coal. An analysis of a sample from the South
Bulli Colliery, by Mr. Pittman, Government Geolo-
gist, is as follows: —Hydroscopic moisture, 1.(0;
volatile hydrocarbons, 25.40; fixed carbon, 66.00; ash,
7.60; total, 100.00.
The coke submitted was found to be well swollen
with cauliflower-like excrescences, firm and lust-
rous. The ash was of a yellowish tinge, and floc-
culent. One of the great features of the coal from
this company’s mines is that it can be coked without
washing, and is absolutely free from all extraneous
matter. So satisfactory has the coal proved for
coking purposes that the Broken Hill Proprietary
Company have decided to discontimre the importa-
tion of coke and to exclusively use the small coal
supplied from the South Bulli Mine, a contract
extending over a great number of years having been
entered into with that great silver-lead mining and
smelting company, .who have erected 100 ovens at
Bsllambi, the whole forming the largest coking
plant in the Southern Hemisphere. The coal from
the Bellambi Mines is utilised for steaming pur-
poses by the Orient and Pacific Companies, the
Federal S.N. Company, Limited, Nord Deutscher
Lloyd, the Canadian-Australian, Nippon Yusen
Kaisha (Japanese Mail lirie), Houlder Bros.,
White Star (Liverpool) line. United States
Navy, Burns, Philp and Company, and Mell-
wraith, McEacharn and Company. Such a long list
of customers, and the position held by them in the
steam shipping world, speak emphatically as to the
high quality of the .Bellambi Company’s coal. With
the exception of the interstate trade, the Company
does not export its coal, as owing to the qualities
the latter possesses for steam purposes it has ample
trade in its bunkering. For many years past the
Company has exclusively supplied the above-
named shipping companies, the aggregate of
the contracts being over 350,000 tons of large coal,
and 150,000 tons of small coal anmtally. These
figures speak eloquently for themselves.
In the year 1900 the number of persons employed
below and above ground in the Bellambi Mine was
115, and the annual output 48,148 tons. At the
South Bulli Mine 305 persons were employed below
and above ground, the annual output being 150,691
tons.
In 1901 the output of both collieries greatly in-
creased. South Bulli alone employed 362 persons
below and above ground for an output of 246,364
tons, and an extensive addition recently made to
the plant will in a brief period greatly enlarge the
present output.
The South Bulli Mine was opened up in 1837.
Bellambi was opened in 1900. At the former the elec-
triQ light is used throughout the main workings. The
haulage plant at each mine is in duplicate, so that
in case of a break-down no loss of work is entailed.
Very efficient hydraulic pumps, working at 750 lbs.
to the square inch, are in use, and the mine water
is pumped by lines of pipes to the Broken Hill
Proprietary dam, where it is used for the damping
down of coke.
Ample ventilation is supplied by the latest pat-
tern " Waddle” fans, which give a current of
120,000 cubic feet. It is, however, intended to make
provision for extending the workings, and a larger
fan is to be introduced, which will supply 500,000
cubic feet of air per minute against a six-inch gauge.
At Bellambi pumps driven by electricity have
been installed, and proved to be a great success.
Large dams have also been completed in close prox-
imity to the mines, from which a constant supply
XTbe Coal Jnbustin?.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches.
SOUTH BULLI AND BELLAMBI COLLIERIES.


of fresli water is always obtainable. A fuller idea
may be formed of the extent of the Company's opera-
tions when it is stated that from 750 to 800 men are
constantly employed between the two mines and at
the Broken Hill Proprietary Coke Works', The
company has fine workshops, and does all its own
locomotive and waggon repairs, the shops being
fitted with the latest machinery, steam hammers,
etc. ■
The coal is brought from the mines by the Com-
pany’s private railways to the jetty, whence it is
shipped on board steam colliers and brought
directly to the steamer requiring it at Sydney or
elsewhere. The Company own a very fine fleet of
four, modern colliers, with a carrying capacity of
3600 tons. They are named " Marjorie," " Werfa,"
"Malachite,” and "Cuvrajong." Three of the
largest are of the highest class at Lloyd's and
equipped with electric light and every facility for
quick intake and discharge.
The "Marjorie," which is the latest addition to
the Company’s collier fleet, is fitted so as to allow
ten gangs of men to work simultaneously. The
Company have also a fine hulk, named the " Argo,"
which is capable of carrying 1800 tons of coal, and
is similarly fitted ’jp with all modern appliances.
Messrs, Mcllwraith, McEacharn and Company Pro-
prietary. Limited, Melbourne, whose offices are
at Melbourne, London, and elsewhere .
The general manager at Sydney is Mr. F O
Waley, who holds a high position in the business
world of Sydney, for his organising abilities and
great knowledge of the coal trade. Prior to his
joining the Company he had experience as Secre-
tary and Shipping Manager for the firm of Messrs.
Burns, Philp and Company, and he is held in high
esteem in the social world of Sydney, where he re-
sides.
With regard to the management of the Colliery, it
may be mentioned that Mr. George Cater, who was
for eleven years with the firm, recently died, and
the vacancy thus caused has been filled by Mr. A.
E. O. Sellers, for some years the Manager of the
Corrimal Mine in this State. . The position is a
highly responsible one, and the new occupant of it
is a thoroughly qualified colliery manager of great
practical and scientific attainments.
The high position to which the Bellambi Coal
Company, Limited, has attained speaks volumes
as to the efficient direction and management of the
Company’s concerns in all departments, and these,
coupled with the quality of the coal, which have
were not out of their calculations, for, notwith*
standing the greatness and wealth of the Northern
Colliery district, the Southern District has steadily
forged ahead, until it is now the great source of
supply to all steamer lines. A\ hen the Bellambi
Coal Company, Limited, pin chased the business ot
himself and his partner, Mr. Waley was re-
garded as a gentleman whoso special knowledge and
long experience in the business of coal mining
would be most useful to the new proprietary, and
he was offered and accepted the position of general
manager to the Company.
The choice was a wise one on the part of the new
proprietary, as Mr. Waley's knowledge of affairs,
business capacity, and powers of organisation made
him pre-eminently fitted for the position, and his
previous experience with Messrs. Burns, Philp and
C 0.,, Ltd., would naturally be inestimable to one
managing a great colliery concern, and having a
close business relation with the chief coal users on
the Australasian coasts,
There can be no doubt of the fact that Mr. Waley s
intimate knowledge of the requirements °f Ship-
owners with regard to their fuel supply, and also
of the conditions which govern them, has had much
to do with the present strong position of tin Com-
In addition to their tug named the “Katie/’ an-
other tug-boat fitted in the most up-to-date
fashion, will sh’oitly be put into seivic?.
The Directors of the Company are gentlemen in
the front rank of the shipping and commercial
world of Australasia, and are well known in every
part of the world “ where merchants mod do con—
gregate.” The Chaiiman of the Boaid is Sir Mai-
colm McEacharn M.H.R., of Melbourne, who has
been Mayor of that great City, and is gieatly intc-
rested in the shipping and commerce of this conti-
nent. Another Director is Coloney James Burns,
of Messrs Burns, Philp and Company, Limited,
Who is head of the vast organisation which laigely
controls the Queensland and Pacific trade. Messrs.
R. R. Woolcott, J.P.; of Melbourne, and A. For-
syth of the AUSN Company, Sydney, ana gentle-
men’of great experience in the shipping world. An-
other Director is the Hon. Nicholas Fitzgerald,
M.L.C., of Melbourne, who has large interests in the
brewing industry, as’ well as in the general com-
meice and trade of Australia.
The head office is at 469 Collins Street, Mel-
bourne, the Sydney office being located in commodi-
ous premises at 9 Bridge Street. The Company’s
agents for the United Kingdom and Melbourne are
won success in the pasf, will doubtless achieve like
results in the years that are to come. The Bel-
lambi Company’s motto is progress, and it has
constantly met the increasing demands of its trade
and kept well abreast of the times. It disburses
annually in wages alone, between miners, sailors,
and coal lumpers, an average of close upon <£150,0 0,
and both for the sake of the large number depend-
ent upon it and for the important district which
depends so largely on the coal trade for its sue-
cess, we most heartily wish the Company continued
prosperity.
v n W ATBY
'
A gentleman vigorous and active in business, and
possessing a special knowledge of the coal trade—
such is Mr. F. G. Waley, General Manager of the
Bellambi Coal Company, Limited, and there is no-
thing in the history or affairs of that company with
which he is unacquainted. Mr. Waley was ori-
ginally a partner of the firm of Mitchell and Waley,
who wet» enterprising colliery proprietors, and re-
garded I he Southern or Illawarra district as one
which, when developed, would be one of the great
lines of mining industry in New South Wales. They
pany, as one stiiking feature of the Company’s
operations is the large number of contracts
they have entered into, for long terms ahead, with
the great shipping firms of the world,
Mr. Waley is yet in his prime, having been bom
in 1860, so that by every expectation he has many
years of useful life still before him. He is a native
of London, but takes as much pride in this city,
its haibour, its public institutions, and its we’faie,
as one who has the honour of claiming the metro-
polls of New South Wales as his birthplace,
Although the subject of our sketch is so much
occupied with the engrossments of the rapidly in-
creasing musmess he supervises that he has little
time to devote to other objects, he has yet found
time to serve the colony as a magistrate, and has
for many years held a prominent position in the
naval forces of the colony. Mr. Waley was for
some years an Alderman of North Sydney, and in
1891 unsuccessfully contested a seat in the Legisla-
tive Assembly for West Sydney as one of the selected
Freetrade candidates, but together with his three
colleagues suffered defeat at the hands of four labour
members. He is also known as a keen follower of
yachting, and an enthusiastic supporter of Rugby
football.


Messrs.
James and Alexander Brown.
COLLIERY PROPRIETORS, SHIP AND TUG
OWNERS, MERCHANTS, &c.
No commercial or industrial house in Australia
is more widely or more favourably known than the
firm of Messrs. James and Alexander Brown, of
Sydney, Newcastle, London, San Francisco, a.id
Valparaiso, colliery proprietors, ship and tug
Scotland in 1839. The total output of the mines of
Newcastle in the year 1841 being only 30,256 tons.
Coming to the Newcastle district, although practi-
cally knowing little about coal, the two brothers
saw how great an opening existed for the successful
development of the vast undergrowth wealth that
lay beneath their feet. The difficulties, however,
were very great, for monopoly attempted to bar their
way.
The only people who at that time were mining
for coal, in a serious fashion, were the Australian
Agricultural Company, a body that had secured
great powers in New South Wales from the Im-
perial Government. An attempt was then made
by that company to discourage outside competi-
How primitive the appliances of those early days
were may be gauged by the fact that the coal was
run by means of wheelbarrows on planks, and then
shot into the holds of the small sailing craft that
plied between Newcastle and Sydney.
Soon after the initial difficulties had been re-
moved, the firm opened up mines in various parts
of the Newcastle district, and by these actions
paved the way for others. One feature of coal-
mining is that the researches of those engaged in it
make the paths of others easier. The result of a
bore, though it can be kept secret for a time, can-
not be maintained for ever, and in a negative or
positive sense it affords most valuable information
to all others who are engaged in wresting from
J. AND A. BROWN'S NO. 2 AND 4 COLLIERIES, NEWCASTLE DISTRICT.
GENERAL VIEW OF THE WORKS AND PIT HEAD AT MINMI.
owners, merchants, ship brokers, and ship chand-
lers.
THE HISTORY OF THE FIRM.
Is that of a long-continued and highly-suc-
cessful effort, carried on for two generations
towards the development of the coal trade
of this State, cognate industries being from
time to time added thereto. The result is a
commerce conducted over nearly the whole habit-
able globe, with promise of still greater develop-
ment.
The coal trade of New' South Wales was a very
small affair when Mr. James Brown and his brother,
Mr, Alexander Brown, arrived in this State from
tion by claiming that in 1829 they had secured the
sole right to mine for coal in the district for a
period of thirty-one years.
The Messrs, Brown were the first of those who
disputed that claim, and after long extended liti-
gation, Messrs. J. and A. Brown’s effort had the
result of bringing the matter before the Full Court.
Notwithstanding an adverse verdict restraining
them from mining at Four Mile Creek, the Messrs.
Brown persevered, and three years later arranged to
work a portion of the Burwood seam. Soon after
the close of the memorable lawsuit the Australian
Agricultural Company agreed to forego their mon-
opoly, and freedom under the laws of the State has
since been the watchword in the coal mining indus-
try of New South Wales.
nature her valuable underground treasures.
Thus'the Messrs. Drown in various ways helped
to map out the coal-bearing portions of the New-
castle district. The firm prospered, and there was
little that they touched that did not prove advan-
tageous. Mr. Alexander Brown predeceased Mr.
James Brown, who died at Newcastle some few years
ago, respected by the entire community, and especi-
ally by those who had known him in the early
years of his strenuous, industrious and enterprising
life.
The present members of the firm are Mr. John
Brown, who, as senior partner, has his headquarters
in London. From this coign of vantage he most
ably directs the firm’s world-wide trade. Mr. Wil-
liam Brown is well known to the shipping and coro-
Cbe Coal Jnbustn?.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches:-contmued.
THE DUCKENFIELD, BROWN’S & PELAW-MAIN COLLIERIES.


niercial world of Sydney as the managing partner
of the firm m Australia during the absence in Lon-
don of Mr. John Brown. These gentlemen are sons
of the late Mr. James Brown.
A tup from Sydney to the mines and other pro-
perty owned by the firm of J. and A. Brown in the
Newcastle and Maitland districts is most interest-
ing and instructive in its nature. After reaching
Newcastle by steamer or tram from the metropolis
Stat ‘° n ’
distant, and thence by
THE COMPANY’S PRIVATE RAILWAY
. ,i , t, * f ivr ■ f rv, f
to the township of Minmi, a further journey of
six miles. The wayfarer leaves the sparkling waters
of the Hunter River behind him, and proceeds over
a well-kept line that runs through a stretch of
flat country, to the more elevated and broken ten i-
tory in which the collieries are situated.
It may be here stated that the firm possess a
great and undoubted advantage in having their
own line, as well as efficient shipping appliances on
the Hunter River at Hexham. The private rail-
way carries the coal from the Duckenfield and
Brown’s 2 and 4 mines to the Company’s wharf at
stir is observable in the day time. On Friday even-
ings and Saturdays following the fortnightly pays,
however, there is a good deal of bustle in the main
thoroughfare.
Minmi is well situated on the slope of the ranges,
and spreads across Back Creek. The township covers
an area of over 600 acres, the population being
about COOO. The religious wants of the people are
carefully provided for, there being churches for the
W n “ d
Methodist denominations. A Mechanics Institute
(W^nnirn I rA 1 v n h, S r.h l 'if ““I 8 . tlat lt
does n t receive the support which it mei its.
There is a very good State School, with an aver-
age attendance of 700. The township also boasts of
a Post and Telegraph office, several large stores.
five hotels, and a Police Court, the cases for which
are few, as the town is very orderly.
Railway communication is maintained by two
passenger trains per day to and from Hexham, and
four coaches run daily to Wallsend. On holidays
extra trains and coaches are put on.
The township, with its many activities, has its
origin from the enterprise and activity of its foun-
ders, Messrs. J. and A. Brown, who literally laid
is kept free from water by a large Tangye pump,
which draws 7000 gallons per hour, the water find-
ing its way to the pit bottom.
Duckeufield employs about 400 men, and the out-
put, which can be raised indefinitely, is at present
runnh.g out above 365,000 tons annually.
Af Brown's Collieries the onenimrs are known as
and 4 tunnels! As theiruames indicate
tbey start from sur f a ce Here are to be found
a vLvfine haulS planT'tip?serinset ™d
every f , cility for loading trucks . Under the ridge 9
the coal is found at a de P th varying from 20 to 4 0
feet. The main road is about two miles long from
the BUrf to the boundary> and in 60me parts
xu A
ha "* af?3 18 conducted °' e ; ‘ hat c t
. , e sean ? vanes from 4 feet 10 inches to 5 feet 6
inches, and it is a good mine to work in, although
somewhat dry in parts. The machinery and plant
are very fine, the haulage being performed by one
engine of 30 h.p. and two of 25 h.p.
The ventilation is carried on by means of I' a
Schiele fans. The coal is a good cooking coal, and is
also suitable for gas-making purposes. There is
really no difference between the coal taken out of
J. AND A. BROWN’S DUCKENFIELD COLLIERY.
Near Minmi, Newcastle District.
Hexham, where they supply their own tugs with
coal, and also have a large workshop for the repair
of their boats.
The ordinary coal, for the carriage of which the
firm have over 400 waggons and 3 locomotives, is
taken from the private siding at Hexham by Go-
vernment engine to Newcastle, and there shipped.
At present another branch line. Hi miles long, is
being laid down from the Minmi Junction to Rich-
mond Vale, the estimated cost of which will of ne-
cessity be considerable, and run into many thou-
sands of pounds
One rrf the methods adouted hv Mr' Andrew Car-
negie! theg?e“ United States millionaire, in order
to build up his vast fortune, was to own his rail-
ways, steamers, and iron mines, as well as his rol-
ling mills, and in doing so he only took a leaf out
of the book nf Messrs I and A Brown who have
adhered to that policy from almost the’first stage
of the firm’s existence
Arrived at
MINMI
after a pleasant run, the visitor finds him-
self in a typical mining township of the
earlier type. It is surrounded by ridges, and as the
men are mainly engaged in the mines, not much
the foundations and built up the superstructure of
this village of the hills.
Chaperoned by Mr. George Dune, the mine mana-
ger, the visitor proceeds to inspect the three col
lieries located within the radius of half a mile of
the centre of the township of Minmi. There are
three separate tunnels, named
THE DUCKENFIELD AND BROWN’S NO. 2
U AND 4
, , . . .
The latter are close together, the former being
about a quarter of a mile distant from (he others.
The Duckenfield tnnnel was commenced in 1872,
and completed two years later It pierces the hills
at an incline of one foot in sixteen for a distance of
a mile and a half, the workings extending all over
that hilly region. The roof is conglomerate and
the coal is of a luminous nature. The height of
the seam varies from 4 feet 10 inches to 5 feet 6
inches. The mine is very well ventilated, the means
of ventilation being a Schiele fan. It is exception-
ally well planned. Some of the headings are half a
mile long. Two huge belts, 40 feet long, are used in
the process of cleaning the coal.
The coal worked is part of the famous Borehole
seam, from which such vast quantities of coal have
been taken in the Newcastle district. The Colliery
Brown’s Collieries and Duckeufield except in the
thickn ;ss of the seams.
The roof m Brown s Collieries is composed ot
black shale, the floor is of sandstone of the same
kind as is obtained for building purposes from the
Warrtah quarries.
The mines are worked by means of a number of
headings from the main travelling road. The loaded
skl P s ° f coal are hau! , e . d b >’ hor£es to mam road,
and thence by an endless wire rope to the screens,
The big or round coal is carried on a belt to the
railway trucks, the small coal being taken by
small trucks at the bottom of the sheets and shot
into the storage box. The collieries are capable
of an annual output of about 500,000 tons per
annum Brown s No 2 and 4 openings employ
about 600 men The locality is very healthy, as is
shown by the fine physique of the miners, their
interests being well cared for by the owners and
those officers responsible to them for the safety of
life and property.
These splendid mines are officered as follows... Mr.
George Durie is mine manager at Duckenfield and
Brown’s No. 2 and 4. It need hardly be said that
lie is a very able officer, Mr. Geo. Durie being a
veteran miner, and well capable of showing younger
men how their work should ho done. He came from


Scotland in 1868, and was under-manager 24 years
previous to his being appointed manager, a position
he has held for the last eighteen months. The
miue workshops at Minmi, which are well worthy
of inspection, are used for repairing trucks, col-
liery machinery, big tools, etc. A considerable
number of hands are employed. Some of the
tnachinery is remarkable, it being the first of its
kind ever introduced into the Newcastle district. It
was laid down in 1851, and though it has performed
much work all through, it is now as good as any
modern plant.
The workshops are under the capable supervision
Borehole, but the Greta seam, which underlies
the former at a great depth. Owing, however, to
the combined effects of elevation and denudation,
the Borehole seam does not exist here, and the
shafts to the Greta seam have to be sunk a con-
siderable depth. Along this route are a number of
coal-bearing properties, of whose possibilities Pro-
fessor David speaks in terms that would be con-
sidered exaggerated if we did not know that they
were based upon the most solid of facts. Realising
that the coal fields of Newcastle were being heavily
drawn upon, and that the opening of new fields was
necessary, Messrs. John and William Brown some
duce the haulage from Pelaw-Main to Newcastle
by 16 miles. The Pelaw Seam is the highest ever
opened up in Australia, it being from 18 feet up-
wards, without a break or band,
There is also another seam some 7 feet in thick-
ness on the same estate, the whole forming a work-
able area, which is estimated to last 200 years at
an output of 1,000,001 tons per year. The quality
of the coal is excellent for steam and household
purposes, and as a gas-making coal is unrivalled,
some of it being almost “ cannel” like in its nature,
The output is rapidly increasing, and in the course
of a few years, on completion of the Richmond Vale
J. AND W. BROWN’S FAMOUS PELAW-MAIN COLLIERY,
WEST MAITLAND DISTRICT.
1. View of the Pelaw-Main Colliery, showing Railway Siding facilities. 2. One of the Pelaw-Main Colliery Adits.
3. Haulage Machinery in course of erection, capacity 4000 tons per day.
Of Mr. R. C. Tweedie, mechanical engineer. One
peculiarity of the mines is the large number of
men who have been very many years in the service
of the firm, and another is that not a few natives
of Scotland have on various occasions found their
way to
the Brown s No. s 2 and 4 and Duckenfield, known
as the old estate, is 6000 acres, all freehold.
Leaving the township of Minmi, the visitor pro-
Deeds across country, to the splendid new coal field
that is being opened up on the other side of the
range. Here the seam worked is no longer the
time ago purchased the Pelaw-Main property, ad-
joining that known as Richmond Vale, The two
managing partners, Messrs. John and William
Brown, on purchasing
TTTF PPT AW-Af ATM MTNP
- ’
decided to open up and work it entirely
apart from the firm of J. and A. Brown.
They are now working the Pelaw-Main with
two tunnels, and have been doing so for the
past thirteen months. A railway line is be-
ing constructed from Minmi, which will re-
line, it will have reached the enormous aggregate
of 6000 tons per day.
The manager at Pelaw-Main is Mr. Richard
Thomas, a native of Wales.
The Richmond Vale property was purchased in
1833 by a Melbourne syndicate, who proved the
ground, and sunk a shaft on a 14 feet 6 inch seam
of coal, with a second one of 17 feet 6 inches in
thickness. The property consists of 5000 acres of
freehold coal-bearing country.
The Stockrington coni property has an area of
1406 acres freehold, and is not yet worked. This


latter is the latest purchase of Messrs. J. and A.
Brown.
Some idea of the magnitude of the firm’s opera-
tions may be formed from the fact that the esti-
mated value of the properties and plant is about
,£500,000, exclusive of the value of their steam col-
liers, tugs, etc. '
THE FLEET.
A record of the firm’s operations would be incom-
plete without mention of the great shipping busi-
ness carried on by Messrs. J. and A. Brown. They
are concerned in the business of so many vessels,
both inwards and outwards, that a great fleet of
tugs has been rendered necessary. Their fleet,
which consists of the steamers " Champion,” 15J
h.p.; " Stormcock,” 120 h.p.; " Bungaree," 150
h.p.; " Goolwa,” 90 h.p.; “Gamecock,” 45 h.p.;
“Enterprise,” 40 h.p.; “Energy,” 35 h.p.; "Duc-
kenfield,” 150 h.p.; and “ Alice,” 70 h.p., is one of
the finest in Southern waters, each vessel being
MR. JOHN BROWN,
Senior Partner.
equipped with disconnecting engines and all the
most modern time and labour-saving appliances.
The steamers “ Duckenfield” and “ A lice” are
regularly engaged in the shipping of coal between
Newcastle and Sydney, and in addition are suitable
for towing purposes. The following powerful tugs
are also employed in conjunction with the fleet, —
"Commodore,” 150 h.p.; “Irresistible,” 90 h.p.;
" Port Jackson,” 50 h.p.
The boats of Messrs. J. and A. Brown are easily
recognised by their black funnels with a white band
in the centre, and the firm’s house-flag on their
bows.
The flagship of the fleet, the famous “ Champion,"
carries, in addition to the ordinary equipment of a
tugboat, a full salvage plant with which she did
such good service in the salvage of the “ Emile
Galliene” and the " Port Patrick.” The firm, who
are agents for many shipping lines, were the foun-
ders of the direct importing line between Britain,
the Continent of Europe, and Newcastle about 30
years ago, and have maintained the same ever since.
As merchants the Messrs. Brown have stores at
Newcastle and Sydney. Their Australasian head
office is at Newcastle, and 64 Leadenhall Street is
their London address.
The following figures will give some idea of tlie
great business in export of coal carried on by the
Messrs. Brown as Colliery Proprietors:—
July Ist, 1896, to June 30th, 1897, Sydney and
Newcastle, 328,632 tons.
July Ist, 1897, to June 30th, 1898, Sydney and
Newcastle, 328,581 tons.
July Ist, 1898, to June 30th, 1899, Sydney and New-
castle, 325,280 tons.
July Ist, 1899, to June 30th, 1900, Sydney and
Newcastle, 317,469 tons.
July Ist, 1900, to June 30th, 1901, Sydney and
Newcastle, 337,632 tons!
January Ist to December 31st, 1902, Sydney and
Newcastle, 450,000 tons.
The wages paid to the miners in the employ of
the firm amounts to the large sum of £6OOO per
fortnight.
Such a record of well directed and continuous
energy in developing the resources of a new coun-
try is well worthy of preservation, especially in
these days, when enterprise has to struggle hard
against opposition. To men like the present heads
of this great firm, the people of Australia owe a
debt of gratitude, as by their operations and pro-
gressive methods remunerative employment is en-
joyed by thousands of persons connected with min-
ing, shipping, and commerce in every part of the
Australian Commonwealth.
ME. JOHN BROWN.
The senior partner of the firm of Messrs. J. and
A. Brown is Mr. John Brown, a native of New-
castle, New South Wales. His father was, with his
brother, Mr. Alexander Brown, now deceased, a
founder of the firm. They purchased the old Mel-
bourne mine at Minmi, and having worked that out,
they, in 1874, acquired from the late Hon. John
Eales, the Duckenfield property, which has been
worked ever since.
In 1876 the important collieries now known as
Brown’s Nos. 2 and 4 were opened. Messrs. Jobe
and William Brown have since added to their
holdings the famous Pelaw-Main mine, which is
their private property, while the firm of J. and A.
Brown have on their part added the well-known
Richmond Vale and Stockrington Colliery proper-
ties to their immense proprietary. Mr. John Brown
resided for years in Newcastle, but of late the inte-
rests of the firm have kept hira in London. Though
so far distant, he keeps closely in touch with the
business in New South Wales.
The operations of Messrs. J. and Alex. Brown
being world-wide, the residence of a partner in the
great commercial centre of Britain is almost a ne-
cessity. Mr. John Brown is a business man
to his finger’s tips, and has a keen in-
sight into the ebbs and flows of commercial and
industrial life. The concerns of his firm’s vast
business are ample enough to engross all his atten-
tion, nevertheless, he finds time to study the great
economic, municipal, and social events, which from
time to time demand public notice. Quiet in his
demeanour, and of a most unassuming nature, a
stranger would never consider that Mr. John
Brown bore on his shoulders the senior partner’s
share of the care of a great and rapidly expanding
industry, in which hundreds of thousands of
pounds are involved. In the great world of Lon-
don, Mr. Brown finds a range and scope suitable
for his splendid abilities, nevertheless, as an Aus-
tralian, he has a warm corner in his heait for
his beloved native land, whose rich natural re-
sources he has done so much to develop by means
of a lifelong career of honourable industry. He is
much respected by his brother partners, who keep
in close correspondence with him, and second his
efforts for the benefit of the firm in every possible
way. While a resident of Newcastle Mr. John
Brown held the position of Consul for Peru.
MR. WILLIAM BROWN.
In Sydney business centres the second partner of
the firm of Messrs. J. and A. Brown holds an ack-
nowledged and honoured place. Mr. William Brown
is a native of Newcastle, and having resided for
many years in Newcastle and Sydney, possesses an
intimate knowledge of every detail in connection
.with mining, shipping, and commerce.
MR. WILLIAM BROWN,
Managing Partner in Australia.
The vast operations of his firm in Australia are
ably managed by him in the absence of the senior
partner in London. Both in his business capacity
and personality, Mr. William Brown holds the
respect of those who serve the interests of the film
under him.
Close touch has to be kept with London, for much
of the business of the firm originates there, especi-
ally in the shipping and commercial departments.
He is one of three sons of the late Mr. James
Brown, one of the two founders of the firm, and
naturally prizes the position that his house has
taken in the development of New South Wales min-
ing, commercial, and shipping industries.
As a further evidence of the high position occu-
pied by Mr. William Brown in this State, it may
be mentioned that he holds the position of Consul
for Chili. With the great increase of the firm’s
business of late years, bis time is fully taken up,
and it is certain that it will not be less so in
the near future, when the development of the great
colliery properties recently acquired in the Mait-
land district shall have taken place.


Per cent.
Moisture ...
... 1-16
Volatile hydrocarbons ...
... 22’V1
Fixed carbon
... 67*04
Ash
... 9-09
100-00
Coke making capacity ...
... 76-13
Messrs. G. S. Yuill & Co., Ltd.
COAL AGENTS.
Au important branch of the large trade carried
on by Messrs. G. S. Yuill and Co.. Ltd., of 6 Bridge-
street, Sydney, is their coal business, which has
greatly increased during recent years, their cus-
tomers hailing from all parts of the world.
Their source of supply includes the Northern and
Southern Colliery Districts of New South Wales,
so that they are always in a position to supply
whatever description of coal may be required.
Their special attention, however, has been direc-
ted to the development of the Illawarra or Southern
Coal Fields, and their enterprise in this direction
has done much in bringing the product of these
mines, with its excellent steaming qualities, to the
very high place it now holds.
The town of Wollongong, which is situated in the
heart of this district, is not possessed of a very
suitable loading port, and when heavy weather sets
in, .steamers are sometimes compelled to seek more
favourable conditions elsewhere. Fortunately, the
harbour at Port Kembla, which lies between Wol-
and Bed Point; affords splendid shelter,
being protected on the south by Red Point, a group
known as The Five Islands giving it further im-
munity from heavy weather.
Besides this, a breakwater is now in course
of construction, which, when completed, will
still more enhance the value of this
harbour as a safe coaling station. Private
enterprise has also been brought to bear in order
to give every facility to shipping. The Southern
Coal Company’s jetty has Accommodation for
vessels of upwards of 5000 tons, and drawing 28 feet
of water. Loading appliances of a very efficient
type are in use, and prompt despatch can be
guaranteed even for the largest steamers.
The jetty has a length of 2300 ft.; the moorings are
most complete, and the loading arrangements con-
sist of three shoots. The outer and inner shoots are
constructed on the ordinary plan, and when run out
for working have an extreme height from tip to
water line of 22 feet 6 inches. To accommodate the
increasing size and height of modern steamers, the
middle shoot consists of a travelling belt (with a
speed of 45 feet per minute—equal to a coaling
capacity of 300 tons per hour), which runs out hori-
zontally, and commands a height of 32 feet 6 inches,
but if necessary it can be adjusted to load any
vessel. As regards speed of delivery, 300 to 400
tons an hour can be run into an empty hold.
Messrs. G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., pay great at-
tention to bunkering business, this being a special
feature of their coal trade. The arrangements made
by them for meeting the requirements of clients
are of the most complete kind, and a mention of
some of the users of coal supplied by them is suf-
ficent evidence of the entire satisfaction given.
The company supply bunker coal to the following
amongst others; —British-India, Aberdeen, Tyser,
Houlder, German-Australian, Adelaide, A.U.S.N.,
and Union of N.Z. Co.’s steamers.
THE CORRIMAL-BALGOWNIE COLLIERIES.
LIMITED.
MESSRS. G. S. YUILL AND CO., LTD.,
SOLE SELLING AGENTS.
A laige and noted colliery of the Illawarra or
Southern district worked at Corrimal by
the Corrimal-Balgowhie Collieries, Ltd., which is
situated about 600 feet above sea level. The area
of the property is between 2000 and 3000 acres, and
the average thickness of the coal is about 6 feet;
the seam is very clean and free from faults. The
main entrance to the mine is an adit in the side
of the mountain, and the coal comes down an in-
cline to Corrimal Station, thence on to the Govern-
ment main line to a point past Wollongong, and
thence four miles by private line to Port Kembla,
where it is shipped from the jetty there. The com-
pany’s mining plant is a very fine one, and includes
electric, ventilating and pumping gear, and an
ample supply of wagons, which enables them to give
quick despatch to all vessels loading their coal. The
output of the colliery is about 700 tons per day.
Something may be said here of the general nature
of the coal won from the Southern Collieries. It is
a semi-bituminous, short flaming, coking coal, high
in fixed carbon, and burns with a marked freedom
from clinker. Its chemical constituents place it
high on the list of efficient steam coals, while its
physical characteristics of strength, toughness and
density make it well fitted to withstand the break-
age and attrition unavoidable in shipping opera-
tions. It is claimed by Southern Colliery Proprie-
tors that in economy of consumption and steam pro-
ducing capacity it gives results exceeded only by
Welsh coal. An important feature for shippers is
its close stowage capacity, viz., about 39 to 40 cubic
feet to the ton, as against about 45 feet for New-
castle coal, As regards calorific or heat-giving
value, a comparative test made several years ago
by the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of
Works of Southern, Northern and Victorian coal
resulted in the Corrimal coal being placed at the
head of the list with 14-153 British thermal units,
the Newcastle coals going about 13‘5, and the Vic-
torian IF7.
As a testimony of the very high suitability of
this coal for steaming purposes, it is sufficient to
state that the great British Mail Steamship Com-
panies are amongst its customers for bunkering
requirements. For many years the company has
held contracts for the bunkering of the big liners,
and the results have been most gratifying to those
supplied. The'following is an analysis of Corrimal
coal recently made by Dr. Helms, M.A., F.C.S.,
consulting and analytical chemist, of Sydney: —
The sole selling agents of the Corrimal-Balgow-
nie Collieries, Ltd., are Messrs. G. S. Yuill and
Co., Ltd., of No. 6 Bridge-street, Sydney, who have
secured for the collieries bunkering and cargo
orders for the loading of some of the largest vessels
that have visited Australia. The arrangements are
so complete that orders are filled without the
slightest hitch. The development of the Corrimal
Gbe Goal Jnbustn?.
Historical and Biographical Sketches : — Continued.
THE SOUTHERN COAL TRADE.


trade, through the agency of Messrs. G. S. Yuill
and Co., Ltd., has had much to do with the grand
results which have been attained in the Southern
District generally, and even better results may be
looked for than those which have distinguished the
past; owing to the improvements being carried out
by the Government to the harbour at Port
Kembla, which will enable the largest vessels to
load in perfectly smooth water.
AUSTRALIAN COKE-MAKING COMPANY,
LIMITED.
In the early days of Broken Hill a vast amount of
foreign coke was imported, the belief being that
interest to all coal owners possessed of deposits of
coal suited for coke manufacture.
The works of the Australian Coke-making Com-
pany are at Unanderra, near Wollongong. The
plant is one of the largest in the lllawarra Dis-
trict; the ovens number 90, and have a total capa-
city of 650 tons per week.
Mr. Edward Pittman, Government Geologist and
Under Secretary for Mines, New South Wales,
describes the process of coke-making as fol-
lows :—" The coal is delivered into a bin
at the coke works, and is elevated on to
a shaking screen of J inch mesh, which separates it
into ‘nuts’ and ‘fines;’ the former are again ele-
vated to a hopper and sold for private consumption.
The ' fines’ pass through a disintegrator, and the
finely pulverised material, or ‘ duff,’ is then elevated
its excellent weight-bearing capacity it is much
preferred to softer kinds.
Messrs. G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., of No. 6 Bridge-
street, Sydney, are the sole selling agents.
BULLI COLLIERY AND COKE WORKS.
The celebrated Bulli Colliery, of which Mr. G.
Adams is proprietor, has an output of 450 tons per
working day. Attached to the colliery are a num-
ber of excellent coke ovens, the output of which is
about 300 tons per week. The prospects for the
coke industry in the Southern District are excel-
lent, and a considerable amount of capital has been
invested in this branch of enterprise. It is hoped
THE CORRIMAL-BALGOWNIE COLLIERIES, LTD.
1. Corrimal Incline. 2 and 3. Balgownie Daylight Tunnel. 4. A2i ton Block of Corrimal Coal.
coke sufficiently hard to bear the Barrier Ore could
not be made in this country. It is, however, cer-
tain that those interested in collieries in this State
have now succeeded in making a coke equal to all
requirements. The Southern coal possesses pro-
perties which make it peculiarly valuable to the
coke-maker, a certain hardness tending to that re-
sult. The recent great extensions in smelting
operations throughout New South Wales, notably
at Dapto and Cockle Creek, not to speak of the local
requirements at Broken Hill and elsewhere, have
made the industry of coke-making one of great
into the ‘ duff’ hopper, whence it is loaded into
trucks which run along the tops of the ovens.”
The following analysis of Unanderra coke was
made by Dr. Helms, M.A., F.C.S., of Sydney:—
Moisture, 0-70; volatile hydrocarbons, 0-72; fixed
carbon, 8598; ash, 12-GO; total, 10t>. The specific
gravity was found to be 1*792.
The coke made by this company has a great repu-
tation for foundry and smelting purposes. It is
laigely used at Port Pirie, also in Tasmania, AVest
Australia, San Francisco, and Japan. On account of
that in the near future there will be a rise in the
prices of metals which will have the result
of increasing the market for coke, any quan-
tity of which could be produced in New
South Wales according to demand. The Bulli Mine
occupies a commanding position in the collieries
of the Southern District. The seam worked thereat
has now given a name to similar deposits of coal
laid down at the coeval geological period. For
coke-making and steaming qualities the coal is
much valued. Messrs. G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., are
the sole selling agents.


The Newcastle Wallsend Coal
Company.
In the history of human activity perhaps no
subject is more interesting than the turning of
the land regarded during long ages as of little
account into a source of profitable industry.
The name of Wallsend in the Newcastle District
of New South Wales is a reproduction of that of
the original colliery so designated in the North of
England.
In 1859 the Newcastle Wallsend Company com-
menced operations. Their holding‘was a tract of
land some 700 or 800 acres in area, lying in a
southerly direction from the town now known as
Wallsend, and about eight miles from Newcastle.
The capital was <£loo,ooo, in 10,000 shares of .£lO
each. The venture had a stormy infancy, and had
to make a strenuous fight for existence. Notwith-
standing the precipitation of a general strike in the
first year of the company’s history, the concern
succeeded in recording an output of over 40,000 tons.
After eighteen years of successful working, the
company resolved on another campaign of develop-
ment. In 1878 No. 1 tunnel was driven into the
hill on the eastern side, and the mine opened out
on such a large scale as to admit of an output un-
precedented in Australia. The method of working
by adit proving satisfactory, another was opened in
1884. A system of concentration was also estab-
lished, and the company ceased to draw coal at B
pit, the latter being maintained for pumping and
emeigency purposes. The company is now equip-
ping C pit with modern machinery and appliances,
from which, in about nine months' time, they will
be able to increase the daily output by 800 tons.
The output of the colliery in 1901 was 374 886 tons,
valued at about .£133,064. These figures are signi-
ficant, as showing what one of the numerous col-
lieries in New South Wales can accomplish in the
way of adding to the wealth of the State. The num-
ber of men and boys employed below and above
ground at Wallsend Colliery is 856. It is accord-
ingly not surprising that the town of Wallsend is
a large and important one. Although the work-
ings are still some miles from the boundaries of the
estate, they are about three-quarters of a mile
work sorting and picking out all impurities before
it is tipped over the screens which lead to the
hopper waggons.
The bars are three-quarters of an inch apart,
thus permitting the small coal to run through,
while tire large coal passes into the waggons. When
one train is filled it is hauled by rail to Newcastle,
while another train goes under the screens. Eight
screens are at the mouth of No. 1 tunnel, and two
at No. 2. The small coal, when not required for use,
is shot into a 2000-ton hopper. As 2000 tons can be,
if necessary, screened and loaded in one day, the
scene of these operations, even in normal times, is
very animated.
The demand for Wallsend coal largely comes
from foreign countries. A large quantity of its
output goes to the West Coast of South America,
where it has gained an enviable name. Large ship-
ments are also sent annually to interstate ports
and other places. At the present time there are
about 750 steel hopper waggons in use, having an
aggregate carrying capacity of about 5000 tons.
The seam worked in the colliery is the well-known
Borehole, but is better known in the vicinity as
the Wallsend seam. It is very free from faults.
In the following year from the three pits then
known as A, B, and C, the output was increased
to over 120,000 tons. While development was thus
steadily taking place the company was successful
in acquiring a grant of 8000 acres, known as Wei-
ler’s, and adding it to their original estate. The
purchase was an excellent one, for the company
thus obtained an area extending from Cockle Creek
to Hexham, giving a field for colliery operations
for generations to come. Owing, however, to the
vicissitudes of the coal trade the prices of the
company’s shares fluctuated; at one stage they
reached £52, and are now quoted on the Stock
Exchange at jC37 each. Nevertheless, those who
know anything of business understand how good
an investment Wallsend shares are.
An interesting but now almost forgotten fact is
that in the early days the company was successful
in securing from the Government a concession for
the erection of steam cranes on the wharves at New-
castle. The result was the installation of the first
steam cranes used for the shipment of coal at the
great coal port of the North. Later on the Govern-
ment provided other cranes, but an agitation aris-
ing owing to the Wallsend Company having the sole
right to ship by the cranes erected by it, the
State purchased them at a fair value.
THE NEWCASTLE WALLSEND COLLIERY.
from the mouth of the tunnel. In the ventilation
of this large area of underground industrial
activity the principal agent is a huge Guibal fan.
40 feet in diameter and 12 feet wide, with a supply
capacity of 200,000 cubic feet of air per minute.
In addition to the fan there are two furnaces
placed at the mouth of air shafts, supplying each
tunnel with 100,000 cubic feet of air per minute.
On the whole the colliery is very free from those
enemies of the coal miner, fire damp and choke-
damp, accumulations of carbonic acid gases being
prevented by brickwork stoppings at the entrances
of the old workings.
The system of haulage in use is that known as the
tail-rope. By means thereof 40 skips in a train are
being pulled out continuously. Four engines are
employed at this work, w r ith an aggregate of 1200
horse powet. The colliery buildings are erected in
a gorge, and as the skips are . hauled from
the tunnel they* are about six yards above the level
of the railway line, when they are stopped in the
sheds erected for screening purposes and over-
turned, the coal falling upon a large shaker, which
separates the small coal. The large coal is then
delivered on to a slowly moving broad iron travel-
ling belt. While the coal is thus being conveyed a
distance of about 70 feet, men are constantly at
lies regularly, and dips about 1 in 60 south-west
and south.
From 1860 to 1889 the management of the colliery
was under Mr. J. Young Neilson, who died in har-
ness. The present manager, Mr. Alexander Boss,
junior, has all his life been connected with the coal
trade, lie was in the employ of the Wallsend Com-
pany from 1861 to 1878, when he was appointed col-
liery manager to another local company. Three
months after the death of Mr. Neilson, Mr. Ross
was appointed his successor.
Mr. John Wheeler, a very capable and successful
gentleman, who holds a most prominent position
in the metropolitan business world, is Secretary of
the company at its head office in Sydney. At the
Newcastle office Mr. 11. de V. Newton is Shipping
Manager. The Board of Directors of the Newcastle
Wallsend Coal Company consists of gentlemen of
the highest commercial reputation in New South
Wales, Mr. Peter Reid being the Chairman, the
other members comprising Mr. J. Mullens, lion. W.
R. Campbell, M.L.C., Mr. F. Perks, and Mr. J. 11.
Storey. With men of such solid reputation at the
head of its affairs, it is no wonder that the Wall-
send Company has occupied for many years such a
splendid position in the financial and industrial
cii cles of this State.
Cbe Coal 3-nbustq?.
■Historical and Biographical Sketchesi-contmued,
THE NEWCASTLE WALLSEND COLLIERY.


The Wallarah Coal Company,
Limited.
The vast coal measures which are being rapidly
opened up in New South Wales, and which are
estimated to cover an area of over 24,000 square
miles, are an asset to the country w'hose value
cannot be fully approximated: the now universal
use of power-driven labour-saving machinery and
the marvellous strides made in marine engineer-
ing having created a world-wide demand for coal.
The quality of this mineral product of New
South Wales is, on the authority of Mr. John
Mackenzie, F.G.S., unexcelled in any part of the
globe, the coal area located within a radius of 75
miles of Newcastle being one of the richest, most
extensive, and most accessible in Australasia. This
property of the Company, at which vessels up to
2500 tons register can load.
The appliances for filling the ship’s bunkers are
of the most modern type, and capable of loading
at the rate of over 300 tons per hour.
A solidly built railway, of several miles in
length, connects the pit-head with the jetty, the
rolling stock comprising a laige number of hop-
per waggons, aggregating a load capacity of 1500
tons.
The mine is worked from two tunnels, and is
equipped with a fine haulage and ventilating
plant.
For the storage of ‘‘small” the Company has
erected a very large coal box. The workings of
the mine have been excellently carried out, the
main road extending for over a mile.
The coal seam is of a non-explosive character,
and throughout the mine naked lamps are daily
The output of the mine in 1901 was 148,875 tons,
valued at close upon .£70,000. For the year 1902
the Company's output was increased to slightly
over 200,000 tons.
A test made of Wallarah coal, by Mr. W. A.
Dixon, gave the following satisfactory analysis;—
Moisture 1-30
Carbon 74-26
• Hydrogen 5-29
Oxygen 10-93
Nitrogen 0-94
Sulphur ... 0-45
Ash 6-78
100 -00
The Head Office of the Company is situated at
3 East India Avenue, Leadenhall Street, London,
and the Sydney offices at Exchange Corner, 63
STEAMER COALING AT THE WALLARAH COAL CO.’S JETTY, CATHERINE HILL RAY.
is especially applicable to the Wallarah Colliery,
which is situated a short distance from the water’s
edge at Catherine Hill Bay, 48 miles south of New-
castle.
The coal obtained from the Wallarah mine is
constituently the same as that found in the
Southern New South Wales Coal Area, the seams
of the latter outcropping at Wallarah.
,
The Wallarah Coal Company, Limited, was es-
tablished some fourteen years ago by a powerful
English Company, and the present-day appear-
ance of the Wallarah Coal Mine and its approaches
are an ample testimony to the energy, enterprise
and capital which have been expended upon them.
The area of the Company’s property is slightly
over 4000 acres, every portion of which has been
carefully tested by diamond drills.
The wharfage accommodation at Catherine Hill
Bay is provided for with a very fine jetty, the
in use. The seam opened up is close upon 12 feet
thick, but the Company is at present only hew-
ing 6J feet of the mineral in sight.
.
The coal is of a veiy high quality, and is m-
surpassed for steaming, smelting, and household
purposes. A feature of the product ob-
tamed being that the small from the Wallarah is
exceptionally good for steaming. Owing to the
sa f e na t ure 0 f the coal, and the excellency of the
Wallarah seam, the Company does a very large bun-
kering trade, amongst its numerous clientele
being the German Australian Steamship Company,
/pbe Ocean S. S. Co., the China Mutual Steam
Navigation Company, the Lund’s Blue Anchor
Li ne> the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, Naut-
hus steamship Company, Watts, Watts and Co.,
the Britain S. S Company, Howard Smith Pty.,
Ltd., Huddart Parker and Co., and a number of
other Interstate Shipping Companies and Firms.
Pitt Street the Directorate being comprised as
follows
Charles Parbury, Esq. (Chairman), W. Lunds,
Esq. (Managing Director), W. O. Gilchrist, Esq.,
E . E. Moon. Es q., w . R. Mewburn, Esq., A.
Howell, Esq. In Australia Mr. E. A. Norton is the
Managing Agent for the Company. Mr. Joseph
Sperring is the Manager at the Mine.
... , , , ~
number of hands employed at the mine
above and below ground total 450, and these,
as . “J® operatmns of the Company are extended,
°e greatly increased.
To facilitate the despatch of Wallarah Coal to
Sydney Harbour the Company possesses two very
fast steam colliers, “ The Wallarah,” 800 tons,
and the “ Illaroo,” 580 tons, each fully equipped
with every appliance for the quick discharge of
the coal carried by them into the bunkers of ves-
sels.
Cbe Coal Jnbustr^.
■Historical and Biographical Sketchescontinued.


The Seaham Colliery Company,
Limited.
Prominent among the large, modern, and well-
equipped collieries of New South Wales is the
mine owned by the Seaham Colliery Company,
Limited. This valuable property is distant only
15 miles from the City of Newcastle, at the ex-
tensive wharves of which is shipped a very large
portion of the output of the Northern District.
The Seaham property, which is freehold, consists
of 4475 acres, including a large water reserve,
and has been in the possession of the Company
for nine years. Only about 400 acres of the area
has been worked out, leaving a very large por-
tion of the property for future operations. It is
situated in the parishes of Stockrington and Ter-
alba, and the seam wrought is the famous
" Borehole,” from which millions of tons of first-
class coal have been taken since the early days
of coal-mining in Australasia. To those who
know well the resources of the Newcastle (N.S.W.)
district, the statement that a colliery situated
therein works the Borehole seam, is a guarantee
of good coal, combined with economy in work-
ing.
The seam at Seaham is 7 feet in thickness,
of which 5 feet 6 inches is worked. The coal
is of a nature very suitable and safe for trans-
port by sea to great distances. The mine is for-
tunately a dry one, and great care is exercised
in the management, the result being freedom
from accidents of a serious kind. All the parts
of the mine are very efficiently equipped, in or-
der to secure the safety of those who work there-
in, and the installation of electric telephones con-
duces greatly to promptitude in working, the
transmission of orders, and constant and prompt
communication.
The coal extracted from the Seaham mine is of
a first-class nature, and in the highest degree
suitable for household, steaming, and gas pur-
poses. An analysis by Mr. W. A. Dixon, F.1.C.,
F.C.S., showed the following results: —
Moisture 1.73
Volatile hydrocarbons 36.01
Fixed carbon 57.14
Ash 4.74
Sulphur ...; 0.38
100.00-
Seaham coal is specially suitable for railway
and marine purposes, the results being equally
satisfactory both as regards economy in con-
sumption and steam producing power. For gas
purposes there is a steady and continuous de-
mand for the coal. The output of the colliery is
the large one of 280,000 tons per annum. The
railway authorities of several of the Australian
States are regular users of Seaham coal, and
many of the chief Interstate Steamship Com-
panies are customers from year to year. The
Seaham Company does a large trade with San
Francisco, Honolulu, Mexico, Manila, Singapore,
and the West Coast of South America, and the
reputation of the coal, equally with the demand
therefor, is regularly increasing in those and
other parts of the world, to which it is largely
shipped. The recent increase in the demand has
been so great that a second colliery is in course
of being developed. In the coal trade the promp-
ness with which orders can be delivered is a
very important factor, and it is highly satisfac-
tory to state that the Seaham Colliery has, in
this respect, established a splendid reputation at
both its shipping ports, Sydney and Newcastle.
The Seaham Colliery Company holds a number
of valuable testimonials showing the high quality
of its coal. The following is a portion of a
letter from Mr. 11. MeLachlan, Secretary to the
Railway Commissioners, who manage the State
railways of New South Wales
“ I have pleasure in certifying that the coal
used for locomotive purposes from your Seaham
Mine (Newcastle), has given very satisfactory re-
sults. The consumption of the coal has been, for
goods trains, 48.6 lbs per mile; the water evap-
orated per lb. being 7.2 lbs., and the percentage
of ash, including smoke-box and fire-box ashes,
12.9 per cent. The coal develops very good steam-
ing properties, and is considered an excellent
coal for railway locomotive purposes.”
Mr. J. 11. Smith, Chairman of the South Aus-
tralian Railways, Adelaide, wrote on the 25th
March, 1895, as follows:—“ I have pleasure to
inform you that the use of your coal on these
railways has been attended with very satisfac-
tory results. It steams well, does not clinker,
and the percentage of ash is small. The smoke
also from it is not so dense as with many softer
coals. Our Locomotive Engineer is thoroughly
satisfied with it.”
The Inter-Island Steam Navigation Company,
Limited, wrote from Honolulu in December,
1834: —" This is to certify that we have used Sea-
ham coal on our steamers, and have found it to
be as good as any other coals in Newcastle, and
can sell readily.”
The Seaham Company has taken, and continues
daily to take, every precaution that will ensure in
its output freedom from impurities. The mine is
worked by two vertical shafts, the “ downcast"
being 450 feet deep, and the " upcast’’ 470 feet
deep. For more than a mile underground the
haulage employed is on the main and tail rope
system, which is worked in conjunction with
electric signals and telephones. Arrived at the
bottom of the winding shaft, the loaded skips are
drawn to the top by a pair of splendid winding
engines, of 250 horse power each, with 15 feet
drums. They are driven by power obtained from
6 Cornish boilers, each 26 feet by 6 feet. The
engine room is very large and well lighted, and
a good view of the pit-head is obtained there-
from. The coal is weighed automatically, while
it is in the skips, as it comes from the shaft.
As the skips are emptied, the small coal falls be-
tween the: bars of the screens into trucks or bins,
which are run up, over, and emptied into a huge
coal box, having a capacity of 1000 tons of "small."
Most of the contents, however, is loaded and sent
away, as this class of coal has a market for certain
purposes. The large or "round” coal is discharged
on two travelling belts of the latest construction,
each 80 feet long and 4 feet wide, and worked by
separate engines. The dross can then be seen,
and is picked by hand, in order that any pieces
of " band,” or shale, that might have been sent
up with the good coal may not deteriorate the
output as a whole. The machinery used for this
purpose is of a very interesting nature, and fur-
nishes clear testimony as to the great advances
which have been made in the industry of coal-
mining within a comparatively recent period.
The coal is taken from the pit-mouth by a pri-
vate line of railway, worked jointly with another
large colliery on the tonnage basis, to Cockle
Creek, on the main line between Newcastle and
Sydney. The output is hauled by means of three
first-class locomotives of .the most modern type.
In this work over 420 hopper 7-ton waggons, with
a total capacity of over 3000 tons, are employed.
A very great amount of capital is sunk in this
kind of rolling stock, but all large collieries in
the Northern district find it more profitable to
use their own waggons for traction purposes,
rather than be entirely dependent on the State
railways. From Cockle Creek junction the coal-
laden waggons are hauled by the locomotives of
the Railway Department to Carrington Dyke,
Newcastle. Great cranes, driven by hydraulic
power, lift the hopper waggons over the ship’s
hold, and the contents are then allowed to drop,
the cranes lifting and swinging the heavy loads
as if they were feather-weights. The loading is
superintended generally by the Seaham Colliery
Company’s Shipping Manager at Newcastle, when
the coal is sent to that port.
The ventilation of the mine is conducted by
means of a Waddle fan, 30 feet in diameter, by
means of which a current of 150,000 cubic feet of
air per minute, divided into 8 splits, is forced
throughout the airways and workings of the pit.
The ventilating plant is on a hill side away from
the dust of the colliery works. At present there
is a haulage of over a mile from the furthest
heading to the foot of the winding shaft. The
winding engines have a working capacity of 1600
tons per day.
The pit-head frame is on the iron lattice prin-
ciple, one that is exceedingly valuable in reduc-
ing the danger of a fire to a minimum. The
workshops are models of completeness and con-
venience. One shop, in which is installed a
number of drilling machines and other valuable
machinery, being 70 feet by 30 feet. In this con-
nection it should be remembered that only a few
years ago, when the sinking operations were com-
menced, an open space had to be cut out of the
bush.
One very interesting part of the colliery works
is the lamproom, where the safety lamps used
throughout the mine are repaired and kept. Every
appliance for repairing these indispensable adjuncts
to a modern mine is to be found here. The lamps
aie neatly arranged in rows on numbered shelves.
It will be no news to mining experts, but it may to
the general public, that the men, before proceed-
ing down the pit, are given their lamps not only
lighted but locked, and that any miner subjects
himself to a heavy penalty if he should be dis-
covered in the attempt to pick the lock of his
lamp, or in any other way endeavouring to destroy
the protection which the safety lamp provides for
him and every one of his fellow workmen who are
underground.
The drainage of the mine is conducted by means
of pumping engines of the latest type. The loco-
motive sheds, store rooms, etc., are thoroughly ade-
quate for the necessities of the establishment. In
order to supply water to the engines, two large dams
have been constructed. The main travelling road
below ground is H miles long, with branches 500
yards long to rise and dip. The haulage to the pit
bottom is made by means of three self-acting jigs—
one on the east side and two on the west, the full
skips pulling up the empty ones.
The mine manager is Mr. A. Fairley, who has
been in his present position since the Seaham Col-
liery took over the mine. He comes from a place
nigh to Aberdeen, that northern and granitic city
that has sent out thousands of capable, hard-
headed, intelligent and enterprising men to every
part of the world. Mr. Fairley, however, may well
claim to be an old colonist, as he has been a resi-
dent of Australia for over 40 years. During this
long period of service he has had the oversight of
boring and sinking operations in not a few of the
most important collieries of the Newcastle district.
Where difficulties had to be overcome, or dangers
to be faced, Mr. Fairley proved himself a capable
captain. The manager’s house is situated conveni-
ently to the mine.
Cbe Coal Jnbustn?.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches i-eontmued.
THE SEAHAM COLLIERY.


The majority of the miners who work in Seaham
Colliery live in the township of Seahampton, origi-
nally owned by the Company. The men are en-
couraged to obtain the freehold of their allotments,
and about 50 cottages are already built there. The
general air of comfort that strikes a visitor to Sea-
hampton suggests that the miners are able to make
a very satisfactory living from their industrial
relations with the Seaham Company.
Communication between the township and the
City of Newcastle and other parts of the great out-
side world is maintained by a train service run by
the Company. Trips are made twice a day—night
and morning—for five days a week. Saturday is
practically a day off, for not a few of the mining
Notwithstanding the large use of oil in the Pacific
Slope, a considerable amount of coal still finds its
way to the Golden Gate per medium of sailing ves-
sels making the round voyage via Australasia and
San Francisco. The export of Newcastle coal to the
West Coast of South America is also of the utmost
consequence, and the great progress that is being
made in that important and interesting part of the
world has done much to increase the business of the
Seaham Colliery Company. The progress which
the Company has made in an era of great competi-
tion in the local coal trade shows what well-directed
capital, energy, knowledge of the industry, and
first-class selling arrangements, all working in
harmonious combination, can do in the building
up of a great business.
justing the working conditions of the trade. Pirrn,
courteous, and with a pleasing personality, Mr.
Chapman has done much to bring about a closer
relationship between the colliery proprietors and
the representatives of labour, which, owing to the
provisions of the Arbitration Act, is especially
desirable.
During the ten years that Mr. Chapman has been
connected v ith the Seaham Colliery the mine
has been gradually developed, until to-day
the proprietary possesses, in addition to a well-
opened-up seam of the finest coal, one of the
most modern haulage, winding, and transport
plants in New South Wales, and a foreign trade
which absorbs thousands of tons of coal annually.
The very large oversea trade enjoyed by the Sea-
THE SEAHAM COLLIERY COMPANY, LIMITED.
General View of the Mine.
districts, and that being so, three trains are tun
each way on that day.
As 500 men artd boys are employed in and about
the mine, the fortnightly pay-sheet totals some
.£3,500. The money is, to a large extent, expended
locally, many large stores being established at the
adjacent township of West Wallsend, The daily
output of Seaham is at present 1200 tons.
The eagerness which foreign governments display
to extend their political, mercantile and industrial
influence in the Pacific, makes large, supplies of coal
absolutely necessary. To the territories under
the flag of the United States, the Seaham Coal
Company, Limited, as we have above shown, is a
large and increasing shipper. The possibilities of
the Hawaiian Group and the Philippines, as coal-
using centres are very great, and the trade in Sea-
ham coal is not the least striking feature in. the
Commerce between these territories and Australasia.
MR. ISAAC CHAPMAN.
In these days of keen competition and unlimited
facilities for the shipment of coal to all parts of
the civili-ed world, the work which falls upon the
secieiaiy of a laige mining company such as the
Seaham Colliery requires constant watchfulness, a
knowledge of the world’s markets, and keen busi-
ness acumen. Mr. Isaac Chapman, the able secre-
tary of the Seaham Colliery Co., Ltd., whose head-
quarteis aie at 55 Pitt-street, Sydney, is a native
of Ilobait, Tasmania, and has been engaged in
N.S.W. commercial life for the last twenty-four
years, for ten of which he has occupied the respon-
sible position of secretary to the Seaham Colliery
Company. Mr. Chapman, who is held in high
esteem by all engaged in the. coal industry of this
State, figured prominently in the conferences which
have been periodically held for the purpose of ad-
ham Colliery has been mainly secured through
the ability of Mr. Chapman, who, during recent
years, has personally visited all the importaur
coal ports in the old world and America, and
successfully pushed the claims of his Company's
products. The rapid growth of the colliery’s
output affords very ample testimony to the wis-
dom of the directorate in despatching such an
able representative. In addition to his many
duties in connection with the Seaham Colliery,
Mr. Chapman is also Secretary to the War-
atah and Abermain Collieries, the latter having
been but lately opened up, a promising seam in
the West Maitland distinct.
It is to such men as the subject of this sketch
that the present prosperity of Newcastle and its
environs has been built up, as by their foresight,
enterprise, and indomitable eneigy the coal re-
sources of New South Wales have found ah out-
let in the markets of the oversea nations.


The Southern Coal Owners’
Agency.
It will be generally admitted that individual, in-
itiative, and continuous action has done wonders
in the development of industries in new countries.
In the British temperament there is a stiong ten-
dency not only to strike out into new paths, but
to continue in them as long as possible when the
conditions are favourable to personal welfare.
Leaders are everywhere looked for, and their in-
fluence on their fellow men is universally felt and
acknowledged. The colliery industry in New South
Wales would never have attained its present posi-
tion, but for the researches and action of the cap-
tains of that vast enterprise. Every new discovery
made by them at their own expense increased the
sum of human knowledge, and the community was
made richer by their efforts' and researches—in
many cases commercially unprofitable—of the pio-
neers of that great industry. Nevertheless the time
often arrives when the interests of individuals ate
best served by common action on well understood
and well defined lines. The Southern coal trade
MR. C. J. BYRNES, J.P.,
Vice Chairman.
arrived at that stage some little time back, and the
probability is that the future will see a continuance
therein. Federation, even in coal mining, is in the
air, and the valuable fuel upon which the industrial
and commercial fabric.of the world so largely rests
is too costly a product to have its value lowered by
action which could be prevented by the adoption of
thoughtful and prudent measures well within the
reach of shrewd business men.
The Southern Coal Owners’ Agency was estab-
lished on March 1, 1893. It was formed to act as a
felling agency for the following companies, viz.:
Mount Kembla Coal and Oil Company, Ltd., owners
of'the Mount Kembla Colliery; Mount Pleasant
Coal and Iron Company, Limited, owners of the
Mount Pleasant Colliery; Metropolitan Coal Com-
pany of Sydney, Ltd.; owners of the Metropolitan
Colliery, and B. Vickery and Sons, Limited, owners
THE HON. EBENEZER VICKERY, M.L.C.,
Chairman.
of the Osborne Wallsend and Coalcliff Collieries.
The Southern Coal Owners’ Agency are also sole
agents for the South Clifton Colliery, which is
owned by Saywell’s Collieries, Limited, and are
also the lessees of Austinmer and Bulli Pass Col-
lieries.
The Directorate of the Agency consists of one re-
presentative from each of the following five col-
lieries, viz.; Mount Kembla, Mount Pleasant,
Osborne Wallsend, Coalcliff and Metropolitan.
The chairman of the agency is the Hon.
Ebenezer Vickery, M.L.C., who is the largest
colliery proprietor in the Southern District,
and has had the longest experience in regard to
the working of that highly important and valuable
field. Mr. Vickery is also well known throughout
New South Wales as a leader foremost in many
enterprises, having for their object the development
and well-being of this State. There is hardly an
organisation founded for the welfare of the com-
munity that Mr. Vickery is not interested in, either
as an office-bearer or otherwise. Mr. C. J. Byrnes,
J.P., the Vice-Chairman, has been connected with
Mount Pleasant for many years as Managing Direc-
tor. Mr. Byrnes is also President of the Southern
Colliery Proprietors Employers’ Association. In
public life he has won the esteem of a wide circle
of supporters. For six years Mr. Byrnes repre-
sented the Parramatta electorate in Parliament.
For 23 years he was an Alderman of that
district, for sixteen of which he occupied
the honourable position of Mayor. Mr. Byrnes,
who has been a Magistrate of the terri-
tory for the last 37 years, is also a mem-
ber of the Licensing Court of Parramatta. Sir Wil-
liam McMillan, K.C.M.G., Chairman of the Sydney
Directorate of the Metropolitan Coal Company, is
also a Director, and is able to largely influence
business by reason of the existence of his multi-
farious commercial and industrial connections. Mr.
James Robertson represents the Metropolitan Coal
Company’s interests on the board when Sir William
McMillan is absent from Sydney.
Mount Kembla Coal Company, of which the Hon.
Ebenezer Vickery is Chairman, is represented on
the agency by Mr. Joseph Vickery. These gentle-
men, with Dr. James R. M. Robertson, form the
Australian Committee of the Mount Kembla Com-
pany. Mr. G. B. Vickery represents the Osborne
Wallsend Colliery on the Agency’s Board.
The Manager is Mr. W. A. Firth, and it is only
a plain and matter of fact truth to say that the
success of the Agency since its inception is largely
due to his energy, ability, and keen attention to the
interests of those he represents.
MINES REPRESENTED BY THE AGENCY.
THE MOUNT KEMBLA , COMPANY. —This
Company’s mine is regarded aS the most southern
MR. W. A. FIRTH, J.P.,
Manager.
of the Illawarra group of collieries. It is a very
large and important enterprise, and has occupied
an important position in the industrial develop-
ment of New' South Wales. The output is equal to
1100 tons a day. During 1901 the Mount Kembla
Company employed 253 hands underground and 87
above ground, for a total output of 261,350 tons.
The coal is shipped at Port Kembla at the Com-
pany’s own jetty, and steamers up to 3000 tons can
load there in absolute safety in any weather. Fur-
ther, great improvements are in course of being
made at Port Kembla, and these, when completed,
will make the port the great entrepot for the
Southern coal trade, For many years much of the
Zb e Coal !Jnbiisti’£.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches: continued,
THE SOUTHERN COAL TRADE.


coal obtained from the Southern collieries was
transhipped at Sydney, but with the continuous im-
provement at Port Kembla, the necessity for tran-
shipment or lightering at Port Jackson is gradu-
ally being removed, as the largest ocean-going
steamers can be loaded in very little time at Port
MOUNT PLEASANT COAL AND IRON COM-
PANY, LIMITED.—The colliery property of this
Company is located at Wollongong. The output of
the mine is 500 tons per day. The colliery is equip-
ped witli every appliance for economical working.
The coal is shipped at Wollongong and brought to
bring the coal out of the pit, and the other to haul
the skips from the pit mouth to the screens, about
1J miles distant. The latter pair of engines were
designed by Mr. Selwyn Ryrnes, the resident engi-
neer of the Company, and manufactured by Mort’s
Dock and Engineering Company, Balmain, Each
THE SOUTHERN COAL OWNERS’ AGENCY.
1. Pit Head, Mount Pleasant Colliery. 2. Engines working the Ventilating Pan, Mount Pleasant Colliery. 3. Bird’s-eye view, Mount Kembla Colliery.
4. H.M.S. “ Orlando” coaling at Pyrmont Cranes, Darling Harbour, with Metropolitan Coal. 5. Mount Kembla Colliery.—Jetty at Port Kembla.
Kembla. The coal from the Mount Kembla Mine
carries well, and is a very fine steaming coal. The
mine has had a long life, having been opened since
about 1882, but it has yet vast supplies of coal to
draw upon, and seams are still available which a?
yet have been practically untouched,
Sydney in steam colliers. In the year 1901 the Com-
pany employed 151 men and boys underground and
44 above giound, for a total output of 122,530 tons.
At the mine there are two winding engines, the
one manufactured by Messrs. Tangye and Co., to
of the cylinders is 20 in. diameter, with a stroke of
45 in., and the total horse power being equal to
hauling 500 tons. An electric pump was erected
about two years ago for the purpose of draining the
mine. This pump is a Quinty No. 4, with a speed
of 1200 revolutions per minute, and capable of do


liveiing 120 gallons per minute to a height of 122 ft.
The driving power is obtained from an 8j in. x j in.
Westinghouse automatic engine of 30 h.p.
The ventilating plant consists of a Walker’s patent
indestructible ventilating fan, 12 ft. diameter, fitted
with anti-vibration shutter, and drawn by dupli-
cate single high-pressure engines by the same
makers.
THE OSBORNE WALLSEND MlNE.—This col-
liery is situated at Wollongong. It is equal to an
output of 650 tons per day. In 1901 the mine gave
'employment to 202 men and boys underground and
56 above ground, for an annual output of 145,593
tons. Steam colliers convey the product of the
mine to Sydney.
THE METROPOLITAN COAL COMPANY OF
SYDNEY, LIMITED.—The colliery which this
Company operates is the most northern of the Illa-
warra group The vast extent of carboniferous
country belonging to the Company, extends from
Helensburgh, 28 miles from the metropolis, to
Heathcote, 12 miles nearer Sydney. The area is no
less than 21,300 acres. When the proprietary com-
menced operations much boring had to be resorted
to, as the Southern seams, which are worked in
many places by adits near Wollongong, dip con-
siderably in a northerly direction. The boring
operations at Camp Creek in 1834 disclosed a seam
of coal 12 feet 3 inches in thickness, at a depth of
846 feet from the surface. Two years later a bore
put down near Waterfall Station demonstrated the
existence of that seam at a depth of 1513 feet. The
bore being further proceeded with, another seam,
6 feet 1 inch in thickness, was found at 1577 feet.
The work of sinking a shaft at Camp Creek was
then begun. In 1887, Sir William McMillan, the
Chairman of the Sydney Board of Directors, pro-
ceeded to London, and was successful in floating a
Company with an authorised capital of .£300,000.
The work of developing the mine was then pro-
ceeded with in vigorous fashion. Much had to be
done, including the construction of a branch line
to connect the mine with the Sydney to Illawarra
line. The difficulties to be overcome were many, but
they were at last successfully overcome, and the
Company is now in a very strong position. With a
property extending 12 miles in one direction and 7
miles in another, and having an ocean frontage of
one mile, the face will not be disputed that the
Metropolitan Coal Company of Sydney, Limited, is
one of the notable enterprises of this State. Two
thousand acres comprise the present working area.
The most modern appliances are in use in the mine,
the management is of the strictest character, and
much care is exercised in order to reduce the risks
incidental to coal-mining, to a minimum. From
the estimated quantity of coal in the seams there
are centuries of working life before the mine.
The output is 1200 tons per diem. The major por-
tion of the- output is used by the New South Wales
Government on its railways, the Metropolitan Coal
Company holding a contract for the supply of
175,000 tons of large coal per annum. In 1901 the
Company employed 330 men and boys underground
and 85 above ground, being a total of 465 hands, for
an output of 287,036 tons. Mr. D. A. W. Robertson
is the General Manager of the Company.
THE COALCLIFF COLLIERY is capable of sup-
plying 200 tons of coal per day. The product of the
mine is taken from the Company’s private jetty.
Owing to various reasons the output in 1901 was
unavoidably reduced to 10,434 tons.
THE SOUTH CLIFTON COLLIERY in 1901 em-
ployed 141 men and boys underground and 27 above
ground, being a total of 168 employees for an annual
output of 79,191 tons.
THE AGENCY’S PRODUCT.
The product obtained from the above-men-
tioned group of mines is essentially a steam
coal, and for that purpose is considered one
of the best in Australia. It bears carriage well, and
has never been known to fire in the ship’s hold. The
seams range from 6 feet to 10 feet, have a good roof.
vary little in character, and are remarkably free
ftom "faults” and "jumps.”
All the mines are worked from "adits,” with the
exception of the South Clifton and Metropolitan,
which are worked by shafts. The trade of the mines
connected with the Agency is equal to three-quar-
ters of a million tons per annum.
Mr. E. F. Pittman, A.R.S.M., Government
Geologist and Under Secretary for Mines,
N.S. Wales, in his excellent and very infor-
mative work, “ The Mineral Resources of New
South Wales,” gives as a result of 21 analyses of
coal in different parts of the Southern District em-
braced by the operations of the Southern Coal
Owners’ Agency, the following average.—Water, .97;
volatile hydrocarbons, 23.10; fixed carbon, 65.26;
ash, 10.67; total, 100. The trace of sulphur present
was represented by the trifling formula of .462.
The Companies who form the Southern. Coal
Owners’ Agency are also the owners of the follow-
ing steam colliers, which are replete with every re-
quisite for the quick loading and discharge of coal,
viz. Mount Kembla, 700 tons; Palmerston, 500
tons; Kurrara, 430 tons; Heiga, 250 tons. They
also have two hulks, one of 1400 tons and one of 500
tons. Of late years the question of the supply of
coke has been of considerable importance through-
out the Australasian colonies. Practically the
whole of the small coal of the Southern District
mines associated with the Southern Coal Owners’
Agency, with the exception of that obtained from
the Metropolitan Mine, which is used by the Rail-
way Commissioners of New South Wales in connec-
tion with the tramway services, is made into coke,
large contracts for the supply of “ small” having
been made with the Mount Lyell Mining and Rail-
way Company of Tasmania, whose coke works are at
Mount Kembla, The Federal Coke Works at the
Osborne Walls'end Mine, and Messrs. Figtree and
Sons at the Mount Pleasant Mine. The output of
coke for 1901 for the mines of the Illawarra Dis-
trict was 92,943 tons. The output for the previous
year was 76,839 tons. During 1902 this output has
been greatly increased beyond the figures for 1901.
BUSINESS FACILITIES OF THE AGENCY.
From the particulars already given it will be
readily seen that, in Consequence of the laige out-
put from the mines controlled by the Southern
Coal Owners’ Agency, and the unrivalled plant,
shipping facilities and wharfage accommodation,
that the mines possess, large quantities of coal can
be shipped at very short notice. An excellent in-
stance of the great resources at the command of
the Agency is furnished by the fact that in May,
1900, they supplied four troopships with about
14,000 tons of coal in nine days, besides maintain-
ing their contract supplies of coal to H.M.S. Royal
Arthur, the big mail steamers, and thei Government
railways.
The Southern Coal - Owners’ Agency are contrac-
tors for the Royal Navy at all Australian ports. In
addition to this the Admiralty have recently secured
three shipments of coal for Ceylon and one for
Hongkong for trial purposes, with a view to taking
a large quantity of Southern District coal from the
Agency. The well-known high quality of this coal
for steaming purposes, its moderate price, and the
splendid facilities for loading possessed by the
Agency, are features which should command the
attention of all who are concerned in oversea trade.
The following firms and companies are supplied
by thei Agency, viz.; P. and O. S.N. Co., Ltd., Mes-
sageries Maritimes, Shire Line, Gulf Line, Greenock
S.S. Co., Ltd., Eastern and Australian Co., Ltd.,
China Navigation Co., Ltd., Anglo-Australian S.S.
Co., Ltd., W. Milburu and Co., the New South
Wales Government Railways, Colonial Sugar Refiu
ing Company, Ltd. (at their Sydney, Melbourne
Adelaide, Northern Rivers, and New Zealand
works), Huddait, Parker Proprietary, Ltd., J.
Paterson and Co. (Victoria), the Melbourne S. Co.,
Ltd. (Victoria). They also supply numerous brick
works and refineries throughout New South Wales.
The British agents of the Southern Coal Owners’
Agency are Messrs. Cheney, Eggar, and Forrester,
of London, who are amongst the largest coal agents
in Great Britain. Represented a» *■’• are so well in
every part of Australasia, and also in the heart and
centre of the commercial life of the Empire, the
Southern Coal Owneis’ Agency have splendid facili-
ties for supplying coal on this side of the globe;
and the success already achieved in this direction
is a clear indication of the much larger results
which will certainly be attained by them in the
near future.
MR. W. A. FIRTH, J.P.
The identification of successful men with the
growth of prosperous business concerns is one of
the prominent features of commercial life every-
where. The career of Mr. W. A. Firth, J.P., is but
one addition to the many instances where the pro-
gress of the individual is justly and happily com-
bined with the prosperity of the business with which
he is identified. As Manager to the Southern Coal
Owners’ Agency, Mr. Firth has found a vocation
much in keeping with his life experience, as for the
last twenty years he has been actively engaged in
the very centre of the Southern coal mining inte-
rests.
Mr. W. A. Firth came to Sydney as a mere youth.
The year 1883 was the date of his first entry into
business life in the office of Mr. E. T. Beilby. In
the following year he joined the Mount Kembla
Coal Company, and, although a very young man
for such a responsible position, was appointed Secre-
tary within five years of his joining the staff. Mr.
Firth continued to hold the office of Secretary to
the Mount Kembla Company until the Ist March,
1893, with such credit to himself and satisfaction to
his principals, that he was soon recognised as a
clever and painstaking officer. About this period
the conditions of the Southern trade demanded a
radical change in the administration of all affairs
connected therewith, and it was decided by the
Southern coal owners that a certain measure of
federation was requisite in the interests of all con-
cerned. Consequently on the Ist March, 1893, the
Southern Coal Owners’ Agehcy came into being.
It was felt that the best person to preside over the
destinies of such an association, in the chief execu-
tive position, was a gentleman who had been iden-
tified with the Southern coal trade for a consider-
able time, and who was as thoroughly acquainted
with its history, peculiarities and working. Mr.
Firth’s special qualifications had long been recog-
nised, and he was unanimously elected Manager of
the Southern Coal Owners’ Agency—the position he
still most creditably holds, and in which he has
worked up the Company’s business to its present
great dimensions.
During his term of office, in addition to his many
official duties, Mr. Firth has successfully acted on
behalf of all the Southern Collieries in arbitration
cases, conferences, and other meetings relative to
labour matters. As is well known, the ability to
conduct such business with success is synonymous
with a thorough acquaintance with every technical
and practical point which may be brought forwatd.
Neither is there usually much time for consulta-
tion or consideration. Everything, as a rule, has to
be done promptly, and on the spot, necessitating
much experience, an excellent memory, and
rapidity in execution. The progress made by the
Agency under the able management of Mr. W. A.
Firth has been of a solid character, and stamps
him as a most capable man, possessing in a con-
siderable degree the power of organisation and exe-
cutive ability.
In his leisure hours Mr. Firth takes great inte-
rest in athletics, being a firm believer in the good
to be derived from healthful recreation, and was
recently honoured by being elected a Vice-Presi-
dent of the New South Wales Cricket Association.
Mr. Firth’s popularity, prominence in the com-
mercial life of N.S.W., and grasp of the principles
of legal lore, marked him out as a gentleman well
qualified for appointment to the honorary magis-
tracy. Ilis gazetting to the Commission of the
Peace was the occasion of many congratulations
from his large circle of friends.
It may be further said that in the general busi-
ness circles of Sydney, outside as well as inside of
colliery interests, Mr. W. A. Firth is deservedly
respected and highly popular.


Exports.


1901.
1902.
Butter • ...
440,019
14° ,625
Coal
...'
1,681,8*21
1,025,380
Copper ...
- 415,962
295,592
Flour
.
255.485
193.559
Gold-Coin
3,6.0,860
3,108,525
., Uncoined
512.223
515,297
Horns ...
...
2*,*93
21,845
Hoofs ...
...
• 830
G72
Hides ...
...
227,271
251,378
Leather ...
. .
392,578
197,936
Live Stock
. .
1,320,214
1,279,362
Meats ...
.
714,170
625,175
Produc e ...
258,182
425,937
Silver and Silver Lead Bullion ...
],8fi6,R73
1,452,186
Skins
533,138
917,313
Sagar ...
Tallow ...
...
185,'72
143,921
413,318
210,711
Tin
...
150,030
146,223
Wheat ...
...
787,.793
563,696
Wool ...
9,167,251 1
7,681,421
1901.
1902.
Increase or
Decrease.
Wool
Pastoral Produce*
Butter
Wheat and Flour ...
Metals and Ores ..
Gold
Other Merchandise
9,167,264
3,*20,890
449,0(30
1,043 078
2,bo3,880
4,143,o83
0,023,279
7,081,421
3.804 455
149,625
73i>,255
1,894,001
3,023,820
5,G',0,474
Dec. 1,785,833
Inc. 243,505 ’
Dec. 3C0,n3r>
Dee. 312,823
Dec. 709,879
Dec. 519,203
Dec. 422,805
Totils
27,351,124
23,544,051
Dec. 3,81-7,073
•Meats, live stock, leather, hides, slins, horns,
hoofs ami tallow.
Description.
Superior.
Good.
Medium.
Inferior ,
d. d.
d.
a.
d.
d.
d.
d.
G. Merino fleece
9 to 12*
8
to 81
0} to 72
to 65
i. ,, pieces ..
V „
6J
7i
5}
. 65-
„ 5*
,, ,, bellies ..
6|„ 7}
rji.
„ 61
U
, OJ
3
-1
.. ,, locks
3} „ V,
3
3}
of
o»
1
„ 2
G. line crossbred
sk „ y?
6}
,, 8
5
. (ii
3 5
„ n
G. coji'so crossbred..
■il „ &
34
„ 4
0-1
, 3
2
„ 2i
Scoured merino fleece
17 „ 19J
15
„ 16}
i»i
, 15
n?
.. r 3-i
,, ,, pieces
15 „ 16 i
13
„ 14*
11*
» 12|
10
JH
,, ,, bellies
U ., 16*
12
„ 13*
9*
,m
7*
94
.. 63
,, ,, locks
10 „ 115
8}
„ »}
7
, 8}
4J
The Export Trade of N.S.W.
To 31st December,
- 1902.
A General Review.
Statistics, showing:
Individual Shippers, Shipments,
and Destinations, from July Ist,
1901, to 31st December, 1902.
"Jf S the exports of a country are essentially
one of the most important items of its
commerce, and inasmuch as, considered
relatively, they form a true basis on which to
gauge the value of its trade operations, commer-
cial standing, and future prospects, it must be
obvious that a mere general review of the
situation is not in itself sufficient. Such an
important matter, as far as New South Wales
is concerned, is really the foundation of our
progress and development, and must be dealt
with in a broad, comprehensive and complete
manner. In this respect many points have to
be taken into consideration, if a work such as
the “ New South Wales Review” is to achieve
the object for which it is published, i.e : —The
extending of our trade relations witn all
parts of the world. Primarily, it is necessary
to show at a glance —for the benefit of other
countries who may be desirous of importing
such articles —the extent of our output of food
stuffs, wool, coal, timber, etc., together with
the annual relative exports in connection with
each individual item; likewise, a list of the
firms directly engaged in the trade, so as to
demonstrate the possibility of opening up
further fields for developing commerce with
the Southern land. This is necessary as re-
gards the other side of the world, while, from
our point of view, the trade here is corre-
spondingly stimulated by the bringing into
prominence of our operations from year to
year, together with an enumeration of the
various products and quantities shipped away,
and the parts of the world to which they
are consigned. In this way an incentive is
given for a proper consideration of what it
might be possible to do by a display of greater
energy in the matter of introducing our pro-
ducts to the world’s markets. Bearing this in
mind, no trouble or expense has been spared
in the compilation of the following exhaustive
statistics, which, covering as they do, a period
of eighteen months, and occupying twenty-
eight pages, will, it is hoped, convey to the
thoughful man, a comprehensive idea of our
resources in every direction.
The exports of New South Wales for the
year 1902 fell off even more than did the im-
ports, and the drought seriously affected the
output of all the State’s principal lines. New
South Wales being essentially a pastoral
country, it is evident that her exports would
be most influenced by the seasons, and the
disastrous dryness of 1902 is reflected in each
of the items under this heading. Indeed, the
only increase—that of skins and hides—is
but another instance how the drought
wrought havoc among the flocks and herds.
The increase is, of course, due to the effort
made by pastoralists to make what money
they could out of their stock. Instead of al-
lowing them to die on the run, they hurried
them off to the meat works or elsewhere, sold
them for what they would bring, and thus
avoided the dead loss they would otherwise
have suffered. The exports of frozen moat,
butter, and tallow practically ceased towards
the end of the year, while, instead of export-
ing wheat and flour, New South Wales was
compelled to import the equivalent of eight
to nine million bushels. Indeed, from every
point of view,' the drought was the one pre-
dominant influence in the external trade of
New South Wales during 1902. The total
value of exports for 1902 was £23,544,051, as
against £27,351,124, a decrease of £3,807,073.
The value of the principal items, in compari-
son with the figures for 1901, were;—
Summarised, these figures give the following
totals:—
WOOL.
As the leading export line of New South
Wales, wool naturally demands primary con-
sideration in any analysis of the figures for
the year. The past year, unfortunatelv for
all concerned, saw a very considerable shrink-
age in the export of wool, owing to the
drought which raged over nearly the whole
of the pastoral area. For the twelve months
ending December 31st, 1902, there was a de-
crease of 89,992,443 lbs. in the quantity ex-
ported as compared with the year 1901, the
corresponding decrease in value amounting to
£1,785,833. An exjilanation of this discrep-
ancy is abundantly afforded by the reflection
that in 1891 Now South Wales could muster
approximately sixty-two million sheep, where
as, in 1902, only eleven years later, she could
not number more than a little over twenty-
six million head. In 1902 the quantity of.
wool exported from New South Wales am-
ounted to 195,184,062 lbs., valued at
£7,681,421, by far the greater portion of
which was despatched from Sydney. A con-
siderable quantity was also exported from
Newcastle, and a fairly large proportion of
the wool produced in this State following the
geographical lines of least resistance, finds an
outlet to the seaboard through the avenues
leading to Melbourne and Adelaide. It is,
however, estimated that the shortage for the
next six months will not bo so great in pro-
portion as it was in the past period, although
it is certain that a heavy decrease will have
to be recorded. The light clip had its nat-
ural corollary in improved prices on the local
and London market, the year closing strong
with an upward tendency. The following
comnarison of prices is useful in this regard.
The opening rates wore; —


Description,
Superior.
Good,
Medium.
Inferior.
M.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
G. fleece
1U
toU
0}
to U }
Si to
9.J
5
to 8
,, pieces
10
„ U\
8}
„ 9}
7.1 „
«4
4
7
,, la-> bs
9
„ 11
7 ■*
s?-
0 „
7 A
4
„ 5*r
„ bellies
8
„ 9}
0}
„ 7}
51 „
4
” 5J
,, locks
4}
,, 5
,, 4
2? „
u
„ S»i
,, crossbred
iojv
„ 12
9
,,10}
8»
0
ri
„ coarse crossbred
5”
„ 6
4
„ H
;5 ,,
SI
„ 3
Scorned fleece
204
22i
19
„ 20
it* M
18|
14
16J
,, pieces
19
„ -1
10
..
14
15}
111
,, 13 J
„ oellies
17
„ 18}
15
„ 16^
12 „
ui
9*
,, 11}
,, leeks
12
„ us
10
„ 11}
84
9*
,, 8‘
1901.
3902.
Di is’ou.
Ewes
Lambing.
Iambs
Marked-
Ewes
Lambing.
Lambs
Marked.
The Oast
The Table Land ...
The Western Slope
The Biverma
The Western Plains
104,927
4,862.03C
6,565,808
2,534,473
3,217,427
G4,55C
3,177,509
4,118,575
1,719,397
1,377,659
56,995
3,028,313
3,015,608
1,732,727
2,202,008
23,800
1.008,580
809,844
030,322
300,742
Total N.S.W-...
17,281.605
10,457,090
10,095,711
2,899,288
mr.
1902.
Hides. Ox, per lb
4\d,
4 ! ;d.
Leather, sides, per lb. ...
10-‘d.
lid.
Tallow, mutton, per ton
£32
£33
Tallow, beef, per ton
£31
£32,
1901.
Cwt,
Value.
Silver-lead O'es—
Crude?, etc.
Conceutratea
Slimes
Z*nt s
r Copper
Tin
• q Gold
2,005,940
. 6,270,600
759 660
5,280
11,680
148
4,100 oz.
£273,496
1,270,380
30,360
396
4,487
194
16,784
£1,596,097
1902.
CiVt.
Value.
Silver*Lead Ores—
Crudes, etc
Co- centrates
Slimes
Zincs
Copper
Tin
Gold
1,723,780
4,631,180
979,080
5.662
3.27J
425
3,621$ oz.
£112,847
912,495
30,121
289
1,073
922
14,490
£1,072,237
The closing quotations were:—
The Sydney wool market opened in Janu-
ary at advanced rates, which were maintained
throughout. Good merinos were eagerly
sought after at the top price of the season.
The first London wool sales of 1903 reflected
this improvement, showing an advance on the
December rates of 5 per cent, for merino and
fine crossbreds, and 7i to 10 per cent, for me-
dium and coarse crossbreds. The prospects
of the continuance, and even of the increase
of those rates is favourable, owing to the scar-
city of wool present and prospective, and the
rising demand for the product in manufac-
turing circles.
FROZEN AND PRESERVED MEATS.
The effects of the drought are vividly illus-
trated in the branch of the export trade re-
lating to frozen and preserved meats, the re-
turns from which show a marked shrinkage.
During 1901 no less than 13,376,176 lbs. of
preserved meat, valued at £280,908, left the
State, while in 1902 the export fell to
11,274,201 lbs., valued at £251,492, being a
contraction of 2,104,975 lbs. of the value of
£29,416. The Bacon and Ham industry suf-
fered to a much greater extent, the exports,
which in 1901 amounted to 601,904
lbs., valued at £18,038, being dimin-
ished in 1902 to 242,706 lbs., valued at
£8,697, a reduction of 359,198 lbs. of the
value of £9341. Frozen beef and mutton
had a similar tale to toll. In 1902 there was
a decrease of 87,848 cwt. of frozen beef, val-
ued at £11,323 on the previous year’s ex-
port, the following being the figures: 1902,
27,202 cwt., valued at £47,817; and 1901,
115,050 cwt., valued at £159,140. The des-
patch of frozen mutton fell from 395,098 cwt.,
valued at £419,783 in 1901, to 205,148 cwt.,
of the value of £240,145, in the following
year, a decrease of 189,950 cwt., equal to
£179,638. This restriction is likely to con-
tinue, and the record of, the recent stock
sales indicate that store sheep are being ex-
tensively bought up for restocking purposes,
and this will of course largely curtail the
number available for the freezing works. The
percentage of lambs marked is very low, be-
ing about 201 per cent., as compared with
60| per cent, in 1901.
The following table shows the result of the
lambing for the seasons 1901 and 1902:
BUTTER..
During 1902 the export of butter' was
greatly curtailed owing to the continued dry-
ness of the seasons, and only 2,939,086 lbs.,
valued at £149,625, left the State, as com-
pared with 10,352,816 lbs., valued at
.£•149,640, in 1901. Most of the export took
place at the beginning of the year. A total
It is doubtful whether New South Wales,
even with a good season, will be able to do
much more than supply local requirements
during 1903. The local consumption of
sheep and lambs in New South Wales am-
ounts to about 3,000,000, while losses even in
good seasons account for another 2,000,000,
so that at least 5,000,000 sheep and lambs re-
present our local requirements, leaving on
present figures a dangerously small margin
for export. Flocks and herds have been so
decimated that pastoralists, as soon as the
drought has definitely broken, will hold on
to their remainders for the purpose of re-
stocking. and will certainly not be inclined to
deal with meat works any more than is ab-
solutely necessary. Average London prices
at the close of the year, compared with De-
cember, 1901, may bo quoted as follows:
Mutton, 1901, per lb., 2j-d.; 1902, none; Beef,
hinds, per lb., 1901, 3d.; 1902, 41d. There
is, however, a reverse side to this picture, as
the statistics show that frozen poultry, game
and rabbits all had a gratifying increase in
export. In 1901 the revenue of frozen poul-
try sent away amounted to £14,617, while
that for the following year totalled £23,964,
a gain of £9347. The export of game and
rabbits respectively showed a gain of £BB9l
and £5910, roughly about one hundred per
cent, in each case.
OTHER PASTORAL PRODUCE.
The export of tallow towards the latter
part of 1902 may be said to have practically
ceased, as, out of a total of 19,479 casks de-
spatched from Sydney (as compared with
with 42,988 casks in 1901), the first half of
the year was represented by 17,730 casks, and
the second half by only 1749 casks. The
year’s transactions in this line witnessed a
very considerable drop, as the total quantity
imported from New South Wales during
1902 was only 171,766 cwt., as compared with
355,198 cwt. in the previous year. The
export of hides and skins exhibited a
very considerable increase on the figures
for 1901, a fact which is eloquent of
the losses sustained by stock owners,
who, in a great many instances, ow-
ing to want of feed, were compelled to slaugh-,
tor their animals for their pelts. The
monthly despatch of skins varied very little
throughout the year. Horns also showed an
increase for the year, due to the drought,
while leather exceeded the export for 1901,
with a corresponding increase in value am-
ounting to £105,358, shipping remaining
steady throughout. The average London
prices at the close of December in the year
1901 and 1902 were as under: —
of 5475 boxes was shipped from Sydney in
January, and 7445 boxes in February. From
May to the end of September only 1272
boxes were shipped, and in June quotations
on the London market were nominal. For
the last three months of the year, the output
improved somewhat, though the monthly
shipments remained far below the figures for
the beginning of the year. London prices at
the end of the year stood at £5 11s. per cwt.,
an advance of 6s. on the quotations in De-
cember 1901.
WHEAT AND FLOUR.
Mention has already been made of the state
of the breadstuffs market in 1902, under the
section dealing with the importing and dis-
tributing trade. The early part of the year
saw much activity in exporting wheat under
the mistaken assumption that there would be
a large surplus available, but later on a radi-
cal alteration in operations took place, and
when the failure of the New South Wales
harvest was assured, an import basis was es-
tablished, and still exists. Export values of
wheat for the year amounted to £563,696, as
against £787,593 for 1901, while the figures
for flour were £193,559 and £255,485 respec-
tively. In December, 1901, New South
Wales wheat averaged £1 10s. 3d. per quar-
ter in London, and in December, 1902, the
commodity was not listed in the quotations.
METALS, ORES, Etc.
In addition to the drought, which seriously
hampered mining operations throughout the
State, the lower prices operating in the metal
markets had a detrimental effect on the min-
ing industry of New South Wales during
1902. Broken Hill, besides an insufficient
water supply, had to combat a fall in values,
and the export of silver and silver lead bul-
lion from New South Wales fell off consider-
ably, the values for 1901 and 1902 respec-
tively being £1,866,873 and £1,452,186.
This amount is mainly represented by the
output from the Barrier, the export from
which may be made up as follows:
A satisfactory feature of the year’s work
was the steadily increasing efficiency of. mag-


Highest.
Lowest.
Average
1893
3 2i
2 6‘
2 11J
1894
2 72
2 3
2 4J ■
1895
... 2 72
2 31
2 51
1896
... 2 73
O r.3.
~ .J 4
2 63
1897
2 5.}
1 111
2 31
1898
o 43
... ~ -+ 8
2 1
2 3
1899
2 5
2 53
2 3.V
1900
2 61
2 3
2 41
1901
2 51
2 0'
2 31
1902
2 2
1 9 11
-16 1 113
Per ton.
January
JE10 11 4
February
11 12 3£
March
11 10 0 13-16
April
11 11 01
May
11 10 10J
.Tunc
11 5 51
July
11 4 8 1-16
August
11 2 4i
September
10 17 8J
October
10 14 11
November
10 14 3J
December
1015 0
netic separation in the treatment of low-grade
zinc, and lead sulphides at Broken Hill. Sil-
ver, during 1902, experienced another fall in
value, and plumbed a lower level than had
previously been recorded. The London
prices, highest, lowest and average, for the
past ten years have been :
The lead market, likewise, cannot be said
to have improved during the year. A slight
As part compensation, however, for this de-
crease in output, a rise of £4 per ton on the
London market was the result of the year’s
operations, prices advancing from £4B per
ton in December, 1901, to £52 per ton in De-
cember, 1902, with a further rise to £54 mid-
way through the year. Nevertheless, present
prices in the face of the fall of £24 15s. per
ton in the 1901 values must still be considered
low.
Tin showed marked improvement during
the year in price. The London market
opened with quotations at £lO6 ss. per ton,
and, during the early months, a rise set in,
so that in June the average per ton was as
high as £137. Thereafter a drop was listed,
but the market eventually closed strong at
£l2O 10s.
pines, and this despite the oft-repeated asser-
tions that Japanese cheaply-mined coal would
oust New South Wales coal from Asiatic ter-
ritory.
COKE.
The manufacture of coke, which is carried
on principally in the Illawarra district, has
made great strides during recent years. The
majority of the ovens are located round
about Bulli and Port Kembla, and the pro-
portions to which the coke-roasting industry
has grown entitles the Illawarra district to
proclaim itself the home of this particular
trade in Australasia. The remarkable ex-
pansion of the business will be adequately
realised when a comparison is instituted be-
tween the output for the years 1896 and
1902. In the first-named period the produc-
HAULING TIMBER FOR EXPORT.
revival took place, though the value per toil
is still £5 10s. below the quotation two years
ago. Prices monthly on the London market
were:—
Copper mining was also a heavy sufferer
from the drought, and the two principal
mines—Cobar and Baraga—were compelled
to close down from scarcity of water. Dur-
ing 1902 the export of copper from the State
declined in value from £448,889 to £295,592.
COAL.
The export of coal from the State during
1902 showed a slight falling off as compared
with 1901. During the latter year there
were 3,470,985 tons, valued at £1,681,824,
sent away, as compared with 3,261,459 tons,
valued at £1,625,380, shipped in 1902, being
a shrinkage of 209,526 tons, of the value of
£56,444. It should, however, dc borne in
mind in this connection that 1900 and 1901
were phenomenal years for the coal industry,
owing chiefly to the South African and the
Chinese wars. In comparison with the ex-
port of normal years that for 1902 shows a
steady and substantial increase in oversea
shipments, but a decrease is shown in the in-
terstate trade, owing chiefly to the opening
up of carboniferous areas in.the other States.
A pleasing feature of the year’s operations
has been the development and expansion of
the trade with the far East, and the Philli-
tion amounted to 15,953 tons, while in the
latter it reached 105,308 tons, valued at
£75,249.
GOLD.
The export of gold (coined and uncoined)
during 1902, showed a decrease on the figures
for the previous year, the amounts for coined
gold being: 1901, £3,630,860; 1902,
£3,108,525, but the value of the un-
coined gold despatched in 1902 consid-
erably exceeded that of 1901, the
values being respectively £515,297 and
£512,223. The gold yield of the State for
1902 was above, that of 1901, and with ma-
terially reduced exports of merchandise it
might have been expected that the gold ship-
ments would have increased. The heavy oor-
rowing of the State Government, however,
must be considered to have materially check-
ed the gold shipments, as large payments have
been made from Great Britain to New South
Wales. ' - '


At Sydney.
1900-1901.
1901-1902.
By rail
408.817
494,761
By sea
70,164
44,066
Imported
28,993
28,973
Total at
Sydney ... 507,974
567,800
At Newcastle ... 61,297
45,618
Total
569,271
613,418
July to June —12 months.
From Sydney—
1900-1901. 1901-1902.
Bales.
Bales.
To tr.K. and Foreign Ports 530,736
590,827
From Newcastle do.
, 54,555
38.332
Total
... 585,291
629,159
To Victoria
... 22,310
19,892
From Newcastle ...
3,313
3,712
Total
... 25,623
23,604
To New Zealand
49
120
To Queensland
—
To Tasmania
53
*
To South Australia
...
16
Total
102
136
Total by Sea ...
... 611,016
652,899
SHIPMENTS.
Abstract of wool exported
(Interstate excepted)
from New South Wales for the past eleven years:
For year ended
Bales.
June 30th, 1891 ...
... 570,455
„ 1892 ...
... 629,925
1893 ...
... 641,289
„ 1891 ...
... 719,164
„ 1895 ...
... 724,614
„ 1896 ...
... 685,827
„ .. 1897 ...
... 689,856
„ 1898 ...
... 634,845
„ .. 1899 ...
... 646,674
1900 ...
... 573,327
„ „ 1901 ...
... 611,016
.. 1002 ...
.. 652,899
BORDERWISE.
Albury to Victoria
29,289
32,923
Cobram
Do.
1,102
1,373
Corowa
Do.
13,067
12,086
Easton
Do.
2,602
2,214
Howlong
Do
20
24
Moama
Do.
23,923
24,316
Mulwala
Do.
3,802
3,180
Swan Hill
Do.
30,142
30,066
Tocumwal
Do.
6,696
7,135
Wentworth
Do.
6,526
4,953
Total
117,769
118,305
Wentworth
to S. Aus.
15,624
12,848 •
Willyama
Do.
12,554
9,920
Total
28,178
22,768
Boggabilla to Queensland ...
263
——
WaVlangarra
Do. *...
—
—
Total
263
—
Total Borderwise
146,210
141,073
Total exported from the
Colony
757,226
793,972
Less imported from Queens-
land, etc.
38.053
34,436
Net production of New
Wales
719,173
759,536
Increase, 40,363 bales.
Receipts—
1900-1.
1901-2.
July ...
Bales.
2,475
Bales.
3,373
August
13,115
6,279
September
63,901
62,880
October
156,625
149,278
November
137,852
163 835
December
80,913
121,675
January
25,453
32,173
February
10,996
11,956
March
6,103
5,143
April
4,089
4,102
May
4,139
4,073
June
2,314
3,033
Newcastle
507,974
61,297
567,800
45,618
Total Receipts to
30, 1902 . ...
June
569,271
613,418
Exports.
1900-1.
1901-2.
Bales.
Bales.
July
6,299
9,502
August
4,633
13,789
September
17,825
24,874
October
43,092
48,583
November
70,394
127,073
December
135,798
141,874
January
90,023
79,294
February
101,732
119,519
March
77,736
44,975
April
26,564
24,345
May
26,479
12,139
Juue
17,979
11,407
Totals
618,559
657,374
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
July
Menelans
500
«>
Wilcannia ... ...
.." 1060
Transhipment
88
—
1U8
Aug.
Sarpedon
. ... 411
,,
Warrigal
864
Sept
Hector
... 3037
Transhipment . .
... 331
3368
Yiarrawonga.
... 1767
Oct.
Antenor
4714
Bungaree
1508
Nov.
Anglo-African ...
8410
Diomed
1736
u
Narrung
2109
H
Agamemnon
10,379
Dec.
Mcnelaus
3429
Eskdale
3570
II
Wilcannia
1513
1902.
Winchester
6901
Jan.
Warrigal
1994
M
Alcinons
1818
...
Anglo-Chilian
7106
Feb.
Sarpedon
4971
Mch.
Yarrawonga
2826
Orestes
4354
if
Bungaree
1180
Apl.
Hector
2792
,,
Narrung
1501
May
Menelaus
1058
Jane
Patroclus
2232
If
Warrigal
658
. 85,007
JOINT AGENCY SHIPMENTS.
1901.
BAILEES.
Aag.
Mount Stowart
... 369
Transhipment
53
422
Nov.
Yallaroi
... 7306
Transhipment
... 401
7707
f*
Derwent
... 8615
Transhipment
... 112
8727
Hartfield
... 7958
Transhipment
43
8001
Dec.
Neotsfield
... 9615
Transhipment
... 636
10,251
>p
Port Jackson
... 11,430
1902.
Feb.
Amphitrite
8390
I)
Macquarie
8769
Mch.
Brilliant
... 7276
Transhipment
... 155
7431
»»
Cimba
5681
76,809
Of which i is ... < ...
19,203
TOTALS.
28 steamers
... 85.007
10 sailers
... 19,203
104,210
MESSRS. DALQETY AND
CO.. LTD.
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
July
Damascus
... 794
Transhipment
... 1515
2309
M
Persic
... 879
Transhipment
... , 609
1488
Aug.
Nineveh
56
Transhipment
... 349
405
u
Runic
... 325
Transhipment
... 945
1270
H
Moravian
... 304
Transhipment
... 1628
1932
Sept.
Australasian
... 1735
Newcastle
... 1270
Transhipment
... 1269
' 4274
Medic
... 2036
Transhipment
... 1162
3199
EXPORTS
to over-sea ports ( i.e. ports outside of Australasia and New Zealand) for 12 months,
Ist July, 1901, to 30th June, 1902 —for 6 months, Ist July, 1902, to 31st Dec., 1902.
WOOL.
SEASON 1901-1902.
Twelve Months ended June 30, 1902.
Total increase in output 40,363 Bales.
RECEIPTS.
The receipts 'including imports) at Sydney and
Newcastle amounted to 613,418 bales, or an increase,
as compared with the corresponding period of last
year, of 44,147 bales, as follows;
OUTPUT.
The total output of wool from New South Wales
during the twelve months under review amounted
to 793,972 bales, from which must be deducted
31,436 hales, imported from Queensland, etc., leav-
ing a nett output of 759,536 bales, as against last sea-
son of 719,173 bales, or a total increase in the output
of 4j,363 hales.
EXPORTS.
The total quantity of wool exported from Sydney
and Newcastle amounted to 652,899 bales, or an in-
crease, as compared with the corresponding period
of last year, of 41,883 bales, as shown in the follow-
ing tables:—
WOOL RECEIPTS.
A comparative table of wool, received at Sydney
during the 12 months ended June 30, 1902, and last
season:—
WOOL EXPORTS.
Season 1901-2.
A comparative table of wool shipments from New
South Wales to oversea ports during the 12 months
ended June 30th, and last season: —
Total Shipments Despatched by
Outward Agents.
MESSRS. GILCHRIST, WATT AND SANDER-
SON. LTD.
For Wool Statistics, July-Decembev, 1902, see page lOh,


Oct.
Sophocles
Newcastle
...
641
1684
2325
'*
Afrio
Transhipment
4809
1315
6124
Nov.
Salamis
Newcastle
Transhipment
...
607
1843
22
2472
II
Aberdeen
Newcastle
...
190
1712
1902
II
Suevic
Transhipment
8476
1271
9747
Dec.
Damascus
Newcastle
1123
2064
3187
II
Persic
Transhipment
9840
139
9979
1902.
Jan.
Nineveh
Newcastle
...
379
1750
2129
Eunio
4053
»»
Moravian
Newcastle
707
1371
2078
Feb.
Australasian
Newcastle
417
1107
1524
Medio
8946
- -
Transhipment
645
9591
Mch.
Sophocles
Newcastle
175
296
471
>»
Afrio
Transhipment
3408
54
3462
II
Salamis
Transhipment
253
66
319
Apl.
Aberdeen
Newcastle
Transhipment
122
112
250
484
ft
Suevio
8424
Transhipment
1038
9462
May
Damascus
Newcastle
Transhipment
255
871
86
1212
II
Persic
Transhipment
2485
1927
4412
ir
Nineveh
Transhipment
17
273
290
June
Runic
Transhipment
2737
1536
SAILER.
_
4273
1901.
Deo.
Horizon (Newcastle)
TOTALS.
28 steamers
1 sailer
... 94,372
... 5,571
5571
99.943 bales
Fe
Magdeburg
... 15,382
Transhipment
... 589
Mch. Chemnitz
15,971
4672
•>
Meissen ... ....
101
TOTAL.
11 steamers ... 83,363 bales
MESSES. GIBBS, BRIGHT AND CO.
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
Oct.
Star of Australia
Newcastle
... 6840
Nov.
Egremont Castle
6840
... 2113
Newcastle
... 1324
#
3437
Afghanistan
9541
Dec.
Port Denison
... 5672
Newcastle
... 4004
9676
u
Balmoral
5329
1902.
•
Jan.
Romulus
4324
Newcastle
... 777
Feb.
Port Elliott ... ...
■ 5101
7453
Mch.
Australian
23
Apl.
Guthrie
15
1902.
Jan.
SAILER.
Trafalgar (Newcastle)
47,415
6804
1902.
Jan.
Fried, der Grosse
9029
Feb.
Grosser Kurfurst
12,084
Mch.
Bremen
3130
Transhipment
62
itch.
Barbarossa
3192
1382
Apl.
Konigin Luise
2786
May
Weimar
1112
Darmstadt
1150
Transhipment
152
June
Oldenburg
1302
34S
TOTAL.
16 steamers ... • 72,301 bales
MESSRS. W. AND A. MoAETHXJR,
LTD.
1901.
Steamers'.
Bales
July
Gulf of Genoa ...
496
Transhipment
6 .
Nov.
Gulf of Taranto
502
888
Transhipment
254
Eas Mora
■ 1142
11,159
Dec.
Andania
4035
Beatrice
11,286
1902.
Jan.
Gulf of Venice
535
Breconshire
5307
Transhipment
1
5308
Feb.
Gulf of Siam ...
1568
Titania
13,094
Mch.
Gulf of Genoa ... ...
2232
Transhipment
34
Apl.
Gulf of Bothnia
2266
805
Newcastle
90
— 395
June
Vine Branch ...
17
51,307
JOINT AGENCY SHIPMENTS.
1901.
BAILEES.
Aug.
Mount Stewart
... 369
Transhipment
53
Nov.
Yallaroi
422
... 7306
Transhipment
... 401
It
Derwent
7707
... 8615
Transhipment
... 112
II
Hartfield
8727
... 7958
Transhipment
43
Dec.
Neotsfield
8001
... 9615
Transhipment ...
... 636
II
Port Jackson
10,251
11,430
1902.
Feb.
Amphitrite
8390
»
Macquarie
8769
Mch.
Brilliant
... 7276
Transhipment
... 155
• 1
Cimha
7431
5681
01 which i is
76 809
19,202
TOTAL.
9 steamers
... 47.415
11 sailers
... 26,006
73,421 bales
JOINT AGENCY SHIPMENTS.
1901.
SAILERS.
Bales Bales
Aug.
Mount Stewart
... 369
Transhipment
53
Nov.
Yallaroi
422
... 7306
Transhipment
... 401
Derwent
7707
... 8615
Transhipment
... 112
Hartfield
8727
... 7958
Transhipment
43
Dec.
Neotsfield
8001
... 9615
Transhipment
. ... 636
Port Jackson
10,251
11,430
1902.
Feb.
Amphitrite
8390
u
Macquarie ...
8769
Mch.
Brilliant
... 7278
Transhipment
... 155
*»
Cimba
7431
5681
Of which J is
76,806
19,202
TOTAL.
12 steamers
. 51,307
10 sailers
. 19,202
-
70.509 ales
MESSES. DANGAR, QEDYE
AND CO.
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
Oct.
Bloemfontein
... 2632
Transhipment
... 693
Nov.
Barotae
3325
... 5942
Transhipment
... 392
6334
QERMAN-ADSTEALIAN
8.S. CO.
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
Aug.
Solingen
25
M
Keil
144
Oct.
Meissen
Transhipment
... 5432
... 205
5637
Not.
Itzehoe
Transhipment ...
...11,896
... 459
12,355 •
Dec.
Harburg
10,689
Elbing
12,871
1M2.
Vanin
2650
Feb.
Duisburg
Transhipment ...
... 16,325
... 2423
18,748
MESSES. WEBEE. LOHMANN AND CO.. LTD.
AGENTS N.D.L.
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
July
Oldenburg
890
Aug.
P. E. Luitpold ...
3173
Sept.
••• •»«
1589
Oct.
Karlsruhe
Transhipment
... 1563
... 204
1767
Nov.
Ehein
10,726
Dec.
Nectar
10,103
It
Dresden
9151
»»
P. E. Luitpold
Transhipment
... 8653
11
3667
For Wool Statistcs, July-December, 1902, see page lOn.


Deo.
Siam ...
5505
1902.
Jan.
Afton
..; 5721
Feb.
Abergeldie
6690
Mch.
Kobe
... 7329
Transhipment ...
157
74S6
35,061
JOINT AGENCY SHIPMENTS.
1902.
Sailers.
Bales Bales
Ang.
Mount Stewart
369
Transhipment
53
422
Nov.
Yallaroi
7306
Transhipment
401
7707
Derwent
8615
Transhipment
112
■ 8727
m
Hartfield
7958
Transhipment
43
8001
Dec.
Neotsfield
9615
Transhipment
636
10,251
Deo.
1902.
Port Jackson
11,430
Feb.
Amphitrite
8390
u
Macquarie
8769
Mch.
Brilliant
7276
Transhipment
155
7431
"
Cimba
5681
76,809
Of wl
hich i is
19,202
TOTALS.
6 steamers
35,061
10 sailers ...
19,202
54 263 bales
Nov.
Banffshire
264
Leitrim
... 5023
Dec.
Transhipment
Isis
15
5038
3991
1902.
Feb.
Buteshire
2511
9 steamers
CLIENT
(D,
TOTAL.
PACIFIC
. Anderson
16,828 bales
LINE.
• )
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
July
Austral
236
Cuzco
111
Aug.
»>
Omrah
... 103
Transhipment
Ortona
14
120
118
Orizaba
513
Sept.
Oroya
5:17
>>
Ormuz
1493
Oct.
Oruba
1792
Austral
1631
Nov.
Cuzco
.
847
Omrah
1672
Dec.
Ortona
795
Orizaba
713
1902.
Jan.
Oroya
857
Ormuz
616
Feb.
Oruba
739
u
Austral
348
5 ,
Ophir
11
Mch.
Omrah
14
„
Ortona
236
Apl.
Orizaba
229
Oroya
163
May
Ormuz
18
Oruba
139
June Austral
252
Ophir
.
17
26 steamers
TOTAL.
13,927 bales
MESSRS. W. SCOTT, FELL AND CO.
1902.
Sailers-
Bales Bales
Jail.
Marlborough Hill
... 5101
Transhipment
... 733
5837
Feb.
Corryvrechan
3286
TOTAL.
2 sailers
9123 bales
MESSES. TYSER AND CO.
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
Oct.
Indralema
«
Star of Australia
6300
1902.
Mch..
Tomoana
666
TOTAL.
3 steamers ... ' ’
7007 bales
CO-OPERATIVE WHOLESALE SOCIETY.
1902.
Sailers.
Bales
Feb.
Aristides
5593
Apl.
Loch Bredan
741
TOTAL.
2 sailers
6334 bales
MESSES. DAVIES AND
PEHON.
1901.
Sailers.
Bales
July-
Theodora
... 176
Transhipment
39
215
Dee.
Brynhilda
8907
1902.
Apl.
Plcione
.„ 1951
TOTAL.
3 sailers
6073 bales
MESSRS. BURNS PHILP AND CO.. LTD.
1901.
Steamers.
Bales
Aug.
Rosetta Maru
78
Yawata Maru ...
119
Sept.
Kasuga Maru
101
Oct.
Rosetta Maru
458
Nov.
Sierra
58
„
Sonoma
483
Yawata Maru
89
Dec.
Kasuga Maru
56
1902.
Feb.
Kumano Maru ...
89
Transhipment
-48
Mch.
Yawata Maru
137
831
Api.
Kasaga Maru
... 197
Transhipment
2
May
Kumano Maru ...
199
241
June
Yawata Maru
118
TOTAL.
13 steamers
2471 bales
MESSRS. McILWRAITH,
McEACHARN
AND CO.
1902.
Steamers.
Bales
Jan.
Buteshire (Newcastle)
131
TOTAL.
1 steamer
131 bales
MESSRS. S. A. JOSEPH AND RICKARD, LTD.
1901.
Sailer.
Bales
July
Wallacetown
107
TOTAL.
1 sailer
107 bales
MESSRS. G. S. YUILL AND CO., LTD.
1902.
Steamer.
Bales
Apl.
Tsinan
64
TOTAL.
1 steamer
61 bales
THE MESSAGERIBS MARITIMES CO.
(Principal Agent, Mens. Brasier de Thuy).
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
July
Australian
1560
Aug.
Ville de la Ciotat
3252
Transhipment
370
3622
Sept.
Polynesien
... 2865
Transhipment
19
2881
M
Tonkin
2174
Oct.
Armand Behic
2141
Nov.
Oeeanien
1103
Dec.
Polynesien
2180
Transhipment
... 187
2367
1902.
Jan.
Tonkin
.. .•.. <99
Feb.
Australien
2692
Star.
Annam
1481
Apl.
Polynesien
3563
May
Ville de la Ciotat
2038
June
Armand Behic
... 2651
Transhipment
TOTAL.
141
. 2792
13 steamers
29,216 bales
MESSES. BIET AND
CO., LTD.
1901.
Steamers.
Bales Bales
July
Maori King
— —
Transhipment
1
1
Aug.
Kent
—
Transhipment ...
80
80
Sept.
Duke of Westminster ..
539
Transhipment
83
622
»»
Perthshire
1741
Oct.
Duke of Norfolk
... 2579
Transhipment
1
2580
1901.
P. AND 0. S.N. CO.
(A. Gordon AVi -die, Acting
Steamers
gent)
Bales
Bales
July
Oceana
732
Britannia
... 132
Transhipment
... , 74
206
Aug.
Australia
244
Victoria
... 125
Sept.
Transhipment
Home
34
... 437
159
Transhipment
Himalaya
98
... 346
535
.
Transhipment
... 242
—
588
Oct.
China
255
Arcadia
397
Transhipment
... 253
650
India
456
Nov.
Oceana
1121
»
Britannia
... 487
Deo.
Transhipment
Australia
... 32
... 121
519
Transhipment
32
153
Victoria
621
1902.
Jan.
Home ...
235
Himalaya
IfO
Feb.
China ' ...
319
Arcadia
217
Mch.
India
245
>»
Oceana
16
Apl.
Britannia
m
Home
17
May
Himalaya
283
China
34
June Arcadia
331
,,
India
37
TOTAL.
25 steamers .... - 8080 bales
For Wool Statistcs, July-December, 1902, see page lOn.


WOOL SHIPPERS.
■
For 12 months, July 1901,
to June
, 1902.
H. Caulliez
Bales
... 55,352
W. P. Martin and Co.
... 34,00?
E. Gosset and Co.
... 32,805
Wenz and Co.
... 30,531
Ostermeyer, Dervez and Van Rompaey
... 29,972
Dalgety and Co., Ltd.
... 28,844
P. Nutte
... 27,482
A.M.L. and F. Co., Ltd.
... 25,106
Eenard, Lorimer and Co. ...
... 23,560
R. Rhodius and Co.
... 21,193
R. Lhoest and Co. ...
... 21,078
Hinchcliff, Holt and Co.
... 20,877
Gibbs, Bright and Co.
... 19,176
T. Reid
... 18,778
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd. ...
... 18,411
Masurel Fils
... 17,942
Dangar, Gedye and Co.
... 16,725
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
... 14,412
G. Leroux
... 13,420
Lorthiois Freres
... 12,100
Gilchrist,' Watt and Co. ...
... 11,510
Picard-Gonlet Fils
... 11,333
D. Anderson
... 8,113
H. Mathon Bertrand Fils ...
... 7,363
Laycock, Son and Nettleton
... 7,264
Goldsbrougb, Mort and Co., Ltd. ...
... 4,913
Denny, Lascelles and Austin
... 4,843
A. E. and M. Co. ...
... 4.800
W. and A, McArthur, Ltd.
... 4,651
P. Bertrand and Co.
... 4,573
J. Sanderson and Co.
... 4,529
T.'Elliot and Co. ...
... 4,391
Flood and Co., Ltd.
... 4,097
J. W. Clough
... 3,865
Aust. Agricultural Co.
... 3,364
Winchcombe, Carson and Co.. Ltd.
... 3,190
Johnson and Vicars
... 3,059
J. Marks
... 2,836
Pastoral Finance Association; Ltd.
... 2,551
W.-H. Chard and Co.
... 2,410
Gilchrist, Watt and Sanderson, Ltd.
... 2,311
B. Gaillet
... 2,198
A. McElhone
... 2,179
Peel River L. and M, Co., Ltd.
... 2,174
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd.
... 1,948
Aust. Mortgage and Agency Co., Ltd.
... 1,935
Madden and Hixson
... 1,883
G. Heicheneicker ...
... 1,805
Colloroy Co., Ltd.
... 1,756
D. Cohen and Co. ...
... 1,737
C. Taylor and Co. ...
... 1,715
Co-op. AVool and Produce Co.. Ltd.
... 1624
N.Z. L.' and M.A. Co., Ltd.
... 1,506
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd. ...
... 1,435
Eugene Lies
... 1,236
Scottish Aust. Investment Co.
... 1,209
Close, Scroggie and Co.
... 1,202
Sykes, Holt and Co.
... 1,179
P. Weinlig
... 1,163
J. Vickery and Co. ...
... 1,124
B. Richards and Son
... 1,103
J. Erven
... 1,047
Davies and Fehon
904
R. and H. Biunie ...
331
Sydney M.P. Co., Ltd.
739
A. L. and F. Co.
German-Australian S.S. Co.
723
Permewan, Wright and Co., Ltd. ...
671
S. A. Joseph and Rickard, Ltd.
624
Hill, Clark and Co.
617
F. Kanematsu
613
E. Rich and Co., Ltd.
574
W. and J. Lempriere ,..
439
G. H. Gerber
... 410
J. A. Anderson
307
H. Haigh and Son
260
C. Regan
247
Pitt, Son and Badgery, Ltd.
195
H. Allen
190
H. Haege and Son
182
Fanning and Co. ...
160
Petersen and Sargood
158
C. Hermann
155
J. E. Cole
... 116
Springfield P. and E. Co. ...
85
Co-op. Wholesale Society, Ltd.,
59
G. King and Co.
56
Bank of Australasia
...
46
A. C. Storey
42
D. W. Swan and Co.
38
J. H. Radford and Co.
- ... 30
E. Littley
26
W. Carson
26
Mitsui Bussan Eaisha
23
H. C. Munro
20
G. Wilcox and Co.
19
D. McAllister
17
A. H. Owens, Ltd. ...
16
Wright and Abbott
11
.1. E. Begg
9
A. Quiraud
7
Central Wharf S. Co.
7
Sydney S. and W.D. Co.
3
Birt and Co., Ltd. ...
4
Sydney Wool Scouring Co. ...
1
Wright, Heaton and Co., Ltd.
1
Total
... 631,313
II. Allen
190
II. Haege and Son ...
182
Fanning and Co.
160
Petersen and Sargood
158
C. Hermann
155
J. E. Cole
116
Eenard, Lorimer and Co.
114
S. A. Joseph and Rickard, Ltd.
107
Springfield P. and E. Co.
85
J. W. Clough
81
Hasurel Fils
60
Co-op. Wholesale Society, Ltd.
59
H. Mathon-Bertrand Fils ...
57
G. King and Co.
56
Bank of Australasia ... .
46
A. C. Storey
42
D. W. Swan and Co.
88
J. H. Eadford and Co.
30
W. Carson
26
E. Littley
26
G. Wilcox and Co. ...
19
D. McAllister
17
A. II. Owens, Ltd. ...
16
Wright and Abbott ...
14
J. E. Begg
9
Central Wharf S. Co.
5
Birt and Co., Ltd. ...
4
Wright, Heaton and Co., Ltd.
1
Sydney S. and W. D. Co.
1
Sydney W. S. Co.
1
226,7
ENGLISH AND FOREIGN
SHIPPERS.
TO LONDON.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd.
Bales.
28,487
A. L. M. and F. Co., Ltd.
24,884
Gibbs, Bright and Co.
19,176
Dangar, Gedye and Co.
15,038
Hinchcliff, Holt and Co.
14,854
Gilchrist, Watt and Co.
11,510
D. Anderson
8,116
Goldsbrough, Mort and Co., Ltd.
...
4,913
T. Eeid
4 888
Denny, Lascelles and Austin
4,843
A. E. and M. Co.
4,800
J. Sanderson and Co.
4,529
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd. ...
4,516
T. Elliot and Co. ...
4,391
W. P. Martin and Co.
4,174
Flood and Co., Ltd. ...
4,094
Australian Agricultural Co.
3,364
J. Marks
2,836
Wenz and Co.
2,780
Pastoral Finance Association, Ltd.
2,550
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd. ...
2.311
Gilchrist, Watt, and Sanderson, Ltd.
2,268
A. McElhone
2,179
Peel River L. and M. Co., Ltd.
2,174
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
1,977
Aust. Mortgage and Agency Co., Ltd.
1,935
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd.
1,935
Picard-Goulet Fils ...
1,923
Madden and Hixson
1,883
Colloroy Co., Ltd. ...
...
1,756
D. Cohen and Co. ...
1,737
C. Taylor and Co. ...
1,702
Co-op. Wool and Produce Co., Ltd.
1,624
Laycock, Son and Nettleton
1,536
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Eompaey
1,533
N.Z. L. and M. A. Co., Ltd.
1,506
W. H. Chard and Co.
...
1,479
Johnson and Vicars
1,444
Scottish Aust. Invest. Co., Ltd.
1,209
Close, Scroggie and Co.
1,202
Sykes, Holt and Co. ...
1,179
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd.
H. Caulliez ...
1,159
1,135
J. Vickery and Co. ...
1,124
B. Richards and Son
1,103
J. Erven
1,047
Davies and Fehou ...
904
R. and H. Binnie
831
Sydney M. P. Co., Ltd.
739
A. L. and F. Co.
735
Pcrmcwan, Wright and Co., Ltd.
671
Hill, Clark and Co.
617
E. Gosset and Co.
578
E. Rich and Co., Ltd.
• 574
Lorthiois Freres • ...
506
R. Rhodius and Co. ...
424
J. A. Anderson
307
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
272
H. Haigh and Son
260
C. Regan
247
G. Leroux
203
Pitt, Son and Badgery,’ Ltd.
195
TO DUNKIRK.
H. Caulliez
29,781
P. Nutte
20,469.
Masurel Fils
14,307
G. Leroux
12,168
Lorthiois Freres
10,932
AVenz and Co.
8 665
H. Mathon Bertrand Fils ...
7,011
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rompaey
5,134
Renard, Lorimer and Co. ...
3,475
E. Gaillet
2,185
Picard-Goulet Fils
2,133
Q. Eeicheneicker
1,522
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
864
E. Qosset and Co. ...
827 -
AVeber, Lohmanu and Co., Ltd.
195
AV. P. Martin and Co.
187
AVinchcombc, Carson and Co., Ltd. ...
101
AV. and J. Lempriere
58
R. Lhoest and Co. ...
44
G. H. Gerber
34
Johnson and Vicars
SO
Flood and Co., Ltd.
2
Central AVharf S. Co.
2
Pastoral Finance Assn., Ltd.
X
Sydney H.AF.D. Co. ...
1
-120,128
TO ANTWERP.
H. Caulliez
13,601
Wenz and Co.
9,726
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Eompaey
9,638
R. Lhoest and Co. ...
8,910
R. Rhodius and Co. ...
5,087
P. Bertrand and Co.
4,335
Picard-Qoulet Fils ...
4,176
Eenard, Lorimer and Co.
3,448
P. Nutte
3,362
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
3.024
E. Qosset and Co.
2,988
Johnsoh and Vicars
1,438
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
1,228
Masurel Fils
1,106
G. Leroux
1,049
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd.
519
Lorthiois Freres
461
W. H. Chard and Co.
457
Q. H. Gerber
376
W. P. Martin and Co
225
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd. ...
135
H. Mathon Bertrand Fils ...
43
W. and J. Lempriere
36
E. Gaillet ... ;.. ' ... - ...
13
C. Taylor and Co. ...' ... , ..
13
75,394
For AVool Statistics, July-December, 1902, see page 10n.


TO HAMBURG.
E. Gosset and Co.
17,656
Bernard, Lorimer and Co.
11,186
1’uhrmann and Co.. Ltd.
...
9,456
R. Lhoest and Co. ... ... '
8,134
R. Ehodius and Co. ...
7,531
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
4 786
Wenz and Co.
3,770
H. Caulhez
3,674
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Bompaey
3,666
P. Weinlig
...
1,163
Picard-Goulet Tils ...
1,042
German-Australian S.S. Co.
723
Masurel Fils
...
626
P. Nutte
...
432
W. P. Martin and Co.
...
219
G. Eeicheneicker
...
154
Lorthiois Freres
152
P. Bertrand and Co.
71
W. and J. Lempriere
50
Flood and Co., Ltd.
1
74,492
TO BEEMEN.
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Eompaey
9,240
Weber, Lobmann and Co., Ltd.
7,799
E. Ehodius and Co. ...
6 995
E. Gosset and Co. ...
4,529
R. Lhoest and Co.
.r.
2,609
Benard, Lorimer and Co.
1,381
Eugene Lies
1,236
Wenz and Co.
1,201
Masurel Fils
1,008
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
976
Picard-Goulet Fils
825
W. P. Martin and Co.
810
H. Caulliez ...
337
W. and J. Lempriere
178
G. Eeicheneicker
129
Johnson and Vicars
55
P. Bertrand and Co.
15
39,323
TO LIVERPOOL.
W. P. Martin and Co.
15,192
T. Reid
4,615
Laycock, Son and Nettleton
2,418
J. W. Clough
2,259
Hinchcliff, Holt and Co.
2,436
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
768
Wenz and Co.
441
Dalgety and Co., Ltd.
245
Johnson and Vicars
92
W. H. Chard and Co.
54
H. C. Munro
20
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd.
6
Lorthiois Freres
6
Sydney S. and W. D. Co.
1
28,553
TO HULL.
W. P. Martin and Co.
12,436
T. Eeid
4,561
Laycock, Son and Nettleton
1,894
Dangar, Geyde and Co.
1,687
J. W. Clough
1.479
Hinchcliff, Holt and Co.
718
W. H. Chard and Co.
137
Fuhmauu and Co., Ltd.
42
22,954
TO MARSEILLES.
E. Gosset and Co. ...
3,692
Wenz and Co.
2,361
H. Caulliez
982
Eenard, Lorimer and Co.
...
418
P. Nutte
255
H. Mathon-Bertrand Fils ...
252
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
200
Masurel Fils
189
Weber, Lohmann and Co v Ltd.
132
R. Lhoest and Co. ...
93
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Eompaey
39
A. Quiraud
...
7
8,620
TO BRADFORD.
T. Reid ‘
Hinchcliff, Holt and Co.
Laycock, Son and Nettleton...
W. H. Chard and Co
J. W. Clough
1,776
1,318
903
143
46
4,185
TO LONDON, OPT. HULL.
T. Held
Hinchcliff, Holt and Co.
2,938
1,088
4,02ti
TO DUNKIRK, OPT. HAMBURG.
H. Caulliez
Lorthiois Freres
3,935
43
3,978
TO HAMBURG, OPT. BREMEN.
Renard, Lorimer and ,Co
R. Rhodius and Co. ...
E. Lhoest and Co. ... ...
Wenz and Co.
2,719
661
204
61
3,645
TO GENOA.
Wenz and Co.
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
Masurel Fils
E. Rhodius and Co.
Picard-Goulet Fils ...
W. and J. Lempriere
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Eompaey
710
694
519
500
433
117
95
3,068
TO JAPAN.
E. Lhoest and Co. ...
F. Kanematsu
Hinchcliff, Holt and Co.
Mitsu Busson Kaisha
H. Caulliez ... ... ..;
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd.
850
613
463
23
20
13
1,982
TO EHEIMS.
E. Gosset and Co. ...
Renard, Lorimer and Co. ...
1,856
100
1,956
TO BLUMENTHAL.
Wenz and Co.
E. Gosset and Co.
H. Caulliez
Masurel Fils
816
679
281
127
1,903
TO LONDON. OPT, CONTINENT.
Renard, Lorimer and Co.
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd.
Winchcombe, Carson and Co, Ltd. ...
R. Lhoest and Co.
Picard-Goulet Fils ...
725
270
259
234
202
1,690
TO ANTWERP, OPT. DUNKIRK.
P. Nutte 91X
H. Caulliez ... ... ... 134
1,075
TO DUNKIRK, OPT. LONDON.
H. Caulliez
Picard-Goulet Fils ...
577
418
995
TO BOSTON.
P. Nutte 536
W. P. Martin and Co. ... ... 155
W. H. Chard 120
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd. ... ... 52
Gilchrist, Watt and Sanderson, Ltd. 43
906
TO SAN FRANCISCO.
W. P. Martin and Co.
541
TO CALCUTTA.
S. A. Joseph and Rickard, Ltd.,
517
TO LONDON, OPT. DUNKIRK.
II. Caulliez ... ... ... ... 421
P. Nutte ... ... ... ... 75
Picard-Goulet Fils ... ... 17
513
TO ANTWERP, OPT. HAMBURG, OPT.
BREMEN.
Fuhrmann and Co.. Ltd. ... ... 298
P. Bertrand and Co. ... ... 121
419
TO LONDON, OPT. HAMBURG.
P. Nutlo
314
TO DUNKIRK, OPT. ANTWERP.
P. Nutte ... ... . ... ... 182
H. Caulliez ... ... ... ... 108
290
TO MARSEILLES, OPT. DUNKIRK, OPT.
LONDON.
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rompaey
259
TO ANTWERP. OPT. LONDON.
Picard-Goulet Fils ... ... ... 26
H. Caulliez ... ... ... ... 217
243
TO ANTWERP, OPT. HAMBURG, OPT.
BREMEN.
Picard-Goulet ■ Fils ... ... ... 76
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd. ... ... 60
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rompaey 39
P. Bertrand and Co. ... ... 31
206
TO LONDON. OPT. ANTWERP. OPT.
DUNKIRK.
Ostermeyer. Dewez and Van Rompaey
127
TO LONDON, OPT. BREMEN.
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rompaey
122
TO HAVRE.
H. Caulliez ... ... ... 73
Picard-Goulet Fils ... ... 30
103
TO LONDON, OPT. ANTWERP.
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rompaey
80
TO GOOTE, OPT. HALIFAX.
Dalgety and Co.
73
TO LEITH.
W. P. Martin and Co.
68
TO ANTWERP, OFT. HAMBURG.
H. Caulliez
59
For Wool Statistics, July-December, 1902, see page 10ii,


TO GOOTE.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd. ... ,
39
TO MAZAMET.
W. H. Chard and Co.
20
TO. DUNKIRK, OPT. BLUMENTHAL.
H. Caulliez...
17
TO LONDON, OPT. CONTINENT.
“Picard- Goulet Fils
15
TO MELBOURNE.
P. Nutte
916
Laycock, Son and Nettleton
513
A. M. L. and F. Co. ...
222
Picard-Qoulet Fils ...
17
1,668
Total
631,313
OUTWARD AGENTS.
Including Newcastle.
Bales.
Gilchrist, Watt and Sanderson, Ltd.
... 104,210
Dalgety and Co., Ltd. ...
... 99,943
Qerman-Australian S.S. Co.
... 83,363
Gibbs, Bright and Co.
... 73,421
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd. ...
... 72,301
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd.
... 70,509
Dangar, Geyde and Co. ...
... 54,263
Brasier de Thuy ...
... 29,216
Birt and Co., Ltd.
... 16 828
David Anderson
... 13,927
W. Scott. Fell and Co. ...
9,123
E. Trelawny
8,080
Tyser and Co.
7,007
Co-op. Wholesale Society, Ltd. ...
6,331
Davies and Fehon
6,073
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd.
2,471
Mcllraith, McEacharn and Co. ...
134
S. A. Joseph and Rickard, Ltd. ...
107
G. S. Yuill and Co.. Ltd
64
Total
... 657,374
DESTINATIONS.
Bales.
London
... 242,121
Dunkirk
... 121,229
Hamburg
... 78,179
Antwerp
... 75,394
Bremen
... 39,755
Liverpool
... 33,253
Hull
... 22,954
Marseilles
9,337
Bradford
4,186
London, opt. Hull
4,026
Dunkirk, opt. Hamburg ...
3,978
Harrtburg, opt. Bremen ...
3 644
Genoa
3,068
Japan
2,032
Rheims
1,956
Blumenthal
1,903
London, opt. Continent ...
1,705
Antwerp, opt. Dunkirk ...
1,075
Dunkirk, opt. Loudon ...
995
Boston
906
Antwerp, opt. Hamburg, opt. Bremen
625
San Francisco
541
Calcutta
517
London, opt. Dunkirk
513
London, opt. Hamburg
.:. 314
London, opt. Antwerp ...
297
Dunkirk, opt. Antwerp
290
Marseilles, opt. Dunkirk, opt. London
259
London, opt. Antwerp, opt. Dunkirk
127
London, opt. Bremen
122
Havre
103
Qoote, opt. Halifax
73
Leith
OS
Antwerp, opt. Hamburg ... ...
59
Goote
39
Antwerp, opt. London ... -
26
Mazamet
20
Dunkirk, opt. Blumenthal
17
Melbourne
1,668
657.374
Dec.
Australasian
449
Newcastle
1626
2075
Medic
9388
Transhipment
273
9661
..
Sophocles ■
. 57
Newcastle
TOTAL.
15 steamers ...
48,365
2009
■ 2066
MESSRS. GILCHRIST, WATT,
SON, LTD.
AND
SANDER-
1902.
Steamers.
Bales. Bales.
July
Tantalus
1066
Wilcannia
249
Aug.
Orestes ...
577
Transhipment
1
' 578
Yarawonga
904
Sept
Hector
1789
Oct.
Dungaree
708
Glaucus
4216
Nov.
Jason
3787
>>
Naming
2248
,,
Calchas ...
2492
,,
Warrigal
1572
Dec.
Ajax
8639
Stentor ...
7603
35,851
JOINT AGENCY SHIPMENTS.
1902.
Sailers.
Bales. Bales.
Nov.
Yallaroi
8114
Transhipment
358
8472
Dec.
Derwent
9726
Transhipment ...•
51
9777
18,249
Of which i is
TOTAL.
13 steamers ...
2 sailers
N.D.L.
35,851
4,562
40,413
... 4,562
(Messrs. Weber, Lohmann and Co.,
Ltd.)
1902.
Steamers.
Bales. Bales.
July
Gera
321
Aug.
Karlsruhe
878
M
Stuttgart
515
Sept.
Weimar
1044
Darmstadt
1157
Oct.
Oldenburg
2228
Nov.
Rhein
5740
Konigin Luise
6769
Transhipment
6
6775
Dec.
Darbarossa
9547
Transhipment
TOTAL.'
9 steamers ...
28,247
42
9589
GERMAN AUSTRALIAN
S.S.
CO. .
1902.
Steamers.
Bales. Bales.
Oct.
Chemnitz
79
Nov.
Apolda
6490
Transhipment
412
6902
Dec.
Itzehoe
13110
**
Laeisz
5703
Transhipment
TOTAL. .
25
5728
4 steamer* ...
25,819
By Bail.
Sea. Im-
New-
ported
castle.
July ...
1,623
107 1,783
16
August
5 819
44 1,365
—
September
... 28,998
1,721 1,882
2,580
October
... 94.770
10,288 3,007
8,332
November
... 119,883
10,596 2.932
8,058
December
... 54,984
8,605 3,212
3,877
Totals
... 305,577
31,361 14,181
22,863
Grand total ...
373,982
BORDERWISE.
Seasons.
1901-2.
1902-3.
July-Dee. 6
Months.
Bales.
Bales.
Albury to Victoria
... 30 760
23,425
Cobram
do.
... 1,373
1,415
Corowa
do.
... 12,039
9,575
Euston
... 2,244*
—
Howlong
do.
... ~
51
Moama
do.
... 24,255
14.269
Mulwala
do.
... 3,144
2,972
Swan Hill
do.
... 29,779
5,875
Tocumwal
do.
... 7.135
5,507
Wentworth
do.
... 4,958
487
Total
... 115,687
63,576
Wentworth
to South Australia 12,848
1,846
Willyama
do
9,377
8,370
Total
... 22,225
10,216
Total Borderwise
... 137,912
73,792
Decrease
... 64,120 bales
* Included with Swan
Hill.
Total Shipments despatched by
Outward Agents.
MESSRS. DALGETY AND CO., LTD.
1902. Steamers.
Bales. Bales.
July Australasian
57
Transhipment
... 350
407
,, Medic
... 2312
Transhipment
... 1521
3833
Aug, Sophocles
... 441
Transhipment
98
,
— 539
„ Afric
... 2566
Transhipment
795
3361
„ Salamis
... 118
Transhipment
... 110
228
Sept. Aberdeen
... 2214
Transhipment
... 534
2748
,, Suevic
... 4781
Transhipment ...
... 1099
5880
Oct. Damascus
1540
,, Persic
... 2556-
Transhipment
... 189
' — ’ 2745
,, Nineveh
... 1155
„ Newcastle
... 2075
3230
Nov. .Moravian ... ...
... 1041
Newcastle
... 2980
4021
,, Runic
.. 5782
Transhipment
.. 149
5931
For 6 months, July-December, 1902.
WOOL.
RECEIPTS.
The following table indicates the total quantity
of wool received each month at Sydney and New-
castle from July Ist to December 31st, 1902: -


MESSES. GIBBS, BRIGHT AND CO.
1902.
Nov.
>♦
Dec.
Steamers.
Tomoana
Newcastle
Port Victoria
Newcastle
Port Elliott
Bales. Bales.
... 980
... 3130
4110
... 3273
... 1401
■ 4674
5767
14 551
JOINT AGENCY SHIPMENTS.
1902.
Nov.
Dec.
Sailers.
Yallaroi
Transhipment
Derwent
Transhipment
Bales. Bales.
... 8114
... 358
8472
... 9726
51
9777
Of which i is
18,249
4,562
TOTAL.
3 steamers ...
2 sailers
14,551
4,562
19,113
MESSES. DANGAR, GEYDE AND CO.
1902.
Nov.
Dec.
Steamers.
Queen Wilhelmina
Transhipment
Margaret
Transhipment
Bales. Bales.
... 2950
... 424
3374
... 7711
56
7767
11,141
JOINT AGENCY SHIPMENTS.
1902.
Nov.
Dec.
Sailers.
Yallaroi
Transhipment
Derwent
Transhipment
Bales. Bales.
... 8114
.... 358
8472
... 9726
51
9777
Of which i is
18,249
4,563
TOTAL.
2 steamers
2 sailers
11,141
4,563
15,704
MESSES. W. AND A. McARTHTJR, LTD.
1902. Steamers.
July Orange Branch ...
Sept. Gulf of Venice
Nov. Gulf of Siam
„ Gulf of Bothnia
Dec. Gulf of Taranto
Bales.
36
394
2505
2599
4393
9,927
JOINT AGENCY SHIPMENTS.
1902.
Nov.
Dec.
Sailers.
Yallaroi
Transhipment
Derwent
Transhipment
Bales. Bales.
... 8114
... 358
8472
- ... 9726
51
9777
Of which i is ...
18,249
4,562
TOTAL.
5 steamers ...
2 sailers , ...
9,'927
4,562
14,489
MESSES. BHENS, PHILP AND CO., LTD.
1902. Steamers.
Bales. Bales.
July Kasuga Maru
146
Aur. Kumano Maru
99
Sept. Yawata Maru
277
Oct. Kasuga Maru
328
Nov. Kumano Maru
86
„ Sierra
87
Transhipment
281
*368
Dec. Yawata Maru
246
„ Sonoma
191
Transhipment
368
559
„ Ventura
91
Transhipment
TOTAL.
9 steamers
2606
406
■ 497
MESSES. TYSER AND
CO.
1902. Steamer.
Bales.
Nov. Tomoana
TOTAL.
1 steamer
980
980
SHIPPEES.
A.M., L. and F. Co.. Ltd.
17,726
Dalgety and Co., Ltd.
16,688
H. Caulliez ’ ... ’
15,110
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Eompaey
12,909
E. Gosset and Co
10,448
W. P. Martin and Co
9,863
Masuret Fils
9,137
Q. Pietrusky
8,830
E. Lhoest and Co
...
8,400
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
6,471
E. Ehodius and Co.
6 007
Wenz and Co.
5,883
P. Nutte
5,386
Gibbs, Bright and Co.
5,157
D. Anderson
5,030
Gilchrist, Watt and Co.
4,590
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
4,482
Picard Goulet Fils
4 293
Q. Leroux
3,944
Danger, Gedye and Co
8,814
Hinchcliff, Holt and Co.,
..T
3,744
A.E: and M. Co
3,629
T. Eeid
3,258
Lorthiois Freres
2,745
G. Eeicheneicker
2,736
H. Lamboray
...
2,590
Kurth, Weyhmann and Co.
2,589
Pastoral Finance Assn., Ltd. ...
1,961
J. Sanderson and Co
...
1,903
Svdney M.P. Co.
1,611
N.Z. L. and M.A. Co., Ltd.
1,594
W and A. McArthur, Ltd.
1,584
J. W. Clough
1,521
J. Balthazar
1,517
Denny, Lascelles and Austin ...
1,451
Aust. Agricultural Co
1,453
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd.
1,451
Sydney Wood Scouring Co.
...
1,376
J. Marks
1,361
Johnson and Vicars
1,336
H. Mathon Bertrand Fils
1,336
P. Bertrand and Co
1,832
Peel Eiver L. and M. Co.
1,219
Flood and Co., Ltd
1,161
D. Cohen and Co
1,102
A. D. Lloyd
1,077
A. McElhone
1,006
F. Betz and Co
1,002
C. Taylor and Co
914
Madden and Hixson
826
Horman and Wormald
695
Davies and Fehon
646
Gilchrist, Watt and Sanderson
639
Scottish Aust. Invest. Co.
636
E. Eich and Co., Ltd
631
Orient S.N. Co., Ltd
604
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd
591
J. Vickery and Co
572
A.L. and P. Co., Ltd
518
Co-op. Wool and P. Co., Ltd. ...
460
T. Elliot and Co
...
445
Goldsbrough, Mort and Co.
423
W. H. Chard and Co
...
370
1902.
ORIENT PACIFIC LINE.
(D. Anderson )
Steamers. Bales. Bales.
July
Omrah
309
,,
Cuzco
... 211
Aug.
Transhipment
Orizaba
52
27
263
Transhipment . ...
Oroya
... 187
214
120
Ormuz
111
Sept.
Oruba
996
Austral
... 2135
Oct.
Transhipment
Ophir
... 165
2300
599
Omrah ...
899
Nov.
Victoria
... 2615
Transhipment
Orizaba
... 377
2992
1442
Dee.
Oroya
916
>»
Orontes
1668
TOTAL.
13 steamers ... 12,829
THE MESSAGERIES MARITIMES CO.
(Principal Agent, Mons. Brasier de Thuy.]
1902.
Steamers.
Bales.
July
Anstralien
2624
Aug.
Indus
823
Sept.
Ville le la Ciotat
1038
Armand Behic ...
747
Oct.
Australien
1590
Nov.
Polynesien
1596
Dec.
Ville de la Ciotat
729
1902.
Total.
V
7 steamers
MESSRS. BIRT AND CO.
, Steamers.
9147
LTD.,
Bales.
Sept.
Buteshire
1231
Nov.
Perthshire
2251
Nairnshire
1122
Dec.
Morayshire
3124
1902.
TOTAL.
4 steamers ... ... 7728
P. & O. S. N. Co.
(A. Gordon Wesche, Acting Agent.)
Steamers. Bales. Bales.
July.
Oceana
1340
Victoria
... 935
Transhipment
38
Aug.
Australia
__
973
321
Britannia
112
Sept.
Himalaya
225
China
192
Oct.
Rome
... 7j62
Transhipment
Arcadia
32
794
496
India
182
Nov.
Oceana
... 559
Transhipment ••• '
... 214
773
Dec.
Australia
543
Victoria
557
..
Himalaya
249
1902.
TOTAL.
13 steamers ... 6457
MESSRS. DAVIES AND FEHON.
Sailers. Bales. Bales.
July
Iredale, bq.
... 202
Dec.
Transhipment
Earnock
50
252
4291
Total.
2 sailers
... 4543


Colloroy Co., Ltd ■ ■■
Dales.
353
Wright and Abbott
345
Laycock, Son and Nettleton
301
Winchcombe, Carson and Oo., Ltd.
299
Permewan,- Wright and Co., Ltd.
285
J. Ewen
267
Close, Scroggie and Co
266
Laycock, Son and Nettleton ...
258
P.'Brierre
238
Bank of Australasia
230
H. Haigh and Son
211
Hill, Clark and Co
162
S. A. Joseph and Rickard, Ltd.
114
R. and II. Binnie
107
P. Kanematsu
104
Bank of N.S.W., Ltd
96
Sykes, Holt and Co.
88
C. Regan
77
J. H. Sykes and Co.
70
G. Wilcox and Co
64
H. Donkin
...
55
R. AV. Eve
. 49
E. Troost and Co
49
Fanning and Co
25
Scott, Henderson and Co.
22
G. A. Murray
22
P. McWilliams
14
Mitsui Busen Kaisha
12
E. Littley
3
A. Anderson
1
Sydney S. and W.D. Co
1
Total
L.
227,977
ENGLISH AND FOREIGN SHIPPERS.
TO LONDON.
Bales.
Bales.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd.
16,620
Aust. Mort. L. and F. Co., Ltd. ..
17,726
Gibbs, Bright and Co.
. 5157
D. Anderson
. 5030
AV. P. Martin and Co
. 1691
Gilchrist, Watt and Co
. 4590
Dangar, Geyde and Co
. 3814
Aust. Est. M. Company
. 3452
Ostermeyer, Dewez and A r an Rompaey 3026
Past. Fin. Assn., Ltd.
. 1961
J. Sanderson and Co. ...
. 1903
Hincjicliff, Holt and Co
. 1749
Sydney M.P. Company
. 1611
N.Z. Loan and M. Agency ...
. 1594
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd
. 1584
Denny, Lascelles and Austin
1454
Aust. Agricultural Company
1453
Harrison, Jones and Devlin
. 1451
Sydney AVool Scouring Company ..
. 1376
J. Marks
. 1328
Peel River L. and M. Co
. 1219
Flood and Co., Ltd
1120
D. Cohen Si Coy.
. 1102
Picard Goulet Fils
1079
Johnson and Vicars
. 1055
A. McEIhone
. 1006
C. Taylftr and Co
914
Madden and Hixson
826
B. Qosset and Co
820
Hermann and Wormald
695
H. Caulliez
675
Davies and Fehon
646
Gilchrist, AVatt and Sanderson, Ltd. 639
S.A.I. Co.. Ltd
636
E. Rich and Co., Ltd.
631
Orient S.N. Co.
604
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd.
594
J. Vickery and Co
572
A.L. and F. Co
518
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd. ..
516
Co-op. Wool and P. Co
460
T. Elliot and Co
445
Goldsbrough, Mort and Co., Ltd. ..
423
T. Reid
375
Colloroy Co., Ltd
853
AVright and Abbott
315
AVinchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd
. -298
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd
296
Permewan, AVright and Co., Ltd. ..
285
J. Ewen
267
Close, Scroggie and Co
266
G. Reicheneicker ...
253
Bank of Australasia
230
H. Haighi and Son
211
P. Nutte
197
AV. H. Chard and Co
196
Hill. Clark and Co
162
P. Betz and Co.
115
'It. and II. Binnie
107
Bank of N.S.W., Ltd
96
Sykes, Holt and Co
88
C. Regan ■
77
J. H. Svkes and Co
70
Masurel Fils
67
G. Wilcox and Co
64
II. Donkin
55
G. Pietrusky
54
R. W. Eve
49
R. Llioest and Co
37
Lorthiois Freres
34
Fanning and Co. •
25
G. A. Murray
22
R. Rhodius and Co
22
Scott, Henderson and Co
22
,T. Balthazar
17
P. McWilliam
14
E. Littlev
3
A. Anderson
Sydney Stevedoring and W.D.
1
Co., Ltd
1
103,542
TO DUNKIRK.
II. Caulliez
10,672
Masurel Fils
6782
P. Nutte
3978
G. Leroux
3608
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rompaey 3164
Lorthiois Freres
2627
H. Lamboray
2291
O. Reicheneicker
2232
Picard Goulet Fils
1756
E. Qosset and Co
1493
Wenz and Co
1416
H. Mathon Bertrand Fils
1263
J. Balthazar
1017
Fuhrmann and Co
548
P. Brierre
216
F. Betz
113
Q. Pietrusky
91
E. Lhoest and Co
69
- * ■
43,336
TO HAMBURG.
Q. Pietrusky ’
6056
E. Qosset and Co
3259
R. Rhodius and Co.
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van
2751
Rompaey
2696
Kurth, Weyhmann and Co
2233
Fuhrmann and Co
1508
R. Lhoest and Co
1240
A. D. Lloyd
817
Wenz and Co
677
Masurel Fils
4U5
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd. ...
387
P. Nutte
219
H. Lamboray
213
Picard Goulet Fils
210
P. Bertrand and Co
194
O. Reicheneicker
155
Troost, B. and Co
49
F. Betz and Co
46
H. Caulliez
27
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd.
1
23,233
TO ANTWERP.
R. Lhoest and Co
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van
8726
Rompaey
2711
Wenz and Co.
2413
E. Rhodius and Co
1732
H. Caulliez
1536
E. Gosset and Co
1140
P. Bertrand and Co
940
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd
919
Masurel Fils
623
F. Betz and Co.
574
Picard, Goulet Fils
384
P. Nutte
358
Kurth, Weyhmann and Co.
356
G. Leroux
336
Johnson and Vicars
281
A. D. Lloyd
108
H. Mathon Bertrand Fils
73
G. Pietrusky
71
W. H. Chard and Co.
70
Lorthiois Freres
37
H. Lamboray
29
G. Reicheneicker
5
18,422
TO BREMEN.
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
3469
1’. Lhoest and Co.
2750
G. Pietrusky
2558
E. Gosset and Co.
2524
Euhrraann and Co., Ltd.
1681
R. Rhodius and Co
1502
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van
Rompaey
1217
W. P. Martin and Co
652
Masurel Fils
525
Wenz and Co
242
A. D. Lloyd
152
P. Bertrand and Co
122
P. Nutte
108
II. Lamboray
57
G. Reicheneickcr
20
Picard Goulet Fils
12
17,591
TO LIVERPOOL.
T. Reid
2097
W. P. Martin and Co.
1050
Hinchcliffe, Holt and Co. ...
1034
J. W. Clough
930
Aust. Estates and M. Co.
177
Laycock, Son and Nettleton ...
134
Flood and Co., Ltd
41
J. Marks
33
Dalgety and Co., Ltd
TO BOSTON.
22
5,518
W. P. Martin and Co
2750
P. Nutte
526
T. Reid
214
W. H. Chard and Co
104
3,594
TO GENOA.
Masurel Fils
600
Wenz and Co
663
Picard Goulet Fils
.500
Fuhrmann and Co.. Ltd.
388
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van
Rompaey
78
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
1
2,130
TO LONDON, OPT. DUNKIRK.
H. Caulliez
934
J. Balthazar
303
E. Gosset and Co.
47
Picard Goulet Fils
46
Lorthiois Freres
82
Masurel Fils
...
25
1,437
TO BRADFORD.
T. Reid
523
Hincheliff, Holt and Co.
454
J. W. Clough
'347
1,324
TO MARSEILLES.
Wenz and Co
560
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
544
H. Caulliez
44
E. Gosset and Co.
40
Masurel Fils
20
Lorthiois Freres
15
1,223
TO JAPAN.
R. Lhoest and Co
...
559
Hincheliff, Holt and Co.
507
F. Kanomatsu
104
Mitsui Busen Kaisha
...
12
1,182
TO ANTWERP. OPT. BREMEN.
H. Caulliez
328
F. Betz and Co
...
137
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
109
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd.
96
G. Reicheneicker
71
P. Bertrand and Co
...
45
786


TO 1! HEIMS.
B. Gosset and Co 627
Picard Goulet Fils 64
P. Brierre 22
713
TO DUNKIliK. OPT. BREMEN, OPT.
HAMBURG.
II. Caulliez
673
TO NEW YORK.
Fuhrmann and Co., Ltd
491
TO SAN FRANCISCO.
W. P. Martin and Co. ...
369
TO LONDON, OPT. BRADFORD.
W. P. Martin and Co
322
TO MELBOURNE.
Laycock, Son and Nettleton '
301
TO ANTWERP, OPT. HAMBURG.
E. Gosset and Co. 280
F. Betz and Co 17
297
TO DUNKIRK, OPT. LONDON.
Picard Goulet Fils 125
H. Caulliez 12°
245
TO HULL.
Laycock, Son and Nettleton ... 124
T. Reid 49
J. Clough 46
219
I
TO DUNKIRK, OPT. HAMBURG.
J. Balthazar
180
TO LAISTERDYKE.
J. W. Clough
165
TO ANTWERP, OPT. HAMBURG, OPT.
BREMEN.
Picard Goulet Fils 117
P. Bertrand and Co 91
Wenz and Co : 12
160
TO LONDON, OPT. HAMBURG, OPT.
DUNKIRK.
E. Gosset and Co.
152
TO CALCUTTA.
S. A. Joseph and llickard. Ltd.
114
TO BLUMENTHAL.
E. Gosset and Co.
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Kompaey 17
83
TO LONDON, OPT. HULL.
Dalgety and Go., Ltd
46
TO HAVRE.
H. Caulliez
45
TO LEEDS.
J. W. Clough
33
TO HAMBURG, OPT. BREMEN.
W. P. Martin and Co
26
TO ANTWERP, OPT. LONDON.
R. Lhoest and Co.
19
TO MAZAMET.
II. Caulliez
6
Grand total
..
227,977
OUTWARD AGENTS.
Dalgety and Co
Newcastle
Transhipment
Bales.
34.457
8,690
5,118
Bales.
48,265
40,413
28,247
25,819
19,113
15,704
14,489
12,829
9.147
7,728
6.757
4,543
2,606
930
Gilchrist, Watt and Sanderson,
Transhipment
Ltd.
40,310
103
Weber, Lohmann ad Co., Ltd.
Transhipment
28,199
48
German-Australian S.S. Co. ...
Transhipment
25,382
437
Gibbs, Bfight and Co
Newcastle
Transhipment
14,480
4,531
102
Dangar, Gedye and Co.
Transhipment
15,121
583
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd.
Transhipment
14,387
102
D. Anderson
Transhipment
12,048
781
Brasier de Thuy
Birt and Co.
A. Gordon Wesche
Transhipment
6,473
284
Davies and Fehon
Transhipment
4,493
50
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd.
Transhipment
1,551
1,055
Tyser and Co.
Total
236,640
DESTINATIONS.
(Including transhipment.)
London
Dunkirk
Hamburg
Antwerp
Bremen
Boston
Liverpool
Genoa
London, opt. Dunkirk
San Francisco
Bradford
Marseilles
Japan
Antwerp, opt. Bremen
Rheims
Dunkirk, opt. Bremen, opt.
Hamburg
New York
London, opt. Bremen
Melbourne
Antwerp, opt. Hamburg
Dunkirk, opt. London
Hull
Dunkirk, opt. Hamburg
Laisterdyke
Antwerp, opt. Hamburg, opt.
Bremen
London, opt. Hamburg, opt.
Dunkirk
Calcutta
Blumenthal
London, opt. Hull
London, opt. Havre
Leeds
Hamburg, opt. Bremen
Antwerp, opt. London
Mazamet
Bales.
110,577
43,392
23,659
18,422
17,650
3 594
5,550
2,130
1,437
1,424
1,324
1,223
1,182
786.
713
673
491
322
301
297
245
,219
180
165
160
152
114
83
46
45
33
26
19
6
Total
236,640
COLLIERIES.
Tons.
Dnckenfield
228,464
Wallsend
178,720
Seaham
115,582
Various
66,692
East Greta
58,634
Pacific Co-operative
58,040
Waratah
51,891
Co-operative
51,016
Rhondda
49,138
Lambton
... 44,463
Northern Extended
40,789
A. A. Co. ... •
36,781
West Wallsend
85,863
Hetton
35,844
Burwood
35,275
New Lambton
25,846
Southern
25,794
Caledonian
22,634
Mount Kembla ...
10,640
Wallarah
7,917
Dudley ... ... ,
5,019
Lambton and Co-operative
4,366
Bulli
3,279
Stockton
2,500
Pelaw Main
2,455
Wollongong .
1,900
Lithgow
1,795
Anvil Creek
1,186
Metropolitan
1,117
Wickham
365
Total
.. 1,204,005
OUTWARD AGENTS.
Tons.
J. and A. Brown
242,145
R. B. Wallace
230,360
Dalgety and Co, Ltd
148,666
W. Scott, Fell and Co.,
145,169
Earp Bros, and Co.,
131,578
C. F. Stokes and Co.
84,043
G. S. Yuill and Co, Ltd.
68.155
W. B. Sharp
52,580
Gibbs, Bright and Co. ...
32,088
J. M. Hyde
19,722
H. W. Henderson
13,817
F. and II. Langwill
6,963
Mcllwraith, McEacharn and Co.
5,009
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd.
4,920
Caledonian Coal Co.
4,800
Cowlishaw Bios. . ...
2,800
Davies and Fehon
2,570
D. Williams
2,500
.1. White
1,468
W. and A. AlaeArthur, Ltd.
1,268
J. C. Ellis
1,130
J. Scharff
957
0. E. Pauss
697
A. C. Gaertner
450
Weber, Lohmann and Co, Ltd. ...
150
Total
. 1,204,005
DESTINATIONS.
Tons.
Valparaiso
289.716
San Francisco
229,446
Manila
89,876
Honolulu
73,784
Singapore
53,307
Calcutta
29,483
Molleudo
23,813
Tandjong Priok
23,512
Iquique
22,259
Java
21,098
Shanghai
20,736
Portland, 0.
20,155
Acapulco
19,775
Tyilitjap
16,870
Taltal
16,732
Callao
16,864
COAL.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
For Coal Statistics, .Tuly-December, 1902, see page 14h.


Sourabaya ... ;
14,422
Kahului
13,568
Talcahuano
13 561
Antofagastra
13,342
Hongkong
12,432
Bombay
10,400
Noumea
10,118
Batavia
9,661
Coquimbo
9,413
San Diego
■ 9,238
Tocopilla
8,830
Port Elizabeth
6,992
Pisagua
6,777
Ellele
6,393
Mauritius
5,793
Panama
5,381
Caleta Buena
5,315
Coronel
5,100
Samarang
4,900
Gatico
4,552
Guayaquil
4,317
Junin
4,204
Salaverry
3,310
Mahukona
3.299
Zamboanga
3,243
Carrizal
3,121
Fiji
2,819
Tortoralillo
2,762
Cebu
2,443
Mazatlan
2,266
Chanaral
2,254
Ca'dera
2,005
Tchio
2,000
Ilo Ho
1,736
Guayacan
1,672
Guavmas
1,670
Peleli Bay
1,582
Eureka
1.542
Los Vilos
1,530
South Soa Islands
1,508
Lahaina
1,474
Rangoon
1,419
Tahiti
1,341
Beira
1,268
Arica
1,263
Makavreli
1,166
Pam
976
Manzanello
963
Corinto
891
Kehei
797
Total
1,204,005
COIXIEEIES.
•
Duckenfield
Tons.
117,152
Wallsend
65,835
East Greta
50,557
Seaham
44.530
Various
81,886
Pac. Co-operative
31 249
Lambton ...
29,424
West Wallsend
26,135
Caledonian
22,351
A.A. Company
19,942
Pelaw Main
19,527
Helton
13,157
Rhondda ...
12,250
New Lambton
12,008
Co-operative
10,901
Waratah ...
10,325
Burwood ...
8,713
Lithgow
4,785
Mount Kembla ...
4 302
Stanford Methyr ...
4,258
Metropolitan
2,155
Mount Keira
2,076
Wollongong
1,483
Southern ...
900
Newcastle Coal Company
700
Mount Pleasant
.673
Bulli
4S3
Total
547,762
SHIPPERS.
•
Casks
Sydney M.P. Company ...
... 8232
Dalgety and Co., Limited...
... 4775
Co-op. Wholesale Society...
... 4568
H. Fisher
... 4404
B. Richards and Sons
... 3046
T. Elliot and Co.
... 2300
Lever Brothers, Limited ...
... 1196
H. Prell and Co.
932
Austral Freezing Works ...
913
Ostermeyer, Uewez and Van Eompaey
... 807
J. Marks
... 621
Harrison, Jones and Devlin
481
Eabone, Feez and Co.
... 3.1
Sydney Soap and Candle Co., Limited
... 272
J. Bridge and Co., Limited
132
Australian Chilling and Freezing Co.
... 117
F. Kanematsu ...
... 107
C. Asano ... ... ...
64
Funck, Stark and Co.
61
Harrisson and Whiflen ...
86
Gibbs, Bright and Co. ...
33
Foley Brothers...
25
E. Chappell
21
Winchcombe, Carson and Co.
11
C. McClelland ...
10
New Zealand Loan and M.A. Co. ...
8
Morgan and Co.
7
M. Bend and Co.
4
Goldsbrough, Mort and Co., Limited
4
Rosewarno Packing Company, Limited
2
W. and A. McArthur, Limited ...
1
Colonial Sugar Refining Co., Limited
1
A. C. Gaertner...
1
J. Lynch ... ... ... 1 case
1
case 33,493
DESTINATIONS.
Casks
London
... 24,250
Liverpool
... 7,343
Rotterdam
783
Genoa
255
Japan
177
London, opt. Liverpool ...
150
Hamburg
128
Durban
... 127
Marseilles
66
Havre
58
Odessa
58
Mauritius
33
Hong Kong
29
Noumea
11
Bombay
8
Thursday Islands
6
Manila
5
South Sea Islands ... ... 1
case 3
Antwerp
3
I
:ase 33,493
SHIPPERS.
Cases. Casks.
Co-op. Wholesale Society
. . — 448
B. Richards and Son ...
... — 319
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd.
... — 299
Sydney Soap and Candle Co., Ltd.
— 271
Sydney M.P. Co., Ltd.
... — 120
Dalgety and Co., Ltd.
... — 100
Aust. F. Works, Ltd. ...
... — 77
Harrisson and Whiffen
... — 61
OUTWARD AGENTS.
J. and A. Brown ...
Tons.
148,733
E. B. Wallace
99,834
W. Scott, Fell and Co.
65,350
Earp Bros, and Co.
56,320
Caledonian Coal Company
43,943
Dalgety and Co., Ltd.
27 390
W. B. Sharp
20,917
F. Stokes and Co. ...
20,697
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd. ...
20,619
Gibbs, Bright and Co.,
12,186
J. M. Hyde
8,607
Moll wraith, McEacharn and Co. ...
5,710
D. Williams
4,992
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd.
4,663
W. S. Tait and Co.
3,270
F. and H. Langwill
2,032
J. Reid
700
J. Scharff
506
Davies and Fehon
488
Cowlishaw Bros. ...
440
On Chong and Co.
315
Totals
547,762
DESTINATIONS.
Valparaiso ...
Tons
88,846
Manila
72.942
Honolulu ...
57,494
San Francisco
52 315
Singapore ... ... * ...
18.070
Iquique
17,924
Java
17.325
Callao
15,502
Antafagasta
15,128
Caleta Buena
14,409
Acapulco
11,320
Coronel
11,290
Taltal
11,277
Mollendo
11,002
Junin
10,257
Tjilatjap
10,062
Hongkong
9,433
Pisagua
9,318
Caldera
8,720
Samarang
8,100
Bombay
7,248
Tandjong Priok
7,187
Calcutta
5,990
Coquimbo
4,901
Shanghai
4,629
Noumea
4,160
Chanaral
4,154
Celebes
4,127
Panama
4,123
Carrizal
2,512
Port Elizabeth
2,263
Sarco
2,142
Trincomalee
2,076
Tahiti
2,032
Suva ... ...
2,000
Manzanillo
1,967
Tocopilla >
1,910
Durban
1,870
Portland, 0. ... - ...
1,804
Pascasmayo
1,615
Los Vilos
1,464
Mauritius
1,459
Corinto
1,213
Colombo ...
1,156
Arica
1,092
Tchio
673
Jaluit
506
Eureka
440
S.S. Islands
315
Total
547,762
Coal.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
J JLY—DECEMBER, 1902.
TALLOW.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
JULY, 1901— JUNE, 1902.
Tallow.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
JULY-DECEMBER, 1902.


H. Fisher
31
F. Kanematsu
18
H. Prell and Co.
11
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd.
10
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd.
... 3
4
J. D. Patinson
2
Elliott Bros., Ltd.
.
2
A. C. Gaertner
1
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd.
... —
1
Total
... 3
1775
DESTINATIONS.
London
Cases.
2asks.
1291
Liverpool
.
322
Islam
.
101
Hongkong
.
33
Japan
.
18
S.S. Islands
. 3
4
Manila
2
Bombay
.
2
Noumea
. —
2
Total
. 3
1775
Far. and Dairyman’s Co.
100
Berry Central Factory ...
80
Irelands, Limited
80
Weber, Lohmann and Co.
—
—
49
55
Bowden Bros.
50
M. Segur
—
4
46
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd
,
—
18
—
116
40
J. See and Co
—
—
—
.
2
31
Gerber, Miehaut and Co.
7
25
Davis Butchering Co. ...
25
M. Brial
—
16
Smith, Warren and Co. ...
10
15
Clarke and Co
12
A. E. Eudd and Co. ... ...
,
9
H. Bowden
6
D. Bowden ...
4
■T. Bridge and Co
—
4
A. C. Gaertner
12
3
Morgan and Co
3
9.
Father Fischer
—
2
2
J. Soharff
34
1
H. S. Bird and Co
9
1
Dalton Brothers
2
1
J. I. Falk and Co
1
G. Dan
1
E. Lhoest and Co
,
1
J. Wallace
1
Paul and Gray, Ltd.
-
46
—
T. Playfair ... ...
—
—
—
—
42
—
Southern Produce Co. ...
15
Tillock and Co
,
11
,
S. H. Mission
9
Brown, Joske and Co.
7
Gordon and Smith
6
F. Hagen
—
—
—
—
5
—
J. Gillies
—
5
-
J. Williams
5
Brial Freres
3
S. H. College
—
—
—
—
2
—
Bowe Brothers
—
—
—
—
2
—
M. Payer
—
—
■
—
2
—
F. Ireland
—
—
—
—
2
—
Davidson Brothers
—
—
—
2
Stanlev and Co
1
Kerr Brothers and Co. ...
—
1
E. Towns and Co
—
—
—
1
.
G. J. Waterhouse
—
—
—
—
1
J. Dyer
—
—
—
—
1
—
G. Kerr
—
—
—
—
1
A. M. Brodziack
—
—
—
—
1
—
Totals—
I pci, 1 keg, 113 pkgs, 120 tins. 4656 cases, 99,886 bxs.
DESTINATIONS.
•
bio
a>
t]
tn
D
be
-14
c
S3
O
W
p.
H
u
P=
London
—
—r
—
—
35 62,109
Capetown
—
—
—
—
509 22,277
Natal
—
—
—
—
50
3,003
Durban
—
—
—
450
3,524
Liverpool
—
—
—
10
2,312
Durban, opt. Capetown ...
1,621
Manila
1
—
—
— 2331
955
Port Elizabeth
—
—
—
—
50
742
Hong Kong
—
62
—
352
620
South African Pofts
—
—
—
—
—
610
Noumea
—
—
33
—
213
487
East London
300
Japan
—
—
—
—
37
158
Victoria (B.C.)
—
—
—
_
—
120
Thursday Island, etc. ...
—
—
—
_
53
115
Biera
—
100
90
Colombo
—
—
—
—
7
75
South Sea Islands
1
18 120 415
56
Singapore
—
.
4
50
Shanghai
—
—
—
—
3.
. 21
Honolulu
—
—
—
.
—
• 12
Sourabaya
—
—
—
—
15
•—
Maceassar
—
—
—
*
12
—
Bombay •••
—
—
—
8
—
Banda
—
—
—
‘ _
2
Totals
1
1 113 120 4656 99,886
SHIPPEES.
Pkgs. Cs
15x9
N.S.W. Creamery Butter Co.
—
—
—.
1362
Palmer and Co. ...
—
—
—
1000
Hawken and Vance
—
' —
3
1000
Co-op. Wholesale Society
—
_
—
798
Birt and Co., Ltd.
—
—
100
536
Foley Bros.
—
—
1
550
L. J. 0. Bray
—
—
—
510
Farmers’ Co-op. Co., Ltd....
—
—
1
357
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd. ...
—
—
36
200
S. E. Crocket
—
—
—
127
Solomon and Son
—
—
—
122
E. Hall and Son. ...
—
—
—
100
Chinese Shippers ...
—
_
2
93
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd. ...
1—
—
12
69
W. S. Tait and Co.
17
12
61
Coastal Farmers' Company
—
—
—
77
Berrima Dist. F. and D. Co.'
—
—
—
75
H. Prescott and Co.
—
3
5
70
Denham Bros.
—
—
—
70
Austral Fruit and P. Co. ...
40
J. See and Co.
30
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd.
—
9
27
N.S.W. F. F. and Ice Co.. Ltd. ...
a
10
24
Gibbs, Bright and Co.
—
—
20
M. Segur ...
—
—
—
15
Scott, Henderson and Co....
—
' —
11
10
J. Barre Johnstone and Co.
,
10
A. C. Gaertner ...
9
9
Dunston Pope Fruit Company ...
—
—
—
5
Morgan and Co. ...
—
4
4
Gerber, Michaut and Co. ...
—
4
F. Hagen
—
—
5
3
N.Z. L. and M.A. Co., Ltd.
'
2
Tillock and Co. ...
2
L. Cocu ...
2
H. S. Bird and Co.
9
1
J. Gillies
1
1
Dalton Bros.
1
J. Barlow
1
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd.
76
— Smith ...
—
—
50
Justus Scharff
33
J. Bartram and Son
10
N. Shelley
6
Kerr Bros, and Co.
5
G. J. Wateihouse
;
5
Brial Freres
4
Morgan and Smith
4
Pacific Islands Company
—
3
Holdsworth, Macpherson and Co....
1
2
Brown, Joske and Co.
2
Eabone, Feez and Co. ■ ...
2
Staerker and Fischer
1
Nelson and Eobertson
;
1
__
Eowe Bros.
1
E. Towns and Co.
—
—
1
—
. Total
1
21
436
7391
DESTINATIONS.
Kgs.Tkgs, Cb.
Bxs
Durban ... ...
110
3067
Cape Town
9
1410
Marseilles
—
—
—
575
Vancouver ... .;.
50
470
Durban, opt. Cape Town...
—
—
500
London ...
—
376
Noumea
17
32
261
Hong Kong
51
254
Colombo
200
Natal
134
Tientsin
69
Japan
3
11
40
Manila ... •
—
•
—* “
20
Liverpool
—
—
1
10
S.S. Islands
I
1
172
5
Totals
i
21
436
7391
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Intf
wstato
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
00
CO
o
to
to
CO
K
a
ft
w
ft
U
N.S.W. Cmy. Butter Co.
—
—
—
315 19,843
Foley Brothers
—
—
—
—
15 17,287
Farmers’ Co-op. Co., Ltd.
—
—
—
—
199 15,345
Berrima D. F. and D. Co.
—
—
—
—
—
8 120
J. Barre Johnston and Co.
,
—
—
—
11
4,217
N.S.W. F. F. and I. Co.
Ltd ■
—1,589
4,051
E. Meadows
—
—
—
—
—
3,568
H. Prescott and Co
—
—
—
120
78
3.402
J. Bartram and Son ... ...
2,749
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd
—
—
—
100
2,685
Hawken and Vance
—
—
—
—
12
2,458
L. J. O’Bray
1,951
Palmer and Co
1,850
Coastal Far. Co-op. Co....
1.8C6
Denham Brothers
—
—
—
—
110
1,360
R. Hall and Son
—
—
—
—
—
1,017
T. Mitchell
967
Dalgety and Co., Ltd. ...
—
—
—
—
—
625
Birt and Co
598
Wilson Thurgood
813
498
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd.
'
—
—
—
486
T. Clarke ...
41
E. II. Claxton
400
S. Meadows
—
—
—
—
300
385
J. Ireland
—
1
—
—
161
383
H. Dalldorf and Co.
• —^
—
—
—
—
350
Co-op. Wholesale Scy. ...
320
Howes Bros, and Co.
D. Anderson
—
—
—
—
—
246
J. Foley ...
—
—
—
—
—
235
Solomon and Son
—
—
—
—
112
205
E. J. Brown ... — —
1
—
__
—
165
200
P. and 0. Company
-
—
—
—
—
200
W. H. Barlow
—
—
—
—
—
190
W. S. Tait and Co
—
—
33
—
162
185
Chinese Shippers
—
— -
62
—
36
151
Scott, Henderson and Co.
—
—
—
—
20
132
R. Little and Co
—
—
—
—
7
106
Butter.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
BUTTER.


GRAND TOTALS.
Sovereigns (eq. £2,5T2,5&))
504 boxes
Gold (eq. .£262,937) ...
...
286 „
„ bars (eq. JE17.601)
4 .,
Specie (eq. .£100,000)
20 „
Dore bullion (eq. .£92,054)
215 bars
»» »,
42 ,.
Bullion (eq. £69,677)
165 ,.
,, .£5950)
41 boxes
Silver bullion (eq. £5900)
44 „
' ., (eq. £5950)
35 ,.
„ coin (eq. £10,400)
52 .,
Gold and silver coin (eq. £340)
1 .,
Coin (eq. £5092)
14 „
„ (eq. £1300)
Copper coin (eq. £150)
5 cases
15 boxes
Copper
612,935 ingots
2,897 elans
it ...
2,127 cakes
,, ...
407 pigs
50 tons
...
45 bars
,, matte
15,572 bags
• » ,,
80 tons
Bullion
242,420 bars
180 tons
Silver lead bullion
11,680 bars
Lead bullion
9,285 „
837 tons
Lead
233,378 bars
,,
12,129 pigs
Tin
36,225 ingots
Tin clippings
610 bags
29 tons
Ore
53,702 bags
16 tons
28 casks
11 boxes
Chrome ore
22,142 bags
Rock ore
4,639 .,
Copper ore
2,464 „
Antimony ore
1,460 „
Cobalt ore
1,140 „
Tin ore
57 ..
Bismuth ore
6 cases
,
4 casks
Alnnite
1,393 tons
Zinc
186 slabs
...
20 bags
,, ... ...
110 pkgs
. 21 cases
... ...
12 kegs
,, ashes
1,638 bags
,, dross
299 ingots
...
5 bags
,, refuse
100 „
Slag
68 ..
Metal ...
17 cases
it ... ••• ...
5 pkgs
Old Metal - -
253 „
115 bdls
„ ,,
2J tons
Muntz metal
8 cases
Jewellers’ sweepings
8 casks
Gold tailings
4
GOLD, ORES and METALS.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
' SHIPPERS.
Union Bank of Anst., Ltd., 140 bxs sovs. (.£700,000),
315 slabs copper.
Bank of N. S. Wales, 120 bxs sovs. (£600,000), 3 bxs
gold (£15,000), 25 bxs silver coin (£5000), 5 bis
copper coin (£5O).
Bank of Australasia, 71 bxs sovs. (£355,000).
Queensland National Bank, 40 bxs sovs. (£200,000),
10 bxs gold (£50,000).
The Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney, Ltd., SO
bxs sovs. (£150,000), 20 bxs specie (£100,000).
Chinese Shippers, 270 bxs gold (£187,352), 5 pkgs 1
cs metal, 126 pkgs old metal.
London Bank of Australia, Ltd, SO bxs sovs.
(£150,000).
City Bank of Sydney, 29 bxs sovs. (£145,000).
The Aust. Joint Stock Bank, Ltd, 15 bxs sovs.
(£75,000).
The English, Scottish and Aust. Bank, Ltd., 12 bxs
sovs. (£60,000), 1 bx gold (£4000).
Commercial Bank of Australia, Ltd., 10 bxs sovs.
(£50,000), 1 bx gold (£5000).
P. and O. S. N. Co., 5 bxs sovs. (£22,000).
Smelting and Refining Co. of Aust., 1901, Ltd, 179
bars dofe bullion (£77,291), 42 bars dore bullion,
42 bars bullion (£16,794), 12,920 bars bullion,
9,850 bars S. L. bullion, 5100 bars 237 tons lead
bullion, 5793 ingots, 185 cakes copper, 12,281 bgs,
80 tons copper matte, 2268 bars lead.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd, 123 bars bullion (52,833), 29
bars dore bullion (£12,611), 1840 bars, 180 tons
bullion, 1800 bars S. L. bullion, 4185 bars, 600
tons lead bullion, 8055 bars lead, 3182 bags cop-
per matte, 11,084 bags chrome ore, 949 bags an-
timony ore, 16 tons 1892 bags ore.
Sulphide Corporation, Ltd, 7 bars dore bullion
(£2152), 206,600 bars bullion, 164,922 bars, 11,800
pigs lead, 1639 slabs, 1286 cakes, 407 pigs copper.
Royal Mint, 41 bxs bullion (£5950), 44 bxs silver
bullion (£5900), 20, bis silver (£2950), 1 bx gold
(£1585)
Comptoir National D’Escompte de Paris, 4 bxs gold
bars (£17,601), 2 bis coin (£2350), 1 bx gold and
silver coin (£340).
Bank of New Zealand, 1 bx sovs (£5000), 15 bxs sil-
ver (£3000), 27 bis silver coin (£5400), 10 bis
copper coin (£100).
Justus Scharff, 11 bxs coin (£2667), 5 cs coin (£1300).
Sir Q. O’Brien, 1 bx sovs (£530).
O. Fioldhouse, 1 bx coin (£75).
Great Cobar Copper Mining Syndicate, 320,032 ingots
copper, 21,060 bars bullion.
E. and A. Copper Co., 153,305 ingots 50 tons cop-
per.
Lloyd Copper Co., 123,985 ingots copper, 68 bags
slag.
Gibbs, Bright and Co, 27,172 bars lead, 1579 ingots,
656 cakes copper, 109 bags copper matte, 879 in-
gots tin, 12,497 bag? ore, 11,058 bags chrome ore
246 bags antimony ore, 127 pkgs old metal.
W. and J. Lempriere, 33,780 bags ore, 2464 bags cop-
per ore.
T. H. Kelly, 29,475 ingots tin, 4367 ingots copper.
Broken Hill Proprieary, Ltd., 21,545 bars lead, 51
bags ore.
Hermann Haege, 4639 bags rock ore, 906 bags co-
balt ore, 24 bgs ore, 597 bags zinc ashes, 299 in-
gots, 5 bags zinc dross.
Union S. S. Co. of N.Z., Ltd. 4162 bags ore.
J. Paxton and Co., 4573 bars lead.
Q. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 2275 ingots copper.
Gilchrist, Watt and Co., 2201 ingots tin.
F. H. Snow, 2019 bars lead.
J. Barre Johnston and Co., 1623 ingots tin.
A. E. Rudder and Co, 1131 bars lead, 138 slabs cop
per.
R. Guthrie, 1147 ingots copper.
Sydney Smelting Co, 855 bars lead, 292 ingots tin.
The Runcorn Alum Co, 1086 tons alunite.
Saddington and Dixon, 307 tons alunite.
Caird, Maxwell and Co, 878 ingots tin.
F. Kanematsu, 826 bars lead.
Madden and Hickson. 805 slabs copper.
N. M. H. Copper Co., 452 ingots copper.
Thompson and Co, 585 ingots tin.
E. Friedereicks, 610 bags tin clippings.
E. Schemmel, 26 tons tin clippings.
R. S. Lamb and Co, 3 tons tin clippings.
A. J. Kennedy, 679 bags ore.
Lyndhnrst Mining Co, 354 bgs ore.
Lysaght Bros, and Co, Ltd, 475 bags zinc ashes.
Danger, Gedye and Co, 266 bgs zinc ashes, 100 bags
zinc refuse, 12 bgs ore. !
Col. Sugar Ref. Co, Ltd, 288 pigs lead. 186 slabs, 5
cs zinc.
Burns, Fhilp and Co., Ltd., 292 ingots tin, 20 bgs,
16 cs zinc.
S. Hoffnung and Co., Ltd., 265 bgs antimony ore.
A. 11. Owens, Ltd., 234 bgs cobalt ore.
A. Beil, 74 bgs ore.
■ W. S. Friend and Co, 57 bags tin ore.
Wright, Heaton and Co., Ltd., 55 bgs ore, 4 cks gold
tailings.
O. Oppenheimer, 49 bgs ore.
J. Gainford and Co., 45 bgs ore.
Q. Drees, 115 bdls 2J tons old metal.
Morgan and Smith, 110 pkgs zinc.
A. C. Gaertner, 45 bars copper.
Sydney Lead Works, 21 pigs lead.
J. I. Falk and Co., 20 pigs lead.
Haege and Co., 12 bars lead.
W. H. Yates, 23 bags, 3 cks ore, 2 cks bismuth ore
E. Vickery and Sons, 21 cks ore, 2 cks bismuth ore.
Elliott Bros., Ltd., 11 bxs ore, 14 cs metal.
R. Towns and Co., 12 kgs zinc.
Paul and Gray, Ltd, 5 cs muhtz metal.
R. Johnson, Clapham and Morris, Ltd., 3 cs muntz
metal.
Flood and Co., Ltd., 6 cs bismuth ore.
J. Vickery and Co., 4 cks ore.
Kendall and Co., 2 bags ore.
11. E. Finkh, 4 cks jewellers’ sweepings.
J. J. Gillham, 2 cks jewellers’ sweepings.
Walker and Hall, 2 cs metal.
Bell Bros., 2 cks jewellers’ sweepings.
DESTINATIONS.
London, 91 bxs sovs. (.£452,000), 20 bis specie
(.£100,000), 215 bars dore bullion (£92,045), 42
bars dore bullion, 165 bars bullion (£69,677), 41
bis bullion (£5950i, 44 bxs silver bullion (£5900),
20 bxs silver (£2950), 1 bx gold (£1535), 1 bx coin
£75), 242,420 brs, 180 tons bullion, 11,680 brs S.L.
bullion, 9285 bars, 837 tons lead bullion, 602,376
ingots, 2560 slabs, 2127 cakes, 407 pigs, 50 tons
copper, 15,463 bags, 80 tons copper matte, 230,220
bars, 11,800 pigs lead, 33,433 ingots tin, 51,75'}
k a i? 3 -.16 tons, 28 cks, 11 bxs ore, 22,142 bags
chrome ore, 4639 bags rock ore, 2464 bags cop-
per ore, 1460 bags antimony ore, 906 bags cobalt
ore, 6 cs 4 cks bismuth ore, 741 bags zinc ashes
100 bags zinc refuse, 337 tons alunite, 68 bags
slag. 16 cs metal, 4 cks gold tailings, 4 cks jew-
ellers’ sweepings.
San Francisco, 410 bxs sovs. (£2,050,000), 1475 in-
gots tin, 54 bags ore.
Hong Kong, 269 bxs gold (£186,352),, 569 bars lead,
253 pkgs old metal, 5 pkgs 1 cs metal.
Natal, 10 bis gold (£50,000).
South Sea Islands, 1 bx sovs. (£5000), 3 bxs gold
(£15,000), 52 bxs silver coin (£10,400), 15 bxs sil-
ver (£3000), 11 bxs coin (£2667), 5 cs coin (£1300),
15 bxs copper coin (£150), 288 pigs lead, 186 slabs,
110 pkgs, 20 bags, 21 cs, 12 kegs zinc, 5 cs muntz
metal.
Bombay, 3 bxs gold bars (£15,065).
Thursday, Island, etc., 3 bxs gold (£10,000), 3 cs
muntz metal.
Noumea, 1 bx sovs. (£5000), 45 bars copper.
Marseilles, 1 bx sovs. (£530)12 bxs coin (£2350), 1 bx
gold and silver coin (£340), 72 slabs copper.
Calcutta, 1 bx gold bars, (£2536).
London, op. Liverpool, 5503 ingots copper.
London, op. New York, 3025 ingots copper.
Shanghai, 2258 bars, 21 pigs lead, 1579 ingots, cop-
per.
Antwerp, 807 bags zinc ashes, 299 ingots 5 bgs zinc
dross, 610 bags, 3 tons tin clippings, 138 slabs
copper.
Liverpool, 1086 tons alunite, 466 bags ore, 57 bags
tin ore.
Port Said, 1251 bags ore.
Hamburg, 175 bags ore, 13 tons tin clippings, 115
bdls, 2i tons old metal, 4 cks jewellers’ sweep-
ings. - -
Japan, 1292 bars lead.
Vancouver, 1169 ingots tin.
Manchester, 452 ingots copper.
Rotterdam, 234 bags cobalt ore. -
Victoria (8.C.), 148 ingots tin.
Havre. 127 slabs copper.
London, Antwerp, or Hamburg, 109 bags copper
matte.
Amsterdam. 13 tons tin clippings.
Samarang, 30 bars lead.
Manila, 20 pigs lead.
New York, 3 bags ore.
Gold, Ores and Metals.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Union Bank of Aust., Ltd., 140 bis sovereigns
(£700,000) . .
Bank of New South Wales, Ltd., 74 bxs sovereigns
(£349,409), 1 bx silver coin (£500), 8 cks allies


GRAND TOTALS.
Sovereigns, bxs (£1,846,109)
375
„ pkg (=£3000)
1
Gold, bxs (,£191,677)
156
Gold coin, bx (£6000)
1
Bullion, bars (£195,622)
327
„ bxs (£4500)
35
Dore bullion, bars (£126 032)
228
Silver bars (£1083) ...
20
Silver coin, bxs (£894)
2
Silver bullion, bxs (£1200) ...
9
Coin, cases (£1400) ...
5
„ bg
1
Bullion, bars
50,400
Lead bullion, brs ...
... 14,000
Lead, bars ...
... 153 190
,, pigs
251
,, rolls
51
Copper, ingots
... 288,167
,, cakes
231
,, bars
7
Copper matte, bgs ...
... 6,513
Ore, bgs
... 51,034
„ cks
7
„ pkgs
6
„ cases
2
Tin, ingots
... 18,688
„ pkgs
... 1,461
Tin ore, bgs
Tin clippings, bgs ...
30
... 1,907
Chrome ore, bgs
... 6,533
Cobalt ore, sks
13
Bismuth ore, pkgs ...
2
Spelter, ingots
165
,, cakes
... 1,320
Zinc, bdls
36
„ pkgs
57
,. roll
1
,, bags
358
„ cks
5
kgs
21
Zinc blocks, bdls
20
Zinc dross, bgs
257
Zinc ashes, bgs
290
Zinc icfuse, bgs
97
Dross, ingots
... 3,264
,, cks
8
Alunite, tons
... 2,590
Iron pigs
43
Metal, cs
68
„ bdls
83
,, bxs ...
48
„ bgs ...
24
„ bars ...
5
„ cks ...
3
„ pkgs
89
Muntz metal, cs
37
,, ,, bdls ...
Ashes, cks ...
19
8
Sweepings, cks
.2
Bank of Australasia, 52 bxs sovereigns (>£253,000).
Queensland National Bank, 40 bxs sovereigns
(.£200,000)
E.S. and A. Bank, 22 bxs sovereigns (£110,000).
London Bank of Aust., Ltd., 20 bxs sovereigns
(£100,000), 10 bxs gold (£50,000).
Bank of N.Z., Ltd., 2D bxs sovereigns (£101,000), 1
bx gold coin (£6000)
A J.S. Bank, Ltd., 6 bxs sovs (£30,000).
P. and O. S.N. Co., Ltd., 1 bx sovereigns (£4000), 1
pkg sovs (£3000), 6 brs lead
Chinese Shippers, 136 bxs gold (£91,677), 13 bdls
muntz metal
Commercial Bank of Aust., Ltd., 10 bxs gold
(£50,000).
Dalgety and Co., Ltd., 246 brs bullion (£144,791), 12
bars Dore bullion (£7788), 9905 ingots copper,
1708 bgs copper matte, 8320 brs lead, 30 bgs ore
Smelting and Refining Co. of Aust. 1901, Ltd., 216
bars Dore bullion (£llB 294), 40 brs bullion
(£20,131), 2616 brs lead, 4805 bgs copper matte,
1273 bgs ore
D. Anderson, 13 brs bullion (£11,050)
National Bank of N.Z., Ltd., 15 brs bullion (£10,400)
Waipi G.M. Co., 13 brs bullion (£9250)
Royal Mint, 35 bxs bullion (£4500), 9 bxs silver bul-
lion (£1200)
J. Scharff, 5 cs coin (£1400), 87 bars lead, 2 cs muntz
metal
Great Cobar Copper Mining Co.. 15 bars silver
(£806), 161,513 ingots copper
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 5 bars silver (£277), 15,200
bars lead, 5222 ingots 1461 pkgs tin, 5000 bars
bullion, 186 cakes copper, 6533 bgs chrome ore,
30 bgs ore
Comptoir National d’Escompte de Paris, 1 bx silver
coin (£394).
Sulphide Corp., Ltd., 96,200 brs lead, 45,400 brs bul-
lion, 14,000 bars lead bullion, 45 cakes copper
Lloyd Copper Co., 61,176 ingots copper, 296 bgs ore
E. and A. Copper Co., Ltd., 55 570 ingots copper
W. and J. Lempriere, 44,565 bgs ore
J. Paxten and Co., 20,108 brs lead, 358 bgs zinc,
1320 cakes spelter
T. 11. Kelly, 11,963 ingots tins
Bowden Bros, and Co., Ltd., 6518 brs lead
Union S.S. Co. of N.Z., Ltd., 3862 bgs ore
J. A. Simonsen, 3264 ingots, 8 cks dross, 96 bgs zinc
ashes, 97 bags zinc refuse
Runcorn Alum Co.. 2590 tons alunite
A. Fraser, 2290 brs lead
E. Friedereichs, 1756 bgs tin clippings
J. Barre Johnston and Co., 1410 ingots tin
Gollin and Co. Pty., Ltd., 1206 brs lead
R. Johnson, Clapham and Morris, Ltd, 257 bgs zinc
dross, 105 bgs zinc ashes, 165 ingots spelter, 4 cs
muntz metal.
F. Kanematsu, 458 brs lead
A. E. Rudder and Co., 363 bgs ore
Lichtner and Co., 200 bgs ore
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd., 11l pigs 3 rolls lead, 8
ingots tin, 32 bxs 5 cs 1 pkg metal, 2 cs muntz
metal, 4 cks 5 kgs zinc
R. Guthrie, 173 brs lead, 16 bxs metal
R. S. Lamb and Co., 151 bgs tin clippings, 24 bgs
metal
A. Oppeuheimer, 148 bgs ore
G. Drees, 78 bdls 39 pkgs metal
W. S. Tait and Co., 99 pigs lead, 5 cs muntz metal,
2 cs metal, 1 roll zinc
M. Segur, 85 ingots tin, 13 sks cobalt ore
Dangar, Qedye and Co., Ltd., 89 bgs zinc ashes
Paul and Gray, Ltd., 56 pkgs zinc, 13 cs muntz
metal, 4 bdls 2 cks 1 cs metal
Wright, Heaton and Co., Ltd., 71 bgs ore
Aust. Smelting Co., 36 bdls zinc, 31 pkgs metal
A. Beil, 68 bgs ore
Elliott Bros., Ltd., 36 cs 16 pkgs metal
S. Hoffnung and Co., Ltd., 41 pigs lead, 10 kgs zinc
Sydney Lead Works, Ltd., 48 rolls lead
Holdsworth, Macpherson and Co., 43 pigs iron, 1 ck
zinc
W. 11. Yates and Co., 30 bgs 2 cks ore, 2 pkgs bis-
muth ore
W. S. Friend and Co., 30 bgs tin ore
F. Hagen, 20 bdls zinc blocks, 4 cs muntz metal, 2
cs metal
A. Yates and Co., 24 bgs ore
R. C. Ghest, 27 bgs ore
Perks and Stack, 19 bgs ore
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 5 brs copper, 6 kgs 1
pkg zino, 5 bdls muntz metal
E. Vickery and Sons, 5 bgs 5 cks 6 pkgs ore
W. Kopserr and Co., 12 cs 1 ck metal
Adelaide S.S. Co., Ltd., 8 brs lead
J. Lempriere, 7 bgs ore
Smith, Copeland and Co., 7 cs metal
A. C. Gaertner, 6 cs muntz metal
H. Haege and Co., 6 bgs ore
Leplastrier and Co., 6 bgs ore
Weber. Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 2 brs copper, 1 cs
metal, 1 cs muntz metal
Wallaroo and Moonta G.M. Co., 3 ingots copper
Nelson and Robertson, 3 bgs ore
J. Macintosh, 3 bars metal
Father Shaw, 2 brs metal
Flood and Co., Ltd., 2 cs ore
M. Payer, 2 cs metal
G. J. Waterhouse, 2 pkgs metal
E. - Sansome, 2 cks sweepings
R. W. Hardie. 1 bg ore
Morgan and Smith, 1 bdl M. metal
Father Fischer, 1 bdl metal
F. Goff and Co., 1 bg coin
DESTINATIONS.
San Francisco, SCO bxs sovereigns (£1,501,000), 20
bxs gold (£100,000), 1410 ingots tin, 27 bgs ore
London, 53 bxs sovereigns (£243,409), 1 pkg sover-
eigns (£3000), 327 brs bullion (£195 622), 35 bxs
bullion (£4500), 223 brs Dore bullion (£126,032),
9 bxs silver bullion (£1200), 20 brs silver
(£1083), 253,203 ingots 45 cakes copper, 138 599
brs lead, 50,400 brs bullion, 14 000 brs lead bul-
lion, 15,438 ingots. 1461 pkgs tin, 46,307 bgs 7
cks 2 cs 6 pkgs ore, 6533 bgs chrome ore, 13 sks
cobalt ore, 4805 bgs copper matte, 2 pkgs bis-
muth ore 3264 ingots 8 cks dross, 1320 cakes
spelter, 1047 tons alunite, 185 bgs zinc ashes,
97 bgs zino refuse, 36 cs 16 bxs 16 pkgs metal.
8 cks ashes, 2 cks sweepings
Hongkong, 136 bxs gold (£91,677). 382 brs lead, 36
bdls zinc, 31 pkgs metal, 13 bdls muntz metal
Capetown, opt. Natal, 10 bxs sovereigns (£5O 0C0)
Capetown, opt. Natal, 10 bxs sovereigns (£50,000)
S. Islands, Ibx gold coin (£6000), scs coin (£1400),
1 bx silver coin (£500), 111 pigs, 7 rolls lead,
8 ingots tin, 7 brs copper, 57 pkgs 21 kgs 4 cks
zinc, 14 cs 32 bxs 1 ck 1 bdl 5 brs 3 pkgs metal,
10 cs O bdls muntz metal.
Noumea, 2 bxs sovereigns (£2000), 140 pigs lead, 85
. ingots tin, 43 pigs iron, 15 cs muntz metal, 7cs
metal, 20 bdls zinc blocks, 1 ck 1 roll zinc
Marseilles, 1 bx silver coin (£391), 7608 ingots cop-
per, 30 bgs ore •
London, opt. Liverpool, 22,217 ingots copper.
Japan, 9561 brs 44 rolls lead, 1 bg coin
Antwerp, 3933 bgs ore, 434 ingots tin, 1463 bgs tin
clippings, 358 bgs zinc
Naples, 5136 ingots copper
Liverpool, 1543 tons alunite, 1708 bgs copper matte,
186 cakes copper, 484 bgs ore, 30 bgs tin ore, 257
bgs zinc dross, 105 bgs zinc ashes, 165 ingots
spelter
Shanghai, 2328 brs lead, 3 ingots copper
Hamburg, 1313 ingots tin, 53 bgs ore, 78 bdls 24 bgs
39 pkgs metal
Yokohama or Kobe, 1163 brs lead
Yokohama, 1157 brs lead
Bremen, 200 bgs ore, 376 bgs tin clippings
Liverpool, opt. Antwerp, 68 bgs tin clippings
Thursday Island, 11 cs 4 bdls 2 cks metal, 10 cs
muntz metal
Pago Pago, 2 cs muntz metal.
Frozen and Preserved Meats.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901-June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
B. Richards and Son, 213,369 ores, 2079 prs legs,
16,460 legs mutton, 37,912 crcs lamb, 2735 qrs,
267 buttocks, 491 pcs beef, 1350 sides, 14 pcs
veal, 10 bags calves’ heads, 8 cases calves' feet,
541 cits, 8 cs hares, 58 crts, 41 cs rabbits,
363 crts poultry, 12 cs 4 crts 4 cks tongues. 9 cs
fries, 325 crts 296 cs 433 pkgs 40 bga F. sundries.
Austral Freezing Works, 196,851 crcs, 433 haunches,
2448 pis legs mutton, 33,612 crcs lamb, 4835 qrs
• 558 pcs beef, 50 crcs 100 sides veal, 1627 cs meats,
24 crts hares, 186 crts 337 boxes 217 cs, 120 bgs
kidneys. 59 cs 15 bxs tongues, 8 cs sheeps’ heads,
228 crts 62 cs 8 bgs F. sundries.
But and Co., Ltd., 61,731 crcs, 29,571 legs mutton,
18,t68 crcs 3 cks 3 cs lamb, 1066 qrs beef, 116
crcs 690 sides veal, 225 crts 24 cs rabbits, 27 crts
hares, 15 crts 9 cs tongues, 21 cs tails, 157 crts
106 cs 9 bgs F. sundries.
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 27,096 crcs, 1200 legs, 200
prs legs, 240 saddles mutton, 2290 crcs lamb, 40
qrs, 249 pcs, 66 rumps and loins, 25 ribs, 7
barrels, 2 cks 2 kegs beef, 175 crcs 2 cs veal, 582
crcs 20 sides 2 cs pork, 114 crcs suckers, 406 crts
120 cs 6 bgs 8 crcs rabbits, 82 crts 32 cs 6 crcs
hares, 12 crts hares and rabbits, 187 crts 389 cs
31 pkgs poultry, 829 cs meats, 293 cs 57 livers,
18 cs 2 tongues, 25 cs 1 (single) hams. 5 cs 1 side
bacon, 10 cs bacon and ham, 6 cs 3 kidneys, 10 cs
brains, 5 cs hearts, 3 cs sweetbreads, 2 cs tripe,
3 bags sheeps’ heads, 2 cs sausages.
For Frozen and Preserved Meats Statistics, July-December, 1902, see page 19h.


F. W. and P. Hudson, 32,645 crcs mutton, 16,853
crcs lamb, 300 sides veal, 3583 crts rabbits, 2976
crts hares, 1130 crts poultry, 13 crts tails, 237
crts F. sundries.
J. Cook, 25,223 crcs mutton, 348 crcs lamb, 10 cs
meats, 50 cs 7 crts rabbits, 6 cs 24 crts hares,
59 cs kidneys, 85 cs tongues-, 21 crts tails.
Davis Butchering Company, 15,179 crcs mutton,
160 crcs lamb, 380 qrs beef, 10 sides veal, 1511
crcs pork, 1451 crts 107 cs poultry, 254 crts
poultry and frozen sundries, 100 crts 2 cs hares,
58 crts 6 cs rabbits, 20 cs meats, 31 cs sausages,
1-bag livers, 1566 crts 406 pkgs 26 bags frozen
sundries.
Palmer and Co.. 12,489 crcs mutton, 750 crcs lamb,
800 qrs beef, 178 crcs 573 sides veal, 163 crcs
pork, 1024 crts poultry, 50 crts rabbits, 16 cs
kidneys, 448 crts 79 cs 251 pkgs F. sundries.
Aust. Chilling and Freezing Company, 9913 crcs
325 cs mutton, 21,647 crcs lamb, 85 cs 200 boxes
kidneys, 158 cs meats, 124 pkgs F. sundries.
W. Drake, 7432 crcs mutton, 514 crcs lamb, 260 qrs
beef, 20 sides veal, 31 crcs pork, 210 pkgs 53 crts
9 cs F. sundries.
Sydney M.P. Company, 124,274 cs meats.
Rosewarne Packing Company, Ltd., 28,413 cs meats,
243 cs F. sundries.
J. Barre Johnston and Co., 2500 crcs mutton, 4101
cs meats, 13 crts poultry.
A. Kidman, 2600 crcs lamb.
Oldham, Drabble and Co., 1205 crcs mutton, 50
crcs lamb, 768 qrs beef, 80 sides veal, 10 crts
rabbits, 87 crts P. sundries.
E. Meadows, 3676 crts hares, 610 crts rabbits.
Hudson, 1121 crcs mutton.
Rabone, Feez and Co., 3680 cs meats, 8 cs -beef.
Burns, Philp and Co., 2401 cs 4 brls meats, 274 cs
118 kegs 51 brls 16 cks 8 pkgs beef, 45 cs bacon,
22 cs hams, 9 crts 20 cs poultry, 14 cs rabbits,
14 cs 1 keg tongues.
E. B. Williams and Co., 2977 cs meats, 234 crts
poultry.
J. Barnes. 2484 cs meats, 230 cs tongues, 1 cs bacon.
T. Elliot and Co., 3C6 crcs mutton, 1000 crcs lamb.
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 5184 crcs mutton, 913
qrs beef, 144 crcs lamb, 1881 cs meats, 172 crts
hares, 43 cits 54 cs rabbits, 48 cs 564 crts poultry,
71 cs 59 crts 14 bxs F. sundries.
N.S. Wales F.F. and I. Company, Ltd., 1209 crts
poultry, 742 crts hares, 108 crts 102 cs F. sun-
dries.
W. S. Tail and Co., 1015 kegs 5 cs beef, 918 cs meats.
25 bags 21 cs bacon, 8 cs hams, 24 cs tongues,
2 cs tripe.
McGregor, Watt and Co., 2000 sides pork.
Denham Bros., 999 sides pork, 16 pkgs bacon, 1 cs
meats.
Euroa Preserving Company Proprietary, Ltd., 1500
crts rabbits.
Aikell and Douglas, 1568 cs meats.
W. Haughtou and Co., 1453 cs meats.
McNamara P. Company, 1210 cs meats, 75 cs poul-
try.
N.S.W. Canning Company, 1251 cs meats, 200 cs
tongues.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd., 1000 cs meats, 13 crts poul-
try.
Solomon and Son, 713 kegs 12 casks beef, 20 cs
meats, 35 bags 3 sacks 7 cs bacon, 2 bags 1 cs
hams.
M. Segur, 617 cs meats, 140 cs 20 kegs beef, 35 cs
. tongues, 14 cs 1 bag bacon, 1 cs 2 bags ham.
Moigan and Smith, 624 cs meats, 63 cs 3 kegs beef,
3 kegs pork.
Naval Depot, 627 cs 101 bxs 23 cks meats, 10 cks
beef. •
J. Soharff, 489 cs 3 bxs meats, 356 kegs 117 cs 37
pkgs beef, 27 cs mutton, 2 cs lamb, 20 cs tongues,
2 cs hams, 1 cs 1 side bacon, 1 cs ham and
bacon.
A. C. Gaertner, 317 kegs 26 cs 1 bx beef, 312 cs
meats, 10 cs mutton, 26 bags 11 cs bacon, 4 bags
1 cs hams, 5 cs tongues, 2 cs tripe.
Dalton Brothers, 421 cs meats, 43 cs 25 kegs beef,
1 cs 4 bxs hams, 2 cs bacon, 1 cs tongues.
T. Playfair, 4 crcs 1 keg mutton, 128 crcs lamb,
100 qrs 1 keg beef, 41 pkgs meats. ‘ ,
Board for Exports, 191 crcs mutton, 58 crcs lamb. ■"
J. T. Brown, 110 crcs mutton, 55 cs meats. ,
H. Prescott and Co., 20 crcs mutton, 20 qrs-beef,
335 crts hares, 285 crts rabbits, 53. es meats, 25
middles, 4 sides 1 bag bacon, 10 crts tails, 29
hams.
T. A. Field, 100 crcs lamb, 100 sides veal.
J. Paterson, 59 crcs lamb.
Chief Inspector of Stock, 16 crcs lamb.
Smith, Warren and Co., 34 crcs 4 cases mutton, 2 cs
meats, 2 cs bacon.
F. Hudson, 478 crts hares.
Hawkon and Vance; 328 crts hares, 31 crts rabbits.
Brown, Joske and Co., 357 cs meats, 41 cs beef, 2 cs
mutton, 2 cs tongue, 1 cs ox cheek.
J. Bartram and Son, 304 os meats, 43 crts poultry.
Wheeler and .Co., 286 crts rabbits, 32 crts hares, 29
crts poultry.
J. J. Horrocks, 200 crts hares, 9 crts rabbits.
Queensland Meat Export Company, 207 crts rabbits.
W. Mofilin and Co., 150 cs rabbits, 100 cs meats.
E. Rich and Co., 227 cs meats, 8 cs beef, 2 cs
tongues.
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 159 cs meats, 116
kegs 26 cs beef, 25 cs tongues, 4 cs bacon, 3 cs
hams.
Chinese Shippers, 198 cs meats, 40 kegs 14 cs beef,
11 cs bacon, 2 cs ham.
Southern Produce Co., 140 cs meats, 42 crts poul-
try, 5 cs ham.
H. B. Black and Co., 100 cs tongues, 95 cs meats.
W. Archer, 187 crts hares.
Co-op. Company., 112 crts rabbits.
F. Hagen, 144 cs meats, 70 kegs beef, 6 cs tongues.
H. R. Carter, 191 crates poultry.
W. Pitts, 106 crts poultry, 3 crts hares, 2 crts rab-
bits, 36 crts F. sundries.
Pacific Islands Company, Ltd., 112 cs meats, 6 kegs
beef.
11. S. Bird and Co., 85 cs meats, 4 cs beef, 4 cs mut-
ton.
D. Mitchell arid Co., 71 crts hares, 22 cs meats.
M. Payer, 75 kegs beef, 10 cs meats.
Warren and Strang. 50 crts rabbits, 30 crts hares.
Morgan and Co., 42 cs meats, 30 kegs beef, 3 ca
tongues, 1 cs bacon.
S. Bennett and Co., 37 cs meats, 30 brls 6 csks beef.
J. J. Leslie, 56 kegs 16 tierces beef, 14 kegs meats, 2
kegs pork.
Paul and Gray, Ltd., 46 cs beef, 31 cs meat#.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 70 cs meats.
A. M. Brodziack, 65 cs meats.
M. Bugler, 46 cs meats, 22 kegs beef.
Harrison, Jones, and Devlin, Ltd., 60 cs meats.
R. Archer, 60 crates hares.
S. College, 54 cs meats.
G. J. Waterhouse, 33 cs meats, 10 kegs beef, 2 bags
1 pkg bacon.
Jago Packing Company, 40 cs sausages.
The Bodalla Company, 28 cs hama, 14 cs bacon,
1 cs bacon and hams.
R. Towns and Co., 31 cs meats, 1 keg beef.
Father Fischer, 20 brls 15 kegs beef, 4 cs meats.
J. Williams, 18 kegs beef, 14 cs meats.
A. Jouve and Co.. 25 kegs beef, 5 cs meats.
R. T. Colley, 29 crts rabbits;
Australian Meat P. Company, 28 cs meats.
Weymouth and Co., Ltd., 26 cs meats.
11. Daldorf, 24 cs meats.
G. Wilcox and Co., 20 cs rabbits, 3 brls meats.
T. Pratt, 21 cs meats.
Export Company of Australia, 20 cs meats.
Co-op. Packing Co., 20 cs meats.
11. Fischer, 10 cs 10 kegs beef.
D. Cohen and Co., 18 cs meats.
S. 11. Mission, 8 cs meats, 7 kegs beef, 1 cs tongues.
J. Connell and Co., 15 cs meats.
Southern Agency Company, 14 crts poultry.
Kerr Brothers and Co., 6 cs 6 kegs beef, 1 cs bacon,
1 cs ham.
Nelson and Robertson, 13 cs meats.
M. O’Neill, 12 kegs beef.
J. Gillies, 7 cs meats, 1 side bacon.
F. Lassetter and Co., Ltd., 11 c» meats.
Australian Produce Agent, 10 cs meats.
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 5 cs meats, 5 kegs beef.
R. Little and Co., 9 cs meats. .
Fanners’ Co-op. Company, Limited, 4 bgs 1 ca
bacon, 3 bags hams.
J. See and Co., 5 cs bacon, 1 cs bacon and ham, 1
cs ham.
Cameron and Cameron, 6 kegs beef.
Gillespie Bros, and Co., 5 bags bacon.
J. Smith, 5 cs meats.
Morgan and Dezarnaulds, 5 cs meats.
Itardie and Co., 5 cs meats.
A..Hordern and Sons, 3 cs meats, 2 cs mutton.
Tiiybck and Co., 2 cs meats, 1 cs 2 pkgs beef.
1 G. Pearson, 4 cs meats. '
A. W. McDonald, 3 crts poultry.
F. Pearson, 3 cs meats.
J. Stuart and Co., 3 cs meats.
J. Bardsley and Co., 2 cs meats.
Rev. Guilleman, 2 cs meats.
C. Baines, 2 cs hams.
Scott, Henderson and Co., 2 cs hams.
Learmonth, Dickinson and Co.. 1 cs meats, 1 ca
tongues.
J. Dyer, 1 cs meats, 1 keg pork.
W. Arnott, 1 cs meats.
Col. Sugar R. Company, Ltd., 1 cs meats.
F. Adams and Co., 1 cs meats.
Brunton and Co., 1 keg meats.
Australian Wesleyan Mission, 1 cs beef.
Bowden Bros, and Co., 1 cs bacon.
J. McLean, 1 bag bacon.
Brial Freres-, 1 bag bacon.
J. Barlow and Co., 1 side of bacon.
N.S.W. Creamery Butter Co., Ltd., 1 pkg hams.
M. Holdsworth, 1 crt game.
DESTINATIONS.
London, 210,637 crcs, 16,460 legs, 2979 prs legs, 2448
bags legs, 325 cs mutton, 83,955 crcs lamb, 826
qrs., 471 pcs 267 buttocks beef, 87,052 cs meats,
8488 crts hares, 2050 crts 153 cs rabbits, 477 bxs
235 cs 120 bgs 75 crts kidneys, 40 cs 15 bxs
tongues. 10 crts tails, 39 crts poultry, 1 crt game.
2 cs pork, 50 crts 50 cs 124 pkgs F. sundries.
Capetown, 132,353 crcs 29,571 legs mutton, 9271
crcs lamb, 208 qrs beef, 50 crcs 1164 sides veal,
10 bags calves’ heads, 8 cs calves’ feet, 250 ores
2999 sides pork, 4261 cs meats. 1221 crts poultry,
356 crts 74 cs rabbits. 80 crts 2 cs hares, 525 cs
tongues, 50 crts 36 cs kidneys; 21 crts tails, 1
bag livers, 5 os sausages, 1 cs bacon, 672 crts
366 cs 145 pkgs 14 bgs F. sundries.
Durban, 98,180 crcs mutton, 3606 crcs lamb, 8366
qrs beef, 188 crcs 1511 sides 14 pcs veal, 385
crcs pork, 40,832 cs meats, 2579 crts 123 cs poul-
try, 254 crts poultry and F. sundries, 73 crts 95
cs rabbits, 44 crts 12 cs hares, 19 crts 121 cs
tongues, 40 crts 26 cs kidneys, 21 cs tails, 9 ca
fries, 59 cs sausages, 1 pkg hams, 815 crts 539
cs 354 pkgs 36 bags F. sundries.
Natal, 28,972 crcs mutton. 1090 crcs lamb, 1660 qrs
beef, 106 crcs 520 sides veal, 1070 crcs pork, 2448
crts 107 cs poultry, 1548 cs meats, 157 crts 2 cs
hares, 142 crts 6 cs rabbits, 80 cs kidneys, 13 crts
tails, 9 cs' tongues, 8 cs sheep’s heads, 10 cs
sausages, 1708 crts 801. pkgs 25 bags 4 cs F.
sundries.
Hong Kong, 11,263 crcs mutton. 900 crcs lamb, 26
loins and rumps, 25 ribs, 24 qrs 20 pcs beef,
180 crcs pork, 563 cs 41 pkgs meats, 62 crts 32 cs
6 crcs hares, 50 crts 33 cs 8 crcs 6 bags rabbits,
12 crts 7 cs 4 pkgs poultry, 16 pkgs 1 side bacon,
5 cs 1 ham, 2 cs bacon and ham, 2 cs sausages.
Colombo, 8054 crcs 1200 kgs 200 prs legs 240 saddles
mutton, 1240 crcs lamb, 249 pcs 36 qrs 40 rumps
and loins, 12 cks 7 brls 2 kegs beef, 20 crcs veal,
75 cs meats, 62 crts rabbits, 20 crts hares, 12 crts
hares and rabbits, 6 cs tongues.
Manila, 7909 crcs mutton, 150 ores lamb, 155 crcs 2
cs veal, 402 crcs 20 sides pork, 114 crcs suckers,
175 crts 332 cs, .27 pkgs poultry, 294 crts 87 cs
rabbits, 293 cs 57 livers, 12 cs 4 cks 2 tongues,
6 cs 3 kidneys, 10 cs brains, 5 cs hearts, 3 bags
sheeps’ heads, 3 cs sweetbreads, 2 cs tripe, 49
cs ham, 16 cs bacon, 8 cs bacon and hams.
Durban, opt. Capetown, 33,343 crcs mutton,-33,914
cs meats, 10 crts hares, 8 bags P. sundries.
Liverpool, 2200 crcs mutton, 27,207 crcs lamb, 100
qrs beef, 4013 crts rabbits, 1185 crts hares, 213-4
cs meats.
South African Ports, opt., 18,974 crcs mutton, 895
cs meats,
Capetown, opt. Natal, 15,378 crcs mutton.
Durban, Capetown, or London, 13,056 crcs mutton.
London, opt. South African Ports, 8288 crcs mutton,
60 bxs kidneys.
Capetown, opt. London, 7523 crcs mutton.
London, opt. Liverpool, 6221 crcs lamb, 298 crts
rabbits.
Durban and Capetown, 4000 crcs mutton.
Beira, 3134 crcs mutton, 69 crcs lamb, 697 qrs beef,
1123 cs meats, 42 crts hares, 21 crts rabbits, 24
crts poultry, 59 crts 14 bxs F. sundries.
East London, 3300 crcs mutton, 46 crcs lamb, 28
sides veal, 51 crts poultry, 9 cs F. sundries.
Vancouver, 2500 crcs mutton, 907 cs 3 brls meat, 20
cs rabbits.
Port Said, 2501 crcs mutton, 558 pcs beef, 19 cs
meats, 21 crts kidneys, 4 cs hams.
Cardiff, 2557 crcs lamb.
For Frozen and Preserved Meat- Statistics, July-Dccember, 1902, see page 19n,


GRAND TOTALS.
Mutton, ores
...612,603
,. legs ...
... 47,231
,, bags legs
... 2,448
prs legs
... 3,179
„ haunches
433
„ saddles
240
,, cases
374
„ kegs
Lamb, crcs
1
...136,339
,, oases ...
5
„ casks
Beef, qrs
3
... 11,917
,. pcs
... 1.298
,, buttocks ...
267
,, rumps and loins
66
„ ribs
25
» kegs
... 3,100
,, cases
833
„ bids
1C8
„ casks
46
„ tierces
16
„ pkgs.
47
,, boxes
Veal, ores
1
519
„ sides
... 3,223
„ pcs
14
,, cases
2
Calves’ heads, bags
10
,, feet, cases
8
Pork, crcs
... 2,287
,, sides
... 3,019
„ kegs
6
,, cases
Suckers, crcs ...
2
114
Hares, crates ...
... 10,088
,, cases
48
„ crcs
6
Rabbits, erts ...
... 7,566
,, cases...
479
,, bags ...
6
,, crcs
8
Hares and rabbits, erts... 12
Poultry, erts ...
... 6,625
„ cases ...
639
pkgs ...
31
Meats, cases
... 186,498
,, boxes
104
„ casks
23
„ kegs
15
,, ■ brls
7
„ pkgs
Kidneys, crates
41
186
„ cases ...
383
„ boxes...
537
„ bags ...
120
,, singles
3
Tongues, cases
852
„ orates
19
,, boxes
15
,, casks...
4
,, kegs ...
1
„ singles
.. 2
Bacon, cases
146
bags ...
102
, sacks ...
3
„ pkgs ...
17
■ ,, middles
25
„ sides ...
8
Hams, cases
105
„ bags
11
„ boxes ...
4
„ pkgs ...
1
„ singles
30
Bacon and hams, cases
13
.Livers, Cases ...
293
„ bag
1
,, singles
57
Tails, crts
44
„ cases
21
Fries, cases
9
Brains, cases
10
Hearts, cases ...
5
Sweetbreads, cases
3
Tripe, cases
6
Sheeps’ cases
' 8
„ „ bags
3
Sausage cases ... ...
76
Ox cheeks, cases
1
Game, crt
1
Poultry and F. sund., crts
254
F. sundries, crts
3 304
,, ,, cases
968
,. ., pkgs
1,424
., „ bags
83
,, „ boxes
14
Mediterranean Ports, 1000 ores mutton.
South Sea Islands, 1206 kegs 611 os 101 bids 22 cks
16 trcs 47 pkgs beef, 35 cs 1 keg mutton, 2 cs
lamb, 7685 cs 15 kegs 4 brls 3 bxs meats, 9 crts
20 cs poultry, 5 kegs pork, 73 cs 30 bags 25
middles, 7 sides 1 pkg bacon, 34 cs 29 hams, 1
cs hams and bacon, 59 cs 1 keg tongues, 1 cs
ox cheeks.
Noumea, 1892 kegs 204 cs 12 cks 1 bx beef, 10 cs
mutton, 1802 cs meat, 72 bags 45 cs 3 sks bacon,
11 bags 7 cs 4 bxs hams, 1 cs bacon and hams,
66 cs tongues, 4 cs tripe.
Port Elizabeth, 2690 cs meats.
Genoa, 416 cs meats.
Thursday Island, etc., 34 crcs 4 cs mutton, 4 crcs
lamb, 18 cs beef, 161 cs meats, 1 keg pork, 11 cs
bacon, 3 cs hams, 1 cs bacon and ham, 14 cs
tongues, 6 cs rabbits.
Mauritius, 207 crts rabbits, 67 crts poultry, 70 cs
meats.
Victoria (8.C.), 240 cs meats.
Bombay, 77 cs 101 bxs 23 cks meats.
Japan, 4 crcs mutton, 13 crcs 3 cs 3 csks lamb, 10
cs meats, 1 cs hams.
San Francisco, 10 crcs lamb.
Maccassar, 15 cs meats, 1 cs hams.
Singapore, 9 cs meats.
Banda, 1 cs hams.
Frozen & Preserved Meats
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Austral Freezing Works, Ltd., 24,730 crcs mutton.
6817 crcs lamb, 825 qrs beef, 928 sides veal, 728
cs meats, 531 crts rabbits, 70 crts hares, 14 cs 10
crts, 30 bxs tongues, 32 cs, 18 crts kidneys, 13
bgs calves’ heads, 155 cs, 98 crts, 160 bgs F. sun-
dries.
Birt and Co., Ltd., 14,039 crcs mutton, 957 crcs lamb,
210 crcs pork, 536 qrs beef, 276 sides veal, 334
crts poultry, 21 crts 2 cs kidneys, 22 crts tongues,
64 crts, 2 cs F. sundries.
Palmer and Co., 6006 crcs mutton, 100 crcs lamb, 165
crcs pork, 12 crcs, 200 sides veal, 354 crts poul-
try, 16 crts kidneys, 236 crts F. sundries.
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 2770 crcs mutton, 100 crcs
lamb, 731 crcs pork, 57 crcs suckers, 76 crcs
veal, 15 bodies, 30 hinds, 5 briskets beef, 284
cs meats, 217 crts rabbits, 45 crts hares, 60 crts
3 cs poultry, 83 crts, 5 cs turkeys, 11 crts geese,
4 crts fowls, 2 crts pheasants, 22 crts, 4 cs
tongues, 21 cs livers, 18 cs hearts, 10 cs brains,
8 cs kidneys, 7 cs sweetbreads, 3 cs sausages, 7
pkgs F. sundries. ...
F. Wr and P. Hudson, 3000 crcs mutton, 431 crts
poultry, 330 crts hares, 20 crts rabbits, 40 crts
tripe
Sydney M. P. Co., Ltd., 7113 cs meats.
E. B. Williams and Co., 3539 cs meats, 193 crts
poultry, 120 crts hares, 82 crts rabbits, 50 crts
hares and rabbits, 25 crts tripe, 16 cs tongues, 3
cs hearts, 109 crts, 65 cs, 12 bxs, 35 bgs, 17 pkgs
F. sundries.
Euroa Preserving Co. Pty., Ltd., 3349 crts rabbits,
753 crts hares.
J. Bartram and Son, 1700 crts hares, 1149 crts rab-
bits, 7 crts kangaroo tails.
Rosewarne'Packing Co., Ltd., 1789 cs meats, 60 cs
mutton, 50 cs tongues.
Brewer Bros., 1000 crts hares.
E. H. Clayton and Co., 511 crts hares, 406 crts rab-
bits.
Bank of Adelaide,- 871 crts rabbits.
N.S.W. F.F. and I. Co., Ltd., 775 crts hares.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 819 cs, 29 pkgs meats,
122 cs, 75 kegs. 10 cks beef, 42 cs sausages, 13 cs
2 bgs bacon, 11 cs hams, 8 cs bacon and hams, 5
crts poultry.
Arkel and Douglas, 942 cs meats.
Denham Bros., 1000 sides pork.
B. Richards and Son, 73 crcs lamb, 1099 sides veal,
199 crts 39 cs, 71 bgs F. sundries.
W. S. Tait and Co., 547 cs, 63 pkgs meats, 212 kegs
beef, 4 cs 4 bgs 1 pkg bacon, 5 cs 1 bag hams
J. Bane Johnston and Co., 693 cs meats, 4 cs
tongues, 2 cs rabbits, 1 cs sausages.
Aust. Chilling and F. Co., Ltd, 500 cs meats.
Wall and Molesworth, 469 crts hares, 119 crts rab-
bits.
W. H. Archer, 386 crts hares, 109 crts rabbits.
J. Cooke, 536 qrs beef.
Davis Butchering Co., 93 crcs pork, 129 crts poultry,
45 cs, 20 crts tripe, 16 bgs livers, 389 crts, 119 cs
46 pkgs F. sundries.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd., 400 cs meats.
H. M. Victualling Yard, 253 cks, 242 cs meats.
Christchurch Meat. Co., 200 crcs pork.
E. Rich and Co., 199 cs beef, 10 cs mutton, 49 cs
meats, 2 cs tongues.
Pacific Islands Co., Ltd., 150 cs beef, 57 cs 12 pkgs
meats, 2 kegs pork, 1 pkg bacon.
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd, 146 crts hares, 59 crts
rabbits, 36 crts poultry.
Weber, Lbhmann and Co., Ltd., 117 cs, 46 kgs meats,
40 brls, 30 cks beef, 4 cs bacon .
M. Segur, 221 cs, 44 pkgs meats, 40 kgs beef, 2 cs
tongues, 1 cs bacon.
A. C. Gaertner, 123 cs meats, 42 kgs beef,, 22 bgs, 2 cs
bacon, 1 bg, 1 cs hams.
Union Canning Co., 184 cs meats.
Solomon and Son, 107 kgs beef,, 47 cs meats, 12 bgs,
2 cs bacon, 1 bg hams.
Phillips and Pike, 100 cs beef.
J. J. Horrocks,. 103 crts hares.
J. Scharff, 75 kgs, 17 cs, 6 pkgs beef, 59 cs, 9 kgs
meats, 3 cs hams, 1 bg bacon, 1 ck, 1 kg tongues.
N. Shelley, 74 cs meats, 8 cs beef.
Kerr Bros., 60 cs meats, 4 bgs, 1 cs bacon, 2 bgs, 1 bx
hams.
11. S. Bird and Co., 56 cs meats, 2 cs, 1 ck beef, 1 cs
tongues, 1 cs bacon.
Paul and Gray, Ltd., 50 cs meats, 20 cs beef, 1 side
bacon.
Southern Produce Co., 40 crts poultry, 30 cs meats.
J. Davis, 95 crts F. sundries.
Morgan and Smith, 60 cs meats, 21 cs, 10 kgs beef, 3
cs hams, 1 cs tongues.
F. Hagen, 53 cs meats, 2 bgs bacon, 1 cs, 1 kg tongues.
Morgan and Co., 40 cs meats, 10 cs beef, 16 bgs, 1 cs
bacon, 3 cs tongues.
Jago Packing Co., 42 cs meats.
N.S.W. Canning Co., 40 cs rabbits.
N.S.W. Small Goods Co., 33 cs sausages.
On Chong and Co., 20 kgs beef, 11 cs meats.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 25 cs meats.
Tillock and Co., 20 cs meats, 1 cs beef, 5 sides 2 bgs
bacon, 1 cs hams.
G. J. Waterhouse, 20 cs, 1 bx meats, 1 cs beef. 1 cs
tongues, 2 bgs bacon, 1 bg bacon and hams.
Brown, Joske and Cb., Ltd, 19 cs meats, 5 cs beef.
M. Payer, 20 kgs beef, 2 cs tripe, 1 cs meat, 1 cs
bacon.
Dalton Bros., 18 cs meats, 2 cs beef, 4 cs tongues.
T. Playfair, 20 ters beef, 3 kgs meats.
Rabone, Feez and Co., 13 cs beef, .10 cs meats.
Melbourne Chilled Butter Co., 20 crts hares.
Nelson and Robertson, 22cs meats.
Aust. Fruit and P. Co., 10 cs poultry, 10 cs meats.
N. 11. Paling, 15 cs meats.
S. H. Mission, 15 cs meats.
R. Towns and Co., 7 cs beef, 6 cs meats.
Wheeler and Co., 12 crts kangaroo tails.
Holdsworth, Macpherson and Co., 12 cs meats.
Stanley and Co., 9 crts rabbits, 1 crt poultry.
J. Little and Co., 8 cs tongues, 2 cs kidneys, 1 cs
meats.
J. See and Co., 8 bgs bacon, 2 cs hams.
A. Hordern and Sons, 7 cs meats.
J. Gillies, 5 cs meats, 2 bgs bacon.
J. McLean, 1 cs bacon, 1 cs hams, 3 cs 2 pkgs bacon
and hams.
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 4 cs meats, 2 cs rabbits.
G. Pearson, 5 cs meats, 1 bg 2 pkgs bacon.
Foley Bros., Ltd., 4 cs bacon and hams.
Aust. Wesleyan Mission, 2 cs meats, 1 cs beef.
D. Mitchell and Co., 3 cs tongues.
F. Lassetter and Co., 3 cs meats.
S. Bennett and Co., Ltd., 2 cks meats, 1 cs beef.
J. Wallace, 2 cs meats.
J. Williams, 2 kgs beef.
Brial, Freres, 2 cs hams.
H. Mcllrath, 2 cs meats.
Col. Sugar Refining Co., Ltd., 1 cs, 1 bg bacon.


GRAND TOTALS.
Mutton, ores
50,545
» cs
70
Lamb, ores
8,047
Veal, ores
83
„ sides
2,503
Pork, ores
1,399
sides
1,000
„ kegs
2
,, bxs
1
Suckers, crcs
57
Meats, cs
19,155
„ cks
255
„ kgs
58
,. pkgs
U8
„ bx
1
Beef, qrs
1,897
,, CS
681
,. kgs
604
,, cks
41
,, trs
20
„ brls
40
,, hinds
30
,, bodies
15
„ pkgs
6
,, briskets
5
Rabbits, crts
6,921
,, CS
44
TIares, crts
6,428
Hares and Rabbits, crts
50
Poultry, crts
1,583
CS
14
Turkeys, crts
83
„ C9
5
Geese, crts
...
11
Fowls, crts
4
Pheasants, crts
2
Bacon, bgs
79
„ CS
33
„ sides
7
„ pkgs
4
Hams, cs
29
bgs
5
„ bx
1
Bacon and Hams, cs
15
., .. pkgs
2
„ bg
1
Tongues, cs
’ 115
,, crts
54
„ bxs
30
kgs
2
„ ck
1
Sausages, es
79
„ kg
1
Livers, cs
21
.. bgs
16
Tripe, crts
85
CS
47
Kidneys, crts
55
,, CS
44
Hearts, cs
21
Brains, cs
10
Calves’ Heads, bgs
13
Kangaroo tails, crts
19
Sweetbreads, cs
7
Frozen Sundries, crts
1,190
.. ,, CS
3S0
,. „ bgs
266
„ pkgs
70
,, ,, boxes
12
Austral Timber Co., 1 cs beef, 1 cs meats.
J. Connell and Co., Ltd., 1 cs meat.
E. Brown, 1 cs poultry.
H. Berry and Co., 1 kg sausages.
J. H. Buttel, 1 kg beet.
Farmers 5 Co-op. Co., Ltd., 1 cs bacon.
N.S.W. Canning Factory, 1 cs tongues.
'Chinese Shippers, 1 bx pork.
Hordern Bros., 1 side bacon.
DESTINATIONS.
Durban, opt. Capetown, 12,324 crcs mutton, 815 crcs
lamb, 215 sides veal, 6428 cs meats, 221 crts poul-
try, 30 crts, 2 cs F. sundries.
London, 7319 crcs mutton, 3135 crcs lamb, 5002 crts
hares, 3-476 crts rabbits, 3567 cs meats, 7 crts kan-
garoo tails.
Durban, 4985 crcs mutton, 2255 crcs lamb, 418 crcs
pork, 12 crcs, 1527 sides veal, 3567 cs meats, 739
crts, 10 cs poultry, 300 crts rabbits, 296 crts
hares, 50 crts hares and rabbits, 45 crts 45 cs
tripe, 42 crts kidneys, 16 cs 30 bxs tongues, 33 cs
sausages. 16 bgs livers, 13 bgs calves 5 heads, 3 cs
hearts, 704 crts, 323 cs, 217 bgs, 12 bxs, 63 pkgs
F. sundries.
Capetown, 8916 crcs mutton, 400 crcs lamb, 100 crcs
1000 sides pork, 700 sides veal, 715 cs meats. 463
crts rabbits, 94 crts hares, 134 crts poultry, 64
cs 10 crts tongues, 15 cs, 13 crts kidneys, 40 crts
tripe, 143 crts, 55 cs, 49 bgs F. sundries.
London, opt. Capetown or Durban, 7010 crcs mut-
ton.
Durban, opt. Capetown, opt. London, 5720 crcs mut-
ton.
Capetown, opt. Durban, 4501 crcs mutton.
Natal, 2000 crcs niutton, 200 crcs lamb, 40 crcs pork,
69 crts poultry, 21 crts hares, 14 crts rabbits, 313
crts F. sundries.
Manila, 1000 crcs mutton, 142 crcs lamb, 721 crcs
pork, 57 crcs suckers, 76 crcs, 61 sides veal, 99
crts, 3 cs poultry, 83 crts, 5 cs turkeys, 11 crts
geese, 4 crts fowls, 2 crts pheasants, 42 crts rab-
bits, 5 crts hares, 22 crts tongues, 21 cs livers,
18 cs hearts, 10 cs brains, 8 cs kidneys, 7 cs
sweetbreads, 7 pkgs F. sundries.
Colombo, 1053 crcs mutton, 100 crcs lamb, 30
hinds, 15 bodies beef, 75 crts rabbits, 40 crts
hares, 49 cs meats.
Port Said, 1000 crcs lamb, 19 cs kidneys.
Hong Kong, 717 crcs mutton, 70 crcs pork, 5 briskets
beef, 168 cs, 91 cks meats, 4 cs tongues, 3 cs
sausages.
Liverpool, 2537 crts rabbits, 970 crts hares, 308 crts
poultry, 708 cs meats, 12 crts kangaroo tails.
South Sea Islands, 2279 cs, 61 pkgs, 19 kgs, 2 cks, 1
bx meats, 667 cs, 175 kgs, 41 cks, 40 brls, 6 pkgs
beef, 10 cs mutton, 22 cs, 14 bgs, 7 sides, 3 pkgs
bacon, 19 cs, 2 bgs, 1 bx hams, 15 cs, 1 bg, 2
pkgs bacon and hams, 12 cs, 1 ck, 1 kg tongues
10 cs 1 kg sausages, 6 crts, 1 cs poultry, 2 kgs.
1 bx pork, 2 cs rabbits.
Noumea,lo6l cs, 9 kgs, 87 pkgs meats, 429 kgs, 14
ts beef, 65 bgs, 11 cs, 1 pkg bacon, 10 cs, 3 bgs
hams, 11 cs, 1 kg tongues, 2 cs rabbits, 2 cs
tripe.
Mauritius, 825 qrs beef, 25 cs meats.
London, opt. South African Ports, 536 qrs beef.
Durban, opt. Table Bay or London, 536 qrs beef.
Vancouver, 240 cs meats, 9 crts rabbits.
Bombay, 162 cks, 74 cs meats.
Beira, 160 cs meats, 7 crts poultry.
Port Elizabeth, 50 crcs pork, 110 cs meats.
Victoria (B. C.), 60 cs mutton.
Thursday Island, 20 trs beef, 33 cs sausages.
Honolulu, 40 cs rabbits.
London, opt. Durban, 22 crts tongues.
Singapore, 8 cs tongues, 2 cs kidneys, 1 cs meats.
Calcutta, 3 cs meats.
WHEAT, FLOUR, &c.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
J. Darling and Son, 255,645 bgs wheat.
J. Bell and Co., 233,456 bgs, 1498 tons wheat, 703 sks,
981 bgs flour.
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 207,975 bgs, 764 tons
wTreat, 4590 bgs flour, 715 sks, 5061 bgs bran, 3461
bgs oats.
Co-op. Wholesale Society, 30,281 bgs, 1200 tons
wheat, 560 sks flour.
Morgan and Dezernaulds, 25,986 bgs wheat.
Wise Bros., 14,432 bgs wheat, 1904 sks, 2080 i sks,
4514 bgs, 3120 J bgs flour, 2385 sks, 2712 bgs
sharps.
S A. Joseph and Rickard, Ltd., 11,415 bgs wheat,
17,633 sks, 498 bgs flour.
H. B. Black and Co., 11,207 bgs wheat.
Dalgety and Co., 7493 bgs wheat, 1130 sks, 746 bgs
flour.
Brunton and Co., 50 bgs 400 tons wheat, 4565 sks,
267 4 sks, 761 i sks, 40 J sks, 170 bgs, 200 i bgs.
10 tons, 200 cs, 35 crts 20 tins flour, 665 sks
sharps, 20 bgs bran, 10 bgs meal.
J. Marks, 1140 bgs wheat.
Farmers 5 Co-op. Co., Ltd., 833 bgs wheat, 5 bgs oats,
2 bgs bran.
Stratton and Son, 170 sks, 2000 J sks, 6-166 J sks, 2600
i bgs, 68-10 pkgs, 20 tins flour, 907 sks, 905 bgs
sharps.
M. Segur, 5968 sks, 1480 I sks, 700 bgs flour, 73 sks,
48 bgs oats, 66 bgs, 20 tnks bran, 20 inks pol-
lard.
A. C. Gaertncr, 158 bgs wheat, 4674 sks, 80 J sks,
1520 bgs flour, 330 sks oats, 114 bgs bran, 10 bgs,
22 cs pollard.
W. S. Tait and Co., 45 bgs wheat, 4005 sks, 1218 bgs,
8 pkgs flour, 40 sks, 892 bgs, 3 tnks bran, 420 bgs,
10 cs, 1 tnk pollard, 101 sks, 101 bgs, 34 pkgs
oats, 1 sk maize.
Madden and Hixson, 2951 sks, 3652 bgs flour.
Virgoe, Son and Chapman, 7 bgs wheat, 2440 sks,
3648 bgs, 50 tons flour, 6 bgs maize.
Solomon and Son, 2595 sks, 2101 bgs flour, 10 sks, 122
bgs oats, 164 bgs sharps, 114 bgs bran.
McCoiquodale Bros., 1 sk wheat meal, 1318 sks 3230
bgs 80 cs flour.
Quirk, McLeod and Co., 3201 sks flour.
It. Little and Co., 63 bgs wheat, 2362 sks flour, 664
sks sharps, 472 sks, 2 tnks oats, 70 sks 55 bgs
maize, 338 sks, 150 bgs, 1 tnk bran, 3 sks pol-
■ lard, 150 pkgs oats and chaff.
Kershaw, Martin and Co., 2400 sks, 570 bgs flour.
Wright, Heaton and Co., Ltd., 2205 sks, 110 i sks
flour, 7 sks bran, 7 sks pollard.
Morgan and Smith, 930 sks, 165 bgs 16 cs flour, 3828
sks, 162 bgs, 61 cs sharps, 20 sks oats.
F. Chapman and Co., 1620 sks, 255 bgs flour, 300 bgs,
10 tons bran.
Gillespie Bros, and Co., 11 bgs wheat, 1019 sks, 220
i sks, 6 tnks flour, 160 sks, 89 bgs bran, 24 sks
oats, 10 bgs maize, 10 bgs pollard.
W. H. Short, 1499 sks flour.
Mungo Scott and Co., 1107 sks 112 4 sks flour.
J. Campbell, 112 sks flour, 2143 bgs bran, 179 sks
sharps, 4 bgs pollard.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 22 bgs wheat, 327 sks,
200 J sks, 226 bgs, 293 crts, 180 cs, 309 pkgs, 1
tnk, 1 ck flour, 7 sks, 228 bgs bran, 22 bgs, 94 cs
oats, 55 bgs, 20 cs maize, 12 bgs pollard.
Brown, Joske and Co., 775 sks, 180 bgs, 5 cs flour,
786 sks, 257 bgs sharps, 65 sks, 130 bgs bran.
J. Scharff, 41 bgs wheat, 558 sks, 136 bgs, 498 cs, 29
crts, 12 tnks, 5 cks, 36 pkgs, 4 tins flour, 20 bgs
maize, 8 bgs oats, 6 bgs bran.
Arkell and Douglas, 248 sks, 934 bgs flour.
E. G. Barker, 30 sks, 857 bgs flour.
F. Crago, 600 sks, 40 bgs flour, 50 sks meal.
A. M. Brodziack, 1065 sks, 276 bgs sharps, 10 sks, 10
bgs bran.
11. Prescott and Co., 1 bg wheat, 964 bgs oats, 49 bgs
bran, 4 bgs maize.
Scott, Henderson and Co., 250 sks, 461 bgs flour.
F. Ireland. 2CO sks, 1000 i bgs flour.
J. Bridge and Co., 20 bgs wheat, 20 sks, 431 bgs bran,
207 sks, 118 bgs maize, 53 sks, 106 bgs oats, 5 bgs
pollard.
It. Lhoest and Co., 50 bgs wheat, 250 bgs flour.
Tothill Watson, 742 bgs bran.
Davidson Bros., 92 sks, 25 cs flour, 542 bgs bran.
Jersey Milk Co., 500 bags oats.
Weber, Lohmann and Co., ICO sks, 50 bgs, 155 cs, 15
crts flour, 8 bgs oats, 8 bgs bran.
Aitken Bros., 85 bgs flour, 200 sks, 302 bgs sharps,
35 sks pollard.
Chinese Shippers, 20 bgs wheat, 10 i sks, 70 bgs, 160
cs, 60 4 cs, 40 crts flour, 12 sks, 82 bgs maize, 14
bgs oats, 50 bgs pollard, 14 bgs bran.
Colonial Sugar Helming Co., Ltd., 44 sks, 8 4 sks, 17
J sks flour, 265 sks, 20 bgs sharps.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 582 4 tks flour.
E. Davey and Son, 120 4 bgs, 165 cs, 15 crts-flour.
G. Pearson, 40 sks, 220 4 sks, 160 4 bgs flour.
G. J. Waterhouse, 52 sks, 154 4 sks. 48 bgs, 40 4 bgs, 3
cs flour.
H. S. Bird and Co., 54 sks, 52 bgs, 128 cs, 2 cks flour.
W. Langer, 115 sks, 25 bgs, 5 crts flour. 20 bgs meal,
25 cs rye meal.
For Wheat, Flour, etc.. Statistics, July-December, 1902, see page 2IH.


Wheat
GBAND TOTALS.
, bags
800,437
II
tons
3,862
Flour,
sks
71,056
II
i
.2,387
II
1 „
12,398
,,
i „
40
II
bags
32,130
i
20
II
i
7,642
♦ l
pkgs
7,352
ff
cases
1,675
II
60
II
crates
482
II
tons
80
II
tanks
19
II
casks
38
II
tins
36
II
kegs
3
Sharps
, sacks
10,944
II
bags
5,627
II
cases
61
Bran,
sacks
• 1,400
II
bags
11,420
II
tons
44
tanks
24
Pollard, sacks
45
II
bags
646
II
tanks
21
cases
32
Oat9,
sacks
1,090
,,
bags
5,802
ii
tons
10
i>
cases
94
ii
pkgs
34
ii
tanks
2
Maize,
sacks
305
ll
bags
379
ll
trusses ...
7
cases
20
Oats and Chaff, pkgs
150
Meal,
sks
50
ii
bags
30
Bye Meal, cases ...
25
Wheat Meal, sks ...
11
T. Allsop and Sons, 280 J bgs flour.
J. Sanderson and Co., 205 bgs oats.
T. Pratt, 111 pkgs flour.
W. N. Willis, 133 bgs bran.
Davis Butchering Co, 100 bgs pollard.
M. Bugler, 93 sks flcur^
M. Payer, 80 sks flour.
F. 80 bgs flour.
R. Harper and Co., Pty, Ltd, 80 sks flour.
11. M. Suttor, 66 bgs oats, 45 bgs bran.
G. Kiss, 60 bgs oats.
Denham Bros., 9 bgs wheat, 6 sks, 20 bgs maize, 12
bgs oats, 30 bgs pollard, 27 bgs bran.
A. Hordern and Sons, 40 sks, 20 bgs, 5 pkgs flour, 1
bg bran.
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 41 bgs wheat, 10 sks flour,
13 sks, 22 bgs bran.
Smith, Warren and Co., 9 bgs wheat, 5 ska, 20 i bgs,
40 i bgs flour, 3 bgs oats, 3 bgs maize, 3 bgs bran.
3 bgs pollard.
J. C. Hooper, 50 sks flour.
R. Towns and Co., 33 sks flour.
S. H. Mission, 10 bgs, 42 crts, 22 cs flour.
Rabone, Feez and Co., 5 crts 80 pkgs flour, 4 sks
bran.
A. Jouve and Co., 30 bgs flour.
Scott and Co., 30 cks flour.
J. Smith 40 J bgs flour.
C. Asano, 40 { bgs flour.
G. Watson and Son, 44 bgs sharps.
J. See and Co., 9 bgs wheat. 10 bgs oats, 29 bgs bran.
I!. Htdl and Son, 10 tons, 20 bgs oats, 5 bgs maize, 5
bgs bran.
11. R. Carter and Co., 30 tons bran.
Dalton Bros., 10 bgs wheat, 10 sks flour, 5 sks oats.
Tillock and Co., 10 sks, 11 bgs, 2 cs flour, 5 sks bran.
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd, 28 bgs oats, 14
bgs bran.
Walker and Oxby, 20 bgs bran.
S. Bennett, 18 sks flour.
E. Rich and Co., Ltd, 15 sks flour.
J. T. Lawler, 22 bgs oats, 3 bgs bran.
Adelaide S. S. Co., 18 1 sks flour.
Hardman Bros., 20 cs flour.
H. Bowden, 4 bgs wheat, 8 sks maize, 2 sks bran, 1
bg pollard.
Briscoe and Co., Ltd, 13 pkgs flour.'
O’Neil, 14 bgs oats.
J. Gillies, 9 sks, 2 bgs flour.
H. Erhard and Co., 10 sks flour.
Kerr Bros, and Co., 10 sks flour.
G. Kerr, 10 sks flour.
G. Lloyd and Co., 10 sks wheat meal.
Hogg, 7 trs maize, 3 tons bran.
F. Hagen, 6 sks, 6 bgs bran.
J. Wallace, 2 i bgs, 10 cs flour.
J. Stew-art and Co., 12 tins flour.
Morgan and Co., 8 sks bran.
Nelson and Robertson,’ 5 sks flour.
D. Mitchell and Co., 5 sks flour.
J. Pemell, 5 bgs flour.
Stanley and Co.. 1 bg wheat, 1 bg maize, 1 bg bran,
1 bg pollard.
Father Fischer, 3 sks flour.
J. Dugan, 3 crts flour.
J. Connell and Co., Pty, Ltd, 3 cs flour.
F. Lassetter and Co., Ltd., 2 sks flour.
Ferguson and Co., 1 »k flour.
Israel and Co., 1 sk flour.
Hardy and Rossiter, 2 cs flour.
Learmonlh, Dickinson and Co., 1 cs flour.
Bowden Bros, and Co., 2 sks oats.
Foley Bros., 1 sk maize.
W. Davis, 1 ton bran.
DESTINATIONS.
Falmouth, 329,203 bgs wheat.
Liverpool, 106,789 bgs, 1200 tons wheat, 1410 sks, 280
bgs flour.
St. Vincent, 83,121 bgs wheal.
London, 44,331 bgs, 400 tons wheat, 34,009 sks, 6914
bgs flour.
Port Said, 48,480 bgs wheat.
Hull, 42,559 bgs, 450 tons wheat.
Cape Town, 41,359 bgs, 100 tons wheat, 1321 bgs
flour, 715 bgs oats. 715 sks bran, 10 bgs meal.
Gibraltar, 35,798 bgs wheat.
Noumea, 23,878 bgs wheat, 17.275 sks, 1190 i sks 4621
bgs flour, 60 sks, 1158 bgs, 23 tnks bran, 443 sks,
249 bgs, 34 pkgs oats, 7 sks, 410 bgs, 21 Inks, 2- cs
pollard, 164 bgs sharps.
Callao, 15,039 bgs wheat.
East London, 11,207 bgs wheat.
Antwerp, 10,966 bgs, 1712 tons wheat, 50 sks flour.
South Sea Islands, 2435 bgs wheat, 14,603 sks, 287 i
sks, 1062 i sks, 40 1 sks, 2360 bgs, 242 i bgs, 1665
cs, 482 crts, 512 pkgs, 38 cks, 19 Inks, 36 tins, 3 kgs
flour, 10,944 sks, 5463 bgs, 61 cs sharps, 265 sks,
411 bgs bran, 327 sks, 141 bgs, 94 cs oats, 2 sks,
46 bgs 20 cs maize, 35 sks 21 bgs 10 cs pollard,
20 bgs meal, 25 cs rye meal, 11 sks wheat meal.
Japan, 147 bgs wheat, 115 sks, 2000 4 sks, 5066 i sks,
258 bgs, 1810 i bgs, 6840 pkgs flour, 15 sks oats.
Durban, 248 sks, 8822 bgs, 10 cs flour, 6940 bgs, 44
tons bran, 2387 bgs 10 tons oats, 7 trs maize, 100
bgs pollard.
Hong Kong, 2080 i sks, 3639 bgs, 3520 1 bgs flour, 43
bgs bran.
Colombo, 1302 sks, 3195 bgs, 50 tons flour, 325 sks,
150 bgs bran, 200 sks oats, 150 pkgs oats and
chaff.
Glasgow, 4003 bgs flour.
Thursday Island, etc., 127 bgs wheat, 110 sks, 1400
i sks, 70 bgs, 20 4 bgs, 1040 4 bgs, 60 4 cs flour, 303
sks, 283 bgs maize, 105 sks, 147 bgs, 2 tnks oats,
35 sks, 139 bgs, 1 tnk bran, 3 sks, 115 bgs pol-
lard.
Manila, 450 sks, 460 bgs, 1000 J bgs flour, 1470 bgs
oats.
Beira, 1030 bgs flour, 362 bgs oats.
Natal, 2315 bgs bran.
Port Elizabeth, 500 sks, 56 bgs flour, 50 sks meal.
Sourabaya, 150 sks, 1200 4 sks, 15 tons flour.
Mauritius, 200 sks, 200 4 sks flour.
Singapore, 170 sks, 100 4 sks flour, 126 bgs oats, 59
bgs bran.
Batavia, 50 sks, 200 J sks, ICO bgs, 5 tons flour.
Padang, 224 sks flour.
Bombay, 205 bgs oats, 205 bgs bran, 50 bgs maize.
Madras, 150 sks flour.
Banda, 40 sks flour.
Samarang, 10 tons flour.
Victoria (8.C.), 1 bg flour.
Wheat, Flour, &c.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
A. C. Gaertner, 30 bgs wheat, 2300 sks 1740 bags
flour, 20 sks 68 bags 3 tanks bran, 54 bags oats,
30 sks 5 bags pollard, 1 bag meal
Brunton and Co., 2 bags wheat, 2182 sks 20 i sks
620 I sks 50 pkgs 18 crts flour, 680 sks 75 bags
sharps
W. S. Tait and Co., 275 bags wheat, 1550 sks 8 i
sks 781 bags 13 pkgs flour, 505 bags 1 tank bran,
177 bags pollard, 21 sks 53 bags oats, 12 bags
bran and pollard, 1 sk maize, 1 bag meal
Morgan and Dezarnaulds, 2217 bags wheat
Morgan and Smith, 418 sks 21 4 sks 80 bags 20 i
bags 2 crts 1 cs flour, 710 sks 633 bags sharps,
12 bags bran
M. Segur, 1500 sks flour, 71 sks 70 bags 10 tanks
bran, 20 sks oats
Wise Bros., 201 sks flour, 375 sks 858 bags sharps
Brown, Joske and Co., 320 sks 10 cks 31 cs flour,
707 sks sharps
Wright, Heaton and Co., 877 sks 50 bags flour, 24
bags bran, 24 bags pollard
Morgan and Co., 641 bags wheat, 55 sks 100 J sks
50 bgs flour, 69 sks oats, 6 sks 15 bgs bran
McCorquodalo Bros., 554 sks 50 bags 3 tanks flour
Gillespie Bros, and Co., 2 bags wheat, 506 sks 1
bag flour, 9 sks 5 bran. 2 sks chickwheat,
li sks meal
Solomon and Son, 60 sks 422 bags 100 i bags flour
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 17 bags wheat, 139
sks 10 J sks 367 bags 40 i bags 134 cs 82 crts
47 pkgs 2 tanks flour, 20 sks 12 bags maize, 10
bags bran, 10 bags meal, 5 bags oats
A. M. Brodziack, 150 sks 414 bags sharps
G. S. Pearson, 3 sks 360 J sks 120 bags flour
Justus Scharff, 39 bags wheat, 135 sks 65 bags 291
cs 65 crts flour, 5 bags pollard, 10 bags 10 cs
bran, 8 sks oats, 5 cs rye meal, 1 bag oats, 1
bag corn
R. Little and Co., 10 sks 200 bags flour, 100 bags
bran
J. Bell and Co., 44 bgs wheat, 80 sks flour, 145 bgs
sharps
Stratton and Sons, 66 sks 240 bags sharps
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd., 69 sks flour, 209 sks
sharps
G. J. Waterhouse, 38 sks 104 J sks flour, 112 bags
8 cs flour, 2 bags 2 pkgs maize, 1 bag bran
Smith, Copeland and Co., 185 sks 70 bags sharps
Aitken Bros., 55 sks 167 bags sharps
F. Hagan, 40 J sks flour, 25 sks 26 bags bran, 10
sks oats
M. Payer,, 50 sks 50 bags flour
Pacific Islands Company, 190 cs flour
W. Longer, 43 bags 10 cs flour, 10 bags meal, 25
cs rye meal
H. S. Bird and Co., 57 bags 21 cs 11 crts X ck 2 kgs
flour
J. McMahon, 44 sks 50 bags bran
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 15 sks 118 cs flour,
2 cs rye flour
J. See and Co., 25 bags wheat, 30 bags bran, 5 bags
oats and barley
Kerr Bros, and Co., 15 bags 41 pkgs flour
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 11 bags wheat, 1 cs flour,
13 bags bran, 23 sks pollard
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., 28 sks oats, 14 sks
bran, 2 tanks oats and bran
G. Kiss, 43 bags bran
E. Rich, 40 i bags flour
Davidson Bros., 35 bags meal
S. Mission, 20 sks 15 cs 10 crts flour
N. Shelley, 20 sks 15 crts flour
E. Davey and Sons, 50 cs flour
Chinese Shippers, 8 bags wheat, 40 cs flour, 16 bags
maize, 4 bags oats
11. Berry, 40 sks flour
E. G. Barker, 30 sks flour, 5 sks sharp
Rabone, Feez and Co., 44 crts flour


GRAND TOTALS.
Wheat, bags ... ... 3328
Flour, sacks ... ... 11,258
,, i sacks .... ... 144
,, i sacks ... ... 1142
,, bags ... ... ... 4231
,, J bags ... ... 120
,, i bags ... ... 80
,, cases ... ... 915
,, crates ... ... 247
,, pkgs ... ... 151
., casks ... ... 11
,, tanks ... ... 5
„ kegs ... ... 2
Sharps, sacks ... ... 3142
„ bags ... ... 2602
Bran, sacks ... ... 195
„ bags ... ... ... 996
., tanks ... ... 14
„ cases ... ... 10
Oat?, sacks
... 156
bags
... 126
Oats and barley, bags
Oats and bran, tanks
(
Maize, sacks
„ bgs
54
,, pkgs
2
Pollard, sacks
55
„ bags
... 219
Eye meal, cases
30
Meal, sack
1
., i sack
1
,, bags
62
Bran and pollard, bags
12
Chickwheat, sacks
2
Eye flour, cases
2
Corn, _bags
2
Bran and corn, bag ...
1
Barley, bags
5
GRAND TOTALS.
Hair, bales
887
„ bags
213
.. Pkgs
19
„ cases
3
Horns bales
193
,. bags
8,959
,. pkgs
75
,, butt
1
Hoofs, bales
134
„ bags
1,906
.. pkgs
165
Bones, bags
2,999
„ pkgs
372
„ tons
9
„ cwt.
1
Bones and hoofs, tons
6
Shanks, bags
705
Sinews, bales
114
,, bags
19
., Pkgs
22
Sinews and Bones, bags
42
,. ,. „ pkgs ...
276
„ ,, pizzlesbgs
Pizzles bis
17
8
„ hag
1
Piths, bags
181
„ cwts.
27
A. Hordern and Sons, 21 sks 13 bags flour, 1 sk
bran, 1 sk pollard, 1 bag bran and corn
Farmers’ Co-op. Company, 4 bags wheat, 4 bags
maize, 4 bags bran, 4 bags pollard
R. Town and Co., 12 sks 1 bag flour
Bowden Bros., 7 bags bran, 5 bags maize, 1 bag
pollard
Smith and Co., 10 sks flour
Foley Bros., 2 bags wheat, 3 sks flour, 4 sks 1 bag
bran, 1 bag maize, 1 sk meal
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 5 bags wheat, 5 bags
barley
Fuller Carrying Co., 8 sks flour
R. Hall and Son, 2 bags wheat, 3 bags pollard, 2
bags bran, 1 bag maize
Mitchell and Co., 10 bags flour
Denham Bros., 10 bags maize
F. Lassetter and Co., 2 bags wheat, 7 sks flour
H. Prescott and Co., 7 bags oats
Nelson and Robertson, 5 sks flour
J. Wallace, 3 sks flour, 1 sk bran, 1 sk pollard
Bank of N.S.W., Ltd., 5 sks maize
R. Harper and Co. Pty., Ltd., 2 cs flour, 4 bags
meal
S. Purcell, 4 sks flour
J. Dive, 2 bags wheat, 2 bags maize
Ferguson and Co., 2 sks 2 bags flour
S. Bennett and Co., 3 sks flour
J. Pemell, 3 i sks flour
J. Gillies, 2 sks 1 cs flour
Tillock and Co., 2 sks flour, 1 bag meal
Austral Timber Co., 2 bags flour
F. Goff and Co., 2 bags oats
R. McClelland, 1 sk flour
J. Barlow and Co., 1 sk flour
MoLelland and Roach, 1 sk flour
J. W. Eaton, 1 sk flour
Searl and Son, 1 bag maize
Paul and Gray, 1 bag corn .
Aust. Wesleyan Mission, 1 cs flour
N.H. Mission, 1 cs flour
DESTINATIONS.
Noumea, 3243 bags wheat, 6347 sks 100 J sks 48J
sks 3108 bags 100 i bags flour, 174 sks 801 bags
14 tanks bran, 147 sks 107 bgs oats, 53 sks 206
bags pollard, 12 bags bran and pollard, 2 tanks
oats and bran, 2 bags meal
South Sea Islands, 54 bags wheat, 4809 sks 24 i
sks 1094 i sks 1103 bags 20 1 bags 80 J bags 915
cs 247 cits 101 pkgs 11 casks 5 tanks 2 kegs
flour, 2 cs rye flour, 3142 sks 2602 bags sharps,
21 sks 41 bags 10 cs bran, 26 sks 17 bags 2 pkgs
maize-, 9 sks 6 bags oats, 1 sk I J sk 60 bags
meal, 30 cs rye meal, 2 sks 8 bgs pollard, 5
bags oats and barley, 2 bags corn, 2 sks chick-
wheat, 1 bag bran and corn
Thursday Island, 26 bags wheat, 20 sks 2U bags
flour, 37 bags maize, 11 bags bran, 5 bags pol-
lard, 4 bags oats
Pago Pago, 80 sks 20 J sks 50 pkgs flour
Colombo, 100 bags bran
Shanghai, 43 bags bran
Beira, 5 bags wheat, 5 bags barley
Hongkong, 7 bags oats
Japan, 2 bags oats
London, 2 sks flour
Hair, Horns, Hoofs, Bones, &c.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Harrisson and Whiffen, 94 bis hair, 1 bl, 3228 bgs
horns, 113 bis, 845 bgs 97 pkgs hoofs, 489 bgs
bones.
Funok, Stark and Co., 6 bis, 6 bgs hair, 27'bls, 4809
bgs, 53 pkgs horns, 7 bis 279 bgs hoofs, 351 bgs
shanks.
D. Brown and Co., 138 bis 7 bgs hair, 31 bis, 415 bgs
horns.
R. V. Brown, 66 bis, 181 bgs, 17 pkgs hair.
A. McElhone, 5 bis 5 bgs hair, 46 bis, 281 bgs, 1
butt, 22 pkgs horns, 6 tons bones and hoofs, 1 bl
9 bgs sinews.
F. Kanematsu, 11 bis, 105 bgs, 68 pkgs hoofs, 867 bgs
79 pkgs bones, 22 bgs shanks, 13 bis 13 pkgs
sinews, 7 bis pizzles.
Bowden Bros, and Co., 1 bl, 6 bgs hoofs, 570 bgs, 45
pkgs bones, 115 bgs shanks, 14 bis, 6 bgs 1 pkg
sinews.
C. Asano, 677 bgs bones, 42 bgs sinews and bones, 45
bgs shanks, 8 pkgs sinews, 1 bg pizzles.
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rompaey, 2 bis, 537 bgs
hoofs.
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 204 bgs horns, 172 bgs
shanks, 181 bgs piths.
T. Komura, 2 pkgs hair, 125 bgs, 162 pkgs bones, 181
pkgs sinews and bones.
H. Caulliez, 490 bgs bones.
Rabone, Feez and Co., 167 bgs bones.
W. Mofflin and Co., 9 bis hair, 134 bgs hoofs,.
J. Paterson, 50 bgs bones, 54 pkgs sinews and bones,
4 bis sinews
R. Guthrie, 24 bis sinews, 41 pkgs sinews and bones.
G. La«eby, 7 bis horns, 86 pkgs bones.
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd, 1 bg hair, 46 bis,
17 bgs horns.
G. Wilcox and Co., 32 bis hair.
A. H. Owens, Ltd., 28 bis hair.
A. E. Rudder and Co., 44 bgs bones
Virgoe, Son and Chapman, 38 bis sinews, 1 bl piz-
zles.
E. Cole, 24 bis horns.
B. Richards and Son, 9 tons 1 cwt. bones, 1 ton 7 cwt
piths.
Flood and Co., 8 bis hair.
J. Keep and Sons, Ltd., 12 bgs hair.
R. T. Colley, 1 bl, 4 bgs sinews, 17 bgs sinews and
pizzles.
J. Hart, 20 bgs bones.
J. H. Radford and Co., 11 bis horns.
J. Duff, 11 bis sinews.
Hill, Clark and Co., 6 bis sinews.
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd., 2 b’s sinews.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 5 bgs horns.
Todd and Diinant, 3 cs hair.
H. H. Qroth and Co.. 1 bl hair.
R. Blaxland, 1 bg hair.
DESTINATIONS.
London, 197 bis 21 bgs 3 cs hair, 165 bis 564 bgs 1
butt, 22 pkgs horns, 358 bgs, 80 pkgs, 9 tons 1 cwt.
bones, 6 tons bones and hoofs, 172 bgs shanks, 2
bis, 13 bgs sinews, 17 bgs sinews and pizzles, 181
bgs, 1 ton, 7 cwt. piths.'
Japan, 2 pkgs hair, 5 bgs horns, 12 bis, 111 bgs, 63
pkgs hoofs, 2323 bgs, 286 pkgs bones, 42 bgs, 276
pkgs sinews and bones, 182 bgs shanks, 112 bis
6 bgs, 22 pkgs sinews, 8 bis, 1 bg pizzles.
Havre, 5973 bags horns, 182 bags hoofs, 332 bgs
shanks
Genoa, 93 bis, 1 bg hair, 109 bis, 1244 bgs, 97 pkgs
hoofs.
Antwerp. 44 bis, 5 bgs hair, 10 bis 520 bgs, 53 pkgs
horns, 31 bgs hoofs, 18 bgs shanks.
Glasgow, 42 bis, 159 bgs hair.
Dunkirk, 1 bl, 993 bgs horns, 318 bgs bones.
Marseilles, 6 bis, 790 bgs horns, 66 bgs hoofs.
Liverpool, 4 bis, 12 bgs 17 pkgs hair, 13 bis, 32 bgs
hoofs.
Bremen, 240 bgs hoofs, 1 bg shanks.
Continental, opt. 08 bgs horns.
Hamburg, 7 bis hair, 11 bis, 11 bgs horns.
South Sea Islands, 12 bgs hair.
Hair, Horns, Hoofs, Bones, &c.
Exported from.N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Punch, Stark and Co., 72 bis hair, 26 bis 3531 bags
horns, 199 bags bones
Harrisson and Whiffen, 51 bis hair, 42 bis 1607 bags
horns, ,47 bis 189 bags hoofs, 9 bags bones
D. Brown and Co., 173 bis hair, 59 bis 344 bags
horns, 106 bags bones
T. Komura, 3 bags hair, 3 bis horns, 143 bags 143
pkgs hoofs, 453 bags bones, 21 bis 6 bags 46 pkgs
sinews, 4 bags 12 pkgs pizzles
W. Mofflin and Co., 2 bis hair, 516 bags horns, 27
bags bones, 1 bl sinews
A. McElhone, 27 bis 4 bags hair, 73 bis 153 bags 41
pkgs horns, 6 tons hoofs, 38 tons bones and hoofs,
44 tons 18 cw't shanks, 13 bis 9 bags sinews, 2 bags
pizzles
F. Kanematsu, 7 bis 15 bags 165 pkgs hoofs, 51 bags
14 pkgs bones, 9 bags thighs, 8 bags buttocks, 6
bis 3 bags 149 pkgs sinews, 2 bis 4 bags 7
pkgs pizzles
C. Asano, 200 bags hoofs and sinews, 35 pkgs bones
and sinews, 75 pkgs bones and glue pcs
J. Patterson. 44 bags bones, 2 bis sinews
R. Guthrie, 12 bags bones, 15 bags 2 bales 7 pkgs
sinews, 2 bis 7 bags pizzles
E. Cole, 13 bis horns
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd., 12 bis horns


GRAND TOTALS.
Hair, bales
339
bags
13
„ cases
3
.. pkg
Horns, bales ...
1
228
„ bags
6151
„ pkgs
41
Hoofs, bales ...
54
„ bags
347
.. pkgs
308
„ tons
6
Hoofs and sinews, bags
200
Bones, bags
901
., pkgs
14
Bones and glue pcs, pkgs
75
Bones and hoofs, tons ...
38
Bones and sinews, pkgs
85
Thighs, bags ...
9
Buttocks, bags
8
Shanks, tons ...
44
„ cwt
18
Sinews, bales ...
45
„ bags
33
„ pkgs
202
Fizzles, bales
4
„ bags ...
17
„ sacks ...
7
„ pkgs
19
GRAND TOTALS.
Hides (singles)
... 111,070
It
bales ...
150
>»
bags
... 1,729
It
sacks ...
560
II
bdls
169
casks ...
100
Hide
pieces, bales
52
, bags
77
,
pkga
6
Leather, bales...
... 10,697
pkgs ...
151
rolls
53
II
trusses
47
bags ...
43
,$»
II
bdls ...
... . 3
cases
20
box ...
1
Basils, bales ...
... 1,116
II
bag
1
II
pkgs ...
... - 2
pel . ...
1
Glue
pieces, bales
... 1,187
„• bags
246
.. pkgs
... 409
Fleshings, bales
36
Virgoe, Son and Chapman, 7 sks pizzles
G. Wilcox and Co., 6 bis hair
11. Todd, 2 bis 3 cs 1 pkg hair
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd., 5 bags hair
A. H. Owens, Ltd., 3 bis hair
R. S. Lamb and Co., 2 bis hair
Flood and Co., Ltd., 1 bl hair
W. S. Tait and Co., 1 bag hair
DESTINATIONS.
Havre, 4426 bags horns, 126 bags bones
Japan, 3 bags hair, 3 bis horns, 7 bis 158 bags 306
pkgs hoofs, 200 bags hoofs and sinews, 587 bags
14 pkgs bones, 9 bags thighs, 8 bags buttocks, 75
pkgs bones and glue pcs, 35 pkgs bones and
sinews, 32 bis 24 bags 202 pkgs sinews, 4
bis 15 bags 7 sks 19 pkgs pizzles
London, 204 bis 4 bgs 3 cs 1 pkg hair, 157 bis 215
bags 41 pkgs horns, 6 tons hoofs, 106 bags bones,
33 tons bones and hoofs, 44 tons 18 cwt shanks,
13 bis 9 bags sinews, 2 bags pizzles
Antwerp, 35 bis hair, 744 bags horns
Dunkirk, 461 bags horns, 73 bags bones
Genoa, 74 bis hair, 7 bags horns, 47 bis 189 bags
hoofs, 9 bags bones
Marseilles, 68 bis 298 bags horns
Liverpool, 14 bis hair
New York, 10 bis hair
S. Islands, 5 bags hair
Vancouver, 2 bis hair
Noumea, 1 bag hair.
Hides, Leather, Basils,
and Glue Pieces.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
G. Wilcox and Co., 239 sks 100 casks 30,820 hides,
1 bl basils, 1 bag glue pcs.
D. Brown and Co., 17 bis 223 bags 26,904 hides, 4
bis leather.
B. Chappel, 12 sks 3 bags 24,078 hides.
Harrisson and Whiffen, 97 bales, 104 bags 7531
hides, 428 bis leather, 5 bis basils, 440 bis 19
bags 19 pkgs glue pcs.
E. Fredereichs, 5886 hides.
E. Littley, 5419 hides.
Funck, Stark and Co., 242 bgs 150 sks 3845 hides,
1 pkg leather, 4 bis 1 bag 2 pkgs: basils, 55 bis
59 pkgs glue pcs.
B. Richards and Son, 3013 hides.
Rabone, Feez and Co., 2237 hides.
W. Mofflin and Co., 9 bis 1025 hides, 295 bis leather,
86 bis glue pcs, 30 bgs hide pcs
H. Haege and Co., 535 bags 135 sks hides.
H. Caulliez, 480 bags hides.
F. Alderson and Co., 42 bags hides, 1626 bis 85
pkgs 45 trusses 9 cs 1 box leather.
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd., 1517 bis
leather, 81 bis glue pcs.
T. Elliot and Co., 353 bis leather, 790 bis basils.
Sydney Wool Scouring Company, 962 bis 2 cs
leather, 106 bis basils.
Farleigh, Nettheim and Co., 975 bis 35 pkgs 1 truss
1 cs leather.
Virgoe, Son and Chapman, 898 bis leather. 12 bis
47 pkgs glue pcs.
R. Saddington, 698 bales 10 bags leather.
J. Vickery and Co.. 390 bis leather, 134 bis basils.
Jeffrey, Dennis and Co., 436 bales leather.
A. McElhone, 52 bis 47 bags 6 pkgs hide pcs, 126
bis 151 bgs 120 pkgs glue pcs.
A. Thompson and Co., 300 bis leather.
F. Teasdel, 3 bis 96 bags hides, 145 bis leather, 25
bis basils.
H. McCrea and Co., 249 bis leather.
J. Marks, 7 bis hides, 210 bis leather.
A. 11. Owens, Ltd., 17 bis 169 bdls hides.
F. Kanematsu, 13 bis 8 pkgs leather, 255 bis glue
pcs.
E. M. Farleigh, 161 bis leather.
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 148 bis 1 roll leather.
Birdsall Bros., 140 bis leather, 9 bis basils.
F. E. Funck and Co., 269 hides.
H. L. Rosenthal, 120 pkgs glue pcs.
C. Greatrex and Son, 95 bis 35 rolls 1 cs leather.
J. E. Begg, 94 bis leather.
W. Balchin, Ltd., 36 bis 75 bgs glue pcs.
R. T. Colley, 73 bis glue pcs.
H. Haigh and Son, 58 bis leather, 30 bis basils.
J. Hardie and Co., 71 bis leather.
McMurtrie and Co., Ltd., 66 bis leather.
C. Niccol, 59 bis leather.
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 37 bis 23 bags leather.
Johnson and Vicars, 43 bis leather, 8 bis basils.
J. Paterson, 16 bis 26 pkgs glue pcs.
M. Mofflin, 36 bis fleshings.
J. B. Forsyth, 34 bis leather.
Bowden Bios, and Co., Ltd., 16 bis 1 pkg leather,
1 bl 10 pkgs glue pcs.
Bank of N.S.W., 24 bis leather.
J. Bridge and Co., 21 hides, 5 rolls leather.
R. Guthrie, 14 sks hides, 1 bl leather.
City Bank of Sydney, 20 bis leather.
Beaumont and Co., 19 bis leather.
W. S. Tait .and Co., 4 bis 14 pkgs leather.
M. Segur, 13 bis 1 pkg leather.
G. Cull and Son, 12 bis leather.
W. Harrison, 11 bis leather.
E. S. and A. Bank, 10 bgs leather.
R. Little and Co., 10 bis leather.
J. Barre Johnston and Co., 10 sks hides.
Madden and Hixson, 10 hides, 9 bis leather.
Hill, Clarke and Co., 12 hides.
A. A. Kron, 4 bags hides.
T. E. Barren, 9 bis leather.
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd., 7 big leather.
G. C. Watson, 7 bis leather.
Holdsworth, Macpherson and Co., 2 bis 3 rolls 3
bdls leather.
T. Komura, 8 pkgs glue pcs.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 6 bis leather.
A. C. Qaertner, 2 bis 6 rolls leather.
C. H. Slade and Co., 6 bis leather.
F. Chapman, 4 bis glue pcs.
Colonial Sugar Refining Co., Ltd., 4 pkgs leather.
J. Renard and Co., 4 cs leather.
F. Hagen, 2 bis 1 roll 1 truss leather.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 2 bis 2 rolls leather.
J. D. Alderson, 3 bis leather.
Ostermeyer, Dewez, and Van Rompaey, 3 bis basils.
Dalton Bros., 2 bis 1 pkg leather.
11. J. Solomon, 2 bis leather
H. Peabody and Co., 2 cs leather.
A. E. Rudder and Co., 1 bl glue pcs.
Picard, Goulet Fils, 1 bl glue pcs.
T. and W. Willis, 1 bl leather.
M. Bugler, 1 bl leather.
Morgan and Co., 1 bl leather.
O. Sander and Co., 1 cs leather.
J. Brush, Son and Co., 1 pkg leather.
E. Leburne, 1 bl basils.
E. Schemmel, 1 pci basils.
DESTINATIONS.
London, 10 bis 252 sks 40 bags 35,755 hides, 52 bis
47 bgs 6 pkgs hide pcs, 9221 bis 43 bgs
6 rolls 3 cs 1 pkg leather, 1107 bis basils, 735
bales 230 bags 120 pkgs glue pcs, 86 bis flesh-
ings,
Antwerp, 13 bis 1108 bags 169 bdls 39,287 hides, 4 cs
leather, 2 pkgs basils, 1 bl glue pcs.
. Hamburg, 15,398 hides, 49 bis leather, 5 bis 1
parcel basils.
Genoa, 106 bis 10 bags 7600 hides, 1 bag glue pcs.
Liverpool, 3 bags 5742 hides, 14 bis glue pcs.
Dunkirk, opt. Antwerp, 2024 hides.
London, opt. Liverpool, 1761 hides.
Bremen, 12 bis 999 hides 10 bis leather, 1 hi 1 bag
basils. ' - -
Havre, 6 bis 1000 hides.
Marseilles, 1000 hides, 1 bl basils.
Capetown, 3 bis 138 bags hides, 835 bis 67 pkgs 32
trussesj 6 cs 1 roll 1 box leather.
New York, 372 bags hides, 30 bags hide pcs, 4 cs
leather, 37 bis glue pcs.
Japan, 7 sks 4 bags hides, 323 bales 44 pkgs 1 cs
leather, 289 bales 91 pkgs glue pcs. .
San Francisco, 54 bags hides. 111 bales 15 bags 198
pkgs glue pcs.
Ontario, 156 ska 100 cks hides.
Boston, 135 sks hides.
Naples, 504 hides.
Durban, 10 sks hides, 140 bales 28 rolls 5 trusses 1
case leather.
Natal, 45 bis 13 pkgs leather.
Noumea; 26 bis 10 rolls 7 pkgs 3 bdls 1 truss leather.
Port Elizabeth, 33 bis 8 trusses leather.
Mauritius, 13 bis leather.
S.S. Islands, 1 bl 12 pkgs 2 rolls leather.
Thursday Island, etc., 1 bl 5 rolls 1 truss 1 pkg
leather.
Batavia, 3 pkgs 1 cs leather.
Singapore, 2 pkgs leather.
Manila, 1 pkg 1 roll leather.
Toronto, 1 bl basils.
Dunkirk, 1 bl basils.
Hides, Leather, Basils & Glue Pieces.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902,
. SHIPPERS.
Q. Wilcox and Co., 2 bis 18 bgs 5 sks. 62,499 hides
D. Brown and Co., 38 bis 18 bgs 35,745 hides, 57 bis
leather
Harrisson and Whiffen, 20 bis 13 cks 26,512 hides,
48 bis leather, 233 bis 7 bgs 77 pkgs glue pcs
Funck, Stark and Co., 93 bis 198 bgs 1 pkg 15,244
hides, 45 bis 2 pkgs basils
E. Littley, 172 bgs 11,685 hides
E. Friedereichs. 5259 hides
Virgoe, Son and Chapman, 9 bis 2397 hides, 1031 bis
4 cs leather, 32 bis basils, 85 bis glue pcs


GRAND TOTALS.
Hides, singles
161,762
,. bales
274
„ bags
407
„ casks
13
„ sacks
5
.. pkg.
1
Leather, bales
5,861
„ pkgs
153
,, rolls
64
„ bags
81
„ cases
14
„ trs.
5
Scrolls, bales
107
Splits, bales
2
Basils, bales
1,532
.. pkgs
Fleshings, bales
2
3
Hides and skins, bags
51
Glue pcs, bales
926
„ „ bags
126
.. ., Pkgs
659
G. pcs and hoofs, pkgs
151
G. pcs and bones, pkgs
32
GRAND TOTALS.
Skins, bis
2,675
„ bags
277
„ bdls
127
„ sack
X
,, casks
14
,, cases
4
„ keg
1
.. pkg
1
.. pel
I
„ S bis
13,833
.. pkg
1
W. Mofflin and Co., 112 bis 1890 hides, 435 his
leather, 79 bis basils, 74 bis glue pcs
J. Marks, 1037 hides, 121 bis leather, 2 bis splits
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd., 1041 bis 7 pkgs
leather
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd., 1000 hides
Lowenstein and Co., 1000 hides
F. Alderson and Co., 714 bis 56 pkgs 6 cs 1 trs
leather
T. Elliot and Co., 100 bis leather, 606 bis basils
F. Kanematsu, 385 bis 263 pkgs glue pcs
T. Komura, .1 bg hides, 102 bis scrolls, 69 bgs 319
pkgs glue, 151 pkgs G. pcs and hoofs
Sydney Wool Scg. Co., 62 bis leather, 490 bis basils
J. 11. Craven and Co., 494 hides
E. Saddington, 480 bis leather
Farleigh, Nettheim and Co., 441 bis 2 trs leather
Jeffrey, Dennis and Co., 318 bis leather
J. Vickery and Co., 202 bis 6 bgs leather, 103 bis
basils
Beaumont Bros., 159 bis leather, 16 bis basils
E. M. Farleigh, 119 bis leather
H. Haigh and Son, 88 bis leather, 31 bis basils
O. Greatrex and Son, 57 rolls, 50 pkgs leather
W. Balchin, Ltd., 101 bis Q. pcs
C. Asano, 28 bis glue pcs, 3 bis fleshings, 32 pkgs
G. pcs and bones
Johnson and Vicars, 62 bis basils
J. 11. Eadford and Co., 43 bis leather, 24 bis basils
E. Guthrie, 5 bis scrolls, 15 bis 35 bgs Q pcs
Birdsall Bros., 48 bis leather, 4 bis basis
J. C. Ludowici and Son, 48 bis 1 cs leather
E. Lidbury, 51 bgs hides and skins
J. Hardie and Co., 44 bis 7 pkgs leather
McMurtrie and Co., 46 bis leather
Dalgety and Co., Ltd., 2 bis leather, 40 bis basils
F. Teasdel, 39 bis leather
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 14 bis 25 bgs leather
Warren and Strang, 35 bis 1 cs leather
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 28 bis leather
H. McCrea and Co., 24 bis leather
F. Grimley, Ltd., 22 bis leather
A. Mcßlhone, 5 bis 15 bgs glue pcs
Col. Sugar Eef. Co.. Ltd., 2 bis 9 pkgs 1 cs leather
S. A. Joseph and Eickard, Ltd., 11 bs leather
W. S. Tait and Co., 2 bis 7 pkgs 1 trs leather
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd., 9 bis leather
M. Hollinstein, 7 bis leather
F. Hagen, 5 bis 1 trs leather
Johnson and Sons, 5 pkgs 1 roll leather
E. W. Cameron and Co., 5 bis leather
Holdsworth, Macpherson and Co., 5 rolls leather
Morgan and Co., 4 bis 1 pkg leather
C. Niccoll, 1 bl 3 pkgs leather
Baillie and Son, 4 pkgs leather
Burns, Fhilp and Co., Ltd., 1 roll 1 cs 2 pkgs leather
J. E. Begg, 3 bis leather
M. Segur, 2 bis leather
A. C. Gaertner and Co., 1 bl 1 pkg leather
Morgan and Smith, 1 pkg leather.
DESTINATIONS.
London, 108 bis 18 bgs 1 sk 45,990 hides, 4997 bis 5
cs 31 bgs 11 pkgs leather, 2 bis splits, 1381 bis
basils, 266 bis 15 bgs G. pcs
Antwerp, 6 bis 193 bgs 42,289 hides, 2 bis basils
Hamburg, 80,316 hides
Genoa, 20 bis 22,414 hides, 1 pkg basils
Liverpool, 24 bis 10,461 hides, 66 bis Q. pcs
Naples, 4326 hides
Bremen,, 1 pkg 4321 hides
Japan, 1 bg hides, 63 bis leather, 107 bis scrolls, 3
bis fleshings, 521 bis 104 bgs 582 pkgs glue pcs,
151 pkgs glue pcs and hoofs, 32 pkgs glue pcs
and bones
Dunkirk, 1864 hides
Havre, 43 bis 1636 hides, 4 bis 1 pkg basils
Marseilles, 66 bis 645 hides, 13 bis basils
Capetown, 457 bis 3 cs 26 pkgs leather
Trieste, 500 hides
San Francisco, 190 bgs hides, 3 bis leather, 51 bgs
hides and skins, 73 bis 7 bgs 77 pkgs G. pcs.
Durban, 151 bis 57 rolls 3 cs 1 trs 80 pkgs leather
Durban, opt. Capetown, 147 bis leather
London, opt. Hull, 62 bis basils
London, opt. Hull opt. Huddersfield, 40 bis basils
Noumea, 15 bis 5 rolls 2 trs 17 pkgs leather
South Sea Islands, 4 bis 2 rolls 2 trusses 3 cs 12 pkgs
leather
Bordeaux, 19 bis basils
Calcutta, 11 bis 7 pkgs leather
Boston, 13 cks hides
Mazamet, 11 bis basils
London, opt. Liverpool, 7 bis hides
Mauritius. 6 bis leather
Honolulu, 5 bis leather
Vancouver, 4 sks hides
Natal, 2 bis leather
SKINS.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
G. Wilcox and Co, 1822 bis S., 1117 bis F., 25 cks C„ .
348 bis, 4 cs, 2 cks skins.
W. H. Chard and Co., 1671 bis S.. 142 bis F„ 108 bis
skins.
Osterineyer, Dewez, and Van Eompaey, 1322 bis S.,
50 bgs C. skins.
Picard, Goulet Fils, 1330 bis S. skins. '
A. Gtiillhou, 1249 bis S skins
Harrisson and Whiffen, 698 bis S., 88 bis F., 5 bgs C.,
184 bis, 272 bgs skins.
Wenz and Co, 928 bis S. skins.
Balaye, Jeune and Co., 844 bis S. skins
F. E. Miller, 109 bis S„ 864 bis F., 479 bales, 5 bgs
skins.
A. 11. Owens. Ltd., 227 bis S., 135 bis F., 18 bis E., 14
bis C., 3 bis K.—579 bis, 126 bdls skins
J. H. Eadford and Co., 495 bis S„ 113 bis F., 265 bis
skins.
A D. Quirand, 561 bis S., 63 bis skins.
Cureier, Adet and Co., 521 bis S.
C. Hermann, 16 bis S., 348 bis F., 39 bis M., 101 bis
M. Brial, 489 bis S„ 51 bis skins.
W. Mofflin and Co., 82 bis S„ 221 bis F„ 5 bgs C„
194 bis skins
Brial Freres, 401 bis S.
Hermann and Wormald, 6 bis S., 328 bis, 8 bgs F.
F. Melte, 271 cks, 35 cs, 30 pgks casings.
E. Schemmel, 273 bis S., 1 bdl skins, 2 cks pelts.
E. T. Colley, 20 bis S„ 201 bis 8 pkgs 2 bgs 1 bdl
F„ 1 bl C., 12 bis skins.
D. Brown and Co., 180 bis S., 24 bis F., 43 bis E., 1
bl goats.
Dangar, Gedye and Co, 171 bis S., 24 bis F„ 7 bis
skins.
J. H. Craven and Co., 173 bis S. skins.
W. Balchin, Ltd., 11 bis S., 110 bis F.. 11 bis skins
J. Marks, 19 bis S., 48 bis P., 8 bis E., 53 bis skins
C. Hogard, 118 bis S„ 3 cks C skins.
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., 53 bis F., 63 bis skins
E. Lhoest and Co., 56 bis F., 3 bis E., 17 bis skins.
J. Harrison, 3 bis S., 42 bis F., 31 bis skins.
F. Alderson, 1 bl F„ 39 cks C., 7 sks pelts, 11 cks
skins.
H.Canllicz, 58 bis S.
M. Bugler, 51 bis F., 2 bis skins.
D. Hermann, 20 bis S., 12 bis F„ 23 bis skins,
11. W. Peabody and Co., 9 bis F„ 10 bis M., 34 bis
skins.
D. Gniraud, 48 bis S. skins.
N. Canning Co., 40 cs E skins.
11. Ebner, 37 cks casings.
W. Haughton and Co., 30 bis F. skins
J. E. Bcgg, 15 bis F„ 13 bis skins.
J. Vickery and Co., 22 bis F.
E. and H. Binnie, 21 bis F.
C. Taylor and Co., 16 bis S skins.
E. Littleby, 16 bis F.
Gilchrist, Watt and Co., 12 bis E skins.
J. Vickery and Sons, 11 bis skins.
C. Pierse and Co., 10 bis skins.
N.Z. L. and M. A. Co., Ltd., 7 bis pelts.
E. J. Abbott, 6 bis skins.
W. Wormald, 5 bis sk ins.
Turner, 5 bis skin s .
Funck, Stark and Co., 1 pkg S„ 1 bl 3 bgs C. skins.
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 4 bis E. skins.
Virgoe, Son and Chapman, 4 pkgs casings.
E. Cole, 2 bis S„ 2 bis F. skins.
E. Vickery and Co., 3 bis F. skins.
W. J. Hoowaith, 3 bis F. skins.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd., 3 bis F. skins.
Madden and Hixon, 2 cks casings.
Sydney Wool-Scouring Co., 1 ck pelts.
Trebeck, Son and Co., 1 cs, M
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, 1 ck C. skins.
Burnett and Pierce, 1 ck skins.
G. S. Yuill and Co., 1 keg skins.
A.-New, 1 fk skins.
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd., 1 pkg skins.
E. Guthrie, 1 pci skins.
DESTINATIONS.
Mazamet, 5458 bis S., 138 bis skins.
London, 3989 bis S., 2241 bis, 8 pkgs, 2 bgs, 1 bdl F.,
67 bis E„ 1 bl, 24 cks C„ 1 bl, G, 886 bis, 1 ck
skins, 4 cks pelts, 12 cks, 4 pkgs casings.
Antwerp, 1820 bis S., 35 bis F., 1 bl, 3 bgs C, 3 bis
E„ 1 bdl skins, 2 cks pelts
San Francisco, 525 bis F., 14 b's C., 3 bis K., 754 bis
skins, 7 bis pelts.
New York, 67 bis S., 606 bis F., 8 bgs F., 24 bis M.,
358 bis, 4 cs skins.
Hamburg, 333 b’s S., 32 bis F., 265 cks, 35 cs, 30
pkgs casings.
Liverpool, 576 bis S., 1 cs M., 52 bis, 3 cks skins, 3
cks pelts.
Marseilles, 561 bis, 1 pkg S, 27 bis F. skins.
Dunkirk, 568 bis S.
Genoa, 161 bis S., 16 cks 5 bgs C., 137 bis, 215 bgs
skins. 1 ck casings.
Vancouver, 109 bis S., 10 bis F„ 3 cks 5 bgs C, 317 bis,
126 bdls 5 bgs, 2 cks skins, 1 ck pelts
Bremen, 152 bis S., 103 bis F., 50 bgs C., 18 bis E., 35
bis, 1 sk skins, 2 cks casings.
Marseilles, op. Mazamet, 53 bis S. skins.
Naples, 57 bgs skins.
Victoria (8.C.), 40 cs E. skins.
Manchester, 29 bis S. skins.
London, op. New York, 25 bis M. skins.
St. Paul, 23 bis F. skins.
Hull, 6 bis S. skins.
Boston, 1 bl S., 25 cks C., 6 cks skins.
Glasgow, 2 cks skins.
Thursday Island, 1 pkg skins.
Manila, 1 keg skins.
Japan, 1 pci skins.
Capetown, 24 cks casings. ,
Port Elizabeth, 5 cks casings.
Durban, 1 ck casings.
For Skin Statistics, July-December, 1902, see page 25n.


Skins, F bis
... 3,602
.. ,, bags
10
„ bdl
1
.. .. pkgs
8
„ M bis
49
„ „ case
1
K bis
. 3
R bis
88
,, „ cases
40
„ C bis
16
.. ,, bgs
63
oks
68
G bl
1
Ca.-ing?, casks
310
,, eases
35
.. pkgs
34
Pelts, bis ...
... 7
; casks
10
GRAND TOTALB.
Skins, bis
3,125
» bgs
153
„ cks
a
„ kgs
6
,, sks
5
„ cs
1
.. pel
1
pkgs
2
„ S. bis
8,015.
F. bis
3,717
» .. pkgs
8
.. » bg
1
.. cs
1
„ 0. bis
41
bgs
78
„ „ cks
27
„ .. pkgs
5
„ M. bis
. 71
„ K. bis
48
„ 0. bis
11
.. .. bg
1
„ E. bis
7
„ S. pcs, bis
„ pcs, bis
17
13
K. cuttings, bgs ... ■
17
Casings, cks
188
pkgs
6
kg
1
„ and weazands, pkgs
34
Slats, bales
68
Skins.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Picard-Goulet Fils, 2268 bis S.. 136 bis skins.
Q. Wilcox and Co, 470 bis S., 1329 bis F„ 12 cks C.,
11 bis 0., 393 bis, 5 sks, 6 cks skins. 17 bgs K.
cuttings.
Wenz and Co., 1703 bis S„ 359 bis skins.
A. Guilhou, 561 bis S., 129 bis skins
W. H. Chard and Co., 556 bis S., 104 bis F„ 1 bg 0.,
37 bis skins, 13 bis skin pcs. .
A 11. Owens, Ltd., 15 bis S., 90 bis F., 48 bis K., 27
bis C., 506 bis skins.
Balaye, Jeunc and Co., 569 bis S., 25 bis skins.
Hermann and Wormald, 5 bis S., 487 bis F., 85 bis
F. E. Miller, 287 bis F„ 45 bis M., 210 bis skins
Curcier, Adet and Co., 468 bis S., 7 bis R. skins.
W. Mofilin and Co., 123 bis F., 336 bis skins.
Tlarrisson and Whifflen, 110 bis S., 52 bis, 8 pkgs
F., 10 bgs 2 cks C., 107 bis, 117 bgs 38 cks skins,
1 keg casings.
R. Lhoest and Co., 21 bis S., 264 bis F., 87 bis skins
J. 11. Radford and Co., 79 bis S., 130 bis F., 85 bis
skins.
R. S. Lamb and Co., 257 bis F. skins.
Brial Frerea, 228 bis S., 2 bis, 28 bgs skins.
Da’gety and Co., Ltd., 231 bis S.. 9 bis F„ 5 bis
skins.
Ostermeyer, Dewez and Van Rompaey, 216 bis S
skins.
E. Schemmel, 104 bis S„ 78 bis F., 24 bis skins.
W. Balchin, Ltd., 84 bis F„ 95 bis skins, 6 pkgs
casings.
F. Mette, 145 cks casings, 34 pkgs casings and wea-
z^inds
A. Guirard, 20 bis S., 137 bis skins.
D. Brown and Co., 24 bis S., 41 bis F., 6 bis 17 bgs,
5 pkgs, 1 ck C., 22 bis skins.
Moore’s Wharf, 100 bis S. skins.
Young and Co., 40 bis F., 47 bis skins.
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd, 43 bis F„ 39 bis
skins.
J. Sanderson and Co., 82 bis S. skins.
Hammond and Co., 41 bis F„ 26 bis M. skins.
E. Littley, 80 bis S„ 11 bis F., 18 bgs C. skins.
Virgoe, Son and Chapman, 45 bis S„ 11 bis skins.
B. Cole, 55 bis F skins.
J. Marks, 17 bis F., 33 bis skins.
R. and H. Binnie, 37 bis F., 9 bis skins.
H. Caulliez, 35 bis S., 10 bis F. skins.
H. Ebner, 43 cks casings.
Wormald and Co., 39 bis skins.
J. B. Begg, 30 bis F., 8 bis skins.
W. Hermann, 38 bis skins.
C. Hogard, 24 bis S., 3 bis 12 cks C skins.
J. Craven and Co., 37 bis S skins.
W. Munro, 37 bis skins.
Nelson and Robertson, 33 bgs C. skins
Matthews and Co., 18 bis S.. 11 bis F., 4 bis skins.
M. Bugler, 14 bis F., 11 bis skins.
Dangar, Gedye and Co., Ltd., 13 bis F., 10 bis skins.
J. Harrison and Co., 2 bis S., 8 bis F., 11 bis skins.
J. Vickery and Co., 17 bis F. skins.
T. Komura, 17 bis S. skin pcs.
J. 11. Lowenstein, 16 bis skins.
A. McElhone, 13 bis S„ 2 bis, 1 bg F. skins.
W. Haughton and Co., 15 bis skins.
D. F. Stewart, 15 bis F, skins.'
A. 11. Hatterstezea, 11 bis S. skins.
Hermann and Co., 11 bis skins.
Close, Scroggie and Co., 11 bis F. skins.
F. Kanematsu, 7 bgs skins.
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 6 kgs skins.
R. T. Collie, 5 bis F. skins.
Funck, Stark and Co., 5 bis C. skint
R. T. Abbott, 4 bis skins.
T. C. Plante, 2 bis F. skins.
Scott, Henderson and Co., 1 bl skins.
H. Berry and Co., 1 cs skins.
Duguid and Co., 1 bl skins.
E. Friedereichs, 1 bg skins.
Lawrence, 1 cs F. skins.
Johnson and Co., 1 pkg skins.
Wright, Heaton and Co., Ltd., 1 pkg skins.
H. W. Peabody, 1 pel skins.
N.Z. L. and M. A. Co.. Ltd., 68 bis slats
DESTINATIONS.
London. 1018 bis S., 2167 bis, 1 bg F., 6 bgs, 3 cks, 5
pkgs C., 521 bis, 1 ck, 1 pkg skins.
Mazamet, 3344 bis S„ 7 bis R., 48 bis skins, 13 bis
skin pcs.
Antwerp, 1740 bis S., 99 bis F., 2 bis, 11 bgs C., 167
bis skins, 1 kg casings.
New York) 778 bis F., 71 bis M„ 48 bis K.. 27 bis C..
882 bis, 10 cks skins.
Marseilles, 867 bis S„ 4 bis C., 742 bis skins.
Genoa, 249 bis S., 128 bis F., 5 bis, 61 bgs 10 cks C.,
101 bis 145 bgs, 5 cks, 1 pkg skins, 2 cks casings.
Hamburg, 320 bis S., 75 bis 8 pkgs F., 21 bis, 1 bg
skins, 174 cks casings, 34 pkgs casings and wea-
zands.
Dunkirk, 477 bis S. skins.
Vancouver, 414 bis, 5 sks skins, 6 pkgs casings
Bremen, 17 bis 5.,'196 bis F., 11 bis, 1 bg 0., 24 bis
skins.
San Francisco, 184 bis F„ 1 pci skins, 17 bgs K. cut-
tings, 68 bis slats
London, opt. Dantzig, 196 bis S. skins.
Boston, 67 bis S., 3 bis, 12 cks C., 28 cks skins.
Liverpool, 113 bis S., 4 bis F., 2 cks C. skins.
St. Paul’s, 22 bis F., 47 bis skins.
America, 21 bis F., 43 bis skins.
Montreal, 58 bis skins.
S. Annus Soudt, 46 bis S. skins.
London, opt. Hull, 35 bis S. skins.
London, opt. Marseilles, 26 bis S. skins.
Japan, 7 bgs skins, 17 bis S. skin pc.
London, opt. New York, 22 bis F. skins.
Minneapolis, 5 bis F„ 16 bis sains.
Toronto, 2 bis 1 cs F., 11 bis skins.
Quebec, 12 bis F. skins.
Cape Town, 9 cks casings.
Manila, 6 kgs skins.
Trieste, 3 cks casings.
Ouchee, 2 bis F. skins.
S. S. Islands, 1 cs skins.
TIMBER.
Exported from N.S.W.'to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July 1901—June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Staerker and Fischer, 100 loads 46 pcs hardwood,
7020 blocks, 111 logs, 1 pile, 208,863 feet, 44,137
pcs
J. Scharff, 2817 pcs Oregon, 246 pcs hardwood, 39
pcs blue gum, 9 pcs kauri, 84 piles, I Oregon
spar, 64 bis, 20,752 pcs.
Col. Sugar Refining Co., Ltd., 8467 pcs hatdwood,
460 pcs 3 bdls kauri, 117 pcs Oregon, M iron-
bark girders, 5759 sleepers, 409 poles, 66 piles,
9147 pcs.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 8822 pcs sandalwood,
1383 pcs 29 bdls hardwood. 601 pcs deal, 480 pcs
Oregon, 236 pcs 239 pkgs 9 bdls kauri, 112 pcs
baltic, 82 pcs pine, 74 bdls redwood, 227 bdls
64 pkgs 9517 pcs.
A. C. Gaertner, 3460 pcs, 30,000 ft. hardwood, 959
pcs Oregon, 171 pcs 34 bdls kauri, 3320 pickets,
20j palings, 93 piles, 251 pcs.
Saxton and Binns, 882 pcs 6534 feet -redwood, 151
pcs 14,955 feet 12 spars Oregon, 506 pcs kauri,
438 pcs hardwood, 89 pcs 50 bdls pine, 100
palings, 1 box 7495 pcs.
The Kauri Timber Company, Ltd., 1457 pcs har'-
wood, 511 pcs 83 pkgs 10 bdls kauri, 121 pcs
2100 ft. Oregon, 30 pcs baltic, 11 pcs ironbark
13,965 feet 42 pkgs 201 pcs.
W. S. Tait and Co., 5848 pcs hardwood, 324 pcs
pine, 100 pcs kauri, 2859 pickets, 5194 pcs.
H. W. Peabody and Co., 77,979 clocks.
National Mortgage Agency, 54,080 ft.
MeEwen and Co., 9345 pcs.
Goodlet and Smith, 1737 pcs9 bdls Oregon, 1218 pcs
35 bdls hardwood, 1140 pcs deal, 681 pcs kauri,
2000 feet 34 bdls 4258 pcs.
Holdship and Co., 131 pcs hardwood, 40 pcs Ore-
gon, 7943 pcs.
Weber, Lohmanu and Co., Ltd., 1 pc hardwood,
6176 pcs.
A. Taylor and Co., 1527 pcs hardwood, 45 pcs iron-
bark, 9000 blocks, 1000 pickets, 200 sleepers,
140 tons, 2285 pcs.
J. W. Eaton, 479 pcs kauri, 393 pcs hardwood, 13
bdls 3 pcs Oregon., 500 palings, 7 bdls, 3647 pcs.
Nelson and Robertson, 784 pcs blackbutt, 72 pcs
hardwood, 4594 pcs.
M. Segur, 3783 pcs hardwood, 646 pcs red gum, 3000
ft.
Chinese Shippers, 2390 pcs 30 bdls Oregon, 332 pcs
10 bdls redwood, 300 pcs kauri, 185 pcs hard-
wood.
Morgan and Smith, 876 pcs hardwood, 316 pcs Ore-
gon, 614 pcs red gum, 78 pcs pine, 44 pcs kauri,
1909 pcs.
G. Hudson and Son, 2546 pcs tallow wood, 96 pcs
hardwood, 92 pcs.
J. H. Binns, 2218 pcs Oregon, 47 pcs kauri.
Langdon, Hopkins and Langdon, 1825 pcs hard-
wood, 800 posts.
Rabone, Feez and Co., 210 pcs hardwood, 14 pkgs
1837 pcs.
Clyde Engineering Co., Ltd., 77 pcs hardwood, 42
pcs ironbark, 4 pcs blue gum, 5000 pickets,
1000 palings, 146 pcs.
E. F. Broad, 1573 pcs.
Rev. Guilleman, 201 pcs hardwood, 190 pcs baltic,
83 pcs Oregon, 6 bdls 970 pcs.
Government Architect, 964 pcs Oregon, 148 pcs
hardwood.
W. J. Moxham and Co., 850 pcs ironbark, 594 pcs.
For Timber Statistics, .Tuly-December, 1302, see page 2(ilt.


GRAND TOTALS.
Hardwood, pcs
... 33,991
„ feet
... 30,000
bdls
233
„ . loads
100
Oregon, pcs ...
... 12 852
„ feet
... 17,055
„ . bdls
52
„ spars
13 *
Sandalwood, pcs
... 8,822
,, bdls
20
Kauri, pea
3960
„ bdls ...
181
.. pkgs
322
Redwood, pcs
... 1,274
„ feet
6,534
,. bdls ...
84
Tallow wood, pcs
... 2,546
Real, pcs
... 1,741
Red gum, pcs...
1,260
Blue gum, pcs...
43
Blackbutt, pcs
781
Pine, pcs
573
,, bdls
50
„ boards
35
Baltic, pcs
654
Ironbark, pcs ...
473
„ girders
14
Cedar, bdls
12
Blocks
... 93,999
Sleepers
... 5,964
Pickets
... 12,179
Palings
... 1,800
Posts
800
Poles
409
Piles
260
Logs
Timber, pcs
137
... 145,604
„ feet
... 281,908
„ bdls
614
„ tons
140
„ pkgs. ...
149
,, bales ...
64
,, boxes
1
G. J. Waterhouse, 229 pcs hardwood, 495 pcs.
M. Bugler, 349 pcs kauri, 138 pcs hardwood, 23 pcs
Oregon, 209 pcs.
Holdsworth, Macpherson and Co., 439 pcs hard-
wood, 258 pcs baltic, 20 pcs redwood.
S. A. Burns and Co., 716 pcs.
T. Pratt, 13 pkgs 593 pcs.
Langley Bros., 457 pcs hardwood.
J. Gillies, 119 pcs hardwood, 64 pcs baltic, 66 pcs
kauri, 16 piles, 91 pcs.
F. Lassetter and Co., Ltd., 134 pcs hardwood, 10
pcs kauri, 208 pcs.
Castle Bros. (Wolf and Son), 340 bdls.
Austral Timber Company, 93 pcs hardwood, 164 pcs
Morgan and Co., 230 pcs.
S.H. Mission, 227 pcs.
Wesleyan Mission, 212 pcs.
J. J. Banks, 169 bdls hardwood.
Paul and Gray, Ltd., 87 pcs Oregon, 80 pcs.
J. Williams, 152 pcs hardwood.
H. Fisher, 80 bdls kauri, 13 pcs hardwood.
W. M. Ford, 85 pcs.
J. Booth and Co., 84 pcs.
W. S. Preddy, 35 pcs Oregon, 34 pcs hardwood.
Renard, Lorimer and Co., 66 pcs.
Coastal Farmers’ Company, 40 pcs redwood, 23 pcs.
H. McKenzie, 41 bdls kauri, 12 bdls cedar, 10 pcs.
J. J. Gillham ,50 pcs hardwood.
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 45 pcs hardwood.
E. Short, 29 pcs.
J. Wishart, 25 pcs ironbark.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 20 bdls sandalwood.
R. C. Ghest, 16 pkgs.
Noyes Bros., 16 pcs.
H. C. Bell, 11 logs 3 pcs.
Funck, Stark and Co’., 13 logs.
J. Harris, 29 pine boards.
J. Keep and Son, Ltd., 6 pine boards.
A. Hordern and Sons, 4 bdls kauri.
C. Asano, 5 sleepers.
Romey and Co., 3 pcs Oregon.
A. Gray, 2 pcs Oregon.
Pacific Islands Co., Ltd., 2 logs.
DESTINATIONS.
South Sea Islands, 21,162 pcs 233 bdls hardwood,
11,768 pcs 39 bdls 17,055 ft. 1 spar Oregon, 2546
pcs tallow wood, 1850 pcs 322 pkgs 137 bdls
kauri, 1234 pcs 6534 ft 84 bdls redwood, 1741 pcs
deal, 624 pcs baltic, 614 pcs red gum, 43 pcs
blue gum, 249 pcs 50 bdls 29 boards pine, 81
pcs 14 girders ironbark, 12 bdls cedar, 5759
sleepers, 5000 pickets, 1100 palings, 800 posts
409 poles, 130 piles, 15,965 feet 267 bdls 133
pkgs 1 box 79,916 pcs.
Hamburg, 100 loads hardwood, 6996 blocks, 123
logs, 1 pile. 208 863 ft.. 43,639 pcs.
London, 784 pcs blackbutt, 262 pcs sandalwood,
9000 blocks, 140 tons, 54,080 ft., 14,864 pcs
Noumea, 12,326 pcs 30,000 ft. hardwood, 959 pcs
Oregon, 646 pcs red gum, 368 pcs 34 bdls kauri,
324 pcs pine. 7179 pickets, 700 palings, 109 piles,
•3000 ft., 1732 pcs.
Hong Kong, 8560 pcs 20 bdls sandalwood, 64 bis 41
pcs.
Thursday Island, etc., 1750 pcs 10 bdls kauri, 394
pcs hardwood, 123 pcs 13 bdls 12 spars Oregon,
30 pcs baltic, 200 sleepers, 7 bdls 481 pcs.
Manila, 41 pcs hardwood, 6 pine boards, 78,003
blocks, 340 bdls.
Bremen, 2 logs, 1998 pcs.
San Francisco, 392 pcs ironbark, 67 pcs hardwood,
970 pcs.
Liverpool, 1347 pcs.
Shanghai, 2 pcs Oregon, 393 pcs.
Capetown, 16 pkgs, 88 pcs.
Japan, 20 piles, 11 logs, 5 sleepers, 46 pcs.
Antwerp, 66 pcs.
Vancouver, 40 pcs redwood, 23 pcs.
Colombo, 1 pc hardwood, 1 log.
Calcutta, 1 pc kauri.
.
Timber.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Saxton and Binns, 5965 pcs hardwood, 2700 pcs Ore-
gon, 701 pcs pine, 389 pcs 6 pkgs kauri, 362 pcs
redwood, 120 pcs Baltic, 27 pcs cedar, 3 pkgs
gum, 350 posts, 5 bdls palings, 1334 pcs, 1 bx
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd., 6597 pcs 4 piles hardwood,
5399 hardwood sleepers, 2 pcs ironbark, 26 iron-
bark saplings, 16 pcs Oregon, 6 turpentine piles,
•1058 split posts, 506 pcs
McEwen and Co., 41 pcs 14 piles blackbutt, 25 pkgs
8151 pcs
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 1746 pcs 3 spars Oregon,
1386 pcs hardwood, 775 pcs Baltic, 773 pcs
kauri, 227 pcs pine, 122 pcs tallowwood, 50 bdls
box, 9 pkgs gum, 6 logs, 3 pkgs 2384 pcs
Morgan and Smith, 3154 pcs hardwood, 66 pcs Ore-
gon, 1057 pcs
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 18 pcs hardwood,
6630 pcs
Staerker and Fischer, 9 logs rosewood, 42 logs, 1 cs
5719 pcs
Nelson and Robertson, 1546 pcs blackbutt, 334 pcs
hardwood, 105 pcs Baltic, 5000 blocks, 1368 pcs
J. Scharff, 1964 pcs hardwood, 248 pcs blue gum, 62
pcs pine, 5 bdls kauri, 12 piles, 65 bdls 216 pcs
A. Taylor and Co., 1012 pcs hardwood, 175 pcs iron-
bark, 1469 pcs
'M. Segur, 1066 pcs hardwood, 1495 pcs
Qoodlet and Smith, Ltd., 883 pcs hardwood, 522 pcs
Oregon, 430 pcs deal, 86 pcs deal boards, 106 pcs
kauri, 19 pcs shelving, 6 pcs cedar, 4 pcs pine,
2 spars, 12 pkgs
A. C. Qaertner, 439 pcs kauri, 54 pcs hardwood, 22
logs, 2340 pcs
W. S. Tait and Co., 736 pcs hardwood, 281 pcs 152
boards kauri, 163 pcs Oregon, 55 pcs pine, 2
ironbark girders, 96 bdls 632 pcs
The Kauri Timber Co., Ltd., 54 pcs 33,615 feet Ore-
gon, 2200 feet Baltic, 2000 feet redwood, 791 pcs
6 bdls kauri, 42 pcs hardwood
J. W. Eaton, 737 pcs redwood, 410 pcs Oregon, 235
pcs hardwood, 250 hardwood pickets, 42 pcs
kauri, 36 pcs Baltic, 2 pcs teak, 1283 pcs
H. W. Peabody and Co., 100,000 blocks
W. J. Moxham and Co., 736 pcs ironbark
G. J. Waterhouse, 235 pcs hardwood, 210 pcs Ore-
gon, 51 pcs Baltic, 111 pcs Baltic weather-
boards, 21 pcs tallowwood, 3 pcs red gum, 4 pcs
boards 254 pcs
Kerr Bros, and Co., 206 pcs kauri, 147 pcs Oregon,
12 pcs hardwood, 8 bdls 4 pkgs 128 pcs
Smith, Copeland and Co., 92 pcs hardwood, 296 pcs
G. de Fraine, 380 pcs hardwood
New Zealand Timber Co., 362 pcs kauri
Chinese Shippers, 347 pcs Oregon
S.H. Mission, 187 pcs hardwood, 93 pcs mahogany
Ifahone, Feez and Co., 189 pcs hardwood, 44 pcs
H. Haege and Co., 300 hardwood sleepers
Kite and Price, 61 pcs ironbark, 250 posts
J. Wallace, 275 pkgs
B. D. Pike and Co., 94 pcs ironbark, 59 pcs
11. Ilowitz, 69 pcs battens, 51 pcs flooring, 50 pcs
scathing
Father Fischer’, 139 pcs
W. S. Prtddy, 130 pcs hardwood
Holdship and Co., 124 pcs kauri
J. Gillies, 90 pcs Oregon, 24 pcs hardwood, 12 pcs
kauri
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 25 pcs hardwood, 75 pcs
H. McKenzie, 47 pcs Oregon, 35 pcs scotia
N, Shelley, 72 pcs
N.Z. L. and M. A. Co., Ltd., 4 pcs
G. Hudson and Son, 65 pcs hardwood
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 60 pcs ■
D. A. Rogers, 54 pcs
J. Barre Johnston and Co., 48 pcs
Gollin and Co. Pty., Ltd., 25 pcs
J. Harris, 16 pcs pine
F. Lassetter and Co., Ltd., 11 pcs pine, 4 pcs kauri
J. Wishart and Son, 7 ironbark girders, 4 pcs
hardwood, 4 pcs
Rev. Guilleman, 14 pcs hardwood
Aust. Wesleyan Mission, 13 pcs
Woodlark I.P. Co., 12 boards
Davies and Fehon, 10 pcs hardwood
Federal Timber Co., 10 pcs
Rev. Shaw, 9 pcs
Central Tramway and M. Co., 5 bdls sleepers
P. C. Gray, 5 pkgs
Hellstrom, Dunn and Co,, 4 bdls staves
C. A. McDonald, 3 bdls
Royal Naval Depot, 3 bds
DESTINATIONS.
■ South Sea Islands, 22,695 pcs 5399 sleepers 250 pickets
4 piles hardwood, 6115 pcs 33,615 feet Oregon, 1090
pcs 2200 ft Baltic, 111 pcs Baltic weatherboard,
1872 pcs 11 bdls 6 pkgs kauri, 1021 pcs pine, 1099
pcs 2000 feet redwood, 430 pcs deal, 248 pcs blue
gum, 93 pcs mahogany, 143 pcs tallowwood, 86
pcs deal boards, 15 pcs 26 saplings 7 girders
ironbark, 50 bdls box, 33 pcs cedar, 69 pcs bat-
tens, 50 pcs scathing, 51 pcs flooring, 35 pcs
scotia, 19 pcs shelving, 12 pkgs gum, 3 pcs red
gum, 2 pcs teak, 4 pcs 12 boards, 1058 split posts,
600 posts, 5 bdls sleepers, 12 piles, 6 turpentine
piles, 76 bdls 299 pkgs I bx 17,434 pcs
Noumea, 1856 pcs 300 sleepers hardwood, 720 pcs
152 boards kauri, 163 pcs Oregon, 55 pcs pine, 2
ironbark girders, 5 bdls palings, 96 bdls 22 logs
3910 pcs
London, 1587 pcs 14 pries blackbutt, 25 pkgs 6279 pcs
Hamburg, 14 logs 6832 pcs
San Francisco, 1053 pcs ironbark, 95 pcs
Manila, 100,000 blocks, 2 pcs
Liverpool, 362 pcs kauri, 9 rosewood logs, 5000
blocks, 673 pcs
Thursday Island, 252 pcs hardwood, 240 pcs 3 spars
Oregon, 575 pcs kauri, 2 spars
Bremen, 34 logs, 341 pcs
New York, 314 pcs
Japan, 83 pcs
Vancouver, 64 pcs
Durban, 3 bdls 60 pcs
Victoria (8.C.), 48 pcs
Shanghai, 1" pcs hardwood, 23 pcs
Hongkong, 20 pcs
Marseilles, 4 bdls staves
Genoa, 1 log, 1 cs


GEAND TOTALS.
Timber, pcs
... 36,178
pkgs
321
„ bdls
... 175
„ boards
12
„ case
1
,, box
1
Hardwood, pcs
... 24,813
,, sleepers
... 5,699
„ pickets ...
250
,, piles
4
Oregon, pcs
... 6,518
,, feet
... 33,615
,, spars
3
Kauri, pcs
... 3 529
„ bdls
11
„ boards
152
„ pkgs
Blackbutt, pcs
6
... 1,587
„ piles
14
Ironbark, pcs
... 1,068
„ girders
9
„ saplings
26
Baltic, pcs
... 1,090
„ feet
... 2,200
„ weatherboards
Eedwood, pcs
111
... 1,099
„ feet
... 2,000
Pine, pcs
... 1,076
Deal, pcs
430
„ boards
86
Blue gum, pcs
248
Bed gum, pcs
3
Gum, pkgs
12
Tallowwood, pcs
143
Mahogany, pcs
93
Cedar, pcs
33
Box, bdls
50
Eosewood, logs
9
Teak, pcs
2
Battens, pcs
69
Flooring boards, pcs
51
Board, pcs
4
Scathing, pcs
50
Scotia, pcs
85
Shelving, pcs
19
Staves, bdls
4
Blocks
... 105/00
Posts
600
Split posts
... 1,058
Logs
71
Piles
12
Turpentine piles
6
Sleepers, bdls
5
Palings, bdls
5
Spars
2
LIVE STOCK.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
SHIPPERS
Houlder Bros., 1472 horses.
W. N. Willis, 997 horses, 67 cows, 30 erts fowls.
Winchcombe, Carson and Co., Ltd., 1101 sheep
Colonel Hunt, 751 horses.
M. Brial, 582 sheep, 5 horses.
G. Kiss, 469 horses, 14 cows, 2 ponies, 10 dogs.
J. Bridge and Co., Ltd., 500 sheep.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 246 horses, 100 sheep,
12 pigs, 6 dogs, 2 deer, 1 bull, 2 erts fowls.
Howard Smith Co., Ltd., 180 horses.
H. Dalldorf, 134 horses.
N. Loan and M.A. Co., Ltd., 100 sheep, 2 pigs.
Brial Freres, 199 sheep.
H. E. Smith, 98 horses.
Moxham Bros., 50 horses.
T. Playfair, 95 sheep.
J. Scharff, 42 sheep, 6 head cattle, 1 bull, 2 calves,
5 dogs.
Maiden Bros., 31 sheep.
Smart and Co., 29 horses.
Colonial Sugar Refining Co., Ltd., 31 horses, 1 bull
Lamotte, 28 horses.
T. A. Field, 20 sheep.
Beale and Gregg, 50 sheep.
Pitt, Son and Badgery, Ltd., 20 calves, 5 goats. 2
coops poultry.
W. E. King, 17 horses.
Hurley, 14 horses.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 21 sheep
G. A. S.S. Co., 18 sheep.
Q. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 10 pigs, 1 cow, 1 calf.
E. Hunter, 9 horses.
A. C. Gaertner, 10 horses.
D. H. Smart, 8 horses.
W. Buttel, 6 sheep.
J. A. Buttel, 6 sheep.
W. Inglis, 4 cows.
W. Pair, 3 horses.
S. Bennett, 3 horses.
M. Segur, 3 horses.
Scott, Henderson and Co., 3 sheep.
H. Chisholm. 2 horses.
Pastoral Finance Association, Ltd., 2 horses.
Nelson and Robertson, 2 horses.
M. Steer, 2 horses.
J. McNamara. 4 horses.
Hegrady, 2 horses.
Glance, 2 horses.
N. E. MacDonald, 2 horses.
F. Lassetter and Co., Ltd., 2 dogs.
Weber, Lohmann and Co., 3 horses, 16 goats.
W. S. Tait and Co., 1 horse.
Caulder, 1 horse.
J. C. Cotterill, 1 horse.
F. A. McKenzie, 1 bull.
W. Davis, 51 horses.
W. and A. McArthur, 51 horses, 6 coops fowls.
Hogg, 48 horses.
F. Glass, 28 horses.
Neary, 21 horses.
C. Nicholson, 20 horses.
J. R. Wood, 17 horses.
E. H. Ames, 10 horses.
J. C. Catherel, 6 horses.
Chinese Shippers, 2 horses, 12 sheep.
Leseuret, 2 horses.
Col. Holdsworth, 1 horse.
J. Fogarty, 1 horse.
E. B. Johnson, 1 pony.
J. D. Pattison, 6 cows, 1 bull.
F. V. Hall, 1 cow.
Hill, Clark and Co., 3 goats.
DESTINATIONS.
Durban, 2635 horses, 22 cows, 30 crts fowls.
Noumea, 2132 sheep, 25 horses.
South Sea Islands, 572 sheep, 79 horses, 22 calves,
13 dogs, 12 pigs, 6 head cattle, 24 goats, 3 bulls,
2 deer, 2 crts fowls, 2 coops poultry.
Durban, opt. Capetown, 683 horses.
Port Elizabeth, 411 horses, 45 cows.
Singapore, 215 horses, 21 sheep, 1 cow.
Bombay, 190 horses, 40 sheep.
Calcutta, 225 horses.
Batavia, 145 horses, 13 cows.
Shanghai, 161 horses. 10 dogs.
Thursday Island, etc., 100 sheep, 2 pigs.
Beira, 51 horses, 6 coops fowls.
Sourabaya, 18 sheep.
Hongkong, 10 pigs, 4 cows, 1 pony.
Manila, 10 horses, 8 cows, 2 ponies, 1 bull, 1 calf,
3 sheep.
London, 5 horses.
Honolulu, 3 horses.
Bremen, 1 horse.
Japan, 1 bull.
GRAND TOTALS.
Horses ... ... 4839
Sheep ... ... 2886
Cows ... ... 93
Fowls, crts ... ... 32
„ coops ... ... 6
Poultry, coops ... 2
Pigs ... ... 24
Goats ... ... 24
Calves 23
Dogs ... ... 23
Head Cattle ... ... 6
Bulls ... ... 5
Ponies ... ... 3
Deer ... ... 2
Live Stock.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Bell, 172 horses
G. G. Kiss, 138 horses, 2 cows, 5 dogs
W. Hurley, 100 horses
Winchcombe, Carson and Co.. Ltd., 185 sheep
Co-op. Wool and Produce Co., 98 sheep
C. Nicholson, 44 horses, 28 cattle, 5 sheep
T. Playfair, 73 sheep
Lamotte, 40 horses
Smith, 25 horses
A. Calder, 31 horses
J. Neary, 21 horses
P. Kanematsu, 18 cattle
A. Smith, 52 sheep, 1 ert pigs, 9 erts poultry
H. Naval Depot, 30 sheep
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 1 horse, 12 cows, 3 calves,
12 sheep
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd., 12 horses
J. A. Buttel, 10 sheep
H. Victualling Yard, 10 sheep
Van Renen, 7 horses
A. C. Gaertner, 7 horses
D. S. Hart, 6 horses
S. Coffey, 5 horses
Brown, Joske and Co., 4 horses
Boulton, 4 horses
Reimenschneider, 3 horses
C. Asano, 4 erts pigs
Holdsworth, Macpherson and Co., 1 horse
Lamb and Co., 1 horse
R. Jackinson, 1 horse
G. Goode, 1 horse
Smith, Copeland and Co., 1 horse
R. Donaldson, 1 horse
F. Hagon, 1 horse
J. Maonamara, 1 horse
J. Meloy, 1 horse
E. Brown, 1 calf
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 7 cits fowls
A. Basham, 2 coops fowls
Wright, Heaton and Co., 1 coop fowls
P. C. Gray, 2 bxs fowls
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd- 1 coop poultry.
DESTINATIONS.
Calcutta, 372 horses
Noumea, 16 horses, 283 sheep
S. Islands, 28 horses, 175 sheep, 1 ert pigs, 1 calf
9 erts 1 coop poultry, 2 bxs 1 coop fowls
East London, 44 horses, 28 cattle, 5 sheep
Bombay, 56 horses
Hongkong, 35 horses, 4 erts pigs, 2 coops fowls
Batavia, 28 horses
Shanghai, 25 horses, 2 cows, 5 dogs
Colombo, 24 horses
Manila, 12 cows, 3 calves, 12 sheep
Japan, 18 cattle
Macassar, 1- horse
Beira, 7 erts fowls.
GRAND TOTALS.
Horses ... ... ... 629
Sheep. ' . ... ... 475
Cattle ... ... ... 46
Cows ... .. ... 14
Calves ... ... ... 4
Pigs, crates . ... ... 5
Dogs ... ... ... ... 5
Poultry, crates ... ... fl
do. coop ... 1
Fowls, crates ... ... ... 7
do. coops ... ... ... 3
- do. boxes ... ... 2


GEAND TOTALS.
C. nut, brls
9,073
„ casks
1,671
,. butts
15
„ . cases
1
Oleine, casks ...
405
Castor, drums . ,
105
,, cases
53
Machine, cases
100
Mineral, casks
80
„ cases
80
China, cases
61
Oleo, brls
80
Wood preserving, drums
25
Neatsfoot, csk
1
Oil, brls
8,853
.. csks
1,536
„ hhds
498
butts
59
„ drums
996
,, cases
865
„ tins
50
„ pkgs
22
,, box
1
FRUIT.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Solomon and Son, 1724 cs, 68 i cs, 5 J cs.
Castle Bros. (Wolf and Son), 575 cs, 1075 i cs.
M. Segur, 659 cs, 21 i cs.
Hopkins and Lipscombe, 183 cs, 604 J cs.
Weymark and Son, 528 cs, 5 J cs.
Chinese Shippers, 293 cs, 442 i cs, 10 i cs.
J. Pope and Co., 166 cs, 205 J cs.
H. Jones and Co., 272 cs.
Ferguson and Watson, 228 cs, 30 i cs.
W. and A. McArthur, Ltd., 200 cs.
J. Dive, 167 cs, 30 i cs.
R. S. Donaldson, 182 cs.
Davidson Bros., 170 cs.
M. F. Vollner, 150 cs.
Weber, Lohmann and Co., 143 cs.
A. B. Pitt, 100 cs.
Stanley and Co., 85 cs.
J. Scharff, 78 cs. ,
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd., 74 cs.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 46 cs, 17 i cs.
J. D. Pattison, 70 i cs.
A. B. Chave, 53 4 cs.
I’. M. Stewart, 39 cs.
A. Ferguson and Co., 32 cs.
Dalton Bros., 30 cs.
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 28 cs.
J. Bridge and Co., 26 cs, 6 J cs.
Griffiths Fruit Co., 10 cs, 36 i cs.
Arkell and Douglas, 25 cs.
M. Brial, 22 cs.
U.S.S. Co., 20 cs.
W. S. Tait and Co., 18 cs, 6 pkgs.
Brial Freres, 18 cs.
J. A. Buttel, 15 cs.
W. J. Lohenstein, 15 cs.
H. S. Bird and Co., 14 cs.
S. Zollner and Co., 14 cs.
Browni, Joske and Co., 13 cs.
Dunstan Pope Fruit Co., 12 cs.
J. Raper, 10 cs.
Taylor Bros., 10 cs.
Morgan and Smith, 10 cs.
W. Pope and Co., 8 cs.
A. C. Gaertner, 8 cs.
H. Prescott and Co., 15 i cs,
S. Bennett and Co., 7 cs.
P. Reveree, 4 cs.
Staerker and Fischer, 3 cs.
S. H. Mission, 3 cs.
F. Hagen, 3 cs.
Morgan and Co., 2 cs.
Smith, Warren and Co., 2 cs.
Rabone, Feez and Co., 1 cs.
* DESTINATIONS.
Noumea, 2957 cs, 94 J cs, 5 i cs.
Thursday Island, etc., 854 cs, 1160 i cs, 10 i cs.
Manila, 663 cs, 1398 i cs.
S.S. Islands, 1059 cs, 10 i cs, 6 pkgs.
Colombo, 283 cs.
Durban, 275 cs.
Capetown, 220 cs.
Bremen, 100 cs.
Hongkong, 26 cs, 15 J cs.
San Francisco, 6 cs.
Japan, 1 cs.
Shanghai, 1 cs.
Grand totals—644s cs, 2677 J cs, 15 i cs, 6 pkgs.
Fruit.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports, Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Austral Fruit and Produce Co., 716 cs
Solomon and Son, 626 cs 50 bxs 10 crts
Dunstan-Pope Fruit Co., 334 cs 11 hf-cs
Hopkins and 62 cs 126 hf-cs
J. Dive, 72 cs 114 hf-cs
M. Segur, 171 cs
Wevmark and Son, 145 cs
G. S. Yuill and Co.. Ltd., 97 cs
A. E. Donaldson, 38 cs 33 qr-cs
H. Stanley and Co., 48 cs
S. Zollner and Co., 46 cs
A. O. Gaertner, 46 cs
.T. Lyons, 40 cs
L. Michel, 40 cs
Ferguson and Watson, 38 cs
J. Pope, 30 hf-cs
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 22 cs 2 hf-cs
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 22 cs
W. S. Tait and Co., 18 cs
Peacock and Co., 15 cs
Ferguson, 15 cs
C. G. Piggot, 13 cs
Taylor Bros., 12 cs
Chinese Shippers, 3 cs 10 hf-cs
J. Scharff, 12 cs
Griffiths Fruit Co., 11 cs
A. M. Brodziack, 10 cs
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 8 cs
M. Zollner, 6 cs
Staerker and Fisher, 5 cs
Brown, Joske and Co., 5 cs
Brial Freres, 4 cs
A. Hordern and Sons, 3 cs
Dalton Bros., 3 cs
H. .Tones and Co., 3 cs
E. O. Jones, 3 cs
N. Shelley, 3 cs
Matthews and Co., 3 cs
S.H. Mission, 2 cs
G. J. Waterhouse, 2 cs
N.H. Mission, 1 cs
Paul and Gray, Ltd., 1 cs
DESTINATIONS.
Noumea, 1109 cs 30 hf-cs 50 hxs 10 crts
Durban, 834 cs
S.S. Islands, 499 cs 2 hf-cs 33 qr-cs
Thursday Island, 137 cs 261 hf-cs
Port Elizabeth, 90 cs
Batavia, 40 cs
Manila, 7 cs
Japan, 5 cs
Bremen, 3 cs
Totals—2724 cs, 293 hf-cs, 33 qr-cs, 50 bxs, 10 ci
OILS.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902,
SHIPPERS.
Lever Bros., Ltd., 8333 brls 1599 casks 1 cs C. nut,
30 brls oleo, 3344 brls 817 csks 498 hhds 111
drums, 1 cs.
Co-op. Wholesale Society, Ltd., 139 brls 15 butts
4 csks C. nut, 567 csks 311 brls 59 butts.
Buzacott and Co., 600 brls C. nut.
Sydney Soap and Candle Co., Ltd., 345 csks oleine.
F. Kanematsu, 60 csks oleine, 64 csks C. nut, 116
brls 90 csks.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 1 brl C. nut, 175 cs
96 drums.
A. C .Gaertner, 80 csks 10 cs mineral 15 cs China,
121 drums 50 csks 38 cs.
J. X. Falk and Co., Ltd., 185 cs.
Morgan and Smith, 112 drums, 66 cs.
Paul and Gray, Ltd. ,96 drums, 29 cs.
W. S. Tait and Co., 11 cs China, 11 cs castor, 76 cs
40 drums.
F. Hagen, 40 cs castor, 60 drums 18 cases.
M. Segur, 35 cs China, 2 cs castor, 69 brls 10 cases.
Brown, Joske and Co., 5 drums castor, 50 tins 25
drums 25 cases.
Briscoe and Co., Ltd., l r o drums castor.
Rabona, Feez and Co., 100 cs machine.
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd., 12 csks 12 brls 14 drms i{
cs 22 pkgs.
S. Hoffnung and Co., Ltd., 80 drms.
Chinese Shippers, 38 drums 20 cs.
Dalton Bros., 52 cs.
H. W. Peabody and Co., 50 cs.
M. Moss and Co., 50 cs.
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 25 drms wood pre-
serving, 20 drums 1 cs.
J. Scharff, 43 drums.
Rev. F. Shaw, 25 drums.
J. Sandy and Co., 21 drums.
Smith and Kopsen, 20 drums.
Perdriau and Co., 20 cs mineral.
Holdsworth, Macpherson and Co., 17 drums.
Nelson and Robertson, 15 cs.
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 10 drums.
F. Alderson and Co., 10 drums.
H. S. Bird and Co., 10 cs.
R. Harper and Co. Pty., Ltd., 10 cs.
J. Keep and Sons, 8 drums.
R. Towns and Co., 8 drums.
J. Marks, 4 csks C. nut.
S. College, 6 drums.
Learmonth, Dickinson and Co., 5 drums.
Clarke and Co., 5 cs.
Wildridge and Sinclair, 4 cs.
Kerr Bros, and Co., 3 drums.
G. J. Waterhouse, 2 drums, 1 cs.
J. Blackwood and Sons, 3 drums.
D. Mitchell and Co., 3 cs.
Morgan and Dezarnaulds, 1 brl 2 cs.
E. Rich and Co., 2 drums.
Singer Manfg. Co., 2 cs.
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, 1 csk neatsfoot.
Union Oil Co., 1 cs.
A. Hervey and Co., 1 bx.
DESTINATIONS.
Liverpool, 4344 brls 1603 csks 15 butts C. nut, 3565
brls 1384 csks 49S hhds 59 butts 111 drums 1 cs.
San Francisco, 4195 brls C. nut, 30 brls oleo.
Japan, 533 brls 64 csks C. nut, 60 csks oleine, 206
brls 90 csks.
South Sea Islands, 100 cs machine, 11 cs 5 drums
castor, 635 drums 560 cs 50 tins 42 brls 12 ctks
22 pkgs.
Noumea, 100 drums 42 cs castor, 61 cs China, 30
csks 30 cs mineral, 240 drums 110 cs 50 csks 40
brls.
London, 345 csks oleine, 4 csks C. nut.
Vladivostock, 185 cs.
Saipan, 25 drms wood preserving.
Thursday Island, 1 brl C. nut, 10 drms 4 cs.
New York, 5 cs.
Naples, 1 csk neatsfoot.
Calcutta, 1 cs C. nut.
Madras, 1 bx.
For Oil Statistics, July-December, 1902, fee page 29ji.


GRAND TOTALS.
Cocoanut. brls
3707
,, casks
520
China, cases
55
Oleine, casks
100
S.P., casks
20
Mineral, casks
5
Castor, drums
4
,, cases
5
C. oil, cases ...
10
Lucca, cases ...
5
Fish, cases
2
Neatsfoot, drum
1
Barrels
... 3054
Casks
... 1956
Cases
... 401
Drums
... 228
Butts
188
Box
1
Packages
... 1900
GRAND TOTALS.
Feitilizei-, sks
6,500
„ bgs
3,324
Ammonia, bgs ...
5,449
Sulph Ammonia, sks
2,174
.. bgs
3,576
,, „ tons ...
Desiccated blood, bgs
102
1,200
» „ sks
843
Manure, sks
1,812
bgs
323
Dried blood, bgs
194
,, „ tons
Blood Manure, bgs
92
. 229
Bonedust, sks
83
„ bag
1
Guano, sks
3
GRAND TOTALS.
Sulpb. ammonia, bags
1119
Do. do. sacks
no
do. do. tons
393
Fertilizer, bags
1334
Dried blood, bags
736
do. do. tons ...
23
Do. do. cwt. ...
10
Manures, sacks
777
SHIPPERS.
Case?
The Bodalla Co.
285
A. C. Gaertner
180
W. S. Tait and Co.
160
Denham Bros.
113
R. Little and Co. ...
65
M. Segur
60
Solomon and Sons
56
F. Ireland.
42
W. and A. M'Arthur, Ltd. ...
33
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd. ... 1 box ...
SO
II. Prescott and Co.
25
Farmers’ Co-op. Co., Ltd. ...
25
Morgan and Co.
17
J. Slier ion
1)
J. See and Co.
6
Burns. Philp and Co., Ltd.
6
Southern Produce Co.
5
Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Ltd.
5
II. S. Bird and Co.
5
J. Ireland
4
Smith, Warren and Co.
3
II. Bowden
3
Dalton Bros.
3
J. T. Brown
2
Davidson Bros.
2
Gerber, Michaut and Co. ...
2
J. Scharff
2
Paul and Gray
2
Morgan and Smith .... 2 bxs ...
1
Learmonth, Dickinson and Co. ■ ■
1
J. Wallace
1
Tillock and Co.
1
Kerr Bros.
1
Brial Freres
1
J. Gillies ... ... 1 bag
Totals ... ... 1 bag 3 boxes
1157
DESTINATIONS.
Cases
Noumea
524
Manila
457
S.S. Islands ... ...1 bag 2 boxes ...
68
Beira
33
Hongkong
26
Thursday Island ...
21
Colombo ... ... Ibox...
12
Port Elizabeth
8
Sourabaya
5
Totals ... ... 1 bag 3 boxes
1157
Oils.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Lever Bros,, Ltd., 2016 brls coooanut, 2246 bids 1830
cks 1556 pkgs 85 drums 7 cs
Co-op. Wholesale Society, 1690 brls 424 cks C. nut,
763 brls 188 butts 343 pkgs 38 cks 1 cs
Sydney Soap and Candle Co., 100 cks oleine, 2 cs
F. Kanematsu, 96 cks C. nut
J, I. Falk and Co., 95 cs
W. S. Tait and Co., 18 cs China, 72 cs 2 drms 1 bx
1 ck
Morgan and Smith, 1 bid C. nut, 41 drms 35 cs
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd., 10 cs C. oil, 26 cks 10
drms 8 cs 4 bids
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 51 cs
S, Hoffnung and Co., Ltd., 20 drms 12 cs 3 cks 1 brl
Paul and Gray, Ltd., 25 drms 7 cs
Lichtner and Co., 5 cs lucca, 21 cs
W. Adams and Co., 23 brls
Nelson and Robertson, 20 cks S.F., 3 drms
W. H. Peabody and Co., 30 cs
SI. Segur, 10 cs China, 10 brls
A. C. Gaertner and Co., 5 cs China, 5 cks mineral.
10 cs
Holdsworth, Slacpherson and Co., 5 cs China, 5 cs
castor, 8 drms 1 cs
Brown, Joske and Co., 10 cs 4 drms
Sloigan and Co., 2 cs China, 2 cs fish, 6 cs 2 drms
Chinese Shippers, 5 cs China, 5 cs
Dalton Ergs., 10 cs China
lI.M. Naval Depot, 8 cks
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 7 drms 1 cs
F. Hagen, 7 brls
Gerber, Michaut and Co., 6 cs
R. Towns and Co., 6 drms
W. Kopsen and Co., 5 dims
F. Lassetter and Co., Ltd., 1 drm neatsfoot, 4 cs
J. Blackwood, 4 cs .
S. Mission, 4 cs
S. Bennet, 4 dims castor
G. J. Waterhouse, 4 drms
11. 11. Groth and Co., 2 drms
J. Scharff, 2 cs
R. Hornsby and Son, 2 cs
Goodlet and Smith, 2 drms
Rev. Shaw, 1 dim
A. Hordern and Sons, 1 drm
Tillock and Co., 1 cs
Buzacott and Co., 1 cs
G. S. Pearson, 1 cs
D. Mitchell and Co., 1 cs
Union Oil and S. Co., 1 cs
Smith and Kopsen, 1 pkg
DESTINATIONS.
Liverpool, 632 brls C. nut, 2978 brls 1918 cks 188
butts 85 drms 1898 pkgs
San Francisco, 2001 brls C. nut
London, 958 brls 424 cks C. nut, 100 cks oleine
S. Islands, 20 cs S.F., 7cs China, scs lucca, 4
brls C. nut, 1 drm neatsfoot, 4 drms 5 cs castor,
1 cs C. oil, 214 cs 132 drms 37 cks 10 brls 1 pkg
Noumea, 48 cs China, 5 cks mineral, 2 cs fish, 86 cs
37 brls 6 drms 1 ck 1 bx
Islam, 100 brls C. nut
Japan, 96 cks C. nut
Vladivostock, 95 cs
Vancouver, 29 brls
Victoria (8.C.), 12 brls C. nut, 1 pkg.
New York, 6 cs
Pago Pago, 5 drms
MANURES.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Porta (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 19C2,
SHIPPERS.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 6500 sks 824 bgs fertilizer,
1200 bgs 843 sks desiccated blood.
Philp and Co., Ltd., 5449 bgs ammonia,
3576 bgs 102 tons sulph ammonia.
Colonial Sugar Refining Co., Ltd., 2174 sks sulph
ammonia, 1582 sks 320 bgs manure
F. Kanematsu, 2500 bgs fertilizer.
G. Shirley and Co., 140 sks manure, 88 sks bone
dust.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd., 92 tons dried blood, 90 sks
manure, 229 bgs blood manure.
G. Baterson ,3 bgs manure.
Pacific Island Co., 3 sks guano.
Rabone, Feez and Co., 1 bg bone dust.
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 191 bgs dried
blood.
DESTINATIONS.
Mauritius, 6500 sks 824 bgs fertilizer, 1200 bgs 813
sks desiccated blood.
Japan, 2010 bgs ammonia, 3576 bgs sulph ammonia,
2500 bgs fertilizer, 3 sks guano, 3 bgs manure.
S.S. Islands, 2174 sks sulph ammonia, 1812 sks 320
bgs manure, 88 sks bone dust
Samarang, 2425 bgs ammonia, 62 tons dried blood.
San Francisco, 512 bgs ammonia.
Honolulu, 502 bgs ammonia.
Batavia, 30 tons dried blood.
London, 1 bg bone dust.
Souiabaya, 229 bgs blood manure, 102 tons sulph
ammonia.
Colombo, 194 bgs dried blood.
Manures.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
F. Kanematsu, 1334 bags fertilizer.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., Ill:) bgs sulph.
ammonia
Col. Sugar Ref. Co., Ltd., 110 sks sulpb. ammonia,
777 sacks
Dalgety and Co., Ltd., 393 tons sulpb. ammonia,
453 bags 23 tons 10 cwt dried blood
11. Markwald, 283 bags dried blood
Aust. Manures Co., 1 bag dried blood. •
DESTINATIONS.
Japan, 1334 bags fertilizer, 588 bags sulpb ammonia
Samarang, 393 tons sulpb. ammonia, 452 bags 13
tons 10 cwt dried blood
S.S. Islands, 110 sks sulph. ammonia, 777 sacks
Honolulu, 531 bags sulph. ammonia, 1 bag dried
blood
Colombo, 283 bags dried blood
Sourabaya, 10 tons dried blood.
CHEESE.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
For Cheese Statistics, July-December, 1902, see pagj IJOII.


SHIPPERS.
Cases
A. C. Gaertuer
... 46
W. S. Tait and Co.
... 39
Morgan and Co.
... 20
Solomon and Son
... 17
J. See and Co.
... 13
G. S. Yuill and Co., Ltd
... 9
Bnrns, Philp and Co., Ltd.
... 6
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd.
... 5
N. Shelley ...
... 3
Pillock and Co.
... 2
Paul and Gray, Ltd. ...
2
Dalton Bros.
2
Morgan and Smith, 3 bxs
... i
Farmers’ Co-op. Co., Ltd.
... i
Foley Bros., Ltd.
... i
F. Hagen
... i
L. Coen
... i
J. Scharff
... i
Kerr Bros, and Co.
... i
Denham Bros.
... i
R. Little and Co.
... i
Pacific Islands Co., Ltd.
... i
G. J. Waterhouse
J. Gillies, 1 bag 1 bx
J. Wallace and Co., 1 box
Totals—1 bag 5 bxs 175 cases.
... • i
DESTINATIONS.
Cases
Noumea
... 138
South Sea Islands, 1 bag 5 bxs
... 27
Hongkong
6
Manila ... ...
3
London
Totals—1 bag 5 bxs 175 cases.
1
SHIPPERS.
Bags.
Col .'Sugar R. Co., Ltd. 361 cs, 32 gunnies 732
J. Connell and Co. Pty., Ltd.
... 704
P. J. 11. Ducker
... 506
Dalton Bros.
... 128
Chinese Shippers ... ...
... 52
I). Mitchell and Co., Ltd.
... 22
Paul and Gray, Ltd.
... 20
Learmonth, Dickinson and Co.
16
H. C. Hooper
... 16
G. J. Waterhouse
12
A. Hordern and Sons ... 2 sks ...
3
F. Lassetter
2
Tillock and Co....
..: 1
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., 89 tins, 5 cits
E. W. Knox 56 cases
II. S. Bird and Co. 15 cases
Gerber, Michaut and Co. 14 sks
J. SoharlT 14 cases
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd. 13 crts, 6
cases
Totals—18 crts, 14 sks, 89 tins, 452 cs, 32
gunnies.
2214 bgs.
DESTINATIONS.
Bags
Noumea
... 1787
S.S. Islands 14 sks, 18 crts, 89 tins.
291
cs, 32 gunnies...
... 279
Thursday Island, etc. 32 gunnies
... 149
Total—18 crts, 14 sks, 89 tins, 452 cs, 32
gunnies.
2214 bgs.
£
.Agricultural implements
28,227
Antimony
1,182
Apparel and drapery ...
... 424,167
Iteer
15 629
B icycle s
25,845
Boots and shoes
79,953
liuilding material
31,287
Butter
... 326,954
Carriages
15,006
Coal
34,859
Coffee
4,101
Coin (bronze)
1,105
Coin (gold)
... 2,860,059
Copper
... 316,846
Copra
8 933
Cordage and rope
27,086
Drugs and chemicals
... 186,985
Earthenware
49,430
Fancy goods
33,431
Fish
33,725
Flour
... 188,525
Furniture and upholstery
70,133
Galvanized iron
57,552
Galvanized manufactures
... . 56,863
Gold (uncoined)
... 306,445
Gum
2,090
Hardware
... 376 866
Hops
4,273
Horns, bones, hoofs, etc.
37,924
Indiarubber goods
12,603
Iron and steel
46,601
Jewellery
44,062
Jute goods
57,487
Leather
... 416,153
Live stock
... 110,583
Machinery
... 232168
Manures
... 79,395
Meats
... 629,723
Musical instruments
31,194
Oilmen’s stores
... 238,974
Ores
92,761
Paints and oils
... 214,934
Pig lead
20,448
Produce
... 282,538
Bice
18,512
Scientific instruments ...
17,527
Shale
55,357
Ship chandlery
26 903
Silver
... -155,617
Skins and hides
... 649.989
Spirits ...
75,967
Stationery and books
... 136,681
Sugar
... 166,827
Sundries ...
82,106
Tallow
... 375,721
Tea ,
86 643
Timber
... 125,200
Tin
... 167,461
Tobacco and cigars
... 161,214
AA T ax
7,168
Wheat
... 603,769
Wine
30,856
AVool
... 7,026,068
Total
... 18,514,865
Agricultural implements ...
£
6,446
Antimony-
119
Apparel and drapery
... 208.049
Beer
7,687
Bicycles
9,567
Boots and shoes
... 45,744
Building material
... 14,081
Butter
... 62,989
Carriages
... 10,198
Coal
... 27,840
Coffee
1,514
Coin (bronze)
171
Cheese.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SUGAR.
Exported from N.S.AV. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901—June, ISO 2,
Sugar.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Bags
W. S. Tait and Co 16
A. Hordern and Sons, 2 bxs 11 sks ... ... 12
G. J. Waterhouse, 1 ert 7 pkgs ... ... 10
D. Mitchell and Co., Ltd. ... ... ... 5
Austral Timber Co. ... ... ... ... 4
J. Bardsley and Co., 26 cs ... ... ••• 2
Fergusson and Co. ... ... • . ... 1
J. Barlow and Co. ... ... ... ... 1
Morgan and Smith ... ... ... ••• 1
Rabone, Feez and Co. ... ... ... 1
McClelland and Roach ... ... ... 1
F. La?st (f er and Co., Ltd., 2 sks
J. Gillies, 1 sk
Civil Service Co-op. Scy., Ltd., 1 bdle
Paul and Gray, Ltd., 1 cs
Totals —1 bdle 1 ert 2 bxs 27 cs 14 sks 54 bgs 7
pkgs
DESTINATIONS.
South Sea Islandai, 1 bdl 1 ert 2 bxs 7 pkgs 27 cs
14 sks 54 bags
SHALE.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Ports (Interstate
excepted), for Twelve Months.
July, 1901-June, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Dalgety and Co., Ltd., 8001 tons.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 5747 tons, 2150 i tons.
Anst. Ker. Oil and M. Co., Ltd., 6082 tons.
N.S.W. Shale and Oil Co., 1755 tons* 150 i tong. 319
bags.
Madden and Hixson, 19 pkgs.
Weber, Lohmann and Co., Ltd., 7 bags.
DESTINATIONS.
Genoa, 10,329 tons, 2150 i tons.
Rotterdam, 8001 tons.
Valparaiso, 1400 tons.
Liverpool, 650 tons, 150 i tons.
London, opt. Liverpool, 500 tons.
London, 400 tons 19 pkgs.
Soitrabaya2os tons.
Batavia, 100 tons.
Hongkong, 319 bags.
Bremen, 7 bags.
Totalsi—326 bags, 19 pkgs, 2300 } tons, 21,583 tons.
Shale.
Exported from N.S.W. to Oversea Forts (Interstate
excepted), for Six Months.
July—December, 1902.
SHIPPERS.
Gibbs, Bright and Co., 3335 tons 17 cwt 5 qrs
Aust. Kerosene Oil and Mineral Co., Ltd., 3151 tons
N.S.W. Shale and Oil Co., Ltd., 330 bags
DESTINATIONS.
Genoa, 6344 tons 13 cwt 3 qrs
Liverpool, 142 tons 4 ewt 2 qrs
Hongkong, 330 bags
Totals —6180 tons 17 cwt 5 qrs 330 bags.
Total Value of Exports.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
The value of Exports from the Port of Sydney
for twelve months ended June 30. 1902, as compiled
from the Customs returns, amounted to £18,514,865,
the principal items being:—
July—December, 1902,
The value of Exports from the Port of Sydney
for six months ended December 31, 1902, as com-
piled from the Customs returns, amounted to
.£9,009,410, the principal items being:—


Coin (gold)
... 2,100,748
Copper
... 124,152
Copra
246
Cordage and rope
... 12,602
Drugs and chemicals
... 91,566
Earthenware
... 17,331
Fancy Goods
... 29,824
Fish ... ••• ••• ■
... 11,879
Flour
... 101,194
Furniture and upholstery
... 22,510
Galvanized iron
... 12,979
Galvanized manufactures
... 30,284
Gold (uncoined)
... 283,128
Gum
. ... 1,558
Hardware
... 155,746
Hops
2.884
Horns, bones, hoofs, etc. ..«
... 27,215
Indiarubber goods
5,367
Iron and steel
... 14,620
Jewellery
... 42,268
Jute goods
... 25,754
Leather
... 259,329
Live stock
... 27,292
Machinery
... 99,736
Manures ...
... 30,196
Meats
... 180,506
Musical instruments
7,158
Oilmen's stores
... 122,528
Ores
... 60,233
Paints and oils
... 149,986
Pig lead
... 18,666
Produce
... 167,997
Eice
5,285
Scientific instruments
7,598
Shale
... 17,373
Ship chandlery
8,652
Silver
... 232,373
Skins and hides
... 615,370
Spirits ... ... -'...
... 41,372
Stationery and books
... 59,178
Sugar
... 65,698
Sundries
... 44,699
Tallow
... 28,358
Tea ...
... 45,573
Timber
... 44,120
Tin
... 76,610
Tobacco and cigars
... 137,205
Wax
1,807
Wheat
5,098
Wine
... 16,781
Wool
...2,924,343
£0.009,410
Total Quantity of Exports.
July, 1901—June, 1902.
Tlie quantity of products exported from New South
Wales to oversea ports (i.e., Ports outside of Aus-
tralia and New Zealand), for twelve mouths ended
•lune 30, 1902, will be found in the following
tables, arranged under their respective heading,
the totals being;—
Wool, 631,313 bales
Coal, 1,204,003 tons
Sovereigns, 504 boxes (£2,512,530)
Gold, 286 boxes (.£262,937)
Gold bars, 4 boxes (£17,601)
Specie, 20 boxes (.£100,000)
llore bullion, 215 bars (£92,054)
» ~ 42 bars
Bullion, 165 bars (£69,677)
~ 41 boxes (£5950)
Silver bullion, 44 boxes ( £5900)
Silver, 35 boxes £59,500)
Silver coin, 52 boxes (£10,400)
Gold and silver coin, 1 box (£340)
Coin, 14 boxes (£5092)
■, 5 cases (£1300)
Copper coin, 15 boxes (£150)
Copper; 612,935 ingots, 2897 slabs, 2127 cades, 407
„ Pigs, 50 tons, 45 bars
Copper niatte, 15,572 bags. 80 tons
Bullion, 242,420 bars, 180 tons
Silver lead bullion, 11,680 bare
bead bullion, 9285 bars, 837 tons
Bead, 233.378 bars; 12,129 pigs
Tin, 36,225 ingots
Tin clippings, 610 bags, 29 tons
Ore, 53,702 bags, 16 tons, 28 casks, 11 boxes
Chrome ore, 22,142 bags
Hock ore, 4639 bags
Copper ore, 2464 bags
Antimony ore, 1460 bags
Cobalt ore, 1140 bags
Tin ore, 57 bags
Bismuth ore, 6 cases 4 casks
Aluniie, 1393 tons
Zinc, 186 slabs, 20 bags, 110 pkgs, 21 cases 12 kegs
Zinc ashes, 1638 bags
Zinc dross, 299 ingots, 5 bags
Zinc refuse, 100 bags
Slag, 68 bags
Metal, 17 cases 5 pkgs
Old metal, 253 pkgs, 115 bdls, 2J tons
Muntz metal, 8 cases
Jewellers’ sweepings, 8 casks
Gold tailings, 4 casks
Mutton, 612,603 ores, 2448 bags, 3179 pairs, 47,231
legs, 433 haunches, 240 saddles, 374 cases, 1 keg
Lamb, 136,339 ercs, 5 cases, 3 casks
Beef, 11,917 qrs, 1298 pieces, 267 buttocks, 66 rumps,
and loins, 25 ribs, 3100 kegs, 833 cases, 108 brls,
46 casks, 16 tres, 47 pkgs, 1 box
Veal, 519 crcs, 3223 sides, 14 pieces, 2 cases
Calves’head, 10 bags
Calves’ feet 8 cases
Pork, 2287 crcs, 3019 sides, 6 kegs, 2 cases
Suckers, 114 crcs
Hare», 10,088 crates, 48 eases, 6 ercs
Babbits, 7566 crates, 479 cases, 6 bags, 8 crcs
Hares and rabbits, 12 crates
Poultry, 6625 crates, 639 eases, 31 pkgs
Meats, 186,498 eases, 104 boxes, 23 casks, 15 kegs, 7
brls, 41 pkgs
Kidneys, 186 crates, 383 cases, 537 boxes, 120 bags, 3
singles
Tongues, 852 case?, 19 crates, 15 boxes, 4 casks, 1 keg,
2 singles
Bacon, 146 cases, 102 bags, 3 sacks, 17 pkgs, 25
middles, 8 sides
Hams, 105 cases, 11 bags, 4 boxes, 1 pkg, 30 singles
Bacon and hams, 13 cases
Livers, 293 cases, 1 bag, 57 singles
Tails, 44 crates, 21 cases
Pries, 9 cases
Brains, 10 cases
Hearts, 5 cases
Sweetbreads, 3 eases
Tripe, 6 cases
Sheep’s heads, 8 cases, 3 bags
Sausages, 76 cases <
Ox cheeks, 1 case
Game, 1 crate
Poultry and I', sundries, 254 crates
Frozen sundries, 3304 crates, 968 cares, 1424 pkgs, 83
bags, 14 boxes
Wheat, 800,437 bags, 3862 tons
Flour, 71,056 sacks, 2387 hf-sacks, 12,398 qr-sacks, 40
-J-sacks, 32,130 bag?, 20 hf-bags, 7642 qr-bags, 7352
pkgs, 1675 cases, 60 hf-cases, 482 crates, 80 tons, 19
tanks, 38 casks, 36 tins, 3 kegs
Sharps, 10,914 sacks, 5627 bags, 61 cases
Bran, 1400 sacks, 11,420 bags, 44 tons, 24 tanks
Pollard, 45 sacks, 646 bags, 21 tanks, 32 cases
Oats, 1090 sacks, 5802 bags, 10 tons, 94 cases, 34 j)kgs,
2 tanks
Maize, 305 sacks, 379 bags, 7 tierces, 20 cases
Oats and chaff, 150 pkgs
Meal, 50 sacks, 30 bags
Rye meal, 25 cases
Wheat meal, 11 sacks
Hides, 150 bales, 1729 bags, 560 sacks, 169 bdls, 100
casks, 311,070 singles
Hide piece.?, 52 bales, 77 bags, 6 pkgs
Leatber,lo,o97 bales. 151 pkgs. 53 rolls, 47 trusses,
43 bags, 3 bdls, 20 cases, 1 box
Basils, 1116 bales, 1 bag, 2 pkgs, 1 parcel
Glue pieces, 1187 bales, 246 bags, 409 pkgs
Fleshings, 36 bales ,
Hair, 387 bales, 213 bags, 19 pkgs, 3 eases
Horns, 193 bales, 8959 bags, 75 pkgs, 1 butt
Hoofs, 134 bales, 1906 bags, 165 pkgs
Bones, 2999 bags, 372 pkgs 9 tons 1 cwt.
Bones and hoofs, 6 tons
Shanks, 705 bags ■ *
Sinews, 114 bales, 19. bags, 22 pkgs
Sinews and bones, 42 bag?, 276 pkgs
Sinews and pizzlos, 17 bags
Fizzles, 8 bales 1 bag
Piths, 181 bags 27 cwt.
Skins, 2675 bales, 277 bags, 127 bdls, 1 sack, 14 casks,
4 cases, 1 keg, 1 pkg,' 1 parcel
S. skins, 13,883 bales, 1 pkg
F. skins, 3602 bales, 10 bags, 1 bdl, 8 pkgs
31. skins, 49 bales 1 case
H. skins, 88 bales, 40 cases
K skins, 3 bales
C. skins, 16 balo?, 63 bags, 68 casks
G. skins, 1 bale
Casings, 310, casks, 35 cases, 34 pkgs
Pelts, 7 bales, 10 casks
Hardwood, 33,991 pcs, 30,000 ft, 233 bdls, 100 loads
Oregon, 12,852 pcs, 17,055 ft, 52 bdls, 13 spars
Sandalwood, 8822 pcs, 20 bdls
Kauri, 3969 pcs, 181 322 pkgs
Redwood, 1274 pcs, 6534 ft, 84 bdls
Tallow-wood, 2546 pcs
Deal, 1741 pcs
Redgum, 1260 pcs
Blue Gum, 43 pcs
Blackbutt, 784 pcs
Pine, 573 pcs, 50 bdls, 35 boards
Baltic, 654 pcs
Ironbark, 473 pcs, 14 girders
Cedar, 12 bdls
Timber, 145,604 pcs, 281,908 ft, 614 bdls, 93,999 blocks,
5964 sleepers, 12,179 pickets, 1800 paling?, 800 posts,
409 poles, 260 piles, 137 logs, 140 tons, 149 pkgs, 64
bales, 1 box
Butter, 99 886 boxes, 4656 cases, 120 tins, 113 pkgs, 1
keg, 1 pci
Tallow, 33,493 casks, 1 case
Oil, 9073 brls, 1671 casks, 15 butts, 1 case cocoanut,
405 casks oleine, 105 drums, 53 eases castor, 100
cases machine, 30 casks 30 cases mineral, 61 cases
China, 30 brls oleo, 25 drums wood preserving, 1
cask neatsfoot, 3853 brls, .1536 casks, 498 hhds, ,59
butts, 996 drums, 865 cases, 50 tins, 22 pkgs, 1 box
Fruit, 6445 cases, 2677 hf-cases, 15 qr-cases, 6 pkgs
Horses, 4839
Sheep, 2886
Cows, 93
Fowls, 32 crates, 6 coops
Poultry, 2 coops
Pigs. 21
Goats, 24
Calves, 23
Dogs, 23
Cattle, 6 head
Bulls, 5
Ponies, 3
Deer, 2
Manures, 6500 sacks, 3324 bags fertilizer, 5149 bags
ammonia, 2174 sack? 3576 bags 102 tons sulph am-
monia, 1200 bags 43 sacks desiccated blood, 194
bags 92 tons dried blood, 229 bags blood manure,
88 sacks 1 bag bonedust, 3 sacks guano, 1812 sacks,
323 bags
Shale, 21,585 tons, 2300 hf-tons, 326 bags, 19 pkgs
Cheese, 1157 cases, 3 boxes, 1 bag
Sugar, 18 crates, 14 sacks, 89 tins, 452 eases, 32
gunnies, 2214 bags
July—December, 1902.
The quantity of products exported from New South
Wales, to oversea ports (i.e., Ports outside of Aus-
tralasia and New Zealand), for six months ended
December 31, 1902, will be found in the following
tables, arranged under their respective heading,
the totals being;—
Wool, 373,982 bales
Coal, 547,762 tons.
Sovereigns, 375 bxs (£1,846,409), 1 pkg (£3,000).
Gold, 156 bxs (£191,677).
Gold Coin, 1 bx (£6000).
Bullion, 327 bars (£195,622), 35 bxs (£4500).
Doro Bullion, 228 bars (£126,082).
Silver. 20 brs (£1083)
Silver Coin, 2 bxs (£894).
Silver Bullion, 9 bxs (£1200).
Coin, 5 cs (£1400), 1 bg.
Bullion, 50,400 bars.
Lead Bullion, 14,000 bars.
Lead, 153,190 bars, 251 pigs, 51 rolls.
Copper, 288,167 ingots, 231 cakes, 7 bars.
Copper Matte, 6513 bgs.
Ore, 51.034 bgs, 7 cks, 6 pkgs, 2 cs.
Tin,18,688 ingots, 1461 pkgs.
Tin clippings, 1907 bgs. .
Tin Ore, 30 bgs.
Chrome Ore, 6533 bgs.
Cobalt Ore, 13 sks.
Bismuth Ore, 2 pkgs.
Spelter, 165 ingots, 1320 cakes.
Zinc, 36 bdls, 358 bgs, 57 pkgs, 1 roll, 21 bgs, 5 cks.
Zinc blocks, 20 bdls.


Zinc ashes, 290 bgs.
Zinc dross, 257 bgs.
Zinc refuse, 97 bgs.
Dross, 3264 ingots, 8 cks.
Alunite, 2590 tons.
Iron, 43 pigs.
Metal, 83 bdls, 68 cs, 48 bis, 24 bgs, 5 3 cks,
89 pkgs
Muntz Metal, 37 cs, 19 bdls.
Ashes, 8 cks.
Sweepings, 2 cks.
Mutton, 50,545 crcs, 70 cs.
Lamb, 8047 crcs.
Veal, 88 crcs, 2503 sides.
Pork, 1399 crcs, 1000 sides, 2 pkgs, 1 bx.
Suckers, 57 crcs.
Meats, 19,155 cs, 255 cks, 58 kgs, 148 pkgs, 1 bx.
Beef, 1897 qrs, 681 cs. 604 kgs, 41 cks, 20 trs, 40 brls,
30 hinds, 15 bodies, 6 pkgs, 5 briskets.
Rabbits. 6921 crts, 44 cs.
Hares, 6428 crts.
Hares and Rabbits, SOorts.
Poultry, 1583 crts, 14 cs.
Turkeys, 83 crts, 5 cs.
Maize, 26 sks, 59 bgs, 2 pkgs.
Pollard, 55 sks, 219 bgs.
Eye Meal, 30 cs.
Meal, 1 sk, 1 J sk, 62 bgs.
Bran and .Pollard, 12 bgs.
Chickwheat, 2 sks.
Rye Flour, 2 cs.
Corn, 2 bgs.
Bran and Corn, 1 bg.
Barley, 5 bgs.
Hides, 164,762 singles, 274 bis, 407 bgs, 13 cks, 5 sks,
1 pkg.
Leather, 5861 bis, 153 pkgs, 64 rolls, 31 bgs, 14 cs, 5
Scrolls’, 107 bis.
Splits, 2 bis.
Basils, 1532 bla, 2 pkgs.
Fleshings, 3 bis.
Hides and Skins, 51 bgs.
Glue Pieces, 926 bis, 126 bgs, 659 pkgs.
Glue Pieces and Hoofs, 151 pkgs.
Glue Pieces and Bones, 32 pkgs.
Hair, 339 bis, 13 bgs, 3 cs, 1 pkg.
Horns, 228 bis, 6151 bgs, 41 pkgs.
Oiegon, 6518 pea, 33,615 feet, 3 spars.
Kauri, 3529 pcs, 11 bdls, 152 boards, 6 pkgs.
Blackbutt, 1587 pcs, 14 piles.
Ironbark, 1068 pcs, 9 girders, 26 saplings.
Baltic, 1190 pcs, 2200 feet. 111 weatherboards.
Redwood, 1099 pcs, 2000 feet.
Pine, 1076 pcs.
Deal, 430 pcs, 86 boards.
Blue Gum, 248 pcs.
Red Gum, 3 pcs.
Gum, 12 pkgs.
Tallowwood, 143 pcs.
Mahogany, 93 pcs.
Cedar, 33 pcs.
Box, 50 bdls.
Rosewood, 9 logs.
Teak, 2 pcs.
Battens, 69 pcs.
Flooring Boards, 51 pcs.
Board, 4 pcs.
Scathing, 50 pcs.
Scotia, 35 pcs.
Shelving, 19 pcs.
Staves, 4 bdls.
SHIPPING FROZEN MEAT.
Geese, 11 crts.
Fowls, 4 crts.
Pheasants, 2 crts.
Bacon, 79 bgs, 33 cs, 7 sides, 4 pkgs.
Hams, 29 cs, 5 bgs, 1 bx.
Bacon and Hams, 15 cs, 2 pkgs, 1 bg.
Tongues, 115 cs, 54 crts, 30 bxs, 2 kgs, 1 ck.
Sausages, 79 cs, 1 kg.
Livers, 21 cs, 16 bgs.
Tripe, 85 crts, 47 cs.
Kidneys, 55 crts, 44 cs.
Hearts, 21 xs.
Brains, 10 cs.
Calves’ heads, 13 bgs.
Kangaroo tails, 19 crts.
Sweetbreads, 7 cs.
Frozen Sundries, 1190 crts, 380 cs, 266 bgs, 70 pkgs,
12 boxes.
Wheat, 3328 bgs.
Flour, 11,258 sks, 114 i sks, 1142 i sks, 4231 bgs, 120 J
bgs, 80 i bgs, 915 cs, 249 crates, 151 pkgs, 11 cks,
5 tnks, 2 kgs.
Sharps, 3142 sks, 2602 bgs.
Ilian, 195 sks, 996 bgs, 14 tnks, 10 cs.
Oats, 156 sks, 126 bgs.
Oats and Barley. 5 bgs.
Oats and Bran, 2 tnks.
Hoofs, 54 b.'s, 347 bgs, 308 pkgs, 6 tons.
Hoofs and Sinews, 200 bgs.
Bones, 901 bgs, 14 pkgs.
Bones and Glue Pieces, 75 pkgs.
Bones and Hoofs, 38 tons.
Bones and Sinews, 35 pkgs.
Thighs, 9 bgs.
Buttocks, 8 bgs.
Shanks, 41 tons, 18 cwt.
Sinews, 45 bis, 83 bgs, 202 pkgs.
Fizzles, 4 bis, 17 bgg, 7 sacks, 19 pkgs.
Skins, 8045 bis S., 3717 bis, 8 pkgs, 1 bg, 1 cs F., 41
bis, 78 bgs, 27 cks, 5 pkgs C., 71 bis M„ 48 bis
K„ 11 bis, 1 bg 0., 7 bis R., 3125 bis, 153 bgs, 44
cks, 6 kgs, 5 sks, 1 cs, 1 pci, 2 pkgs.
Sheep Skin pieces, 17 bis.
Skin pieces, 13 bis.
K. cuttings, 17 bgs.
Casings, 188 cks, 6 pkgs, 1 kg.
Casings and Weazands, 34 pkgs.
Slats, 68 bis.
Tallow, 1775 cks, 3 cs.
Butter, 7391 bxs, 436 cs, 21 pkgs, 1 kg.
Timber, 36,178 pcs, 324 pkgs, 175 bdls, 12 boards, 1
cs, 1 bx.
Hardwood, 24,813 pcs, 5699 sleepers, 250 pickets, 4
piles.
Blocks, 105,000.
Posts, 600.
Split Posts, 1058.
Logs, 71.
Piles, 12.
Turpentine Piles, 6.
Sleepers, 5 bdls.
Palings, 5 bdls.
Spars, 2.
Oil, 3707 brls, 520 cks Cocoanut, 55 cs China, 100 cks
oleine, 20 cks S. F., 5 cks mineral, 4 drms, 5 cs
castor, 10 cs C., 5 cs lucca, 2 cs fish, 1 drm
neatsfoot, 3045 brls, 1956 cks, 401 cs, 228 drms,
183 butts, 1 bx, 1900 pkgs.
Fruit, 2724 cs, 293 J cs, 33 i cs, 50 bxs, 10 crts.
Live Stock, 629 horses, 475 sheep, 46 head cattle, 14
cows, 4 calves, 5 crts pigs, 5 dogs, 9 crts, 1 coop
poultry, 7 crts, 3 coops, 2 bxs fowls.
Manures, 1119 bgs, 110 sks, 393 tons snip, ammonia.
1331 bgs fertilizer, 736 bgs, 23 tons 10 cwt. dried
b100d,"777 bags.
Shale, 6486 tons, 17 cwt., 5 qrs, 330 bgs.
Cheese, 175 cs, 5 bxs, 1 bg.
Sugar, 54 bgs, 14 sks, 27 cs, 7 pkgs, 2 bxs, 1 crt, 1
bdl.


Primary
Production.


Primary Production.
A Review
for the Year 1902.
Pastoral, Agricultural Mining.
XShQ Real vSource of Wealth.
CHE wealth which directly emanates from the
soil, and which is designated the primary
product of a country, is naturally the
greatest and most abiding fount of prosperity
which any nation can possess. In new coun-
tries such as Australia, where the arts and
manufactures have not yet had time to gain
more than just a foothold, primary production
still continues to form the occupation of the
be restrained, but, when the withering in-
tluence of a prolonged drought pervades the
State, those industries which stand closest in
relation to the primal source of a'l weilth
suffer first, and suffer most. It is for the
reason that the drought fiend held the emu-
try so long in its remorseless grip that the re-
turns in most departments of primary pro-
duction evidenced a shrinkage during 1902.
rainfalls that helped to compensate for the
lack of moisture in other parts. The splen-
did rains that fell over nearly every portion
of the country during the last few weeks of
1902 were looked upon as the precursor of
more settled seasons, and, with such a pros-
pect before it, New South Wales may be re-
lied upon to recover lost ground, and main-
tain her position at the head of the States of
A PRIZE RAM.
great majority of the people. In New South
Wales the pastoral, agricultural and mining
industries form the tripod upon which the
prosperity ol the State stands, and any in-
jury done to one of these is reflected with
damaging effect upon the whole community,
Under normal conditions in this country
the various branches of enterprise, which are
included under each of those three specified
heads, are alive with a vitality that will not
Notwithstanding the severity of this scourge,
which temporarily blasted some of the finest
country in the State, the visitation has not
been sufficient to destroy the confidence of
the people in the potential agencies upon
which their welfare mainly subsists. Fortu-
nately the whole of the State was not laid
under tribute to the drought, as the coastal
districts and a considerable area of the table-
land enjoyed intermittent and refreshing
the Commonwealth. The ramifications of
primary production in New South Wales
form the main source of her wealfch and the
j - ,i c
J° llow ! n e succinct record of the condition of
industries at the end of 1902 will con-
vey a accurate idea of how this coun-
try t* as weathered one of those recurring
cycles of depression, from wh : ch it is the lot of
no community to be entirely exempt.


The Pastoral Industry.
The pastoral industry of New South Wales
has, in consequence of the recent severe and
prolonged drought, suffered a decline, but the
depression must prove only temporary, as
the recuperative power of the country is such
that, given a few inches of genial rainfall,
and the now desert country will blossom
like a rose. Fortunately for the pastoralists
the drought cycle appears to have now run
its course, and, with the advent of good sea-
sons, prosperity will again become assured,
among the sheep and cattle owners who
have in the past been the greatest contribu-
tors in the production of colonial wealth.
The year 1891 was ihe record year for sheep
in New South Wales, the number then total-
ling 61,831,416, since which date the number
great was the rush for these coastal locations,
that in many instances the owners of the
properties were offered prices for a short
lease that in other seasons would almost pur-
chase the land outright. In this way, the
owners of many areas on the eastern slopes
of the Main Range reaped a rich harvest
from soiling the stock of their less fortunate
fellows. The rain which auspiciously ushered
in the new year, 1903, immediately inspired
the hopes of the sheep owners, and, with the
prospect of good times returning, the peripa-
tetic flocks were removed hack to their old
holdings, and the question of restocking the
runs at once became a matter of the first im-
portance.
Owing to the depletion that had gone on
during the previous two years, there neces-
sarily is now a great dearth of breeding ewes
in the State, and this will, of course, have to
be made good before re-stocking can com-
north-western districts districts, and the
western slopes of the great plateau. The
number of cattle in the State at the end of
1902 was estimated to he 351,427 milch cows,
and 1,385,730 head of stores. Of the latter,
40,303 were depastured on the western plains,
150,106 on the western slopes and in River-
ina, 605,737 on the tablelands, and 589,584
in the coastal districts. The number of store
cattle was seriously diminished owing to the
long spell of dry weather, but, with a return
to normal conditions, the industry will at
once respond to the change. During 1902
443,465 cows calved, being a reduction of
nearly 50 per cent, on the number for the
previous year. The total number of calves
branded in 1902 was 251,444.
The horse-breeding industry is one that
should and does thrive well in New South
"Wales in ordinary seasons, and for many
has steadily fallen, owing to various causes.
in 1901 the number had been reduced to
41,857,099, but the year 1902 saw a partial
paralysis of the industry, when the numerical
strength of the flocks dwindled to 27,284,587.
For this unfortunate condition of affairs the
protracted aridity of the season was primarily
responsible. As was only to be expected, on the
Western plains, where the flocks were more
dense, and where both feed and water were
extremely scarce, the losses were great ,but it
was on the Western slopes, and the wide
plains of Riverina, that the proportional
diminution was most noticeable, the deple-
tion being equal to nearly 50 per cent. On
the tablelands, also, there was an appreciable
shrinkage, but in what are designated the
coastal districts, the numbers increased. This
augmentation was caused by the large num-
ber of sheep from the back country, where the
herbage was all exhausted, to the coastal
area, where feed was more plentiful. So
FATTENING PADDOCKS.
mence in earnest. The demand thus created
is being supplied as expeditiously as possiole,
and at the various sale yards the bidding for
ewes is very spirited, and the fortunate ven-
dors can rely upon obtaining very high prices
for all stock capable of reproducing. The
process of restocking must necessarily be
somewhat slow, but the matter is being taken
up in a spirit of sanguine anticipation, and
under the auspices of favourable seasons, the
industry may be expected to recoup itself
without any undue delay. .
As a cattle producer New South Wales
does not figure so conspicuously as its north-
ern neighbour, nevertheless, the cattle indus-
try is a decidedly live one in this State. The
breeding of dairy cattle of improved strains
is carried on a very considerable extent in
the coastal districts, where dairying is tfle
chief occupation of the people. Store or
ordinary cattle come principally from the
years this State has done a large and re-
muuerative trade in horseflesh with India
and other countries. There is a market in
Europe for horses to be used for military pur-
poses, and, in view of the easy and safe facil-
ities for shipment now obtainable, and the
possibility of New South Wales producing a
beau ideal remount, there should not be
much difficulty experienced in capturing at
least a slice of the continental trade. The
number of horses in the State in 1902 was
450,050, of which 24,823 were running on
the Western Plains, 119,649 on the Western
Slopes and Riverina, 162,178 on the Table-
lands, and 143,400 in the Coastal Districts,
One special feature in connection with horse
breeding in this State is the almost absolute
immunity from disease which prevails, and
which indubitably is a most important matter
to be taken into consideration in relation to
an industry”that, under proper supervision,
could be very materially developed.


Agriculture.
The soil and climate of Now South Wales
is admirably suited to agriculture, as such a
variety of elements and diversity of condi-
tions present themselves for the benefit of the
agriculturalist, who has before him the op-
tion of entering upon the cultivation of pro-
ducts running the whole gamut of tempera-
tures, from frigid to tropical. New South
Wales embraces a considerable range of lati-
tude, and the contour of the country is such
Statistics for 1902 show conclusively that in
all the principal crops raised in the State
there was a very considerable decrease, the
only crop for which an increase was recorded
being sugar cane, which exhibited an aug-
mentation of 1.7 tons per acre. The prin-
cipal crop, wheat, can be cultivated in any
part of the State, except along the coast,
where the climate is too humid, giving rise
to rust and smut. The districts of
Bathurst, Goulburn, Gundagai, Tumut,
Moree, Young, New England, and Riv-
erina now form the chief wheat-grow-
ing centres, The year 1902 proved a
the production amounting to 26,939 bushels.
In the tableland districts, over some of which
there was a slight diffusion of moisture, the
yield averaged only 2.3 bushels per acre.
The area put under wheat in these elevated
localities was 339,866 acres, of which 231,140
acres were sown for grain, the yield therefrom
being 540,762 bushels. On the western
slopes the yield shrunk to 1.1 bushels per
acre. The total area sown was
915,286 acres, of which 770,635 was
for grain, the production of wheat be-
ing 865,754 bushels. Biverina fared even
worse, with an average yield of 0 6 bushels
HARVESTING.
as to create a climatic diversity, as profitable
as it is pleasurable. In the north the pro-
ducts are sub-tropical in character, and in-
elude sugar cane, maize, coffee, potatoes,
pumpkins, melons, grapes, bananas, etc. On
the tablelands, wheat, barley, maize, oats, lu-
cerne, potatoes, apples, peaches, etc., are
largely grown, while on the western slopes
wheat is the principal crop, the cereal being
grown both for wheat and hay. Of recent
yeare agriculturehas made great strides in
, \ s , S,?’ ’ ; “ e^ e being now nearly two and a
halt millions of acres under cultivation.
very disastrous one for the wheat farmer ow-
ing to the drought, the average yield per acre
amounting to 1.2 bushels per acre; the aver-
age per acre for the previous ten years being
10.1 bushels. The total area under wheat
was 1,599,834 acres, of which 1,276,812 was
sown for grain, the total production being
1,589,205 bushels. The districts eastward of
the coastal range having had a fair amount
of moisture, in parts returned the highest
yield, the average being 8.1 bushels. The
area under wheat in this coastal belt was
6216 acres, of which 3253 was sown for grain,
per acre, the production from 316,391 acres
(266,303 of which was sown for grain) being
155,663 bushels. On the western plains the
crop was an absolute failure, there being a
return of 87 bushels only from 22,075 acres,
of which 5481 were sown for grain. The
average production of 1.2 bushels per acre
for 1902 indicates that there was practically
no harvest in nearly all the centres. Maize,
which may he said to be cultivated through-
out a wide range of territory, has its home
primarily in the coastal districts, where the
rainfall is more regular than over the in


tenor. During 1902, there were 222,656 acres
under crop, the production from which was
4,047,149 bushels, giving an average yield of
18.2 bushels per acre, which was a decrease of
10.9 bushels on the decennial average. Oats,
likewise, decreased to 8.2 bushels per acre,
the area sown (42,774 acres) producing
350,629 bushels. Barley, with which 4507
acres were sown, produced 17,933 bushels of
grain, being an average of only 4.0 bushels
per acre, a shrinkage of 25 per cent, on the
decenpial average. The Hay crops, Wheat,
Barley, Oats and Lucerne, which covered
about half a million acres, aggregated a har-
Tobacco is a plant that thrives in some
parts of New South Wales, but, as its proper
cultivation demands special knowledge on the
part of the grower, it is not so much grown as
it should be, considering its possibilities as a
profitable crop. As the art of properly rais-
ing tobacco becomes better known to farmers,
an improvement will take place in the quali-
ties of the leaf, and this will bring about a
steadier market, along with an increase in
price, which in turn cannot fail to stimulate
production. During 1902 there were 317
acres under cultivation, yielding a crop of
2604 cwt., being an average of 8.2 cwt. per acre.
an experiment in the New England district,
and a careful analysis has shown the yield
per root to range from 16 to 25 per cent.,
results that are not paralleled elsewhere. In
addition to its value as a marketable com-
modify, sugar beet is an excellent fodder for
dairy cattle, its saccharine constituents ren-
dering it invaluable in the cold upland dis-
tricts. A noteworthy development in agrar-
ian enterprise is the extent to which the suc-
culent natural herbage is augmented and for-
tilled by the cultivation of artificial grasses.
In nearly all the dairying districts consider-
able areas are laid down in these grasses.
THE PLOUGHMAN.
vest of just on a quarter of a million tons,
of which lucerne was by far the most pro-
lific. This last-mentioned circumstance is ac-
counted for by the fact that lucerne, or, as it
is called in some parts, alfalfa, is cultivated
chiefly on and about the fertile river flats
and alluvial fields near the coast, where
. “ uv ai iiuu. ■ 1 \
moisture is- always obtainable. Potatoes are
grown both as a winter and a summer crop
in New South Wales, the area devoted to the
tuber crop in 1902 being about 26,158 acres,
the average yield being about 2 tons 8 cwt.
per acre.
The rich sub-tropical flats and valleys along
the courses of the Northern Kivers afford a
congenial situation for sugar cane, which is
produced in considerable quantity, the aver-
age yield being about 20 tons per acre, while
the prices paid by the mills range from Bs. to
15s. per ton, according to density. Ihean-
..
nual consumption of sugar in New South
Wales runs into about 70,000 tons, of
which something like 20,000 tons is produced
locally, so that it is apparent there is plenty
of room for the industry to extend. The cul-
tivation of sugar beet has been carried on as
many of which, particularly paspalum, flour-
;sh amazingly, their power of resistance to
climatic changes being superior to that pos-
sessed by the indigenous varieties. The util-
0f lese exotic grasses has been amply
demomtrated on many past uragcs, and their
. , , J ° t i
introduction on large numbers of pastoral
° ~ ~ .
runs, where the vitality and fattening proper-
ties of the different grasses are submitted to
severe tests, shows that the artificial pastures
have won the good opinion of those best quali-
ified to judge of their value.


Dairying.
The dairying industry during the year
1902, notwithstanding the unprecedented
drought of that period, formed one of the prin-
cipal lines of the State’s primal productions.
Like all the other cognate industries of the
country, it suffered from the dry season, but,
as dairying is carried on chiefly in the coastal
and tableland districts abutting thereon,
where the rainfall is more regular and copi-
ous, it did not undergo such a serious shrink-
age as the others which were not so advan-
tageously circumstanced. It is true that
physical conditions operated unfavourably in
the direction of causing a diminished milk
supply, and consequent butter yield, even in
the best districts, but this was not an un-
mixed evil as far as the farmers were con-
cerned, as the shortage in the production
mal concentration of population obtained in
and around Sydney, and this obviously
created a greater demand for the necessaries
of life. This increased demand for butter
was confronted by a diminished supply, and
this upset the market temporarily at least, so
that in place of an export, an import basis
had to be arranged. Owing, however, to
the facilities offered by cold storage —which
it would appear had been largely availed of
by far-seeing and speculative merchants—the
trade was not disturbed to anything like the
extent it would have been had such a system
of economic conservation been non-existent.
As the local tupplies coming forward wore not
equal to the demand, large importations had
to be made, chiefly from New Zealand, where,
during recent years, the dairying industry has
made phenomenal strides. Owing, however,
to the manner in which the butter market
is controlled, the dearth of the local article
did not result in the commodity being raised
coming to be better and more widely under-
stood, and, consequently, improved milking
strains are being introduced into the herds,
while greater attention is being given to the
questions of feeding, housing, and otherwise
dealing with stock in order to ensure the
maximum of results.
The total number of dairy cattle in milk
in the State at the end of 1902 was com-
puted at 351,427, while two years before the
number stood at 420,148, the highest on re-
cord. The reduction, however, may be ac-
counted for in several ways, not the least
feasible being that owing to the high prices
ruling for store cattle, a considerable number
of cows, whose value as milkers was not
equal to their cash value as stores, were sent
to market. Of the number mentioned, as
belonging to 1902, no less than 251,971 were
located in the coastal districts, where the
least diminution in the numbers, as compared
TYPICAL MILKERS.
meant, in most instances, an enhanced price
for the supply available. In this way a very
considerable number of dairy farmers,
located principally in the northern and south-
ern coastal parts, where feed was abundant
and cheap, realised larger returns than dur-
ing previous years of plenty, when the supply
was such as to cause an overplus on the local
market, with a considerable margin for ex-
port. There can be little doubt that 1902
saw a greater aggregation of population in
the metropolitan area than had been the case
for several years. The drought in the in-
terior of the State, and throughout several
of the other divisions of the Commonwealth,
drove large numbers of people towards Syd-
ney, where the heavy expenditure on public
works by the Government acted as an attrac-
tion to the many who had fallen upon bad
times in other parts. In this way an abnor-
to an exorbitant price, as has frequently been
the case in the past, before science came to
the assistance of the dairymen and butter
factor. During 1902 there was a perceptible
rise, ranging to a maximium of 3d. on the
lb., any further advance being kept in check
by outside competition. A large portion of
New South Wales is essentially dairying
country, and farmers are now beginning to
realise that under normal conditions of soil
and climate, dairying can be made one of the
most profitable of occupations. To what
extent this idea has gained ground during re-
cent years, is manifested by the difficulty
that now exists in the way of obtaining dairy
lands, except at a price which, notwithstand-
ing the undoubted prospects of the industry,
permits of the question of a remunerative
return being somewhat encompassed with
doubt. The scientific aspect of dairying is
with the two previous years, was recorded,
On the tablelands there were 67,229, on the
western slopes and in Riverina 29,075, and
on the western plains 3,152.
Closely allied to the dairying is the breed-
ing of swine, a branch of productive enter-
prise that is now being taken up largely as a
side line, capable of giving a highly remuner-
ative return. A farmer who sells his milk to
a creamery can purchase separated milk, i.e.,
that from which the cream has been ex-
tracted, at from 2d. to 3d. per ten gallons, a
price which renders it a very profitable pig
food, provided that edible crops such as
maize, pumpkins, mangolds, etc., are grown
to supplement the milk diet. Dairymen are
now beginning to recognise the value of pig
raising, and, as a consequence, the industry
is advancing rapidly, particularly in the
Northern Rivers District.


The Mining Industry.
The mineral wealth of New South Wales
is a potential factor which makes for the pro-
gress of the State. Despite the trying con-
dition of 1902, the aggregate value of the
metals and minerals produced in the State
during that year reached the very respect-
able figure of £5,638,145, representing a
shortage of only £368,490 on the previous
year. The increases in the value of the out-
put, amounting to £350,330, were contri-
buted chiefly by gold, coal, oil shale, opal,
lirnstone, ironstone flux, alunite and dia-
monds. The total decreases totalled
mining operation was 124, of which 105 hap-
pened in coal and shale mines and 19 in metal-
liferous mines, the latter being the lowest for
years. The lamentable explosion at the Mount
Kembla Colliery, by which 95 men lost their
lives, was responsible for the large annual list
of fatalities. The number of killed shows a
ratio of 3.680 per 1000 of persons employed,
and the number of those seriously injured (112)
bears a ratio of 3.324 per 1000.
It is impossible to arrive at anything like
a reliable estimate of the value of the mining
machinery and plants in the State, as many
of the proprietors, particularly the colliery
owners, have an aversion to giving informa-
tion on this head. The estimated value, at
the end of the year, of all the mining plants
mented production is doubtless due to the
fact that the smelting works at Dapto and
Cockle Creek extracted the gold from con-
siderable quantities of auriferous ore that
had been forwarded from other States of the
Commonwealth, also from New Zealand,
Gold mining in the State was greatly retarded
owing to the scarcity of water to carry on
crushing operations. Under those circum-
stances ground sluicing was almost entirely
suspended, but as a number of the creeks and
watercourses were dried up, miners were able
to prospect their beds, with the result that a
considerable amount of alluvial was secured,
A feature of the year’s transactions was the inte-
rest awakened in dredging owing to the very
gratifying results obtained from this'form of
WENTWORTH PROPRIETARY GOLD MINE, LUCKNOW, N.S.W.
£718,821, silver lead and lead being the prin-
oipal delinquents, in an amount of £522,003;
copper showed a’deficiency of £104,379. In
tin also there was a perceptible shrinkage,
the figures being £23,609. Coke exhibited a
diminution in manufacture, to the value of
£l6 060 The number of persons employed in
and’about the mines of the State at the end
of 1902 was 33,695, as compared with 36,615
during the previous year The number em-
ploved delving coal and shale numbered
13,114, being an increase of 699 persons on
those employed in the previous year. Amongst
the metalliferous miners there was a consider-
nh I. fain™ n ff hut there was an increase to
mfnovQ at White Cliffs
in connection with
and machinery, other than that at the coal
and shale mines, was put down at £2,132,261.
This approximation, of course, does not in-
elude the value of the plants at the several
ore-smelting and refining works, where highly
valuable machinery is installed.
The area under mining occupation at the
end of 1902 was approximately 196,222 acres,
and the number of applications dealt with
by the Mines Department totalled 714,
covering an acreage of 23,355 acres
GOL D
T- H'-vha • none
The gold produced in tins State dnr,„s: 1902
amounted to 300,289 ozs. crude, equal to 254,405
ozs. fine, valued at £1,080,773, being an increase
of £159,491 on the previous year. This aug-
mining in some parts. This resulted in quite
a rush for dredging land, the area held under
lease or application for leases for dredging
purposes being 11,719 acres,
The gold obtained by dredging amounted to
ozs., valued at £97,891, an increase of
1888 ozs., valued at £8263, on the foregoing
year. This yield was contributed to by 22
bucket and 7 suction dredges, which, in ad-
dition to the gold, also secured 110 tons of
tul > valued at £B3OO. At the end of the year
there were 36 dredging plants in commission,
valued f £262,700 and five others were in
course of removal to fresh locations. .
The total amount of gold won in New South
Wales up till the close of 1902 was 13,775,922
oz„ valued at £50,742,588.


SILVER, LEAD AND ZINC.
During the year 1902 the value of the
silver, lead and zinc produced in the State
was estimated at £1,498,462, as against
£1,959,021 for 1901, being a decrease of
£460,559. This reduction is due to the low
prices ruling for silver and lead, which caused
all but four of the Broken Hill mines, whence
the bulk of the output comes, to temporarily
close down. The depression in the market
rates not only reduced the value of
the output, but also curtailed the out-
put itself. The depreciation of a num-
ber of metals has given rise to greater
efforts to effect economies and improvements
in the methods of mining, so as to bring re-
fractory ores and previously wasted bye-pro-
deposits of zinc ores of Broken Hill and other
districts will be effected. The value of the
total output of silver, silver sulphide and
silver-lead ores, exported from the State up to
the end of 1902 stands at £33,781,756.
COPPER.
The drought of 1902 covered a multitude of
deficiencies, one of which related to the
amount of copper won from the mines of this
State during that year, the value of the metal
raised being £308,923, as compared with
£413,302 for 1901. The decrease of £104,379
is attributable to the want of water for work-
TIN.
As the greater proportion of the tin ob-
tained in New South Wales is alluvial, the
want of water for sluicing purposes appreci-
ably retarded production, the total value of
the ore won during 1902 being £53,706, as
compared with £77,315 for the year previous.
During the former year a very considerable
quantity of tin ore was imported into this
State for treatment, the value of the tin con-
tained therein being reckoned at £78,428.
During the year considerable attention was
attracted to several of the stanniferous dis-
tricts, and on the Euriowie and Waukeroo
fields in the far West quite a revival was wit-
nessed. No less than 771 acres having been
applied for and additional plant erected at
GOLD MINING AT TUMBARUMBA CREEK, N.S.W.
View showing breaking’ down. Nozzle, and Suction-pipe of Centrifugal Elevating Pump.
ducts into profitable utilisation. The attempts
made to bring the cost of production well
within the market value of the metals,, so as
to leave a fair margin of profit on the enter-
prise, have been to some extent successful, and
the prospects of solving the difficulties that
have hitherto been unsurmountable are be-
lieved to be within hopeful distance of re a-
lisation. Many improvements in the treat-
ment of the waste products of the field by
magnetic attraction have been made. At the
Cockle Creek Zinc Distillation Works a quan-
tity of spelter was produced from slimes, and
the success of this experiment has induced the
hope that this branch of industry has been
established on a profitable level. Experi-
ments are now being made with a new process
for the treatment of the refractorv sulnhide
ores of the State, and if they prove successful
a revolution in the working of the immense
ing and smelting purposes. The Great Cobar
Copper Mine, which furnished the greater
part of the output, viz., £224,699 in value, of
which £90,209 was represented by gold and
£3688 by silver, which is closely associated
with the cuprite ore, was on the point of sus-
pending operations, but as such an event would
have been fraught with very serious conse-
quences, not only to the mine, but also to the
town and district, the Government arranged
for a supply of water to be conveyed by train
until the rain set in, a contingency that even-
tuated in November last. The Burraga Mine,
which, for many years, had been a consistent
producer, and the large copper refinery at
Lithgow, besides numbers of other smaller
properties, had to close down for several
months owing to the water supply giving out.
The value of the total output of copper in
New South Wales is estimated at £8,515,882.
the close of the year, the prospects of the in-
dustry were considered very hopeful. The
total value of the tin produced in the State
up to the end of 1902 is computed at
£10,980,259.
DIAMONDS
The quantity of diamonds won during 1902
showed an increase on the previous year. In
the former period, the quantity of diamonds
totalled 11,995 carats, valued at £11,326,
which was an advance of 2673 carats, of the
value of £1570 on 1901. The greater portion
of this yield was obtained from Boggv Camp
field, in the Tingha district, where three
mines were in existence. The increase in the
winnings is attributed to the work at these
mines being more actively carried on during
the year, and to the operations of fossickers


while prosecuting their search for stream tin.
The Monte Christo Mine, which is the prin-
cipal one in the noted Bingara field, com-
menced work towards the end of the year, after
a long spell of idleness, and during ten days
in the month of December 87 cubic yards of
wash dirt were dealt with, giving a return of
529 carats. The search for brilliants in New
South Wales, which dates back to 1867, has
been somewhat spasmodic, but it would
appear that the industry during the past two
years has obtained a better footing than pre-
viously, and possibly in the future the returns
will be augmented. The total winnings up
till the end of 1902 amounted to 121,420§
carats, valued at £76,616 17s.
OPAL.
Mining for opal has now become a recog-
nised industry in this State, and the year 1902
showed a record in the production of this
mineral, the total value of the noble opal won
during that period being £144,000, an advance
of £24,000 on the value of the previous year’s
output. The chief—in fact, the only—opal
field working in the State ds known as White
Cliffs, some distance to the westward of Wil-
cannia. Here marked activity has been recent>
ly displayed, and the reports of several very
valuable finds have attracted a considerable
number of men to the district, the number of
miners during the year being about 1100. The
drought, which was extremely severe in this
part of the State, greatly hampered opera-
tions, but despi’e this discouragement the out-
put was greater than ever before. The location
might be described as a poor man’s field, as
nearly all the claims are held by working
miners. So far, the workings are in compara-
tively shallow ground, and the onlv equipment
necessary to obtain the mineral is a windlass,
bucket, pick, shovel, and knife, so that no
great outlay of capital is required to make a
start. The iridescent material is found at
various depths, but most of the work has been
done at the 9, 13, 18, 24, 32 and 40 feet levels.
Towards the end of the year copious rains fell,
and this encouraged the development of fresh
energy, so that the outlook for the future is
decidedly hopeful. The total value of the opal
raised in New South Wales up till the end of
1902 is estimated at £716,599.
IRON AND IRON ORE.
The prospects of the iron industry in New
South Wales are at present “ hung up” pend-
ing the decision of the Federal Parliament
with reference to a bonus on iron manufac-
tured locally from local ore. During 1902 a
quantity of iron stone was mined for flux at
Carcoar, Picton, and other places, the value
of which was estimated at £10,690. During
the same period a very considerable quantity
iron oxide was raised also for fluxing pur-
. ses. At the Eskbank Works, Lithgow,
over 6000 tons of finished iron castings, gal-
vanised corrugated iron, bolts, sheets, etc.,
were manufactured, chiefly from scrap iron.
The future of this industry, which should de-
elop enormously, owing to the presence in
the territory of immense bodies of high-grade
ores, is at present dependent upon a political
contingency.
LIME AND CEMENT.
~ . , „ . .
Quarrying limestone is a branch of mining
that is carried on extensively in New South
Wales, a considerable quantity of the argil ace-
ous material being manufactured into lime
and hydraulic cement, or used as a flux by the
smelting companies. The limestone formation
is pretty general over several portions of the
mterioi, quarries being worked at Capertee,
“ U ™' ® ro^en Rockley,
& ti j^u 60 ’ oaaif^ im ° P r °^ ucec * ] n 1902 tot-
al . led c m 2 ’ s V onS ’, of a " estimated value
ot ctib,olB, while the value of limestone raised
for flux was valued at £10,615.
OTHER METALS
During 1902 thc production of antimony
fell away greatly owing mainly to the closing
down of the Eleanora Mine, near Hillgrove,
which was thc chief producer. The value of
the output amounted to only £542, as against
£llB3 for the previous year. Bismuth, too,
showed a very appreciable diminution, the
ty l va ue of the product, most of which came
from Whipstick bemg only £3lOO, as com-
p with £6665 f° r 1901.
Chromium likewise suffered a reduction, as
the production was only 500 tons, valued at
£1740, being only a little over one-fourth of
the previous year s output. Although it is
well known that several deposits of chrome
exist in the fetate, little or no effort has been
made to work them except at Gobarrolong,
near Gnndagai Hero, the accessible-ore has
been nearly all recovered, and any further de-
velopmcnt will necessitate a considerable ex-
penditure, so that prospects are not encour-
aging.
At Yulgibar, in the northern district, thc
cinnabar mines give evidence of returning pro-
spirity. Experiments made with small parcels
of ore yielded 2 per cent, of mercury per ton
of ore, which makes the value of the stone
about £6 per ton, a figure that is considered
consistent with good work being done.
Cobalt, which is mined nrincipally at Port
Macau arie, showed a great decline, the value
of tbc product for the y ea r being £304, as
against £lO5l for 1901.
Molybdenite to the value of £lB4l was
raised durillg the earj but towa rds the end
of thafc period thc demand f or this mineral
f e u practically to nil, probably on account of
wolfram, a less c istly material, being substi-
tuted, in the processes for which molybdenum
had bcen used .
T .. . ..
In the Fl ,f leld Dlvlslon 375 ozs of platinum
valued at £i 50, were won during 1902 and con-
siderable quantities of kaolin were raised dur-
ing same period at Ulladulla, Tichborne
and Gosford, but no actual records were ob-
tainable. The production of alunite, or alum
stone, from the quarries at Bulladola, near
Port Stephens, showed a satisfactory increase,
the output for export to England for treat-
BROKEN HILL, N.S.W. (1899), SHOWING B.H. PROPRIETARY SILVER MINE IN
THE DISTANCE.
ment being 3644 tons, valued at £10,932, as
against 3144 tons, valued at £9438, for 1901.
Darlng the year very considerable quanti-
tieg of marble were quarried , at Caleula, Bore-
nore in the west, and Moparrabah in the
Kempsey district. These marbles are of ex-
ce]lent quality, being beautifully coloured
and grained> while their bardness and capac ity
f or polish have caused them to supersede
xta.li an marble in many kinds of work, partial-
lar]y in the buildi tradcs . Some very fine
imens of the Moparrabah marble are to bo
se£m in connection witll portioll of the decora .
tive i nterior of tbe Sydn ey Art Gallery,
J
Basalt, or as it is generally known, blue-
stone, has an economic value as macadam for
roads, etc. The principal source of supply is
at Bombo, on the coast near Kiama, where an
inexhaustible supply exists, and where it can
be mined at a minimum of cost and conveyed
to the metropolis by water, the freightage
being very low.


Forestry.
The forest or timber wealth of New South
Wales is very considerable, yet the people
of this State have shown a deplorable lack
of enterprise in pushing an export trade in
what is undoubtedly one of the most valu-
able of the resources of the country. Now that
a more general recognition of this hitherto
unregarded wealth has come about, owing
principally to the demand that bar set iu
for Colonial hardwoods, from Europe and
America, the apathy, ignorance, and avarici-
ousness of the past becomes significantly ap-
parent. Vast tracks of forest wealth have
been ruthlessly sacrificed to a perverse utili-
and to conserve the best interests of an in-
dustry that indubitably has a great future
ahead of it. The durability of New South
Wales hardwoods has been abundantly de-
monstrated before both scientific and practi-
cal experts in various parts of the world, and
recently large contracts have been entered
into for the supply of quantities of these tim-
bers to oversea destinations.
The forest area of the State has been esti-
mated at about 15,000,000 acres, upon which
timbers of commercial value exist. At the
end of last year the proportion of this area
reserved for forestry purposes was 6,963,662
acres. In the earlier stages of administra-
tion little or no attention was given to the
question of reservation for forestry. Prior
to 1879 no data is available, but on that date
try purposes. Of ordinary hardwoods there
is an extensive supply available, and a large
margin for export, and, in localities not im-
mediately accessible, the forests of this tim-
ber arc practically virgin. Ironbark, the
most va'uable hardwood, is somewhat scarce
within easy distance of the towns, but further '
back there are yet considerable supplies avail-
able. One cause of its growing scarcity is
the extent to which regrowth is prevented by
the use of fire to sweeten pasturage. Inland,
ironbark exists in fairly abundant quantity,
and the same may be said with regard to
box. The forests of red gum rank among
the finest of the timber resources of the
State. They are situated chiefly on the Mur-
ray River flats, which contain an abundant
supply of timber in all stages of growth. In
TIMBER WAGGONS.
tarianism which, if not annihilated or check-
ed, would within a comparatively few years
have led to the complete denudation of the
valuable indigenous timbers of the State.
Almost every part of the forest and scrub
country hears evidence of the vandalism of
the past when veritable giants of the bush
were felled to procure a few shingles or sap-
lings, or where fire was requisitioned to effi ct
a clearance, regardless of the enormous de-
struction of valuable trees which such a
course entailed. Indiscriminate ring-bark-
ing, too, is responsible for much of the im-
mensc waste that, until recent years, was al-
lowed to prevail. The establishment of a
State Forestry Department has, however,
done much to abate the evils complained of,
the reserved area was 2,991,466 acres. Dur-
ing the next four years it increased to
4,893,826 acres, and since then it has gradu-
ally risen to its present acreage, which may
be said to cover 3| per cent, of the lands of
the State. It is still very much under what
it should be, as it has been enunciated by an-
thorities on Forestry that to meet climatic
requirements, and provide an adequate tim-
her supply, at least 10 per cent, of area
should be retained under timber. Although
not widely distributed, the State’s timber re-
sources are large, particularly in the coastal
division, where, owing to rapidity of growth
and abundant habit of reproduction, there
is little danger of a shortage of hardwood
timber, if sufficient land be devoted to fores-
various parts of the Northern Rivers district
the cedar flourishes well. There has been a
wanton destruction carried on by timber-
getters for years, but this is now minimised.
During 1902 timber to the value of £124,235
was exported from this State, while the value
of that imported amounted to not less than
£509,253. In New South Wales there are
about 345 saw mills, with an aggregate of
6517 horse power, and a value in plant and
machinery of £273,883, employing some-
thing over 4000 persons. In this State a
Department of Forestry exercises a jurisdic-
tion over the forest reserves and, since its
institution, it has effected a vast improve-
ment in respect to the conservation of the
timber resources.


Fruit.
The fruit industry is one that, under proper
management, should constitute a most valu-
able adjunct to the agricultural wealth of the
State. For the production of fruit of every
kind there exists throughout the territory of
New South Wales all the essentials of both
soil and climate. There is practically an un-
limited market for most kinds of fruit, and
the cultivation offers many attractions and re-
munerative returns for the grower who is
of Nature in this respect, the fruit industry
in this State has never received the attention
its importance warrants. Until very recent
years fruit growing was looked upon as a
sort of haphazard occupation, and those who
engaged in it, with few exceptions, were unwil-
ling to give to the subject the attention
which it demanded. Since it has been dem-
onstrated by the experts of the Agricultural
Department that fruit culture, pursued on
scientific lines, can be made to yield excel-
lent monetary returns, the industry has
shown a decided tendency towards improve-
ment, but there yet remains a vast amount
the other States, and even from Italy and
America. There is little doubt that if a
better quality article of local production were
put on the market at a figure below what is
now asked for the very indifferent sorts sub-
mitted, an unprecedented demand would sot
in and be maintained, much to the benefit of
the growers. Some few orchardists, despair-
ing of a good local market, have on more
than one occasion tried to inaugurate an ex-
port business, but, though the trial shipments
carried out under different systems, have in
some instances arrived at London in good
condition, the bulk shipments, for reasons
MAKING A START.
content to concentrate all his energies towards
the production of what is “best” in every
sense of the word. This State, with its great
range of latitude, presents a wide scope for
variety as well as succession in production.
In the northern parts the sugar cane, ban-
anas mango and pineapple find a truly sub-
tropical habitat In the more central portion
the various members of the citrus family.
especially the orange arc cultivated to perfec-
tion while in the more Southern districts the
annl’e pear cherry -trawberry and kindred
fruits’ of the temperate zone are grown in
abundance Notwithstanding the lavishness
of work to be accomplished ere it can be said
to be on a really satisfactory footing. Nev-
ertheless, it is some gratification to be able
to chronicle the fact that a good start has
been made in the right direction, and to
anticipate that the parlous condition of such
an important business will soon be a thing
of the past. For some unexplainable reason
Australians are not great fruit eaters, so that
the demands of the local market should be
easily satisfied, but here in New South Wales
not enough is grown to meet the comparatively
modest requirements of the people, and, as
a consequence, large importations come from
not easily understood, have in most cases
been failures. Citrus fruits, chiefly oranges,
have, however, been the exception. The
Australian fruit season being the antipodes
of the European, oranges from this part of
the world arrive in the Northern Hemi-
sphere at a time when the market is bare,
and if they open in good order, as they often
do, good prices are realised, resulting in
handsome profits for the shippers. This
particular branch of the trade is as yet only
in its infancy, but when local orchardists
have mastered the art of growing ai d curing
citrus fruit, specially for export, the business


will likely increase to gigantic proportions.
It is probably the preserving, drying, pulp-
ing and canning of fruit that will lead to
the proper development of fruit growing in
this State. At the present time compara-
tively little is done in this direction. The
few jam factories that do exist are situated
in or near the metropolis, and the carriage
of the fruit from the distant country parts,
where the crops are often most prolific,
would entail too much expense, and, there-
fore large quantities are allowed to rot on
the ground. The establishment of pulping
stations or local canneries would perhaps get
over the difficulty, in much the same way
that the erection of creameries throughout
the dairying districts put the butter industry
on a sound financial basis.
The area of the orchards of the State at
present, exclusive of orangeries, amounts to
31,310 acres, of which 27,094 are productive,
and 4216 non-bearing. The production ag-
gregated £176,757 in value, returning an
average of £6 10s. per acre, a decrease of
16s. per acre on the value of the previous
year’s harvest.
The orangeries of the State embrace an
acreage of 16,207 acres, of which 12,500 are
bearing, and 3657 no£ bearing. Last sea-
son’s crop yielded 424,366 cases, being an
average of 34 cases per acre, or, in other
words, 578 dozen per acre.
The area laid out in market gardens is
now greater than ever, being 8260 acres, the
return from which has been computed at
£218,592, or an average of £26 9s. per acre.
In the Central districts of the State, there
is an enormous area suitable for the growth
of the vine, the olive, fig and prune, in fact,
all drying fruits would grow to perfection
here, and there is no reason to doubt that
the culture of those deciduous fruits would
be highly successful, provided a supply of
water for irrigation purposes vras available
when required.
Viticulture is a branch of the agricultural
industry that should progress well, as all the
natural conditions arc highly favourable to
the cultivation of almost every variety of
grape. There arc, unfortunately, however,
impediments that hamper the development
of the best traits of viticulture, the principal
being the apathy and prejudice of Austra-
lians towards the product of the local vine-
yards, which experts have declared to be the
equal under proper conditions of blending
and maturing, to anything produced else-
where. Fortunately, the salient characteris-
tics of Australian wine are being better un-
derstood both at home and abroad, so that
the future of the industry assumes a more
hopeful aspect. Last season there were 8793
acres under vines. The harvest of 5044 acres
was put through the press, resulting in the
production of 806,640 gallons of wine, being
an average of 160 gallons per acre. The
table crop was pulled from 2701 acres, which
yielded 3715 tons, an average of 1.4 tons per
acre. There were 1048 acres non bearing.
The statistical figures to hand show that
the industry has been almost stationary for
years past, but as the knowledge of cultiva-
tion spreads, and the demand for the product
increases, a greater interest in the culture of
the vine may be confidently anticipated.
The
Rainfall of N.S.W.
A CHAT WITH THE GOVERNMENT
ASTRONOMER.
THE DROUGHT CYCLE THEORY.
The climate of a country is one of the most
important factors in the sum of its advan-
tages. A territory with a bad climate may
boast of a fertile soil, abundance of minerals,
and great lakes and rivers, but its one
great drawback may nullify all the
benefits on on the other side. For
instance, the eastern and western coasts
of Africa are naturally very rich, but
their liability to malaria has for cenlurit s
made them practically closed to effective col-
onisation by the white races. If the interior
of Australia were subject to the heavy rain-
falls which prevail in other parts of the world
in corresponding latitudes, we should have to
deal with a heLvily timbered jungle, into
which every foot of progress would have
to be cut by axe and bill-hook, and in which
malarial fevers would find a congenial home.
To the dryness of the south-western regions of
Australia is largely due the salubrity of the
districts to which settlers have been mainly
attracted. Certainly in many years the rav-
ages of drought in this country make people
wish that their lot had been cast in lands
which were reasonably healthy, and, at the
same time, blessed with a better rainfall. But
at such times it is well to remember that
droughts existed in this land long before the
white man appeared on the scene. The vast
plains of the interior were at no distant geo-
logical period covered by the waves of the pri-
meval ocean, and since the waters receded
from them the moisture of the local atmos-
phere has been mainly condensed by the
great coastal range, the summits of which at
one time appeared as islands above the watery
waste. Proximity to the ocean has made
the districts near the coastal mountains well
watered, and that very plenitude has worked
to the disadvantage of the plain country be-
yond the Dividing Range. The origin of
coastal rains can be readily understood. They
are mainly the result of condensation on
mountain ranges of the vapours which arise
from the ocean. The monsoonal rains which
benefit the western country are produced by
an agency of far wider reach. A few words
regarding them by way of elucidation may
be useful to some of our readers, although
to the seafaring portion of them the subject
is practically known. When the sun, as the
usual saying is, goes north of the equator, the
great plains of Southern Asia become greatly
heated by the almost vertical solar rays. The
air above them accordingly becomes rarified
and ascends, causing a strong current to set
in towards India and surrounding regions
from the southward. It can be readily under-
stood why this is so, when it is remembered
that the sea, unlike the land, does not become
greatly heated, but preserves an almost uni-
form temperature all the year round. The half
yearly change known as “ the burst of the
monsoon” is accompanied by wind of great
force, bringing with it deluges of rain. From
about April to October the south-west mon-
soon blows. When the sun crosses the equa-
tor southward the great- plains of Australia,
the islands in proximity to this country, and
South Africa, become in their turn greatly
heated, the result being a reversal of the great
air current, and the “ bursting of the north-
east monsoon” in October, that wind being
the prevalent one till the following April,
Of course that part of Australia nearest the
tropic receives the largest benefit from the
north-east monsoon, but the moisture-laden
wind frequently blows well down to the south,
and on such occasions the parched western
country of Australia receives those drenchings
for which it his so long languished.
In considering the subject of the rainfall of
New South Wales it is necessary to premise
the existence of three distinct areas, present-
ing strikingly different natural characteristics.
The first of these is the coastal district, a strip
of country 800 miles long, bounded on its
eastern side by the Pacific Ocean, and on the
other by the mountain chain known as the
Dividing Range. The rainfall therein ranges
according to a rainfall map published in 1896,
from 36 to 76 inches, and feeds fifteen rivers
of considerable volume. This division is
from 30 to 150 miles in width, and embraces
an area of 38,200 square miles. The second
division may be termed table-lands, and ex-
tends the whole length of the colony, with a
width varying from 120 to 2uo miles, and an
area of 84,900 square miles. This elevated
part of the State varies in altitude from 1000
to 7000 feet, the larger portion thereof, how-
ever, being from 2000 to 3000 feet high. The
rainfall in this belt of countrv is from 26 to
50 inches per annum, and rivers and streams
therein .are numerous. The third division is
the Western District, including the great
plains of the west, intersected by the Darling,
Murray, Lachlan, Murrumbidgee and other
smaller rivers. It covers an area, extending
between the table-lands and the border of
South Australia, of 187,600 square miles. The
rainfall in this division varies from 10 inches
in the extreme west to 25 inches in the east-
ern portion. The average rainfalls in the
three divisions are given as follows, from re-
cently published calculations;—Coastal, 41.89
inches; table-lands, 32.62 inches; western,
19.80 inches; but, as indicated above, the
average rainfall in a large area west of the
Darling is less than 10 inches. The mean
rainfall of the State for the last 30 years is
about 25 inches, but, with such an irregular
distribution the striking of an average would,
without explanation, convey an entirely er-
roneous meaning, as, in the meteorological
conditions of Australia generally, extremes
emphatically meet.
The man who, in New South Wales, has
daily studied and observed the mcteorlogical
conditions of the State for the longest period
is Mr. H. C. Russell, the Government As-
tronomer. The writer of this article, forti-
fied by a letter of introduction from the pub-
lishers cf the “ Annual Review,” recently
waited on that gentleman to “ talk about the
weather” with one eminently qualified by
experience, knowledge and observation to do


Average
Monthly,
Greatest
Monthly.
Least
Monthly.
Av’rage No.
of rainy d’ys
in.
in.
in.
January
3-607
10-489
0*419
14
February
5‘164
18-5 6
0 401
14
M»rch
6*218
18-700
0-419
15
April
5514
24 490
0-160
13
May
5*499
20-868
0-214
16
June
5*926
16-2P6
0541
13
July
4*490
13-208
0-120
12
August
3-112
14-886
0-040
11
September . .
3-014
14045
0-083
12
October
2*800
8-645
0-210
13
November ...
3-23$
9'880
0-290
13
December ...
2*547
7804
0-453
13
Nearly AverO
agres, totals, y 60,059
and extremes J
24-490
0-040
159
jo with authority. Mr. Russell is a
native of West Maitland, in this State,
and, coming to Sydney, entered the Univer-
sity and took his degree of B.A. He is a
Companion of the Order of St. Michael and
St. George. Mr. Russell is a Fellow of the
Royal Society, and has contributed many val-
uable papers to the Transactions of that
learned body. His “ sanctum sanctorum ”
shows at a glance the scientific nature of the
occupant thereof. The Government Astron-
omer is evidently of that good old school that
has produced so many men of note, mark, and
integrity in New South Wales.
“ Well, what do you wish to know about
the weather?” said the, chief of the meteoro-
logical department of the State.
“ I wish to get some particulars of the rain-
fall for, say, the last seven years,” said the
visitor.
“ Of course, I can easily give you these.
They are matters of public record. At the
same time I must say that to take a period of
seven years for this purpose would give an un-
favourable presentment of the rainfall of this
State. For the past seven years have been
part of a cycle of droughty years. That is
best shown by this large diagram,” and Mr.
Russell pointed to a chart, and proceeded to
state facts and figures, which he had given in
papers read before the Royal Society of New
South Wales in 1896 and 1901. They dwelt on
the periodicity of good and bad seasons in
Australia. Mr. Russell explained that the ob-
servation on which he had based his theory
had been extended over many years. To
coastal rains small attention could be paid in
making his calculations, as they were the result
of causes which did not contribute to the rain-
fall at inland recording stations. The station
at Horsham, Victoria, has been a most useful
one in arriving at his conclusions, as observa-
tions have been taken there since 1848. At
Bathurst the results obtained by rain gauges
■ commenced to be recorded ten years later. Mr.
Russell explained that inland the monsoonal
and winter rains come to us as parts of the
regular offshoots of the equator, whereas the
coastal rains were often brought up by offsets
of equatorial hurricanes and comparatively
local causes. That is to say, the inland observ-
ing stations and not the coastal ones were en-
tirely relied on in arriving at the conclusion
that good and bad seasons come in regular
cycles in Australia. Seeing how comparatively
small an area is the region benefited by coastal
rains, the action of Mr. Russell in basing his
conclusion on the observations obtained at far
inland stations will not be impugned.
Mr. Russell divides the years for which
records have been kept into periods of 19
3 r ears duration. Commencing with 1889, a
period of abundant rain finished in 1894.
With 1895 a period of drought se3 in, which
continued until 1903 with remorseless severity.
“From that year (1895),” said Mr. Russell
before the Royal Society last year, “ to the end
of 1900 we have lost twenty-five millions of
sheep by starvation, in addition to the death
°f all the increase during the past six years.
This increase would in good years have
amounted to about twenty millions of sheep
more.” Since these words were spoken before
that honoured body of scientists, the further
loss by drought has been tremendous, and
squatters have for a long period been feeding
their best sheep on imported fodders.
The diagram to which reference has been
made shows a very close connection between
the moon’s position to the earth and our rain-
fall. The lower part thereof exhibits in a
remarkably clear manner that the rains coin-
cide with the positions of the moon in declinar
tion in about 19 years. Mr. Russell remarked
before the Royal Society last year as follows;
“ I do not mean to say that I have demon-
strated that the moon is an active point in the
weather, but I think, seeing the rain is shown
so clearly to come in times of abundance, when
the moon is in certain degrees of her motion
south, and when the moon begins to go north
then droughty conditions prevail for seven or
eight years—a phenomenon repeated for three
periods of nineteen years—that it is either a
marvellous coincidence, or there is a law con-
necting the two phenomena. I am convinced
that there is some connection between the
two.” It has also been pointed out by the
Government Astronomer that a period of be-
tween six and seven years may be traced in
our dry years a long way back. Thus 1872,
1865, 1858, 1852, 1845, 1838,1832, 1826, 1820,
1814 and 1808.
The term “ declination,” in its astronomi-
cal sense, is worthy of attention. The place of
a star in the heavens is determined by its right
ascension and declination, in the same way as
a point on the earth’s surface is determined by
its latitude and longitude. That is to say, de-
clination on the celestial sphere answers to
longitude on the terrestrial globe. The moon
is not always the same distance from the earth.
The point at which the moon is nearest our
globe is called her “ perigee,” and that at
which she is furthest from it her “ apogee.”
When the moon is at perigee she is within
225.000 miles, and when at apogee, over
251.000 miles from the earth. It is Mr. Rus-
sell’s contention, as stated above, that the dif-
ferences in the moon’s orbit are closely connec-
ted with rainfall.
Referring to the diagram of the moon’s
movements, Mr. Russell explained the mode of
its framing: —“ The extreme south position of
the moon for each year was selected as a con-
venient way of showing the motion in declina-
tion and marked on the diagram representing
that year. Year after year the moon’s ex-
treme declination was plotted on these lines.
Finally, all the points were joined, thus mak-
ing the curves. These indicate the extreme
south distance of the moon from the equator
each year. During the southerly motion of the
moon there is abundance of rain. Then
drought begins, not wholly for want of rain,
but in many instances because we have strong
north to north-west hot winds. When there is
plenty of rain this feature does not appear.”
The writer left the Observatory with some-
thing to think over in Mr. Russell’s conversa-
tion and recapitulations of information for-
merly published to the world. The great pre-
sent comfort in the theory enunciated by the
Government Astronomer of New South Wales
is that we have passed through the greater
part of the present dry cycle, and are approach-
ing the period of abundant rain. Mr. Russell’s
contention is that between one period of abun-
dant rain in Australia and another, a period of
about 19 years intervenes—coinciding with
the differences in the moon’s declination —
and that the period of great abundance and
that of great drought both last about six
years. The theory seems entirely reasonable.
It is not “ a far cry” to the moon. We can
with the naked eye see the principal features
of the portion it always presents to us, and by
means of a telescope can easily discern its
mountains and valleys, and even the shadows
thrown by the former on the latter. The in-
fluence of the moon on tides is a matter of
every-day knowledge, and there is nothing
unreasonable in the supposition that she may
exercise a powerful influence on the atmos-
phere of the earth. The winds which blow
about the periods of new and full moon, and
at the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, have
been specially ascribed to the moon’s agency.
If later observations should confirm the cor-
rectness of Mr. Russell’s hypothesis, the
people of Australia will be better prepared
than they have hitherto been to face the mete-
orological conditions of their land. A fuller
knowledge of what they have to meet should
enable them to guard against overstocking the
back country when great droughts may rea-
sonably be expected; to conserve water sup-
plies in the years of abundant rainfall; to pre-
serve from greedy over-feeding or reckless des-
struction the country’s natural herbage; and
to utilise to the utmost the stores of artesian
water with which large areas of interior Aus-
tralia have been blessed. Doubtless there will
be scoffers at every scientific theory, even
though it be founded on deductions from ob-
servations continued over a long scries of
years. But the patient and observant scien-
tist can stand fire, for he knows that every
original contribution to the sum or human
knowledge must establish a set of facts not
previously known, and that inductive philoso-
phy can have no pet theories. If fuller know-
ledge should demonstrate a hypothesis to be
wrong,‘the scientific mind does not hesitate in
demolishing it, and with undiminished ardour
begins another voyage on that vast ocean of
natural philosophy which, though explored by
myriads of investigators, contains yet so many
mysteries.
The year 1902 will be notable in the mete-
orological annals of New South Wales as the
one of the record drought. It is a record that
we would have gladly dispensed with, but
Nature does her work unaided, and asks no
leave from any mortal. That in this country,
after over a century of occupation, we do not
know the full capabilities of our climate, is a
fact which should make us pause when dis-
counting our national future.
The following table, showing the monthly
rainfall at Sydney during the 42 years ended
1900, will be found interesting:—


Messrs. H. Prescott & Co.
PRODUCE MERCHANTS.
Young as we are in nationhood, we of Australia
can already point to a decade that was big with
promise of the future, a period to which we owe
more of our present day prominence than we do to
all the slow years that preceded it. We have among
us yet many men who can talk of that time, when
"the fifties” were in full swing, and the golden
age had lifted the country from a quiet and easy-
going community to the plane of progress along
which it has ever since travelled uninterruptedly.
Of such a beginning and such a career the firm
of 11. Prescott and Company, of 336 and 338 Sussex-
street, affords an excellent example. Established
in 1850 by the late Mr. Henry Prescott, the business
at first found sufficient accommodation at 101 Sus-
sex-street.
The small office in which Mr. Prescott con-
ducted his business could almost have been packed
away in a corner of the firm’s present premises and
forgotten, but Mr. Prescott was of a nature which
steadfastly refused to launch out into undue infla-
tion of space to a possible detriment of a sound
financial stability. Consequently, for over thirty
years he was content with his first choice, and it
was not until 1880 that an enlargement was found
imperative if the ever-extending operations were to
be successfully negotiated.
In 1885, the present senior partner. Captain
Robert Craig, joined Mr. Prescott after the death
of the latter’s son in the previous year, and the
firm’s appellation was changed to that of 11. Pres-
cott and Company, under whicn name it has con-
tinued ever since. In 1889 it was found absolutely
necessary to erect a new building, and the firm
moved into temporary premises while the old build-
ing was demolished and a large and commodious
one was erected on the same site. Mr. Prescott re-
tired from active business in 1892, and two years
later Mr. J. B. Wright became a partner, bringing
an extensive commercial knowledge and keen busi-
ness attributes to further strengthen the proprie-
tary’s position.
Three years ago Mr. J. B. Craig, a son of the pre-
sent senior partner, was admitted into partnership,
and at the present time these three gentlemen con-
trol the operations of 11. Prescott and Company,
Owing to the still greater growth of the firm. and
the necessity for new stores to accommodate the
produce forwarded by a continually expanding
clientele, Messrs. H. Prescott and Company erected
their present premises at 336 and 338 Sussex-street,
in August, 1901.
The warehouse of to-day is a fine, commodious
erection of massive architectural lines, built with
especial regard to the utilitarian aspect of affairs,
an aspect, the observance of which has always been
one of the firm’s leading characteristics.
On the ground floor of 338 Sussex-street is located
the dairy produce and forwarding departments,
where from day to day there is a scene of continu-
ous bustle and activity as the big consignments
come in from the country and the large orders go
out to the many customers. At the rear and on the
same floor as these departments there is a complete
plant for the tinning and packing of butter for ex-
port, an industry which the firm was one of the
first in New South Wales to exploit.
The first floor is occupied by the partners, ac-
countants, and general offices, and above them on
the second and third floors are bulk stores, while
in the adjacent building at 336 the firm have always
on hand immense stocks of grain, hay, and other
agricultural produce. Throughout the building
each department is lofty, well ventilated, and amply
lighted. Besides this central establishment, the firm
has a hay store and produce depot at Maitland and
another at Orange for the distribution, selling, and
buying of produce, live stock, etc., of all descrip-
tions.
They are also agents for the Tweed River and
Australian Dairying Companies’ butter, in both of>
which concerns they have a large financial interest.
The expansion of their trade relationship in recent
years, especially in connection with their export of
butter, necessitated representation in Lcndon, and
their home buying agents in the metropolis of the
Empire are located in Basinghall-street.
The principal lines handled by the firm of H.
Prescott and Company are Maize, Oats, Barley, Lu-
cerne Hay, Oaten Hay, Chaff, Onions, Butter,
Bacon, Cheese, Eggs, and Hams. Their business is
not confined to New' South Wales, but in every
State the name of 11. Prescott and Company is a by-
word for expeditious dealing and sterling integrity
in every department.
The products upon which the firm especially pride
themselves are their proprietary lines of Daisy
Brand Butter and Hams, for which they find a great
demand throughout the State. This demand is par-
ticularly strong for the Daisy Brand Hams, some
idea of the output of which may be gained from the
fact that in New South Wales, during the week pre-
vious to the Christmas festivities, over 5000 hams,
weighing from 7 lbs. to 18 lbs. each, were rold in
Sydney and throughout the State.
The firm also stock the famous Eclipse and
Thistle brand sugar-cured hams. The reputation of
the Daisy Brand Butter has long since extended be-
yond the confines of New South Wales, and the
export trade in this commodity is a large and in-
creasing one. As has been said, Messrs. H. Pres-
cott and Company were among the first to place
their butter on the home markets, and from the
year 1889, when the shipments were successfully in-
augurated, the firm has continued to consign largely
to London, the butter being specially packed at
their own factories.
Butter of the Daisy brand goes Londonwards in
large quantities every' year, and more recently a
very satisfactory demand has sprung up in the Is-
lands and in South Africa. To the latter country
Messrs. 11. Prescott and Company were the first
to export wheaten hay, the initial shipment of 509
tons going from here in the early part of 1902 to
the order of the Imperial Government.
Daily auction sales of produce are held at Redfern
by Messrs. H. Prescott and Company, while three
times a week their auctioneers bring under the ham-
mer, at the sale yards, largo consignments of pigs,
calves, dairy cattle and other live stock. The wide-
spread connection of the firm naturally requires
the employment of a large staff. Two auctioneers
are kept constantly employed in disposing of the
produce sent down to the firm by country clients,
and in addition a large number of export travellers
and salesmen are brought into requisition,
Over 50 hands find work in the various warehouses
and offices. Messrs. H. Prescott and Company also
act as commission agents for clients in New South
H. PRESCOTT & CO’S SYDNEY STORES AND OFFICES, SUSSEX STREET.
ftbe U>trobucing 3-nbustr?.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.
PRODUCE MERCHANTS.


Wales and all parts of Australasia, for whose benefit
the firm make a special effort towards the prompt
rendering of Account Sales.
MR. H. PRESCOTT.
The late Mr. H. Prescott, the founder of the firm,
arrived here in the forties when Sydney was but a
village in comparison with the city of to-day, and
Australia had not yet startled the world into dreams
of a new El Dorado. Mr. Prescott became associa-
ted with the old Illawarra Company, in what was
humorously, if somewhat slightingly, referred to as
“ the pig and whistle trade,” by that large sec-
tion of Sydney’s people whose interests were either
purely or partially pastoral.
In his work Mr. Prescott naturally came into
close contact with farmers and others, among whom
he was very popular.
Me. H. PRESCOTT.
With many assurances of support from his
wide circles of friends who guaranteed him their
business, Mr. Prescott started in 1851 at 101 Sussex-
street, as a produce and commission agent, thus
laying the foundation of the present gigantic con-
cern, which has outlived many rivals, and has had
an existence of over half a century.
Once established, his sterling qualities soon
brought him to the front, and there he stayed, al-
ways quick to seize upon any legitimate mer.ns of
extending his connection and increasing his busi-
ness, until about ten years ago, when advancing
age made him realise that his career as a commer-
cial man was over.
He therefore retired from active participation in
the concern and entered upon the enjoyment of the
evening of his days. He was not long allowed to
remain among the many friends his worth had
made, and eight years ago this kindly hearted and
richly esteemed man went to his long rest.
CAPTAIN ROBERT CRAIG.
The present senior partner of ihe firm of Messrs.
H. Prescott and Company, Captain Robert Craig,
is, like so many others of Australia’s first-rank
commercial men, a native of Scotland, having first
seen the light in Ayrshire. He came out to Aus-
tralia in 1874 as pioneer captain for the E. and A.
Company in the S.S. “Legislator,” and continued
to command steamers of this company’s fleet until
18S1, when he accepted the position of Marine
Superintendent. In this capacity he had a very
great deal to do with the arrangement of details in
the efficient conduct of the company’s lines in Aus-
tralia, and to him in large measure is due the suc-
cessful development of the “ E. and A.” in later
times.
During his connection with the E. and A. Com-
pany in this capacity his duties occasioned nume-
rous dealings with the late Mr. H. Prescott, and in
1885 he decided to join the latter gentleman in his
business. He was no less successful in shore-going
pursuits than he had been at sea, and from the time
be joined Mr. Prescott his many excellent points
found full scope for their exercise.
When Mr. Prescott died. Captain Craig became
senior partner in the firm, and carried on the busi-
ness with splendid results as regards its evolution
to the position it occupies to-day.
MR. J. B. WRIGHT.
Mr. J. B. Wright is of the same nationality as
Captain Craig, and the fact that both the senior
partners of the firm are “ Scotland horn and bred'*
is sufficient evidence, if evidence were needed, of the
reputation which the country north of the Tweed
has, for sending out through the Seven Seas men
of sound business qualities to build up mercantile
houses in every quarter of the globe.
Mr. Wright is a native of Glasgow, and came to
Australia in 1886. The day after landing in Sydney
he commenced work for H. Prescott and Company
in a very minor position, but grew up with the
business, until in 1894 he was taken into partner-
ship by Captain Craig.
In the same year the firm's export trade in butter
had increased to such an extent that it was found
necessary for Mr. Wright to go home in order to
make arrangements for placing the trade on a firm
basis. In this responsible undertaking Mr. Wright
bore out the high opinions formed of him, and dis-
played marked ability as an organiser.
Since his return he has devoted himself with
whole-souled energy to the interests of his firm, and
has consequently found no time to occupy any posi-
tion in a municipal or public sense,
At the same time, Mr. Wright has at all times
taken an interest inthe'welfare of the dairying and
agricultural industries, and the farmers and other
“ servants of the soil" have a warm friend and a
staunch guardian of their rights and privileges in
him.
SIR. J. B. CRAIG.
The third partner of the company, Mr. J. B.
Craig, is a son of Captain Robert Craig, and was
born in Scotland about twenty-eight years ago. He
received his educational and commercial training
in this country, and was admitted into a partner-
ship in Messrs. H. Prescott and Company some
three years ago. In 1902 Mr. Craig visited South
Africa and England, returning via Canada and the
States, on business for the firm, which he brought
to a successful conclusion.


B. Richards & Sons.
THE RIVERSTONE MEAT COMPANY.
During the recent sojourn of the Prime Minister
of the Commonwealth, Sir Edmund Barton, in Lon-
don, he took the opportunity, in the course of one
of his many speeches, of referring to Australia as
“ the butchery of the Empire.” Though perhaps
phrased more forcibly than elegantly, the epithet
was undoubtedly a happy description, terse and
telling, of the place that our land fills in the econ-
omy of the British Empire, and it emphasised anew
the importance of the greatest of our secondary
industries—an industry which has leapt to the front
within the last score of years, and which bids fair
to remain one of the principal branches of our in-
ternal and external commerce. From the first, es-
sentially a pastoral country. New South Wales
meat was shipped away, its value being set down
at =622,910, while last year the Customs figures gave
.£515,562 for value, the quantities being:—3B7,l64
carcases of frozen mutton and 14,255 pieces of frozen
beef, the totals, owing to obvious causes, showing
a considerable decrease on the previous year’s re-
cord. Enough has, however, been said to empha-
sise the importance of the export trade in frozen
meat, and to draw attention to the prominence it
occupies in the economy of the State.
In this trade B. Richards and Sons, of the River-
stone Meat Company, have always taken a foremost
place. Indeed, from the very beginning, the firm,
which has occupied an enviable position in the lead,
may be said to have been the pioneers of meat ex-
port, and led competitors in the keen struggle for
a footing in the metropolis of the Empire. Founded
in 1879 by Mr. Ben Richards and his two sons
Robert and James, as " B. Richards and Sons,” the
Riverstone Meat Company stands to-day as a pi e-
eminent example of what exceptional ability, prac-
the scheme for a frozen meat export trade was due
to Mr. Robert Richards, B. Richards and Sons un-
dertaking, with the thoroughness that marked all
their dealings, the pioneering of this great adjunct
to the pastoral industry. From that time a most
gratifying rate of progress was maintained, from
year to year the firm, known as Messrs. B. Richards
and Sons’ Riverstone Meat Company, extended its
sphere of operations, and became an increasingly
important factor in that portion of New South
Wales industry dealing with the product of pas-
toral pursuits.
In 1899 Mr. Robert Richards felt that his ardu-
ous life merited a holiday, and his trip home,
taken in that year, was the first real cessation from
hard work that he had ever allowed himself.
It may here be incidentally mentioned, as giving
an idea of the esteem in which Mr. Richards was
held by his fellow citizens, that on the eve of his
departure for the old world, a banquet, which was
at one and the same time the largest and most re-
B. RICHAEDS AND SONS, RIVERSTONE MEAT COMPANY.
General View of the Works at Riverstone, N.S.W.
naturally played a very prominent part in the de-
velopment and expansion of the frozen meat trade,
and though in later years the State has found
worthy rivals in Queensland and New Zealand, she
still holds her own.
In the initiation of the meat export trade the
name of Mr. Robert Richards stands out conspicu-
ously as that of the man who could justly claim to
have been the pioneer of the frozen meat trade.
From its inception Mr. Richards spared neither time
nor money in its expansion. The work accomplished
by him in the export of meat on a satisfactory basis,
may easily be judged when the prejudices that
ruled amongst shipowners and sellers in the old
world, and the almost insurmountable difficulties
that lay in the way of finding a market, are taken
into consideration.
As soon, however, as the export trade started, and
all difficulties were surmounted, expansion was
wonderfully swift. In 1882 only 13,782 cwt. of frozen
tical business knowledge of requirements, and
strict attention to details will do. Their operations
have grown enormously within the 20 years of the
firm's existence, and in good seasons at the present
day it is no unusual thing to " put through” as
many as 4000 sheep and nearly 200 bullocks in one
night.
Very little time had elapsed before the founders
of the firm recognised the full significance of their
new venture, and characteristically set about the
enlargement of their interests in this direction. On
the magnificent grass country at Riverstone the
stock sent down from stations in the interior were
depastured, so that all ill-effects of their journey—
sometimes inevitably a long and trying one—should
wear off before they were selected for slaughter.
Having obtained so desirable means to the end,
they had in view, the founders were keenly alert
for legitimate lines of expansion. An outlet for the
surplus was quickly exploited. The conception of
presentative from a commercial and pastoral stand-
point, ever held in this State, was tendered to him
on March 29th, 1899.
While in London he made many friends, and won
the same esteem for his admirable qualities as pre-
vailed in Australia. Eeturning via the Cape, he
had the good fortune to become acquainted with
that great Empire builder, the late Cecil Rhodes,
just before that gentleman left for Kimberley prior
to the Boer War. Two such men with so many in-
terests in common (were they not both, each in his
own way, engaged in the task of helping the up-
building of the British Empire) could not fail to be
mutually attracted, and to the end of his days Mr.
Richards counted that all too brief communion
with the lion of South Africa as amongst his most
pleasant experiences.
Mr. Robert Richards was not permitted to remain
long at the head of affairs after his return from the
old country. In 1902 ho died, universally loved
ZTbe flbrobudng Jnbustnj.
Historical and Biographical Sketches continued.
CARCASE BUTCHERS AND MEAT EXPORTERS.


, , „ nm „ jri by all who
ential moHoro TTo Ufi- o ’ ei '-be>' m business
! j,' . . widow, five sons and
. fi>o tianHs nf ftio f,i-n arge one, is now
1 t,ic cm, Mr w r? rS i. U j er 'V
n t ’ „( ichards, and Mr.
n', ’ .. t>„„- e, and Com-
P a Z’ f v. Rl °aards, the
? e . . ~ 1 management, hav-
* m ■ n. ranClS ' a tlema 1 n
' v _i.: rtT , tt„ j K 1 1 j conc ® ,n from its
incep • . ® r . IT . a e the business
‘ ro J n ‘ , , 18 em ? coa ducted on the same
sys em un er exac > similar conditions to
those « it uere practised in the older days, the
policy o re aming, as managers of departments, the
men w 0 e P? to build up the popularity and
success ol the firm, in the days of the founders, has
as quietly and quickly as possible. They are then
turned out, to get over the effects of their journey,
on the splendid grazing lands, Riverstone being
admirably situated in this regard. The property
consists of some 6000 acres. An abundance of fresh
water is supplied from the Eastern and South
Creeks, which flow through the paddocks, and which
even the most severe drought does not materially
affect. The area is, of course, subdivided for cattle
and sheep.
The enormous trade done by the Company neces-
sitates the division of their works into several dis-
tinct departments, the principal of which are devo-
ted to the killing of the sheep and cattle (these are
kept distinct). The main buildings have a frontage
of over 300 yards to the railway, and are very
solidly constructed, special attention having
throughout been paid to the provision of appli-
disease. The Company throughout its whole exist-
ence has always made a special point of this in-
spection and surveillance, and the question of ex-
penditure or loss in this connection is never allowed
to weigh against the ideal of cleanliness and whole-
someness. The public, who are fortunate enough to
secure Riverstone meat for their table, whether that
public be here or in the old country, may rest as-
sured that no precaution has been neglected, in its
prepa. at,on for the market, in the direction of
securing healthy untainted beef or mutton,
In regard to the preparation of the various pro-
ducts from each carcase, nearly all of which have
some commercial value, the same ideal of cleanliness
which characterises the whole work of the Company
is observed. The hides, after being flayed, are laid
down in the salting pits, and, when sufficiently
cured, sent to Sydney, where they carry the credit ol
THE RIVERSTONE MEAT COMPANY’S WORKS, RIVERSTONE.
1. Exterior of the Mutton House, showing Easement below Killing Floor. 2. Interior of Mutton House. Killing Pens, Hanging Beams, and Skin Floor.
3. Front View of Works, showing Railway Facilities.
been strictly adhered to, and with two such heads it
is safe to predict for it a career as prosperous
in the future as it has been in the past.
For the benefit of the uninitiated, ir will be inte-
resting to trace the evolution (if one may so term it)
of the cattle and sheep of the inland pastures, to
the sides of beef or carcases of mutton which repre-
sent the main product of the Riverstone Meat
Works Sheen and cattle are purchased from all
parL of thl s P tate Queensla"d, P and victoria. The
gathering together of stock necessitates the employ-
ment of a small recipient of buyers, who. headed
by Mr Colin Richards operate direct
frem the squatters, knd superintending the des-
patch of the cattle and sheep to the works. Special
eare is alwavs exercised that only the best is
bought none but the highest class stock is looked
at it beine their aim to secure the primest. From
the nearest railway station the beasts are trucked
to Riverstone, precautions being taken all along the
route that the railway iourney should knock them
Iw as little as nossible
On arrival at Riverstone the trucks are side-
tracked on to the loop line, running along the front
of the works, and the cattle or sheep are detrained
ances for expeditious handling, and most important
of all, the ensuring of absolute cleanliness in everj
process. Departments in the range of buildings arc
set apart for engineers, carpenters, blacksmiths.
coopers, etc. The whole of the works are lighted by
electric lamps, the Company having installed
powerful dynamos driven by up-to-date engines.
The engine-room is a model of compactness, great
thought having been given to the laying down of the
machinery so that all parts of the mechanism can be
easily approached. Quite a village of out-buildings
surround the main structure, comprising cottages
for the employees, stables, cartsheds, men’s
quarters, etc
When the stock are considered fit for killing, the
required number of bullocks for the night’s slaugh-
ter are cut out of their mob and brought quietly up
from the paddocks by experienced drovers to the
killing yards. When operations commence in the
beef house the bullocks are driven into the killing
pens in lots of four, and got ready for trucking to
Sydney. During the whole time the killing is in pro-
gress a Government inspector is present to see that
each carcase, and everything connected with human
consumption, is absolutely free from all taint or
being amongst the best flayed and cared-for in the
States.
The " Mutton-House,” as it is called, is an im-
mense building of over 100 yards in length, with a
proportionate width. It is two stories high, the
sides being wholly of trellis-work, so that the air
has free passage through and through the building,
while the lower floor is cemented throughout, in
order that the customary cleanliness of the Com-
pany may be fittingly observed,
The sheep are driven up an inclined race to the
killing floor, where they are run into pens with
sliding bars, and kept there until the butchers’ as-
sistants bring the animals to the killing pen. Over-
head on the killing floor are hanging beams of suf-
ficient capacity. After being killed and dressed the
carcases are lifted up, under the superintendence
of experts, each being graded according to its class,
The carcases are hung up in a current of fresh
pure air until 3 o clock m the morning when the
tram arrives to take the meat to Sydney. The
trucks are run right alongside the shed, the car-
cases being immediately transferred thereto,
Though perhaps not quite so numerous as those
obtained from the cattle, the skins and offal ( c o


called) of the sheep supply much that is of com-
mercial value. The ground floor of the “mutton-
house” is utilised for the treatment of the “offal,”
which is dropped through traps from the killing
floor. By this means the offal-floor and the meat
THE RIVERSTONE MEAT COMPANY. FAT CATTLE WATERING AT ONE OF THE DAMS.
intended for human consumption, are kept entirely
separate from the remaining and less important
operations. As in the case of the beef-house, the
mutton shed, in all its departments, is a perfect
model of cleanliness and method in its working, and
by reason of the new contrivances which the Com-
pany are always quick to adopt, the meat is very
little handled in the course of its transit.
The bone-dust made by the Company meets with
a continual brisk demand as a fertiliser. No foreign
substances are mixed with it. and agriculturists
generally find the bone-dust extremely rich in all
constituents necessary for the reviving of exhausted
land.
Another fertiliser which is in great request is
their desiccated blood. The Company, who make a
speciality of this blood manure, have received most
satisfactory encomiums upon its high-grade purity
and absolute freedom from all adulteration.
In the production of tallow, strict attention is
paid to the separation of the different qualities.
The Riverstone Meat Company’s head office and re-
ceiving depot are located at Darling Harbour (Syd-
ney), and here the final stages in the passage of the
beef and mutton fiom the pastures to the public
are entered upon. A very complete plant for the
handling of beef and mutton in its various forms
has been erected, and when the special daily train
f'om Riverstone arrives at about 5 a.m., a small
army of busy workers is in attendance to unload.
The detraining work is rendered easier by the u c e of
overhead tramways, along which the meat for local
consumption travels direct to the disti ibuting depot.
As it passes along the rail the meat is automatically
weighed, the recording dial being placed in the tally
keeper’s office. From the depot a large number of
vehicles convey the meat throughout the city and
suburbs to all the principal retailers. As at the
works, complete cleanliness is insisted upon in th“
depot, and the carcases being handled as little as
possible, buyers are assured of a standard quality
in each of the lots they purchase.
Great as is their local business, the export trade
of the Company, in normal seasons, transcends it
in importance. They have clients all over the
world, and though the bulk of the shipments natur-
ally find their way to England, a demand—and a
growing demand—for the Riverstone brand has
sprung up of late years in South Africa and the
East. An estimate of the immense connection en-
joyed can be formed from the fact that, in good sea-
sons the Company frequently have 200,000 carcases
in the fieezing chambers. Shipments have been
made up to as laige a number as 10G 000 sheep. Of
course, the unparalleled drought of 1901 and 1902
has considerably hampered and reduced this export
trade in frozen meat, in common with that of other
pastoral produce, and the Comimny has therefore
THE RIVERSTONE MEAT COMPANY.
MUSTERING BULLOCKS ON THE SOUTH CREEK, RIVERSTONE.
had to temporarily restrict operations in this,
direction, bending their energies rather to the satis-
fying of local requirements. As soon as opportu-
nity offers it is their intention to once more give
their usual attention to this branch of their busi-
ness, and make every effort towards the still fur-
ther expansion of the oversea trade.
Under Mr. B. H. Richards and those as-
sociated with him (chief among whom is Mr.
H. B. Francis, who is an enthusiasm worker),
the firm’s work is carried out, at the pre-
sent day with the same verve and business
energy which was one of the outstanding
features of its progress in the past. Although the
many ramifications are all handled in an abso-
lutely masterful way, and the standard laid down
by the founders fully maintained, it must not he
supposed that conservative lines are slavishly fol-
lowed. Those in chaige are ever on the lookout for
improved methods in every branch, when once any
such improvement is found workable, it is forth-
with adopted, and every nerve strained to keep the
works right up to date in all departments. The ex-
cellent management, the thoroughness of the
system in operation, the reputation worthily enjoyed
by the firm for honour, integrity and trustworthi-
ness, and the exalted opinion held of its products,
combine to make the Riverstone Meat Company
one of the finest concerns of its class in the world.
New South Wales in particular, and Australia i*>
general, has every justification for a feeling of
genuine pride in the Riverstone Meat Company
and the men who, by dint of unremitting attention
and continued application, have made it the rich,
prosperous and growing industry which it is at the
present day.
THE LATE MR. ROBERT RICHARDS.
To the present generation the late Mr. Robert
Richards (or, as he was affectionately termed
throughout pastoral and sporting circles, “ Bob”
Richards), was even better known than his father.
Born on the Hawkesbury in the forties, when “Ben”
Richards was beginning his life’s work, the son fol-
lowed closely in the father’s footsteps. It was
owing to Mr. Robert Richards alone that the export
trade in frozen meat was taken up and pioneered by
the Company, and his energy persevered in the face
of all the “ set backs” received in the early days.
He foresaw the gieat future before the industry,


when he started to establish it in 1883-84, and the
pastoralists of New South Wales owe much to his
dogged determination which saw the thing through.
The initial losses were heavy, and might have
discouraged a weaker man, but " Bob” Richards
was made of sterner stuff, and, undeterred by first
failures, kept on until success crowned his efforts.
His was a busy life, with the work of managing
the firm’s affairs at headquarters, and acting, when-
ever possible, personally as buyer. In his buying
operations, perhaps the purchase of 50,000 sheep
was the largest number of fat sheep purchased from
one station, and 1300 the largest number of fat
cattle. On one trip alone, round various stations,
he bought up no less than 250,000 fat sheep. An-
other large deal, with one property, was the pur-
chase of 40,000 fat sheep and 800 fat cattle. As show-
ing the wide scope of his purchases, it may be said
that, in one year, he acquired no less than 625,926
sheep and 29,184 cattle. After the local require-
ments had been satisfied there remained a surplus,
for expoit, comprising 433,259 carcases of mutton
and 35,751 quarters of beef. When he died, in 1902,
(he widespread expressions of regret for his decease
THE LATE MR. ROBERT RICHARDS.
were tempered by the knowledge that his life’s work
had been splendidly achieved. He passed away
while still in the full enjoyment of his vigorous
manhood. To his relatives, as to his employees, by
whom he was universally loved, his death came as
a severe blow, and it will be long ere the memory of
that kindly, shrewd, but truly generous personality
known to all as “ Bob Richards” will be forgotten
in the State of New South Wales.
MR. B. H. RICHARDS.
Fortunately, the son of “ Bob” Richards, Mr. B.
H. Richards, inherits all the former’s sterling
qualities ,and, as senior executor under the will, by
the exercise of the great organising and executive
ability he possesses, maintains the firm’s reputation
at the same high standard, and conducts its affairs
in the same broad-minded businesslike way which
has marked the Riverstone Meat Company’s opera-
tions from its inception. In this regard he has,
of course, the co-operation of his fellow executor,
Mr. Carson, whose knowledge of all that appertains
to the pastoral industry is indubitably of the
greatest value to the concern.
Mr. B. H. Richards is a native of Richmond,
where he was born in 1876. Mr. Richards was sent
out into the country by his father, who well knew
the incalculable benefit of a thorough experience of
all sides of pastoral life. For five years Mr.
Richards was engaged in this very necessary work,
and eventually became his father’s trusted lieu-
tenant until last year, when the general manage-
ment devolved upon him, and he wisely determined
to adhere exactly to the old-time policy of the
firm as laid down by his father. Despite the check
administered by the drought, there is abundant
evidence, since Mr. B. H. Richards assumed control,
that the Riverstone Meat Company is not only up-
holding its past reputation, but, in the future, will
increase it.
MR. B. H. RICHARDS.
lie is running the business on thoroughly up-to-
date lines, keeping a high standard of quality in
everything, and, in this work, he has the hearty
co-operation of his brother, Mr. Colin Richards,
as buyer, and Mr. H. B. Francis, who was
so highly respected and trusted by the foun-
ders of the firm. With so laudable, an
intention as has been briefly outlined,
with such helpers, and with so excellent a training
in all that conduces to commercial prosperity, it is
safe to predict that Mr. B. H. Richards, while he
remains at the helm, will steer the ship as well as
his father and grandfather did before him.
MR. H. B. FRANCIS.
Throughout the pastoral districts of New South
Wales, Queensland and Victoria, as well as in the
great meat trade centres abroad, the name of Mr.
H. B. Francis, Manager of B. Richard’s Riverstone
Meat Company, is a household one. Mr. Francis,
who possesses those qualities which enable a man to
successfully control the detail oiganisation of such a
huge concern is lec'gvisfd a? an expe 1 in every
branch of the wholesale meat trade, and an excel-
lent judge of stock. Having occupied a leading
position in the control of the firm’s operations for
so many years, Mr. Francis has acquired a personal
knowledge of the requirements of the whole of the
New South Wales trade, and, in his position of
Manager for the Riverstone Meat Company, the
information thus possessed has been of inestimable
value to the Company in the maintenance of the
old-time high-quality standard of the Riverstone
products and in the fulfilment of all dealings with
the firm’s customers on the same excellent lines
which proved so mutually satisfactory before the
death of Mr. Robert Richards.
In connection with the export of frozen meat,
Mr. Francis has had an experience covering the
whole period since the introduction of Australian
meat to the old world markets.
As shipping superintendent for Mr. Robert
Richards during the pioneering days of the industry,
Mr. Francis was instrumental in introducing many
practical ideas for the better handling and cani-
MR. H. B. FRANCIS.
age by sea of frozen meat. Thus, in the present-
day export trade, British and Continental im-
porters are assured, in regard to contracts entered
into with the Riverstone Meat Company, that their
interests will be watched over, at this end, by a
gentleman whose knowledge of the preparation of
the meat and other necessary conditions for expo.t
is unrivalled.
THE RIVERSTONE MEAT COMPANY. BIPDS-EYE VIEW OF THE RENTING PADDOCKS.


Thos. Playfair.
WHOLESALE SHIPPING AND EXPORT
BUTCHER.
For many year past the business founded by the
late Mr. Thomas Playfair has been identified with
all that is high class and progressive in the meat
trade of Sydney. Those who go down to the
sea in ships have a very special appreciation of the
business carried on at 103 George-street North.
With the seafaring man, a full supply of meat
is of vital importance. The latter, as a
rule, does not carry live stock to be
slaughtered on the voyage, but fills up
his harness casks and lockers with supplies neces-
sary for ship’s use until he arrives at his next port.
If his beef is not of good quality all on board are
made aware of the fact after the first day out, and
it is impressed on them until the end of the voyage.
The vituperation used with regard to meat, which
is not up to standard, cannot be expressed in cold
print, and the memory of the unhappy bullock
which furnished the feast is not only rudely treated,
but that of every beast related to it for generations
back. When a deputation from the fo’castle de-
sires an interview with the “ old man” on account
of the food, relations are likely to become strained
between fore and aft for the remainder of the
voyage.
One advantage which Mr. Thomas Playfair had
above many in the trade when, in the year 1860,
he started the business of Shipping Providore, was
that he thoroughly realised what a supply of good
meat meant for people afloat as well as ashore,
and therefore understood how vastly im-
portant to the comfort, health and life of all on
board was an ample stock of first-class animal food.
From the commencement, therefore, he took care to
deal in only one kind of meat, and that was the
best. A thorough Englishman, he believed in the
“ roast beef of old England,” and resolved that that
of Australia should, so far as he was concerned, be
of equally high standard. Since the lamented death
of Mr. Thomas Playfair, the high reputation and
traditions of the business have been consistently
and admirably sustained by the founder’s son, Mr.
Edmund Playfair, J.P., a gentleman whose name is
one of the most familiar in the trade, and around
the sphere of influence which has Circular Quay
as its centre. Notwithstanding the vastness of the
business, it is all conducted from the one estab-
lishment, at the address above noted, and this cen-
tralisation is not without its advantages, for every
detail is carried on under “ the master’s eye.”
The cattle intended for slaughtering are mostly
purchased at Flemington, but a good many are
bought in the country. They are treated at the
Abattoirs, under Government inspection. Great
purchases of dead meat from Queensland and New
Zealand are also made, the value of a shipment often
ranging as high as .£6OOO. A large trade is also
carried on in salt beef, and, during the recent dis-
astrous and long-continued drought, a great out-
let for this class of meat was found in the country
districts, one of the largest inland customers being
the proprietors of Boorabil Station, where His
Royal Highness the Duke of York stayed during
his progress through this country. In the early
seventies the firm also held, by special appointment,
the warrant of purveyors to 11.R.H. the Duke of
Edinburgh.
At the present time Mr. Thomas Playfair supplies
the following Governments and shipping companies :
—The Russian Government (in the Far East), the
French Government (in New Caledonia), the P. and
O. Steam Navigation Company, the North-German
Lloy-d Steamship Company, Messageries Maritimes
Steamship Company, German-Australian Steam-
ship Company. Aberdeen White Star Line, British
India Steam Navigation Company, Huddart, Par-
ker and Co., Strath Line, British and Colonial Line,
Canadian-Australian Steamship Company, White
Star Line (Liverpool), Anglo-Australian Steam
Navigation Company, Eastern and Australian
Steam Navigation Company, Union Steamship
Company, Lund’s Blue Anchor Line, Tyser Line of
steamers, Houlder Brothers, Limited, Mcdlwraith,
MeEaeharn and Co., Japan Mail Line, Melbourne
Steamship Company, Oceanic Steamship Company,
Ocean Steamship Company (Alfred Holt), Devitt
and Moore, Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd., On, Chong
and Co., McVicar, Marshall and Co. (Liverpool),
American and Australian Steamship Company, Aus-
tralian United Steam Navigation Company, Dan-
gar, Gedy'e and Co., and many’ others. Large quan-
tities of meat are sent by the firm for the consump-
tion of the pearl fishers in Torres Straits. The
Hotel Australia and other large consuming centres
in the metropolis are also on the firm’s books.
The following lines are always on hand :—Corned
beef, pork, and mutton, in tierces, barrels and
kegs; ox tongues and tripe, in jars; while bread,
milk, and vegetables are ever ready'. The firm are
as willing to sell live stock as they are to provide
meat. In the conduct of this great business, every
modern and up-to-date - appliance is usid. The
goods which undeigo the process of boiling are
treated by steam. On the premises is a refriger-
ating plant, worked on the Linde dry'-air principle,
which has a carrying capacity of 60,000 lbs. of meat.
Fresh Food and Ice storage is also one of the fea-
tures; of the business.
The work of distribution is conducted ashore by
some 15 pair-horse teams and lorries. For the
greater part of the year, however, it is necessary
to employ’ at times a dozen outside teams to cope
with the pressure, of business. The firm’s own teams
are noted for the splendid appearance of the horses
and the generally excellent turnout, the former
being invariably in almost prize condition, al-
though, of course, they have alway's plenty to do.
Evidently they have found a good master in the
proprietor of the establishment over whose business
premises appear the figures and words “ 103, Thomas
Playfair.”
Distribution is conducted afloat by the firm’s
steam launch “ Dahlas.” All incoming vessels are
boarded by' representatives of Mr. Playfair out-
side the heads. A boatshed, accommodating three
men and a sea-going boat, having been stationed
at South Head for the last 30 years. As
showing the completeness of their providor-
ing, it may be stated that those recent
distinguished visitors to our port, the .Tap-
anese squadron, contracted with Mr. Playfaii
to supply them with everything required, with the
sole exception of coal. The launch “ Dahlas” was
placed at the disposal of the Consul-General for
Japan, Mr. Eitaki, for the purpose of conveying
that distinguished and honoured official and his
friends to the Sydney Heads, where the Mikado’s
men thrice gave their New South Wales hosts
the national salutation of " Banzai”—literally
“ May you live for ever.” Distinctly hyper-
bolical and Oriental, the wish is nevertheless one,
fhe warmth and meaning of which is easily under-
stood by the colder intellects of the West.
Here reference may be made to the fact that many
Asiatics have very strong ideas in the matter of
food. What one eats, drinks and avoids, is not so
jiueh a personal matter, as one of leligion. Ti-
the Mahommedan the pig is an unclean animal, and
the touch of its flesh is pollution. To the Tiigh-
caste Hindu, kine are sacred animals, and it is
sacrilege to kill them. Some of the gieatest con-
flicts between Mussulmans and Brahmins in India
have arisen from those two ideas. When the Mo-
hammedan thirsts for a row with his Hindu fellow-
citizen he contrives to have a bullock killed con-
veniently near a temple sacred to Kali, or other
of the thousand and one gods and goddesses of
Hinduism. When the Hindu is spoiling for a fight
with the Moslem fellow-citizen he arranges to have
a pig killed near a mosque, and then sits down to
await results—which are never long in coming.
When blood begins to flow. Private Thomas Atkins
is instructed to keep the peace by means of a bayo-
net, and obeys the command very willingly. All
these important results arise out of prejudices with
ipgard to meat. The modem Japanese, however,
have no trouble on that score. Indeed, it is the
other way about. Their leading men and philoso-
phers have an idea that the generally short stature
of their people is due to the use, since time im-
memorial, of a vegetable diet. They- now contend
that rice at every meal, even when taken with a
little fish, is insufficient for the development of the
race info big men and women. Consequently they
hold that a more general use should be made of
butcher meat than is now the case. There may be
something in the theory, or there may not. Cer-
tain it is that many- a big strapping fellow has been
fed on potatoes and butter-milk, and even culti-
vated intellect on a little oatmeal. But the theory
of the Japanese philosophers is considered by' all
shipping piovidores as an excellent woiking one,
and one that is very good for trade, especially when
a Japanese squadron is in poit. To sum up, the
proper conclusion of the whole matter probably is
that man is an animal fitted for all diets, including
an omniverous one.
That branch of Mr. Playfair’s business which
deals with correspondence with the old country is
conducted through Messrs. D. McEwan and Co., of
Pitt-street, Sydney. The firm of Thos. Playfair is
one which, during its long continuance, has at-
tracted hosts of friends to the proprietor and all
concerned in the management thereof. Civility',
courtesy, fair dealing, combined with the supply
of the best meat of its kind in the market, and of
small goods of an unexceptional kind, have natur-
ally built up a wholesale business of a very envi-
able type. This result has not been achieved in a
day, and did not come by chance. It has been
Uh e flbrobudng Jnbustri?.
Historical and Biographical Sketches :-oontmued.
WHOLESALE SHIPPING AND MEAT EXPORT.


wrought for, day by day, and year after year, the
goal aimed at being steadily kept in view. Especi-
ally has this been the case in providing supplies
for maritime people. To keep in business touch
with them is not easy, for the nature of their occu-
pation compels them to be ever on the move; often
the captain of a regular trader is succeeded on next
MR. EDMUND PLAYFAIR.
St. Andrews, Scotland, and his mother a native of
England. He was, throughout his career, the archi-
tect ot his own fortune. He was entered for the
Royal Navy, and had his first experience of the
sea in the year 1844 on board H.M.S. “Hecla." He
subsequently served on board various vessels, and
was with the Baltic Fleet during its service in the
war against Russia, being present at several actions,
in the year 1859, H.M.S. “ Pelorus’* voyaged to Syd-
ney. Mr. Playfair, who served on board, resolved
to settle in this city, and made all necessary ar-
rangements in that direction, leaving the vessel and
the Rojuil Navy with the respect and good wishes
of all with whom he had been associated. To the
end Mr. Playfair remained the jolly, frank, kind-
hearted, outspoken and fearless man that he had
been during his long service at sea. He was always
a favourite among every class of people, not only
commanding their respect, but what was equally
important, their warmest regard.
.
Mr. Playfair commenced business in the year
named as a wholesale shipping butcher, giving it
that methodical attention which years of naval dis-
cipline had imparted. His partner, Mr. Bailey,
having paid the debt of Nature, Mr. Playfair sue-
ceeded to the business, and succssfully laid the
foundation of the huge and progressive concern we
know to-day, and within a short time attained a
position of independence. This secured, he had
time to devote to public concerns. He was held in
such general esteem that his fellow-citizens invited
him to represent them in the Sydney Municipal
Council. The subject of this sketch consented to
the requisition, and in 1875 was returned by a large
majority as the aldermanic representative of Gipps
Ward, and it is highly creditable to Mr. Playfair
that he held the position to the day of his death.
at Homebush, which cost over .£60,000, was due.
The fact being specially accentuated when, in the
year 1896, a beautiful fountain was erected at Flem-
ington by the Municipal Council of Sydney, as a
memorial of the deceased alderman,
One incident in Mr. Playfair's municipal career
is well worth telling. When Lord Carrington ar-
rived as Governor of New South Wales, a local con-
troversy arose as to the authority which would
present to Her Majesty's representative the first
address of welcome.. The Ministry of the day, of
which Sir Geoige Dibbs was Premier, desired to
perfoim that function. It was known that Sir
George was possessed of a stiff backbone, but the
Mayor of Sydney, Alderman " Tom" Playfair, was
also a gentleman who could very well hold his own.
The Mayor considered the municipal authorities
had right on their side, inasmuch as the place
where Lord Carrington would land was within the
Council's territory. Accordingly, His Worship the
Mayor, with the Town Clerk and several Aldermen,
succeeded, without causing any fuss or visible un-
pleasantness, in presenting the' first address of wel->
come to Lord Carrington. The Government had
their turn later on, and at this function the Mayor
and Council authorities did not assist, but Mr.
Playfair had asserted the Council's ancient rights
and liberties, and was perfectly satisfied with the
result,
At the general election in 1889 Mr. Playfair was
elected to represent the constituency of West Syd-
ney in the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales,
polling 3986 votes—the highest aggregate cast of
any city constituency in the contest. He proved a
capable member, working hard in the interests of
the country, and, when he caught Mr. Speaker's
eye, spoke to some purpose. In the general election
THE LATE ALDERMAN THOS. PLAYFAIR.
Founder of the Firm.
voyage by a complete stranger. The best test of
satisfaction is a repetition of orders, and, judged
by results, the methods of Mr. T. Playfair’s busi-
ness are heartily approved by the enormous clien-
tele regularly patronising the establishment.
To speak of a world-wide reputation is a large
thing to say, but it can in sober truth be predicted
with regard to the concern over which Mr. T. Play-
fair presides.
When every now and again we read of the evil
lesults arising from the consumption of bad and
ill-kept meat, the necessity of pure supplies of
animal diet becomes all the more apparent. It
is almost needless to state that throughout the
establishment under review personal and mechani-
cal cleanliness is most scrupulously insisted upon.
Every detail of the trade is conducted upon a system
which eliminates every chance of contamination
caused by chemical or atmospheric changes. When
the slightest doubt exists as to a particular line,
it is relegated to a place amongst the by-products.
Ey rigidly acting on this principle the high stand-
ard of meat intended for the use and nourishment of
man is steadily and systematically maintained in
every transaction of the thousands which are annu-
ally concluded within the walls of Mr. T. Playfair’s
establishment.
If the late Mr. Playfair had chosen to use a crest,
he would probably have chosen the Avoids ” Play
Fair” as a motto. Certainly the spirit, if not the
actual words of that injunction, is ever in the mind
of his worthy son and capable successor, and is
well understood by the large staff employed in an
establishment very widely and most favourably
known throughout the Southern Hemisphere.
THE LATE ALDERMAN THOMAS PLAYFAIR.
Alderman Thomas Playfair, whose splendid busi-
ness abilities, public spirit, benevolence, and high
personal qualities greatly endeared him to his fel-
low citizens, Avas one of Nature’s noblemen. His
lamented death caused widespread grief not only
in Sydney and its suburbs, but throughout Aus-
tralasia, for he had warm friends in every part,
thereof,
Mr. Playfair was a. native of Essex, England,
and was born in 1831. His father was a native of
But further civic honours awaited him. In 1885 he
avos elected to the high and honourable office of
Mayor of Sydney, and the duties of that position
ware dischaiged by him in a highly capable and
satisfactory manner.
Mr. Playfair’s name as a municipal representative
and head of the people was associated with many
important schemes for the benefit of the metropolis.
One of these may he specially named. It was to
Alderman Playfair's persistent advocacy and effort
that the establishment of the great cattle saleyards
of 1891 Labour interests carried West Sydney, and
Air. Playfair was among those who were laid aside.
. .
Air. Thomas Playfair died on the 15th November,
1893, to the unbounded regret of his fellow-citizens
and hosts of friends. His funeral at Waverley
Cemetery was very largely attended, and the
obsequies were conducted amid many signs of public
grief. The eldest son, Mr. Edmund Playfair, ear-
lies on the business in that honourable and pro
gressive manner which distinguished his respected
father,


Fowls.
Ducks.
Geese.
Turkeys.
Totals.
1902
.. 93 462
17,549
1,258
2,892
120,161
1901
.. 45,999
21,262
1,755
4,184
73,140
1900
.. 23,056
15,378
1,316
4,755
44 505
1899
.. 12,570
8,034
404
1,800
22,838
1S9S
.. 9,411
5,916
522
904
16.753
The
N.S.W. Board for Exports.
In connection with the export trade of
New South Wales, some six years ago, the
Government appointed an Advisory Board
with the object of assisting undeveloped in-
dustries in the State through such recom-
mendations as the Board might make. In
course of time a branch of the Agricultural
Department in connection with the Board
has come to be known as the Board for Ex-
ports. One of the first efforts on the part of
the Board was to recommend the Govern-
ment to make some provision for tho treat-
ment of poultry, rabbits and hares for ex-
port, and, in consequence of such recommen-
dations, cold storage accommodation was pro-
v.ded at Pyrmont on a small scale. Poultry
was shipped to London after being graded,
and packed by experts employed by the Gov-
ernment. The produce met with varied for-
tunes, but on the whole the result was not so
satisfactory to those who tried the London
market, as to cause any extensive continu-
ance of export of this produce in that direc-
tion. During the South African war, how-
ever, a very extensive business was done in
exporting frozen poultry to Cape Colony and
Natal.
Contracts for tinned meat, jam, hay, flour,
etc., were negotiated by the British War
Office authorities through the Government of
New South Wales, the details of such busi-
ness being entrusted to Mr. H. V. Jackson,
an officer of the Agricultural Department,
who is also Secretary to the Board of Advice.
Goods forwarded on account of the War Of-
fice were all inspected and certified to, as to
weights and quality, by the officers of the de-
partment connected with the Board for Ex-
ports, and it is satisfying to know that all
goods so supplied proved satisfactory to the
authorities m South Africa. The matter of
accommodation at Sydney for the shipment
of grain was also taken in hand by the Board
of Advice, with the result that the Minister
for Agriculture obtained a vote of money,
which enabled the construction of the large
grain sheds at Darling Island to be carried
out. The question of grain elevators was
also brought prominently forward, and
though grain elevators have not been adopt-
ed, yet a very extensive system of machinery
for the handling of grain in bags has been
installed at the grain sheds. The .board also
recommended the Government to thoroughly
test the storing of eggs in cold chambers. Mr.
Bradshaw, the Government Poultry Expert,
having pointed out that it was likely to be
eminently successful, the recommendation
was adopted, with the result that large
quantit es of eggs are held in store every sea-
son. The matter of exporting raboits and
bares, from small beginnings, has grown ma-
terially every year, and is continuing to in-
crease. The Department of Agriculture does
not export, but the products are graded,
packed, and frozen for exporters, and certifi-
cates issued as to quality.
The Board of Exports was an early advo-
cate of Commercial Agencies abroad, and Mr.
Jackson, the Secretary of the Board, is en-
trusted by the Minister for Agriculture with
any detail matter requiring Departmental at-
tention, as the result of reports and enquiries
from the Commercial Agents for New South
Wales, who are located in London, South
Africa, and the East.
THE HON. A. KETHEL,
Chairman of the Board.
The Board, as a Committee of Advice, does
not take part in any administrative detail
and dealings with exporters, that being en-
tirely Departmental. The Parliamentary
vote to enable the Department of Ag
riculture to carry out the work in con-
nection with cold storage and the preparation
of frozen produce for export is voted under
the sub-head of “ Board for Export, and,
consequently, an impression is sometimes con-
veyed that the Board is an expensive item,
but, as a matter of fact, we are given to un-
derstand that, of late, the Cold Storage
Denot has recouped the amount voted by
Parliament for the carrying on of the work,
and the amount of money voted is mainly in
connection with the carrying on of the Gov-
ernment Cold Storage Depot, the object being
to assist and encourage export. The
charges are made as low as possible, based
MR. H. V. JACKSON,
Secretary to the Hoard.
on meeting expenses, but not accruing pro-
fits on the operations. Besides the Board of
Exports and Cold Storage Depot, Mr. Jack-
son and the staff have other departmental
duties, and for some months the office of the
Board has been occupied in connection with
the distribution of seed wheat to the settlers
in the drought stricken areas of the State.
The quantity of poultry put through the
Government Cold Storage Depot, Sydney, for
export, during the last five years, was as
follows; —
Tho quantities of rabbits and hares put
through the Government Cold Storage Depot,
Sydney, for export in 1901 and 1909 were as
follows: —
Rabbits. Ila its.
1991 ... 169,702 124,666
1902 ... 237,260 76 050
In 1898 some 11,000 dozen of eggs were
stored in cool chambers, in 1899. 93,000
dozen were sent into store, and in 1900,
96,000 dozen eggs were stored. In 1901, as
a result of the previous season’s successful
cold storage of eggs, 3897 cases of eggs were
stored from September to December, valued
at £7OOO, and in 1902 the number of cases of
eggs stored from September to December
amounted to 3557 cases, or 128,152 dozen
eggs.
The operat ons at the Government Cold
Stores, as they increase in volume, are far-
reaching in their ramifications as regards the
employment of labour—large numbers of men
are employed in the country trapping rab-
bits—the railways benefit, dealers, carters,
wharf labourers, and case makers are all af-
fected.
Goods are graded, packed and frozen, and
the cases branded in such a way that the
goods are shewn to be New South Wales pro-
ducts, and packed under Government super-
vision. Certificates are also issued to the
shipper. Every care is taken as regards
weights and quality. This season, several
Victorian firms arc operating at the New
South Wales Government Cold Storage
Depot, and a leading Victorian exporter ex-
presses the opinion that the New South
Wales rabbit will compare favourably with
any other colonial rabbit exported. The rab-
bits arriving at the stores this season are of
excellent quality.
The enquiries and orders that are now be-
ing received in this State fiom Great Britain
and South Africa for Colonial timber and
other products indicate that the Commercial
Agents have so far been an excellent means
of placing the resources of this State before
people in other lands, likewise there is no
doubt very beneficial results will accrue from
the manner in which New South Wales has
been advertised in the East by the late Mr.
Whiteley, whose career of usefulness was un-
fortunately so suddently cut short while
carrying out his duties on behalf of this
State.
The Chairman of the Board for Exports is
the Hon. Alexander Kethel, M.L.C., the
Vice-President being Mr. A. W. Gillies. The
remaining members of the Board are Mr.
Thomas Jessop, M.L.A., Mr. T. C. Worboys,
Mr. W. J. McVeigh, Mr. T. H. Houghton,
M. Inst C.E., M.I. Mech. E., Mr. L. C.
Auldjo, C.E., Mr. R. A. Price, M.L.A., Mr.
Stephen Sullivan, Mr. T. W. Taylor, Mr. B.
B. O’Conor, M.L.A.


Banking.


Banking.
in Australasia.
TN reviewing the condition of banking in Aus-
tralasia at the close of the second year of the
century, the most notable feature met with
is the splendid showing that, in spite of a
scourging drought and a fluttering and floun-
dering import tariff, the banks have been able
to make. Had it been our duty to report even
a considerable falling off in profits, with a
tendency to greatly restrict business, it would
hardly have been surprising, yet we are able
to chronicle most satisfactory progress. This
goes far to prove that the lessons of 1893 were
well and truly learned. Unfortunately a com-
plete break-up of the drought cannot yet be
recorded, but in many parts of the country
highly fructifying rains have fallen, and these
will, doubtless, be of the greatest service in
restoring heart to the people. The tariff, the
other “ curse” from' which the country has
been suffering since the beginning of the cen-
tury, is, at least, settled for a time. From the
broad standpoint of free trade, the tariff can-
not be described as satisfactory, but, con-
sidering that five of the six States of the Com-
monwealth had not been nurtured under the
beneficent teaching of independent freedom
of trade, the tariff might have been worse. At
any rate, it is settled, probably for many
years, but all but certainly for the remainder
of the first Commonwealth Parliament.
Australia now has a tariff against the out-
side world that is expected to yield an annual
gross revenue of about 10 millions sterling,
and of this 75 per cent, is returnable to the
States wherein it is collected. Internally she
enjoys the blessings of free trade, and there is
always a possibility of reciprocal trade trea-
ties. Banking in Australia should, therefore,
not suffer any permanent disadvantages by
the consummation of federation.
Comparing the statistics of 1902 with those
of 1901, there is a slight shrinkage in the total
assets, eleven banks having suffered a decrease
totalling about 31 millions; but, on the other
hand, ten banks have increased their assets
by a total of about 2j millions, so there has to
be recorded a shrinkage of 1J millions. The
discounts and advances show an increase of a
few thousands of pounds, thirteen banks hav-
ing reduced these by about 2 \ millions all told,
while the remaining eight have increased their
advances and discounts by almost exactly the
same amount. The shrinkage in the assets
may have been partly caused by sale of pro-
perties in possession, and also by the paying
off of old deposits; but the habit of our best
banks of writing down their premises to
amounts very much below their value is no
doubt responsible for a good deal of it. On the
whole, the slight reduction in assets may be
accepted as a good sign, under the circum-
stances, for it is safe to surmise that a good
deal of it has gone into the secret reserves in
the way of provision for bad debts by tho
general writing down of assets. The “ cash,
coin, and bullion” column show a small de-
crease, but that is because we have this year
separated the money at call and short notice
in London, an item which, it is satisfactory to
note, is growing. With an improved system
of paper currency, so that notes might be
legal tender within the Commonwealth, our
banks would be enabled to so largely increase
their money at short call in London that it
would exceed the whole sum of the notes
issued, and would be always ready waiting to
meet our drafts on London in the event of a
lull in our exports of gold.
The reduction in the item “ real estate and
other property” is also a good sign. As a
matter of fact, it is well known that the real
value of the genuine property of our banks has
increased during the year, but the property'
entered at “ book value,” has got somewhat
nearer the vanishing point.
In the table of assets we have this year made
a separate column for the notes of the Queens-
land Treasury, but as some of our banks make
no mention of these in their balance-sheet the
information is not complete. It is to be hoped
that the Commonwealth Parliament will soon
be at liberty to deal with currency and bank-
ing, one of the effects of which will be the dis-
appearance of the Queensland Treasury notes.
In the meantime, we would recommend the de-
partment to use a better ink for the signing of
the notes. ' At present, in some instances, the
paper outlasts the ink, and we have seen notes
in circulation on which the writing was unde-
cipherable. In one instance, though the note
was far from remarkably dirty, the signature
had vanished as completely as if it had never
been there. Others appear to have been re-
signed. Laxity in the case of bank notes
should be studiously avoided, so that the
people might learn to quickly detect irregu-
larities. Fortunately, frauds on bankers are
not common in Australia, but they are by no
means unknown. In the instance referred to
above, the note passed from hand to hand as
freely as if the signature had been still upon
it, which, of course, says very little for the care
exercised by the public.
Turning from the assets of our banks to
their liabilities, no very great changes are re-
corded. The most acceptable feature is the
increase in reserves, which have risen from
£5,314,109, or 26.38 per cent., to £5,589,184,
or 27.65 per cent, of paid-up capital. Sepa-
rating the four principal banks from the re-
mainder, the increase in reserves represents an
advance from £4,215,000, or 69.09 per cent.,
of paid-up capital, to £4,330,000, or 70.98 per
cent. Even these figures do not fully represent
the reserves of these banks, for, since the pre-
paration of the balance-sheets from which
these statistics have been compiled, the recom-
mendations of directors to add considerable
sums have been confirmed by shareholders.
The Bank of New South Wales reserve fund
now totals £1,300,000, £15,000 having been
thus added, while the Bank of Australasia has
added £40,000, making its reserve fund
£1,075,000. In tho percentage of reserve to
capital, the Commercial Banking Company of
Sydney leads the way with 101 per cent. This
is followed by the Bank of Australasia (67.19
per cent.). The Union Bank of Australia
(66.66 per cent.), and the Bank of New South
Wales (65 per cent.). These are, of course, the
principal dividend-paying banks of Australia.
For some time they have been paying 10 per
cent., and tho Bank of Australasia has now
advanced to 11 per cent. These rates are, of
course, calculated on the capital, not on the
proprietary funds. Calculated on the latter,
they range from 5 per cent, in the case of the
Commercial to 6| per cent, in the case of the
Bank of Australasia. When it is remembered
that not only are the capital and reserve fund?
at risk, but also considerable further sums in
the shape of reserve liability, it is very plainly
seen that banking in Australia is very far from
being overpaid for its services.
The liabilities of our banks to the public have
increased from £106,128,613 to £108,257,437,
or slightly over 2 per cent. This is not a heavy
increase for a year, but, all things considered,
it is an achievement of no mean import. In
the profit and loss column, which shows an in-
crease of about a quarter of a million, or 25
per cent., there are some encouraging items,
and the reduction in the column of deferred
deposits is also very cheering. That some of
our banks a,re still doing poorly is, unfortu-
nately, only too true, but they are sticking
bravely to their work of self-salvation, and are
both learning and teaching lessons that will
never be forgotten.
Not a very great deal can be reported in the
matter of building improvements during the
year. The handsome edifice of the Bank of
Australasia, at the corner of Martin Place and
George Street, Sydney, is fast approaching


completion, and its occupation will probably
convince the authorities of some of the other
ment. The design is one that would readily
admit of an addition at any future time, and it
will be very nobly domiciled in Sydney, and
the shareholders will not find fault with the
opinion of their directors that, after all, high
dividends mav be a better advertisement than
high buildings. The new head offices of the
Bank of New South Wales and the Commer-
cial Banking Company of Svdney are still
talked about, but nothing definite is as yet
available concerning them. There is, of
course, no reason why such wealthy institu-
tions should wait for a return of verv prosper-
ous times for the erection of their new build-
ings. On the contrary, there are two reasons
why delay should be avoided. Their erection
would help to improve matters in the building
and allied trades, and very prosperous times
are expensive times for building operations.
Speaking generally, our banks are to be
warmly congratulated on the excellent posi-
tion they have maintained throughout these
times of drought. Nothing but splendid man-
agement could have brought about this satis-
factory result; and it is to be devoutly hoped
that the early disappearance of the drought
will speedily bring in its turn the rich reward
GEORGE STREET, LOOKING SOUTH. IN THE FIFTIES.
SYDNEY, SOUTH FROM WINDMILL HILL—I823.
great banks that it is time they were at work
on their own improvements. The building of
the Bank of Australasia will be a great acqui-
sition to the Mother City of all Australasia,
whose beautiful buildings are none too numer-
ous. The walls are of solid masonry and
brickwork, and the floors are of the new fire-
proof, hollow tiles Compared with American
models, this building is all very near the
ground. By recent news from New York we
learn that the Hanover National Bank, New
York, a bank very little, if any, larger than
the Bank of Australasia, is just completing a
beautiful edifice of three and twenty stories,
about five times as many as are provided in
the Bank of Australasia. Of course, it has to
be remembered that the Sydney office of the
Bank of Australasia is not the head office, but
merely a branch, and looked at in this regard,
it will strike the mind of Australians as one of
great importance; but considering its juxta-
position with the sites of the head offices of the
Bank of New South Wales and the Commer-
cial Banking Companv of Sydney, “ the man
in the street” enjoys the opinion that two or
even three additional stories would not have
been thrown away. It would, indeed, have
been a splendid help in the matter of advertise-
PITT STREET, LOOKING SOUTH, IN THE FIFTIES.
is quite likely that provision for this has been
made. Even as it is, the Bank of Australasia
that brave and capable banking so well
deserves.


The Bank of New South Wales.
The criticism passed on those who named some of
the States of Australia in such a manner as to
cause considerable confusion to people on the other
side of the wo. Id, cannot be extended to those who
founded the Bank of New South Wales. For no
oth'i financial institution in this State has a better
claim to be regarded, par excellence, than the Bank
of New South Wale-. That great, prosperous, and
time-honoured concern is the oldest bank in the
Mother State of Australasia. It was founded in
November, 1816, the year after the Iron Duke, with
a suddenly raised army of raw and mixed levies,
and in combination with the Prussian Aimy, gave
the final blow to the Corsican tyrant on the field
of Waterloo.
The founders of the bank were prominent com-
mercial and financial membeis of the community
who were thoroughly convinced that the time had
fully arrived for the establishment of a financial
institution which would command the confidence of
the community. On the 22nd February, 1817, an
advertisement appeared in the " Sydney Gazette”
inviting tenders for a suitable, strong, well-built
house situate in ■or near “ George-street,” for
the purposes of the new bank, and also
inviting applications for “ two persons of respect-
able character, who can give good security for their
fidelity, to fill the situations of cashier and prin-
cipal accountant." The fiist account opened with
the bank was that of Seigeant Jeremiah Murphy,
of the 46th Ilegiment, on the sth April, 1817, the
amount being .£5O. From this humble beginning
this great financial institution hatr it*s rise.
The first balance-sheet was presented on the 13ch
January, 1818, and was signed by J. T. Campbell,
President; D. Wentworth, Thomas Wylde, William
Redfern, and A. Jenkins.
The following gentlemen comprised the Director-
ate in 1833: —Richard Jones, M.C. (President), W.
C. Wentworth, Robert Wardell, LL.D., George T.
Savage, William Hutchison, James Chisholm,
James B. Bellington, Nicholas Aspinall, William
Lawson, William Lithgow, M.C., R. Campbell, jun.,
Prosper De Mestre. The staff consisted of John
Henry Black, Cashier; Joseph Hyde Potts, Ac-
countant; Thomas Lord, Clerk; John Austin, Jin-
graver ; Vi. C. Wentworth, Solicitor.
Business was commenced in the following year.
The conditions of commerce and social life in this
State were vastly different from what they are to-
day. There were, it is neediest- to say, neither rail-
ways, tramways, telegraphs, telephones, nor proper
postal communication. Roads were few and bad.
and the tracks used by wayfarers were unbridged
and dangerous to travellers. The free settlers
of the time looked upon the colony as a
place of voluntary exile, to be left as
quickly as possible, if fortune favoured their
enterprises. Money was scarce, and much of
the trade was conducted by means of barter, yearly
settlements being the rule. It was amid such con-
ditions that the imugurators of the Bank of New
South Wales laid the foundations of this great in-
stitution, which has for nearly a century stood so
firmly before every financial whirlwind that has
blown over Australia.
The incongruity of the currency which existed in
New South Wales eighty-six years ago may be ima-
gined when it is stated that, until the year 1826,
the accounts of the Bank of New South Wales were
kept in Spanish dollar's. A fact suggestive of the
rimes of Robinson Crusoe and other maritime
heroes whose currency, taken from wrecks or prizes,
consisted of “ pieces of eight.” Even Spanish dol-
lars were so scarce in this part of the world in the
early yeans of the past century that His Majesty’s
lieges here were obliged to cut pieces out of those
coins. The. pieces cut out were called “dumps,”
and the disfigured coins were known as “ Holey
Dollars.” The capital of the Bank of New South
Wales in the year 1825 was the very modest one of
43,200 dollars; its note circulation was but 115,950
dollars; and its deposits only 297,159 dollars. In
1836 the capital was increased to £lOO,OOO. The
first balance-sheet after incorporation (March,
1851), showed the following figures;—Capital,
£122,120; notes, £33,883; deposits, £395,626. The
tremendous effects of the discovery of gold began
to tell enormously on the business and finance of
the country, so that by September, 1853, the capital
of the bank had been increased out of profits to
£473,472; while the notes stood at £423,942; and de-
posits, £2,056,257.
Prosperity continued to attend, in an unvarying
manner, the operations of the Bank of New South
Wales. In 1860 the capital was increased to
£750,000; a few years later to £1,000,000; and then
to £1,250,000. In 1893 the shareholders were invited
to take up an additional £750,000 at £5 per share
premium, and the offer was practically accepted to
the fullest extent. The paid-up capital accordingly
now stands at £2,000,000. The Reserve Fund, in-
cluding its most recent addition, amounts to
THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Head Office, 341 George Street, Sydney.
61,315,000; and the reserve liability to 62,000,000.
Of the Reserve Fund, 6600,000 is invested in Bri-
tish Government securities, the balance being em-
ployed in the Bank’s business. Ample evidence of
the progress made is shown by the fact that some-
thing like 610,000,000 has been divided since 1818
among the sh a rehold ens.
A prominent feature in the history of the Bank of
New South Wales is that no half-year has
passed without the declaration of a dividend. For
the 17 years ended September 1892, the dividends
totalled 17J per cent.; to March, 1893, 15 per cent.;
to September of the same year, 12j per cent.; while
in 1894 they were 10 per- cent. An era of 9 per cent.
dividends then followed. For several half-years
past (he dividend declared has been the sweetly
simple, easily remembered, and altogether decimal
one of 10 per cent. It will be confessed that in
there, days of great fluctuations in the money mar-
ket, when even British Consols seem to be a prey
for the ravening “ bears,” an Australian bank
which continues to pay dividends, such as those
above indicated, is well worthy of the attention of
investors.
The Bank’s accounts are made up half-yearly to
March 31st and September 30th, and submitted to
shareholders in May and November, dividends
being payable at the Head Office or any of the
branches. Share registers are kept in Sydney, Mel-
bourne and London. One-fourth of the shares are
permanently on the London register, and no transfer
can be made between Australia and London. No
transfer fee is charged. Each individual share-
holder must sign the deed of settlement, personally
or by attoi ney, a copy being kept at the London
and Melbourne offices for that ptupose. The voting
power of shareholders is apportioned so that the
latter have one vote for every five shares held up
to a maximum of 50 votes. Shares must be the
property of the holder for three months prior to
voting, and married women can only be regis-
tered as shareholders jointly with their husbands,
The Directors of the Bank of New South Wales
are:—The Hon. C. Kinnaird Mackellar, M.D.,
M.L.C., President; Sir Normand MacLaurin, Kt.,
M.L.C., LL.D., Senator James Thomas Walker, the
Hon. Reginald James Black, M.L.C., William Alfred
Cottee, Esq., Richard Binnie, Esq.; the Auditors
being Messrs. Harrington Palmer and Frederick W.
Uther. The Head Office is at 341 George-street,
Sydney, with Mr. Thomas Hunt Ivey as Manager,
The General Manager of the Bank of New South
Wales is Mr. J. Russell French, who occupies a
very prominent position in the social and business
circles of Sydney, in addition to the leading place
he holds as the principal executive officer of the
oldest financial institution in this State. In all
matters of finance Mr. J. Russell French is an ack-
nowledged authority, and his versatility in other
Banking.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches.


blanches of knowledge and effort have secured for
him the gieat goodwill and utmost respect of a
large circle of admiring friends. The London Board
consists of the following Directors: —Robert Lucas
Tooth, Esq. (Chairman), Henry P. Powell, Esq.,
Frederick Green, Esq. The London Manager is Mr.
David George, the office being located at 64 Old
Broad-street. The London bankers are the Bank
of England and the London Joint Stock Bank,
Limited.
The Manager and Chief Officer for Victoria is Mr.
Roderick Murchison, and the Inspector for New
Zealand Mr. E. J. Finch.
There are 10') branches in New South Wales, the
inspecting staff consisting of Messrs. C. G. Alford,
,T. T. Ford and W. J. Edwards. The number of
branches in the other States of Australasia are re-
spectively as follows.—Victoria, 30; Queensland, 28:
New Zealand, 37; South Australia, 2; West Aus-
tralia, 6. The Commercial Bank of Tasmania,
Limited, is the agency for the Bank of New South
Wales within that island. In Fiji the Bank has a
branch at Suva. Foreign agencies are established
in Hamburg, India, China, Ceylon, Singapore, Bat-
avia, Manila, Japan, Valparaiso, Rio de Janeiro,
Buenos Ayres, South Africa, etc.
Some idea of the world-wide transactions of the
institution under review may be. gleaned from the
list of agents and correspondents hereunder enume-
rated:—Great Britain, 7; Europe, 125; Asia, 16;
Africa, 24; North America, 12; South America, 6;
and the West Indies, 8. By means of this great net-
work of branches and agencies, the Bank of New
South Wales transacts all kinds of business con-
nected with finance and exchange. Interest is
allowed on deposits, if lodged for fixed periods, at
rates obtainable from any of the Bank's offices.
Dividends on shar es in public companies are collec-
ted for customers. Investments are also made on
their behalf in colonial or British securities. Drafts
and letters of credit are issued. Approved bills at
any of the above-mentioned places are negotiated,
and the agency of other banks is undertaken on
such terms as may be agreed upon. Circular notes
are issued in sums of £lO or .£2O, negotiable in India
and other Continental places, and in Europe or
America.
The report presented on the 22nd May, 1903, at
the half-yearly general meeting of the proprietary
showed tbat the net profits for the half-year, after
deduction of rebate on current bills, interest on
deposits, paying note and other taxes in Australia,
New Zealand, reducing valuation of bank premises,
providing for bad and doubtful debts, and including
recoveries from debts previously written off as bad,
amounted to .£115,793. With the undivided balance
from the last half-year the amount for distribu-
tion was £131,072. A dividend at the rate of 10 per
cent, per annum absorbed .*lOO,OOO, and the Reserve
Fund was augmented by £15,000; the balance of
£16,072 being carried to profit and loss new account.
The statement of the assets showed a total of
£5,136,648 in coin, bullion and cash balances;
£lOO,OOO held at shoit call in London; £1,645,158 in-
vested in British and Colonial Government securi-
ties and £91,863 in municipal securities; £162,858
in Queensland Government noteis; £27,886 in notes
of other banks; £284,887 due by other banks; and
bills receivable in London and remittances in tran-
sit, £1,904,240. The bills discounted and loans and
advances to customers, amounted to £18,535,243.
The estimated value of the palatial premises owned
by the Bank of New South Wales, and which occupy
a commanding position in the heart of the business
portion of Sydney, is £1,500,000. This amount,
owing to the wise policy adopted by the directorate
of writing off a certain sum from the accrued profits
of each year, has been reduced, until it now stands
in their books at £678,000.
As the head office has been 50 years in the pre-
sent premises, alterations are being made therein,
lo provide for additional light, space and ventila-
tion. The construction of a new office, which has
been proposed for several years, has accordingly
been temporarily deferred.
As showing how the institution has been able to
i stain the services of its officers, it may be stated
that Mr. Turner, a trusty official, has recently
retired after 50 years' service.
In his speech at the last half-yearly meeting, the
Hon. Charles Kinnaird Mackellar, M.L.C. (Chair-
man), referred to the favourable nature of the
figures presented, notwithstanding the long con-
tinued drought. In the item loans and advances to
customers, which includes local bills receivable and
bills discounted, the total was £600,000 greater than
that of last year. The deposits from the public also
showed an increase. These comments are thoroughly
justified by the figures contained in the balance-
sheet. They show not only the splendid nature of
THE HON. CHARLES KINNAIRD
MACKELLAR, M.D., M.L.C.
the organisation of the Bank of New South Wales,
but the great staying and recuperative powers of the
State in which it had its origin, and in which so
laige a poition of its vast business is still tran-
sacted.
THE HON. CHARLES KINNAIRD MACKELLAR,
M.D., M.L.C.
A notable feature in connection with New South
Wales finance is that at the head of some of th?
greatest banking and financial institutions of the
State are to be found men whose intellectual at-
tainments are of a very high standard. Foremost
amongst those who may be said to control the mone-
tary interests of the citizens of the metropolis and
the country districts of this State is the Hon.
Charles Kinnaird Mackellar, M.D., M.L.C., who
occupies, as President of the Bank of New South
Wales, a most responsible position. Dr. Mackellar
was born in Sydney in the year 1844, and is a son
of Dr. Frederick Mackellar, M.D., a native of Scot-
land, who was, at one time, Suigeon to the Sydney
Hospital, and also practised for many years in
Sydney. The subject of this sketch was educated at
the Sydney Grammar School, during the regime of
the late Professor Stephens.
On leaving College, Dr. Mackellar spent five or
six years in-the Northern district of New South
Wales, where he engaged in pastoral pursuits. He
MR. J. RUSSELL FRENCH,
General Manager.
then visited Glasgow, and having completed his
studies at the University of that famous city, re-
turned to Sydney in 1872, and practised his profes-
sion for several years.
In 1882 he was appointed Medical Adviser to the
N.S.W. Government and President of the Board of
Health, which positions he occupied for three years,
when he resigned in older to enter the Legislative
Council.
Shortly afterwards he became associated with
politics in the Jennings-Dibbs Ministry, taking a
seat in the Cabinet, and representing the Govern-
ment in the Upper House.
Asa politician Dr. Mackellar has taken an active
part in the introduction of legislative measures deal-
ing with social questions, especially in regard to the
interests and welfare of women and children.
Some three years ago he visited England with
the intention of staying there, but owing to a family
bereavement, viz., the death of his son, who was
killed whilst holding a commission in the 7th
Dragoon Guaids, decided to return to Australia.
Apart from the important position of President of
the Bank of New South Wales, Dr. Mackellar has
been for many years medical director in. Sydney of
the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United
States. He is at present a director of Messrs. Pitt,-
Son and Badgery, the well-known wool brokers of
Sydney, and various other commercial concerns of
eminent standing, including the directorship of the
recently acquired property known as the .Gloucester
Estate Company, which has for its object the bring-
ing about of closer settlement in the country dis-
tricts and the establishment of dairy faims. In con-
nection with charitable institutions. Dr. Mackellar
has occupied a prominent position as a represen-
tative of the Government Board of the Sydney and
Prince Alfred Hospitals, and was also President
of the State Children’s Relief Boa:d.
MR. J. RUSSELL FRENCH.
One of the most important positions in New
South Wales is filled by Mr. John Russell French,
General Manager of the Bank of New South Wales.
This gentleman was born on the sth March, 1847,
in the Bengal Presidency, where his father, Major
John French, of the 14th Bengal Native Infamry,
was then serving his country and sovereign.
The future Bank Manager partly received his
education at Cheltenham (England), a place greatly
resorted to by “old Indians” and retired military
officers, and under the Rev. Qeoige McArthur, at
Old King’s School, Macquarie Fields, near Sydney
When in his sixteenth year, in 1863, he joined the
Bank of New South Wales Head Office staff, Syd-
ney, and rapidly lose in the service, serving the
Bank in various capacities at the Head Office, and
at Goulburn and Wagga. At the age of 27 he was
appointed to the Inspectors’ staff in New Zealand.
Further promotion followed, and in 1887, having
been reappointed Inspector at the head-quartern
office, he returned to Sydney. On the Ist July, 1894,
Mr. French received the very important position of
General Manager to the institution into whose ser-
vice he had entered as a boy in his teens. It is an
interesting fact that during its almost ninety years'
existence the Bank has had only five chief executive
officers, viz., Messrs. Geoige Black, Robert Wood-
house, Shepherd Smith, George Miller (now re-
tired), and Mr. John Russell French—the subject
of this sketch.
Mr. French is an acknowledged leader in every
matter connected with the practical working of
finance, commerce and trade. He is a foundation
member of the New South Wales Institute of
Bankers, which, during its comparatively short
history, has done such good work in promoting
com'Vadeship among the senior members of the
banking community, and increasing the professional
knowledge and business qualifications of the juniors.
Mr. Russell French is a very busy man, his sterling
qualifications, as a prominent citizen, having
caused his counsel and services to be in request by
the executives of many local organisations. Among
the many positions occupied, or which have been
occupied, by him, may be mentioned: —Presidency
of the Chamber of Commerce, member of the Com-
mittee of the Cleigy Widows and Orphans’ Fund,
member of the Council of the King’s School, Trus-
tee of the Sydney Grammar School, member of the
Committee of the National Shipwreck Relief So-
ciety, and a Director of the Prince Alfred Hospital.
In addition to being the General Manager of the
oldest bank in New South Wales, and standing in
the front rank of Australasian financial experts,
Mr. J. Russell French is a gentleman of the highest
culture and refinement, and has proved himself
eminently fitted to occupy the high position he has
attained.


The Commercial Banking Com-
pany of Sydney, Limited.
Amongst the powerful financial organisations of
New South Wales the Commercial Banking Com-
pany of Sydney, Limited, occupies a prominent
and influential position.
This institution, which is purely Australian in
origin and development, is entitled to take rank
as the second oldest establishment of its kind in
this part of tlie world, and its career has been one of
almost unexampled prosperity. The bank was
founded in 1834, at the time when the young
Colony of New South Wales was just beginning to
enter upon its legitimate birthright.
Within a few months of the meeting at which it
was decided to form the Bank, business was com-
menced, the doors being opened to the public in
October, 1834. The original directorate consisted
of twelve members, every one of them being men
holding good positions in the Colony at that time.
They were Messrs. William Macpherson (Chair-
man), John Lamb (Deputy Chairman), Thomas
Barker, Kobert Scott, Kobert Johnstone, Thomas
Marsden, Kobert How, Frederick A. Hely, James
Tod Ooodsir, Joseph 11. Grose, Roger Therry,
Thomas P. Macqueen. The first office of the Bank
was situated at the Colonnade, in Bridge Street,
and was afterwards removed to George Street, a
few doors north from King Street, where, on the
10th of January, 1835, the first half-yearly meeting
was held. As showing the growth of the Bank’s
business, it may be stated that the premises in
which the meeting was held were rented on a seven
years’ lease at £285 per annum. To-day the Com-
mercial Banking Company of Sydney, Ltd., employs
a small ai my of clerks, ledger-keepers, accountants,
etc., and a glance at the accompanying illustration
of the building at present occupied is an ample de-
monstration of the progress made.
At this distance of time it is also interesting to
note the contents of the first balance-sheet, dated
Ist of January, 1835, whose figures show from what
a small beginning the large and important busi-
ness now transacted has grown. The items enum-
erated being as follow; —To Capital, £30,467 10s.;
Government Deposit, ,£5000; Individual Deposits,
.£17,630 Is. lid.; Notes in Circulation, £8143; Pro-
fit and Loss, £624 14s 5d.; Total, £61,865 6s. 4d.
The Credit side displayed: Coin, £22,232 Is. 4d;
Bills receivable, £38,183 55.; Banking House stipu-
lated price, £1950-£1450; Total, £61,865 6s. 4d.
In those days the methods of banking were dif-
ferent in some respects from those of to-day, se-
curities being taken as collateral to the bills dis-
counted, which were generally renewed, or partly
so, at maturity. In 1847 the Directors decided to
remodel the Constitution, and obtain an Act of
Incorporation. This was successfully carried out
by the late Sir Edward Knox, who formed practi-
cally a new bank with enlarged powers. Up to
this period, the bank had not made much head-
way, compared to the ratio of progress witnessed
in recent years, but under its new charter it began
THE COMMERCIAL BANKING COMPANY OF SYDNEY, LTD.
HEAD OFFICE, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
to forge ahead rapidly. In July of that year, viz.,
1847, the present General Manager, Mr. T. A.
Dibbs, joined the service of the Bank as a junior.
and gradually worked his way up through the var-
ious grades until, in 1867, he became the General
Manager, a position he still retains. In 1853 the
head office of the Bank was removed to the present
fine building opposite the General Post Office, and
at the intersection of George and Barrack Streets.
For years past the progress of the Bank has been
highly gratifying and remarkable.
To illustrate the development that has taken
place, and to give some idea of the solidity and
strength of the institution, a reference to the last
half-yearly balance-sheet, dated the 31st Decem-
her, 1902, is particularly apropos. The capital of
the Bank consists of £1,000,000 paid up, while the
Reserve Fund amounts to £1,010,000, and there is
also a Reserve Capital of £1,000,000, making a (o-
tal of £3,010,000. The notes in circulation are of the
value of £505,903, the bills in circulation totalling
£675,182 14s. 7d. The deposits aggregate the enor-
mous total of £ll,BO-4,567 13s. 3d., which is a strik-
JSanhing.
•Historical and Biographical Sketches ’.-continued.


ing testimony to the large confidence that the
Bank enjoys.
The Assets of the Company comprised coin and
bullion in hand, ,£2,521,004 ss. 3d.; cash at Bank-
ers, £467,649 Bs. 4d.; money at short call in Lon-
don, £300,000; advance to Government, £148,866 3s.
lid.; Government securities, £1,180,508 11s. Id.;
Queensland Government notes, £42,550; remit-
tances in transit, £666,084 Bs. 7d; notes and bills
of other banks, £36,684 os. 6d.; bills discounted,
and all debts due to the bank, £9,269,271 os. 3d;
Bank premises furniture, £447,100.
The balance at the credit of Profit and Loss Ac-
count, after deducting rebate on current bills and
accrued interest on fixed deposits, reducing prem-
ises account, paying note tax, providing for land
and income taxes, also bad and doubtful debts, as
well as granting to the officers a bonus on their
salaries, amounted to £76,846 18s. lid. The usual
half-yearly dividend, at the rate of 10 per cent.,
was paid, aggregating £50,000, while an undivided
profit of £26,846 18s. lid. was carried forward.
Such a record of successful financing might well
gratify the shareholders, and lead to expression of
their appreciation of service rendered by the Di-
rectors, and the large staff of officer.-, who in turn
have always reciprocated the generous considera-
tion received at the hands of the proprietary.
The Commercial Banking Company of Sydney,
Limited, undertakes financial bu iness of all
kinds. It issues drafts, circular notes and travel-
ling letters of credit for- any part of the world.
It makes advances on wool and other produce con-
signed to the United Kingdom and the Continent
of Europe, and transacts all usual banking busi-
ness.
A comparison of the position of the Bank at the
three most notable periods of its existence, shows
that the reserved profits in 1835 w-ere nil, in 1847
they amounted to £7543, and in 1902 they reached
£1,036,846. The totals in 1835 were £61,865; in
1847, £359,832; and in 1902, £15,079.717.
This is evidence that the management of the in-
stitution has been in the hands of men whose
probity, ability and judgment could not be im-
pugned. Throughout its existence the Commercial
Banking Company of Sydney, Limited, has enjoyed
a rare measure of public confidence, which has
been jealously conserved and strengthened year by
year. The Directors have always endeavoured to
focus their energies and simplify their methods so
as to entail greater power, solidarity in working,
and to build up an institution that would stand
four square to every- wind that blows. To what
extent they have prevailed, in spite of all the vi-
cissitudes of Australian finance, the figures which
have been quoted furnish an answer that admits
of no cavil, and the eminently prosperous condi-
tion of the Bank at the present day, stands as a
fitting monument to the enterprise, industry, and
foresight exhibited in working out the destiny of
this admirable institution. The present Board of
Directors consists of Mr. Q. J. Cohen (Chairman).
Hon, H. E. Kater, M.L.C. (Deputy Chairman),
Hon. Henry Moses, M.L.C., Hon. Richard Jones,
M.L.C., and the Hon. F. T. llumphery, M.L.C.
Mr. T. A. Dibbs is General Manager; Mr. T. B.
Gaden, Assistant Manager and Chief Inspector;
Mr. A. J. Soutar, Accountant.
The head office, which is situated in the centre
of the City, facing Martin Place, is a very fine
and imposing edifice modelled on the Corinthian
style, and built of Sydney freestone, which has ac-
centuated the beauty of the architect’s design.
The London branch office is established at 18
Birchin Lane, with a local directorate, composed
of the following gentlemen;—Sir J. A. Youl,
K.C.M.G., Mr. F. H. Dangar, Mr. B. AY. Levy,
and the Hon. 11. S. Littleton, with Mr. F A.
Scrivener as Manager.
The Sydney branches of the Company, which
cater for the whole of the metropolis, are as fol-
SIR. T. A. DIBBS.
low:—Eastern Branch, Oxford Street, E. L. Kut-
ledge Manager; Exchange Branch, Pitt Street
North, D. 11. Scott, Manager; George Street West,
J. Hern, Manager; King Street, W. Macintosh,
Manager; Leichhardt, A. H. Gregg, Manager;
Newtown, W. H. Goddaid, Manager; North Syd-
ney, J. Barnett, Manager; Paddington, G. M.
Webster, Manager; Pitt and Bathurst Streets, W.
H. Cordeaux, Manager; Eedfern, E. E. Poulton,
Manager; Southern Branch (Haymarket), C. W.
Gadcn, Manager; Waterloo and Alexandria, G. A.
Layton, Manager.
The Interstate Agents for the Commercial Bank-
ing Company of Sydney, Ltd., are.-Victoria, Bank
of Victoria, Ltd., and Branches, National Bank of
Australasia, Ltd., Colonial Bank of Australasia,
Ltd.. Commercial Bank of Australia, Ltd.; South
Australia, National Bank of Australasia, Ltd., and
Branches, Bank of Adelaide: Western Australia,
National Bank of Australasia, Ltd., and Branches.
Commercial Bank of Australia, Ltd., and
Branches; Tasmania, Commercial Bank of Tas-
mania. Ltd., and Branches; New Zealand, Na-
tional Bank of New Zealand, Ltd., and Branches.
MR. T. A, DIBBS.
The General Manager of the Commercial Bank-
ing Company of Sydney, Limited, Mr. T. A.
Dibbs, is a leading authority on all matters con-
cerning Banking and Finance, and more especially
so when the subject is Australian in character.
He can lay.claim to the honour of being the oldest
bank manager in Australia, and has seen more ac-
tive and varied service than any other banking
official within the bounds of the Commonwealth.
He is a true son of the soil, having first opened
his eyes to this world on the 31st October, 1832, in
a small cottage which then occupied the site upon
which the palatial building of the Equitable now
stands, and within a stone’s throw- of the office
where he has spent the greater portion of his busy
life. At the age of fourteen Mr. Dibbs set out to
make his way in the world, and, having obtained
a junior post in the office of the Commercial Bank-
ing Company of Sydney, he, with characteristic as-
siduity, set himself to improve his position and
prospects.
Energetic, industrious, and enterprising, he soon
forged his way in the Company’s service, and,
during the rough times of the gold diggings era in
the country, he was entrusted with a great deal of
responsible work, of a nature which would tax
both the physical endurance and mental ingenuity
of the most resourceful of men. The Commercial
Banking Company, like the other banks then do-
ing business in the Colony, was extremely enter-
prising in the methods it adopted to attract a
sound connection amongst the miners, and, in
order to secure their good will, as well as their
business, it was very essential that the officials en-
trusted with the Bank’s work on the various gold-
fields, should be possessed of special qualifications
if success weie to be attained. Mr. Dibbs piovcd
himself to be just the man to undertake pioneer
work of this kind, and (he manner .in which he
carried out his duties won the warm appreciation
of his superiors, who rewarded him by rapid pro-
motion in the service. In 1867 he became General
Manager of the Bank, a position which he has ever
since filled with conspicuous ability.
The commanding position which the Commercial
Banking Company of Sydney, Limited, holds to-
day in the world of Commerce and Finance, is in
a great measure due to the influence and capacity
exhibited by Mr. Dibbs. On all questions relating
to finance, his opinions are eagerly sought, and
the value of the advice he has tendered on many
occasions has always elicited the highest encomi-
ums of those qualified to form an accurate
opinion,


VIEW OF GEORGE STREET IN THE SIXTIES.
Showing the Commercial Bank of Sydney and the Bank of New South Wales,
OLD PITT STREET IX THE SIXTIES
View taken from Bridge Street Corner. The Junction of Soring Street can be seen in the centre of the Picture.
The vacant ground on the right is the site of the present A.M.P. Society and other offices. The building on the right is the
lance Marine Insurance Company, and behind the tree can be seen the premises of Messrs. Brown and Co.
and the “Sydney Morning Herald” Office, while the position on the left, opposite the vacant ground,
is that now occupied by the Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance Co.


Insurance.


Insurance
in Australasia.
TN the last issue of “ The Annual Review ” we
took the opportunity of saying that if Aus-
tralasia had anything at all of which it
might fittingly be proud, it was the condition
of its life assurance. Since then that condi-
tion has been severely tested. Even at that
time a distressing drought was in full swing,
but the direst effects thereof had not been
then felt. Fortunately for Australia, rain
has recently fallen, and the showers have
been showers of blessing indeed. But the
effects of a drought last long after the break-
ing. Where, a year ago, was stock starving
for food, now there is food wasting for the
lack of stock to eat it. 'And all the time all
classes have directly and indirectly been suf-
fering the consequences. Yet, notwithstand-
ing the wide-spread disaster, Australia is by
no means in the condition that she is by
those ignorant of her recuperative powers
supposed to occupy. And, next to the flour-
ishing conditon of our banks, nothing so well
proves the stability of the country as the
condition of life assurance. That our life
offices, especially the struggling ones, have
felt the strain is, of course, beyond dispute,
yet they have neither fallen nor become ut-
terly cast down. On the contrary, they
have, in a wonderful way, maintained an ad-
mirable rate of progress. Their new busi-
ness has kept up splendidly. The rate of
interest earned has, in some cases, risen not-
iceably, while in no case has there been any-
thing like a heavy fall. The assets are in
good condition, and writing-down has mainly
been a matter of form, there being no real
necessity for it. These facts speak well for
Australia, and encourage the hope that the
time is not far distant when settlement will
be so general throughout the country that
the effects of a drought.—for droughts are
not total, but partial—will be much less
keenly felt. In Tasmania and New Zealand,
droughts are unknown, and, as his great fact
becomes better appreciated by the agricul-
tural classes, these countries will be more
and more prepared to make good the short-
ages of the parts afflicted by drought. This
will have a steadying effect on all enterprises
doing business throughout Australasia. Al-
ready this has been felt with very beneficial
results, and this is a fact that some of the
would-be wise crit cs of the Old Land en-
tirely overlook. They forget that the third
largest, in point of population and wealth,
of these States and Colonies —New Zealand—
has neither droughts nor floods, and they ig-
nore the fact that three of our largest banks,
and at least half-a-dozen of our life offices
have groat businesses in those favoured
islands, from which large profits are drawn.
These fearful critics fail to realise that when
Australia is temporarily depressed, she has a
flourishing sister across the Tasman Sea, and
an affectionate daughter stretching willing
hands across the straits of Bass. And even
' right at home this equalising tendency is
not ineffective. While a great part of the
Continent of Australia was suffering from
drought, South Australia was reaping a re-
cord harvest. Besides, the drought has
shown us that we are not entirely dependent
on wheat and wool, and beef and mutton..
Much of the labour dispensed with on ac-
count of the lessening of the flocks and herds
found its way into our mines, resulting in a
greatly increased gold yield. Timber, also,
came in for more attention, and many of our
industries found new and profitable markets
to help us over the pinch.
But, though all these have helped to break
the blow that might otherwise have fallen on
our banks, insurance offices, and other finan-
cial institutions, it is to the good manage-
ment of the concerns themselves that their
salvation is due. The inexperienced arc apt
to speak slightingly of the services rendered
by boards of directors and highly-paid offi-
cials, but were it possible for them to realise
the disasters that are averted or ameliorated
by the sound judgment of those whose abili-
ties they presume to judge, a very different
impression would be created. To the wisdom
displayed in the investment of the funds of
our life offices, more than to anything else,
is due the immunity from loss dur.ng both
good and bad times. There has been no
scarcity of poor security offering, security
that might some years ago have been ac-
cepted, but the lessons of the past have not
been forgotten.
But, while it is true that in the main our
life offices have progressed laudably, it is also
true that some have done much better than
others. Some have done so well as to merit
not only a good word, but every encourage-
ment; but one or two might be mentioned
whose progress has been far from satisfac-
tory. To say that these will not be able to
carry on would be rash prophecy, but we
certainly think the opinion might be haz-
arded that it would be of great advantage to
the policy-holders if the non-progressive so-
cieties were taken over by some of those that
really have a claim to continued existence.
As has been well said, a life office does not
fulfil the m’ssion assigned to it by merely
paying its way and providing fees for direc-
tors, and salaries for highly-paid officials. At
present rates of, interest and premiums good
bonuses should be forthcoming, and those
offices do but cumber the earth which go on
year after year yielding little or none of this
good fruit. In order to get new business
they have to pay commission at rates that
make profit almost impossible, and this has
a demoralising effect on both canvasser and
canvasee. We would urge the policy-holders
in non-progressive societies to bestir them-
selves. It is not a matter to be left to the
initiative of the directors and officers, for
they are too much interested in looking after
the half loaf that is said to be better than
none. Not until insolvency stares them in
the face will they be able to look at amal-
gamation from the standpoint of their policy-
holders. And then it may be too late. Pro-
bably there is not an office in Australasia that
could not now make arrangements to be
taken over by a stronger concern, but every
year of non-progression will make arrange-
ments more and more difficult. There is
much more urgency about this matter than is
generally imagined by the policy-holders, or
admitted by their officers. It is said that if
an Australasian life office should fail, life
assurance in this country would receive a
check from which it would take a long time
to recover. This is a matter on which it
would be unwise to dogmatise, but we arc
certainly not prepared to accept that state-
ment without examination. In fact, we are
inclined to the opinion that the failure of one
of the weaklings would have a beneficial ef-
fect on all the others, both weak and strong.
It would emphasise the necessity of the other
weaklings being immediately taken over by
such as might be persuaded to take them,
and it would bring home to assuranta the
wisdom of seeing that their money should be
put in right channels. There is no gain-
saying the fact that thousands of those who
believe they are making a wise provision for
their dependents are being misled by plaus-
ible statements, and the sooner the people
wake up to this fact the better. Even a
young office, if properly conducted, can pay
bonuses, though, for considerations of
strength, it might be advisable to withold


ES5
v +S
2 0 o
o • o •
• *n
Jn. P* fl JO t
ium Income
per ceut. c
iums.
2 a ° 2
S§$S”S
« sS- 3 -j?
® ® -*3 +s a
» © 5 2
sis a
s-«g2S<
.2
»>
PM 2 CM
W oFsm fto
3
£
£
Citizens’ Life Ass. Co.
144,365
773
.05
Aust. Mut. Prov. Scty.
1,536,536
71,967
4.64
New Zea. Government
271,890
15,222
13.33
National Mutual
361,240
51,078
14.45
Temp, and General
46,236
7,063
15.27
Australian Widows
164,233
35,418
21.56
Mutual Life of Aust.
179,417
29,506
16.44
Colonial Mutual
301,242
54,585
18.12
City Mutual
46,730
9,217
19.72
Standard ...
3,381
2,100
54,11
them or a ew years. The great enemy of a
bonus-paying power is extravagant expendi-
j" 1 ' 1 ' 0 ;, said that mortality never
lulls a me office. The main consideration,
there ore, tor assurants is the ratio of ex-
ponses. I he following tables give these ra-
intending assurants are earnestly
advised to study them. In connection with
this advice, however, it is necessary to em-
phasise what we have already said about
comparmg the expense ratio with the proper-
is deducted from the expenses, and also from
the income, on which it is sought to fix the
ratio. The effect of this is that, provided
that not more than 75 per cent, of the new
premium income be expended in securing it,
the greater the new business, the lower will
be the ratio of expenses, for the remaining
25 per cent, of the new premium income is
added to the renewal premium for division
into the remaining expenses. It should be
mentioned that the expenses are still further
In the hope of helping on a good cause by
centreing some interest on this new plan bc-
ing introduced by the “Review,” we have
pleasure in submitting a few calculations by
way of test. Those well acquainted with our
life offices and their achievements will know
whether the method provides a fair means of
comparison. We are not prepared to speak
very definitely on the point, but if the com-
parisons should be found odious,- merely be-
cause of their correctness, some of our offices
COMMITTEE OF THE INSURANCE INSTITUTE.
tion of new business. Whether by profitable
er unprofitable life offices, new business can-
not be got without canvassing, and canvas-
sing must be paid for. This makes new busi-
ness expensive, but the members have no
ground for complaint on this score, for it is
their own carelessness that makes canvassing
a necessity, and it is their discreditable habit
of procrastination that makes canvassing so
costly. The cost of procuration being a ne-
cessity, it is provided for in the premiums,
and is, therefore, a legitimate payment, pro-
® r mi- a
vided that it be not excessive. The Re-
view,” the Sydney Banking and Insurance
journal, appears to be developing a plan of
so clcslattog Hie expenditure of a life office
that legitimate expenditure for the procura-
tion of new business will not swell the ratio.
The principal feature of the innovation is
that 75 per cent, of the new premium income
lelncrd by allowances for annuity business,
and for the management of the funds. The
“ Review” does not contend that its system
is perfect, or even as correct as it hopes to
make it, but there can be no gainsaying its
contention that it sharply differentiates be-
tween those offices that obtain their new
business on payable lines, and those that, in
their frantic efforts to make a good showing,
imperil the security of existing members.
And, as this is precisely what is most wanted
in connection with our life assurance, we
flvinlr flip (< ifn be commsnded on
think the Keyiew is to ne commenaea on
its able attempt to solve a problem that has
been perplexing the assurance world for
=
taken up atresh g » , . ’•
not particularly rapid or steady decline in
interest will, of necessity, bring this matter of
unpayable expenditure well to the front-
would do well to make some rapid and pur-
manent changes. Here are the results of our
calculations: ■


INCOME.
Consideration
Estab-
Year
Renewal
New
For
Other
Name. lished.
Ending
Premiums
Premiums.
Annuities.
Interest.
Sources.
Total.
£
£
£
£
£
£
A.M.P. Society 1849
31/12/02
1,503,571
131,860
39,193
828,188
6,916
2,509,729
1819
31/12/01
1,451,045
132,641
60,103
791,453
21,148
2,456,389
Aust. Alliance 1862
31/8/02
13,064
12,561
—
10,340
35,965
1862
31/8/01
13,624
16
700
10,416
—
24,757
Hut. Life of Australasia 1869
31/12/02
171,829
30,352
15,957
69,254
7
287,399
.. ... 1869
31/12/01
159,117
25,453
17,818
65,936
10
268,334
Nat. Mut. Life of Australasia .. 1869
30/9/02
346,429
62,278
16,617
157,677
148
583,149
1869
30/9/01
335,740
52,317
26,174
151,959
228
566,416
N.Z. Government L. Ins. Dept. 1869
31/12/01
266,816
20,396
11,615
142,449
(1) 19,577
460,753
1869
31/12/00
261,458
20,640
4,634
136,955
14
423,700
Aust. Widows’ Fund 1871
31/10/02
159,903
17,323
3,681
67,205
5,550
253,661
„ .. 1871
31/10/01
. 152,573
22,883
5,749
63,293
(2) 5,275
249,773
Colonial Mut. Life 1873
31/12/02
293,737
30,021
349
105,157
—
429,263
„ 1873
31/12/01
287,939
25,712
—
99,165
412,816
Temp, and Gen. (Ord.) 1876
30/9/02
42,629
14,430
4,856
12,017
73,932
„ 1876
30/9/01
37,819
12,991 -
—
11,062
-
61,872
Temp, and Gen. (Ind.)
30/9/02
52,121
—
—
1,326
—
78,259
30/9/01
39,203
—
—
994
—
40,198
City Mutual Life 1879
31/12/02
45,260
5,880
—
12,606
—
63,746
„ „ 1879
31/12/01
43,256
7,414
—
11,516
~
62,188
Citizens’ (Ord.) 1883
31/12/02
185,139
36,907
2,679
22,684
16
197,425
1888
31/12/01
112,513
36,983
1,479
17,551
14
168,520
Citizens’ (Ind.) 1887
31/12/02
31/12/01
175,810
—
—
12,827
51
188,688
„ „ 1887
172,916
—
—
11,151
48
184,113
Aust. Met. Life 1895
31/8/02
11,616
—
—
1,041
41
12,693
„ 1895
31/8/01
9,508
—
—
1,521
8,677
19,706
Peoples Prudential 1896
31/8/02
(3) 12,302
—
264
—
12,566
1836
31/8/01
12,021
—
—
234
— '
12,255
Standard (Ord.) 1893
30 fi/02
2,866
4,060
—
247
1
7,174
.. „ 1839
30/6/01
3,885
1,159
—
164
2
5,210
Standard (Ind.)
»» >>
30/6/02
—
24,307
—
—
—
24,307
30/6/01
—
19,384
—
—
—
19,384
(1) Including .£16,753 from the Tontine Savings Fund No. 1. (2) Single Premiums .£2,600, and Profit on Eealisation of Securities £2,675.
(3 Including New Premiums.
LIFE ASSURANCE IN AUSTRALASIA.
COMPARATIVE STATEMENT GIVING ITEMS OF INTEREST CONCERNING THIRTEEN COMPANIES HAVING THEIR HEAD OFFICES IN
AUSTRALASIA.
LIFE ASSURANCE COMPARATIVE STATEMENT.-Continued.


CLAIMS AND BONUSES.
OUTGO.
FUNDS.
Name.
Year.
Death. Maturity.
Total. Surrenders.
Annuities.
Cash
Bonuses.
Com-
mission.
Expenses.
Beginning
Total. of Year.
End
of Year.
A M. P. Society
31/12/02
.£643,280 .£305,954
=£949,997
.£303,755
.£40,180
=£61,142
.£51,604
(1) =£188,452 =£1.595.130 £17 WU nil eia ttq hq
»» >» •••
31/12/01
677,692
300,193
982,339
315,605
36,526
54,580
51,002
(2) 181,668
1,621,720
17,029,845
249,778
17,864,514
257,469
A. A. A. Co
31/8/02
15,416
6,654
24,661
643
226
97
2,646
28,274
31/8/01
30,058
900
280
141
3,773
35,152
260,173
249,778
AT. L. A.
31/12/02
59,337
41,575
100,912
17,061
4,571
1,382
16,443
(7)41,783
182,152
1,533,693
1,638,939
„
31/12/01
53,497
33,189
92,686
15,432
2,879
1,556
17,250
42,451
172,254
1,437,612
1,533,693
Nat. Mnt. L. of A’asia
30/9/02
120,449
114,135
234,584
34,755
5,991
11,621
29,491
71,362
307,804
3,265,126
3,460,471
„ „ ,»
30/9/01
140,598
103,289
243,887
53,842
4,309
1,151
23,969
67,001
394,160
3,092,870
3,265,126
N.Z. Gov. L. Ins. Dept.
30/12/01
122,471
42 399
164,870
63,323
11,629
16,277
10,497
14,084
45,110
315,293
3,139,957
3,285,416
30/12/00
151,219
46,884
11,394
14,388
47,044
281,425
2,997,681
3,139,957
>» » »»
Aust. Widows’ Fund ...
31/10/02
46,781
55,265
102,046
26,199
2,027
8,111
17,295
38,789
194,467
1,509,234
1,577,753
,, ,, ,,
31/10/01
44,781
47,540
92,321
14,365
1,744
1,209
19,570
39,623
168,832
1,428,294
1,509,234
Colonial Mutual Life...
31/12/02
126,953
74,451
201,704
22,031
1,183
1,595
19,714
60,388
306,614
2,595,870
2,706,830
*t ff »> •••
31/12/01
119,376
82,234
201,610
21,386
1,192
2,595
18,713
63,441
408,936
2,385,266
2,491,990
Aust. Temp and Gen. (Ord) 30/9/02
11,631
8,641
20,272
4,039
159
88
10,523
8,117
43,198
253,865
284,448
»» ,, ,, ...
30/9/01
10,912
10,085
20,997
3,485
171
71
10,696
9,213
44,633
236,627
253,865
Aust.Temn. and Gen. (Ind.) 30/9/02
4,651
2,962
7,613
682
25,648
9,795
43,738
24,812
34,671
30/9/01
4,111
3,236
7,347
376
17,106
9,832
34.661
19,276
24,812
City Mutual Life
31/12/02
11,484
7,872
19,356
12,130
203
356
(3) 6,938
(8) 20,369
59,352
234,002
238,396
31/12/01
9,043
5,679
14,722
4,505
165
249
(3) 8,417
9,790
37,848
209,664
234,002
Citizens’ (Ord.)
31/12/02
20,532
2,562
23,094
9,554
1,845
27,533
62,025
491,601
626,755
491,601
31/12/01
19.267
1,106
20,373
12,965
944
15,995
(9) 10,589
60,866
,, f , ... ...
■Citizens’ (Ind.)
31/12/02
23,429
14,432
37,921
3,786
29,244
(9) 80,990
151,941
298,847
835,594
31/12/01
21,325
20,576
41,901
1,748
28,566
(9) 69,233
141,447
258,182
298,847
Aust. Metropolitan Life
31/8/02
31/8/01
2,914
1,146
227
336
634
1 273
(10) 17,860
3,652
22,908
34,221
24,010
2,916
8,050
22,565
34,221
Peoples’ Prudential ...
31/8/02
31/8/01
895
1,077
(4) 5,516
1,078
4,393
4,306
(5) 3,644
7,627
13,056
11,449
5,321
4,831
4,516
5,321
,, ,, ...
mr “~
Standard (Ord and Ind.
,, „ [comb.]
30/6/02
30/6/01
1,041
1,041
453
40
15,343
12,546
11,494
9,787
(6) 27,918
22,786
15,286
18,848
13,479
15,286
1. Includimr taxation. .019,727: Deserve, £10,811 :
Written off Premises, .£8,800;
Improvements to Premises, <£2051
2. Including Improvements to Premises, Reserves for Depreciation and Written on Premises, <£z«),rcu
.'3. Including Inspection Expenses
and Medical Fees.
4. Including: Payments to Medical Profession and Chemists, and Allowances tor Disablement.
.5. Including written off Goodwill,
Cl,500, and Di
vidend, <£217.
•6. Including: written off Extension Account, and
<£31 off Office Furniture.
.£1281.
7. Including improvements to properties, <£919,
and securities written down
8. Including app’tns to write oil deterred instalments <£11,036.
9. Including .£2000 dividend to shareholders.
10. Including written off property
values £5500.
The Standard s Ordinary Branch expenses
can be guessed at only, as they have never
been separated from those of the Industrial
Branch. The above calculation is arrived at
y a owing per cen . o t e industrial
premiums to go for expenses. This leaves
7 xiLeTto h to?afnremii^r l aud r tb o ° f
expenses to total premiums, and the new cal-
culation brings out the result of 54.11 per
cen '
In the case of the Citizen’s Life Company
the innovation works peculiarly because that
company ■conducts its Ordinary Branch at an
of 1~ ol it.
new premiums. This very clearly proves one
■of two things—either that the Company gets
its new business at rates that make it ex-
■ceedingly profitable, or that the Industrial
Branch has to bear more than its fair share
■of expenses. As there is no office doing In-
dustrial business on better terms than is
■done by the Citizens’, it is not possible to
prove the charge as to unfairness in the divi-
gion of expenses. If the Citizens’ were to
follow the lead of the next best Industrial
•office, and charge its Industrial policy-holders
68 per cent., the Temperance and General’s
rate, the remaining expenditure of the Citi-
zens’ would be considerably under 45 per
cent, of the Ordinary Branch newpremiums.
Probably this is the last time we shall be
able to give the Citizens’ Ordinary Branch
expenses at less than 75 per cent, of the new
premiums, for, as the renewal business grows,
a® ex P ellses m u st increase somewhat. For
the year ll'OO the expenses were but 50 per
cent, of the new premiums; for 1901 tlTey
were upwaids of 66 per cent., and for last
year, 74.61 per cent. It is evident that, in
the case of the Citizens’, an allowance off
the expenses equal to 75 per cent, of the new
premiums is excessive hut of course the
allowance must £ mal in .IT,,S„cS
and, as the new calculation was specially
made to encourage our offices to get as much
new business as possible at payable rates
there is not much room for complaint. ’
The allowance of 2 per cent, of the consid-
eration for annuities enables the offices to
pay a fair commission on this class of busi-
ness, and leaves something for the other ex-
penses connected with annuities. Whether
this something that is left is sufficient or not,
is, of course, a matter of opinion. Technical
ability of a high order is needed for the trail-
saction of annuity business.
The allowance of 2s. per cent, of the funds
for investment expenses, supplemented■ by'a
reward for g6od returns of interest, is also
more or less arbitrary, but everyone well
knows that a considerable part of the time of
directors and executive officers is occunied
wit h this important branch of the business,
Jt j s reasonable that investment charges
Zu M not be set agist premium income!
and there is no way of separating them
exactly
Opinions will certainly differ on the ques-
-4-* { .i , • , . .
° * **
/, f method refeiied to above, a quarter
° . tho exces ® of interest over 4 per cent, is
all °wed. Some might contend that the
' vllo ° excess should be allowed, but it has to
°e rcm embered that high interest is supposed
to mean somewhat inferior security as well
as S reater expense in management. On the
whole, we are inclined to think that good
judgment has been displayed by the “ Re-
view ”in this matter. A fair start has been
made in the direction of giving credit where
credit is due, and it now remains for those
who may be dissatisfied with the proposal to
improve it where they can ’
LIFE ASSURANCE COMPARATIVE STATEMENT.—Continued.


Loans on
Govt.
Cash in
Freehold
Policies, Secuiities,
hand, on
and Lease-
Property
Year
Rever- Municipal
Deposit,
hold Pro-
acquired
Premiums
Other
Name.
Ending
Mortgages.
sionary In-
Deben-
and on
perty (in-
by fore-
Outstanding
Interest
Items,
terests.
tines.
Current
eluding
closure.
and in days
Accrued
Agents’
Total.
Life in-
Account.
office fur-
of Grace.
and out-
Balances,
terests, etc.
niture).
standing.
etc.
£
£
£
£
.£
£
.£
£
£ .
A.M.P. Society
31/12/02
8,998,177
4,138,045
4,429,306
394,685
371,865
558,245
190,022
144,452
20,490
19,245,287
tt tt •••
31/12/01
8,533,921
4,037,451
3,943,968
476,185
380,665
585,797
191,935
137,327
9,779
18,297,032
Anst. Alliance
31/8/02
240,013
28,361
54,258
73,519
78,209
' 475
3,270
5,677
483,863
» tt •••
31/8/01
220,013
28,457
19,600
68,431
92,048
—
468
3,009
63,938
496,885
Aust. Widows
31/10/02
936,701
201,009
170,897
62,001
128,020
46,661
25,866
15,905
1,334
1,588,397
tt tt * * *
31/10/01
909,006
197,525
154,611
46,835
129,702
50,014
24,559
13,753
1,561
1,527,566
Anst. Temp, and Gen....
30/9/02
104,046
49,666
38,906
10,335
71,649
(1) 35,452
3,609
1,937
326,103
» tt f)
30/9/01
101,835
37,236
18,792
19,496
71,225
(1) 33,155
3,157
1,809
—
286,707
Col. Mut. Life
31/12/02
1,156,083
233,718
335,500
218,091
687,624
31,670
23,706
29,619
2,716,011
M tt •••
31/12/01
1,103,291
232,566
314,437
184,100
675,369
—
30,814
23,416
36,366
2,600,359
City Mut. Life ...
31/12/02
72,711
81,142
20,634
1,718
45,562
4,386
10,583
31 80
239,926
>» tt •••
31/12/01
64,043
87,709
10,235
3,776
43,913
4,456
8,512
—
12 888
235,532
Citizens
31/12/02
337,070
55,137
251,605
45,352
253,902
(2) 1,820
18,395
3,020
6 052
971,355
.
31/12/01
257,060
34,010
205,005
24,930
250,651
2,244
16,391
5,700
4,800
800,791
Mut. L. of A/asia
31/12/02
795,994
161,727
301,092
41,963
243,373
91,971
—
13,218
1,649,338
tt tt . '*■
31/12/01
788,421
154,031
245,045
8,890
243,710
93,665
—
11,370
—
1,545,135
Nat. Mut. L. of A/asia
30/9/02
1,792,007
669,465
206,021
163,111
474,821
125,586
24,767
27,397
49,683
3,591,991
» tt tt
30/9/01
1,777,545
644,472
171,343
105,606
414,630
127,004
28,246
25,534
51,426
3,399,231
N.Z. Govt. Life
31/12/01
1,614,479
602,189
861,138
61,508
126,196
5,152
39,889
46,443
6,132
3,363,126
tt tt •••
31/12/00
1,488,759
579,494
863,162
64,916
128,276
—
39,959
44,214
7,349
3,216,129
People’s Prud
31/8/02
3,885
'
3,377
251
250
2,000
9,763
tt tt •••
31/8/01
2,432
—
3,506
235
—
250
—
3,500
9,923
Standard
30/6/02
—
189
70,502
376
282
672
109
(3) 7,100
19,230
>t ••• •••
30/6/01
—
5,771
1,473
232
—
1,159
49
6,946
15,630
Aust. Met.
31/8/02
1,697
331
10,135
524
24,612
286
99
899
38,583
tt ••• •••
31/8/01
3,103
"
30,107
1,125
88
25
34,448
(1) Held as mortgagee in possession.
(2) Including mortgaged properties in possession, .£1618
(3) Including New Business Extension Account, .£5500.
Outstanding
Assurance
Reserves for
Paid-up
Reserve
Claims
Outstanding
Year ending.
Funds.
Depreciation.
Capital.
Funds.
Premium
Accounts, etc.
Deposits.
A. M. P. Society
31/12/02
•£18,779,113
£256,040
£185,878
£24,257 £19,245,287
M tt •••
31/12/01
17,864,514
247,735
160,930
23,853
18,297,032
Aust. Alliance
31/8/02
257,469
2,480
125,000
75,000
5,313
3,354
468,616
(t tt
31/8/01
249,778
34,027
125,000
75,000
6,038
7,083
496,885
Aust. Widoivs’
31/10/02
1,577,753
4,366
2,268
4,008
1,588,397
t t
31/10/01
1,509,234
9,324
5,013
3,894
1,527,566
Aust. Temp, and Gen.
30/9/02
319,119
1 909
5,075
326,103
tt it tt tt
30/9/01
278,677
2,530
5,500
286,707
Colonial Mutual Life
31/12/02
2,620,862
85,967
7,402
1,780
2,716,011
31/12/01
2,499,113
96,756
3,908
581
2,600,359
City Mutual Life
31/12/02
238,396
1,500
29
239,925
it a a ... ...
31/12/01
234,002
1,500
30
235.532
Citizens’ Life
31/12./92
942,349
20,000
6,105
2,901
971,355
it tt ... ...
31/12/01
770.448
20,000
1,350
4,924
4,068
800,791
Mutual Life of Australasia
31/12/02
1,638,939
10,189
210
1,649,338
It it tt •••
31/12/01
1,533,693
11,275
167
1,545,135
Nat. Mutual Life
30/9/02
3,460,471
81,915
45,168
4,438
3,591,991
t * tt tt ••• •••
30/9/01
3,265,126
82,316
47/921
3,868
3,399,231
N.Z. Govt. L. Ins. Dept. ...
31/12/01
3,290,644
36,297
33,920
2,265
3,363,126
It tt tt
31/12/00
3,139,957
36,297
12,625
27,250
3,216,129
Peoples’ Prudential
31/8/02
4,631
4,694
238
9,763
tt tt
31/8/01
5,321
4,332
270
9,923
Standard
30/6/02
6,318
12,500
381
19,230
>*
30/6/01
2,786
12,500
344
15,630
Aust. Met. Life
31/8/02
14,788
9,222
607
13,966
38,583
It )t tt ••• ...
31/8/01
25,039
9,182
227
34,448
Statements Showing Assets and Inabilities of the Same Companies.
ASSETS.
LIABILITIES.


TOTAL INCOME.
Name.
Estb.
r Renewal
Year Ending. Premiums.
New
Premiums. For Annuities.
Interest. Other Sources
Totals.
Equitable Life Assurance Society of the TJ.S.
... 1839
31/12/02 ,£8.715,805
31/12/01 7,766,713
£2,155,354
1,864,393
£321,269
277,759
£2,886,149
2,658,28tl
£359,794
506,964
£14,438,371
13,074,113
Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York
... 1843
31/12/02 8,502,833
31/12/01 7,742,881
2,297,564
2,188,303
981,596
667,352
3,050,546
2 788,069
316,252
881,238
15,148,791
14,267,843
New York Life Insurance Co.
... 1845
31/12/02 10,163,757
31/12/01 8,762,604
2,825,481
2,438,181
472,149
406,750
2,660,924
2,288,292
133,396
672,599
16,255,708
14,568,426
Name.
Estb.
TOTAL OUTGO.
Year
Ending. Claims. Surrenders. Annuities.
Cash
Bonuses.
Commission.
Other
Expenses.
Total.
Equitable Life Assurance Society of the TJ.S.
... 1859
31/12/02 £3,649,703 £1,322,873 £158,438
31/12/01 3,623,072 1,186.427 142,717
£920,213
769,087
£1,518,443
1,315 678
£1,094 006
977,370
£8,663,676
8,014,351
Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York
... 1813
31/12/02 (1) 4,392,223 654,255 ’ 373,470
31/12/01 4,534,314 634,583 323,555
517,122
415,981
1,763,974
1,683,086
1,334,240
1,147,243
9,035,284
8,798,762
New York Life Insurance Co
... 1845
31/12/02 4,105,129 976,289 334,245
31/12/01 (2)3,869,158 781,777 321,589
871 368
?08,420
1,889,269
1,381.159
1,466,275
1,370,589
9,642,575-
8,432,692
1. Including £7864 supplementary contracts.
2. Including £4,810 Instalments paid on Trust Policies.
Est
Year Ending.
IUNDS.
Begin-
ning of Year.
End of Year.
Per cen :•
of Interest
to mean of
Principal.
Proportions of
Premiums.
New. Renewal.
New Business.
Policies. Insuring.
Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S.
... 1859
31/12/02
31/12/01
.£67,549,540
62,141,728
.£73,324,234
67,549,540
4-183
4-185'
'
—
—
Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York ...
... 1843
31/12/02
31/12/01
71,975,777
66,506,696
78,089,284
71,975,777
4-150
4-109
21 -27
22-03
78-73
77-97
, -■ -
,, >> )» >> *’
New York Lifr Insurance Co
>> >> » tf
... 1815
31/12/02
31/12/01
59.048,564
53.910,899
65,422,487
59,048,564
4-369
4-309
21-75
21-78
78-25
78-22
155,440
131,398
■£62,220,945-
54,000,779
FIRE.
Among a number of satisfactory features in
connection with fire underwriting in Austra-
lasia, perhaps the most gratifying is that the
column prepared for showing the underwrit-
ing loss is blank throughout in the Austra-
l.L. list, and very -fatly thro.gW a.
Brilisl, list c N,t r i,l„ l .,,di„ f ,11 that is said
8 Til l6 fr 7°f B ], a ? a !^ d lnsurance '
and the effect of hard times on that feature,
aC wefrMe m aS^ mP hr ng f^ leB
tralia Had some of the “ mite” nn'L'll
Hon been asked to m'vp a f n f f +1 «.
i TnsSaln I n I f
iq nl .j i qqo ,-i •„ VinrHlv Hk 1 V lBlllOBB °
wi “ J WO r
p 1° • 1 ffi d w-fl! Cr T lllg ' galn fOl
eve y colonial office With pleasure we con-
gratnlatc oui Australasian offices on their good
fortune and good judgment That losses
s iou e & eiiera y sma er a a ime w en
they might reasonably have been expected to
0 . 7 eXC ™ e In f y s ra 1 y n ]f anc | SI JS"
gOS 8 ; a i,V e 6 or 8 Jmpiove the risks by
the installation of sprinklers, and the provi-
sion of o lei preventive and retardent devices
nave met with encouraging results,
In America the work of risk improvement,
as it is called; is being carried out in a most
thorough manner, and even in conservative
England fire underwriters are beginning to
that ’ after all there is more pro-
111 ghtll ? g fi . r0 ’ and tbus . less ® nln S the
T’ “ m pdmg T rates m the h °P e of
m “ tmg “ T 7 P 7!,'
ST* T , h . e fire of the United
“f™ °ca«
£‘“.l S“h.„ X ““S
no such preventive measures are applied. To
tlle improvement of the met hods of water sup-
pl ?’ to the increased fire brigades ’
to im P rovements ln building construction, to
the encouragement of the use of automatic
sprinklers, to the testing of all kinds of ap-
pliances, and to the enlightenment of property
owners in the Prevention of fires, the fire un-
derwriters of America are devoting the closest
attention. As a result of all this the loss to
the world by fire is being daily reduced.
feature that is worthy of more attention
than it generally rece ives is the fact that all
these improvements are being brought about •
f or y le benefit of two classes, but at the ex-
pense of one Every improvement in fire-
fighting makes it better for those who insure,
and f or those who neglect to insure, but the
expense of it all comes out of the pockets of
those who insure. Thus the prudent and
provident are taxed for the benefit of the im-
prudent and improvident, which is vicious
in principle and totally unjustifiable,
There is another point of view from which
this matter of risk improvement should be
viewccL While dle establishment of labor-
tories and testing stations, and all the thou-
'"U,d »” d *‘«P. *
come far short of minimising the expenses
N OW this is doubly”SsEveS if the et
pens™ not behig really increased, the re-
duction in rates of premiums would have the
effect of increasing the ratio of expenses to
prem ium income. The effect of the installa-
tion of Grinnell sprinklers is to reduce £lOO
0 f premiums to £BO. Thus, the office has
£BO instead of £lOO from which to pay losses
and expenses. Quite likely the £6O required
for losses will be reduced to £2O, but the £3O
f or expenses will remain unaffected, which
means a ratio of expenses to premium income
of 37.5 instead of 30.0, though the expenses
have not really increased a penny. But the
testing of various appliances for fire-fighting,
and all the insurance engineering work that
is now being undertaken for the prevention of
fires must really increase the expenses, and
thus bring about a double increase in the
ratio of expenses. Un the other hand.
American Life Companies Operating in Australasia.


Katio to Premium
Premiums
Income of
Period
less Ile-as-
Expenses.
Underwj
tiling.
Company.
Head Office.
Ending
surance
Losses. and
Under-
Under-
. Total
and
Commission.
Gain.
Loss.
Losses.
Expenses.
writing
writing
Assets.
Eeturus.
Gam.
Loss.
dC
£
£
£
,t
Aust. Alliance
M bourne
31/8/02
55,005
30,958
15,816
8,231
—
56.28
28.75
14.97
(1) 497,701
»J tt
,,
31/8/01
53,211
33,526
14,348
5,337
—
63.00
26.96
10.03
■
(2) 496,885
Aust. Mut. Fire
Svdnev
31/3/03
35,565
10,544
14,326
10,695
—
29.65
40.28
30.09
178,844
tt
,,
31/3/02
34,961
9,618
13,628
11,715
•
27.51
38.98
33.51
172,508
City Mut. Fire
Sydney
31/12/02
14,903(3)
3,336
6,263
5,304
—
22.38
42.03
35.59
335,755
tt tt
31/12/01
13,254(3)
6,245
5,'437
1,572
—*—
47.12
41.02
11.86
36,373
Colonial Mut. Fire
Melbourne
30/9/02
135,212
67,489
46 538
21,186
—
49.91
34.42
15.67
71,084
|i »»
,,
30/9/01
114,870
52,790
37,102 ‘
24,978
—
45.95
32.30
21.74
—
113,795
Derwent and Tamar
Holm 1 1
31/10/02
22,664
11,597
6,243
4,824
—
51.17
27.54
21.29
120,867
tt tt
31/10/01
23,783
17,631
7,083
931
—
74.13
29.78
3.91
115,384
Mercantile Mutual
Sydney
30/6/02
45,061
10,041
24,584
10,435
—
22.28
54.56
23.16
96,336
tt *»
,,
30/6/01
39,324
9,817
19,454
10,053
—
25.00
50.00
25.00
90,682
Mutual Fire of Tas.
L«un«eston
30/9/02
5,828
1,720
2,308
1,800
—
29.51
39.60
30.89
214,673
tt tt
,,
30/9/01
5,659
2,044
2,657
958
—
36.11
46.96
16.93
212,761
Nat. F. and M. of N.Z.
Dunedin
30/9/02
109,476
54,029
33,316
22,131
—
49.35
30.43
20.22
287,396
tt >/
,,
30/9/01
108,120
62,013
31,376
14,731 '
—
57.35
20.02
13.63
268,090
N.Z. Ins. Co.
Anckland
30/11/02
386,960
249,158
104,370
33,432
'
64.39
26.97
8.64
672,003
M . »•
,,
30/11/01
371,487
231,041
101,886
35,560
—
63.00
27.43
9.57
622,208
North Q’land Ins. Co.
Sydney
30/9/02
88,186
55,729
24,228
8,229
—
63.20
27.47
9.33
_ . . -
147,815
„ »
,,
30/9/01
84,908
46,848
24,045
14,015
—
55.18
28.31
16.51
126,846
S. Brit. F. and M. of N.Z.
A uckln nd
31/8/02
248,647
163,067
64,106
21,474
—
65.58
25.78
8.64
405,265
it ft
„
31/8/01
234,239
147,909
62,176
24,154
.
63.14
26.54
10.32
358,669
Standard F. of N.Z.
Dunedin
31/12/02
58,917
30,561
17,209
11,147
—
51.87
29.21
18.92
_____
142,460
it tt
31/12/01
56,893
33,016
16,919
6,958
—
58.03
29.74
12.23
134,747
United Ins. Co.
Sydney
30/9/02
81,215
33,711
29,040
18,464
—
41.51
35.76
22,73
_____
187,865
tt tl
,,
30/9/01
76,347
38,128
27,728
10,491
—
49.94
, 36.32
13.74
-
178,701
Victoria Ins. Co.
Melbourne
30/6/02
87,080
48,727
18,115
20,238
55.96
20.80
23.24
153,170
ft tt
”
30/6/01
82,477
48,253
20,273
13,951
—
58.50
24.58
16.92
—
139,874
(1) and (2) Including Life Assurance and other Funds.
(3) After deduction
of Bonus to Policy Holders.
British Fire, and Fire and Marine Companies Operating in Austra asia.
ent of revenue accounts according to last available statements.
Premiums
Expenses
less Re-as-
and Com-
Underwriting
Ratio to Premium Income of
Head Period
surances
Losses.
mission.
Company.
Office. Ending
and Re-
Gain.
Loss.
Ex-
Total
turns.
Losses.
penses.
Gain.
Loss.
Funds.
£
£
£
£
£
£
Alliance Assurance Co.,
... London 31/12/02
929,990
435,360
324,314
170,316
46.81
34.87
18.32
2,126,165
tt It n
31/12/01
548,660
280,720
192,930
75,010
51.19
35.16
13.67
-
863,392
Atlas Assurance Co.
... London 31/12/02
516,093
271,457
182,746
33,616
52.60
35.41
11.99
461,244
>1 tt
31/12/01
461,963
280,551
155,870
25,502
60.73
33.85
5.42
418,000
Caledonian Insurance Co.
. ... Edinburgh 31/12/01
417,313
283,704
152,732
19,123
71.58
36.60
8.18
2,563,866
»l tt tt
31/12/00
399,326
258,835
143,634
3,173
64.82
35.97
■
0.79
2,513,471
Commercial Union Ass. ...
... London 31/12/02
1,740,052
876,500
578,900
284,652
50.03
33.27
16.70
-
6,250,000
»f tf !>
31/12/01
1,412,030
711,749
449,970
250,311
50.40
31.87
17.73
5,940,328
(Juardian Fire and Life As
s. Co. London 31/12/01
423,651
250,784
142,401
30,463
59.19
33.61
7.20
4,873,280
If ff t,
„ 31/12/00
393,250
258,028
132,101
3,120
65.61
33.59
0.80
-
4,800’000
Liverpool and London and
• Lobe. Liverpool 31/12/02
1,953,630
990,008
637,842
319,480
52.05
33.03
14.02
|
10,468,205
tt tt t> n
„ 31/12/01
1,788,204
1,148,895
590,617
48,692
64.25
33.03
2.72
'
10,512,361
London and Lancashire
... Liverpool 31/12/01
1,134,213
584,774
400,966
148,473
51.56
35.35
13.09
1,847,060
tt tt ft
31/12/00
955,705
483,414
334,763
137,528
50.58
35.03
14.39
1,766,084
London Assurance Corporation London 31/12/0-1
547,638
252,500
193,540
101,598
46.11
35.35
18.54
4,215,074
tt tf ft
31/12/01
451,924
255,872
155,850
40,202 .
56.62
34.49
8.89
4,020,349
Manchester Fire Assurance
i Co. Manchester31/12/02
732,910
442,795
274,804
15,310
60.41
37.49
2.10
745,092
» t.
31/12/01
829,859
758,112
316,452
244,794
91.35
38.12
29.74
773,262
North British and Mercani
tile... London 31/12/01
1,623,814
1,116,272
559,500
51,958
68.74
34.46
.
3.20
15,722 693
ft ft It tt
31/12/00
1,546,853
972,212
524,312
75,305
62.85
33.90
3.25
15,339,593
Northern Assurance Co.
... A berdeen 31/12/01
852,927
526,831
281,707
44,386
61.77
33.03
5.20
.
6,145 899
tt ft
31/12/00
752,309
417,188
259,076
76,045
55.45
34.44
10.1
5,897,994
Norwich Union Fire
... Norwich 31/12/01
1,036,475
743,532
369,350
76,407
71.74
35.63
.
7.37
1,248,515
tt >t tt
31/12/00
1,004,692
637,836
349,073
17,782
63.49
34.74
1.77
1,344,608
Patriotic Assurance Co.
... Dublin 31/12/01
83,269
82,462
29,347
379,036
tt t*
31/12/00
96,707
63,963
31,963
781
66.14
33.05
0.81
394j 428
Phoenix Assurance Co.
... London 31/12/02
1,415,613
885,739
434,646
95,257
62.57
30.70
6.73
1,889,980
tt It It
31/12/01
1,385,674
947,220
426,017
12,437
68.36
30.74
0.90
■
L834.993
Royal Insurance Co.
... Liverpool 31/12/01
2.509,720
1,484,880
861,475
163,365
58.17
34.32
6.51
11,988,026
„ ,» »
31/12/00
2,078,298
1,240,060
713,388
124,849
59.67 .
34.32
6,01
10,363351
Royal Exchange Ass. Corp’n ... London 31/12/01
518,123
320,111
170,574
27,399
61.78
32.92
5.30
'
4,853,173
„ » „ t,
31/12/00
478,498
271,934
157,159
49,405
56.83 .
32.84
10.33
-
4,683^95
Scottish Union and Nat.
... Edinburgh 31/12/01
582,644
393,038
197,282
7,676
67.46
33.86
1.32
5,076,057
It tt It tt
31/12/00
573,271
386,749
191,653
5,131
67.46
33.43
0.89
4393383
State Fire Insurance Co.
... Liverpool 31/12/02
129,566
67,922
43,715
17,919
52.43
33.74
13.83
174,915
It ft It It
31/12/01
102,795
61,759
36,578
4.458
60.08
35.58
4.34
.
157,677
Sun Insurance Office
... London 31/12/01
1,165,346
670,634
398,556
96,156
57.55
34.20
8.25
2,465,283
If ft f
31/12/00
1,070,556
030,385
372,213
67,958
58.88
34.77
6.35
—
2,104309
Australasian Fire, and Fire and Marine Insurance Companies.
STATEMENT OF REVENUE ACCOUNTS ACCORDING TO LAST AVAILABLE BALANCE SHEETS.


work in connection with fire underwrff ° CB '
also being improved and this tend« fr.
sening of expenses’ The “card index” 6 6S "
tern if beinPfound increasing n T
regard and the tendency to amalcrnm f §
offices’and thus do more
f re pondingly inerted staff il *
coiresponaingiy increased staff, is having a
Thelowering of tf T
penses. the lowering of premiums too, by
the encouragement thus given to additional
business will help to lower the proportion of
T* u° c oso . J an( * scientifically watched. It
J‘ as said, too, that there is a desire on
he P of the underwriters to encourage the
f ° rmatlol \ ° f an insurance engineering associ-
3 l°'l’ . and luite1 uite recently this has been advo-
P a P crread before the Insurance
? St ' tute ° f New S °? th Wa , les b >’ Mr ' Geo ' B -
Smith, whose remarks on this head were cor-
117 -’ andb / some enthusiastically, received.
It is gratifying to find the prospects of fire
underwriting in Australia improving notice-
ably, and it is to be hoped that the breaking
New South Wales by the formation of an Ac-
cident Underwriters’ Association. All the
accident offices are represented on this new
beard, and the veteran fire and accident un-
derwriter, Mr. S. Hague Smith, the Secretary
for New South Wales of the Colonial Mutual
Fire Insurance Company, is the Chairman
The other members are Mr J St Vincent
Welch, the well-known head of the Commer-
cial Union Assurance Company • Mr J J
Allen, the General Manage/ for Australia of
the Ocean Accident Corporation; Mr. John
COMMITTEE OF THE ACCIDENT UNDERWRITERS' ASSOCIATION.
expenses, but, on the whole, the ratio of ex-
penses to premium income will be kept from
rising onh- by the strictest economy.
In cannot be said that in Australia there
has been a great deal of attention given to
this matter of risk improvement, yet it has to
be admitted that at least something is being
done. It has been announced that exceed-
be R, e 7 re/teTin bl sXV P anT S that in their co/
struction the minimisation of the fire risk
of the drought will have the effect of greatly
stimulating the business. With the increase
of wealth that must rapidly follow the fructi-
tying rains with which the country has been
blessed, we doubt nor that fire insurance, in
common with a o er in s o insurance,
will reap handsomely-increased harvests.
<-vmTnvrr A CUT TU> A
ACCIDENT ASSURANCE.
Accident insurance has recently been more
prominently brought before the public of
Goodwyn, the General Manager for Australia
0 f the Norwich and London Accident Assur-
ance Company; Mr. A. E. D’Arcy, Manager
for New gouth Wales of the New Zea i and
Aceident i nsurance Company; and Mr. E. S
Chapman, General Agent for Australia of the
Employers’ Liability Assurance Corporation.
Mr- A. H. H. Aldworth is Secretary of the
Association. A reasonable tariff has been
agreed upon, and accident business is, therefore,
ip full swing op sound lines,


Insurance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.
LIFE ASSURANCE.
The Australian Mutual
Provident Society.
The story of the rise and progress of the Austra-
lian Mutual Provident Society, from its small
beginning 54 years ago, to the proud position
which it occupies to-day, as one of the greatest
financial institutions in Austialia, the largest life-
office of its class in the British Empire, and one of
the largest in the world, is of great interest, and
reads almost like a fairy tale. This story is a
tribute to the public spirit and foresight of those
who, with small hope of personal benefit, were res-
ponsible for the inception of the Society, and to
the enterprise, resourcefulness and thrift of the
Australian people. The formation of the Society
seems to have been the outcome of a conversation
between three gentlemen whose names are well-
known in connection with the history of New
South Wales—the Rev. IV. H. Walsh, Thomas
Holt, and Thomas Sutcliffe Mort. The result of
this conversation was a meeting on 31st August,
1848, at which, in addition to the gentlemen
named, Charles Lowe and William Perry were
present, when a draft prospectus, which had been
prepared by Mr. Walsh, was submitted, and Mr.
Perry was appointed Secretary. Further meet-
ings were held, and other gentlemen were invited
to join in the undertaking, the patronage of the
Governor, Sir Charles Fitzroy, was obtained, and
bn 15th December, 1848, a meeting was held in the
Society’s own office—an upper room on the west-
ern side of Geoige-street, then No. 487, near Hun-
ter-street. At this meeting Trustees, Directors
and Auditors were appointed, and this date may
be'considered the birthday of the Society. It is
not to be supposed that even the most sanguine
and far-seeing of the sponsors of the infant
Society could have predicted for it the enormous
success which the years have brought. Indeed,
they had small cause for hopefulness in the coh-
dition, in 1848, of what were to become the Aus-
tralasian Colonies and, in the dim distance, the
Commonwealth of Australia, as the following
summary, taken from the Society’s Jubilee Report,
will show:—“ At the date of the establishment of
the Society the colony of New South Wales em-
braced the entire territory now occupied by New
South Wales, Victoria, and Queensland, with a
total population of 220,474. Only fourteen years
earlier Edward and Francis Henty had foimed the
first settlement at Portland, in Victoria, and only
ten years earlier Captain Lonsdale had selected
the site of Melbourne. Queensland was practically
Moreton Bay, where a convict settlement had been
formed in 1825, and it was not until the Society
was nearly three years old that Moreton Bay had
a representative in the New South Wales Parlia-
ment. Twelve years before the foundation of the
Society, South Australia had been colonized under
the auspices of the " South Australian Coloniza-
tion Society,” and by 1848 numbered about 41,000
settlers. West Australia had been settled from
Sydney in 1826, and in 1829 the Swan River
Settlement was formed, but so slow was the progress
that in 1848 the population had not leached 5000.
Beyond the continent the island of Tasmania,
though it had been settled from Sydney in 1803,
had only attracted a population of about 68,C00 in
1848. New Zealand was in the purely infantile
stage. The Treaty of Waitangi was signed, and
AUSTRALIAN MUTUAL PROVIDENT SOCIETY’S BUILDINGS, 87 PITT-STREET, SYDNEY.
Wellington and Auckland founded in 1840. In
the following year New Plymouth and Nelson
came into being, while the great Province of
Otago claims equal age with the Society. The
total white population of New Zealand was about
17,000. It was under these circumstances, with a
possible constituency of about 351,000 persons of
all ages and both sexes, most of the wage-earning
portion of whom were struggling settlers with little
means pr inclination for life assurance, scattered
over an area of more than 3,000,000 square miles,
with but few means of communication between
many parts, and with none at all between others,
that the Society was born.”
A further curious sidelight is thrown on the
development of the City of Sydney at the same
period by the following extract, which refers to
that part of George-street in which the Society’s
first office was situated, and which is taken from
the interesting book “ Sydney in 1818”:—" In this
quarter land has of late years sold for a very
high price, and often found ready purchasers at
■£2o per foot. Yet, within the memory of man, it
had scarcely a nominal value; we are even assured
that the site of several houses near the Bank of
New South Wales was exchanged for a bottle of
rum within the last thirty years! So rapidly has
our metropolis advanced in spite of every discour-
agement and difficulty.”


At end
No. of
Sum
of
Policies.
Assured.
Funds.
£
£
5 years
266
101,330
6,583
10 „
1,140
566,085
41,601
15 „
3,990
1,891,124
198,615
20 „
8,663
3,781,020
602,085
25 „
17,511
6,977,795
1,313,853
30 „
35,218
13,392,121
2,606,053
35 „
55,729
20,293,409
4,924,713
40 „
87,070
30,691,196
8,169,311
45 „
119,232
39,331,071
11,954,587
50 „
142,728
43,426,002
15,179.049
54 „
176,815
50,763,590
18,779,113
The experience of the Society’s first year was
not encouraging, and certainly did not tend to
dispel any anxiety which the consideration of
these conditions may have raised. The business
at the end of the year consisted of 30 life policies
for .-£9150, four endowment policies for .£350, and
eight deferred annuity policies for £240 per annum.
It was a day of small things, and gave no hint of
future greatness. The Directors in the first An-
nual Report point out, in reference to the small-
ness of the business effected, that the “ amount
might have been much increased, but the Direc-
tors, with a due regard to the safety of the Society,
have exercised great caution in accepting lives
that are not first class, and have limited the
amount to be insured on the life of one person to
£500.” Indeed, the caution exercised, viewed from
a modern standpoint, seems to have been extreme,
for on 19th September, 1849, the Board declined
a proposal for assurance on the life of the master
of the schooner " Eliza,” trading to Newcastle, “ in
consequence of the risk.” It was the practice in
these early years to require applicants for assur-
ance to personally present themselves before the
Directors, a practice which does not seem to have
been finally discontinued until 1866. On the whole
ME. R. TEECE, F.I.A., F.F.A., F.S.S.,
General Manager and Actuary.
the first Annual Report is not a cheerful docu-
ment, but in one direction at least it shews cause
for congratulation. The Society had been called
upon to pay no claim. In fact, the first death claim
did not arise until 1852. One cannot help speculat-
ing as to the result had one or more risks fallen in
in the first year.
Progress was for some time very slow, and in
spite of the resolution of the Board early in 1850,
that two-thirds of the surplus disclosed at the
first quinquennial investigation should be allotted
to such of the first 100 policies as should then be in
existence, it was not until April, 1851, that this
number was reached. The oldest policy now in
force is No. 21 on the life of Mr. J. M. Pearse, and
it is curious to compare it, and its numerous and
cast-iron conditions, with the practically condi-
tiouless policy of to-day. In the early days
policy-holders were subjected to many disabilities.
These are summarised in the Jubilee Report as
follows:
" Extra premiums were charged to policemen,
gaol warders, railway guards, mariners, bakers,
millers, gold miners and residents in Queensland;
a yachting trip outside the Heads endangered the
validity of the policy; any want of knowledge on
the part of an applicant of his personal or family
history usually resulted in an addition to his age.
if the premium was not paid the policy lapsed.'”
The validity of the policy of to-day, however,
except that it contains a provision with regard to
suicide within thirteen months, is conditional only
on the payment of the premiums, and so long as it
has a surrender value default, even in this par-
ticular, does not prejudicially affect the policy.
Members may engage in any occupation or calling,
and may travel all over the world, or reside in
any part of it, without license or payment of extra
premium.
To the late Mr. M, A. Black, who was Actuary
of the Society from 1868 until his death in 1890,
must be given the credit of suggesting to the
directors the wisdom of sweeping away the whole
of the unnecessary and annoying restrictions with
which the policies of the Society, in common with
those of other offices, were in those early years en-
cumbered. Further than this, under his advice the
Society’s practice in all directions uas liberalised
and its methods of valuation were modernised,
while the old plan of allotting the surplus, which
in its effects was fast becoming increasingly in-
equitable, was replaced by another of Mr. Black's
own devising, which is still in use. These radical
changes were only made after consultation with
prominent English actuaries, Mr, Black proceeding
to England in 1872 for the purpose with a case for
opinion. Foremost among the liberal provisions
for policy-holders made at this time, and most
far-reaching in its beneficent effects, may be speci-
ally mentioned that to which reference has already
been made, for applying the surrender values to
maintain policies in force in the event of members
omitting to pay premiums. Every policy attains
a surrender value after two years’ premiums have
been paid, and the application of the surrender
value to the payment of overdue premiums is made
without any request from the member. Moreover,
the principle is fully carried out, for every pre-
mium advanced is assumed to be paid and the re-
maining surrender value is correspondingly in-
creased. Some idea of the extent to which these
non-forfeiture regulations have been availed of
may be gathered from the facts that nearly four
hundred thousand policies have been thus sus-
tained, while upwards of twenty thousand are
being kept in force at the present time.
For the first 35 years of its history the profits
of the Society were divided among the members
quinquennially. At the close of the seventh quin-
quennium in 1883 the Directors found themselves
with upwards of one million pounds to divide as
the result of five years’ operations. In view of the
vast strides which had been made it was felt that
the time had arrived for annual allotments of
surplus, and from 1884 onwards these have been
carried out. The Society now divides each year
more than half a million cash.
The enormous progress of the Society is strik-
ingly shown by the following figures, which repre-
sent the number and amount of the policies in
force and the funds at intervals of five years and
at the present time
It has been mentioned that the first claim ou the
Society, which was for £lOO, arose in 1852. Since
then the Society has been fulfilling its destiny by
paying to the representatives of deceased members
each year amounts which, with slight fluctuations,
have gradually increased, until in 1902 £643,279 12s.
was so paid. The total amount paid in death claims
to date is no less than £10,323,593, while in addi-
tion £2,966,243 have been handed to members on the
maturity of endowment and endowment assurance
policies. It is impossible to estimate the misery
and privation which have been avoided through
the agency of the Society. Although the extreme
precautions with regard to the admission of new
members which characterised the early years of
the Society have been somewhat relaxed in so far
as the light of modern experience has shown them
to be unnecessary, exceptional care has always
been exercised in the selection of lives. The result
has been that the mortality experience has been
extremely favourable. In no year have the claims
MR. R. B. CAMERON,
Secretary.
reached 72 per cent, of what might have been ex-
pected in terms of the mortality table assumed in
the valuations. In their large bonuses members
of the Society have been reaping the benefit of this
favourable mortality combined with the economical
management and the high rate of interest on its
investments. On two occasions exhaustive investi-
gations of the mortality experience have been made,
and the results published. The first embraced the
operations of the first 30 years, and the second
those of the first 40 years of the Society’s history.
A third investigation, which will deal with the 50
years up to and including 1898, is now in hand, and
with the much larger volume of data available
should prove even more interesting and more in-
structive than the earlier investigations.
For a good many years after the foundation of
the Society all its business was conducted from
Sydney. The local agents, who, with the progress
of the business had been appointed throughout the
colonies, were compelled to refer all except unim-
portant matters to the head office. This neces-
sity pressed hardly upon all members resident out


of New South Wales, and the Board, recognising
this, established branch offices in each of the colo-
nies as the expansion of the business warranted
it. The first branch office was opened in Victoria
in 1863, and this was followed at intervals by the
branches in New Zealand, South Australia,
Queensland, Tasmania, and West Australia, the
last named having been established in 1831. Each
of these branches is under the control of a Local
Board of Directors appointed by the principal
Board. The Local Boards are entrusted with the
acceptance of proposals, the issue of policies, the
investment of funds, and, in fact, with the entire
management of the local affairs of the Society,
subject, of course, to the cardinal principles laid
down by the Head Office Board. In addition to the
branch offices, district offices have been established
in all the most important towns throughout the
Commonwealth and New Zealand. These are
managed by District Secretaries appointed from
the Society’s staff, and, with fuller powers, have
taken the place of the local agencies formerly en-
trusted with the collection of premiums.
The Society’s staff consisted at first of a Secre-
tary, who, in common with the Directors, received
no remuneration at all for nearly two years, and
an office boy, who, if one may credit certain tra-
ditions, was not overworked. On the 31st De-
cember, 1902, the,staff numbered 360. Speaking of
the Society’s staff arrangements, Mr. Teece, in the
Jubilee Report already quoted from, says:—
" All clerks entering the service must be not less
than 16 nor more than 18 years of age; they are
required to submit to an educational test, and
must pass a satisfactory medical examination. The
term of apprenticeship is three years. At the ter-
mination of this period those who have the capa-
city and are anxious to increase their technical
knowledge are subjected to an examination in
actuarial science, the law of life assurance, and the
practice of the business. The result of this exami-
nation determines I heir increases in salary for an-
other three years, at the end of which period those
who wish to proceed further are subjected to an-
other examination, of a more advanced character,
which determines their salary increments for an-
other three years. At the end of nine years they
are ready for promotion to positions of trust and
responsibility in the service. For those who do
not choose to pursue technical studies, a scheme
of classification is in existence by which the annual
salaries are graded according to years of service
until a maximum of .£250 per annum is reached,
after which they are determined by the Board at
an annual review. Each clerk is entitled to a fort-
night’s leave of absence every year. To the opera-
tion of these regulations, and to the fact that for
more than a quarter of a century (of which I can
speak from personal knowledge) no Director has
attempted to exercise any patronage, the Society
owes the existence of a staff the members of which
have, in the majorty of cases, known no other ser-
vice, possess special aptitude for the work they
are required to perform, are proud of the honour-
able traditions of the office, and loyal to its inte-
rests.”
In 1888 a superannuation scheme under the name
of the Officers’ Provident Fund was established.
Every member of the staff is required to contribute
2| per cent, of his salary. As a nucleus of the fund
a grant of £25,000 was made by the Society, this
sum representing back payments from officers then
on the staff. The scheme provides for a retiring
allowance after not less than 20 years’ service, the
amount of which is dependent upon average salary
and length of service. Retirement is optional at
age 60, but compulsory at age 70. Provision is also
made for the payment of a gratuity in the event of
retirement, from incapacity after 10 years’ service
and within 20 years.’ The fund commenced with
£25,000 as indicated, and applied to a permanent
staff of 146. It now amounts to £65,177 Is. 7d.,
and the number of contributors is 360. In addi-
tion to contributing to the fund, each member of
the staff is required to assure his life.
For the efficient carrying on of the business, the
Society’s staff is necessarily divided into depart-
ments. Among others there are the New Busi-
ness, Accountant’s, Correspondence, Claims, and
Computing Departments. In the last-named de-
partment, which, from a layman’s standpoint, is
perhaps the most interesting, because the least
understood, a staff is continuously engaged in
operations which, broadly speaking, have for their
object, first, the discovery of the year’s surplus,
and, secondly its distribution among the policies
entitled to participate. Needless to say, the opera-
tions involved are very various, very numerous,
and must be carried out with great exactness.
Without the mechanical aids to calculation which
are largely availed of, it would be impossible for
the staff to finish the work in the time at their
disposal. Chief among the calculating machines
employed must be placed the “ Arithmometer,” an
instrument invented in France, but much improved
and now manufactured in England. These
machines, of which a number are in very frequent
use, are primarily employed for multiplication and
division, though other mathematical operations,
such as the extraction of square root, are easily
within their powers'. It has been discovered by
actual trial that one man with an arithmometer can
do the same amount of computing work as ten men
without, and do it far more correctly and with far
less expenditure of mental energy. Those who see
the working of the arithmometer for the first
time, and find that what are popularly regarded as
purely mental operations are performed by it in
an absolutely mechanical way, are inclined to look
upon it as rather uncanny. But although famili-
arity breeds contempt and constant users of the
arithmometer stand in no particular awe of it, it is
probably only they who are able fully to appreci-
ate the practical indispensability of it for the pur-
poses for which it is used. The only serious rival
of the arithmometer in its own domain which has
arrived in Australia is the “ Brunsviga,” a Ger-
man machine, which does the same work in a
somewhat similar way, and possesses some advant-
ages, especially in the matter of compactness and
portability. The Society also possesses and uses
one of these. The two machines named being so
similar, and so near apparent perfection, it was
somewhat of a shock to get tidings the other day
of a new machine, which bears the suggestive
title of “ The Millionaire,” which hails from Swit-
zerland. This is said by competent authorities to
do all that its forerunners did, in about one-fifth
the time, with one-fifth the labour. The descrip-
tion of the “ millionaire” seems to bear out these
claims at least in part, while, to cap them, a fore-
cast is made of an electrical attachment to the
machine which will do away with even the slight
physical exertion at present necessary to obtain re-
sults with it. As the Society always endeavours to
keep abreast of the times in those departments of
human activity which come within its scope, it
will no doubt hasten to possess itself of a " mil-
lionaire.” Besides the mechanical aids to calcula-
tion which have been named, others, which are
mainly useful for addition, are employed, though
not to the same extent, by the computing staff.
Foremost among these is Burroughs’ Registering
Accountant, an American invention, which not
only adds any number of amounts (in pounds, shil-
lings and pence if necessary), but at the same time
prints them neatly in columns, and finally prints
the total at foot. It is mainly useful, of course, for
the summation of amounts which are not already
placed under one another in a column.
The world-wide tendency towards a reduction in
the rate of interest obtainable on investments,
which came late to Australia, had for some years
prior to 1892 begun to make itself apparent in the
Society's operations. The liabilities had from the
first been valued at 4 per cent., and there had al-
ways been a substantial margin between this rate
and that actually realised. This margin, how-
ever, was gradually decreasing, and the wisdom
of reducing the valuation rate, and thus streng-
thening the resources, engaged the attention of the
Directors. For the second time in the Society’s
history, therefore, a case for opinion dealing with
this and other matters was prepared and submitted
to three of the foremost actuaries in England, the
General Manager proceeding to London for the
purpose of personally consulting the gentlemen
selected. The result was that the policy proposed
by Mr. Teece was fully endorsed. The changes in
the valuation methods were duly carried out, and
the effect has been that the stability of the Society
—never in question—is to-day greater than at any
time throughout its career. The report by the
referees on the case for opinion concludes with
these words. —“ We desire to add that the careful
investigation which we have instituted into the
operations of the Society since the reference in
1872, and the adoption of the recommendations
then made, has satisfied us that its progress since
that date has exceeded the most sanguine anticipa-
tions that could then have been formed regarding
its future. We have no hesitation in asserting our
belief that it is destined for a career of increasing
usefulness, and that the success to which it has
attained has been well deserved, as the reward
of careful administration and prudent manage-
ment.”
On the 31st December, 1898, the Society com-
pleted its first 50 years, and in the following May
the Jubilee was duly celebrated. Delegates from
each of the Local Boards, as well as all the Resi-
dent Secretaries, were invited to Sydney, and the
Head Office and Branch staffs were variously enter-
tained.
The present and first holder of the office of
General Manager and Actuary of the Society is Mr.
Richard Teece, F.1.A., F.F.A., F.S.S., who entered
the service in 1866, and successively filled the posi-
tions of Chief Clerk and Secretary before being
appointed to his present position in 1890 on the
death of Mr. Black. The Secretary is Mr. R. B.
Cameron, who was admitted at the Victoria
Branch as a junior clerk in 1863, and before being
appointed in 1890, in succession to Mr. Teece, to
the office which he now holds, was Resident Secre-
tary in Tasmania and South Australia respectively.
In conclusion, there is no good reason why, with
the enlightened, careful, and economical manage-
ment which has always characterised it, the Aus-
tralian Mutual Provident Society should not con-
tinue to grow and flourish indefinitely. For more
than 50 years it has been a power for good in this
community, collecting and carefully husbanding
the payments of its members, equitably dividing its
large profits, promptly and honestly paying its
claims, preaching the gospel of self-help, dispen-
sing much needed assistance without the stigma of
charity, and well exemplifying its motto,
« AMICUS CERTUS IN RE INCERTA.”


City Mutual Life Assurance
Society, Ltd.
The City Mutual Life Assurance Society, Ltd., is
a Sydney office whose history dates back to 1878,
when the late Mr. J. P. Garvan, in conjunction
with a few other ardent devotees of life assurance,
established it. At that time the office had a very
modest upstair room in the old Waterloo Cham-
bers, George Street, and its progress for some years
was comparatively slow. However, with the good
times experienced by the Colony during the
five years 1885 to 1890, the Society’s posi-
tion was very considerably improved during
that period. When the present Manager, Mr.
George Crowley, who entered the service of
the Society at its inception, took command,
he instituted a policy of sound, cautious
MR. GEORGE CROWLEY,
Manager.
and conservative administration, with the result
that the institution now ranks among the very
first of life assurance offices in the world. Not by
any means as regards magnitude, for there are
Societies whose daily income amounts to more than
the quarter of a million of solidly invested funds
possessed by the City Mutual. The strength of the
City Mutual lies rather in its liberal policy con-
tracts to the assured, its peculiarly safe methods of
conducting its business, and its solid investments.
It is claimed by the management that no office in
the world issues a contract of a more liberal na-
ture than the City Mutual Life. And it is evi-
dent that very considerable care is taken in the
selection of lives for assurance, inasmuch as the
claim list each year is something like 50 per cent,
of the actual expectation.
For the first time in the history of life assurance
in the world, the City Mutual some years ago in-
stituted a system of giving hospital treatment to its
policy holders where necessary. It also instituted a
system whereby every member, after three years’
payments had been made, was entitled to a free
pojicy equivalent to the whole of the premiums
paid in by him. It also introduced an innovation
in life assurance practice whereby, in the event of a
member being totally disabled, the whole of the in-
surance money at once became payable, and in the
event of partial disablement a proportion of the
policy money immediately fell due.
These and many other minor matters, which, al-
though not much in themselves as affecting the in-
terests of a ten thousand pounds policy holder,
were of inestimable benefit in dealing with the
average assurer, have made the name of the City
Mutual a popular one wherever the Society has
done business. In the Railway Service of New
South Wales, where there are something like four
CITY MUTUAL LIFE ASSURANCE SOCIETY. LTD.
OFFICES, CORNER OF HUNTER AND BLIGH STREETS, SYDNEY.
thousand employees, there is only one institution
whose constituents in the service number anything
like the large proportion secured by the City Mu-
tual. In the Civil Service of the State, the Water
and Sewerage Board, the Fire Brigades’ Companies,
and in other institutions where compulsory insur-
ance is the rule, the name of the City Mutual
looms very largely indeed,
The Society has branches in the neighbouring
States of Queensland and Victoria, and transacts a
very satisfactory business there, as well as in the
parent State. The photo of the building repro-
duced herein shows that the Society is comfortably
housed, but. owing to the large increase in the So-
ciety’s operations, more and more encroachments
must soon be made on the offices now reserved for
the tenants and the public.
insurance. .
■Historical and Biographical Sketches. Continued.
LIFE ASSURANCE.


The Equitable Life Assurance
Society of the United States.
Any public or private institution which has for
its object the promotion of thrift, the amelioration
of poverty, and the providing of monetary aid to
the needy, the widowed and the orphaned, is worthy
of the fullest support and publicity. The pheno-
menal progress recorded by that great institution,
the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S.
throughout the entire globe, is a eelf evident
example of its power for good and a sure guarantee
that its methods of business and the advantages it
offers to its policyholders are deserving of the sup-
port accorded it and the world-wide reputation the
Equitable holds as the leading Anglo-American life
office. The story of its career is unique.
Nearly forty-four years ago in the City of New
York was established a new Life Assurance Society.
This was soon to be known throughout the world
as the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the
United States, and was organized and developed by
Mr. Henry B. Hyde, who had been for some years
an officer on the staff of the Mutual Life of New
York, when he conceived the ambitious scheme of
forming a Life Office on his own account. To carry
out this scheme he resigned his position in the
Mutual and proceeded to gather the amount of
.£20,000 required by the New York State as a
deposit from all Life Companies before granting
permission to commence business. This deposit,
however, was soon made, an office rented on
the first floor of the building on the ground floor
of which was the Mutual Life Office and the Equit-
able Life Assurance Society became a fact. It was
part of Mr. Hyde’s scheme that the new office
should be a purely mutual one, notwithstanding
the provisions of the State Law, above referred to,
requiring the deposit of .£20,000.He, therefore,
decided that the Society should be conducted on a
strictly mutual basis, all the profits being divided
amongst the policy holders, and that payments to
the guarantors of the .£20,000 deposit should be
limited to the then legal rate of interest of 7 per-
cent.’per annum, payable half-yearly. This was
insisted upon at the first meeting of the organizers,
and incorporated in the Charter of the Society.
The w-hole of the immense profits of the Equitable
belong, therefore, to its policyholders, and are by
the Charter absolutely vested in them, the interest
payable on the deposit of .£20,000 being limited by
the Charter and treated as a fixed annual charge
in the same fashion as any other disbursement.
The first President of the Society was Mr. W. C.
Alexander, who continued to hold that office until
his death in 1874, when Mr. Hyde was elected to
the proud position, which he filled for the remain-
der of his life—a period of nearly 25 years.
The history of the Equitable is so bound up with
that of Mr. Hyde that the story of one is the story
of the other. In his capacity as the first Manage:
of the Society his energy was such that at the end
of December, 1859 (less than six months from its
establishment) the Assets amounted to .£21,396,
while the Assurance in force was 26238,333. The fol-
lowing and succeeding years saw still greater busi-
ness, and in December, 1869, these items had grown
respectively to 262,189,775 and to 6627,963,304, with
an income of 261,305,915. Since that time the
Society has ever been growing in a wonderful
manner, which has become well nigh marvellous
during the last ten years. In 1892 the Assets were
£31,887,511, the Assurance in force £177,283,801, and
the income .£8,465,182, while at the end of Decern-
her, 1902, the figures were as follows:—Assets,
£73,855,783; Assurance in force, £205,597,775; and In-
come, .£14.124,944.
The Equitable has not only grown in magnitude,
it has grown in strength. Some thirty years ago
the Directors, with great foresight and discern-
ment, created a Surplus Fund, which should be a
reserve against all manner of contingencies, and at
the same time provide for the payment of the pro-
fits under the Society’s deferred bonus contracts.
This Surplus Fund was devised to strengthen the
position of the Society, which it has done to a mar-
vellous extent. It has increased from year to year,
until at the end of 1902 it reached the tremendous
figure of £15,418,151. This Surplus is, beyond all
question, the strongest Reserve Fund held by any
similar institution in the world. When taken with
the amount of .£58,000,000 which is alreadyheld as
security for the payment of its liabilities under the
Assurance in force, this surplus enables the Society
to hold the splendid sum of £1263 for every £lOOO
of those liabilities. Moreover, it so strengthens the
Society’s position that if the adoption of an all-
round 3 per cent, valuation rate were considered
necessary it could be done immediately without
undue entrenchment on the policyholders inte-
rest, and still admit of a surplus of over
£10,000,000. Such strength is absolutely unassail-
able.
In all dealings with its policyholders, the Equit-
able has been most liberal. It has tried to aid their
EQUITABLE BUILDING, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
insurance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
LIFE ASSURANCE.


way divine eTery P° ss
options available At the s ™ t Ca f e
hVs been evteUeH in tl extreme care
ment of the Society the cnn=vi 8 *? eneia * manage-
cations fn, . ° f , y, apph :
core is shown onrl no effort „ e . r w w uc .k great
mrrpcf psfimnf* nf fV>t> rid* ifr 16 ** ? rrive at a
hv tViP ooioni, + e ° r < it 18 acce Pt e( l
to be chaiwprl nUo ccii= toe *t„ 10n , .i,Premiums
rist is ncppotpf) or r,uch thought, and no
hoPTi most nirofniiynrr j e< ”. ,v lltdl as no '
m otter of pvnpnditnrp is T. , n aga ' n ’ the
Zct it ° De " ,Uch unde,
feature in ?he ntirior supelvl /‘°? 18 *
mu n it f Society,
fn ho Ce °* rls *rs, premiums
of vifni in™*. 1 !,' 1 ! iture, are matters which
whinh ia full. v.' 8I ?i. ce ’ a ac *-
the 1 mana S emen t of
. Tf ? ,j ho oi f u it,
fho FnnUohi o S ° n ° 8 i iv the investments of
q e re amongs the best in the world.
growth of years, and have been adopted by the
Equitable wherever the status of the policyholder
would be improved by the adoption. A main fea-
ture is the granting of certain guaranteed options
to , tlle policyholder during the currency of the
policy. These options are mainly guaranteed cash
or loan value, loans or paid-up assurance or ex-
tended assurance. The amounts of the cash values,
loans or paid-up assurance, and the terms of the
extended assurance are stated in the policy for each
J ear after the third, so that policyholders can tell
at any time exactly how they stand with the
Society, as regards the options under their con-
tracts.
It is also a distinct advantage to policyholders to
know that their policies become incontestable after
the expiration of two years, a privilege, indeed, the
value of which it is difficult to over-estimate.
The management of the Equitable has been
marked by great enterprise and liberality. It has
left no civilised region of the earth unexploited as
regards its possibilities of development. It has
conduct the business of the Society. These Boards,
which are essentially Australian, are composed of
leading men, widely and favourably known in the
several States, and, indeed, it may be said that the
Australian Branch is really an Australian institu-
tion, so identified with the interests of these States
are those who manage its affairs. The Equitable has
consequently obtained the full confidence of the
Australian public, who have therefore given it a
very large share of their support, as evidenced by
the new premium income for 1902 being, with one
exception, greater than that of any other office doing
business in Australasia.
The management of the Society fully appreciates
the trust and reliance which has been placed in
them by the Australian policyholders, and as an
earnest of such appreciation have erected two mag-
nificent buildings—one in Sydney and the other in
Melbourne. These handsome and substantial edi-
fices, truly characteristic of the Society which
created them, stand as lasting monuments to the
Society’s stability and prosperity, and afford an
INTERIOR VIEW OF EQUITABLE BUILDINGS, SYDNEY.
MARBLE CORRIDOR LEADING TO THE EQUITABLE SOCIETY’S OFFICES.
These are valued annually and are subject
to confirmation by an independent authority,
appointed by the State of New York (a
necessarily impartial valuator), and this valuation
is accepted by the office and incorporated in the
annual statement So remunerative are these in-
vestments tint the Societv’s vain through the in-
crease in these valuations during the past five
years has amounted to over ,£2,000,000.
J ’ ' , ~
A complete list of each investment, ana the se-
curity invested in, is made up by the society
annually, and distributed amongst the policy-
holders. Such a publication as this is, untortu-
nately, not made by any Australian Life Office.
The movement of the Equitable has always been
abreast of the times and this progressive policy
has in the Society's contracts being the
most liberal and up to date yet placed before the
public All harassing restrictions have been
abolished liberal conditions have been granted,
and the general contract of assurance simplified in
every possible way. These modifications have been
carried its motto of “ Not for a day but for all
time” to all corners of the earth, and has spread the
gospel of life assurance among all civilised people.
Its branches may be found in every English
speaking country and in every land, where civilised
men exist. From Sweden in the north to New
Zealand and the Argentine in the south; from San
Francisco in the west to Japan in the east, the
realm of the Equitable extends. A policyholder
travelling round the world can pay his premiums,
co n ec t his annuity, or, if needs be, obtain an ad-
vance 0 n his policy in almost any country. In fact,
Equitable is a great International Society. This
enterprise has been exceedingly reproductive,
f or the amount of assurance in force which the So-
ciety holds outside America is over £70,000,000,
nearly as much as all the principal Australian
offices put together.
In 1884 the Equitable extended its operations to
Australasia, and immediately began to make great
strides in the favour of the Australian public.
Branches were established in each of the various
States, and Local Boards of Directors formed to
eloquent testimony to the confidence of its manage-
ment in the future of Australia,
The location of the head office in George Street,
Sydney, in the very centre of the city, is unsur-
passed. The massive proportions of the edifice and
its architectural beauty making it one of the
“lions” of the Mother City. In Melbourne the
Equitable Buildings are of a most imposing cha-
racter, being built upon a commanding site at the
corner of Collins and Elizabeth Streets, where it
towers above the surrounding buildings, and as a
consequence is a city landmark and an adornment
to the Victorian capital.
The great success achieved by the Equitable, as
the above statistics show, is a flattering testimony
to the financial and organising ability of its chief
executive officer, Mr. Charles Carlisle Taylor,
General Manager for Australasia, and his able co-
adjutors, who, by unremitting hard work, have net
only maintained the Society’s reputation as one of
the greatest Life Assurance Institutions ever estab-
lished, but have won for it the highest confidence
and esteem qf the Australasian public.


The Mutual Life Insurance
Company of New York.
The history of the Mutual Life Insurance Com-
pany of New York does not project us back to the
dark ages. This great, strong and trustworthy
financial and investment institution had its
origin in the early forties. In the his-
toric city of combines a number of level-
headed men met in 1843 to found a company
which would give them the benefits of life insurance.
New York was not the splendid city which it is now,
but it nevertheless was a very important seaport,
the entrepot of the eastern seaboard of the Ameri-
can Union. At that small meeting a resolution was
arrived at binding the subscribers to take a certain
amount of life insurance in the company, the aggre-
gate being the modest' sum of .£IOO,OOO. The pre-
miums paid formed the financial basis on which the
Company’s future business was to be established,
under the title of the Mutual Life Insurance Com-
pany of New York. There were no shares of stock
and no shareholders to receive surplus monies. As
at the present time, these belonged solely to policy
holders, and as they were earned they were dis-
tributed in the shape of dividends amongst the
insured.
The progress made has been truly remarkable. The
dividends or bonuses paid during 1843 to 1902
amounted to the vast aggregate of .£22,005,481. The
original founders considered that as far south as
Virginia and Kentucky was a sufficiently great field
for their little venture. For a year after the incep-
tion of the company its correspondence was con-
ducted by the first president, who did all his own
writing. Examination by applicant’s own phy-
sician was accepted. The journey to Europe was
regarded as extra hazardous, an additional premium
being charged. We have changed all that.
Now the company is represented by agents, at-
torneys, and medical officers in every State of the
American Union, and in all the principal centres of
population throughout the civilised world. More-
over, those at the head of the affairs of the Mutual
Life of New York have devised schemes of insurance
and prudential investment that have had the most
sincere flattery of imitation paid to them by a host
of competitors.
The organisation of the company is a matter that
deeply concerns the multitude of its policy-holders
throughout the globe. The Mutual Life of New
York is governed by a Board of 36 Trustees elected
annually by the policy-holders. The Board of Trus-
tees who appoint the officers of the Company and
manage the details of the business con-
sists of the following gentlemen.—Richard A. Mc-
Curdy, President of the Company, New York
City; James' C. Holden, President, National Safe
Deposit Company, New York City; Hermann C.
Von Poet, Oelrichs and Co., Agents, North German
Lloyd S.S. Co., New York City; Robert Olyphant,
Ward and Olyphant, miners and shippers of coal.
New York City; George F. Baker, President First
National Bank, New York City; Dudley Olcott,
President Mechanics and Farmers’ Bank, Albany,
N.Y.; Frederic Cromwell, Treasurer of the Com-
pany, New York City; Julien T. Davies, Counsellor
at Law, Davies, Stone and Auerbach, New York
City; Charles R. Henderson, Banker, Henderson
and Co., New York City; Rufus W, Peckham, Jus-
tice U.S. Supreme Court, Washington, D.C.; J.
Hobart Herrick, Banker and Broker, J. H. Herrick
and Co., New York City; William P. Dixon, Coun-
sellor at Law, Dixon and Holmes, New York City;
Robert A. Granniss, Vice-President of the Com-
MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE CO. OF NEW YORK.
Offices: Coiner of Pitt Street and Martin Place, Sydney.
Jnsucance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
LIFE ASSURANCE.


pany. New York City; Henry H. Rogers, President
National Transit Co., Standard Oil Company, New
York City; John W. Anchincloss, Merchant (re-
tired), New York City; Theodore Morford, Presi-
dent Sussex National Bank, Newton, N.J.; William
Babcock, Commission Merchant, Parrott and Co.,
San Francisco, Cal.; Stuyvesant Pish, President
Illinois Central R.R. Co., New York City and
Chicago; Augustus I). Juilliard, Dry Goods Com-
mission, A. D. Juilliard and Co., New York City;
Charles E. Miller, Counsellor at Law, New York
City; Walter R. Gillette, M.D., General Manager
of the Company, New York City; George G. Haven,
President and Director, Worcester, Nashua and
Rochester R.R. Co.; George S. Bowdoin, Banker (re-
tired), late J. P. Morgan and Co., New York City;
Adrian Iselin, jun., Vice-President, Guaranty
Trust Company of New York, Banker,
Adrian Iselin and Co., New York City; William C.
Whitney, Ex-secretary of the Navy, New York
City; William Rockefeller, Standard Oil Company,
New York City; James N. Jarviei, Arhuckle Bros.,
Coffee, New York City; Charles D. Dickey, Banker,
Brown Bros, and Co., New York City; Elbridge T.
Gerry, Counsellor at Law, 261 Broadway, New
York City; James Speyer, Banker, Speyer and Co.,
New York City; Charles Lanier, Banker, Winslow,
Lanier and Co., New York City; Hamilton McK.
Twombly, New York City; William H. Truesdale,
President Del, Lack and Western R.R. Co.; Du-
mont Clarke, President American Exchange Natio-
nal Bank, New York City; Cornelius Vanderbilt,
New York City; Effingham B. Morris, President
Girard Trust Company, Philadelphia, Pa.
The progress made by the Company since its for-
mation may be understood from a perusal of the
following comparative figures:—ln 1843, the life
policies issued numbered 470; in 1902, the number
was 91,502. In 1843 the total amount received from
policy-holders was .£7791; in 1902 the aggregate was
the great one of .£11,850,293. In the first year of its
operations no payments had to be made to policy-
holders; in 1902, the amounts so paid aggregated
£5,937,070. The income in 1902 totalled £15, 148,790.
The assurances and annuities in force amounted to
.£275,751,963. The total of the contingent guarantee
fund and divisable surplus was £13,991,627.
The reserves against all liabilities amounted to
£64,536,644. The total assets in 1902 made the splen-
did aggregate of £78,528,271. The list of stocks
absolutely owned by the Company on the
31st of December, 1902, showed a net mar-
ket value of £12,758,431, while the list of
bonds absolutely owned by the Company 'n
that date showed a net market value of £32,414,916,
The operations of the Company for 1902 were in
keeping, to a marked extent, with the vigorous
financial condition prevailing in the United States
and the larger part of the world within the pale of
civilisation, the twelve months being distinguished
by the largest additions ever made in a similar
period to its resources. That the oldest insur-
ance company on the American continent should
last year have broken its own record
is a gratifying statement, well worthy to distinguish
the sixtieth anniversary of the institution.
A notable feature of the Company’s business is
encouragement to noble and artistic architecture
wherever it establishes itself. One important Rem
in its list of assets is its real estate and office build-
ings in Loudon, Paris, Berlin, New York, Boston,
Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, Sydney, and
Mexico. These are valued at over £6,500,000.
An important rule in the Company s business is
that first-class risks only are accepted. It does not
insure sub-standard lives, or those engaged in dan-
gerous occupations, or living in unhealthy dis-
tricts. Policy-holders thus benefit by the v ® r y fav-
ourable rate of mortality experienced by the Com-
pany.
Insurers, owing to stress of circumstances, aie
sometimes forced to abandon their policies, in or-
der to wait until the evil days roll by. It is satis-
factory to know that, in the case of the Mutual Lite,
a liberal surrender value is guaranteed and quoted
in the policy for the end of the third and each sub-
sequent year. Another feature of the Company s
operations is worthy of note. If three years pre-
miums are paid policies become automatically paid
up for the amounts stated in the contract.
One of the most interesting transactions—so far
at least as amount was concerned was the pay-
ment by cheque on the 10th January, 1902, to the spe-
cial administrators of Frank H. Peavey, deceased,
of the sum of one million dollars.
A policy, remarkable because of the personality
of its holder, was that of Lord Paunceforte, the
British Ambassador at Washington, who died on
May 24th, 1902. The amount was 25,000 dollars,
upon which His Lordship received dividends am-
ounting to 6492 dollars.
The Mutual Life has devised a large number of
schemes by which the insured derives all the ad-
vantages of life assurance combined with the bene-
fits of investment. Among them may be men-
tioned the guaranteed compound interest “ Gold
Bond,” which returns 3 per cent, in gold on all
premiums previously paid. These credits may be
drawn at the time they are made or at any other
time, but as long as they are allowed to remain
with the Company, they are increased by 3i
per cent, compound interest, compounded annually,
until the end of the specified term. In the event
of the death of the insured, any such accumulated
credits are paid with the amount insured.
The 4 per cent, debenture policy secures to the
beneficiary an immediate and safe investment for
35 years, of the full amount of the policy at 4 per
cent., and at the end of that term the refund of
the principal, or if the beneficiary dies before
the end of the stated period, the payment
of all monies accrued to his estate. Here
is an instance of the practical operation of
the 5 per cent. “Gold Bonds.” If a person contracts
to buy .£2OOO in 5 per cent. “Gold Bonds” from the
Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York,
payment is made during 20 years in annual instal-
ments. If the person dies after having paid one
MAJOR Z. C. RENNIE,
General Manager for Australasia.
premium, no further payment is required, his
estate receiving the following amounts: —£100 a
year for 20 years, £2000; then cash, £2000; total
guaranteed in gold, £4OOO.
The Mutual Life Insurance Company of New
York was established in Australasia in the
year 1887, and since then its local progress has
been phenomenal. It has branches in Sydney, Mel-
bourne, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, and Hobart.
The Australasian business was founded by Major
Z. C. Rennie, a gentleman well qualified in every
respect to represent so great, beneficient, and pros-
perous an institution. The first Australian
offices of the institution were at 131 Pitt
Strefct, Sydney. In 1894 the palatial pile of
offices known as the Mutual Life Buildings, which
form one of the most prominent of the landmarks
of the City of Sydney, were built at the corner of
Martin Place and Pitt Street, and here the Com-
pany’s extensive operations are now being carried
on. The keystone of the arch was set by Sir George
Dibbs, K.C.M.G., then Premier of New South Wales.
The Company’s Committee for Australasia consists
of Major Z. C. Rennie, General Manager; Dr. R. L.
Faithfull, Chief Medical Referee; and Messrs.
Pigott and Stinson, Legal Advisers.
The Mutual Life Insurance Company of New
Yorks rests its claim to public confidence on the
satisfactory results obtained by policy-holders from
their contracts, the unquestioned probity of its
management, its undoubted solvency, and upon the
liberality and courtesy of its administration. These
are great claims, but the figures and facts
which can be adduced in their support are available
to all who care to investigate them. There can
be no doubt that the Company is a remarkable
one, and as beneficient as remarkable to all who
entrust their monetary interests, and those of
their wives and children to its safe keeping.
MAJOR Z. C. RENNIE.
The pleasantly situated little town of Pittsfield,
in Berkshire, Massachussetts, U.S.A., was the
birthplace of Major Zenas Crane Rennie, General
Manager for Australasia of the Mutual Life Insur-
ance Company of New York. It is a typical New
England centre, and, though great changes have
occurred within the last half century, Pittsfield
still retains many of the best characteristics of towns
inhabited by those who claim their origin from
the Pilgrim Fathers. Major Rennie is of a long-
lived stock, his father having recently died at the
age of 92. His Christian names were given him in
honour of a stalwart ancestor who greatly distin-
guished himself in the early days of the great re-
public.
Major Rennie has a stirring history without
reference to his ancestors. In 1861 the future offi-
cer of the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New
York was engaged in commercial enterprises. The
dark clouds of war were then rolling over the land,
and even the most prescient of men did not realise
the terrible nature of the cyclonic storm of pas-
sion, war and agony that was to sweep over the
country, from the Lakes to the Gulf of Mexico.
The booming of the guns at Fort Sumter
at last told the North that the Southern
Confederacy had gone on that warpath, the
end of which no one could adequately fore-
tell. Young Rennie, however, did not wait to
be drafted. One volunteer is always worth ten
pressed men, and as a valorous and patriotic Nor-
therner he offered his sword to his country in its
time of dire need. He not only tendered his own
services, but assisted by friends, raised a company
at his own expense, and. when the force was drilled
and equipped, offered its services to the State.
As was usually the case in regard to levies raised in
that great emergency, the republican principle of
election of officers was resorted to. Z. C. Rennie was
elected Captain, and in his turn nominated the
subordinate officers. The Company was part of the
force under General Banks, who operated in the de-
partment of the Gulf of Mexico in the autumn
of 1862. After a year of active service, Captain
Rennie became so ill that his life was endan-
gered, and, on medical advice, he was ordered away
from the malarial region in which he had first
heard war’s deadly blast. Having been offered by
the Governor of the State of Rhode Island an ap-
pointment as Assistant State and Allotment Com-
missioner, with the title and rank of Major—an ar-
rangement which was confirmed by the War De-
partment—he accepted the same. His duties ne-
cessitated his travelling through the Federal lines
as disbursing officer for the troops of Rhode Is-
land. During the remainder of the war he occu-
pied this position, doing all in his power to break
the power of the South, and to preserve the integ-
rity of the Union.
At the conclusion of the war, Major Rennie found
in life assurance work a congenial metier. In 1886,
while representing his Company at Springfield, Mas-
sachusetts, Major Rennie received instructions to
establish an Australasian Branch of his office, with
headquarters at Sydney. How successfully and tho-
roughly those instructions were given effect to is
now known to the veriest tyro in life assurance work
in this city. Without losing for a moment
the distinguishing characteristics of the best
type of American citizen, Major Rennie has
interested himself in everything relative to
the welfare of Sydney and its people. He has accord-
ingly obtained the woodwill and respect of the best
sections of our community, and his personal friends
and business acquaintances are to be found
throughout Australasia, it is almost needless to
say that the interests of the Mutual Life Insurance
Company of New York are exceedingly well looked
after in this part of the world by its General
Manager.


Mutual Life Association of
Australasia.
One of the commonest of every-day remarks is
that there is no sentiment in business. But it is not
eliminated. For instance, if two rival life assur-
ance agents, equally good at their business, are
endeavouring to take a certain “life,” why is it
that the prospective assurant ultimately decides on
one to the exclusion of the others. A cigar, ju-
diciously administered, may. in some cases, be the
deciding factor, but the strong probability is that
identified with Australia and its interests.
Undoubtedly many who assure with the Mu-
tual Life Association of Australasia, having
first satisfied themselves as to its solidity and pro-
fitableness, finally decide upon becoming policy-
holders owing to the fact that it is an institution
thoroughly, though not exclusively, Australian,
MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALASIA.
OFFICES, CORNER OF GEORGE AND WYNYARD STREETS, SYDNEY.
strictly correct. The fact is that even in the com-
mercial and financial worlds men’s sentiments, pre-
ferences, and even prejudices, cannot be completely
the person who ultimately assures mainly prefers
the title of the favoured office before the other,
or its prestige, or because it is an institution
prospering with this country’s prosperity, and
strengthening with its strength. Truly the noble
group of statuary that graces the splendid build-
insurance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
LIFE ASSURANCE.


ing which forms the headquarters of the Mutual
Life Association of Australasia signifies a great
and striking truth. The distressed widow, fleeing
from the raging beast of want, claims succour
from a well-armed and powerful personage that is
both able and walling to save her from the dire
calamity which threatens.
The institution has now passed the thirty-fourth
year of its useful and progressive existence. Every
year brings fresh triumphs. The Sydney directorate
includes gentlemen of the highest professional and
parliamentary standing in the community. They
are as follow.—Samuel Dickinson, Esq.; the Hon.
F. T. Humphery, M.L.C.; the Hon. W. J. Trickett,
M.L.C.; Russell Barton, Esq.; the Hon. J. N.
Brunker, M.L.A.-; the Hon. L. F. Heydon, M.L.C.
The local directorates at Melbourne, Brisbane, Ade-
laide, Perth, Wellington, and Dunedin are composed
of gentlemen of the highest status and reputation.
The London Board includes Sir Westby Brook Per-
ceval, K.C.M.G., and Henry F. Billinghurst, Esq.,
F.S.S.; with offices at 3 Lothbury Bank, E.C. The
chief medical officer for the United Kingdom is
George Allan Heron, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.S., London,
and the Secretary is Alfred Gilbert, Esq. The Com-
pany is further represented in the United Kingdom
at the following great centres: —Liverpool, Man-
chester, Birmingham, Glasgow, Belfast, and Aber-
deen.
At the principal office of the Association, George
and Wynyard-streets, Sydney, Mr. J. C. Remington
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. C. REMINGTON,
General Manager.
has the chief control as General Manager. When
it is stated that that gentleman has held this highly
important position for thirty years, from the time
when the Association was only four years old, the
splendid business ability of Mr. Remington is at
once apparent. The Secretary is Mr. B. K. Gelling,
F.S.S., who has a high and responsible position to
fill. Mr. R. D. Miller, F.F.A., is the Actuary of the
institution. The principal Medical Officer is that
veteran publicist, physician and statesman, Sir
Normand MacLauriu, M.D., M.L.O.
The year 1902 was an annus mirabilis in the his-
tory of the Association. The institution broke its
own record in every respect. This is all the more
noteworthy from the fact that many parts of Aus-
tralasia suffered severely from the devastating
drought that formed the climax to a succession of
similar visitations which extended over several
years, but the Mutual Life Association of Aus-
tralasia did not have all its interests in one centre.
Their distribution, combined with good judgment
and prudent management in other directions,
tended to that great measure of success which was
told to the members at the thirty-fourth annual
general meeting on the 27th of April last.
The new policies last year were issued for an ag-
gregate of £760,606 ; the new premiums thereon
amounting to .£16,309. The renewal premiums
amounted to 06171,828, being .£12,711 more than in
the previous year. The funds were increased by
.£105,216 to a total of 061,638,939, and notwithstand-
ing a large increase in liquid securities, the interest
obtained is nearly 4J per cent, per annum. All these
advantages were accompanied by a reduction of ex-
penses by £1 6s. per cent.; a fact which is all the
more striking when the large amount of new busi-
ness obtained is considered. Of the Association’s
assets the following five items are the most im-
portant : —Loans on mortgage, ,£795,994; Associa-
tion’s freeholds, .£236,780; municipal debentures
(N.S.W. and Queensland), .£161,180; loans on poli-
cies (within surrender value), 26155,320; British and
Australian Government securities, .£127,711. The
following items are disposed of by marking "nil”
after them, viz., loans on personal security, branch
and agency balances, outstanding premiums.
The progress of the Association during the 30
years in which Mr. J. C. Remington has been Gene-
ral Manager is very remarkable. In 1873 the total in-
come was .£10,000; in 1903, 26287,400. The total funds
in 1873 amounted to .£12,272; in 1903, 261,638,940. The
policies in force in 1873 aggregated .£330,000; the
total for 1903 is £5,823,000. These figures are elo-
quent, and the multiplication of words could add
nothing to their significance.
What the Mutual Life Association of Australasia
regards as its newest and best policy is its com-
bined life and accident assurance. Its advantages
are: life assurance and compensation for disable-
ment by accident are provided; the “combined”
policy, unlike an ordinary accident policy, contains
no restriction as to residence, travel or occupation.
The " combined” policy is issued in the three fol-
lowing forms: —(l) Assurance payable at death; pre-
miums payable during life; (2) assurance payable at
death; premiums payable during a specified term of
years; (3) endowment assurance; sum assured pay-
able at end of term, or at previous death. It is to
be noted that each of these forms of “ combined”
policy includes compensation for disablement by
accident.
Every one will admit the advantages of these
forms o'f policies, but may seriously regard the cost
thereof. It may be said on this score that for about
ten shillings a week a man of the age of 30 can
obtain a "combined” policy for £lOOO, which will
secure the under-noted benefits.—£looo (with pro-
fits) payable at death, combined with £lOOO for per-
manent total disablement; £5OO for permanent
partial disablement; £5 per week for temporary
total disablement, £1 ss. per week temporary par-
tial disablement. Then again, for about fifteen
shillings a week he can obtain a " combined” policy
for £lOOO, payable at the age of 55, or previous
death, and also the full accident benefits as above
stated. It is further to be noted that the ladies
are not weighted in this arrangement; there are
no extra rates for women’s lives. It is pleasing to
record in an Australian journal, the great and
healthy progress of an institution like the Mutual
Life Association of Australasia. For, though it is
an indigenous society, it is nevertheless able to
vigorously send its roots to parts of the world far
remote from the place of its origin; and thereby
bring succulence and strength to its whole fabric.
That the M.L.A. may long live to accomplish fur-
ther triumphs is the wish of all who understand
how enormously a well-conducted insurance con-
cern affects the wellbeing of the communities em-
braced in its operations. For, while hard circum-
stances may break single units in quick succession,
they will fail to do so if the rods of a community
are bound firmly together in the bonds of mutu-
ality, comradeship, fraternity and a common and
important interest.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. C. REMINGTON.
The career of Mr. J. C. Remington, General
Manager of the Mutual Life Association of Austral-
asia, is one which should be well studied by those
who are setting out on the journey of life. It is dis-
tinguished by success in almost every department
of duty that has been undertaken. As a manager
of a great and growing insurance institution such
as the M.L.A., Mr. Remington has been pre-emi-
nently successful throughout the 30 years he has
been connected therewith. As an artillery officer,
he retired on his rank ae Lieutenant-Colonel ten
years ago, and in the Masonic body he has long
occupied the most distinguished and brilliant
positions.
Mr. John Cochrane Remington was born in the
historic town of Coleraine, in the County of Derry,
Ireland, on May 16th, 1850. His early education
was conducted at Coleraine Academy, but on arrival
at Sydney in October, 1863, he was placed at the
Sydney Grammar School. In 1867 the young and
ardent colonist entered the office of Mr. W. H.
Mackenzie, who at that period was the local repre-
sentative of many important fire, life, and marine
insurance companies. Here Mr. Remington re-
ceived a broad and sound training in the art and
mystery of underwriting.
Six years after entering Mr. Mackenzie’s office
the Secretaryship of the Mutual Life Association of
Australasia became vacant. Out of 46 candidates
Mr. Remington, though only 23 years of age, was
successful. The selection has been amply vindi-
cated by the results of the last 30 years.
The satisfaction felt by the Directors with Mr.
Remington was very clearly expressed at the last
general meeting, when a hearty vote of thanks was
accorded the officers, “ particularly coupled with
the name of our General Manager, who has done so
much for our success.” Mr. Remington has twice
served the office of President of the Insurance In-
stitute.
For many years the name of Mr. Remington was
prominent in military affairs, especially as an ar-
tillery officer. At the annual encampments he
MR. B. R. GELLING, J.P., F.S.S.,
Secretary.
occupied a distinguished place, and was a general
favourite. After over 25 years’ service, he retired
in 1893, on his rank as Lieutenant-Colonel.
MR. B. R. GELLING, J.P., F.S.S.
In the financial ranks of Sydney there are few men
who are better or more favourably known than Mr,
B. R. Gelling, Secretary of the Mutual Life Associa-
tion of Australasia. This gentleman was born on
May 17th, 1863, at Daylesford, Victoria. He came in
1881 direct from school to the service of Messrs.
Tiilock and Co., merchants, Sydney, where he soon
occupied an important position. In 1888 the office
of Superintendent of Agents for the Mutual Life
Association of Australasia, having become vacant,
Mr. Gelling was offered and accepted the position.
His other promotions were: Acting Secretary at
Melbourne, 1891; Assistant Secretary at the head
office, 1892; Secretary, 1892.
This position he continues to occupy, with credit
to himself and to the highest satisfaction of the
Board of Directors. Mr. Gelling is one of the honor-
ary magistrates of this State, was President of the
Insurance Institute of N.S.W., and was a founda-
tion member of the Economic Association, the sec-
retarial duties of which he honorarily discharged
for a number of years. Mr. Gelling is also a Fel
low of the Royal Statistical Society of England.


Year.
Income.
Gross Assets
1894
=£136,891
.£403,392
1895
201,565
431,218
1896
256.649
476,839
1897
318,413
796,626
1898
736,947
1,108,489
1899
748,732
1,326,668
1900
878,492
1,464,872
1901
1,120.358
1,786,795
The Ocean Accident & Guarantee
Corporation, Ltd., of London.
The business or science of insurance has surely
nothing much better to offer than that of assisting
the public to provide against accident. The most
careful person has no guarantee against those un-
expected contingencies which lurk in everyone’s
path. The treading on some slippery surface, the
encountering of a piece of grit that gets in one’s
eye, the hasty or false step that results in a se-'
vere sprain or fracture, may mean a life-long in-
jury, or months of pain, combined with a doctor’s
bill that does not err on the side of moderation.
When the benefits of assurance against accident
are more widely known, the public response to the
Companies that deal with this class of business
will be very much greater than it is at present.
Prominent among the institutions taking such
risks is the Ocean Accident and Guarantee Cor-
poration, Limited, of London. It was founded in
London in 1871, a year notable for its financial
and commercial progress. The authorised capital
is LI 000,000; the subscribed capital, .£621,540; and
the paid-up capital .£172,308. The total funds, ex-
clusive of uncalled capital were, at the end of
last year, =£1,379,391. The income in 1902 was no
less than .£1,196,655. The progress of the corpora-
tion during the following eight years may be un-
derstood from the following figures:—
The “ Ocean” has a complete local administra-
tion for setlement of claims. The head office for
Australia is at 131 Pitt Street, Sydney. The Board
consists of the following Directors:—Hon. A. W.
Meekes, M.L.C., Sydney; Sir John See, K.C.M.G.,
Sydney; Lieutenant-Colonel James Burns (Messrs.
Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd.), Sydney; Hon. F. S.
Grimwade, M.L.C., Melbourne; L. A. Jessop, Esq.,
Adelaide. The General Manager for Australia is
Mr. J. J. Allen, and ideal insurance manager,
whose remarkable administrative abilities and in-
domitable perseverance, have had very much to do
with the splendid progress made since the “ Ocean”
extended its operations to these States. The Man-
ager of the New South Wales branch is Mr. E. N.
Parker, who ably seconds the Australian Mana-
ger in that part of the business which is transacted
within the boundaries of the Mother State. The
Victorian Branch .Office is at 45 Market Street
Melbourne, Mr. D. Clyne being the Manager. The
South Australian branch has its headquarters at
14 Grenfell Street, Adelaide, with Mr. W. N.
McFarlane as Manager. The head office of the
Queensland Branch is at 335 Queen Street, Bris-
bane. and Mr. Keith Wilson is the Manager. Mr.
A. W. Farquhar is the Manager of the West Aus-
tralian Branch, with offices at St. George’s Ter-
race, Perth. Sub-agencies have also been estab-
lished in all the principal towns.
The complete manner in which the local admin-
tration of the “ Ocean” has identified itself with
the interests of Australia, may be realised from
the fact that the institution has over ,£IOO,OOO al-
ready invested in Colonial Government securities.
One of the notable features of the “ Ocean’s”
business is its ‘‘Advanced” policy against acci-
dent, illness, or permanent incapacity. The risks
are divided into three classes. The first, termed
the " ordinary,” includes all knids of professional
and commercial men. The second, named the
‘‘medium,” includes master tradesmen engaged in
the building and similar trades. The third, de-
nominated “ hazardous,” includes craftsmen and
all engaged in manual work. The yearly premium
of the “ medium” (.£9 95.), is £1 Is. above that of
the ordinary,” and the premium under the haz-
ardous class is £1 Is, above that of the “ medium.”
Payment of these premiums provides for com-
pensation on the following basis:—Death, if by
ordinary accident, £1000; loss of two limbs (hands
or feet) or two eyes, £1000; loss of one limb or one
eye, £500; permanent total disablement (other
than as stated above) £3O annually; temporary total
disablement (limited to 52 weeks), £6 per week;
temporary partial disablement (limited to 52 weeks),
£1 10s. per week. If the above-mentioned results
ensue from railway or tram car accident, the com-
pensation is doubled in each case. Compensation for
total or irrecoverable loss of sight in both eyes by
disease, and for permanent general paralysis, is
£SOO.
In the case of temporary total disablement by
appendicitis, diabetes, pneumonia, pleurisy, ery-
sipelas, measles, typhoid, typhus, scarlet fever,
small-pox, tenanus, diphtheria, carbuncle, bubonic
plague, meningitis, peritonitis, or Asiatic cholera,
the compensation given is £6 per week, with a
l.imit of 26 weeks.
Under Section 2 of this policy half the above
benefits are allowed for half the above-noted pre-
miums, and Section 2 further provides half the
benefits under the former scheme for one half the
premium. That is to say, for an ordinary risk,
compensation to the amount of £250 for death by
ordinary accident can be secured for an annual
premium of £2 2s. When it is considered how
freely even the most careful person spends trifling
amounts, which, in the course of a year, would ag-
gregate far more than the premium required for
securing the above-mentioned benefits, the import-
ance of taking care to ensure against accident on a
basis similar to that laid down by the “ Ocean”
becomes next to imperative.
The following advantages are set forth in connec-
tion with the “ Advanced” policy:—lt contains no
restriction as to foreign travel; it entitles the as-
sured to a 10 per cent, bonus in reduction of pre-
mium after 5 years in any claim, and a further
5 per cent, after another 5 years without claim.
It should further be noted that clients holding
“ general accident” or “ combined” policies from
the " Ocean” can exchange them at onece. without
loss of bonus, for " advanced” policies, any rebate
due for unexpired time on the old policy being
allowed. Attention should also be paid to the fact
that the limit of compensation for accident is 52
weeks, as against the usual limit of 26 weeks. An-
other advantage is provided in that transfers from
other companies can be effected without loss in
respect of bonus. A feature which should be of
special interest to those who, in the words of a
well-understood phrase, “ never touch it,” is that
total abstainers receive an abatement of 10 per
cent. It is well to note, however, that when abate-
ment is claimed on more than one ground, no more
than 15 per cent, in all can be allowed.
When the sun goes north .the days become short,
the nights are long, and rain and fog obscure the
gloomy horizon, that is the season for the enter-
prising burglar to reap a harvest.
The ‘"Ocean” insures against burglary and house-
breaking. The policies contain no unnecessary re-
strictions, and policy holders are assured that the
conditions will be interpreted in a just and reason-
able spirit. Claims are admitted from £1 and up-
insurance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches, continued.
ACCIDENT AND GUARANTEE INSURANCE.


wards. Liberal discounts are allowed when the in-
surance amounts to .£2OOO, or when the risk is ex-
ceptionally small, in consequence of strong rooms
and other precautions for security. Thus, even the
criminal, in these days of high civilisation, has his
uses, or, at all events, is made to minister to the
advantage of the honest portion of the community.
Another important department of the “Ocean’s”
business is that relating to employers’ liability. Of
recent years the onus cast upon employers with
regard to the lives and limbs of their employees
has been very great. Tinder the Act the employer
is now made liable not merely for the consequences
of his own acts and omissions, but for those of
persons in his employ, over whose actions he may
have absolutely no control. It will be admitted
that the covering of such a risk is of great conse-
quence. It should lead to a large increase of in-
surance business as a measure of security to the
employer, who is threatened with being sooner or
later summarily brought into the clutches of the
law. The employer, however, who does not relish
the idea of being so summarily snuffed out, wisely
avails himself of the scheme of insurance of Em-
ployer’s Liability, which provides so large a share
of the “ Ocean’s” rapidly increasing business.
The corporation, however, has no concern with
party politics or class movements, and has a policy
which safeguards workmen against accidents. For
one shilling a week, under the Workmen’s policy,
£IOO may be secured in case of death by ordinary
accident; 30s. weekly for temporary total disable-
ment ; and an annuity of £7 10s. in cases of per-
manent total disablement. For that premium £IOO
is also secured in cases of total and irremediable
blindness or permanent general paralysis not
caused by accident.
Notwithstanding the objections which the wise
men of old took with regard to their going surety
for friends, the matter is nowadays treated as a
purely business affair. The old and inconvenient
system of suretyships by individuals has now been
almost superseded. The “ Ocean” issues Fidelity
Guarantee Bonds to cover all positions of trust
where security is required. They include floating
policies and collective bonds. The rates of pre-
mium being assessed according to responsibility.
Almost needless to say that the guarantee of fidel-
ity by public companies is one of the most useful
developments given in modern times to the prin-
ciple of assurance. A poor but honest man does
not now need to go begging to his friends to become
surety for him. If he has even an ordinary repu-
tation for trustworthiness, a policy with the
" Ocean” will do the rest, and the insured is un-
der no further obligation to anyone.
In the lesson books of old we were told that a
stranger shipwrecked on an unknown coast, fearing
that he had been cast on a cannibal inhabited is-
land, took heart when he saw the bones of a human
being swinging on a gibbet, and concluded that,
where the hangman put in his fine work, some
sort of law was in operation. Nowadays one of
the most significant evidences of culture and civil-
isation in a new country is a plate-glass window.
It frequently happens, however, that someone, de-
sirous of getting a meal and and a shelter in gaol,
in desperation or in drunken frenzy, smashes the
plate-glass window that was the pride and joy of
an enterprising tradesman, desirous of showing his
well-kept stock to the best advantage. Sometimes a
runaway horse plays the part of a vandal, and,
again, thieves break in and steal, demolishing the
obstructing plate-glass in the process. The
“ Ocean” does a large business in the insurance of
plate-glass, and on conditions that suit the general
public.
It will thus be seen that the Ocean Accident and
Guarantee Corporation, Limited, of London, occu-
pies a foremost place amongst those institutions
which have for their object the insuring of those
risks that are so frequently encountered in every-
day life. Its business locally continues to greatly
prosper under the supervision of a vigilant, enter-
prising and level-headed directorate, an able man-
agement, and an energetic and reputable staff of
subordinate officers. That so beneficient an in-
stitution may continue to greatly prosper, and, in
its prosperity still further advance the welfare of
the Australian community, is the wish of everyone
MR. J. J. ALLEN.
Australasian Manager.
who fully understands how greatly the working of
insurance is a solace and sweetener to human exist-
ence, and removes mountains of care that would,
without it, weigh civilised communities almost to
the dust.
MR. J. J. ALLEN.
In the places where Sydney insurance men most
do congregate, no one is better known or more
highly esteemed than Mr. J. J. Allen, the General
Manager for Australasia of the Ocean Accident and
Guarantee Corporation, Limited, of London.
Mr. Allen is a son of a well-known resident
of Sydney, who occupied a prominent place
in the second Parliament of New South Wales.
The subject of this sketch was born in 1857, so that
he is yet in the prime of life. Mr. Allen was edu-
cated at St. Mary’s Church of England Denomina-
tional School, Waverley, Sydney. In 1872 he en-
tered the office of Mr. William Barton, the father
of the Hon. Sir Edmund Barton, the Prime Minis-
ter of the Commonwealth of Australia. Mr. Allen
speaks in the highest terms of Mr. and Mrs. Wil-
liam Barton, and of the knidness he experienced
from both of them in his youthful days. It is al-
most needless to say that this sentiment has been
extended to their noted and brilliant son, who has
taken so prominent a part in the recent history of
Australasia.
The time arriving for Mr. Allen to leave the office
of Mr. Barton, who was a partner in the firm of
Messrs. Barton and Meltado, stock and share brok-
ers, Mr. Allen gained considerable experience in
several important mercantile concerns in this city.
His ability, attention, and quickness in the per-
formance of every duty that was entrusted to him,
brought him the good-will of several gentlemen
who were in a position to make their sentiments
effective. In 1885 he was offered and accepted a
position in the Sydney Marine Insurance Company,
the Directors of which were, the late Mr.
Richard Jones, the late Mr. Henry Mort, the
late Mr. Q. S. Caird, and Sir (then Mr.)
William McMillan, K.C.M.G., the late Mr. P. J.
Clark being General Manager. That Company was
ultimately amalgamated with the Alliance Marine
Company. Ag Chief Accountant and Acting Mana-
ger, Mr. Allen remained with that institution for
nearly a decade. On the formation of the British
and Colonial Insurance Company, the management
thereof was taken by him on the invitation of the
late Mr. Sydney Burdekin. Proceeding on a visit to
England in 1894, he accepted the offer of the Ocean
Accident and Guarantee Corporation, Limited, to
open up business for them in Australasia.
In July of the following year operations were
commenced, and now, throughout all the States of
the Commonwealth, the “ Ocean’' stands for all
that is secure, advantageous and economical in the
particular lines of assurance and guarantee with
which the institution has to do.
Mr. Allen is regarded as a veteran in the Insur-
ance Institute of Sydney, and is one of the most
constant in his attendance at the meetings thereof.
Owing to his field of action being Australasia, he
is very widely and favourably known in all the
great centres of population in this island continent.
The intricacies of the Employers’ Liability Acts and
cognate matters are as an open book to the gentle-
man who is known to his friends as “ the Ruler of
the Ocean!”
Mr. Allen is more than an expert of the first rank
in the insurance world. He has written much and
well in the press on various topics, interesting to
the generality of mankind. At one period of his
life he was very enthusiastic on the subject of foot-
ball, and contributed many articles on that engross-
ing subject to the weekly press of Sydney. At this
epoch he occupied the position of Hon. Secre-
tary of the Redfern Football and Cricket Clubs.
During the time of the Rev. Dr. Jefferies, the sub-
ject of this short memoir was Hon. Secretary of
the Pitt Street Literary and Debating Society.
When a member of the School of Arts Debating
Club, one of his fellow members was the Right
Hon. G. H. Reid. P.C. In shipping matters Mr.
Allen has had practical experience of a very valu-
able kind, and altogether his versatility in business
affairs varying greatly in their nature, is very
marked. The good wishes of a large circle of warm
friends are not the least valuable of Mr. J. J
Allen’s possessions.


New York Life Insurance
Company.
A genial satirist has described America as being
“the land of the dollar.” Nothing talks like
money, and when one considers the stupendous
operations of the New York Life Insurance Com-
pany, the student of political economy might im-
prove on the epithet and term the United States
“ The land of millions and millionaires." The
New York Life Insurance Company, whose Sydney
office is located at 76 Pitt Street, was incorpor-
ated by special Act of the Legislature of New
York as far back as 1843, and commenced business
in 1845. It is purely mutual —the surplus going
exclusively to policy-holders, there being no stock-
holders. The assured thereby obtain insurance at
a low cost —none of the surplus being taken from
them to be paid to owners of shares. The great
progress of the Company practically proves the
success of this plan. The Company has paid
.£50,292,241 in death claims, purchased policies,
etc., £13,991,062, in bonuses and return premiums,
and £13,793,667 in Endowments and Annuities. —
making a grand total of £78,076,970 paid to policy-
holders, and after making these payments,
held, on January Ist, 1903, for the benefit of its
policy-holders, total assets to the amount of
£66,339,443.
The headquarters of the Company are situated
in a colossal block of buildings at 346 Broadway,
New York, the President being John A. McCall.
The resident board for Australasia, which has
power to issue policies, pay claims, etc., consists of
the Hon. Sir John Lackey, K.C.M.G. (Ex-President
of the Legislative Council), who acts in the ca-
pacity of Chairman, G. C. Westgarth (of
Messrs. Westgarth, Nathan and Company, Solici-
tors, Sydney), and P. G. Braitwaite, M.D., as
Chief Medical Officer.
The General Manager of the Department of
Australasia is Mr. Thomas P. Purves, A.1.A., and
the branch offices under his control are located as
follow; —N.S.W., 76 Pitt Street, Sydney; Victoria,
317 Collins Street, Melbourne; Queensland, 373
Queen Street, Brisbane; South Australia, 30 Currie
Street, Adelaide; New Zealand, 27 Lambton Quay,
Wellington, while agencies have been established
at New Caledonia and Fiji. The Company's
Bankers are the Bank of Australasia, and the
Bank of New South Wales, with which fixed de-
posits are kept for the protection of policy-holders.
The total income for the year ending December
31st, 1902, was £16,255,707; dividends of year to
policy-holders, £871,369; total payments of year
to policy-holders, £6,279,371; number of policies in
force, 704,567; and insurance in force, premiums
paid, £319,249,569.
The New York Life Insurance Company is as
wide as civilisation. In the pursuit of its legitimate
business it has been thrown upon intimate and
direct contact with the affairs of States and Na-
tions, and has made treaties, so to speak, and done
business direct with all leading Governments. The
affairs of the Company are sat upon in judgment
by all these Governments. Nearly all of them
have insurance companies of their own. They
must, therefore, of necessity require that foreign
companies permitted to operate amongst their
people be absolutely sound and equitable, and so
constituted as to contain ample guarantees for
the future. And yet, as the Company now has so
large a membership in every civilized country in
the world, the first interest of every Government,
in its dealings with them, is to protect the New
York Life Insurance Company’s interests, for in so
doing it protects the interests of its own people.
Whoever takes .a policy in the Company to-day
virtually makes a bargain with all the civi-
lized Governments of the world, they in turn
agreeing to watch his every interest, -safeguard his
investment, and protect him thoroughly.
The Managers of the New York Life Insurance
Company desire that only such persons apply for
membership in the Company as fully intend to
retain their membership, and continue their poli-
cies for a specified period. To best accomplish
this end they' believe their policies are worded in
such a wayq and sold on such a plan, as to be
most attractive in the market. They strive hard
to engage as agents those only who will repre-
sent the Company in a serious and business-like
way. To this principle of fair and direct dealing
is due the Company’s remarkable progress. They
can offer no stronger proof that the policy con-
tract of the New York Life and its courteous
methods of doing business with the public, are
appreciated by the public, than the public’s own
endorsement of the fact as shown in their state-
ments.
No policy or sum of insurance is included in
the Company’s report for 1902, as new issues or
otherwise, except where the premium, as provided
MR. THOMAS P. PURVES, A.I.A.,
General Manager for Australasia.
in the contract, has been paid to the Company in
cash. The new business of 1902 was secured at a
lower expense rate. The Company now has
,£38,600,000 more insurance in force than it had on
December 31st, 1901. During the year the Com-
pany placed £8,200,000 more new insurances than
it did in 1901; at the same time they loaned direct
to policy-holders, on the sole security of their
policies, £1,863,797, at 5 per cent, per annum,
without fee or other charge.
The institution is a purely mutual organisation,
managed by trustees selected by the policy-holders
from among their number. There is not a dollar
of capital stock, there are therefore no stock-
holders to share the profits of the business. The
New York Life is composed of over 650,000 policy-
holders, who are the Company, who own the Com-
pany, and who alone receive the profits of the
Company'. Last year the New York Life placed
with the citizens of New York State 21,069 policies,
for a total of £8,232,355 of insurance. The Com-
pany' now has 113,384 policy-holders in New York
State, carrying £48,315,074 of insurance, which is
13,153 more policy-holders and £5,040,574 more in-
surance than it had in New York State one year
ago. These figures conclusively prove what people
think of the Company at home.
“ In the interests of the public,,” said President
Roosevelt in his message of Dec. 3rd, 1901, “ the
Government should have the right to inspect and
examine the workings of the great corporations
engaged in interstate business. Publicity is the
only sure remedy which we can invoke. The first
requisite is knowledge, full and complete—know-
ledge which, upon any statutory law for their ex-
istence or privileges should be subject to proper
Governmental supervision, and full and accurate
information as to their operations should be made
public regularly at reasonable intervals.”
The New York Life, in addition to filing its an-
nual statement with each of the State Insurance
Departments of the United States, files it with
each of the following foreign Governments
European Governments; Great Britain, Portugal,
Norway, Germany, Servia, Switzerland, France,
Holland, Sweden, Austria, Bulgaria, Spain, Den-
mark, Russia, Hungary, Italy and Greece. Ameri-
can Governments (outside the United States):
Canada, Brazil, Bolivia, Chili, Mexico, Guatemala,
Equador, Uruguay, Newfoundland, Cuba, Venezu-
ela, Peru, Argentine. Australasian Governments:
Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, New Zea-
land, and New South Wales.
As nearly all of these Governments have insur-
ance companies of their own, it is only fair to
say that they would not have a foreign company
operating among their people unless absolutely
certain that the company was all that it claims
to be. The acceptance, then, of its Annual State-
ment by each of these foreign Governments is one
of the strongest endorsements that the insuring
public could ask for.
THOMAS P. PURVES, A.1.A.,
General Manager, Department of Australasia,
New York Life Insurance Company.
Mr. Thomas P. Purves, A.1.A., the Company’s
General Manager for Australasia, was born in
Greenlaw, Berwickshire, Scotland, in 1852. He is
particularly well fitted, both by his education
and business training, for the important position
which he now fills. He was originally connected
■with the Northern Insurance Company, in addi-
tion to being a collector of the inland revenue for
the British Government. He then studied law for
four years, and also attended a course of medical
lectures. When only 23 years of age he succeeded
his father, Mr. Allan Purves, as Manager of the
Greenlaw branch of the City of Glasgow Bank.
He held this position for three years, till the
Royal Bank took over the City of Glasgow Bank.
Mr. Purves was offered a similar position under
the new regime, but he declined it, and soon after-
wards left for Australia.
After his arrival, he was appointed accountant
and inspector of branches to the Mutual Assur-
ance Society of Victoria. lie relinquished
this position in 1884, in order to undertake the
management of the New York Life Insurance
Company’s Victorian business. About twelve
years ago Mr. Purves visited the United States,
for the purpose of observing the inner working
of the Company’s mammoth institution in New
York.
In 1895, Mr. Purves was appointed General Man-
ager of the Company’s Australasian Department—
a position that he still holds. It is not too much
to say that the success which has of late years at-
tended the Australasian operations of " the oldest
International Life Company in the world” is
largely due to his energy, tact, and administrative
ability.
insurance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches, continued.
LIFE ASSURANCE.


Australian Mutual Fire
Insurance Society.
Amongst the many Insurance and Financial In-
stitutions doing business in New South Wales, it
is doubtful if any can show a record of continued
successes such as has been so worthily achieved
by the Australian Mutual Fire Insurance So-
ciety, which to-day occupies a position of unique
distinction in this State. Originally founded in
1872, by a number of far-seeing business men, it
was launched on the flood tide which, year after
year, has borne it along over a sea of uninter-
rupted prosperity. Confirmation of this is amply
afforded by the pleasing fact that ever since the
second year of its formation a bonus of 20 per
cent, has been regularly divided between share-
holders and policy-holders, in addition to the an-
nual interest paid to the shareholders. The Aus-
tralian Mutual was the first fire insurance asso-
ciation permanently established in New South
Wales on the mutual principle, which gives to
policy-holders a bonus out of the yearly profits.
This method of doing business was appreciated
by the public, and, the office being a local one. it
was well supported from the start. The encour-
agement so extended to clients in this way caused
the Society to rapidly attain a popularity which
has been continually enhanced by the satisfaction
engendered through the prompt recognition and
adequate settlement of all claims made against
the Society. The liberal lines upon which the So-
ciety’s business has been promulgated have ivon
the confidence of the people in a very marked de-
gree.
It is an institution racy of the soil, being
Australian in every sense of the word. From the
time of its inception the aim of its responsible
officers has been to increase the influence and
augment the strength of the association by every
means in their power, consistent with equity and
common sense. No sinister inducements have been
offered to attract business, and no engagements
have been entered into that have not been faith-
fully carried out by the Society. Throughout the
alternating periods of prosperity and depression
which have fallen to New South Wales, in com-
mon with all other countries, the Australian Mu-
tual has pursued the even tenor of its way, se-
cure in the integrity and prudence of those en-
trusted with its guidance.
The original capital of the Society was ,£6250,
but it was afterwards increased to .£50,000 paid
up—such increase, be it observed, has been paid
out of the profits. The nominal capital is£loo,ooo.
with power to increase to .£1,000,000, so
that it is at once apparent that the Society
rests upon a strong financial basis. The Society’s
invested funds now stand at rhe highly satisfac-
tory total of .£173,082, representing freehold pro-
perty, mortgages, and bank deposits, which con-
clusively indicate how enormously the reserves
have been strengthened. The progress of the So-
ciety, as shown by the following figures, points
to what may, without egotism, be termed phe-
nominal development, more especially when it is
remembered that it confines its operations solely
to the State of New South Wales. Within the
period embracing 1881 to 1832, before the Society
had been in existence for a decade, the gross
income amounted to .£29,190, while the reserve and
investment fund totalled ,£31,500. For the finan-
cial year ending March, 1901, the income reached
£46,168, and the reserves £160,704. The balance-
sheet for the financial year just closed shows that
business was again most satisfactory, the gross
income amounting to £48,973, and the reserves
being further augmented to £173,082, while £8496
17s. 6d. was distributed in bonuses. If further
corroboration were required in regard to the suc-
cess of the Society, it need only be mentioned
that, in addition to the annual dividend to share-
holders, there has been disbursed among the pol-
icy-holders no less a sum than £90,624 in bonuses.
MR. G. HOWARD POPE.
Manager.
The head office of the Society is an imposing
edifice occupying a position at the coiner of King
and Pitt streets, right in the centre of the City.
After its formation the Society was temporarily
housed in two or three different locations, but,
early in the eighties, it removed to the present
commodious building, which was designed by Mr.
Morrell, and forms, without doubt, one of the
handsomest business premises- in Sydney, even in
these days of progressive architecture, as a glance
at the accompanying photographic block will show.
The entire property is freehold, and, as it stands,
constitutes in itself a very valuable asset of the
Society.
The interior has been planned on generous lines,
ample space being provided for carrying on the
large amount of business which is daily transacted
by the Society. The public office is a commo-
dious and well-appointed apartment, while the
suite of offices utilised by the Manager, and his
principal subordinates, as well as the Board
Room, are all arranged on the most approved
plan.
The Directorate consists of Messrs. Sydney 11.
Cary (Chairman), William Hezlet, James Green,
John Wetherill, and J. M. Pierce, all of whom
are well and favourably known in the commercial
and financial spheres of metropolitan activity, the
Manager being Mr. G. Howard Pope.
The Society has agents and branches in every
town in the State, and does business with con-
stituents in every part of the country, but it re-
frains from crossing he borders, being satisfied
with the field which New South Wales presents
for the exercise of its functions as an agent in
promoting the interests of the Commonwealth.
. MR. Q. HOWARD POPE.
In these days of keen competition throughout
all branches of business, the man who can suc-
cessfully guide and control a laige corporation or
society for the benefit of all concerned must be
specially qualified both by instinct and training.
No slip-shod methods will pass as current, and no
rule of thumb tactics will avail in the strenuous
battle for ascendancy. There must be inherent
capacity, backed up by experience and judgment,
interwoven with tact and courteousness, to ensure
even a modicum of success in these days. In Mr.
G. Howard Pope, the Manager of the Aus-
tralian Mutual, the Company has an officer who
possesses all the essentials to promote its interests
and influence. Mr. Pope has had a life-long asso-
ciation with the institution of which he is the
administrative head, having been connected with it
for a period of about twenty-eight years.
Born at Ryde in 1860, his father being the Clerk
of Petty Sessions at that place, he received a good,
sound education, and in 1875 entered the service
of the Australian Mutual Fire Society as a junior
clerk. At that time the operations of the Society
were by no means comparable to those of to-day,
but after the late Mr. Walter Church assumed
control, the Society made giant strides. Mr. Pope
proved himself a most efficient officer, and, under
the careful tutelage of the late Mr. Church,' he
advanced rapidly in the service of the Society. ■ On
the demise of his late chief, the Directors evinced
their appreciation of his ability and loyalty to
the office by appointing him to the vacant posi-
tion, where he again justified the trust reposed in
him. His intimate knowledge of all the intricate'
details of the insurance business, combined with
his mature experience and valid judgment, not
only place him in the front rank of his compeers,
but are also a guarantee that the affairs of the
Society will be well safeguarded and judiciously
advanced.
Jnsurance.
Historical and IBiographical Sketches.—continued.
FIRE INSURANCE.


Messrs. Gibbs, Bright & Co.
The world-wide ramifications of New South Wales
commerce and the attendant monetary risks in-
curred, has made the underwriter an official on
whom the very fabric of commercial enterprise rests.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the old-estab-
lished and world-renowned firm of Gibbs, Bright
and Co., whose name is a household word in every
part of the civilized globe, should devote a consider-
able part of its great oiganisation to insurance busi-
ness, especially as it is a branch of finance which
coincides exceedingly well with their general opera ■
tions as Shipping Agents and Merchants. .
The Sydney offices of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and
Company in which the Insurance Department is
commodiously catered for are handily located at 37
Pitt-street. Under the management of Mr. E. W
G. de Gyulay, this branch of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright
and Co/s business has increased to such an extent
in volume and importance, that a brief resume of
the progress recorded by the trio of offices for
whom the firm act as Agents, will be read with
interest.
Union Insurance Society of
Canton, Limited.
MESSRS. GIBBS, BRIGHT AND COMPANY,
Agents.
This great, wealthy and progressive Company was
established in the year 1835. Its capital is in 10,000
shares of 250 dollars each, of which 100 dollars per
share is paid up, equal to a paid-up capital of
1,000,000 dollars. Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co.
opened an agency in New South Wales for the
Society in 1887, and have thus been its representa-
tives for sixteen years. The Society is at the present
time one of the strongest of marine insurance com-
panies, and does one of the largest businesses. The
net premiums for 1902, after deducting re-insurances
and abatements, was 3,458,543 dollars. The Society
has always been renowned for the large division of
profits made by it with its contributors of business;
in fact, in this respect it stands unique among
marine offices. Particulars of these bonuses during
the fifteen years, 1887-91, are given below. From
these it will be seen that during that period they
a'eraged 2] per cent, on the net premiums con-
tributed by clients of the Society. The total amount
paid away in this manner during the period
reached the large sum of 4,081,507 dollars.
From the same list of figures it will be seen
that during the fifteen years referred to the dividends
to shareholders have ranged from 20 percent, in 1887 to
60 per cent, in 1901, totalling a sum of 1,995,000 dol-
lars. The total funds in the same period have in-
creased from 1,653,840 to 6,735,613 dollars. The capi-
tal paid up in 1887 was 250,000 dollars. At the pre-
sent time it is 1,000,000 dollars. This increase has
been made by transfers from reserves, namely, in
1895 250,000 dollars, and in 1902 500,000 dollars.
The Head Office of the Society is in Hong Kong,
and the shares of the Society are held by leading
merchants and commercial people all over the
Anglo-Saxon world. The Society is represented by
agencies and branches in all the leading ports of
Europe, America, and Australia, and also in the
East.
The large funds, totalling 6,735,613 dollars, at 31st
December, 1901, are all carefully invested in first-
class securities. This will be clear from the follow-
ing. The investments in Hong Kong and Shanghai
amount to 2,050,160 dollars in mortgages, deben-
tures, and other securities, the balance of the funds
MESSES. GIBBS, BRIGHT AND COMPANY.
Offices of the Union Insurance Society of Canton, Guardian Assurance Co., Ltd., The State
Fire Insurance Co., Ltd., 37 Pitt Street, Sydney.
being invested in London and Australia at fixed
deposits, or in cash at current banking accounts, or
held by the various branches and agencies. The
security to the insured is therefore undoubted.
The following particulars of the London and Aus-
tralian investments alone are worthy of considera-
tion.
Details of investments in London and Australia,
as per balance-sheet, 30th June, 1902. —
London Investments. —Deposited in banks,
.1174,000.
Invested in Sterling Securities—Valued at 30th
June, 1902.—Consols, 21 per cent., ,£33,823;
insurance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches, continued.
LIFE, FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE.


Year
yet. Proms.
Profit.
Bonuses to
Contrib. of
Business.
%
Dividend.
%
Funds.
Capital-
1887 ...
$1,122,611 ...
$298,208 ...
$142,857 ...
15 ...
$50,000 ...
20 ..
$1,653,840 ...
$250,000
1888 ...
1,248,813 ...
459,032 ...
211,928 ...
20 ...
70,000 ..
28 ...
1,849,959 ...
250,000
1889 ...
1,215,080 ...
417,922 ...
214,954 ...
20 ...
70,000 ...
28 ...
1,841,105 ...
250,000
1890 ...
1,147,294 ...
356,067 ...
191,205 ...
18 ...
65,000 ...
26 ...
1,996,572 ...
250,000
1891 ...
1,298.031 ...
465,206 ...
223,259 ...
20 ...
70,000 ...
28 ...
2,236,253 ...
250,000
1892 ...
1,254,528 ...
524,079 ..
265,677 ...
25 ...
70,000 ...
28 ..
2,692,145 ...
250,000
1893 ...
1,354,156 ...
628,262 ...
312,189 ...
25 ...
90,000 ...
36 ...
3,353,486 ...
250,000
1894 ...
1,585,288 ...
764,809 ...
403,783 ...
31 ...
120,000 ...
48 ...
3.683,942 ..
250,000
1895 ...
1,588,229 ...
860,867 ...
309,209 ...
25 ...
150,000 ...
30 ...
4, 02,786 ...
500,000
1896 ...
1,664,367 ...
729,073 ...
307,505 ...
22 J ...
160,000 ...
32 ...
4,163,238 ...
500,000
1897 ...
1,925,714 ...
677,562 ...
261,629 ...
20 ...
170,000 ...
34 ...
4,321,224 ...
500,000
1898 ...
2,355,771 ...
742,525 ...
292,166 ...
20 ...
180,000 ...
36 ...
4,860,122 ...
500,000
1899 ...
2,660,419 ...
891,801 ...
307,213 ...
20 ...
200,000 ...
40 ...
5,246.821 ...
500,000
1900 ...
2,982,643 ...
904,542 ...
306,999 ...
20 ...
230,000 ...
46 ...
5,411,183 ...
500,000
1901 ...
3,458,543 ...
1,147,227 ...
330,934 ...
20 ...
300,000 ...
60 ...
$6,735,613 ...
$500,000
$9,867,182
$4,081,507
21 2 /,
$1,995,000
34-3,3
Abatements.
Total Funds.
.£
£
1891
15,462
98,732
1892
36,663
90,228
1893
46,393
98,091
1894
51,782
105,676
1895
59,360
115,789
1896
61,393
123,802
1897
62,991
126,367
1898
70,061
124,365
1899
79,571
125,979
1900
98,071
135,030
1901
102,795
137,493
1902
129,556
154,002
Cape of Good Hope 4 per cent, consolidated stock
insd. (1936), £5940; do. do. 3J per cent, consolidated
stock inscribed (1929-49), £5313; Natal Go-
vernment 3J per cent, inscribed stock (1914-39)
£6240; do. do. 3 per cent, inscribed stock (1929-49)’
£6820, West Australian Government 3 per cent in-
scribed stock (1927), £13,300; Hong Kong Govern-
ment 3J per cent, inscribed stock (1918-43), £7140;
Ceylon Government 3 per cent, inscribed stock (1940)!
£9700; Mauritius Government 4 per cent, inscribed
stock (1937), £5650; United States Government
loan 4 per cent. (1925), £700; Metropolitan
consolidated 3J per cent. (1929), £5475; Glasgow and
South-Western Railway 4 per cent, debentures,
£2660; Great Northern Railway 3 per cent, deben-
tures, £1530; Great Western Railway 5 per cent,
debentures, £9744; London and North-Western
Railway 3 per cent, debentures, £5250; London and
South-Western Railway 3 per cent, debentures
£3060; do. do. 3) per cent, preference, £5700; Midland
Railway 2J per cent, debentures, £2040; North-Eas-
tern Railway 3 per cent, debentures, £1359;
Bombay and Baroda Railway 5 per cent, debentures,
£3200; London County Council 2i per cent. con.
stock (1920), £5400; New South Wales Government
4 per cent, inscribed stock (1933), £4560; New Zea-
land Government 3 per cent, inscribed (1945), £9600;
Japanese Government loan 4 per cent., £4300; Na-
tional war loan 2J per cent. (1910), £1485; Victorian
Government inscribed stock 4 per cent. (1884), £2200;
total, £162,195.
Invested in Rupee Paper.—lndia Government
rupee paper (1854-5) 3j per cent., £8385.
Australian Investments.—Deposited in banks—
Bank of Australasia, £1000; Union Bank of Aus-
tralia, £1000; total, £2OOO.
Invested in Sterling Securities.—Melbourne and
Metropolitan Board of Works debentures, Victorian
Government debentures, and Marine Salvage Asso-
ciation, £18591; grand total, £265,172.
The following tabulated statement of the transac-
tions of the Union Insurance Society of Canton dur-
ing the fifteen years 1887-1901 will be found both
valuable and interesting;—
The figures for 1902 are not yet to hand. The
Society, however, had a very profitable year, declar-
ing an interim bonus of 20 per cent, over its general
business, and increasing the paid-up capital from
500,000 dollars to 1,000,000 dollars by transferring
(he former sum from reserves. This is the second
occasion during the above period in which the
capital has thus been so increased, viz., in 1895,
when the sum transferred was 250,000 dollars. The
Society has from time to time donated large sums
to its officers' provident fund, which is now in a
very strong position. The Society does a large busi-
ness in Australasia, being under the management in
this respect, of Mr. B. Goldsmith, in Melbourne,
who has associated with him the following gentle-
men as a local board, viz., Messrs. W. H. Calder,
E. Fanning, E. Harper, and W. H. Sellars. The
chief agencies in Australia are: —Sydney and Bris-
bane, Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co.; Adelaide,
Messrs. Nankivell and Co.; Fremantle and Albany,
Messrs. George Wills and Co.
The following gentlemen constitute the Board at
the head office, viz.:—Hon. C. S. Sharp (Chairman),
Messrs. N. A. Siebs, Q. H. Medhurst, Hon. E.
Shewan, and G. Bullock. Mr. W. J. Saunders is
Secretary
MR. E. W. G. DE GYULAY.
Manager, Insurance Department,
Gibbs, Bright and Co.
In London the representation is as follows :—Com-
mittee, Messrs. J. L. Scott, Thomas Pyke, N. J.
Ede, W. C. Ward; Agent, Mr. Douglas Jones; Un-
derwriter, Mr. H. C. Saunders.
Guardian Assurance Company,
Limited.
MESSRS. GIBBS, BRIGHT AND COMPANY,
Agents.
This Company is one of the oldest of British Com-
panies, having been established as far back as 1821.
Its headquarters are at 11 Lombard Street, in the
very heart of London City. Its assets are invested
in British Government securities, British and In-
dian railway debentures, and “ gilt-edged” stock
generally.
Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co. represent the Com-
pany in New South Wales, Queensland, and South
Australia, having acted in that capacity for the last
15 years. The Company has a branch office in Mel-
bourne, with a Local Board, viz., Hon. James Bal-
four, M.L.C., and Hon. W. H. Embling, M.L.C.,
Mr. W. F. Allan being the branch manager. The
Company is also represented by agents in Auckland,
Christchurch, Dunedin, Invercargill, Napier and
Wellington.
The paid-up capital is no less than .£1,000,000, a
fact which places the Company in an unique posi-
tion among insurance offices. The income of the
Company from net premiums for 1901 was .£423,651,
and its well-known name for honourable and lib-
eral treatment, has been the means of securing
for it a splendid position amongst the large insur-
ance offices of the world.
It is worthy of remark that in the profit and loss
account of the very first year of existence of this
Company (1822) provision was made on a sound
basis for a fire premium reserve fund for unexpired
risks, and the practice has been followed ever since.
That the company is a progressive one is evidenced
by the fact that the total funds 15 years ago, when
Messrs. Gibbs, Bright, and Co. assumed the agency,
were £4,179,082, whereas at 31st December, 1901, they
totalled £4,873,280.
Evidence of the up-to-date nature of the manage-
ment of the Guardian Company, is furnished by
the fact that when the Company obtained a fresh
Act of Parliament in 1893, and was registered as a
limited company, in the memorandum of the asso-
ciation, one of the objects of the Company was to
transact insurance against burglary and theft.
Another instance of the careful manner in which
the income of the Company is safeguarded, is that
the item of “Agents' bad debts" only amounted to
£32, as against an aggregate of over £393,000 received
for fire premiums during 1900, after deduction of
reinsurance premiums.
The State Fire Insurance Co.,
Limited.
MESSRS. GIBBS, BRIGHT AND COMPANY,
Agents.
■ 1 «
This Company was established in 1891, with head
offices at Exchange Buildings, Liverpool. The
“ State’’ is the third insurance company represented
by Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co., who commenced
the Company’s business in New South Wales in
1899.
The subscribed capital is .£700,000, of which
.£70,000 is paid up. The total funds at 31st Decem-
ber, 1902, were .£154,002. The net premium income
for that year was £129,556. The net underwriting
profit was .£17,919. The funds are, therefore, seen
to be more than sufficient for the business done,
and doubtless will be adequately increased from
time to time as the business increases. The sum of
'£20,000 was transferred to the reserve fund at 31st
December last. The following particulars of the
Company show that it is progressing, and that its
business is being carefully and skilfully conducted.
Premiums less
Re-insurances and
The Company is represented throughout New
South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Aus-
tralia and West Australia, also in New Zealand,
and is steadily earning for itself the respect and
confidence which it certainly desei ves. A perusal of
the names of the various directors of local boards
in the United Kingdom will shoiv how strongly the
Company is supported by many of the leading pro-
fessional and commercial gentlemen in the old
country. From the last report it appears that the
Company has acquired fine premises at 16 and 18
Dale Street, Liverpool, where, as soon as possible,
new- buildings will be erected for the head office.
The assets are invested in British consols, Exche-
quer bonds, Bank of England stock, railway, guar-
anteed and preference stocks in the United King-
dom, mortgages in the United Kingdom, and other
securities of the most tangible and readily con-
vertible character.


National Fire & Marine Insur-
ance Company of New Zealand.
The splenuid position which has been attained
by New Zealand in the business of insurance, is
very remarkable. “ The Britain of the South” has
displayed, almost from the beginning of its strik-
ing and romantic history, a spirit of enterprise,
progress and indomitable energy worthy of the Bri-
tain of the North. That this should have been the
case, however, is not so very strange when due con-
sideration is given to the matter. For New Zea-
land, from its earliest history, was colonised by
people who came from that middle class which has
done so much for Anglo-Saxondom all the world
over. Enterprising and adventurous men and wo-
men, tired of the restricted scope of home, pro-
ceeded to a new land, where the conditions were
very different. They found a country where the
climate was bracing enough to stimulate exertion,
but not to stifle it; where a great coast line gave
occupation to the mariner, gold-fields offered their
reward to searchers after their hidden treasure,
forests yielded their wealth of timber, and a fruit-
ful soil returned rich crops to the cultivator, and
feed for the sheep and .cattle of the pastoralist.
When the producing interests of the country had
been well attended to, the time arrived when fin-
ance of every kind demanded the attention of a
section of the people. The business was entered
into with as much energy as was displayed by the
New Zealanders in other directions. That of in-
surance received a large measure of attention. The
plentifulness of timber lent itself to the building
of many houses constructed of that material, and
thus gave a large opening to fire insurance. New
Zealand’s stormy coasts provided an equally im-
portant opening to the business of marine insur-
ance. Then the time arrived for the New Zealand
offices to lengthen their cords and strengthen their
slakes; and agencies were founded in every large
centre throughout Australia.
The National Fire and Marine Insurance Com-
pany of New Zealand is not an institution of yes-
terday. It was founded in the year 1873, and is
thus 30 years old. Of all the vicissitudes which the
“ Land of the Maori and the Moa” has experienced
during the eventful years the Company has been a
full partaker. It now stands, like New Zealand
itself, in that strong position which results from
the successful overcoming of difficulties. Although
an age of 30 years is a respectable one for an in-
surance Company—giving as it does an expectation
of life of a very cheering kind—it nevertheless
gives encouragement for much greater development;
and, as there is always room at the top for finan-
cial and commercial concerns, as well as for indi-
viduals, it’s impossible to place a limit to the po-
tentialities of the “ National.”
The Company has an authorised capital of
£2,000,000, of which no less a sum than .£lOO,OOO is
paid up. Its reserve fund stands at £lOO,OOO, to
which has to be added a further reserve of £48,000
for unexpired risks. The capital is invested on mort-
gage, freehold properties in New Zealand, deben-
tures, money on deposit and short call, and balance
at bankers.
The Company’s official statement, published in
compliance with Section 79 of the Companies’ Act,
1882, gives the following particulars;—Estimated
liabilities, £16,771; total assets, £287,395, made up
as follows:—Bills of exchange and promissory
notes, £150; cash at banker’s, £22,809; other securi-
ties, £264,435. The ratio of accumulated funds to
premium income shows a position of unusual
strength and absolute guarantee.
The Board of Directors consists of the following
gentlemen:—Mr. J. M. Ritchie (Chairman), Mr.
Keith Romsay (Vice-Chairman), Messrs. Alexander
Burt, R. Glendenning, Thomas W. Kempthorne
NATIONAL FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE COMPANY OF NEW ZEALAND.
Offices: 14 Spring Street, Sydney.
and John Moloney. Mr. Henry E. Williams is the
General Manager. The Company’s head office is at
Rattray Street, Dunedin, and the Bank of New
South Wales transacts its banking business. It
has branches at Auckland, Canterbury, Wellington
and Hawkes’ Bay; and in South Australia, New
South Wales, Victoria and Queensland.
The " National” accepts fire risks of every de-
scription, and this department of the business is
based on lowest current rates. Marine risks reach-
ing to all parts of the world are taken on the most
favourable terms. Such is the far-reaching nature
of business in these days that wool is covered
from the sheep’s back to London. The balance-
sheet for the year ended 30th September, 1902,
showed that the aggregate of fire and marine pre-
miums during the twelve months, less reinsur-
ances and returns, amounted to the considerable
one of £109,475. No less a revenue than £10,305
w'as received during the year as interest and rents.
After carrying £7,971 to reserve fund and carrying
fonvard £15,124, the sum of Is. 3d. per share was
distributed. As the shares are 10s. paid up, this
represented a dividend of 12J per cent, for the year,
the "sweet simplicity” of which doubtless com-
mends itself to the fortunate shareholders.
insurance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches. Continued.
FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE.


The Company for several years paid higher divi-
dends, but everyone will acknowledge that 12J per-
cent. is an excellent return for money invested in a
business that is entirely founded on risks from
fire and water.
The accounts of the “ National” are made up
yearly to September 30th, and submitted to share-
holders in November, but interim dividends are
payable. The share register is kept at Dunedin,
and the transfer fee is 2s. 6d. The voting powers
of shareholders are.—One vote for every share up
to ten; beyond ten, one vote for every ten shares
up to 300 shares; beyond 300 shares, one vote for
every 25 shares.
The “ National” has an agency in London, its
address being 9 Gracechurch Street, E.C. Mr. A. Hill
Jack is the London Manager.
The New South Wales branch of the Company
has its headquarters at 14 Spring Street, Sydney,
opposite the head office of the Australian Mutual
Provident Society, Pitt Street. The Branch is in
the capable hands of Mr. W. A. Gibb, who has
been Manager since 1884, and whose geniality, long
experience, and wide knowledge of affairs, have
secured for the Company he so thoroughly repre-
sents, numbers of clients, and for himself person-
ally, troops of friends.
The history of the “National” shows that it has
always been efficiently and prudently conducted. The
yearly statements of account manifest that the
traditions of the past are still being maintained,
and that, with a splendid return to shareholders, is
also given the best guarantee for stability in facing
those risks which it is the business of an insur-
ance Company to confront.
It may be said that existing insurance companies
have to face an increasing competition from new
rivals, with the result of reduced returns, and com-
pulsion to undertake risks which would otherwise
not be looked at. The answer is that well-founded
institutions have no need to fear the operation of
wild cat companies. Old and well-established com-
panies, having the experience of years, as well as the
actuarial returns of centuries, to guide them, are
not likely to east away the substance of assured
success for the shadow of ephemeral returns on a
temporarily phenomenal scale. It is further to be
remembered that in the business of insurance, the
practice of reinsurance plays a very important part,
so that a fair number of insurance offices in a given
field is not without its benefit to all concerned, as
the risks ate better distributed then than they
otherwise would be.
It may be said that the growth of fire and marine
insurance companies, such as the “ National” of
New Zealand, is more than equal to requirements.
In this connection the future of Maoriland and
Australia should be steadily kept in view. There
can be no doubt that an immense material develop-
ment will take place in these lands within the
next half century, accompanied by a great increase
of population, and a consequent immense augmen-
tation of commercial and financial transactions.
The command of the Southern Pacific will be
shared between the Commonwealth and New Zea-
land, and in that political and monetary mastery,
all sound local insurance institutions will un-
doubtedly participate. Those on the spot, having
a fund of local business experience to guide them,
will be in a position to make the best of their
situation, and to avoid pitfalls into which the re-
presentatives of institutions founded eslewhere,
coming into unknown ground, are liable to stumble.
The great increase of population will mean a cor-
responding augmentation in the number of dwell-
ings, and accordingly, a greater field to be covered
from risk by fire insurance.
With regard to marine insurance, the line of
progress will be even more marked in the days to
come. The “ National,” with its sister companies
that undertake marine underwriting, has a future
before it of a very' cheering kind. In these days
all the world and his wife are on the path of tra-
vel; knowledge is increased, and men move to and
fro on the earth. The standard of vessels that ply
between the different States has been greatly raised
within the last few years, and steamers that a
little time ago were regarded as of a very high-
class kind, are now considered out of date when
compared with the floating hotels that ply between
our various local ports. The vast coast line of
Australia, the insular situation of New Zealand,
and the fact that the ocean is the path on which
the traffic of the Southern Archipelago must be
borne, will necessitate an enormous fleet of steam-
ers to cope with our ever-increasing local trade.
It may be regarded as certain that in a generation
hence the wilds of New Guinea, the Solomons, the
New Hebrides, and other islands and groups will
be as well explored as the Blue Mountains are to-
day. New Zealand institutions like the “ National”
will also greatly benefit in their marine insurance
department by the fact that the country of their
inception is one which carries on a large export
trade in produce and frozen meat, and will con-
tinue to do so, necessitating the covering of large
ri-ks. In this connection it may be remarked
that the insuring of vessels laden with frozen
meat is a duty which the shippers do well not to
overlook.
It is very frequently asserted that insurance is a
sort of betting business, a series of gambling tran-
sactions, a continuous attempt to “ pick the
double” under somewhat more respectable auspices
than those which surround the ordinary betting
ring. “ Nothing of the kind,’’ will be the remark
of those whose views on the subject are worth any-
MR. W. A. GIBB.
Manager.
thing. The success of the National File and Mar-
ine Insurance Company of New Zealand is an evi-
dence that insurance is a business conducted ac-
cording to the well-established laws of finance and
co-operation, in combination with mathematical cer-
tainties, and the exercise of good judgment when a
basis of calculation cannot be accurately ascer-
tained. The opeiations of the “National’’ and
other concerns, worked on similarly sound lines,
prove that insurance is a profitable business to
those who engage in it,—provided always that
“they know how to do it.” That it is a boon and
a blessing to the insured is equally manifest by
the fact that hardly any kind of business is en-
gaged in nowadays in which fire lisks are not
covered. As for- marine insurance, it is an item
in the accounts of shipowners and shippers hardly
less indispensable than the cost of provisions for the
captain, officers and crew, or the bill for “ bunk-
ers.” Thus it is that the operative field of insti-
tutions like the “ National” of New Zealand will
ever be open so long as men build habitations for
themselves, engage in any industry, or invade Nep-
tune’s wide and watery domain.
Mil. W. A. GITSB.
The history of tho.-e who have built up a large
and profitable business out of little, or perhaps
nothing, ought to be interesting to all who study
the ways and life of mankind. For the men re-
ferred to are emphatically creatois, and the human
race is by their lives and actions blessed and en-
nobled. It is said that man can evolve an instinct
which impels him to work for the sake of the
object accomplished, quite as much as for the
value of the reward received. Whether this
theory be correct or not it is certain that the
world is enriched by the actions of those who,
in the course of the trivial round, and the ac-
complishment of the common task, labour year
after year to make a livelihood for themselves,
and at the same time leave the world better than
they found it.
Mr. William Alexander Gibb, Manager in Sydney
of the New South Wales branch of the National
Fire and Marine Insurance Company of New Zea-
land, is a gentleman whose business life has been
always devoted to insurance. lie is a native of
Aberdeen, that far Northern Scottish city, noted
for its granite, and for the business aptitude of its
citizens.
At the early age of five Mr. Gibb left the shores
of Old Scotland for New Zealand, which was
reached in the year 1861. He was educated at the
public and high schools of Dunedin, a city
then, as it is now, a replica of the better pait
of Scotland. When 14 years old Mr. Gibb com-
menced the serious business of life by entering
the Dunedin branch of the Victoria Insurance
Company. In 1873, after about three years’ ser-
vice, he joined the National Fire and Marine In-
surance Company of New Zealand, an institution
which had only then been established, and in the
service of which he was destined to spend an im-
portant part of his life. The head office was then,
as it still is, in Dunedin. Mr. Gibb’s ability,
grasp of detail, industry and tact were such as to
secure for him- not only the goodwill of clients,
but the appreciation of those in the office whose
favourable opinion was worth having. Promotion
was rapid, and Mr. Gibb was rightly regarded as
a coming man. This belief was justified by his
being commissioned in 1884 to proceed to Sydney,
there to manage the New South Wales branch of
the Company, and in that position he has been
for the last 19 years. It is the earnest hope of the
multitude of his friends and admirers in this city
that here he will remain for many a year to come.
On arrival in Sydney Mr. Gibb obtained a promi-
nent and popular position in the business world of
the harbour city. In assurance circles he was warmly
welcomed, and his office greatly benefited by the ap-
pointment. For two ye-ars Mr. Gibb represented
British and Intercolonial Companies on the Metro-
politan Fire Brigades Board. He has been Chair-
man of the Fire Underwriters’ Association of New-
South Wales, and was the first to hold that ap-
pointment simultaneously with the position of
Chairman of the Sydney Marine Underwriters’ and
Salvage Association. Of the latter Association he
has been Chairman several times, and is also a
member of the Federal Council. As one univer-
sally known where “ merchants most do congre-
gate,” Mr. Gibb is fitly a member of the Sydney
Merchants’ Exchange.
The strong position locally occupied by the Na-
tional Fire and Marine Insurance Company of
New Zealand is the best evidence that could be
given of the manner in which the interests of his
office are safeguarded and advanced by the Sydney
Manager. The position is an exceedingly import-
ant one, for Port Jackson, as one of the great ports
on the all-round course of the world’s navigation,
has a multiplicity of maritime risks to be covered
every day of the year, and the fire risk in the
market are naturally increasing with the growth
of population, manufactures and commerce. The
management of a veteran officer who has, from the
day he began business life, been engaged in the
transaction of fire and marine insurance, is there-
fore most important at this great centre of ship-
ping and general enterprise. Mr. W. A. Gibb is
a good all-round Insurance Manager, and both his
New Zealand and Australian well wishers are
unanimous that the right man is emphatically in
the right place, without prejudice to whatever
higher position may be in store for their justly
esteemed friend.


The New Zealand Insurance
Company.
The name of the New Zealand Insurance Com-
pany is as familiar as a household word to all
whose business risks compel them to safeguard their
ventures on land or sea against the dangers of
fire, or the perils of the great deep. It can be
averred without fear of contradiction that if
traders, manufacturers, ship-owners, and the
commercial public generally could not insure
their risks, the enterprises now begun daily
in the course of ordinary business, would
dwindle into comparative insignificance, and every
transaction would be merely of a hand to mouth
character. Underwriters may justly claim to be
the crown of the commercial arch, and if they were
withdrawn, confusion dire would immediately fol-
low.
Among the institutions which occupy a foremost
place in the estimation of the insuring public on
this side of the line, prominently stands forth the
New Zealand Insurance Company. Its phenomen-
ally successful career is almost a romance. As its
name implies, its origin was in that wonderful
colony which is not without justice termed “ the
Britain of the South.” The Company was estab-
lished in Auckland in 1859, when the condition of
the colony was primitive in comparison with what
it is to-day. But from the beginning the venture
had keen, shrewd, and capable men at its head.
Those who laid its foundations were leading citizens
who knew very well what they were about. The
capital was ,£lOO.OOO nominal, of which ,£52,000 was
subscribed, and £5OOO paid up. The first office was
in what was known as Fraser’s Buildings, at the
corner of Queen and Shortland streets, Auckland.
The first risks were accepted on June 4th, 1859.
How vigorously the business was conducted was
demonstrated by the fact that in 1861 the capital
was increased from ,£lOO,OOO to ,£250,000. The range
of its operations has been extended from New Zea-
land until it now embraces Australia, Great Britain,
the United States, British North America, South
America, South Africa, Ceylon, China, Japan, and
other countries. In that immense field of mercan-
tile and shipping activity, the New Zealand Insur-
ance Company is represented by a great army of
managers and agents. The vast expansion of busi-
ness necessitated, in 1874, an increase of capital
from .£250,000 to £1,000,000, at which sum it now
stands, with .£200,000 paid up.
The stability of the Society’s position is amply
demonstrated by the fact that its reserve and re-
insurance funds together, amount to the very large
total of £300,000. Its total investments aggregate
£566,417, including the following amounts :—Com-
pany’s freehold properties and offices, £209,376;
British Consols, £55,082; New Zealand Govern-
ment 4 per cent, debentures, £70,000; United States
bonds, £55,509; Argentine Government securities,
£24,500; fixed deposits, £51,624; and Auckland City
leasehold, which, after allowing for sinking fund of
£34,655, amounts to £23,683.
The vast strides made by the Company since its
inauguration are shown by the following figures:—
In 1860 the net premium revenue was £3,766; in 1865,
£45,241; in 1875, £145,825; in 1885, £219,914; in 1895,
£265,178; in 1900, £342,036; in 1902, the revenue
amounted to 336,960, which, with an addi-
tional £21,963, derived from rents and interest,
increased the total net revenue to the princely one
of £408,923.
Briefly stated, the New Zealand Insurance Com-
pany has up to date paid away .£4,873,427 in losses,
and has yet been able to distribute among its share-
holders no less than ,£842,500, besides building up
some of its reserves and re-insurance funds out of
the profits. The balance-sheet presented at the an-
nual meeting held on January 14th, 1903, giving
results for the year ended 30th November, 1902,
showed that the profits on the year’s transactions,
after making full provision for all ascertained
losses, amounted to £55,395. This, added to a
balance brought forward, amounted to £75,305. Of
this amount £30,000 was paid in dividends, a total
of £25,000 was carried to reserve and re-insurance
funds, and £20,305 carried forward.
The New Zealand Insurance Company is, as al-
ready indicated, an institution not of a stay-at-
home character. It practically takes the whole
world as its field. Certainly, in its case, the policy
of expansion, combined with prudent management
and the formation of great reserves, is amply justi-
fled by results. Last year’s operations estab-
lished a record in net revenue, and though the
losses made good amounted to nearly a quarter of
a million, the profit on the year’s transactions
amounted, as already stated, to .£55,395. Notwith-
standing the nature of the Company’s operations,
great discrimination has from its inception been
exercised in the risks accepted ; and the desire to do
business has never closed the eyes of the gentlemen
at the head of its affairs to the necessity of a keen
scrutiny in the details of their underwriting,
One remarkable fact in connection with the won-
derfully progressive colony of New Zealand is the
lead taken by its fire and marine insurance corn-
panies throughout Australasia. Comparisons are
proverbially odious, and there is not the slightest
practical necessity for the New Zealand Insurance
NEW ZEALAND INSURANCE COMPANY. OFFICES, 81 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
Jnsurance.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE.


Company to contrast the details of its business with
those of any other institution. Facts are their own
witnesses, and cannot be disputed. For the
purpose of memorizing, however, there is virtue in
concrete facts and round numbers, and the state-
ment that the net piemium income of the New
Zealand Insurance Company exceeds ,£IOOO per day,
Sundays included, is one that will be easily remem-
bered.
The Company has throughout been exceedingly
fortunate in its Directors and executive officers.
It goes without saying that in all great and flourish-
ing business concerns good fortune is practically
synonymous with first-class management. The
late Mr. G. P. Pierce was General Manager from
about the foundation of the Company until his
death in 1891. He was succeeded by Mr. Warwick
Weston, who had acted as Inspector for a long
period. Mr. Weston paid the debt of nature in
1895, and was succeeded by Mr. David Craig, one of
the oldest and most experienced officers in the Com-
pany. By birth, education, and professional train-
ing, Mr. Craig is a Scot. He was born in the
“ Kingdom of Fife,” was duly indentured to a solic-
itor there, spent seven years in the office of a Writer
to the Signet in Edinburgh, and attended the law
classes at the University during a portion of that
period. In 1865 Mr. Craig landed in New Zealand,
and two years later joined the staff of the New Zea-
land Insurance Company at Auckland. He was
very soon promoted to Christchurch, and for many
years was in chaige of the Company’s Canterbury
business. As successor to Mr. Weston Mr. Craig
has been emphatically the right man in the right
place, and results have triumphantly vindicated
his appointment to the highly important and
greatly sought after position. Mr. Craig, who has
been connected wjth the New Zealand Insurance
Company for the past 36 years, was recently granted
a well-deserved twelve months’ holiday by the Dir-
ectors. Mr. James Buddie, for thirteen years man-
ager of the Melbourne branch of the Company, be-
ing appointed acting general manager during the
absence of Mr. Craig. The onerous post of Inspec-
tor of Branches is held by Mr. J. C. Hanna.
On the recent death of the late Chairman of the
Board of Directors, Mr. A. G. Horton, who was
one of the proprietors of the " New Zealand
Herald,” his son, Mr. Henry Horton, was elected to
a seat on the board, whilst Mr. Arthur H. Nathan
occupied the vacant position of Chairman, which he
still holds. Other directors of the Company are
Mr. Thomas Buddie, Solicitor, Mr. Seymour Thorne
George, sharebroker: Mr. M. A. Clark, Warehouse-
man; Mr. Arthur M. Myers; and Mr. L. J. Bag-
nall.
One striking feature of the New Zealand Insur-
ance Company is its stability. It stands “ four
square to every wind that blows.” In times of
brisk business its directors have ever remembered
the fact that commercial movements, like the fluc-
tuations of the weather, are in cycles: that it is not
prudent to pay out profits without a thought regard-
ing reserves; and that speculative risks have crip-
pled scores of once flourishing institutions. The
result of this prudent caution in management is
that when the day of stress and storm arrives, the
New Zealand Insurance Company is thoroughly
well prepared for it, and does not regard its coming
as a strange and unexpected phenomenon. Its
strong reserves, well maintained for that purpose,
ere drawn upon only when occasion necessitates.
Every man with the slightest claim to be regarded
as ordinarily prudent, endeavours to provide for
the “ rainy day,” and he is unfortunate indeed
whose expenditure is always a little above his in-
come. The New Zealand Insurance Company,
while keeping a keen eye on the events of the day,
does not forget that the morrow has to be provided
for, and that the financial interests of thousands
throughout the world are bound up with the solidity
of its financing and reserves.
In these days, when all sorts of experimental and
empirical systems are so much in vogue, it is satis-
factory to find an institution like the New Zealand
Insurance Company, that is content to conduct its
business, to its own advantage and that of its
clients, upon methods which have been amply justi-
fied by years of financial experience. The busi-
ness public of Australasia specially should feel
gratified with the success of so great and well con-
ducted an institution as the Company under review,
for every community is bettered by the existence
of associations whose operations make for the finan-
cial profit, tranquility and security of almost its
humblest member. Great and secure institutions,
like the New Zealand Insurance Company, cannot be
built in a day, and so long as that Company con-
tinues its profitable and beneficent existence, the
public who insure their risks with it will realise
that their confidence has not been misplaced.
MR. J. A. MINNETT.
The history of a great and successful undertaking,
however interesting in itself, is utterly incomplete
apart from a knowledge of the human agents by
which the grand results have been accomplished.
The massing of figures, however imposing can have
an interest only for the statistician or publicist;
and where one demands a knowledge of figures
merely, a thousand require to know about men.
When a striking column of facts is presented to the
public gaze, there is a natural curiosity to know
who is at the back of and primarily responsible for
those grand results. Among the many branches of
the New Zealand Insurance Company, not the least
important is the Sydney office, and in the personnel
of that great institution’s executive force Mr. John
MR. J. A. MINNETT.
Alma Minnett, the Manager of the Sydney Branch,
occupies a very prominent and honourable position.
Mr. Minnett is a son of the late Captain J. C. V.
Minnett, of the 14th Royal Irish. lie first saw the
light at the great and busy manufacturing town of
Halifax, Yorkshire, England, on Apiil 25th, 1854, a
year memorable in the military annals of Britain.
The Crimean campaign the Persian War, the Indian
Mutiny, and many a so-called “ little war,” gave
much employment during following years to all
connected with the British Army. Then came the
long Maori War, which dragged its slow length
along for five years. In 1860 Captain Stinnett’s
regiment “got the route” for New Zealand,
and arrived at Auckland, in December of that
year. The battalion, 1000 strong, was engaged in
the fighting at Waikato, Wanganui, and Taranaki.
The regiment having been ordered to Melbourne,
Captain Minnett and his family resided there for a
considerable period.
Young Minnett was educated during this period of
his life at Wesley College, St. Hilda Hoad.
When the time came for a start to be made in the
serious business of life, Mr. Minnett, in 1873, joined
the staff of the New Zealand Insurance Company in
Sydney. The branch had then only been one year
in existence. It was the day of small things, and,
besides the Manager, only two other clerks were em-
ployed. By steady, conscientious, and resourceful
attention to business, Mr. Minnett rapidly rose in
the Company’s service. In due time he became
Chief Clerk, and later on was appointed Assistant
Manager. The latter position he held till 1899, when
he was appointed successor to Mr. Hague Smith as
Manager for New South Wales.
And here we come to a personal characteristic that
has stood Mr. Minnett in good stead in his business
career. All through his life the sea has had a
strong fascination for him, an inclination very use-
ful for one who has had much to do with mar-
ine risks. In fact, before he finally settled down to
a business-life ashore, that gentleman took a few
short voyages. Before returning to England to end
his days, Captain Minnett had resided in Sydney,
and, on coming here with the other members of his
family, young Minnett spent a good portion of his
spare time in the manly and healthful recreation
of yachting. Chatting with the head of the Sydney
Branch of the New Zealand Insurance Company,
we learn that he has sailed in almost every kind
of boat, " from a sixteen footer to a forty tonner.”
For a few years Mr. Minnett was honorary trea-
surer of the Prince Alfred Yacht Club, and, during
the last thirteen years has occupied a similar office
in connection with the Royal Sydney Yacht Squad-
ron. One incident in his history shows how his
nautical experience and seamanship dovetailed
closely and remarkably with his busines,.. as marine
underwriter. It will be remembered that in August
of 1895, the steamer " Catterthun,” hound for China,
went on Seal Rocks a few hours after leaving her
moorings at Sydney, and sank, as was afterwards
demonstrated, some five miles beyond the place
where she had struck. Besides the loss of valuable
lives, including that of the captain, and of a splen-
did steamer, there was that of 9019 sovereigns,
which were being carried in the specie room. It
was resolved by the underwriters to make a strenu-
ous effort for the recovery of the specie. The con-
cerns interested were the New Zealand Insurance
Company, and the Alliance Company, of London.
Mr. Minnett, with the late Captain John Hall, ac-
companied by Divers Briggs and May, accordingly
proceeded in search of the wreck. Among the ex-
ploring fleet were the tugs " Mermaid” and “ Ster-
ling.” Commencing from the place where the stea-
mer struck, by constant and laborious dragging,
continued for four days, the wreck was located in 31
fathoms of water. The depth was greater than any
other divers had worked at. On May 4th, 1896, after
the arrival of new gear from England, the second
expedition set out from Sydney; but it was not until
July that a diver succeeded in getting the
strong room door opened with the aid of
dynamite. It seemed as if the elements had
combined to resent this attack on the watery
domain of Father Neptune, for thirty days
of stormy weather followed. Here it may be
slated that Captain Hall, having become ill, re-
turned to Sydney, and the sole command of the ex-
pedition accordingly devolved on Mr. Minnett. The
weather having moderated, another commencement
was made with the herculean task, and, on the 17th
August, the first gold was brought up. Ultimately
the whole of the gold, with the exception of two
boxes, containing 740 sovereigns, was recovered.
The cost was about 33 per cent, of the amount
brought out of the deep. To those acquainted with
diving operations it will be interesting to know
that the great work was accomplished by 49 dives—
seven in May, one in June, and forty-one in July
and August. The net result of the expedition was
the saving of about .£6OOO to the insurance com-
panies. The feat, which was one of the great events
of submarine salving, was largely successful owing
to the personal efforts and nautical experience of
Mr. Minnett, who deservedly obtained great kudos
for the skill, pluck, perseverance, and indomitable
resolution which he displayed during several months
of exhausting and dangerous work.
In 1881 Mr. Minnett married Miss Milson, daugh-
ter of the late Mr. John Milson, and niece of that
renowned yachtsman, the late Mr. James Milson.
Three sous and a daughter form the family circle of
Mr. and Mrs. Minnett.
In conclusion, it may be stated that the Sydney
branch bulks very largely in the returns of the New
Zealand Insurance Company, and that its import-
ance is steadily increasing. One chief factor in that
success, apart from the intimate knowledge of the
business obtained by the Branch Manager, during
over a quarter of a century’s experience, is that
gentleman’s deserved popularity. In the business
circles of Sydney Mr. Minnett occupies a front rank
position, and as a citizen no one is held in higher
personal regard.


The Sun Insurance Office,
London.
The Standard Fire and Marine
Insurance Company.
The Norwich & London Accident
Insurance Association.
MESSRS. ROYLE AND COMPANY.
GENERAL AGENTS.
The history of a firm that has obtained the
highest degree of public confidence, not by dazzling
coups of mercantile juggling, but by steady pro-
gress in the legitimate affairs of business, which
they have from time to time taken up, is at all
times interesting reading. Such a concern is that
of Messrs. Hoyle and Co., of Boyle’s Chambers,
Bond Street, Sydney. The business was founded
in the year 1880 by Mr. C. J. Eoyle, J.P. Three
years later Mr. G. B. Boucher entered his service,
and later on became a partner, and the third part-
ner is Mr. F. A. Eoyle, a son of the founder.
One department, and that not the least impor-
tant one of the business of the Company is insur-
ance agency.
Messrs. Eoyle and Co. are general agents for the
Sun Insurance Office, whose London headquarters
are at 63 Threadneedle Street. It was
founded in the year 1710, so that it has the pres-
tige which attaches to an institution that will, in
a few years, celebrate the second century of its
remarkable and beneficient existence. The
total income of this office for 1901 was
£1,247,580. The total funds on the 31st De-
cember of that year amounted to <£2,275,690. The
steady growth of the Company’s business is shown
by the fact that, in 1891, the sums insured
amounted to £373,700,000; whereas, in 1901, the
ambunts insured aggregated <£460,000,000. For the
year ending 31st December, 1901, the premiums
received, less re-insurances, amounted t0£1,165,346,
being an increase of £94,789 as compared with
those of the preceding year. The losses paid
amounted to £670,633, being at the rate of 57.55
per cent, on the premiums received.
Certainly the Sun Fire Office stands in a com-
manding position in the insurance world.
It is the oldest purely fire office, and is
at the same time one of the wealthiest in the
world. It covers losses of all kinds, including loss
of rent by fire, and losses occasioned by lightning
or explosion of gas, whether a fire occurs or not.
It has paid in claims during the last ten years more
than four millions sterling. However extensive the
fire, all claims are promptly settled in Sydney,
without reference to the Head Office. It is so
strong that it can issue policies for any amount
required; and, as a matter of fact, the Sun annu-
ally insures over four hundred millions sterling.
Another valuable agency held by Messrs. Eoyle
and Co.—indeed, the first that was held by them—
is that of the Standard Fire and Marine Insurance
Company of New' Zealand, whose headquarters are
at High Street, Dunedin, Otago. The capital of this
Company is £1,000,000. The General Manager is
Mr. Thomas R. Fisher. The income of
the Company for 1902, including balance
brought fonvard from last year, amounted to
BOYLE'S CHAMBERS.
Sydney Offices of The Sun Insurance Office, London, The Standard Fire and Marine Insurance Co.,
The Norwich and London Accident Insurance Association,
£108,697, and the expenditure to .£86,553 leaving a
balance of .£22,143 to be carried to the credit of
profit and loss account. The reserve fund stand*
at £30,000, the re-insurance reserve at £20,000, and
insurance.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches.-eontinued.
ACCIDENT, FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE.


a sum of .£2OOO was set apart as provision for de-
preciation in securities. The assets total £142,459,
the greater portion of which is represented by in-
vestments and interest-bearing deposits.
Among the noted insurance offices of the world is
the Norwich and London Accident Insurance
Association, the New South Wales Agency of which
is held by Messrs. Royle and Company. The Nor-
wich and London is the oldest accident Company
doing business in Australia. The Australian busi-
ness was inaugurated in October, 1902, when Mr.
John Goodwyn, the present General Manager of the
Company for Australasia, took up his quarters at
Bond Street, Sydney, the New South Wales Agency
being taken up by Messrs. Royle and Co. The
Company has branches in Australia, at Brisbane,
Melbourne, and Adelaide.
The Norwich and London Accident Insurance
Association is an institution whose objects should
be better known to the public than they appar-
ently are. For instance, an annual premium of
£8 ss. for first class risks will secure £lOOO at death
from accident, and £2OOO at death if by railway or
tram-car accident. Similarly, for the loss of two
limbs or sight of two eyes from accident. The sum
of £6 per week is assured during, temporary total
disablement from accident. In temporary disable-
ment caused by fever, diphtheria, small-pox,
measles, bubonic plague, and other dangerous com-
plaints, compensation is payable up to twenty-six
weeks, at £6 per week. The sum of £l2 per week
is paid during temporary total disablement if by
MR. G. B. BOUCHER.
railway or tram-car accident. Other branches of
this very important and valuable institution’s
operations are; —Employers’ insurance agiinst lia-
bility for accidents; fidelity guarantee, and em-
ployers’ third party indemnity. The Norwich and
London stands in an excellent position. In 1807 the
net premium income exceeded £lOO,OOO per annum,
and since that year it has increased by £79,318, or
over 70 per cent.
Another of the agencies held by Ale-srs. Royle
and Co. is that of the New Z aland Plate Glass
Insurance Company, an institution of very high
commercial standing, and noted for the prompt-
ness with which claims are met. This Company
has been in existence for over twenty years, and
undertakes every class of risk in connection with
the accidental breakage of windows and plate glass.
It has a capital of £lO,OOO, and its head office is at
Dunedin, New Zealand.
Among mercantile agencies held by Alessrs. Royle
and Co. is that for the Alonkbridge Iron and Steel
Company, of Leeds, Yorkshire. This Company
supplies the railways with wheels, axles and other
parts of engines, etc. Alessrs. Royle and Co. are
also agents for Alessrs. Kitson and Co., the famous
locomotive builders, of Airedale Foundry, Leeds,
who supplied the first steam tramway engines to
Sydney.
It is almost needless to say that the firm of
Alessrs. Royle and Co. rank is the highest circles
of Sydney commercial life.
MR. C. J. ROYLE, J.P.
The history of the founder of the firm of Messrs.
Royle and Co., of Bond Street, Sydney, shows how
true it is that training, combined with natural in-
clination, will in the end have a powerful influence
ME. C. J. ROYLE, J.P.,
Fournier of the Firm.
in the shaping of one’s career. Mr. C. J. Royle,
J.P., who is the head of the business named, was
born in England in 1845. He subsequently entered
on a business career in the world’s great centre of
commerce and finance. In 1879 Mr. Royle landed in
this country. He visited all the colonies, but de-
cided that New South Wales offered the best field.
Mr. Royle’s views at that time, however, were more
of squatting than of commerce or city finance, and
he accordingly acquired Ullamulla sheep station,
near Hill End. Sir Royle remained a squatter, as
he laughingly admits, for the shortest time on
record, and once again returned to Sydney. In
1830 the valuable and progressive business of
Messrs. Royle and Co. was founded.
Mr. Royle’s English connection has in many ways
conduced to the progress and prosperity of the firm
which he founded. The other members of the firm
are Messrs. G. B. Boucher and F. A. Royle, a «on
of the founder.
MR. F. A. ROYLE.
Air. Royle, as a citizen of Sydney, possesses a
large circle of enthusiastic friend-. Refined and
cultivated, he takes a great interest i.i all arti tic
matters, and is a liberal patron of art. In 1876 the
fieedom of the City of London was conferred upon
him by the Turners’ Company. He is a Director
of many influential local companies, and of various
enterprises in other States, and is also a member
of the Fire Brigade Board. Two of his
sons take a part in the business. As that of a gen-
tleman well versed in all legal and constitutional
lore and practice, it was only deemed proper when
Mr. Eoyle’s name was added to the Commission of
the Peace for New South Wales. He is also a Jus-
tice of the Peace for Queensland and South Aus-
tralia.
MR. G. B. BOUCHER.
As a member of the firm of Messrs.Royle and Co.,
Mr. G. B. Boucher occupies a very important posi-
tion in the insurance circles of Sydney. That gen-
tleman is a native of England, and came to New
South Wales in 1883, in the company of Mr. C. J.
Royle, principal of the firm of which Mr. Boucher
subsequently became, and is still, a member.
Mr. Boucher has served as a member of the Com-
mittee of the Fire Underwriters’ Association of
New South Wales, and takes a keen interest in
the important work done by that body.
MR. F. A. ROYLE
The third partner of the firm of Messrs. Royle
and Co. is Mr. F. A. Royle, a son of Mr. C. J
MR. JOHN GOODWYN, A.I.A.
Royle, the founder and principal. Mr. F. A. Eoy’.e
believes in a progiessive policy, and, since his ad-
mission to partnership has, by his unremitting and
energetic support of every new development, that
has commended itself to the experienced views of
his co-partners, done much to forward the interests
of the firm.
ME. JOHN GOODWYN, A.I.A.
Mr. John Goodwyn, General Manager for Aus-
tralasia of the Norwich and London Accident In-
surance Association, is a native of the Ea.-t of
England. In 1890, Mr. Goodwyn joined the Chief
Office staff of the Norwich and London Accident In-
surance Association, and, except for a few months
in 1894, has been with them ever since. In 1897 he
qualified as an Associate of the Institute of Actu-
aries, From 1898 to 1902 Mr. Goodwyn had charge
of the Workmen’s Compensation Department at
their Chief Office.
When, in 1902, the Directors decided to extend
the operations of the Association to Australasia,
Mr. Goodwyn was chosen to undertake the work of
organising the bu-iness in the various States; and
the New South Wales Agency having been taken
up by Messrs. Royle and Co., Mr. Goodwyn located
his Headquarters as General Manager for Aus-
tralasia in Bond Street, adjoining their offices.


The Royal Insurance Company.
The title of the Royal Insurance Company is one
that immediately attracts the attention of all loyal
people. Even in business the element of sentiment
cannot be completely obliterated, and there can be
no doubt that the founders of this Company were
well aware when they decided upon giving their
new project the name which it has honourably
borne for 68 years, that its designation would wear
well throughout the British Empire. Unquestion-
ably, however, the best title will not carry a busi-
ness concern to the goal of triumphant success and
continuous prosperity. In the case of the Royal,
there were, from its inception, men at the head of
affairs who knew well how to lay the foundations
and build the superstructure of a financial under-
taking, and their methods have not become obsolete,
although the majority of them have long gone the
load which every one must tread alone.
The Royal Insurance Company had its origin in
Liverpool, whose great, strenuous, and enterprising
population has had so much to do with the making
of modern England. On the shores of the Mersey
have been planned multitudes of great commercial
and financial schemes that have left their broad
mark on the history of the Empire. The sturdy
men of Northern England have been joined at
Liverpool by hundreds of thousands of keen-witted
Welshmen, laborious Irishmen, and shrewd Scots-
men, and in the course of centuries the modern
Liverpudlian has been evolved. That type takes the
whole world for its parish, and if money is to be
made by shipping, commerce, agriculture, or manu-
facturing, whether at Greenland or Timbuctoo, or
far Cathay, the Liverpool man or syndicate is ready
to take risks and put money in the venture. In
1845 enterprise was exceedingly brisk on and about
the public places and quays of the great north-
western port. It was only a few years after George
Stephenson had demonstrated by his new locomotive
—the “Rocket”—that travelleis could with safety
be carried at the rate of 15, or even 20, miles an
hour. The quagmire of Chat Moss had been effec-
tually bridged by means of rails and sleepers, and
a great boom in railway building had given birth to
a new class of speculators, known as railway kings,
who wielded an almost regal sway over the crowds
of humble suppliants who wanted railway scrip in
exchange for their gold. Shipping was equally brisk,
and thousands of people bound for the shores of the
United States, vastly stimulated those grand ship-
building enterprises which constructed the Cunard,
. White Star, Guion, Dominion and the other great
lines of steamers. The docks were insufficient for
the immense demands made in them, and the
building trade was in a phenomenal condition of
activity on both sides of the water. Such a state of
affairs gave rise to negotiations which ultimately
culminated in an announcement that the “Royal
Insurance Company was being established to meet
the increasing demands and the wishes of a large
and influential body of merchants, brokers, and
owners of property.”
The Company was provisionally registered on the
11th March, 1845, with a capital of -€2,000,000 in
100,000 shares of .X2O each. The provisional com -
mittee consisted of 24 members, with James Law-
rence, Esq., Mayor, at their head. A call of 18s.
per share was made on the 24th May, and the
16th Jum - of that year the Directors announced that
they were prepared to receive proposals for fire and
life insurances. A year after commencing operations
the Company became the owners of a portion of land
on which the Head Office now stands. That area
having proved insufficient, more land was acquired
in order to give room for the splendid new premises
which have just been completed.
The progress of the Company, though at first can-
tiously conducted, has always been sure. Naturally,
agencies were first established in localities that
could easily be reached from Liverpool. At the end
ROYAL INSURANCE COMPANY.
Offices: 74 Pitt Street.
of 1815, however, agencies had been established at
Calcutta, and in the Brazils, and in 1846 in Nether-
lands-India, British Guiana, the Philippines, Singa-
pore, and New Brunswick, now included in the Do-
minion of Canada. In the following year agencies
were established at Chili and in Peru, and in 1848
in Barbados, Sweden and Sourabaya. The year 1849
was locally memorable from the fact that the
Jnsurance.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches I —Continued.
FIRE INSURANCE.


Fire Premiums.
10 Years
Fire
Ending
Premiums.
£
1854
568,781
1865
2,485,449
1874
5,890,830
1884
8,439,822
1894
14,002,281
Total Income and Invested Funds.
Invested Funds
10 Years
Total
at Close of
Ending
Income.
the Year
.£
£
1854 ...
883,115
414,776
1864
3,767,978
1,111,973
1874
.. 9,079,363
2,957,174
1884
.. 12,939,808
5,348,407
1894
. 19,764,163
8,274,620
" Royal” commenced business in Australasia, taking
Melbourne for its headquarters. Two years later
in the year of the Great Exhibition in Hyde Park,
London—the business of the Company was extended
to Sydney. Branches were also established at New-
foundland, Upper Canada, and the United States of
America. A year after the formation of the Com-
pany an office was opened in London, with a local
directorate.
In its royal and ever successful progress, this
Company has found it profitable to acquire the
business of other Companies. Amongst the concerns
so amalgamated being the National Fire Insurance
Corporation, Brighton and Sussex Union Fire In-
surance Company, the Midlands Counties Insurance
Company, the Kent Insurance Company, and the
Lancashire Insurance Company. One of the largest
of these amalgamations, although not the latest in
point of time, was that with the Queen Insurance
Company, effected in 1891. This transaction was re-
garded as the greatest ever undertaken in the history
of life insurance. Special legislation was requisite,
including authorisation of an increase of the
“ Royal’s” capital to £3.000,000 by the creation of
50,000 additional shares.
A few comparative figures will show at a glance
the progress made by the Company in the following
decades.—
The growth of the Company may be very effectu-
ally stated by mentioning that while the income
for the 18 months ended 31st December 1 . 1846, was
only £75,254, the revenue for the year 1901 amounted
to the exceedingly large total of £3,601,692, while the
total funds at 31st December, 1901, reached
£11,988,025.
In the second book of Virgil’s "Aeneid” a goddess
promises the fugitive escaping from the burning of
Troy that she would place him safely on his pat-
ernal threshold.. The “Royal” has taken the words
11 Tutum te Sistam ” (“I will place thee in safety”)
as its motto. It is a ery appropriate one, and many
have blessed the dry on which they made arrange-
ments with that institution to be placed in safety
with regard to their goods and property. The strong
financial position of the Company enables it to
promptly give that relief which the calamitous
nature of a great fire renders so necessary to the
hundreds, or perhaps thousands, involved. We
have no need to read the history of Chicago in order
to understand what may be the results of an im-
mense conflagration. It is very possible that con-
gested Sydney, with miles of closely packed ware-
houses and factories in her narrow streets, will one
day fully realise the dangers which attend the pack-
ing of so much valuable property in such small
compass.
If that day should unfortunately arrive, it will be
well for 1 the insured to have their risks covered by
offices like the “ Royal” well able to stand a great
and abnoimal strain.
We have above stated tbat the business of the
“Royal” was commenced in Melbourne in 1819. Mr.
Edward Whitby, of Flinders Lane, was the agent.
First-class risks ranged from 7/6d. to 12s. per cent,
per annum, second-class risks from 12s. 6d. to 15-.,
third-class risks from 255. to 30s. For 24 years
business was carried on by means of agencies, but in
1874 offices on its own account were established at
No. 74 Collins-street West, adjoining the London
Chartered Bank of Australasia. Increase of busi-
ness necessitated a change in 1878 to 35 Queen-street,
and again in 1887 the extended operations of the
Company demanding still another removal, offices at
9 Queen-street were leased. The "Eoyal,” still con-
tinuing to augment in size, still larger premises were
needed, and the “ Empire Building” was secured,
and having undergone alteration, became the Aus-
tralasian Head Office, the location being at 414, 416,
and 418 Collins-street, Melbourne.
With regard to the returns obtained from fire in-
surance business, it is worthy of note that the profit
on a turnover of over £3,000,000 is only 5 per cent.,
which, considering the risky nature of the business,
is a very small return.
When, therefore, an agitation is made for a lower-
ing of rates equal to a reduction of Is. in the pound,
it should be remembered that if it were acceded to,
the profit of the Company would be converted into
a loss. It may thus be said that current fire insur-
ance rates are on a bedrock basis.
Of the assets of the “ Royal,” the sum of £2,294,000
is represented by mortgages on freehold and lease-
hold property within the United Kingdom;
£2,209,000 in railway guaranteed and preference
stocks, and £1,915,557, total value of freehold build-
ings. Other large amounts are represented by rail-
way preference and other solid stocks, easily con-
vertible into cash in the open market.
MR. HENRY F. FRANCIS,
Manager.
The policies of the "Royal" cover loss arising from
gas explosion, bush fires, and lightning. The in-
surance of rents, in the event of buildings being
made untenantable by fire, is undertaken as a sp:cial
feature, and affords a valuable protection to all
concerned.
The life insurance department of the business is
kept entirely separate from the fire department.
The life assurance fund stood in the list of liabili-
ties of the Company on the 31st December, 1901, at
,£7,532,750.
The Sydney office of the “ Eoyal” is at 74 Pitt-
street, the Manager, Mr. Henry F. Francis, having
occupied this important position for about 17 years,
during which period the business of the Company
in New South Wales has been greatly increased.
The universal opinion, held amongst those who
locally do business with this great English institu-
tion, is, that Mr. H. F. Francis is an ideal manager,
and a very capable representative of one of the best
known of the world’s great fire insurance offices.
MR. H. F. FRANCIS.
Those who by their own unaided ability, and
owing nothing to purely adventitious circum-
stances have risen to very high and respon-
sible positions, are worthy of being known to others
far remote from their own private or local business
circles. It is only through the great influence of the
press this knowledge can be imparted. It has been
truly said that nothing printed can be ever des-
troyed, meaning, as a plain matter of fact, any
topic which has been published in papers or books
with a circulation of hundreds or thousands is prac-
tically indestructible. To young men especially,
the history of their fellow citizens who have pre-
ceded them in the path of life is exceedingly instruc-
tive and valuable. The career of the Sydney
Manager of the Royal Insurance Company has very
many points of interest to those who are making
their first steps in life’s journey.
Mr. Henry F. Francis is a native of Sydney, his
birthday being July 12, 1856—a glad year for the
British Empire, for in it peace was declared, and
the Crimean Campaign closed amid the joy of the
British nation, and the return to their native land
of the remnants of the gallant forces who, for many
weary 1 months, faced the withering hail of bullets,
and the still more murderous blasts of the icy winds
on the heights of Sebastopol. Mr. Francis was edu-
cated at the Sydney Grammar School, that grand
old scholastic institution which has given so many-
capable men to every- department of human activity
in the capital of the Mother State of Australia. The
time arriving for him to take his part in the battle
of life, the future insurance manager entered the
office of the Victoria Insurance Company in Pitt-
street, where he rapidly rose to the, position of
chief clerk. His ability and capacity attracting the
attention of those who were on the outlook for cap-
able officials, he in 1878 was offered and accepted the
position of Manager of the then newly opened
branch of the National Mutual Life Association of
Australia. A period of five years was spent in the
service of that Company, at the end of which Mr.
Francis received the appointment of Manager of
the Melbourne branch of the Equitable Life Insur-
ance Society of the United States.
The important work of opening the office of that
great institution in the Southern metropolis also
devolved on him. After a year’s stay in Melbourne,
he was appointed Sydney Manager of the Eoyal
Insurance Company, a great English institution,
having branches and agencies all over the world.
The fact that Mr. Francis has held this position
for about 17 years is one of much significance, as
showing the great value of his services to the Com-
pany he so faithfully, efficiently and zealously ic-
presents.
In these days of keen competition, insurance
managei s must furnish results; and the long period
in which Sir. Francis has controlled affjirs in this
city is an eloquent testimony as to the amount of
business transacted at the Sydney office of the
“ Royal.”
Mr. F rancis, however, has not confined his
thoughts after business hours to what he has had
to do during the working day. He has occupied
very prominent positions in those circles where
underwriters most do congregate. He has not only
seived on the committees of the Fire Underwriters’
Association of New South Wales and the New South
AVales Insurance Institute, but has held, at various
times, the offices of President and Vice-President of
both these very important and highly useful bodies.
Mr. Francis is included in the membership of the
Sydney Chamber of Commerce, and at one time
took a leading part in municipal affairs, being five
years an Alderman of the pleasant suburb of Rand
wick.
During this period he filled with great credit to
himself and to the unqualifying satisfaction of the
ratepayers, the high and honourable position of
Mayor. As circumstances led to his leaving the
district for a time, he resigned his seat on the Rand-
wick Council.
Mr. Francis enjoys the distinction of being a
champion player at the ancient and historic game
of bowls. Notwithstanding this fact, however, he
has no "bias” in favour of placing amusement
before work, his business being, to him, the prin-
cipal object of his life. Altogether Mr. Francis is
a splendid sample of the Sydney born and educated
gentleman, who has risen to a worthy and respon-
sible position by a diligent exercise of his abilities,
developed by close study and a careful business
training ultimately matured.


The Mercantile Mutual Fire
Insurance Co., Ltd.
With the gradual development of Australian com-
merce and the consequent increase of capital in-
vested in meichandise, has come the necessity for
piotecting to the utmost the interests of those en-
gaged in trade. In a city such as Sydney, where the
streets are somewhat narrow, and the business ware-
houses, stores, etc., crowded together within a
limited area, the danger from fire is an ever present
one, as no matter how careful the heads of a firm
may be in regard to their own premises, they can-
not hope to contend against a fire which may at any-
time break out in an adjoining warehouse and en-
gulf them in ruin. Thus to-day, fire insurance is
an absolute necessity, and merchants who neglect
to take advantage of the excellent rates of insurance
offered by- such first-class offices as the Mercantile
Mutual iFire Insurance Company, Limited, have
only themselves to blame should they, through want
of foresight, fail to protect their property against
the ravages of a conflagration.
In the fiont rank of progressive Insurance Com-
panies stands the Mercantile Mutual, whose impos-
ing head office, known as the Mercantile Mutual
Chambers, is located at 120 Pitt-street, Sydney. The
establishment of this well known Company dates
back to 1878, when, on the 10th of Januaiy of that
year, the Mercantile Mutual was foimed under the
Company’s Act for the conduct of Fire Insurance
under the mutual principle, with a nominal capital
of .£150,000, in AT shares, with power to increase to
AT,COO,OOO, of which A 30.000 has been paid up. The
special features of the Company’s methods of busi-
ness, viz., the sharing of profits with its customers,
together with the security atfoided to the insured,
at once commanded success. In fact, during the
first year’s operations, although at that time the
city business was of a limited character, and the
palatial Mutual edifices which now adorn the streets
of Sydney were almost unknown, the Company
made such progress that its gross premium revenue
totalled £8222, whilst the losses paid amounted to
the insignificant sum of A 721.
Comparing the first year’s business with that of
1902, the immense stiides made by the Mercantile
Mutual are at once apparent, for in the latter year
we find that the gross premium revenue totalled
A 55,426, or nearly seven times as much as that re-
ceived in the first year, while the settlement of
claims amounted to no less than £10,040. In con-
nection with the payment of cash bonuses on pre-
miums, which, as has already been stated, is equally
divided between the policyholders and shareholders
annually, the Company has paid since its formation
over £154,642, being at the rate of 20 per cent, of the
premiums received each year. Some idea of what
this distribution means can be gathered from the
fact that during last year’s operations the large sum
of £11,085 was paid away in cash bonuses.
Until 1901 the Company limited its operations to
New South Wales when the success attained in the
mother State warranted an extension, and a branch
was opened in Melbourne, with offices at No. 9
Queen-street, on the 20th of June of that year, with
the result that to-day the Company has agencies
located in all the principal towns throughout New
South Wales and Victoria. Regarding the Com-
pany’s financial position, it may be stated that it
is absolutely secure, its total investments, in-
cluding freehold property and other assets, amount-
ing to over £91,107.
The 24th annual report and balance-sheet, giving
the financial position of the Company up to 30th
June, 1902, which is the last published, shows that
the Company has not only made great strides, but
that it is being built up on a very firm financial
foundation. The receipts for the year, including
balance brought forward, less appropriation.
.£6.1,920, while the expenditure, re-insurances, and
los>es, including appropriation for leadjusted
claims, together with interest paid shareholdeis,
totalled J 246,865, leaving at a credit of profit and
MR. KELSO KING, J.P.,
Manager tor N.S.W.
loss account the sum of ,£19,055, which was appor-
tioned as follows.—To bonuses of 20 per cent, on
premiums divided between policyholders and share-
holders, free of income tax, less money paid to
shareholders, £9210, the balance, £9845, being car-
lied forward.
It is worthy of note that during the year claims
under 239 policies amounted to £10,040, which sum
included ample provision for any unadjusted losses
at that date. The re-insurances totalled £10,365,
while the total assets reached £93,366 10s. Alto-
gether the position of this successful colonial office
is a very enviable one, directed by men of first-class
standing in the Australian business world, all
officers of front rank ability, the Mercantile Mutual
MERCANTILE MUTUAL FIRE INSURANCE
COMPANY, LIMITED.
Offices: 120 Pitt Street, Sydney.
File Insurance Company, Limited, gives promise
of continuing its career of usefulness during many
a year to come.
The success achieved by the Company is due to
the able manner in which its affairs have been ad-
ministered by those who have throughout its exist-
ence held the responsibilities of control, and its
record is one which compares favourably with any
of the old world’s greatest insurance institutions.
The present directorate, at the head office, Sydney,
composed of gentlemen who;e probity and experi-
ence in finance is too well known to need partieu-
larisation, has as its Chairman G. Allen Mansfield,
Esq., whilst associated with him are Russell Bar-
ton, Esq,, the Hon. W. J. Trickett, M.L.C., Walter
Hall, Esq,, and John Pope, Esq. Mr. Kelso
King, who has occupied the responsible posi-
tion of Manager since the inception of the
Company, is a gentleman who holds the
esteem and confidence of the business com-
munity of Sydney, while Mr. R. W. Thal-
lon, as Secretary to the Mercantile Mutual, has ably
seconded the efforts of his chief. The Victorian
branch of the Mercantile Mutual being conducted
as a separate business concern, has on its director-
ate such well-known gentlemen as Randal J. Al-
cock, Esq., and James M. Gillespi", Esq., Mr. M. T.
Sadler occupying the position of Resident Secretary.
MR. KELSO KING, J.P.
The name of Mr. Kelso King, of the Mercantile
Mutual Fire Insurance Company, Limited, is a
household one in New South Wales Insurance
circles. Mr. King, who was born in Sydney in 1853.
and received his education at Calder House, Eve-
leigh, is one of those pushing Australians who, by
unremitting industry and application, has won his
way to the front rank of Sydney’s leading men.
When sixteen years of age Mr. King began his busi-
ness career as a junior clerk in the Bank of New
South Wales, where his ability won for him the
confidence of his chief, and speedy promotion. After
a few years spent in the service of the bank above
named, he accepted a responsible po.-ition on thf
staff of the Commercial Bank of Sydney, remain-
ing with that institution until 1878. At this time
Mr. Kelso King was a well-known figure in com-
meicial circles, and a recognised authority on ac-
countancy and finance, and when at this date the
promoters of the now widely known Mercantile
Mutual Fire Insurance Company offered him the
responsible position of Manager, he foresaw the
great possibilities of the Company, and with cha-
racteristic enterprise decided to adopt their sug-
gestion, and take over the management of the con-
cern in New South Wales, to which the institution’s
operations were at that time limited. The wisdom
of the Directors in selecting such a master of organi-
sation as Mr. King is amply demonstrated by the
phenomenal success which the Mercantile Mutual
has achieved, and the sound financial position it
occupies to-day as one of the leading Australian
Fire Insurance offices.
The subject of our sketch, who is necessarily a
very busy man, nevertheless finds time during his
few spare hours to further the interests of a number
of other institutions outside the one he so ably
controls. Amongst other positions held by him it
may be mentioned that he is a member of the Fire
Underwriters’ Association of New South Wales, the
Insurance Institute, Royal Society of New South
Wales, and the Society of Arts, London. He is also
a Fellow of the Royal Colonial Institute, while his
business knowledge and gieat financial experience
make him amply qualified to hold the high posi-
tion he occupies as a Director of the Mort’s Dock
and Engineering Company and the Mount Morgan
Gold Mining Company. Mr. King is also a Justice
of the Peace of New South Wales and Queensland,
and is an ardent supporter of every public move-
ment which has for its object the furtherance of the
interests of the community amongst whom he
resides.
insurance.
•Historical and Biographical Sketchcs.-eontinued.
FIRE INSURANCE.


The North British and Mercan-
tile Insurance Company.
The North British and Mercantile Insurance Com-
pany was established in the year 1809, its incor-
poration being by Royal charter. Since then altera-
tions in its constitution have been made by special
Acts of Parliament. The date of its establishment
takes us up to a period six years before the,close
of Napoleon Buonaparte’s meteoric career at the
Battle of Waterloo. Its title shows its close con-
nection with “ the grey capital of the North." The
home establishment further discloses its Scottish
origin. The President is His Grace the Duke of
Sutherland; Vice-President, the Most Honourable
the Marquis of Zetland, K.T.; extraordinary Direc-
tors, the Earl of Aberdeen, Lord Wolverton, Lord
Moncrieff of Tulliebole, Lord Forbes, Baron Schio-
der, and Lord Ridley. -
In the list of London members of the general
court of directors are to be found the names of such
pillars of finance as Lord Hillingdon, the Hon.
Charles Napier La>vrence, Mr. Charles Morrison,
Mr. Hubert F. Barclay, Mr. Vincent R. Hoare, and
Mr. John Pierpout Morgan, jun. On the Edin-
burgh Board are, among other prominent person-
ages, the Earl of Elgin, K.G., Sir James H. Gib-
son-Craig, Bart.; Sir Charles B. Logan, D.K.S.;'
Lieutenant-Colonel R. Dundas, and Mr. George
Younger. The North British and Mercantile In-
surance Company’s chief London office is at 61
Threadneedle-street, E.C. The Edinburgh office is
at 61 Princes-street. '
The figures of the Company’s business for 1902
are not yet available, but at 31st December, 1901,
they were as follow Paid-up capital, A 687.500;
fire funds, <£2,695,518; life funds, £12,339,645; total
net assets, £15,722,693. The, revenue from the Fire
Department, including interest, etc., for 1901,
amounted to £1,732,437, and the fire losses amounted
to £1,116,272. The funds of the Life Department are
not liable for obligations under the Fire Depart-,
ment, nor are the funds of the Fire Department
liable for obligations under the Life Department.
In this Company, therefore, the investments for
the Life Department are kept entirely separate
from those of the Fire Department. Property of
nearly every description is insured at the lowest
rates on premiums corresponding to the risk.
The Company does one of the largest fire busi-
nesses in the world, and transacts fire business in
nearly every part of the world. Naturally, the
transaction of so large a business means fire loss
payments on a large scale. .The fire losses paid
during the last 20 years alone amount to close upon
£17,000,000. One of these losses is quite historical.
In October, 1871, a terrible fire occurred in Chi-
cago, United States of America. The result was the
destruction of 18,000 houses, covering an area of
nearly five square miles. Two hundred persons
perished and 100,000 persons were rendered home-
less. Coming, as the calamity did, at the beginning
of winter, the position of the people affected was
very trying. It is well known, however, that the
Chicago men did. not for a very long period wring
their hands and bemoan their troubles. Hardly
had the fire-swept giound become cool before the
foundations of new, better, and more fire-
proof premises were laid. Like the fabled phoenix,
a new and stronger Chicago arose from the,.ashes
of the old city. The United States are a part of the
world where both calamities and recuperations are
on an immense and startling scale. The manner in
which the Chicagoans manfully met their misfor-
tunes, and became stronger by apparent defeat,
compelled the admiration of the world. It reminded
all who gave the matter thought that the new
Americans, like the old Roman oaks, derived
strength from the axe that lopped their boughs.
Manifestly, however, the disaster was so great that
it would have been crushing to many if it were not
for the fact that a considerable part of the loss was
covered by insurance. The total damage done was
MR. G. S. ARTHUR,
Resident Secretary.
somewhere in the vicinity of .£33,000,000. The North
British and Mercantile Insurance Company was one
of the heaviest losers by this stupendous conflagra-
tion.
As showing the immensity of the risks covered by
the British fire insurance companies, it may be
stated that in the great Hull and Ottawa fires, the
losses were one and a half millions sterling. Of
that great sum three-quarters of a million had to
be found by the insurance companies, and the share
of the North British and Mercantile was ~£36,000. At
the fire in Jacksonville, Florida, the share of this
Company was .£30,000. At a Montreal fire a loss of
£12,000 was sustained.
The Company commenced operations in This State
in 1878. The New South Wales branch is. in charge
of Mr. George S. Arthur,"Resulent whose
headquarters are at No. 6 Spring-street, Sydney.
Mr. Arthur was appointed in 1888. The Company
has agencies in all the leading country towns of New
South Wales.
The Victorian branch of the North British and
Mercantile is at 381 Collins-street, Melbourne. The
Victorian Board consists of the following gentle-
men :—Mr. John Grice (Chairman), Francis Gra-
ham, and Leslie Sanderson. The Company is re-
presented in Queensland,' South Australia, West
Australia, and New Zealand.
As showing the manner in which the directorate
of this Company is regarded by men of high busi-
ness standing in the old country, it may be stated
that Mr. George Auldjo Jamieson, a very prominent
figure in the Edinburgh community, was a member
of the board for over 40 years,-and died in harness.
The Company is also well served by men who have
been in its service from youth to old age. Recently,
Mr. Burnett, Manager in London.of the Fire De-
partment, tendered his resignation after a service
of nearly 40 years’ duration.
As the North British and Mercantile transacts
fire business only in Australia, it is unnecessary to
give here full particulars regarding its life business.
It may, however, be stated that the revenue of the
Life Department for 1901 was the considerable one
of £1,575,668.
; MR. G. S. ARTHUR,, '
Resident Secretary,
Mr. George Shannon Arthur, Resident Secretary,
at No. 6 Spring-street, Sydney, of the North Bri-
tish and Mercantile Insurance Company, over a
quarter of a century ago entered the employ of the
world-wide-known firm of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright
and Co. In 1888, after about 12 years’ satisfactory
service with the firm, he severed his connection
therewith. An evidence of the excellent relations he
had established was furnished by the fact that on
leaving, Mr. Arthur received a handsome presenta-
tion from the firm. He simultaneously was the re-
cipient of an inscribed gold watch from the staff.
Through the appointment of Mr. George A. Russell
to the position of General Manager for the North
British and Mercantile Insurance-Company for Aus-
tralasia, necessitating his removal, the general
agency in Sydney of that institution became vacant,
Mr. Arthur being offered the important position
then vacant, which he accepted.
Mr. Arthur has served on the committee of the
Fire Underwriters’ Association of New South
Wales.
As a resident of North Sydney, Mr. Arthur pos-
sesses a large circle of urarm and appreciative
friends, and has the goodwill of an important and
increasing clientele in his business relationsr
Jnsuvance.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches.-eontinued.
FIRE AND LIFE INSURANCE.


Yea i'.
Fire
Department.
Amount
of Premiums.
Life
Department.
Amount
of Premiums.
1836
.£9,970
.£831
1846
47,763
16,166
1856
222,279
72,781
1866
818,055
254,397
1376
989,756
250,782
1896
1,552,835
230,326
1902
1,953,630
239,656
The Liverpool and London and
Globe Insurance Company.
The founders of the Liverpool and London
Insurance Company, when they decided, in the
year 1836, to commence operations, certainly
believed that there was something in a name.
Having agreed upon methods of conducting fire
and life insurance business that would stand the
test of time, they hit upon a title which would
appeal to business men of English birth all the
world over. To those who know the City of Liv-
erpool, the mere mention of its name conjures up
thoughts of commercial enterjrrise which find a
field beyond every sea; both mariner and lands-
man bringing tribute from the uttermost ends of
the earth to the dock-lined shores of the Mersey:
while to speak of London, with its many miles of
brick and mortar, and its splendid historical and
commercial associations, is to locate what is fa-
miliarly known as, the centre of British national
progress, stability, and intellectual attainment.
Both these great centres of human life naturally
find their complement in the GUobe, which was sub-
sequently annexed, every part of which is minis-
tered to by them, and vice versa.
The origin of the Liverpool and London and
Globe Insurance Company.is not lost in the mists
of mediaeval antiquity. It was founded in the
year 1836, a period in rvhich great commercial and
financial activity was manifested in all parts of
England, particularly in the north-western coun-
ties?. Liverpool and London were being
drawn very closely together, and regarded
the Globe as their great field of action. Then,
as now, what Lancashire says to-day Eng-
land asserts to-morrow. So it came about that in
the. foundation of this great Insurance Company
the interests of the Mersey and Thames were con-
joined, and found an outlet in the big world be-
yond Britain’s immediate domain. Since the
period above referred to, notwithstanding the for-
midable obstacles which all insurance companies
doing a large business must be prepared to en-
counter, the Liverpool and London and Globe has
greatly prospered, and now stands in a position
which is undoubtedly envied by younger and less
firmly established rivals.
The Head Office is at No. 1 Dale Street, Liver-
pool, the Chief Office 7 Cornhill, London, and
there are branches at 56 Charing Cross and 130
Fenchurch Street.
The leading features of the institution may be
briefly stated as follow:—The Company is strictly
proprietary. No insurer or policy-holder, or pur-
chaser, or recipient of any of its annuities, is in-
volved in the slightest liability or partnership.
On transfer of his stock the liability of a propri-
tor ceases, as between the proprietors, and abso-
lutely in one year after register of transfer.
Boards may be established in Britain and abroad,
with equal powers, with regard to the signing of
policies and the business of their respective dis-
tricts, as are entrusted to the principal Board of
Directors,
keeping of the various Australian Governments.
Accordingly, for the main purpose of this article,
the Company’s Fire Department will only be dealt'
with.
The Liverpool and London and Globe is a well-
tried concern, which has been proved in times of
trial to have been built up on a solid monetary
foundation. In its recoid at Chicago in 1871,
though it refrained from giving dividends to its
own shareholders for some time, it saved its policy-
holders from financial ruin when no less than sixty
fire insurance companies suspended their opera-
tions. •
LIVERPOOL AND LONDON AND GLOBE INSURANCE COMPANY.
Offices: 62 Pitt Street, Sydney.
The paid-up capital of the Company amounts to
.£245,640, the following figures for 1902 being well
worthy of perusal:—General Beseive Fund.
£1,300,000; Fire Re-Insurance Fund, £800,000; bal-
ance to credit of Profit and Loss, £748,430; with
other fire funds, £136,502; total, £2,984,932. The
total claims paid by the Company, since
its commencement, after deduction of re-
insurances, have exceeded thirty millions ster-
The progress of the Company will best be seen
by a perusal of the following figures:—
Some years ago the Company abandoned its sys-
tem of guaranteed bonuses, and substituted that of
participation in quinquennial profits, nine-tenths
of which are given to policy-holders. Owing, how-
ever, to local legislation, which the Board of Direc-
tors regarded as hostile, the Company decided to
cease carrying, on Life business in nearly all (he
States. Its position, in this matter, is, that it
persists in refusing to hand over its funds to the
insurance.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-continued.
FIRE AND LIFE INSURANCE.


ling. In addition to its ample funds the
Company is backed by the unlimited liability of
its thousand and odd proprietors. The Fire Ee-
serves have been created out of the surpluses of
prosperous years, and form the best possible pro-
tection to both the assured and the proprietors.
Common prudence should impel all property owners,
whether oi personal or real estate, to protect them-
selves from the effects of not only the unprofitable
years which must be looked for in all business
undertakings, but of those wide-spread and ruinous
conflagrations which from time to time are
constantly breaking out in .various parts of
the world. The present is the day of big things,
in every department of human activity, and we
cannot open the morning papers at our breakfast
table without finding an account of some big fire,
or circumstances which have arisen out of one.
The Directors of the Liverpool and London and
Globe Insurance Company claim that, by their now
world-wide business, depending for its usefulness
and existence on no special locality, and backed by
its large accumulation of reserve funds, they give
the required protection.
A word may be said of the audit of the Com-
pany’s accounts. To insure the accuracy thereof,
they are subjected to two independent audits, one
by the auditors appointed by the Proprietors; the
other by Public Accountants, whose audit* be it
observed, is a continuous one throughout the year.
Fire insurance of every description is rated ac-
cording to the nature of the risk to be insured. It
should be noted that policies may be opened to
cover the loss of rent during the re-instalment of
the building destroyed or made untenantable by
fire, at the rate of the building to which the rent
applies. Under the Company’s policies, loss aris-
ing from explosion' of gas, within the building,
(gas works excepted), or from fire caused by light-
ning, is made good. Farm buildings, produce and
stock are also insured; insured cattle, if killed by
lightning on farms, being paid for without extra
rate.
The Australasian business is under the control
of the Sydney Board of Directors, the members of
which are Mr. Walter Gumming Watt, of Messrs.
Gilchrist, Watt and Co. (Chairman); the Hon. Ed-
ward Eater, M.L.C.; Mr. Eric Henry Mackay, and
Mr. George Mair. At the Australasian Head Office,
62 Pitt Street, Sydney, the E’sident Secretary,
Mr. Mordaunt William Shipley Clarke, a gentle-
man well known amongst insurance managers, is
in command. For nearly 46 years Mr. Clarke has
been connected with the Company, and has held
his present position since 1880, and in such a way
as to greatly add to his own personal and profes-
sional reputation. The Eesident Secretary is ably
assisted by the following repre entatives; —Mr.
George Buzzard, Melbourne; Messrs. Webster and
Co., Brisbane; Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co., Ltd.,
Townsville; Mr. E. M. Steele, Adelaide; Mr. James
Mcßean, Perth; Mr. Henry Edgell, Launceston;
Messrs. Eoberts and Allport, Hobart; Messrs.
Levin and Co., Wellington (N.Z.); Messrs. T. Brod-
rick and Co., Invercargill; Messrs. Bird and Adley,
Christchurch; Mr. A. G. Buchanan. Auckland;
Messrs. J. H. Cock and Co., Nelson; Messrs. Brod-
rick and Chalmer, Dunedin.
Under the title of the Liverpool and London
Fire and Life Company, operations were first com-
menced in Australia in 1853, a year which proved
to be an exceedingly busy and prosperous one
for the business members of the early colonies,
numbers of commercial and financial schemes being
launched; many of what are now amongst our most
prosperous firms and institutions being at that
time established.
The Liverpool and London Fire and Life Com-
pany opened up by taking over the business of the
Australasian Life and General Assurance and An-
nuity Company, the object being to establish a
standard life office on mutual principles. A com-
mittee of the old policy-holders, composed of the
late John Gilchrist, George Miller, Sir Edward
Knox, George King, and G. Kenyon Holder, was
formed on the 11th of September, 1852, to consider
whether the proposals submitted by the Liverpool
and London should be accepted. The policy-holders
—the late Sir Alfred Stephen, Sir E. Deas Thom-
son, Thos. Seely, Arthur M. A. Beckett, John Hubert
Plunkett, Sir W. M. Manning, and Jas. Morton —
unanimously decided to recommend their accept-
ance.
Instead of what was thought at the time, the
uncertain advantage of a share in the profits,
they accepted the guaranteed bonus scheme of the
new Company. The Sydney register contains tKe
names of all the leading colonists of the olden
time.
From the past history of the Australasian Branch
of the Liverpool and London and Globe, it will be
seen that the local business is closely identified
with what may for convenience be termed the
golden age of New South Wales. Possessing many
of the best features of modern institutions, it also
may be considered a concern reminiscent in many
respects, of the good old times, or, at all events, of
the times that we, of this present day, regard as
such. Solid as it is in the old country it is equally
so out here, as its transactions in fire risks clearly
show. The office is notable for the prompt, thor-
ough. just and circumspect manner in which all
losses are adjusted and met, every effort being
made to demonstrate to policy-holders that all
lawful claims receive that treatment which should
be accorded by a Company whose business it is to
protect the public against calamity by fire.
An apparent disposition is sometimes mani-
fested to regard even British companies ope-
rating in Australasia as foreigners, and in-
terlopers. Such a sentiment cannot well be
reasoned with, as its injustice and absurd-
ity are apparent. While on this subject it may
be stated that, in order to prevent any possible
cavil, the Company, at no slight expense, obtained
from the several State legislatmes local acts enab-
ling it to sue and be sued, viz. New South
Wales, 1865, 28 Vic.; Tasmania, 1874, 38 Vie.; vic-
toria, 1877, 40 Vic.; Queensland, 1877, 41 Vic.;
MR. M. W. S. CLARKE,
Resident Secretary for Australasia.
South Australia, 1879, 42-43 Vic.; New Zealand,
1879, 43 Vic.
In addition to the headquarters already men-
tioned, the Company has branch offices in the fol-
lowing towns and cities of the United Kingdom:
Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle, Bristol, Birming-
ham, Dublin, Glasgow and Edinburgh. In the
new world, branches are , located at New York,
Chicago, New Orleans, San Francisco and Mon-
treal.
After what has been stated of tlje Company’s
income, resources and world-wide organisation, it
is almost needless to assert that the institution is
a good one for property-holders to make their in-
surance arrangements with. The payment of per-
haps thirty-five millions in 67 years to insurees,
in respect of their losses, speaks, with a voice not
to be misunderstood, of the continuous usefulness
of an institution which is clearly serving the ob-
jects for which it was founded, and that without
the slightest corresponding risk to those benefited
thereby.
ME. M. W. S. CLAEKE.
There are few gentlemen better known in the
financial and commercial circles of Sydney than
Mr. Mordaunt William Shipley Clarke, the much
respected Eesident Secretary for Australasia of
the Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance
Company. For many years he has been the Men-
tor of hundreds of young men engaged in the busi-
ness of assurance, and also the guide and friend
of them all. Mr. Clarke was born in 1833, in Dor-
setshire (England), that pleasant county whose
butter was so highly thought of by Mr. Middle-
wick, and whose dumplings have become a pro-
verb. The subject of this sketch is the worthy son of
a worthy sire, the Eev. W. B. Clarke, M.A.,
F.E.S., who at the time of the former’s birth held
the living of Longfleet, near Poole. At six years
of age the boy accompanied his parents to New
South Wales. The Eev. W. B. Clarke here found
a great and almost virgin field for his abilities as
a geologist. Those who wish to know the work
the Eev. W. B. Clarke performed in the geological
arena of this State .will find some of it recorded in
blue-books and State papers; but the world at
large has never fully realised the valuable ser-
vices this reverend gentleman performed for New
South Wales. Suffice it to say here that the
theories of the Eev. W. B. Clarke regarding our
gold-fields, coal-fields, and the general deposition
of minerals and metals, have since been most
amply vindicated by results, and that much of
what has been accomplished by later geologists
has been based upon lines laid down years ago
by the Eev. W. B. Clarke.
After a stay of three years in Parramatta, young
Mordaunt Clarke returned in 1842 with his mother
and sisters to England. Thereafter the family
proceeded to Ireland, and Mr. Clarke matri-
culated at Trinity College, of which he be-
came graduate in 1856. The young student was
nominated by Mr. (afterwards Lord) Fitzgerald
to a position in the Civil Service. This, after a
competitive examination, he obtained. Mr.
Clarke subsequently heard that it had been the in-
tention of Lord Fitzgerald to appoint him his pri-
vate secretary. But this was overborne by the
sudden departure of the family to Australia, news
having been received of the illness of Mr. Clarke’s
father.
Having received in Britain a knowledge of the
theory and practice of railway construction, Mr.
Clarke, on returning to Sydney* was for several
months engaged by Mr. E. O. Moriarty, afterwards
Principal Engineer for Harbours and Elvers, in sur-
veying and laying the Pyrmont Bridge Company’s
road. In this work was included the making of the
drawings necessary for the construction of the
work. A position in the Survey Office then natur-
ally followed. But Mr. Clarke’s life-work did not
lie in the direction of the draughting table. Af-
ter a short stay in the Survey Office, he was in-
vited by the late Mr. J. S. Willis, at that time
Chairman of the Sydney Board of Directors of the
Liverpool and London, to enter the service of
that Company. Notwithstanding the appointment
he passed the required examination, and was li-
censed to practise as a surveyor. It is hardly
necessary to point out that this qualification has
since stood Mr. Clarke in excellent stead in his
position of chief executive officer of a great fire
insurance company. Mr. Clarke rose step by
step in the office, and, on the retirement of Mr.
Stanger-Leathes in 1880, was appointed to the posi-
tion of Manager.
For the long period of 45 years' Mr. Clarke has
been identified in various capacities with the Liv-
erpool and London and Globe Insurance Company,
having spent all that time at the post of duty.
Even his visits to other parts of Australia hav-
ing been made in connection with the affairs of
the Company, of which he is such an old, faithful,
distinguished and successful servant. By the busi-
ness public of Sydney Mr. Clarke is as highly es-
teemed as by the local directorate and heads of
the Company in the old land, and, on the inaug-
eration of the Fire Underwriters’ Association of
New South Wales was unanimously appointed its
first President. When the Fire Brigades’ Board
of New South Wales was formed, he was elected to
represent the foreign companies. The subject of our
sketch takes a deep interest in municipal affairs,
and has sat ais an alderman for North Sydney, of
which district he has been a resident for only a
few years less than half a century.
In the days before he became a veteran, he took
a considerable interest in defence matters, and,
after 18 years military service as a volunteer, re-
tired on his rank of Major. He married in 1869
Miss Mann, daughter of the late Captain Gother
Mann, and has a family of five, his eldest sou,
Mr. W. B. Clarke, being engaged in duties at the
head office of the Company in Sydney. The second
son. Dr. G. E. C. Clarke, is resident surgeon at the
Newcastle Hospital, and the third is practising as
architect. Mr. M. W. S. Clarke has an interesting
and highly intellectual personality, and is rightly
regarded as a very fine type of the English gfntle-
man who has found his life-sphere under the
Southern Cross.


Messrs. Wormald Brothers.
SOLE AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATIVES FOR
THE GRINNELL AUTOMATIC SPRINKLERS
AND FIRE ALARM,
AND
MANUFACTURERS OF ARMOURED FIRE-
PROOF DOORS AND SHUTTERS.
Of all the dangers that business people, firms
or companies have to face, none are greater than
that which at any moment may be produced by
fire.
Messrs. Wormald Brothers, of 17 Bond Street,
Sydney, have studied the subject of fires as a
practical matter of business, and their ability
the same at its incipient stage. It further, simul-
taneously, and likewise automatically, raises an
alarm. The Sprinkler comes into action by
the heat of the fire itself rising up to the ceil-
ing. As soon as the temperature reaches 155 de-
grees in the warehouse, or, in the case of a boiler-
room, £B3 degrees Fahrenheit (or as can be ar-
ranged), the soldc.r, which keeps the Sprinkler qui-
escent, melts, and the invention then comes into
action. As it does so immediately over the spot
where the fire starts, all damage by fire or water
is confined to a very limited area. The alarm
gong will sound not merely on the opening of the
Sprinkler in case of fire, but also when, by acci-
dent or otherwise, a Sprinkler or some other part
of the installation should have been damaged, so
as to liberate even a small quantity of water, and
are attached. The escaping water impinges on a
deflector and is scattered in the form of a shower in
all directions.
The Fire Underwriters’ Associations have shown
their recognition of the great value of the Sprink-
ler by granting a discount of 20 per cent, off pre-
miums, which must, in many ca-es, especially in
highly-rated risks, mean a considerable saving.
The cost, therefore, of a complete installation will
in time pay itself with interest, and, moreover,
prove itself a good investment. Over 50,000 build-
ings in every part of the world are protected by
over ten million Grinnell Sprinklers, The Great
Marshall Field Group of buildings at Chicago
whose floor space covers one million square feet,
has been fitted up. The installation comprises
15,500 sprinklers, and is provided with 23 Variable
SECTIONAL VIEW OF A BUILDING FITTED WITH THE GRINNELL SPRINKLERS AND FIRE ALARM.
Showing arrangement of piping, reserve water tank, valves, and alarm gong. Also one Sprinkler on each floor, operating on supposed fires.
and energy have resulted in bringing before the
public a number of valuable appliances for fight-
ing the fire monster.
THE GRINNELL AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER
AND FIRE ALARM.
The Agency for this splendid and highly effective
preventive of fire is one of the most important
held by Messrs. Wormald Brothers. The device is
an invention of Mr. Frederick Grinnell, of Provi-
dence, Rhode Island, United States of America.
As the name implies, it is a means of automati-
cally in other words, independently of human aid,
sprinkling water on a fire, and thereby arresting
thus act as a tell-tale. Devices for automatically
communicating with -the nearest fire station can
also be attached.
All installations are now erected' in accordance
with the rules laid down by Fire Insurance Com-
panies for the regulation of Sprinkler equipments.
Lines of horizontal distributing pipes are carried
through the building, near the ceilings, from 8 to
10 feet apart. These are connected with larger ver-
tical rising pipes supplied from the public water
main, as a primary supply, and a gravity tank or
other approved source as a secondary supply,
that will keep the water in the pipes under con-
stant pressure. To each of the lines of pipes, and
from 8 to 10 feet apart, the automatic Sprinklers
Pressure Alarm Valves and five Grinnell Dry Pipe
Valves. There is also an Electric Alarm system
of Gongs throughout the buildings, and Annunoia
tor located in the power plant. At every riser,
Shut-oil and Drain Valves are provided on each
floor.
The Grinnell Automatic Sprinkler and Fire
Alarm is not a merely theoretical appliance. It
may be certain that the fire underwriters would
not have allowed 20 per cent, off their usual
rates to those protected by the Grinnell Sprinkler,
if they had not good foundation for making so
large and significant a concession. An ounce of
practice is worth a ton of theory, and Messrs,
Wormald Brothers hold undoubted testimonials re-
Jnsiuance.
■Historical and Biographical Sketches.-eontinued.
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLERS & FIRE ALARM, FIRE-PROOF DOORS .& SHUTTERS.


garding the worth and efficacy of this great and
beneficial invention. One of these is from the well
known Company of Messrs. Paterson, Laing and
Bruce, Ltd., Melbourne. On the night of the 20th
May, 1900, the gong connected with their Sprinkler
installation gave the alarm. The whole dam-
age amounted to only .£IOO. The insurance
on stock in the building—which was a
seven-storey one—amounted to £26,000, and on the
building to £4OOO. It will be unhesitatingly ad-
mitted that the " save” was an excellent one.
The report of the “ Argus’’ of Monday, 21st May.
1900, contained the following:—“Mr. Stein, Super-
intendent of the Metropolitan Fire Brigade, speaks
very highly of the work done by the Grinnell
Sprinklers. They had extinguished the fire before
the Brigade arrived, and without their aid there is
every probability that a serious fire would have
occurred.”
The impression left on the minds of the mem-
bers of the board of directors of Messrs. Paterson,
Laing and Bruce, Ltd., was very strong. They
wrote to Messrs. Wormald Brothers as follows; —
" This is our first experience of the effect of the
Grinnell Sprinkler in practice, and we are grate-
ful to find that our faith and forethought have
been rewarded by the saving of our building and
stock, and, possibly, further incalculable damage.”
Another grand “save” was on the 10th March,
1902, at the warehouse of Messrs. Levy Brothers
and Co., Lonsdale Street, Melbourne. The " Age”
of 10th March, 1902, reports on the matter as fol-
lows : —“ The value of Automatic Sprinklers for
the prevention of fire was exemplified on Satur-
day night at the warehouse of Messrs. Levy
Bros. At about midnight a fire broke out in the
upper story, and the alarm given to the brigade
was promptly answered. The services of the fire-
men, however, were not needed, for the heat of the
flames set the Grinnell Automatic Sprinklers work-
ing, and the drenching downpour which ensued ex-
tinguished the blaze immediately. The damage
done to the stock was very slight. Messrs. Levy
Brothers, writing to Messrs. Wormald Brothers on
the subject, state: —“ We are ourselves particul-
larly gratified at the result, since our business has
not been interrupted, and what this loss would
have meant in case of a serious fire, it would be
difficult to estimate.” As the affair turned out,
the loss was settled for £l2i).
Among the large establishments of Sydney, in-
stalled with the Grinnell Sprinkler, are those of
the following firms, companies and institutions: —
Messrs. S. Hoffnung and Co., A. McArthur and Co.,
Feldheim, Gotthelf and Co., Holdsworth, Mac-
pherson and Co., Elliott Brothers, Ltd., Dixson To-
bacco Co., Cameron Bros, and Co., New York and
MR. H. P. WORMALD.
Brooklyn Tobacco Co., American Tobacco Co.,
Ltd., “ Evening News” office, Sargood, Butler,
Nichol and Ewen, Ltd., J. S. Reid’s buildings.
Government Printing Office, Government Ordnance
Stores, Goodlet and Smith, Ltd., Kauri Timber
Company, Limited, Robert Harper and Co., Par-
sons Brothers and Co., Pty., Ltd., Paterson, Laing
and Bruce, Ltd., D. Mitchell and Co., Ltd., Ander-
son and Co., Ltd., and the new warehouse now be-
ing erected for Henry Bull and Co., Ltd. In Mel-
bourne most of the large warehousemen have their
establishments fitted with the Sprinkler. In Bris-
bane, Wellington, Dunedin, Auckland, and Perth
these most necessary adjuncts to buildings, where
valuable property is stored or in position, are to
be found. The records kept by Messrs. Wormald
Brothers show that 27 outbreaks of fire have
been extinguished by the’ Grinnell automatic
Sprinkler since its introduction to Australia.
SECTION OF THE GRINNELL PATENT.
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER.
Speaking of records, it is interesting to
peruse figures regarding the work done by the
Grinnell Sprinkler in general. Up to the end of
last year the fires extinguished by the Grinnell
Sprinkler throughout the world numbered 6COO.
The average loss of these fires was only £sB—a re-
markably small figure.
In buildings, where the water in the pipes is li-
able to freeze, the Grinnell Dry Pipe system is
applied. In this system a differential air valve
intervenes between the water supplies, which are
beyond the reach of frost, and the Sprinkler pipes
between building. By this system no less
than 500 fires have been extinguished; and in 330
of these cases there were no claims upon the in-
surance companies. The average loss per fire was
the low one of .£6O.
GRINNELL WATER CURTAIN, WITH
CORNICE SPRINKLER.
This valuable system is specially designed for
the external protection of buildings from fire in
adjacent buildings. The Cornice Sprinklers are
fixed on a pipe line running along and under the
cornice or eaves of the building. These Sprifiklers
are not automatic. To ensure always an ample
pressure of water, .arrangements have been made
with the Hydraulic Power Co., whereby the 700 lb.
pressure from their main can be utilized in case of
necessity. When a fire in a neighbouring building
threatens, water is turned into the pipes by the
operation of a valve on the lower floor. The stream
which issues thus forms a water curtain for the
building’s protection.
THE GRINNELL DRENCHER SYSTEM.
Still another useful device is this .elaboration of
the previously-mentioned system . The open
Sprinklers are fixed in lines on all the slopes of
the roofs, as well as over every window or door-
way on the external walls of the building. These
drenchers concentrate the water spray on the most
vulnerable points. Thus the whole system forms
a screen through which fire and heat cannot com-
municate.
The claim is strongly and emphatically advanced
by Messrs. Wormald Brothers, that given an in-
ternal installation of Grinnell Automatic Sprink-
lers, with an external one of Grinnell Drenchers
and Cornice Sprinklers, and an efficient and ade-
quate water supply, it is practically impossible for
any building to be destroyed by fire. This is a
great position to affirm, but the facts thoroughly
warrant them in doing so.
ARMOURED FIRE RESISTING DOORS AND
SHUTTERS.
These most important and useful appliances are
universally recognised and especially commended
by the fire experts of the United Kingdom, the'
Continent of Europe, the British Colonies and
America, as the only trustworthy protection of
openings within or on the outside of a building.
As they will neither buckle" nor warp, like iron
doors and shutters, they fulfil their object, by re-
taining their shape instead of letting the flames
pass through. Being much lighter than iron doors
or shutters, they are more easily manipulated.
They have the further and very important advan-
tage of being less expensive. If specially desired,
they can be made to close automatically in case of
fire. They can be made single or double, sliding,
hinged or folding. Sliding doors or shutters are
fitted with frictionless pulleys or ball bear-
ing hangers.
To practical men an explanation of their con-
struction will not come amiss. The doors are con-
structed of three or four thicknesses (according to
the area of opening) of well-seasoned timber, and
completely covered with tinned steel sheets, put on
in such a manner that, whilst free to expand, they
exclude the air and cannot become detached. The
air being thus excluded from the wood, combus-
tion is prevented. They are recognised and
accepted by all insurance companies. Messrs.
Wormald Brothers have many testimonials as to the
progress of very large fires having been stopped by
these invaluable doors, and have had orders placed
with them by many of the largest manufacturers
and storekeepers in the City of Sydney, the other
States and New Zealand. It may be stated that in
one well-known factory—the Dixson Tobacco
Works—no less than 65 of their armoured fire-re-
sisting doors were fitted. Among many establish-
ments fitted with these doors may be mentioned
those of Messrs. Toohey’s, Limited, Standard Brew-
ery, Messrs. Perdriau and Co., rubber merchants,
Messrs. S. Freeman and Sons, Ltd., of Ultimo,
Messrs. Farmer and Co., Ltd., Civil Co-operative
Society, Ltd., etc., etc.
WIRE-GAUZE SHUTTERS.
These shutters, as the name signifies, are made
of wire gauze in an iron frame, in accordance with
the rules of the Fire Underwriters’ Association,
who recommend them as an excellent fire retard-
ant. Flames will not pass through the
meshes of the wire-gauze shutters installed by
Messrs. Wormald Brothers, light is but slightly
impeded, and fresh-air is freely admitted. More-
over, these shutters, being generally made fixtures,
are always in position.
MR. J. D. WORMALD.
The factory and store of Messrs. Wormald Brothers
are at 7 Dean’s Place, Sydney. The business was
started about 14 years ago. Messrs. Wormald
Brothers have an agency at 33 William Street,
Melbourne, where Mr. W. E. L. Wears, C.E., is
their representative for Victoria, South Australia
and Tasmania. They have also representatives
, in the other States of the Commonwealth and New
Zealand.


The
Metropolitan Fire Brigades.
A HIGHLY EFFICIENT SERVICE.
In a city of the size and importance of Sydney
a properly equipped and well-regulated fire-ex-
tinguishing service is an absolute necessity. In
earlier years, when the metropolis of New South
Wales was a small place compared with its im-
mense proportions to-day, the fire-fighting orga-
nisations were of a purely volunteer character.
Act of Parliament was passed constituting the
Fire Brigades Board. Under the provisions of
this enactment a permanent brigade of paid fire-
men was established, under the immediate control
of a highly trained officer imported from the
principal Fire Department in London. The dif-
ferent volunteer fire brigades, amongst whom no
unanimity or discipline had been possible, were
now brought into line, and under the judicious
direction of a capable Board, they at once became
valuable auxiliaries to the permanent brigade.
In some of the outlying districts the protection of
the property of the residents is now left al-
most entirely to the care of the volunteer com-
office embraces for each a period of two years, are
elected by the members of the interests they re-
present on the Board.
The Metropolitan Fire Brigade, the Central or
Head Station of which is situated at Nos. 213
217 Castlereagh-street, Sydney, comprises one
Superintendent (Alfred Webb), who is also In-
spector of Kerosene; one Deputy Superintendent
(N. G. Sparkes), 5 district officers, 10 station
officers, 123 firemen, and 11 auxiliaries.
There are 13 stations situated at various loca-
tions in the city and suburbs, and these stations
are connected by telephone with the wharves and
principal buildings in the city. Those of the
THE METROPOLITAN FIRE BRIGADES BOARD.
As the City progressed, and the dimensions and
height of the buildings increased greatly, while
at the same time they became more closely packed
together, it was borne home forcibly to the civic
authorities and the Government that the volun-
teer fire brigade system was utterly inadequate to
cope with such heavy demands upon it as was
entailed by the outbreak of a large conflagration.
To the credit of the authorities, they promptly
recognised the danger that threatened the city
in the absence of a well-manned and efficiently
equipped Fire Brigade, so, in order to give pro-
tection and security to the valuable interests that
had grown up within the metropolitan area, an
panics, who have shown that Under a proper
system they are capable of rendering splendid
work. The Sydney Fire Brigades are under the
control of a legally constituted Board, consist-
ing of six members, with a Secretary, the follow-
ing interests being represented :—The Government,
the Insurance Companies not having their head
offices in Sydney, the Insurance Companies having
their head offices in Sydney, the Sydney Municipal
Council, the Suburban Municipal Councils, and
the Volunteer Fire Brigades. The representative
of the Government acts as Chairman of the Board,
for which a salary of .£2OO per annum is appor-
tioned, but the other delegates, whose tenure of
staff who are not resident at the stations are in
communication with them by means of electric
bells and telephones. The quarters of most of the
volunteer fire companies are also in electric com-
munication with the M.F.B. Stations, and on a
call being given at any of these a message is
transmitted to the head-quarters direct, then it
is distributed to whatever stations the officer in
charge may deem it expedient to call out for duty.
The plant in use at the different stations, which
is of the best and most approved pattern, comprises
no less than thirteen steam fire engines, or
"steamers,” as they are called, twenty-four manual
engines, twelve telescopic ladders, twelve horse


carriages, twelve horse reels, one horse van, one
telescoping water tower, several fire escapes, one
of which, recently donated to the brigade, can be
extended to a height of 80 feet. There are also a
number of spare hydrants, ladders, and stand
elevation of 220 feet. Another steamer of similar
design, but with a lesser pumping capacity, viz.,
800 gallons per minute, is also on duty at the Cen-
tral Station. In the haulage of this mass of fire
extinguishing apparati nearly one hundred horses
the several appliances to which they are ready
to be hitched at whatever hour a call may be re-
ceived. To facilitate turning out, and expedite
matters whenever an alarm is raised, all the sta-
tions are supplied with snap harness. Telephones
OFFICES OF THE ALLIANCE ASSURANCE COMPANIES, 97 PITT STREET, SIDNEY.
pipes, together with thousands of yards of hose.
One of the steam fire engines—“ Big Ben”—ranks
amongst the hugest and most powerful of its kind
in the world. It is capable of pumping 1000 gallons
per minute, and can throw a jet of water to an
are employed. These animals are all splendid speci-
mens of the heavy coaching class, and are speci-
ally trained for the work they are called upon
to perform. They are stabled at the vari-
ous stations, being always located alongside
connected with the fire stations are placed in
specially constructed fire alarm boxes, that are
fixed in the most important centres in the city
and suburbs. The value of the stations and plant
vested in the Board amounts to about .6120,000,


and the annual expenditure on upkeep, etc., aggre-
gates about ,£30,000, of which amount the Govern-
ment contribute one-third, the Insurance Com-
panies —one-third, and the Municipal Councils
a like proportion.
What are generally known as the Volunteer Fire
Companies, in contradistinction to the permanent
Brigade, are in reality partially paid firemen,
there being only a couple of companies that are
not in receipt of subsidies. These partially paid
men, as well as the few purely volunteer fire-
men, are all amenable to the system of discip-
line enunciated by the Board, and at fires they
take their instructions from the senior officer pre-
OFFICES OF MESSRS. M. METCALFE AND
COMPANY, AGENTS FOR
THE SOUTH BRITISH FIRE AND MARINE
COMPANY OF NEW ZEALAND. AND
OCEAN MARINE INSURANCE COMPANY.
sent, so that there is no liability to any hiatus of
authority, as was so often the case before the
Fire Brigades Act came into force. These com-
panies receive an annual endowment, amounting
to about ,£3OOO, in addition to considerable ex-
penditure on their 'stations and equipment. This
endowment permits of a regular sum per capita
being granted per month by way of a retaining
allowance. In addition, a certain sum is allowed
for drills, and while on duty at fires a liberal
allowance per hour is paid to every man .
OFFICES OF THE NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE
ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALASIA, LTD. 85 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
OFFICES OF MESSRS. T. AND W. WILLIS, ID BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY,
Representing
THE DERWENT AND TAMAR FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE CO., AND THE BOMBAY
FIRE AND MARINE INSURANCE CO.


Railways and
Tramways.


The Railways and Tramways of
New South Wales.
The railways of New South Wales must occupy a
front place when dealing in any way with the wealth
and progress of the State. Financially, they repre-
sent a large part of its national debt, while they con-
tribute very materially to the annual consolidated
revenue. The development of the resources of the
State would also be impossible without their aid.
GENERAL REMARKS.
Looked at on the map, New South Wales is a
compact territory, and without a knowledge of the
local conditions a glance would lead one to be-
lieve. that its transportation facilities are better
than they really are. It would appear, for in-
stance, to be well supplied with inland rivers, but
unfortunately when these would be most valuable
they are liable to become attenuated streams, and
in seasons of diought, for lengthened periods, be-
come quite unn rvigrble; while bars at the mouths
of the coastal rivers are a source of frequent in-
terruption to navigation. As a highway for com-
merce to the inland districts the rivers are uncer-
tain and unreliable. It is of the utmost importance,
therefoie, that some certain means of communica-
tion should be afforded, such as the railways supply,
and these have been generously provided through-
MR. DAVID KIRKCALDIE.
Commissioner,
Government Railways and Tramways.
out the State, (he mileage of the lines in proportion
to population ranking high as compared with many 7
other countries. For instance, on the 30th June,
1902, the date of the Railway Commissioners' last
annual report, the. mileage open amounted to 3028
miles, which gives an average of one mile of line
open per every 449 of the population. The ratio in
the United Kingdom is one mile to every 1877 in-
MR. C. N. J. OLIVER,
Chief Commissioner,
Government Railways and Tramways.
habitants; France has one mile for every 1414 of
the population; and Germany one mile to every
1789. The vast railway mileage of the United
States, however, places that country in a better
relative position, the proportion there being one
mile of railway 7 to each 392 of the population.
The New South Wales lines stretch south to the
Victorian border at Albury, 386 miles flora Sydney,
where a connection is made with the Victorian
railways. Other branches to the south-west reach
Hay and Finley, 454 and 448 miles from Sydney
respectively. In the west, at the Darling River,
Central Australia is touched at Bourke and Bre-
warrina, 503 and 513 miles; and on the north the
Queensland railways aie connected with at Jen-
nings, 490 miles from Sydney 7 , a long branch run-
ning north-west to Moree and Inverell, the latter
place being 509 miles from Sydney.
HISTORY.
The advantages of railways were recognised many
years ago, the earliest dating back nearly half a
century, the first section from Sydney to Parra-
matta having been opened on the 28th September,
1855. At that time Sydney was a comparatively
small place, and the driver of the first engine, re-
lating his experience of the opening day, states, of
the country between Sydney and Parramatta that
“ it was nearly all bush, with a stray public-house
here and there on the road-side.” Now 7 , of course,
as all local readers will know, there is a practically
continuous chain of connecting suburbs between the
tw 7 o places.
The progress of construction was slow, owing, to
some extent, no doubt, to w 7 ant of enterprise, but
also to the difficulties connected with the first sec-
tions out of Sydney, as the southern and western
ranges had to be mossed within 100 miles of the
metropolis, the western one involving the con tiuc-
tion of the, track acioss the Blue Mountains, ne-
cessitating, amongst other works, the use of the
zig-zigs known as Lapstone Hill (since cut out) and
the Great Zig-Zag into the Lithgow Valley.
At the end of 1880, 25 years after the first line was
opened, the mileage had increased only to 849 miles;
but the next 20 years saw an increase from that
total to 2811 miles, and the mileage in operation to-
day is 3138 miles, while an additional length of 313
miles is now under construction.
STATISTICS.
The capital debt of the State is largely made up
of its railway investments, and it has a valuable
asset to-day to show for the expenditure. The capi-
tal cost, according to the last report of the Railway
Commissioners (June 30th, 1902), is given as
.1:40,565,073, but considerable sums have been spent
since that date in additions to the railway property
and new lines, finished or under construction. For
many years the railway returns, after paying work-
ing expenses, have practically met the interest on
cost of construction, but the anticipations are that
MR. W. M. FEHON,
Commissioner,
Government Railways and Tramways.
the present year will show a considerable falling off
in this respect owing to the disastrous drought
which has devastated Australia, but which is now
happily passing away.
Übe
’lRaihvavs anb tTramwavs
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Historical and Descriptive Sketch.


Year Ended
Year Ended
30th June,
30th June,
1888.
1902.
No. of miles open ...
2,111
3.025J
Revenue
.£2,295,124
£3,668,686
Passengers carried...
Goods, minerals and
15,174,115
30,835,214
live stock tonnage
3,399,772
6,467,552
The following statement will show at a glance the
increase in the business since the Commissioners
have been in office, one column giving the results
as shown in their latest annual repoit, and the
other the corresponding details from the report for
the year immediately preceding their appoint-
ment; —
Of the total of £3,668,686 earned during the last
financial year, it may be mentioned that £2,263,837
South Wales much of her pastoral business which
formerly was diverted by road or river to other
States. In connection with the agricultural inte-
rest, the giowth is due to a healthy increase in the
total production, encouraged by the, facility for
getting produce at low rates to Sydney; and as the
prosperity of the State will be largely dependent
upon the development of this industry, it is gratify-
ing to notice that from 1891 to 1901 the acreage
under crop increased from 846,383 to 2,276,628 acres,
certainly demonstrating that the additional popu-
lation is occupied in one of the soundest sources
of national wealth, namely, agricultural produc-
tion.
The railway administrations have ahvays recog-
nised the value of the agricultural interest by mak-
ing every reasonable effort to promote it, and for
long distances the rates for railway carriage are the
period, there were three Commissioners; but sub-
sequently single Commissioners had charge of the
business, directly under Ministerial control. The
last Commissioner, prior to the appointment of the
Board of Commissioners, was the late Mr. Charles
Goodchap, who was sole Commissioner for nearly
eleven years; but he was largely hampered in his
management by political interference, which the
present Railway Act was passed to abolish, and en-
sure the railways being worked on business lines.
and in the best interests of the State. This Act,
introduced by Sir Henry Parkas, in 1888, appointed
a Board of three Commissioners, and gave them
practically independent powers whereby they are
enabled to administer the railways and appoint and
control the staff without any political interference.
The first three Commissioners under the Act were
Messrs. E. M. G. Eddy (Chief Commissioner), and
THE GREAT ZIG-ZAG, LITHGOW VALLEY, N.S.W.
One of the most Remarkable Railroads in Australia.
was derived from the goods traffic, £1,367,796 from
passenger traffic, and £37,053 from rents and mis-
cellaneous charges
Under the former heading the pastoral industry
was served by the carriage of 640,120 bales of wool,
while 5,539,770 sheep and 207,948 cattle were moved.
Mining is also helped very largely by the railways
of the State, 4,197,332 tons of minerals being car-
vied in 1902, Newcastle, as the largest coal centre,
being responsible for 2,972,921 tons of this total.
The farmer also added his quota to the business, as
387,720 tons of grain were carried, and 245,574 tons
of The y trlffic V from'tho^producing interests has been
growing by leaps and bounds, minerals in ten years
having increased from 2,799,845 tons in 1892 to
4 197 332 tons in 1902, and grain from 198,491 tons to
387 720 tons
In regard to the wool traffic, the growth has been
largelv due to railway extensions retaining to New
lowest in any of the Australian States, wheat, for
instance, being carried for 400 miles for 13s. 4d. per
ton. As showing the reasonable rates that prevail
for the car.iage of goods, it may be mentioned that
for the year ended 30th June last no less than 80.85
per cent, of the goods traffic was carried at under Id.
per ton per mile, exclusive of terminal charges, the
rates ranging from ,51d. to ,72d. per ton per mile,
while the average earnings for the whole of the
goods, mineral and live stock business amounted
to 1.07 d. per ton per mile. The average receipt
per passenger per mile was only o.4<d.
ADMINISTRATION
ADMINIo IRAI lON
v
A word may be said as to management. The Rail-
way Department has, since the first construction
of its lines, had a number of experiments in regard
to its system of control. Originally, and for a dioi t
Messrs. Charles Oliver and W. M. Pehon. The pre-
sent Board consists of Mr. Charles Oliver (Chief
Commissioner), and Messrs. David Kirkcaldie and
W. M. Pehon. The country has been very fortunate
in the selection of these gentlemen to fill the res-
ponsible positions of Commissioners. In Mr. Eddy
they had one of the loading railway experts of the
world, and who rendered magnincent service to the
country by his administration, while he held the
position of Chief Commissioner. The Railway Com-
missioners, in their first yearly report after his
death, wrote.—
" ’ VVe h<S f^ ly acknowledge the great ser-
vice rendered to the country by the late Mr. E.
G ' Eddy ’ , t . hp C . hlef 1 Co ’ nm ‘^
sioner under the Act, who so ably laid the
groundwork of the success of the. present system
of management, and by whose bright intMlect
and herculean labours it was firmly established. 7


ROLLING STOCK.
The rolling stock on the railways represents a
value of some £5, 000,000, and comprises 518 loco-
motives, 11,183 goods wagons, 1052 departmental
wagons, and 1073 coaching vehicles.
The locomotives are the strongest of their class
in Australia, the most powerful, known as the “T”
class, or Australian Consolidation, being capable of
hauling 700 tons on a 1 in 100 grade at the rate of
15 miles an hour. It is eight-wheels coupled, with
a leading two-wheeled bogie, and has outside eylin-
11 tons tare. The great advantage of these wagons
is that when big traffics are moving, such as wool,
grain, etc., large loads can be taken at a minimum
of deadweight, while there is also an additional
saving of room at depot stations, which is an im-
portant consideration, particularly at a place like
Darling Harbour, where, in the height of the sea-
son, up to 10,000 bales of wool have been unloaded
in one day. For general goods and for the ordinary
traffics, the common style of four-wheeled wagon
has been found to be profitable. Recently the Com-
raissioners, following the lead of the up-to-date
Sleeping cars built on the Pullman plan are used
on the long distance trains, as well as corridor and
lavatory carriages for passengers not wishing to
travel in the sleeping cars. The sleeping and cor-
i idor cars are of somewhat similar external appear-
ance, but differ in their internal arrangements. The
former are on the American plan, the main portion
being open, with a central passage and seats on
either side, on which the beds are made up at night,
longitudinally. The corridor cars, on the other
hand, are compartment carriages, the compartments
opening off from a corridor running the entire
ders 21 inches in diameter by 26 inches stroke. The
total weight of the engine and tender, the latter cap-
able of carrying 36.50 gallons of water and six tons of
coal, is about 107 tons.
Another powerful engine is that known as the
" P” class, used for express and mail trains, but
also worked in with goods and live stock traffic.
It is six-wheels coupled, with a leading four-
wheeled bogie, and has cylinders 20 inches in dia-
meter by 26 inches stroke, and with passenger
trains can take a load of 255 tons up a 1 in 100
grade at 35 miles an hour; or, when working goods
PRESS AND MAIL TRAIN ENGINE.
American companies, have provided for steel
wagons, and a number, carrying 15 tons each, on
four wheels, are in use, with excellent results. A
laige number of waggons are used entirely for live
stock business, and are built specially for that pur-
pose, the largest accommodating over 200 sheep.
What appeals most, however, to the travelling
public is the class of passenger carriages that are
in use, and in this connection it may be said that
there are now running on all the principal trains
carriages of superior modern types, it having been
the aim of the Commissioners from the time of their
length of the vehicle, thus combining the privacy
of a compartment carriage with the freedom of
moving about, if desired, from one compartment to
another. Lavatory conveniences are provided in
compartments at either end of sleeping and corri-
dor carriages. Corridor cars are provided for both
first and second class passengers. Most of the sleep-
ing and corridor carriages are of the vestibule type,
that is, communication is afforded between the cars
by means of a connecting passage, so that in a
vestibule train, such as the Melbourne express,
through communication is possible from end to end
FIRST-CLASS VESTIBULE CORRIDOR CAR.
Length of body over panels, 61 ft,; length over buffers, 67 ft, 11 ins.; width over panels, 9 ft. 41 ins.; height of body inside, from floor to ceiling, at centre, 9 ft. 0¾ ins.; capacity, 45 persons;
tare, 36 tons 10 cwt, The interior is divided into seven passenger compartments, including a lady’s saloon at one end and a smoker’s compartment at the other. Seating
accommodation is provided for nine in lady’s saloon, twelve in smoker’s and six in each of the intermediate compartments. Requisite lavatory accommodation
and vestibules are provided at the ends. Through communication is made from one car to another.
trains, can take6oo tons up the same grade at 15
miles an hour. The total weight of the engine and
tender, in working order, is over 88 tons.
Following the inlioduction of the powerful loco-
motives which the Commissioners introduced,
wagons of a much larger capacity were also pro-
vided. Tubular wagons, for instance, having a
length of 35 feet with a width of 8 feet, are in use,
having a carrying capacity of 22 tons, with a tare
of 10 tons. An iron under-frame bogie wagon has
also been introduced, with a length of 32 ft., and a
width of 8 ft. 8 in., having a capacity' of 23 tons on
appointment to bring the passenger stock up-to-
date in all respects, and with this end in view the
accommodatiou has been consistently improved.
Amongst the first of the improvements initiated
after their appointment was the introduction of
what are known as lavatory carriages, in which
each compartment communicates with a lavatory—
a convenience highly appreciated by passengers on
long journeys. Carriages of this type are provided
for both first and second class passengers (there
are only two classes on all the Australian railways),
and are in use on the long distance lines, as well as
on branch lines.
of the train. It may be added that with the excep-
tion of a few of the Pullman sleeping cars first im-
ported, the whole of this type of vehicle, as well
as the corridor cars, have been constructed in the
railway' workshops at Sydney,
For dealing with the heavy suburban traffic, cars
of the American typb have been adopted, the first
and second class cars being of uniform type, differ-
ing only iu their internal fittings and upholstering,
These are end-loading cars, having a central aisle,
with reversible seats on either side, each capable of
seating two adults.


PERMANENT WAY.
In regard to the permanent way itself, the gauge
is of the world s standard of 4 ft. 8) in., laid with
steel rails and hardwood sleepers, principally iron-
bark, the latter being considered probably the best
wood for the purpose used in any part of the world.
Unfortunately the gauges of the railways of the
States on either side differ, Queensland being 3 ft.
G in. and Victoria 5 ft. 3 in. The gauge adopted
here, however, is, as mentioned previously, the
gauge that has been adopted practically throughout
the world, and it has already been affirmed by the
The cost averages a little over .£2OOO per mile. Lines
of this character avoid the great disadvantage of
break of gauge; they cost little more in the first
instance than a narrow gauge line; and the whole
of the ordinary rolling-stock, exclusive of engines,
which are .selected from the lightest types existing
in the State, can pass over them, and thus avoid
the great disadvantage and cost of creating a
separate class of rolling stock.
It may be added that the construction of new lines
and their maintenance are separate responsibilities,
the Public Works Act, which is administered by the
Minister for Public Works, providing for the con-
with the object of business than for ornament.
The railway station at Sydney is not in keeping
with the business done, or the importance of the
metropolis; but has largely been a makeshift, as
for very many years jjast there always has been an
idea of having a city railway, and of making a sta-
lion which would be creditable to the Queen City
of the South.
At the present time a new central station is in
course of erection on the opposite side of the street
to the existing terminus, but it will be some time
before the building can be completed and ready for
working.
TUBULAR GOODS WAGGON.
Length of body outside, 31 ft, 8 in,; width outside, 8 ft.; height of body inside, 2 ft. 9 ins.; capacity, 22 tons ; tare, 10 tons.
railway authorities of the different States that if
unification is to be made—and some day, appar-
ently, that will be imperative—that the gauge of
New South Wales will have to be adopted. At
present, however, transfers have to be made both
at the southern and at the northern border. No
doubt the federation of the States will be a factor
in hastening the consummation of the time of the
unification of the railways.
All the principal lines are laid in the most sub-
stantial way, but in the inland districts, where the
traffic is light—trains, for instance, serving some
districts by running three times a week —the same
struction of new lines under the Government; but
when finished they are handed over to the Commis-
sioners as a going concern, so far as the road-bed
is concerned. The Commissioners, however, are con-J
suited in regard to the prospects of any new rail-fi
way, and decide as to the location of station build-
ing’s, etc.
One of the largest engineering works is that ol
the Hawkesbury Bridge, which has a length of 300(
fest, and the piers are sunk to a depth of as much ai
162 ft. The superstructure is of American type, am
is a handsome one, situated amid the most pleasing
surroundings, a,s will be seen by the accompanying
illustration. ;
One of the handsomest country stations is at Al-
bury, the bordtr station between New South Wales
and Victoria, and it is necessary to have commo-
dious accommodation at this place, as a great deal
of transfer business has. to be done, and on occa-
jsions such as the Melbourne Cup, holidays, etc.,
the number of pascengers changing at this point is
lai ge.
t Generally speaking, the lines have, necessitated a
good deal of engineering skill in carrying them out,
as they pass through considerable areas of rugged
country, reaching on the Western line a maximum
height of 3658 ft., while on the Northern line the
ORDINARY GOODS WAGGON.
Length of body outside 16 ft.; width outside, 8ft. 8½ ins.; height of body inside, 2 ft. ins.; carrying capacity, 10 tons; tare, 6 tons 10 cwt.
substantial road-bed and high speed is not of so
much moment; and eoon after their appointment
the Commissioners gave considerable attention to
the matter, which was met by a system being adop-
ted known as “pioneer” lines. The “pioneer"
system of lines may be described as being intended
for new extensions in purely pastoral and level
country—the characteristics of much of the inland
areas—and where the traffic would be comparatively
light. Lines of this character have been made in a
number of directions, 565 miles being open and a
further 227.) miles are now under construction,
while an additional 331 miles have been authorised.
Six miles from the Hawkesbury Bridge another
engineering work of note occurs in the longest tun-
nel in Australia, namely, the Woy Woy Tunnel,
which is just over a mile in length.
On the Western line the Great Zig-Zag is an en-
gineering feature which has obtained the commend-
ation of engineers all the world over, and attracts
yearly very many visitors to see it. It serves the
purpose of bringing the line from Clarence (3658
ft.), whbre it is at its greatest elevation, to the Lith-
gow Valley, a drop of 700 ft. within five miles.
The buildings erected are of a commercial charac-
ter, and have been designed in all cases rather
lines are laid to an altitude of 4500 ft.
A word may be said in regard to the safety ap-
pliances, which are of the most modern kind, the
lines being very largely worked on the absolute
block system. Where the traffic on single lines is
heavy either the electric staff or tablet absolute
block system is in operation.
The care exercised in the combination of excel-
lent rolling-stock, a safe permanent way, and corn-
potent management, has led to the New South
Wales lines being almost a model in regard to the
security they offer to passengers travelling, acci-
dents being happily rare.


PASSENGER BUSINESS.
. The people of New South Wales appreciate the
comfort of the railway travelling. The reasonable
rates that prevail are evidenced by the number of
passenger journeys made on the railways during the
year, the number of journeys for the year ended
30th June, 1902, being, as already mentioned, over
thirty millions. A great number of the journeys
are no doubt made purely in connection with busi-
ness and residential purposes; but a considerable
general traffic is transacted, particularly out of
Sydney, in connection with visitors to the very
many charming tourist resorts that exist within
a convenient distance of the metropolis; in fact,
few places in the world are so liberally provided as
is Sydney with charming health and picturesque
resorts.
At all holiday times special trains at cheap fares
are run, and the same arrangements apply at the
rveek-ends, a return ticket, for instance, to Mount
Victoria (Blue Mountains), 77 miles, second class,
costing only 6s. 5d., or jd. a mile, for the distance
ised, particularly during the summer months, hy
Sydney residents, seeking health or change in the
cooler climate of the hills. Fast and convenient
trains run both morning and evening, enabling
many business men to live permanently on the
mountains, travelling to and fiom Sydney morning
and evening; while those wishing to make only .1
temporary stay can yet do so and attend to their
business in Sydney by taking out a season ticket
for a limited period at the cheap rales that are
offered. For instance, a svcond class season ticket
to Katoomba, 66 miles fiom Sydney, and 3336 ft,
above sea level—one of the most central and popu-
lar places on the mountains—can be taken out for
a fortnight tor 19-. 4d., or for oti“ month for S6s. 9d.
giving an average daily rate of only Is. sd. for the
total distance of 132 miles travelled.
On the Southern line the hill country, from Hit-
tagong to Exeter particularly, is most attractive,
and although not so high as the Western highlands
—the greatest elevation being reached at Exeter,
91 miles from Sydney, and 2331 ft. above sea level—
the country is most picturesque and fertile, and
dotted with the homes of a thriving farming and
dairying population,
On the North Coast again, about 20 miles out of
Sydney, the borders of the Kuring-gai Chase is ap-
pi oached, another splendid heritage reserved for the
people, consisting of 33,000 acres. Like the
National Park on the south, it has an endless
variety of pleasing scenes and splendid water facili-
ties. It will no doubt some day be the favoured
spot for house-boats. Further north, 33 miles from
Sydney, the Hawkesbury River is reached, which is
considered one of the most picturesque streams to
be found anywhere, and a little distance beyond it
the train runs on the edge of the Brisbane Water,
a charming locality from the picturesque point of
view, while it also furnishes a splendid opportu-
nity for fishing parties, many thousands visiting its
waters during the course of the year. Gosford, at
the head of Brisbane Water, and the resorts be-
yond it, are alike attractive, and induce a large
business yearly.
RAILWAY STATION, ALBURY,
The Changing Junction on the Border of N.S.W. and Victoria.
run; and to Moss Vale (in the Southern Highlands),
7s. 2d. only is paid for a return journey of 86 miles,
or 172 miles for the total journey.
It would require a volume to describe, even in
outline, the many charming tourist resorts thus
brought within the reach of all metropolitan res’-
dents by means of the railways. The Western line
is very popular, opening up as it does the beautiful
Blue Mountains region, which offers a splendid
change of climate, combined with magnificent
scenery, and so conveniently situated as to be
reached by a railway journey of from one and a
half to three hours. The mountain range, part of
the Great Dividing Range running from north (0
south of Australia, is met immediately after passing
Emu Plains Station, 36 miles from Sydney, which
has an elevation of only 89 ft. above sea level. When
the next station, Glenbrook, is reached, however, an
elevation of 600 ft. has been attained in the inter-
vening distance of only four miles. Thence the
line rapidly and continuously ascends, until ii
reaches its greatest elevation at Clarence, 88 miles
from Sydney, which stands 3658 ft. above sea level.
The intervening distance of 48 miles between
Glenbrook and Clarence is studded with a n,umber
of mountain"townships, which are largely patron-
they are in some senses more attractive by reason
of the better roads that are found in their vicinity
and the richer and more fertile country about them.
The waterfalls—the Belmore and Fitzroy especially
also carry larger bodies of water than pass over
the western falls, and are held to have greater
charms. They are, however, more distant from the
i ailway stations, and consequently not so approach-
able to the great bulk of the tourists. Some of the
prettiest drives in the country are to be found in ,
cron-ing from the southern hills to the South
Coast. The minimum distance is about 30 miles,
and the views from the cliffs overlooking the sea,
at a height of about 2000 ft., are unequalled.
The most popular resorts, however, are found in
the close vicinity of Sydney, on the South Coast and
North Coast lines. The South Coast, for instance,
passes over the George's River at Como, 12 miles
from Sydney, and the river is a very favoured re-
sort for picnics; while four miles further on the
line enters the National Park of the State, an im-
mense national reserve of 36,000 acres, having widely
diversified scenery and splendid waterside re-
treats. Further southward again the line runs
along the coast, bay succeeding bay in pleasing
variety on the seaward side, while to the westward
STAFF.
As might be gatheied by the references to the
business done, a laige staff is necessaiy to carry on
operations, and according to the last report of the
Commissioners, the number of hands engaged on the
railways was 14,558, and on the tramways 4016, a
total of 18,574.
The men enjoy excellent pay and many privi-
leges, the New South Wales railway service being
considered to be one of the most favoured of any
railways in regard to its conditions of employment,
Seveial excellent organisations exist amongst the
staff, one—an Ambulance Corps—which provides
opportunity for the men, as far as possible, being
instructed in ambulance work, so as to be able to
render first aid in case of accident, and their skill
and knowledge has on many occasions proved of
marked benefit, particularly where, as sometimes
occurs, the persons injured have been a long way
from any town where skilled medical assistance was
obtainable. A Railway Institute is also in exist-
cnee in Sydney, where the men may meet together
to hear lecturer or for social enjoyment, and have
the benefit of a very excellent library. Classes on
different railway subjects are also in existence.


1888.
1902.
Miles open for traffic
38V
104
Capital (construction
and equipment
.£877,214
.£2,829,363
Revenue
. .£236,519
.£631,757
Interest on capital
£1 19 7 p.e.
.£3 5 7 p.c
Number of passengers
carried
. 108,135,111
TRAMWAYS.
These are also controlled by the Railway Com-
missioners, and form a very substantial addition to
the assets of the State. Summarised briefly, the
financial returns for the year ended 30th June,
1902, were as under;—
steel, and thosu in the outlying districts ironbark.
The system is worked from a central power sta-
tion, the three chimneys of which, rising to a
height of 227 feet, are prominent features in that
part of the city. The station is conveniently situ-
ated in a central position for serving the whole of
the system, while being close to the waters of the
harbour, so that ample supplies of water for con-
densing purposes are available. It may be men-
tioned that the greatest distance to which power
has to be transmitted from the station is at pre-
sen about seven miles. The building is of brick
on stone foundations, consisting of three storeys,
with a length of 318 feet and a breadth of 186 feet,
covering a ground space of 59,148 square feet. At
present 32 Babcock and Wilcox boilers are installed,
arranged in two tiers, each boiler being rated at 250
veyed by specially insulated cables, and there
reduced and passed out on to the lines at the ordi-
nary working pressure. It may be added that the
sub-stations are also provided with storage bat-
teries, which can be charged during those portions
of the day when the traffic is light, to be utilised
later at times of pressure.
In spite of the great power available from the
present installation, additional machinery is neces-
sary in order to provide for the large growth of
traffic, and to supply power for the new extensions
that have been agitated for owing to the popularity
of the system, and tenders were recently invited for
the supply and erection of an additional engine and
generator of 1500 k.w. capacity.
In order to cope with the very heavy traffic, and
particularly on holiday occasions, it can be quite
HAWKESBURY RIVER BRIDGE,
One of the Greatest Engineering Feats in N.S.W.
The Sydney tramways have been somewhat unique
in regard to different motive powers. Horse tram-
ways were first introduced, followed by steam tram-
ways, then the cable, and finally the electric; but
the success of the latter soon demonstrated its su-
periority over other systems, and the steam lines
in the city have practically all been converted to
electrical working, and as additional power is pro-
vided at the central power station in Sydney, the
cable tramway will have to give way to its more
active rival.
The Sydney tramways are worked on a modern
electric system, with one or two exceptions where
steam or cable traction is in use, and the installa-
tion is considered to be equal to that found in thb
best cities abroad. The overhead wire system is
used exclusively, side pole, centre pole, and span
construction being all used on various portions of
the track, the poles in the main streets bring of
h.p., and the furnaces being fed by automatic chain
grate stokers. Small coal is used as ftf.-l, and the
labour-saving arrangements are such that from the
time that the coal arrives at the power house in
the railway trucks until the ashes are taken away
in another, eveiything has been done by automatic
machinery,
The engine-room is 275 feet long by 99 feet wide,
and 30 feet high. In it are four cra-s-compound
condensing horizontal engines, by the E. P. Allis
Co., rated at 1250 h.p. each, and also three cross-
compound condensing engines of the vertical type.
by the Allis-Chalmers Co., each rated at 2850 h.p.
so that the total rated h.p. is 13,550, though in
practice this is not worked up to, one of each class
of engine being always kept in reserve as a stand-by.
In addition to the central power-station there are
five sub-stations, situated at different parts of the
system to which the high-tension current is con-
understood that a very considerable rolling-stock
is necessary, and in this connection it may be
stated that nearly 500 electric cars are in operation.
These are of various types, those first supplied on
the George-street line being of the closed in class;
but for general purposes the bogie combination car,
having an enclosed portion in the centre, with open
seats at either end, has been found very serviceable
and popular. Some of the latest cars introduced
are modelled somewhat on the principle of the fami-
liar st'eam cars, with separate compartments and
iside doors.
To house this laige number of cars and provide
for proper cleaning and overhaul, it has been found
necessary to erect seven large car sheds at con-
venient parts of the system. These are provided
with all the necessary appliances for cleaning the
cars, as well as with accommodation for the drivers
and cleaning staff,


TEAMWAY TAKES. ’
In regard to tramway fares, the lines have been
divided into convenient p.nny sections, (he fare
over the whole or any part of each being one penny,
a system which is much appreciated by the travel-
G} miles; and, for convenience sake, a through
passenger may pay the through fare in one amount
wh’-.n entering the car. Each passenger on paying
his fare is handed a small paper ticket by the eon-
doctor, the colour of which varies with the different
sections. This system of cheap penny sections has
66,244,334; while, as shown in the statistics for last
year, the number had increased to 108,135,111, and
this year will again show a very large increase,
It may be added that tramways exist in three
cities of the State, namely, 101 miles in the capital,
15 miles in Newcastle., and six miles in Broken Hill,
COMBINATION TRAM CAR.
Length over headstocks, 37 ft. 6 ins,; length over saloon holy, 12 ft, 1¼ ins.; width, 7 ft. ins.; height, from floor to ceiling in saloon, 7 ft. ins.; tare, including motor equipment, 10 tons
10 cwt.; seating capacity, 48 passengers. The car is arranged with a centre saloon and open compartments, with bulkheads at each end. The seats between the bulkheads
and saloon are reversible. The saloon seats are placed lorgitudinally. Sliding doors are provided at each end of the saloon, and in the bulkheads.
ling public. As an illustration of the fares in
operation, the case of Dulwich Hill may be men-
tioned. This is one of the western suburban lines,
and carries one of the heaviest traffics of the
system. The first section extends from the Circular
Quay, Sydney, to the Railway Station, a distance of
led, particularly in thl city sections, to a very
great development of traffic, especially in what is
known as “pick-up” business, the low fares indue-
ing persons to take a tram in preference to walk-
ing, even for a very short journey.
Tha development of the tramway traffic sines the
the two latter systems being entirely worked by
steam motons.
Generally, it may be said that both the railways
and tramways are looked upon as splendid and
substantial assets belonging to the State, and their
system of working by a non-political board is re-
ROSE BAY,
A Favourite Harbour Resort, skirted by the South Head Tramway Line.
1 mile 71 chains; the second section extends from
the Railway Station to Enmore, 2 miles 77 chains;
and the third from Enmore to the terminus at Dul-
wieh Hill, 1 mile 54 chains. The fare over the
whole or any portion of either of these sections is
one penny, or 3d. for the through journey of over
introduction of the electric system, and the adop-
tion of the popular penny sections, has be.-n quite
remarkable. For instance, the number of passen-
ger journeys made during the year ended 30th June,
1899, during which the -George-strcet and Harris-
street line had been in operation six months, was
garded with general favour. The Commissioners
themselves are deservedly popular for the intelli-
gent and public--pirit.d way in which they have
managed the properties, and the fair way in which
they have dealt with all questions affecting the
staff.


Miscellaneous.


Architecture and Building.
The true development of a country is most
surely evidenced by the prosperity of its
people, and the prosperity of the inhabitants
is in its turn reflected in the style and char-
acter of the buildings, whether these be for
public or private use. In this respect, Syd-
ney, the metropolis of the Mother State in
the Australian Commonwealth, can show a
record that can be approached by few only
of the great cities of the world.
It does not require much effort for anyone
to throw his memory back in retrospective
vision over the past twenty years, and to
take in some of the changes which have been
effected during that period in the city proper
as well as in the various suburbs that cluster
around the main centre, imparting to it both
proportion and importance. A mental bird’s-
eye view of the vast improvements which have
taken place in the structural arrangements of
the homes of the people, as well as in their
business premises, must carry the conviction
that wonderful progress has been made in
every direction. The handsome edifices
adorning the chief thoroughfares, containing
suites of luxurious offices replete, with the
most modern arrangements for sanitation
and convenience, as well as the enormous
warehouses and spacious shops, all fitted with
up-to-date appliances, and controlled by the
latest and most approved methods to ensure
the highest results in regard to both comfort
and efficiency, indicate most unmistakably
the march of progress in this part of the
globe. A glance, too, at the well-appointed
houses and cottages, the homes of the toilers,
which line the suburban streets for miles,
also the splendid villas and palatial mansions
which form the residences of the more patri-
cian class, show that improvement has been
general all along the line. In the erection
of all the Government and municipal build-
ings, the same ratio of advancement has been
maintained, while throughout the numerous
country towns a similar development is to be
noted. The construction of the railways, as
well as scores of massive steel and iron
bridges, together with the gigantic schemes
of harbour and river improvement all testify
to the rapid expansion that has consistently
been going on in this State.
Towards this concrete foim of national ad-
vancement no section of the community has
contributed so much as that included under
the generic term of “ The Builders,” which
may, with every propriety, be held to em-
brace both the architects and those identified
with the cognate branches of the building
trades. That the capacity of those engaged
in these different departments of designing
and constructing is in no way inferior to that
of their confreres, in other parts, is plainly
attested by the magnitude, stability, and per-
manence of the work bearing their imprima-
tur in the cities as well as the towns of the
State.
ARCHITECTURE.
In dealing with architecture in New South
Wales, there is much of a highly complimen-
tary nature that can be said, but there also
is room for a good deal to be stated in depre-
ciation, as owing to the want of rigid legal
enactments to compel a proper recognition of
the canons of the art amongst those who
practice it, there has unfortunately been a
disposition evinced in some quarters to make
mere utility the dominating principle. This
appreciation of the sordid and distorted, how-
ever, is not confined to this country alone,
where the conditions inseparable from early
settlement, and pioneering were highly fav-
ourable to its development. Every year
gives evidence that the old order is rapidly
passing away, giving place to a newer and
better conception of architectural embodi-
ment. A glance backward to the middle of
the last century, and a comparison of the
architecture of that period, with the present
reveals an amazing process of evolution. At
that time there were indeed few buildings
that did not recall the regime of Governor
Macquarie, who certainly exhibited no talent
fer design or structural beauty, but who, nev-
ertheless, lavishly impressed his strong per-
sonality on the young Colony through the
medium of bricks and mortar. Numerous
specimens of his original and efficient style
are still extant in Sydney and the older
country towns. The old immigration bar-
racks now used as the Equity Court, facing
Queen’s Square, The Supreme Court House,
the Royal Mint, and Parliament Buildings
in Macquarie Street, and the Ordnance Stores
at Circular Quay, are links that bind the past
with the present. His style of ecclesiastical
architecture was austerity itself, and the best
example of this is to be seen in St. James’s
Church the top of King Street, but at
Parramatta, Windsor, Richmond, Liver-
pool and Port Macquarie the plain
brick buildings, with semi-circular win-
dows, and squat towers, speak elo-
quently of a period that is past. As
all the Government and public buildings
were designed on severe and economic lines,
it naturally followed that nearly all the ware-
houses, shops and private houses were plan-
ned on the same principle. When the Col-
ony began to number among its inhabitants
men of wealth and taste, a change began to
manifest itself in colonial architecture and
amongst the first evidences of a renaissance
was the erection of the present Government
House, a massive stone pile, built in the Tu-
dor style. The great expansion which fol-
lowed the discovery of gold in the fifties gave
a great impetus to architectural aspirations
and development. The Exchange, at the
corner of Pitt and Bridge Streets, a noble ex-
ample of the Corinthian order, led the way,
and was followed by many fine edifices of
classic design. During the past twenty years
numerous styles, whose names are legion, have
been introduced, and the streets of to-day are
aligned with massive and ornate conceptions
in stone and brick that exhibit in enduring
form all that is unique and imposing in arch-
itectural ideals. Nature has done her best
to assist the architects by providing them
with an abundance of material in which to
embody and preserve tlieir best sentiments,
The warm bright, richly-grained Sydney
freestone lends itself readily to elaborate and
effective treatment, while the sombre-hued
trachyte from Bowral, which is now being
used in some of the largest and handsomest
buildings in the City, makes a striking con-
trast against .the sandstone, red brick or stuc-
co facades which grace the various thorough-
fares. It was most unfortunate that, when
Sydney was founded on the banks of the
Tank Stream, that the town was allowed to
grow up before the site was surveyed and the
streets aligned. The results of this egregious
mistake are only too apparent to-day in the
narrowness and irregularity of most of the
principal streets. This contraction in the
width of the main avenues of the City, which
contain the finest specimens of architectural
skill, detracts greatly from the beauty and
style of the buildings, from the spectator’s
point of view, as the space is too limited to
enable the eye to take in or adequately dis-
cern much of the fine work or embellishments
of the design. The folly of the past has,
however, been recognised by the Govern-
ments of later times, and, as occasion has
arisen, advantage has been taken to make re-
sumptions so as to widen some of the streets,
A notable instance of this happened some
years ago, when a fire destroyed a block of
warehouses and offices running from Pitt to
Castlereagh Streets. The site devastated by
the fire was resumed, along with some land
between Pitt and George Streets, adjacent to
to the General Post Office, and the result was
the formation of Martin Place and Moore
Street, a magnificent open square right in
the centre of Sydney, such as few other cities
can boast. Recently the Government re-
NORTH SYDNEY SUSPENSION BRIDGE.


sumed a considerable area at Miller’s Point,
one of the oldest and most densely settled por-
tions of the metropolis, the streets being nar-
row and tortuous. In course of time, as the
old buildings are demolished, the thorough-
fares will be widened and straightened, and
buildings more in accord with modern ideas
erected. There, however, yet remains much
to be done in the direction of improving the
principal streets, but, owing to the enormous
SUSPENSION BRIDGE,
On the Road between Nowra and Moss Vale.
cost which such work necessarily entails, pro-
gress must be slow and indefinite. Never-
theless, the trend of public opinion in regard
to these matters is in the right direction, and
time will doubtless witness the removal of
many of the “ kinks” that at present distort
and disfigure the integrity of the City high-
ways.
The past decade has seen a vast improve-
ment in the architecture of both the city
and suburbs. Concurrently with innova-
tions of style and external embellishment
there has been a very marked change for the
better in regard to internal decoration and
arrangement, and most important of all with
respect to lighting, ventilation and sanita-
tion. Formerly the ability of the architect
was mainly expended on the exterior of the
edifice, now it is the interior that makes the
greatest demand upon his professional skill
and resourcefulness. Although we have not
yet developed a fad for “ skyscrapers,” still
there are a very considerable number of
buildings in and around Sydney which range
from four to seven stories, and, as these all
have to be provided with a sufficiency of
light and air, as well as easy and rapid ac-
cess and egress by means of lifts, etc., it fol-
lows that the designer has often to exercise
both originality and ingenuity in elaborating
his plans. The fact that Sydney possesses an
excellent water supply, which can be utilised
for hydraulic power and other purposes, also
a splendid water carriage sewerage system
that allows of the most up-to-date methods of
sanitation, materially assists the architect in
plotting out his plans.
THE BUILDING TRADES.
The various trade branches of the building
industry, as distinguished from the profes-
sional or architectural, are very strongly re-
presented in Sydney. Time was not so very
long ago when any job outside the ordinary
had either to be foregone or given to some
outsider, owing to the inadequacy of the local
contractors’ plant to cope with it.~ Now, all
this is changed entirely, and there is no work
here or elsewhere which a New South Wales
builder or contractor would hesitate to un-
dertake. The technicalities of construction in
its different forms are thoroughly understood
here, and there are many firms who, in addi-
tion to employing a staff of trained experts,
and consultants also possess a small army of
skilled workmen, and these have the advan-
tage of the most improved types of machines,
and other mechanical appliances, which go to
make up a modern contractors’ equipment.
The system which now obtains in the erec-
tion of the mammoth buildings that rise up-
on valuable City sites necessitates the em-
ployment of heavy and costly appliances, and
it speaks volumes for the intrepidity and en-
terprise of the local contractors in a young
country where huge jobs are not so frequent
or so regular as in older and more settled
places, that they have seen their way to lay
out a large amount of capital on plant, etc.,
at so great a risk. A casual look around the
City and its environs must carry home the
conviction that here we have men capable of
performing in the most complete manner ev-
ery class of work that the architect or drafts-
man can devise. The colossal piles in free-
stone, brick, and stucco, or the three in com-
bination, which greets the eye at every turn
all bear testimony to the skill and capabili-
ties of the men who erected them. The chief
Secretary’s Office, the Public Works Office,
the Lands Office, the Treasury, the General
Post Office, the Sydney University and affili-
ated colleges, the Sydney and Prince Alfred
Hospitals, the Sydney Town Hall Buildings,
the recently erected Sydney Markets and the
Sydney Art Gallery, all of which comprise
huge aggregations of masonry, and other
classes of trade work, stand out as a few—a
very few—of the examples of the high char-
acter of the work the local firms are capable
of performing. It has been demonstrated
time and again during the past few years
that those engaged in very department of the
building trades in New South Wales can hold
their own with those similarly engaged in
any part of the world. The magnitude and
completeness of the work accomplished in the
past stands out boldly in evidence, along
every street, inviting open comparison with
the work of older countries. No one possess-
ing a vestige of consistency and fairness
would be rash enough to declare, after exam-
ing the buildings, that the majority of the
Public Offices, the Banks and Insurance
buildings, the Warehouses and Mercan-
tile edifices of the Metropolis, did not
make a favourable and creditable com-
parison with similar structures in the
principal cities abroad. The evidence
of those best qualified to express an opinion
on a matter of such importance shows that
what has already been done here in the way
of building construction has not been sur-
passed anywhere, and, judging from the ex-
periences of the past, it is tolerably safe to
predict that the Builders and Contractors of
New South Wales will never be content to
Type of Vestibule Sleeping Car in use on N.S.W. Railways.
Seating capacity 58 passengers, and sleeping accommodation for 28 passengers.
lag behind their confreres elsewhere, but will
always be in the forefront, and still pressing
further forward.


Messrs. Rowe & Spain.
ARCHITECTS.
Somebody with a pretty penchant for phrasing
has not inaptly described Architecture in relation
to its material embodiment as “ Petrified Music”
in happy allusion to the graceful outlines, and sym-
metrical proportions which appeal to the eye from
an architect’s design, in much the same way as the
rythmical cadences of the musician excite the har-
monious vibrations that leave their tuneful impres-
sions on the ear. As in music, so in architecture,
there is a power to arouse the senses to a contem-
plation of the beautiful, but while the former is
bounded by limits of an abstract character, the
latter engenders a wider and more concrete recog-
ST. CLEMENT’S CHURCH, MARRICKVILLE.
nition by reason of its increased general scope and
greater practical utility.
In Australia generally, and in Sydney particu-
larly, the instincts and creative faculties of archi-
tects have had a wide range, and it is not too much
to say that on the whole a wise discretion has been
in the main observed.
The width and alignment of the streets of Syd-
ney have not always been such as to afford oppor-
tunities to display an elaborate architectural design
to the best advantage, but Nature herself appears
to have forseen the mistakes which the early settlers
made in planning the city ,and by way of compen-
sating for their shortsightedness, deposited illimit-
able supplies of splendid building material right
under the feet of those who in after years were to
become the builders of a great city.
The style of architecture which adorns the chief
thoroughfares indicates that Sydney has been for-
tunate in the selection of the men who designed
most of the principal buildings, and amongst the
firms which have taken a prominent part in this
work is that of Messrs. Eowe and Spain, whose office
is located in that stately freestone pile known as
Vickery’s Chambers, in Pitt Street.
The firm dates back to the year 1858, when Mr.
Thomas Eowe laid its foundations deep and strong
in public confidence, and since then, although it has
undergone modification, yet, in colloquial parlance.
it has never “ looted back,” but gone on from one
success to another.
The founder of the firm was a man who was a
thorough master of his profession, and during his
business career designed many important works in
the State. He it was who furnished the original
designs for the Sydney Hospital, that were of a
much more imposing character than the modified
plans which were drawn up at the instigation of the
Government some years afterwards, which were
based on the specifications of Mr. Eowe.
When the late Sir Henry Parkes, as Premier of
New South Wales, called for designs for a State
House to be erected in the Centennial Park, Mr.
Rowe submitted a series of plans of a very elaborate
description, which were specially recommended by
Mr. Alex. Oliver, who was called in as adjudicator
on the merits of the designs submitted.
In 1892, Mr. Alfred Spain, in company with Mr.
W. Wright Campbell, M.S.A., was admitted into
partnership by Mr. Eowe, the firm then consisting
of Messrs. Rowe, Campbell, and Spain. Mr. Camp-
bell died in 1891, and since Colonel Rowe’s death
about four years ago, Mr. Spain has been the sole
proprietor of the business.
Amongst some of the important works carried out
under Mr. Spain’s supervision might be mentioned
the extensive alterations and the remodelling of the
interior of the Hon. E. Vickery’s handsome block
of buildings in Pitt Street. This was a work which
entailed no small degree of professional skill, and
some idea of its magnitude may be gathered from
the fact that it involved the expenditure of many
thousands of pounds. The whole interior of these
immense buildings has undergone so complete a
transformation that anyone to-day visiting the
handsome suites of commodious offices on the dif-
ferent floors, reached by luxurious lifts, or gained
by beautifully panelled marble staircases, would
fail to recognise the huge warehouses which existed
there some years ago.
St. Clement’s Church at Marrickville, a very fine
edifice in the Gothic style of Architecture, stands as
another eloquent testimony to Mr. Spain’s artistic
ability. Both in its external design and its internal
arrangement it ranks as one of the best specimens
of ecclesiastical architecture to be found in the
State.
The very ornate structure forming the Padding-
ton Fire Brigade Station in Oxford Street is another
evidence of Mr. Spain’s versatile conception. Ex-
ternally it exhibits a chaste and attractive appear-
ance, forming a distinctive landmark in that part
of the metropolis. Internally it has been planned
on a scale which will compare favourably with the
best structures of its kind in any part of the world.
Mr. Spain, in his capacity of official architect to
the Fire Brigade Board, has designed several other
of the suburban Fire Stations, all of which reflect
the highest credit upon his skill.
Amongst the mercantile houses of the city and
suburbs Mr. Spain’s characteristic style is fre-
quently noticed, two of the most conspicuous
examples being Messrs. Prescott’s large premises in
Sussex Street, and the handsome block in King
Street, where the Goold Bicycle Company and other
firms are located.
The additions to the Trades Hall in Goulburn
Street are being carried out under his supervision,
also the erection of the new pile swimming baths
at Rushcutters Bay. The new Tramway Hotel, at
the corner of Campbell and Elizabeth Streets, Hay-
market, is being built from his designs, and when
completed will form a welcome feature to that part
of the city, which, owing to its proximity to the
new Central Railway Station, must in the very near
future undergo radical alteration and improvement.
During the Commonwealth celebrations in Syd-
ney, Mr. Spain was commissioned to design and
erect an arch to symbolise the fecundity of New
South Wales as a wheat producing country, and
when finished it was greatly admired by all who
saw its ample dimensions stretching across Bridge
Street, in the vicinity of the late T. Mort’s Statue
in Macquarie Place.
Although the firm’s name is closely identified with
some of the principal buildings in the city, Mr.
Spain does not by any means neglect that part of
his profession which may be said to embrace the
domestic, as he is responsible for many of the ele-
gant villas which are to be found in the residential
sections.
Hrcbitects, JBuilbers anb Contractors.
Historical arrd Biographical Sketches.
ARCHITECTS.


MR. A. SPAIN.
Mr. Alfred Spain, J.P., F.1.A., the principal in
the firm of Messrs. Rowe and Spain, was the partner
of the late Colonel Rowe, F.R.1.8.A., who for many
years occupied a very prominent position in Syd-
ney, both in his professional capacity and as a citi-
zen. For a long period the late Colonel Rowe was
commanding officer of the Corps of Engineers, a
military organisation which, since its formation,
has played an important part in local defence mat-
ters, owing mainly to the personality of its late
chief.
When the Parkes Government created the present
Board of Water Supply and Sewerage, Lieutenant-
Colonel Rowe was offered and accepted the office of
President, a position he was fully qualified to fill.
Here his great powers of organisation and efficient
administration found an ample field for exercise.
Up till the time of his death in 1899 he remained at
the head of the Water and Sewerage Board, and it
was owing to his wise discretion and control that
the work of the Department was begun on a sound
basis.
Mr. Spain was indeed fortunate in being asso-
ciated in business with a gentleman of such high
professional attainments as the late Colonel Rowe,
and so much did the latter value the sterling ability
of Mr. Spain that subsequent to his acceptance of
the position of President of the Water and Sewer-
age Board, he in 1892 admitted Mr. Spain, in con-
junction with Mr. Campbell, M.S.A., as partners in
the business. From that time forward the prin-
cipal work of the firm was undertaken by the two
junior partners, who applied themselves with even
greater assiduity to the active management of the
large and increasing business of the concern in
which they were partners. On the demise of both
Mr. Campbell and Lieutenant-Colonel Rowe, the
onerous duties of the large business, necessitating'
professional and commercial acumen of a high
standard, devolved entirely upon the shoulders of
Mr. Spain, and he has since continued to control
the destinies of the firm with conspicuous ability.
Mr. Spain has been identified with the erection of
some of the most important buildings and architec-
tural work in the city, and is very popular among
the architects of Sydney for the keen interest he
has always evinced in the welfare of the profession.
Throughout his career he has constantly striven
to keep in touch with the most modern developments
in his profession, and all his energies have been
bent towards achieving a high reputation and in
consistently living up to it.
MR. A SPAIN.
j n proof of the foregoing it need only be men-
tioned that Mr. Spain is the holder of a medal
awarded at South Kensington, England, some years
af;o f or sucoess i n Art, and this tangible testimony
( 0 ],j s proficiency from the leading School of Design
in Britain is one of which the recipient might well
be proud. For some years past Mr. Spain has been
closely identified with the defence forces of the
State, and at the present time holds the rank of
Captain, and is the acting Commanding Officer of
the Field Company of New South Wales Engineers,
a post he won by merit, and in which he has se-
cured the unanimous goodwill of both officers and
men serving under him.
His popularity amongst all ranks in the defence
department is further shown by his election as a
member of the Council of the United Service Insti-
tute of New South Wales.
In addition to the call made upon his leisure time
by his connection with the military forces, Mr.
Spain also devotes his counsel and energies to the
furtherance of the interests of other agencies, the
influences of which are not without very consider-
able advantage to the citizens of Sydney and the
State generally.
For many years Mr. Spain has been identified
with the various aquatic bodies in Sydney, and is
well known as an enthusiastic yachtsman. For two
years past, he has been president of the Amateur
Fishermen’s Association of New South Wales, and
during his term of office he has done much to im-
prove the status of the Association, enlarging its
sphere of usefulness as a recreative agency, and as
a body actuated by a desire to protect and foster the
fishing industry of the State.
Mr. Spain’s long and active connection with the
Association has given him special facilities for
making himself thoroughly acquainted with the
Fisheries of New South Wales, and the deep interest
he has always manifested in fostering the develop-
ment of what should be a very important industry
in this State has been recently recognised by the
Government appointing him to a seat on the
Fisheries Commission, where the special knowledge
and practical instincts which he can bring to bear
upon dealing with the work will doubtless prove of
great value, and be adequately appreciated by his
brother commissioners. Mr. Spain was born at Neu-
tral Bay, North Sydney, and has always cherished
such a love for the picturesque suburb which claims
him as a son that he has never deserted it.
FIRE BRIGADE STATION, PADDINGTON


Messrs. Loveridge & Hudson.
BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS.
The art of the Builder, like all other inventions
and contrivances of a utilitarian character, has
during recent years undergone many striking
changes which have made for the welfare, comfort
and enjoyment of the people in all civilised coun-
tries. To form some idea of the advances that have
been effected in the building art, one need not carry
his mind back through the vista of centuries, as a
comparisou of the style of buildings, and the
methods of their construction no more than fifty
years ago, with the character of the work and the
system upon which it is carried on at the present
time will be ample to convince even the most scepti-
cal that giant strides have been made in the direc-
tion indicated.
It does not require any great stretch of memory
on the part of the present generation of Australians
to recall the days when what was known as the
“Wattle and Daub” style of building was very
in evidence. Since the discovery of gold in Aus-
tralia half a century ago every succeeding decade
has witnessed a marked improvement in the charac-
ter of the buildings erected in all the big cities and
in the numerous towns scattered throughout the
various States now forming the Commonwealth of
Australia.
The educational and commercial development of
the community has from time to time demanded
larger, better, and more sanitarily arranged accom-
modation for the housing of the population, and
for the proper carrying on of the multiple concerns
of daily life. To meet this imperative demand, the
resourcefulness of those engaged in the building
trade, has adequately responded, the result being
that the principal buildings in the chief cities of
Australia will amply bear comparison with those
in any part of the world to-day. In hardly any
other avocation of life is real solid merit so in-
dispensiblo as in’ the building trade, the members
of which are ofttimes entrusted with work which
not only has. to defy the corroding influences of
time, but has also to brave the criticism of both
present and future generations.
It is clearly apparent that to occupy a leading
position amongst those who are responsible for the
erection of those structures which form the units of
every city and town, calls for the exercise of quali-
ties of a sterling character. Amongst those whose
record of work in the past justly entitles them to
the hall mark of merit is the firm of Messrs. Love-
ridge and Hudson, Builders and Contractors, of
Sydney.
The present firm came into existence about
twenty years ago, and during the intervening period
it has occupied a commanding position in the State.
Ever since its inception the firm has secured con-
tracts for the erection of a great number of import-
ant buildings which adorn the mother City. The
first building of large dimensions taken in hand was
the Custom House, facing Circular Quay, in 1883—
about a year after they commenced business. This
structure, which is one of the best known in the
metropolis, is built almost entirely of stone, and
presents a very massive, and at the same time
ornate appearance. As an evidence of the magni-
tude of the undertaking, it need only be stated that
the cost of the masonry alone was over .£40,000.
On the completion of this contract the erection of
the Commercial Bank of Australia Building in Pitt
Street, was commenced. They were also the con-
tractors for the mason work in the fine building in
which is housed the United Insurance Company in
George Street.
In the early nineties, they undertook the
heavy stone work of that magnificent pile which
forms one of the most notable monuments of the
builders’ art to be found in Australia, and which
was erected fdr the Equitable Life Assurance of
the United States. Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson’s
contract in connection with this building totalled
upwards of ,£60,000, and the substantial character
of the huge edifice, which is composed of Trachyte,
one of the hardest and most enduring kinds of stone,
well accords with the motto of its owners “ Not for
a day, but for all time.”
Another evidence of the firm’s capacity for “big
jobs” is evidenced in the splendid workmanship of
the tower which forms such a symmetrical adorn-
SCAFFOLDING, EQUITABLE BUILDING.
ment to St. Mary’s Roman Catholic Cathedral, Syd-
ney. The South Wing of the Sydney Art Gallery,
a massive structure in freestone, is another stand-
ing testimony to the excellence of the work per ■
formed by this able firm.
The htige granite columns which support the
Arcade running along the whole frontage of the
General Post Office in Martin Place were turned and
polished at the firm’s workshops, which are replete
with the most powerful and modern machines for
cutting, polishing, and otherwise dealing with huge
blocks of Granite, Trachyte, and other stone of
great hardness.
At the present time the firm is engaged in the
erection of a huge palatial edifice for the Bank of
Australasia, at the corner of George Street and
Martin Place. Like the Equitable Society’s build-
ing adjoining, these premises are built mainly of
Bowral Trachyte, a stone which, although very dif-
ficult to work, nevertheless lends itself readily to
bold and effective treatment, where the dimensions
of the building are sufficient to warrant the term
“ imposing."
These two immense aggregations of substantial
masonry, “ The Equitable" and the “ Bank of Aus-
tralasia” buildings, standing adjacent to one an-
other at a most advantageous point right in the
heart of Sydney, present an area of constructive
outline which, for symmetry, boldness, and strength
is probably unequalled in any city in the world.
Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson recently undertook
an extension to Mort’s Dock at Balmain. This
proved to be a work that required great care and
skill to accomplish, as there was an enormous
amount of excavating to be done, and a deal of solid
masonry to bo put in. The contract ran into nearly
seven thousand pounds, and when completed the
Mort’s Dock Company expressed high appreciation
of the manner in which it had been carried out.
The constructive capacity of the firm entitles it
to rank amongst the “first flight’';of contractors
and builders, as its scope of operations embraces
structural work of all kinds.
In addition to the large operations previously
enumerated, Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson built
the fine suspension bridge over the Kangaroo River,
Kangaroo Valley, on the road between Moss Vale
and Nowra, at a cost of over nine thousand pounds.
This was a piece of work which necessitated the em-
ployment of special qualifications, and demanded
careful supervision on the part of the contractors,
who, when they eventually handed over the com-
pleted structure to the Public Works Department of
the State, were the recipients of the highest en-
coniums from the officials charged with the adminis-
tration of the department.
From the foregoing it will be patent that the
firm’s business is a very large one, requiring the
employment of a great number of skilled artisans
and competent workmen. To enable them to suc-
cessfully carry out their huge operations for the
Government and the leading commercial and finan-
cial institutions, the possession of a thoroughly com-
plete and modern plant, replete with every known
labour and time-saving device, is a sine qua non.
At Bowral, about eighty miles from Sydney, on
the Great Southern Railway, the firm have large
quarries, situated on au abrupt spur of the
Southern Range, and known as “ The Gib.” Here
the celebrated Trachyte stone, which largely used
by the firm for its heavy work, and which is ack-
nowledged to be superior to sandstone in resisting
the erosive forces of Nature, is excavated in enor-
mous quantities.
Like all who plan out an original course for them-
selves, Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson’s adoption of
trachyte for building purposes aroused some hos-
tility in certain quarters, and attempts were made
to show that this class of stone was defective for the
purposes named. Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson
being practical men fully conversant with the art
of building in all its phases, were able to satisfac-
torily prove that their conclusions were correct,
and that Bowral Trachyte was a first-class building
stone, particularly in cases where strength and
durability were essential requirements.
As an adjunct to their business, about nine years
ago the firm established a steam cutting and polish-
ing works, where the huge blocks of stone are sawn
into specified dimension, and when required are
turned and polished to an astonishing degree of
architects, Builders anb Contractors.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.-Continued.
BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS.


fineness and lustre. The workshops are equipped
with machinery of die most approved pattern,
which enables the work to be executed with a rapi-
dity that, to the inexperienced, is both interesting
and surprising.
A visit to any one of the “Sky Scrapers’ ’in course
of erection by Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson is suf-
ficient to show that all the old methods of building
have been swept away, and their place taken by a
newer, more economical, and less dangerous system.
The old style of building from the outside by means
of tiers of scaffolding, up which the hodmen wearily
clambered with their hods on their shoulders, has
been superseded by the “ Gantry System,” by which
the work is mainly done from inside, the materials,
whether of brick or stone, being hoisted by means
of powerful steam cranes, which can be manipu-
lated so as to deposit their loads wherever required
within the range of the building area.
Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson’s plant includes
four very powerful steam cranes, which are always
worked by careful and experienced men, who in
turn are well remunerated for their services, as the
firm considerately recognise that the position of a
crane driver is one of heavy responsibility. In addi-
tion to the hoisting cranes, the firm possess several
MR. T. LOVERIDGE.
portable engines, which supply the necessary motive
power at their various works. Amongst their stock
in trade are to be found rock drills, mechanical ap-
paratus of different kinds, and the hundred and one
implements which are in daily use amongst con-
tractors in a large way.
A principle which has always had recognition by
the Messrs. Loveridge and Hudson, and one which
doubtless has been a considerable factor in estab-
lishing their reputation, is that of always locating
the head office contiguous to the “ job” they are en-
gaged on, so that when they have large buildings
in course of construction each individual partner
is enabled to take an active and consistent part in
the supervision of the particular branch of the
work allocated to his charge.
In dealing with an enterprise of such gigantic
proportions as the foregoing, it would be ungener-
ous not to include some reference to the men who
have succeeded in creating and maintaining a repu-
tation that any body of partners might well be
proud of.
MR. T. LOVERIDGE.
Mr. T. Loveridge, the senior partner in the firm,
is a native of Sydney, where he was born in the
year 1858, and consequently is now in the prime of
his manhood and usefulness.
His father, Mr. Aron Loveridge, was one of the
oldest and best known of the contractors in New
South Wales during a period which might well be
described as the renaissance of building in Aus-
tralia, and as such he has the distinction of having
a long list of some of the most important works
erected during the sixties and seventies of the last
century to his credit. He it was who
built for the Australian Museum, Sydney, its
present elegant habitation. He also erected
the Great Hall of the Sydney University,
the Jewish Synagogue in Elizabeth-street, and
the offices of the Australian Mutual Provident
Society in Pitt Street. He, too, laid the foundations
of the Sydney General Post Office, which in itself
was a work of considerable magnitude.
MR. H. C. HUDSON.
Mr. T. Loveridge, the subject of this brief
sketch, became a member of the firm at its inception
twenty years ago, and ever since has been one of its
hardest workers. He is a gentleman possessing an
intimate knowledge of the multifarious details of
the building trade, and in all his commercial rela-
tionships is regarded as a shrewd and thorough busi-
ness man, keen to intercept the counterfeit, but up-
right, prompt, and honourable in all his dealings
with his fellow men.
ME. H. C. HUDSON.
Mr. H. C. Hudson, though younger in years than
his two partners; is nevertheless on a plane with
them in the display of those sterling qualities which
are the forerunners of success. Like both his busi-
ness colleagues, Mr. Hudson is a native of Sydney,
where he was born in 1862.
His father, Mr. Henry Hudson, like the progenitor
of his two partners, was also a contractor, who had
earned a name for himself in Sydney, by reason of
his probity and thoroughness in business. He was
the senior partner in the large firm of Hudson
Brothers, the founders of the large engineering
works at Granville, and he is now managing direc-
tor of the Clyde Works, one of the largest enter-
prises of its kind in the Commonwealth.
When Mr. Hudson, junior, was old enough to
take upon himself the responsibilities of life he
followed in the wake of his father, and launched
out as a partner in the present concern, the advance-
ment of which he has made the ambition of his
life. Success has, however, not warped or distorted
Mr. Hudson’s views of the world or altered his re-
lationship towards those with whom he has for
years past come into daily contact. In common
with his brother partners, he evinces a cordial inte-
rest in all that pertains to the welfare of the nume-
rous workmen in the employ of the firm, and it
must, indeed, be gratifying to both himself and his
colleagues in the business to find that their efforts
in this regard are warmly reciprocated.
MR. A. S. LOVERIDGE.
Mr. A. S. Loveridge, like his elder brother, claims
Sydney as his birthplace, and gives the year 1860
as that of his nativity. Coming from a stock that
was associated for years with building operations
in Sydney and throughout the country, it was only
natural that when he arrived at man’s estate that
he should follow in the footsteps of his seniors.
MR. A. S. LOVERIDGE.
His early environment and subsequent training
were such as to qualify him for the position which
he now holds as one of the associated partners.
Amongst his confreres in business life he is regarded
as a man of sound judgment, energetic, thoroughly
conversant with the minuti® of the trade, and
active in pushing the interests of the firm, while
at the same time solicitous for the welfare of its em-
ployees.
KANGAROO RIVER SUSPENSION BRIDGE.


The Carrying Trade.
Historical and Biographical Sketches.
CARRYING CONTRACTORS.
Messrs. Manning Brothers.
CARRIERS AND TRANSPORT CONTRACTORS.
An indispensable adjunct to the commercial de-
velopment of any country is an efficient and
economical means of transport. The grower and
the manufacturer of the world’s commodities would
never be able to exist were it not for the inter-
mediary agent who enables him to place his pro-
ducts on the market within the four corners of the
glebe.
One of the sections of the transport service is
that known as the “ carrying” trade, a branch of
business;C<sasisting mainly in providing the means
of transit of goods for short distances, principally
in the towns.
In Sydney a large number of firms engage in this
business, and amongst those which occupy a leading
position >s that of D. and C. Manning, of Circular
MR. C. MANNING.
Quay, which ranks amongst the oldest and best
known in; the City..
The-business was started about 35 years ago by
Mr. Bartholomew Manning. He originally began
with a small plant, but being a man of grit and go,
he was not long in-working up a solid connection
amongst the mercantile firms, hence Mr. Manning
in a very little time laid the foundations of his
undertaking on a firm basis. His reward
came quickly, for he was soon able to dupli-
cate his working plant, and as years went on
he kept exiending his operath ns, until his busi-
ness assumed very large dimensions, consequently
he became an employer of labour on a pretty exten-
sive scale, while his teams and lorries were to be
seen at work in all parts of the City.
Like all men who have worked their way up to
success from small beginnings, he always main-
tained a close and intelligent supervision over his
business, thus winning the confidence of a very large
circle of patrons. While he always believed in
“ holding the reins” firmly in his own hands, he
was ever regarded as a man who evinced a whole-
some interest in the welfare of his employees.
His two sons, Bartholomew and Charles, were in-
itiated into the working of, the business as soon as
they were able to assist him, and as they both “put
enthusiasm into the work,” it was not long before
they acquired an intimate acquaintance with all its
details.
On the death of , Mr. Manning, sen., about five
years ago, his sons assumed the management, and
under their capable direction the concern built up
by their late father, continued to prosper. The
excellent methods they have adopted for the proper
carrying out of their work show that they
are as solicitous for their clients’ interests as
their own, and they have not neglected any means
whereby the approval of a discriminating clientele
might be attained.
Messrs. Manning Brothers are particularly care-
ful to see that all orders entrusted to them receive
prompt attention, careful handling, and safe de-
livery, three, most essential considerations. They
recognise that to successfully compete against all
extraneous influences, and carry out their methods
in the most perfect manner, they must have the
loyal co-operation of their employees. To this end
they are extremely cautious in the selection of their
men, and as a consequence they possess a staff of
drivers, and workmen, who are well trained for
their positions, and qualified in every respect to
amply reciprocate the confidence reposed in them.
Owing to the large business done by this firm it
may be interesting to note that to maintain all the
rolling stock, and keep the horses in the “ pink of
condition,*' entails a very heavy expenditui’e, such
as people outside the business have little concep-
tion of.
In the hurry and bustle of city life few people re-
fleet that the carrying firms are entrusted with the
disposition of goods, often of an exceedingly valu-
able character.. Nevertheless, it is a fact that many
of the loads which pass along the streets during
every hour of the day represent a very considerable
value, and it speaks volumes for the integrity of
the firm, and the honesty of their employees, that
complaints of any kind are exceptionally rare.
Messrs. Manning Brothers, owing to their long as-
sociation with “ carrying” and their grasp of the
thousand and one items which crop up in the
course of each day’s transactions, always find them-
selves sought after by city firms. Their extensive
business, which requires a keen superintendence,
is controlled in such a way that there is no over-
lapping or waste permitted, and the whole con-
cern goes along with the regularity of clockwork.
Each partner takes upon himself the entire super-
vision of a particular portion of the work, and by
this means efficiency, punctuality, and economy
are potent factors in all work undertaken by this
old and reliable firm.
MESSES. B. AND C. MANNING.
Bartholomew and Charles Manning are natives of
Sydney, the former having been born in 1866 and
the latter in 1870. They were practically brought
up amongst horses,.and as are most corn-
petent judges of horseflesh; in fact, there are few
better judges of the points of an equine, whether he
be a heavy draught or light harness horse, than
either of the Manning Brothers. To enable them
to adequately fulfil their carrying contracts the em-
ployment of a considerable number of waggons
horses, and men is necessitabed. During the present
season they have had thirteen teams constantly a
work, which fact is in itself some proof of the
service performed by the firm.
This, however, does not represent all its resources,
because in a huge transport business such as the
one un( i el . review the Messrs. Manning are obliged
to maintain a sufficient reserve number of animals
to work in relays throughout the season or to meet
any extraordinary rush of traffic should such occur,
Messrs. Manning Brothers, by their enterprise and
strict integrity in all matters relating, to transport
entrusted to their care, have built up a great and
growing business, and won the confidence and esteem
of Sydney’s leading mercantile firms.
ONE OF MESSES. MANNING BROS.’ TEAMS.


The
Statistician’s Department.
Among all the States of the Australian
Commonwealth, New South Wales is certainly
the best equipped with statistical publications
and statistical information of every descrip-
tion, referring to all phases of the general life
of the community. It would, indeed, be dif-
ficult to over-estimate the importance of the
office or to appraise the officers at their full
worth, not only to New South Wales in gene-
ral, but to commercial circles in particular.
For many years now it has become so much a
part of the business man’s reading matter to
scan the various bulletins issued under the
instruction of Mr. T. A. Coghlan, 1.5.0., and
to profit by the facts and figures presented to
him by such publications, that he is apt to take
them as a matter of course, and from his fami-
liarity with them to forget that in their col-
lection and collation an immense amount of
energy—enthusiasm even—has been expen-
ded, that the few pages of informative tabula-
tion which he scans has necessitated weeks, or
even months, of close application in its pre-
paration, and that the accuracy and complete-
ness of the particular return has been secured
by a system of organisation that had to be
carefully planned and thoroughly followed out.
It was not until the present Government
Statistician took over the department that
the public began to realise its value. Step by
step in the face of almost unsurmountable ob-
stacles Mr. Coghlan, bringing to tne work a
brain specially fitted for it, and an enthusiasm
that threw him heart and soul into the self-
imposed task, built up the office to its present
standard of thorough effectiveness and effici-
ency. Year by year he added other branches
of the life of the community to his ever-in-
creasing list, discovered something hitherto
unknown which had a distinct bearing on the
well-being of the country, or developed the
information available concerning some other
factor which, until he realised its value, had
been neglected. And in accomplishing this
the Statistician’s office inevitably brought
about the consolidation and improve-
ment of the statistical work of every depart-
ment in the State. It was absolutely neces-
sary that certain information should be col-
lected in a certain way, if the deductions to
be drawn and the conclusions to be made were
to be correct, and, for that purnose, Mr. Cogh-
lan had not only to arrange the work within
the four walls of his own office, but he had to
go much further afield and formulate a scheme
for nearly every department which would, at
one and the same time, facilitate the collec-
tion of the required information, and be of
such a nature as to be worked out by the par-
ticular department to which it applied, with a
minimum of dislocation and a maximum of
efficiency. The collection of agricultural sta-
tistics may be taken as an example both of the
methods adopted and the success which fol-
lowed the carefully elaborated svstem which
was prepared by the Statistician’s office. A
moment’s consideration will serve to impress
upon any but the most superficial observer
the difficulties which, at the commencement,
had to be met. In the first place, there was
the immense area of country in which agricul-
tural industry is pursued, and the widely
separated localities tin which the cultivation of
the soil is practised. Secondly, there was the
difficulty of collecting in a central office the
names and addresses of all who were farmers
in one direction or another. Even if so her-
culean a task had been accomplished, the still
greater difficulty of communicating with each
of them separately and getting the informa-
tion required from them, had to he faced, and,
as will be readily understood, this latter task
would have been almost, if not quite, impos-
sible. In view of all these problems, Mr.
Coghlan conceived a scheme which gave him a
most satisfactory solution. Obviously, the
men who would be most likely to know what
was going on in any district and the occupa-
tions of its residents would be local represen-
tatives of the police, and it was to this body
that Mr. Coghlan turned. Books were
drawn up, printed, and ruled, according to the
information sought. Every officer in charge
of a police station throughout New South
Wales was supplied with a number, together
w-th instructions regarding filling in particu-
lars. In this way, a much vexed question was
settled, and the police have, without any ap-
preciable addition to their daily work, been
able to materially assist the Statistical Office
in the preparation of the Agricultural Returns
for the State.
MR. T. A. COGHLAN, I.S.O.,
Government Statistician.
This is only one instance out of many of the
way in which Mr. Coghlan applies the means
at his disposal in order to achieve the greatest
amount of good at the least possible expendi-
ture of time and money. It is his faculty of
organisation, no less than his undoubted
mathematical ability, that has made the Go-
vernment Statistician one of the most valu-
able officers of the Public Service, and has es-
tablished his reputation not only within the
borders of the Commonwealth, but in almost
every part of the world. At the present time,
when his services to the country have been fit-
tingly recognised by the bestowal upon him
of the newly created Imperial Service Order, a
few lines of biography concerning the Govern-
ment Statistician will not be amiss.
Mr. Timothy Augustine Coghlan, the Go-
vernment Statistician and Registrar of
Friendly Societies of New South Wales, first
entered the service of the State' on April 6,
1873, when a youth of seventeen, after having
received a first-class scholastic training. It
was originally intended that he should follow
the profession of a Civil Engineer, whither the
mathematical bent of his mind directed. With
this end in view he entered the Harbours and
Rivers Branch of the Public Works Depart-
ment, where he served his articles under the
Engineer in Chief, Mr. Moriarty, and in 1883
he became an associate member of the Insti-
tute of Civil Engineers (London). In 1886,
when the Jennings Government established
the Statistical Office, Mr. Coghlan was offered
and accepted the position as chief of the newly
created department, a position for which he
was eminently qualified. His masterful com-
mand over figures, and his splendid powers of
organisation, soon found ample scope for em-
ployment in his new sphere of duty. He set
himself to work with such assiduity and
method that within a comparatively brief
period the public were being furnished with
the valuable information concerning the
State, and the various agencies operating in
the process of development, that has since set
New South Wales among the countries most
favoured in the matter of statistical data. Sub-
sequently he began the issue of his well-known
and valuable publication “ The Wealth and
Progress of New South Wales,” a work which
has done much to dissipate popular ignorance,
and to spread a flood of light upon the magni-
ficent resources and capabilities of this State.
His “ Seven Colonies of Australasia,” has also
been a stupendous work of detailed informa-
tion regarding what has been accomplished by
a young nation in the Southern Seas. Those
two works have rendered invaluable service to
the people of Australasia, and have through
the medium of hard facts and reliable figures
furnished the world at large with a compre-
hensive commentary on all matters of Austra :
lasian import. Mr. Coghlan is wedded to sta-
tistical work. When I lie t’uhlic i'ervice Board
was constituted by the Reid Government in
1896, Mr. Coghlan was offered the post of
Chairman, but as this would probably have
meant dissociating himself from the Statis-
tical Office, he declined the honor in favour of
a Commissioner’s seat on the Board, with the
retention of the office for which he had such a
decided penchant. In 1900 he resigned from
the Public Service Board, and was subse-
quent!” anointed Registrar of Friendly So-
cieties and Chairman of the Old Age Pensions
Board.
In whatever situation Mr. Coghlan has
found himself placed he has distinguished
himself, and no eulogy of his official career
could better describe his worth than the warm
appreciation which his various published
works have evoked wherever the English lan-
guage is spoken. It is an open secret that Mr.
Coghlan will be offered the position of Com-
monwealth Statistician when that department
has been created by the Federal Government,
and should he decide to accept it, his trans-
ference will be a loss to New South Wales, hut
it will mean a distinct gain to the Common-
wealth, where his great knowledge of and in-
timate experience with Australasian matters
will find a wider and more diversified field in
which to operate.


Industrial Arbitration
Court.
For some years the trend of legislation in
New South Wales has been decidedly in a
democratic direction, and since the Labour
Party became a dominant factor in the politi-
cal life of State, it has been instrumental in
having placed on the Statute Book a number
of enactments, some of which at least it can-
not be denied, have been, on the whole, for
the public benefit. The establishment of the
Arbitration Court, which has been designed
to provide a safety valve against industrial
disturbance and disintegration, may be cited
as a genuine attempt on the part of the
leaders of democratic sentiment in New
South Wales to create an entiente cordiale be-
tween capital and labour, with mutual advan-
tage to both parties, while at the same time
promoting the general good of the commun-
ity. The Arbitration Court has been con-
structed under an Act which confers upon it
very liberal and comprehensive powers, and
so far its operations have compelled its recogni-
tion as an efficacious instrument for the pre-
vention of strikes, by giving certainty and
continuity to industrial relations, which, if
possible of reduction to a monetary basis,
would represent a very large- sum saved to
the community.
The Court, which held its first sitting on
May Ist, 1902, sat almost continuously until
the end of the year, and, during that time
dealt with a large number of matters, most
of which were of a novel, technical and com-
plex character. Ever since the Court began
its career, it has been inundated with work,
and, as it is vested with perambulatory
powers, sittings have been held at various
towns in the State, as well as in the me-
tropolis. Already it has sat in adjudication
upon a number of industrial disputes, the ob-
ject being to regulate the rate of wages and
the conditions of work in the trades inter-
ested. These two questions naturally would
be at the bottom of all industrial troubles,
and, in dealing with intricate and delicate
questions of this kind, the Court has often-
times “ a very hard row to hoe.” It cer-
tainly cannot step beyond the limits of equity
or common law which give protection to in-
dividual rights, but it can call evidence to
prove how far the interests of any one sec-
tion of the community impinges upon or
overlaps those of another class, on the pre-
sentation of a properly attested application
by the aggrieved party. No award can be
made contrary to Statute law, and any indus-
trial agreement that is contrary to' law is also
to that extent void. Amongst other things
the Act provides that whoever (a) before a
reasonable time has elapsed for a reference
to the court of the matter in dispute; or (b)
during the pendency of any proceedings in
the court in relation to an industrial dispute,
(1) does any act or thing in the nature of a
lock-out or strike; or suspends or discon-
tinues employment or work m any industry;
or (2) instigates to or aids in any of the
above-mentioned acts, shall be guilty of a mis-
meanour, and upon conviction be liable to a
fine not exceeding one thousand pounds, or
imprisonment not exceeding two months. If
any employer dismisses from his employment
any employee by reason merely of the fact
that the employee is a member of an indus-
trial union, or is entitled to the benefit of an
award, order or agreement, such employer shall
be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty
pounds for each employee so dismissed. In
every case it shall lie on the employer to
satisfy the court that such employee was so
dismissed by reason of some facts other than
those above mentioned. The court in its
award, or by order made on the application
of any party to the proceedings before it, at
any time in the period during which the
award is binding, may (a) prescribe a mini-
mum rate of wages or other remuneration,
with provision for the fixing in such manner
and subject to such conditions as may be
specified in the award or order, by a specified
tribunal of a lower rate in the case of em-
ployees who are unable to earn the prescribed
minimum; and (b) direct that as between
members of an industrial union of employees
and other persons, offering their labour at the
same time, such members shall be employed
in preference to such other persons, other
things being equal, and appoint a tribunal
to finally decide in what cases an employer
to whom any such direction applies may em-
ploy a person who is not a member of any
such union or branch.
In any proceeding before it the Court may
do all or any of the following things with a
view to the enforcement of the award, order
or direction; (1) declare mat any practice,
rule, custom, term of agreement, condition of
employment, or dealing whatsoever in rela-
tion to any industrial matter, shall be a com-
mon rule of an industry affected by the pro-
ceeding; (2) direct within what limits of area
and subject to what conditions and exceptions
such common rule shall be binding upon per-
sons engaged in the said industry, whether as
employer or employee, and whether memoers
of an industrial union or not; (3) fix penal-
ties for any breach or non-observance of such
common rule so declared and specify to whom
the same shall be paid; (4) grant an injunc-
tion to restrain any person from breaking or
non-observing any order, award, or direction
of the court; (5) order the cancellation of the
registration of an industrial union; (o, order
that any member of an industrial union
shall cease to be a member thereof from a
date and for a period to be named in the said
order; (7) fix penalties for a breach or non-
observance of any term of an award, order,
or direction not exceeding five hundred
pounds in the case of any individual member
of the said union, and specify the persons to
whom such penalty shall be paid; (8) impose
a fine not exceeding five hundred pounds for
any breach or non-observance of an award,
order, or direction by a person bound for
such award, order, or direction who is not
a member of an industrial union. And all
fines and penalties for any breach of an
award, order, or direction of the court may
be sued and recovered.
Where the award or order of the court or
any industrial agreement binds specifically a
corporation, person, industrial union, trade
union, or branch, any property held by such
shall be available to answer the award, order,
or agreement, and in the case of any union
where the property is insufficient to fully sat-
isfy the award, the members of such union
or corporation shall be liable severally for
not more than £lO. Any person or union
aggrieved by a decision of the Registrar may
appeal to the President of the Court. The
President of the Court sitting in Chambers
for the purpose of administering this Act has
all the powers of a Judge of the Supreme
Court sitting in Chambers.
The Court as at present constituted con-
sists of a President and two members. Mr.
Justice Cohen (of the Supreme Court Bench)
is President, Mr. Samuel Smith, ex-M.L.A.,
who was appointed on the recommendation of
delegates from industrial unions of employees,
and Mr. W. D. Cruickshank, who was ap-
pointed on the recommendation of the dele-
gates from industrial unions of employers,
being the two members. The Registrar,
upon whom a large proportion of the minor
work falls, has to deal with many questions
which require the application of a legal
mind to overcome the intricacies that fre-
quently obtrude themselves. As a con-
sequence, the position has been filled
by the appointment of Mr. Addison, a well-
known barrister. At present the law permits
the parties to a dispute to be represented in
Court or before the Registrar by a legal
advocate or counsel, but, as this procedure
makes a heavy drain upon the resources of
most of the unions, especially those of the
employees, an effort is being made to amend
the law so as to oust the legal fraternity,
and only permit of the parties themselves
presenting their side of the case personally
before the Court. On this point a good deal
may he sa : d pro and con, and what the out-
come of the agitat : on may be is still in the
realms of speculation. The principle of com-
pulsory arbitration is on its trial in this
State, and the operations of the present Act
is limited to seven and a half years, a period
sufficiently long to test the value of the prin-
ciple, and give the public a good acquaintance
with whatever merits or drawbacks the sys-
tem possesses. Up to the present the friends
and supporters of the measure are delighted
with the results obtained, and claim that,
while the Arbitration Court exists, strikes
and lockouts are impossible.
As showing the range and character of the
matters which occupied the attention of the
Court, it is only necessary to mention that
the disputes determined embrace, amongst
others, the Newcastle Wharf Labourers v.
The Newcastle and Hunter River Company,
also disputes in the following industries:-
Breadcarters, Confectioners, Tailoresses, Lith-
gow Smelters, Undertakers, Wharf Labour-
ers, Professional Musicians, Illawarra Coal
Miners, Tipcarters, Saddle . and Harness
Makers, East Greta Coal Miners. The agree-
ments filed comprise, amongst others, agree-
ments affecting the Coopers, Machine Shear-
ers, Carcase Butchers, Boot Operators, and
Rough Stuff Cutters, Boot Clickers, Weekly
Wharf Employees, Butchers’ Shop Em-
ployees, Seamen in the coastal trade, Stew-
ards and Cooks in the coastal trade, and
Hairdressers. The awards in the case of the
disputes determined upon were about equally,
in favour of the masters and the workmen.


The
Artesian Water Supply.
During the last few, years the subject of
artesian water has been brought home to the
minds of the people, especially those who ob-
tain their livelihood directly from the land, in
a way that, if not very agreeable, has been
none the less very forcible. The dry seasons
of late have caused very many of those whose
interests lie in the direction of one of the mani-
fold forms of farming to give the matter of a
permanent supply of water for irrigation and
other purposes some attention. It is a well-
known truth that the arid country is always
the most prolific, provided that a certain quan-
tity of moisture be thrown over it at periodic
intervals, or at the time the herbage or crops
are in need of a proportion of humidity to sus-
tain and stimulate growth. No better illustra-
tion of this fact can be given than is furnished
on the vast area of comparatively dry country
west of the great cordillera forming the main
watersheds of New South Wales. Here a few
showers of rain are sufficient to transform the
immense barren plains linto a magnificent
stretch of waving green in the space of a few
days. The uncertainty of rainfall, however, is
the hete noir of the settler in these parts, but
if a sufficiency of water be obtainable, as it
undoubtedly is existent in the bowels of the
earth, the “ Never Never Country” in New
South Wales should, within a very short time,
be transformed into a “ land flowing with milk
and honey.”
An attempt to bore for artesian water was
made as early as 1851, when an experiment
was begun to obtain water from a depth within
the walls of Darlinghurst prison, but without
success. It was, however, in 1880 that the
first actual discovery of artesian water took
place on Killara Run, in the far Western Dar-
ling District. It was on Kerribree Station, in
the Western area, that the success of artesian
boring on an extensive scale was first demon-
strated, as the first tube put down was 1073 ft.
in depth, and yielded 350,000 gallons of water
per day, while from a second bore sunk to a
depth of 1340 feet a daily volume of 1,750,000
gallons flowed. After this several other bores
were sunk on various runs, with splendid re-
sults, and then the Government put down
bores at specified places, to -provide a supply
of water along the roads and travelling stock
routes. At present there are about 160 bores
in the State, of which about 70 belong to the
Government, yielding a daily flow of
33,000,000 gallons, the remaining private
bores spouting about 50,000,000 gallons daily.
The Government bore put down on Dongelly
Run, in the Moree District, is the deepest in
New South Wales, the cylinder descending
to 4086 feet, and tapping a flow of 745,200
gallons per day. The greatest temperature
yet recorded for artesian water in this State is
148 deg. Fahrenheit, in the case of the Goon-
dabluie private bore, which has a depth of
2800 feet.
What is generally termed the New South
Wales Artesian basin has an area of about
83,000 square miles, and is in reality the
south-eastern portion of the Great Australian
Artesian Basin. The vast plain stretching
westward from the ranges of the Great Divide
which forms the intake beds of the system, to
the borders of South Australia, has a length
from east to west of about 450 miles, and a
width from north to south of about 130 miles.
It varies in altitude from 200 to 700 feet
above sea level, while the intake beds on the
eastern margin rise to a height of 1200 feet
and more. Computing the fluctuating rainfall
of this region, and comparing it with the area
of the intake beds, approximately 18,000
square miles, it is estimated that during an
ordinary year the total rainfall over this area
would be 1,050,400,000,000 feet. Assuming
then that only about 20 per cent, of the rain-
fall on the intake beds were absorbed by them,
the available supply of water in the artesian
basin in this State would amount to some-
thing like 3,600,274,000 gallons daily, or
nearly fifty times as much as is now obtained
from all the bores already sunk within this
territory. It is believed that this immense
volume of water percolates to the ocean, other-
wise the intake area would become oversatu-
rated, and being thus rendered incapable of
imbibing further, the surplus would soon over-
flow on the land. During the recent dry season
one of the Government bores began to eject a
diminished supply, a circumstance that led
many people to hazard the opinion that the
artesian supply was evidencing signs of deple-
tion, but the possibility of such a contingency
is regarded by those best qualified to express
an opinion as exceedingly remote. Experts
who have had all available data to work upon
are strongly imbued with the belief that there
is no reason to think that the artesian bores
sunk in various parts of the State will over-
take the supply for many years to come. It is,
however, feasible that a prolonged drought
over the intake area may materially reduce
the supply, as it is only natural that a reser-
volir which is being continually drawn upon
without being replenished must, in course of
time, exhibit some sign of exhaustion. How-
ever, until the subject is better understood, it
is impossible to even conjecture how long a
period would elapse- before drought would
affect the Artesian Supply
In this State the Government has taken the
initiative in demonstrating what can be done
in the rainless districts by means of artesian
water, and the measure of success attained has
been little short of phenomenal. At the Na-
tive Dog bore, near Bourke, an area of 20
acres, and at the Pera bore, also in the same
district, 68 acres, were put under fruits, vege-
tables, and cereals, and irrigated with artesian
water. At both places the returns amply justi-
fied the experiments, the yield of wheat at
Native Dog being equal to 35 bushels per acre,
after only two waterings. When one calls to
mind the wonderful fruition of irrigation en-
terprise in the desert regions of the United
States, where the conditions are not so favour-
able as obtain in this State, it is somewhat sur-
prising that the local land owners have not
evinced a greater desire to establish irrigation
farms, especially after the Government of the
State has presented them with such valuable
object lessons as are to be witnessed at Native
Dog and Pera bores. - The hardships and losses
experienced by Western settlers during the
severe drought that has just terminated will
probably cause them to devote more thought
and diligence in the direction of well-regulated
irrigation schemes in the future, as it has been
made forcibly manifest to them that their land
is capable of producing in abundance if only
a small modicum of water can be brought into
contact with the prolific soil.
The quality of the water discharged from
the artesian bores in New South Wales has,
on analysis, been found to contain an appreci-
able quantity of potash, which makes it speci-
ally suitable for irrigation uses. Most of the
water emitted from the various bores has been
proved fit for human consumption, as the per
centage of mineral salts in solution is well
below the maximum. From the foregoing it
will be seen that in its artesian water supply
New South Wales has an asset of incalculable
value, and the sooner this fact is realised the
better it will be for the State generally.
In conclusion, the inspiriting words of Mr.
J. W. Boultbee, the Superintendent of Public
Watering Places and Artesian Boring in isew
South Wales, may be with advantage quoted.
In his report to the Public Works Depart-
ment anent his recent visit to the irrigation
districts of America, Mr. Boultbee writes:—
“ No adequate idea would be conveyed of the
magnitude of what is being done, and the gene-
ral effort that is being made to supplement
by irrigation the production under natural
conditions. It will, of course, be considered
that the conditions obtaining in America are
more favourable for irrigation than in this
State. We have none of the snow-clad moun-
tains and the extensive valleys and running
streams that exist there, nor have we the
teeming population and enormous market,
nor-their rail facilities. We can devise but
few. of the large gravitation schemes which are
having such an enormous influence upon the
arid lands. Neither have we to such an extent
the economic advantages afforded by the ex-
tensive and shallow artesian supplies obtain-
able in some of the States, and which have
been factors in more than one large scheme of
development. We have, however, on the
other hand, millions of acres of fertile land,
only requiring the help of irrigation within
the area of an artesian basin, which in extent,
perhaps, has no equal in the world—in extent
and volume of supply. In our own State the
basin embraces an area of some 82,000 square
miles, in which we have so far—to use an ex-
pression which seems to convey the smallness
of what we have done in comparison with the
area on which we have done it—put some 200
pin pricks, in the shape of borings.
The absence of the facilities afforded by nu-
merous streams and snow-clad ranges to feed
them in this State, should-be no cause for dis-
couragement and apathy while we have the ar-
tesian system to fall back upon. Nothing can
be achieved or gained by sitting down and
allowing the land and our underground sup-
plies to lie idle while our stock are dying in
millions, because the people say “ it won’t pay
to irrigate for stock feeding,” “ the sup-
ply won’t last,” etc. Although America has at
present greater advantages in market and
population than we have, that is no reason
why we should not attempt some development
of those facilities that are afforded us. We can
start under auspices as good as existed there,
even in some respects better. We have but
little or nothing to fear regarding the suita-
bility of the large majority of the waters from
our bores, provided the conditions laid down
by Professor Hilgard are observed, for irri-
gation.”


VICKERY'S BUILDINGS, PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


Commonwealth Buildings,
Brisbane.
JAMES CHAPMAN AND CO.
Without a doubt the Commonwealth Buildings
erected in Adelaide Street, Brisbane, by Mr. James
Chapman, form one of the finest mercantile blocks
to be found anywhere. They not only are an
MR. J. CHAPMAN.
architectural adornment to the City, but they
also provide an up-to-date business stand, re-
plete with every convenience, and enjoying all the
latest advantages in arangement and structural
design. The buildings are three storeys high, and
viewed from any aspect they form a very valuable
addition to the City of Brisbane. They stand upon
a site removed above all danger of injury by flood
water, and they also face Victoria Square, a fine
open space which, in the future, is to be graced
by the presence of a Town Hall in every way
worthy of a City of such importance as Brisbane.
The Adelaide Street frontage displays a facade of
well balanced and harmonious proportions, a
very pleasing effect being produced to the
eye by a judicious blending of red brick
arid warm brown freestone, with cement
dressings. The design is bold and free, al-
most devoid of embellishment, except for a
handsome pediment, set off with an ornate model-
ling. Surrounded though they are by other struc-
tures of large dimensions, the Commonwealth
Buildings, by reason of their beautiful lines and
substantial proportions, monopolise the attention
of the passer by, and compel his admiration for
the enterprise that caused their construction. In-
ternally the building contains three floors, each
consisting of a large superficial area. These are
divided into sample rooms, stock rooms, and of-
fices, complete in all details, so that those oc-
cupying them have every convenience at hand.
The walls, well pierced for ventilation and light
throughout, are plastered, and the ceilings being
lofty, permit of plenty of air being admitted,
without creating a draught. A telephone is pro-
vided with an attendant for the benefit of the
tenants. Special provision has been made to ob-
tain the full benefit of good light, and to this end
features have been let into the design and construc-
tion, by which every apartment and room obtains
an adequate share of daylight. This renders the
building particularly valuable for the displaying
of samples, for the proper inspection of which a
steady, reliable light is a sine qua non. Gas is
laid on all over the premises, and electricity is
also installed as an illuminant. The main en-
trance is through a fine wide vestibule, and the
different floors are rendered easy of access by
means of wide, gently graded staircases. The cor-
ridors are all roomy, and communicate with an
external life, so that tenants are afforded every
facility for the handling of their stocks. Im-
proved sanitary and lavatory accommodation is
also provided.
The upper floors communicate by means of an
overhead bridge, guarded by fireproof doors, with
Messrs. Chapman and Company’s large premises
in Queen Street, so that the danger from fire in
■ iUwr of these immense buildings is reduced to a
minimum. In fact, so elaborate are the precau-
tions that have been observed in the construction
of the Commonwealth Buildings to avert the pos-
sibility of danger from this source, that the whole
of the premises may be said to be fireproof. All
the floors are provided with hydrants and fire ex-
tinguishers placed in convenient positions, and the
janitor in charge of the buildings is a man of ex-
perience and trustworthiness. It will thus be ap-
parent that the proprietor of this splendid build-
ing has given great consideration to all the de-
tails, which go to make for the preservation and
security of his tenants* interests. Mr. Chapman
started out with the idea of making his premises
the best of their kind in Australia, and he has
succeeeded admirably, as all who have had occa-
sion to use the rooms gratefully admit.
The Commonwealth Buildings were formally
opened for the transaction of business on the 13th
of June, 1901, the occasion being marked by a ban-
quet, at which all the leading men of the metropo-
lis were present. On that occasion Mr. Chapman’s
enterprise and foresight were eulogised, and the
sanguine predictions relative to the ultimate suc-
cess of his venture, which were then made, have
already been abundantly verified.
Mr. James Chapman has for many years been
on of the principal business men of Brisbane, in
fact, he may most appropriately be described as one
of the pioneers. He arrived in Brisbane shortly
after the Northern State obtained separate con-
stitutional rights, and has since been identified
with the City throughout all its vicissitudes of
fortune. He commenced business in Queen Street,
and, by his urbanity and good business qualities,
soon became popular amongst the settlers. His
business prospered, and he became intimately
identified with the progress of the town in which
he had cast his lot. He shared in the ups and
downs which are the lot of pioneers everywhere,
and during his early career witnessed the vagaries
of fortune, but; being of a sanguine temperament,
and endowed with a sterling faith in the resource-
fulness of Queensland, he remained steady and
loyal to the country of his adoption through weal
and woe. His cheerful optimism enabled him al-
ways to look on the bright side of things, and
perceive the glints of sunshine breaking through
the clouds, that to others appeared all dark and
ominous. His far-reaching discernment enabled
him to gauge the true position of affairs at .all
times, and the confidence he always exhibited in
the capabilities of Queensland has borne ample
fruit. His business has gone ahead by leaps and
bounds, and to-day it occupies a position in the
community second to none. In mercantile circles
he has always been regarded as a twenty shillings
in the pound man, while in private life his ex-
cellent manly qualities have won for him the
esteem of a large number of friends, and the re-
spect of the entire community.
COMMONWEALTH BUILDINGS, BRISBANE.


Year.
Vessels Cleared Out-
wards for Foreign and
Interstate Ports.
Total
Value of
Imports
from
Foreign
a»d Inter-
state Ports,
Quantity and Value of Coal
exported to Foreign and
Interstate Ports.
Total Value
of Exports
(inclusive of
Coal to
Foreign and
Interstate
Ports.)
Total
amount of
Revenue
Collected.
No. of
Vessels.
Tonrage,
Tons.
Value.
£
£
£
£
1892
1,307
1,381,318
765,083
1.894,735
879,482
1,846,953
191,394
1893
1,108
1,209,467
451,253
1,583,882
702.190
1,700,813
151,286
1891
1,2?5
1,415,159
427,581
1,891,674
710,341
1,485,475
153,895
1895
1,207
1,410,004
420,773
1.920,378
678,217
1,417.122
155,362
1890
1,180
1,479,033
611,872
2,070,304
729,444.
1.496,687
123,280
1897
1,375
1 740,345
510.721
2,431.489
812.347
1,746,925
112.548
1898
1,431
1,803,605
409,527
2,485,394
846,128
1,782,634
118,6X5
1899
1,273
1.707,108
622,563
2,478.397
882,857
1,598,825.
111,129
1900
1.493
2,087,319
680,250
3,021,912
1,136,476
2,185,047
131,272
1901
1.550
2,216,061
857,782
3,104,735
1.528,121
2,*07,306
41.4&4
1902
1.476
2,099.098
977,537
2,960,761
1,484.954
2,059,395
172,586
IMPORTS AND VALUES.
Articles.
1901. ,
1902.
Apparel (wearing)
.£34,525
,£28,567
Butter
4,013
46,265
Drapery
87,074
50,800
Dried Fruits
5,171
4,667
Flour
5,769
9,927
Oats
10,101.
17,233
Wheat
164
35,561
Hay and Chaff
8,295
113,109
Beer
9,357
7,608
Wines and Spirits
26,974
18,336
Iron (Galvanised)
26,421
20,431
Machinery ...'
56,192
17,048
Kerosene
10,145
18,269
Ores
113,864
91,365
Potatoes
23,347
37 635
Salt in bags
5,659
5,287
Salt (rock)
1,527
2,921
Sugar
16,889
23,562
Timber, rough
9,790
15,087
Timber, dressed
15,398
9,546
Other articles
. •••
387,107
404,113
Totals
.£857,782
<£977,537
Newcastle.
THE SECOND PORT OF THE STATE.
GREAT EXPORT OF COAL.
In any statement as to the wealth, progress
and industry of New South Wales, particu-
lars regarding Newcastle cannot be omitted.
That port is, both industrially and commer-
cially, so unique in position that the chief
occupation of its people is of Federal import-
ance. As coal represents the great motive
power of modern progress, the port from
which it is principally shipped on this side
of the line bulks largely in the view of those
engaged in the Australian shipping trade.
Situated on one of the great trade routes of
the world, and supplied with all modern ap-
pliances for mining, transporting, and ship-
ping coal, Newcastle maintains its high repu-
tation as a resort for the manner seeking to
earn a livelihood by bridging the mighty
deep.
While coal is regarded as the principal pro-
duct of Newcastle, the fact should be kept in
mind that a considerable trade, both outwards
and inwards, is carried on in other commodi-
ties ; and the results already achieved in that
direction auger well for a continuance thereof.
The statistics compiled by the Mines De-
partment of New South Wales show that
about one hundred millions of tons of coal
have been extracted from the coal seams of
this State since their discovery. The strong
probability, however, is that the output has
been greater than those figures denote. By
far the largest portion of this great total has
been obtained from the coal mines of the
Northern District, of which Newcastle is the
outlet. For the year ending 31st December,
1902, the output of ; all the collieries of New
South Wales amounted to 5,942,011 tons,
valued at £2,206,598. The contribution of
the Northern District to this great aggregate
was no less than 3,900,297 tons, valued at
£1,633,062. Deducting the quantity required
for local consumption, practically all the re-
mainder was shipped, either to Sydney,, or to
intercolonial ports, or to countries oversea.
The general appearance of the city through-
out the day does not suggest to a stranger that
it is the seat of a great industry. The reason
of that is not far to seek. The large army of
workers engaged in the murky depths of the
mines are not visible to the visitor, who, how-
ever, cannot fail to observe the long trains of
coal waggons drawn to the Carrington Dyke,
where their contents are speedily discharged
into the holds of the many steamers and sail-
ing vessels that have made Newcastle their
objective. Moreover, the collieries are spread
over a wide area, and as the seams become
exhausted, the mining interests are compelled
to go further afield in order to carry on their
business. Fortunately, the carboniferous area
is very extensive, and, within a recent period,
a number of new and important collieries
have been opened in the Maitland District.
But as the output of these pits must come to
Newcastle for shipment, and, as the plant,
machinery and other necessaries mainly ar-
rive at that port, the spread of the coal-
mining area still brings grist to the city at
the mouth of the Hunter River.
Newcastle is only 60 miles distant from
Sydney by sea, and 102 miles by rail, there-
fore the close business relations which exist
between the two gr. at porls of New South
Wales can be easily understood. As a
specially constructed telephone line has con-
nected Newcastle with Sydney for several
years, much of the business between the two
ports has been transacted by vocal com-
munication.
The following statement will give a good
idea of the importance of the trade which
has found an inlet and outlet at the port of
Newcastle during the past eleven years:—
PORT OF NEWCASTLE.
From the above it will be seeh that the
demand for coal considerably slackened off
in 1902, especially towards Die close of the
year. Other exports also showed a falling
off. The result was largely due to the re-
turn to normal conditions after the South
African war. The trade of Newcastle was
greatly stimulated by that conflict.
As a perusal of the table will show, the
port still enjoys a large and healthy trade.
The drought contributed in some degree to
the falling off, as all branches of internal in-
dustry were injuriously affected thereby, es-
pecially pastoral and agricultural produc-
tion.
The population of Newcastle and its sub-
urbs is estimated at over 70,000 persons, but
the numbers fluctuate from time to time ac-
cording to the general conditions of trade..
It will be admitted that a total trade of
£3,036,932 is a very considerable one, and
shows what a big centre of industry the port
is. The average price of coal has varied con-
siderably. In 1893 it stood at 7s. lid.; in
1894, 6s. 9d.; 1895, 6s. 2d.; 1896, 6s. Id.;
1897, ss. lid.; 1898, ss. Bd.; 1899, 6s. 2d.;
1900, 6s. 4d.; 1901, Bs. 4d.; 1902, Bs. 4d.
In connection with the carboniferous
wealth of the Newcastle District, it may be
noted that coke is being manufactured there.
In 1902 the quantity made totalled 24,219
tons, valued at the ovens at £22,423.
In 1902, 9730 men and boys were em-
ployed above and below ground in the col-
lieries of the Northern District. Almost need-
less to say, no women are employed below ground,
and (h' re are very few, if any, employed about
the pit-heads above ground. The miners ar6
mainly paid by the weight of the mineral
they get, and strict union rules may he said
to prevail in the mines generally. The min-
ing plant and machinery are usually of a
very modern type, and all operations are un-
der Government supervision of a very effici-
ent nature. The men work at a hewing rate
which rises and falls with the selling price of
coal, but in this bargain a minimum price is
fixed. Recently coal-cutting machines,
driven by electricity, have been introduced
into the district, and a good deal of curiosity
is exhibited ks to the results attainable by
this innovatioh.
Almost every visitor to Newcastle inspects
the great cranes, worked by hydraulic power,
that lift the hopper waggons, filled with coal,
over the holds of the ships that are being
loaded. Complaints are sometimes made
that these loading appliances are not quite
up to date, nevertheless, a large amount of
work is done by them, and great despatch is
given under ordinary circumstances to the
vessels at the loading berths.
The following return shows the value of
the imports of Newcastle during the year
1902, as compared with the previous year:—


EXPORTS.
Articles.
1901.
1902.
Hay and Chaff, tons ...
1,305
2,803
Flour, centals
3,330
1,913
Maize, bushels
15,100
4,624
AVheat ,,
39,059
3,744
Cattle, number
2,644
2 022
Horses
1,473
623
Sheep
2,943
11,746
Pigs
577
856
Bonedust, tons
129
290
Other manures, tons
318
160
Frozen Beef, cut
34,072
—
Frozen Mutton, cwt.
56,246
26,846
Meats, preserved, lb.
73,726
56,156
Copper Ingots, cwt. ...
15,310
9,920
Silver Lead, cwt.
14,200
25,110
Coke, tons
10,430
4,334
Gold Concentrates, cwt.
4,275
1,835
Railway Sleepers, number
172,968
20,771
Tallow, cwt
11,493
3,355
Timber, rough sup. ft. 1,437,655
441,108
Wool, greasy, bales ...
Wool, scoured, bales ...
45,631
21,187
7,587
3,226
alue of coal exported <£1.528,121 <£1,484,954
Value of other exports
979,185
574,441
Total value of exports £2,507,306 £2,059,395
RETURN
OF REVENUE.
Head of Receipt.
1901.
1902.
Tonnage Rates
.. .£12 003 11
8
.£838 15
4
Harbour and Light Kates 9.074 1
4
9,013 10
7
Duty and Excise
... 109,771 0
3
145,963 15
4
Pilotage
... 11,743 6
4
10,673 6
o
Harbour Removals
6,820 12
6
5,830 12
6
Miscellaneous
41 10
2
188 6
6
Total
,..£149,454 2
3 .£172,586 6
5
SHIPPING RETURN,
INWARDS.
1901.
1902.
Month.
January
February
No. Tonnage.
... 131 171,996
... 116 156,613
No. Tonnage.
119 164,140
116 170.6:4
March
... 125
182,939
130
190,249
April
... 125
166,157
135
191,395
Slay
... 144
204,684
141
186,922
June
... 125
180,375
115
162,2?2
July
... 147
202,253
126
177,777
August
... 125
182,412
106
149,779
September
... 120
176,001
131
182,764
October
... 147
224,462
119
180,720
November
... 103
154,245
139
197,648
December
... 102
144,737
131
182,727
1,510
2,146,874
1,508
2.137,037
OUTWARDS.
1901.
1902.
Slonth.
No.
Tonnage.
No.
Tonnage.
January
February
... 120
... 137
170,814
178,391
Ill
117
156,948
166 197
Slarch
... 144
204,480
115
167,457
April
... 124
167,134
129
177,431
May
... 144
204,684
141
186,922
June
... 125
181,895
124
174,780
July
... 131
180,570
121
186,603
August
... 141
201,366
121
164,213
September
October
... 113
... 147
175,141
219,770
123
132
172,113
1?3,901
November
... 124
182,932
114
157,959
December
... 101
151,347
120'
169,443
1,550
2,216,008
1,476
2,099,098
Following is a return showing the exports of
Newcastle, and their value for 1902, as compared
with the previous year:—
Newcastle is a very lively port, large num-
bers of vessels entering and leaving its
wharves by every tide. Many steamers come
for bunkers only, and, as steamers loading
full cargoes get precedence of sailing ships,
the former do not make a long stay in port.
The following return will be useful in show-
ing the number and tonnage of vessels, ex-
clusive of coasters, which entered and cleared
at the Newcastle Custom House during the
years 1901 and 1902 respectively: —
In the above returns, as will be observed,
no mention is made of coasters. Neverthe-
less, a very large trade is carried on between
Newcastle, Sydney and other ports of the
State, by coasting vessels of handy size.
Newcastle is girdled by a zone of suburban
municipalities that attend to their local
wants without much reference to the city.
There has lately been a good deal of discus-
sion on the subject of a “ Greater Newcastle,”
but some time must elapse before the ac-
complishment of this project.
The city and district are well provided
with all the adjuncts of modern civilisation.
Churches of all denominations are numerous,
and Newcastle is the See of a bishopric. The
water supply is excellent, the city and Car-
rington Dyke are lighted by electricity, and
in some of the suburbs gas is supplied by the
municipal bodies.
Many trains run to and from Sydney daily,
and passenger steamers ply nightly between
the metropolis. . Tramway communication
between the local suburbs and the city has
been in existence for a numter of years.
A great impetus to the trade of the port
has been given by the Smelting Works at
Cockle Creek, a few miles distant from New-
castle. Silver-lead ore is sent in large quan-
tities from Broken Hill, via Adelaide, and
is smelted at the big establishment referred
to, where a large township has recently
sprung up. Ores are sent there, indeed, from
all parts of New South Wales, and a consid-
erable amount of gold is extracted from
them.
It is believed that, in the immediate fu-
ture, large quantities of wheat, the pro-
duct of districts sei’ved by newly-construc-
ted railways in the north-west, will be
shipped from Newcastle. In this and other
directions, however, the northern port has to
reckon with the great attractive force of
Sydney in regard to those products.
As will be seen from the following state-
ment of the revenue collected at the Custom
House, Newcastle, during the years 1901 and
1902 respectively, the port is a good revenue
producer for the Commonwealth:—=
The shipping adjuncts of the port are of
more than average merit. A steamer is
maintained for the use of the Government
pilots; the water-police use an efficient
launch; a large fleet of powerful tug-hoats
owned privately, wait for expected vessels;
and ferry boats ply between the north shore
and other parts of the harbour.
The second port of New South Wales, as
it has a very prosperous present, has un-
doubtedly a great future. The reign of King
Coal over his world-wide realm is so powerful
that it is practically indisputable, and, as
Newcastle has a coal field behind it which
cannot be exhausted for many centuries, that
fact accentuates every project mooted for the
benefit of the city and its suburbs. As a
place of resort for shipping, the port, apart
from its collieries, is one of considerable im-
portance, the fertility and salubrity of the
Hunter River being great. Taking it all
round the Newcastle District is one of the
busiest and most prosperous portions of New
South Wales, and is likely to remain so for
an extended period.
NEWCASTLE HARDER AND WHARVES.


CAPTAIN R. B. DAVIS,
Director.
C. A. COGHLAN, Esq.
Director.
The Commercial Publishing Company
OF. SYDNEY, LIMITED
BOARD OF MANAGEMENT.
W. J. BOYLAN, Esq.,
Managing Director.
JAMES ARTHUR Esq.,
Director.
Mr. F. W. ARTHUR,
Secretary and Advertising Manager.


PAGE
Aberdeen Line ... ... ... 10c
Adams and Co., G. H. ... ... ... 64r
Adams, G. H ... 64d
Adelaide S.S. Co. ... ... ... 35c
Agriculture 20a 4-i
Alison, R. W. ... ... ... 33e
Alvarez, J. H. ... ... ... ... 36e
Alliance Assurance Companies 8j 41k
Allen, J. J. ... ... ... ... 21k
A. and A. Liner “ Sonoma” ... ... 3b
Anglo-Australian S.S. Co. ... ... 32c
Architecture and Building ... ... 2m
Artesian AVater Supply ... ... 11m
Arthur, G. S. ... ... ... ... 35k
Associated General Merchants and Im-
porters ... ... ... ... 12d
Associated Warehousemen of Sydney 13d
Australian Drug Co. ... ... ... 50d
Australian Mutual Provident Society 10k
Australian Mutual Fire Insurance Society 23k
Aust. Coke-making Co. ... ... ... 14g
Bank of New South Wales ... ... 4j
Banking in Australasia ... 7b 2j
Bardsley and Co., John ... ... 40d
Bardsley, John ... ... ... 41d
Bardsley, J., Jun. ... ... ... 41d
Barratt, Samuel ... ... ... 27d
Bay ley, J. and Sons, Ltd. ... ... 61d
Baxter, J. ... ... ... ... 5d
Beale and Co. ... ... ... 4e 20e
Beale, O. C 5e 23e
Beath, D. ... ... ... ... 51d
Beaton, L. ... ... ... ••• 57c
Beckett, E. C 29c
Biddell Bros. ... ... ... ... 34e
Birt and Co. ... ... ... ... 28c
Board for Exports, N.S.W. ... ... 22-i
Boesen, Theo. ... ... ... 23d
Boot and Shoe Trade ... ... ... 7d
Boucher, G. B. ... ... ... • ... 31k
Brayne, A. E. ... ... ... ••• 29e
Branch Line ... ... ••• ••• 16c
Breadstuffs ... ... ... 3b 8d
Breillat, T. C 14a
Briscoe and Co. ... ... ••• 32d
Bridge, J. and Co.; Wool ... ... 7f
Brown, C. F 18d
Brown, John ... ... ... ••• 12g
Brown, William ... ... ... 12g
Brown, J. and A. ... ... 9g
Brunton, J. S. ... ... ••• ••• 22a
Bull and Co., Henry ... 14d
Bull, Henry ... ... ... ••• 15d
Bulli Colliery and Coke Works ... 14g
Burchmore, W. ... ••• ••• 15d
Burke Colman ... ... ••• 66d
Butter, Export Statistics of ... ... 15h
Byrnes, C. J. ... ... ... ••• 19g
Cable Service ... ... ... 60c
Cameron, R. B. ... ... ... ... Hk
Carnelly, William ... ... ... 27d
Casualties, Shipping 41c
Certificates, Dept, of Navigation ... 8c
Chamber of Commerce, Sydney ... 25a
Chamber of Manufactures ... ... 5e
Chapman, Isaac ... ••• 18g
Chapman, J. ... ... ••• ••• 13m
Cheese, Export Statistics of ... 29h 30ii
Chilvers, John ... ... ••• 17d
China Navigation S.S. Co. ... ••• 35c
Circular Quay ... ... ... ... 4c 5c
City Mutual Life Assurance Society, Ltd. 13k
Clarke, M. W. S 37k
Coal Industry of N.S.W., in 1902 ... 1g
*Aoal Export, Statistics of ... 13h 14h
!, Mining ... ... ... ... 23a
INDEX.
PAGE
Cohen, G. J 29a
Coghlan, T. A 9m
Commercial Development , ... ... 2a
Commercial Bank. Co. of Syd., Ltd. ... 6j
Commonwealth Buildings, Brisbane ... 13m
Commercial Bank of Sydney ... ... 8J
Cook, A. J. ... ... ... ... 35e
Cooper, A. B. ... ... ... ... 29e
Cooner, Nathan and Co. ... ... 62d
Co-operative Wool and Produce Co. ... 5f
Copper Mining ... ... ... ...23a 8-i
Corrimal Balgownie Colliery ... 13g
Cox, E. Owen ... ... ... ... 29c
Craig, Capt. Robert ... ... ... 15-1
Craig, J. B. ... ... ... ... 15-1
Crane and Sons, G. E. ... ... ... 69d
Crane, Alfred ... ... ... ... 71n
Crane, Frederick ... 71d
Crane, George E. ... ... ... 71d
Crane, Henry E.... ... ... ... 71d
Crane, Walter G. ... ... ... 71n
Crowley, G. ... ... ... ... 13k
Curcier, Adet and Co. ... ... ... 65n
Dairying ... ... ... 20a 6-i
Dairy Produce ... ... ••• 4b
Dalgety and Co. (Aberdeen Line) ... 10c
Dalgety and Co. (White Star Line) 6c 12c
Dalgety and Co ... 52n 3f
Dawkins, M. F. ... ... ... ... 17c
De Gyulay, E. W .G. ... ... ... 25k
De Thuy, Brasier ... ... ... 19c
Deutsch-Australische DampfschiSs Ges-
ellschaft ... ... ... ... 40c
Dibbs, T. A. ... ... ... ... 7j
Dibble, John ... ... ... ... 15n
Dixson Tobacco Co. ... ... ... 24e
Dixson, Hugh ... ... ... ... 25e
Douglass, W. C. ... ... ... ... 42d
Douglass, W. C. ... ... ... ... 43d
Duckenfield, Brown’s and Pelaw Main
Collieries ... ... ... ... Sg
Dunford, Edward C. ... ... ... 27d
East India Company ... ... ... 4a
Eastern and Australian S.S. Co. ... 32c
Edie, Capt. J. ... ... ... ... 59c
Ellis, F. 29c
Equitable Life Assurance Society of
U.S.A 14k
Evers, H. A. ... ... ... ... 55d
Export Trade Review, 1902 ... ... 2h
Exports, Total Value, 1901-02 ... ... 30h
Exports ... ••• 12a 6b
Exports—l9ol-02, Total Quantity ... 31h
Falk and Co., J. I. ... ... ••• 54d
Falk, J. 1 55d
Farleigh, Nettheim and Co. ... ... 18e
Farleigh, John Gibson ... ... ... 19®
Farm and Dairy Produce ... ... 5b 9d
Federal Line Steamers 28c
Fehon, W. M. ... ... ... ••• 2l
Fell, W. Scott and Co 36c
Fell, W. Scott 37c
Finance, State ... ... ... 7®
Firth, W. A 19g 21g
Forbes, Robert ... ... ... ••• 64d
Forestry 10-i
Foreign Trade ... ... ... 10b
Francis, H. B. ... ... ... ••• 19-1
Francis, Henry F. ... ... 33k
Franki, J. P. ... ... • ••• 39c
Fraser, H. C. ... ... ••• 19a
French. J. Russell ... ... 23a 5j
Friend and Co., W. S. ... ... ... 34d
Friend, A. G. ... ... ... ... 35d
Friend, H. L. ... ... ... 35d
Friend, W. H. ... ... '... ••• 35d
J . I
page
Frozen and Preserved Meats, Export
Statistics of ... ... 17h 19h
Fruit ... il-x
Fruit, Export Statistics of ... —28 h
Fry and Sons, J. S. 26e
Gardiner and Co., W. 16d
Gardiner, the late William ... ... 17d
Gelling, B. R. 19 K
Gibbs, Bright and Co. (Insurance) ... 24k
Gibb, W. A. ... ... 27k
Gibbs Bright and Co. (Shipping and
Merchants) ... ..; ... 32c
Gilchrist, Watt and Sanderson- ... 14c
Gold, Discovery ... ... ... 13a
Gold, Mining ... ... ... •...22a 7-i
Gold, Ores and Metals, Export Statistics of 16h
Goldsbrough, Mort and Co. ... ... 3f
Goodwyn, John ..1 ... ... 31k
Gosney, Charles ... ... ... 17d
Government Astronomer of N.S.W., In-
terview with ... ... ... 12-1
Grain and Fodder ... ... ... 5b
Grant, E. G. ... 39d
Grimloy, Frank, Ltd. ... ... ... 36d
Grimley, Frank ... ... ... 37d
Grocery Trade .1. ... ... 2b 6d 10d
Guardian Assurance Co., Ltd. ... ... 25k
Guthrey, Albert ... ... ... 29e
Gulf Line ... * ... ' ... ... 16c
Hair, Horns, Hoofs, Bones, etc., Ex-
port Trade of ... ... ... 22h
Hall, G. J. ... ... ... ... 15d
Harbour Trust, Sydney ... 57c
Hardware Trade ... 5d 10d
Harrison, Jones and Devlin ... ... 7f
Hastings, J. ... ... ... ... 25d
Hayes, C. H. ... ... ... ... 29a
Hervey, R. A 17e
Hickson, R. R. P. ... ... ... 57c
Hides, Leather, Basils and Glue Pieces,
Export Trade ... ... ... 23h
Hill, Clark and Co. ... ... ... 5f
Hindlc, J. ...- ... ... ... 41d
Hitchman, T. J. ... ... ... ... 17d
Hobson, A. E. ... ... ... ... 23d
Hoskings, vv. H. ... ... ... 17d
Houlder Bros, and Co. (Houlder Line)... 26c
Howard Smith Wharf ... ... ... 8c
Hudson, H. C. ... ... ... . ... 7m
Hunter and Son, John :.. 10e
Hunter, John ... ... ... ... lUe
Hunter, James ... ... ... ... 41d
Immigration ... ... ... ... 14 a
Imports and Tariff, Changes in ... 7a
Imports, Countries of Origin ... 10d
Import, Decennial Returns ... ... 3d
Import, Operations in 1902 ... ... 8d
Imports per Capita ... ... ... 4d
Importing and Distributing Trade ... 2d
Industrial Arbitration Court ... ;.. 10m
Inglis, J. ... ... ... ... ... 20a
Insurance in Australasia ... ... 2k
Insurance L ; fe and Fire Statistics 4k to 8k
Introduction.
Iron, and Iron Ore Mining ... 23a 9-i
Jackson, H. V. ... ... ... ... 22-1
Jefferson, H. G.... ... ... 17c 22d
Johnson and Sons, G. ... ... ... 56d
Johnson, Frank ... ... ... 57d
Johnson, Leonard ... ... ... 57d
Johnson, George E. ... ... ... 57d
Johnston, J. Barre ... ... ... 25a
Joseph, S. A. ... ... ... ... 17a
Jute Goods ... ... ... ... 3b
Kauri Timber Co., Ltd.... ... ... 67d
Kemp, H. H. ... 51d
Keigwin, T. H. ... ... ... ... 20a


page
Kethel, the Hou. A. ... ... ... 22-1
King, Geo. ... ... ... 16a
King, Kelso ... ... ... 34k
Kirkcaldie, David ... ... ... 2l
Kirkham, George W. ... ... ... 27d
Lamb, Commander John ... ... 13a
Lamb, Edmund James ... ... ... 27c
Land and Settlement ... ... ••• 16a
Lane, O. G. S 37c
Lake, F. W ... 18d
Leading Lines, Some ... ... ... 5d
Leather Trade ... ... ... ••• 7d
Lee, Alfred ... ... ... ... 6e
Lighthouses of N.S.W. ... ... ... 50c
Lime and Cement Mining ... ... 9-i
Littlejohn, T. ... ... ... ... 18a
Live Stock, Statistics of ... 6b 27h
Liverpool and Lon. and Globe In. Co. 8j 36k
Loan Expenditure ... ... ... 7b
Local and Island Trade ... ... 3d
Lockhart, N. C. ... ... ... ... 59c
Lockyer, Nicholas C ... ... ... 3d
Longland, A. ... ... ... ... 18d
Loveridge and Hudson ... ... ... 6m
Loveridge, A. S. ... ... ... ... 7m
Loveridge, T ... ... ... 7m
Lund’s Blue Anchor Line ... ... 14c
Mackellar, Charles Kinnaird, the Hon. 5j
Macpherson, John ... ... ... 51d
Maize ... ... *... ... ... 21a
Manning, C. ... ... ... ... 8m
Manufacturing Industry ... ... 2e
Manufacturers’ Agency, Ltd., The ... 18d
Manufactories and Works ... ... 5b
Manning Bros. ... ... ... ... 8m
Manures, Export Statistics of ... ... 29n
Maritime Trade, Sydney, Importance of 6c
Massey-Harris Co., The ... ... ... 38d
McArthur, W. and A., Ltd., (Shipping) 16c
McArthur, W. and A., Ltd., (Soft Goods) 20d
McArthur, Alexander ... ... ... 21d
McArthur, W. A. 21d
McArthur, G. W 22d
McArthur, J. P. ... ... ... ... 22d
McArthur, W. and A. (Merchants, Engin-
eering) ... ... ... ... 58d
McMillan, Sir William ... 18a 17c 21d 51d
McMurtrie and Co. ... ... ... 14e
Meats ... 4b 9d
Meat Export ... ... ... ••• 20a
Mercantile Mutual Fire Insurance C 0.... 34k
Meeks, A. W. ’ ... 21a
Messageries Maritimes ... ... 7c 18c
Metcalfe and Co. ... ... ... 42k
Metropolitan Fire Brigades 40k
Michaelis, George ... ... ... 16e
Mining 22a
Mining Industry, Miscellaneous Metals 7-i
Minnett, J. A ... ... ... 29k
Mitchell and Co., D. ... ... ... 44d
Mitchell, David ... ... ... ... 46n
Mitchell, Isadore ... ... ... 47d
Mitchell, P. C. ... ... ... ... 47d
Mitchell, Sydney J. ... ... ... 47d
Mitchell, H. C. ... ... ... ... 25a
Mort, T. S. ... ... ... ... 39c
Mort’s Dock and Engineering Co. ... 38c
Montefiore, J. L. ... ... ... 15a
Murray, W. G. ’... ... ... ... 17a
Mutual Life Insurance Co. of N.Y. ... 16k
Mutual Life Association of Australasia 18k
Nathan, Charles... ... ... ... 63d
National Mutual Life Assn, of Aust. ... 42k
National Fire and Marine Insurance
Co. of N.Z. ... ... ... ... 26k
Navigation Department ... ... 59c
Nettheim, Cosmann ... ... ... 19e
PAGE
New Zealand Insurance Co. ... ... 28k
New Zealand Loan and Mercantile
Agency Co., Ltd. ... ... ... 2f
Newcastle ... ... ... ... 14m
Newcastle-Wallsend Colliery ... ... 15g
New York Life Insurance Company ... 22k
Nippon, Yusen Kaisha Liner “ Kumano
Maru” ... ... ... ... 6b
Norwich and London Accident Ins. Ass. 30k
Norddeutscher Lloyd ... ... ... 20c
Norrie, H. F. ... ... ... ... 57c
North British and Mer. Insurance Co. 35k
Nosworthy, Thomas ... ... ... 47d
Oats ... ... ... ... ... 21a
Ocean Steamship Co. ... ... ... 14c
Ocean Accident and Guarantee Corpor-
ation, Ltd. ... ... ... 20k
Oils, Export Statistics of ... ...3b2Bh
Oliver, C. N. J. ... 2l
Opal Mining 9-i
Orient Liner “ Ophir” ... ... ... 4b
P. and O. Co 24c
Pastoral ... ... ... ... 17a
Pastoral Finance Association ... ... 4f
Pastoral Industry ... ... ... 3-i
Petersen, Boesen and Co. ... ... 23d
Petersen, J. R. ... ... ... ... 23d
Playfair, Edmund ... ... ... 21-1
Playfair, Thomas ... ... ... 20-1
Playfair, the late Thomas ... ... 21-1
Pope, G. Howard ... ... ... 23k
Ports, Commonwealth, Importance 0f... 7c
Prescott and Co., H. ... ... ... 14-1
Prescott, H. ... ... ... ... 10-i
Production, Primary ... ... ... 2-i
Purves, T. P. ... ... ... ... 22k
Railways and Tramways of N.S.W. ... 2l
Rainfall of New South Wales ... ... 12-1
Reid and Co., Robert ... ... ... 24d
Reid, Senator Robert ... ... ... 25d
Reid, Robert, Jun. ... ... ... 25d
Reid, Maurice ... ... ... ... 25d
Remington, J. C. ... ... ... 19k
Rennie, Major Z. C. ... ... ... 17k
Resoh’s Waverlcy Brewery ... ... 36e
Resch, Arnold ... ... ... ... 37e
Resell, Edmund ... ... ... ... 36e
Resch, Edmund, Jun. ... ... ... 37e
Rich and Co., E. ... ... ... ... 72d
Richards and Sons, B. (Riverstone Meat
Company) ... ... ... ... 16-1
Richards, the late Robert ... ... 18-1
Richards, B. H 19-i
Robinson, A. F. ... ... ... ... 23a
Rodgers, E. H. ... ... ... ... 24a
Rowe and Spain ... ... ... ... 4m
Royal Exchange, Sydney ... ... 29a
Royal Shipwreck Relief and Humane
Society of N.S.W 55c
Royle and Co. ... ... ... ... 30k
Royle, C. J 31k
Royle, F. A. ... ... ... ... 31k
Royal Insurance Co. ... ... ... 32k
Rylands and Sons (Colonial), Ltd. ... 26d
Rylands, the late John ... ... ... 27d
Sales of Vessels and Mortgages ... ... 8c
Sargood, Butler, Nichol and Ewen ... 28d
Seaham Colliery ... ... ... ... 17g
Shale, Export Statistics of ... ... 30h
Shaw, W. E 25e
Shipping of N.S.W 2c
Shipbuilding, Development of ... ... 5a
Shipping Office Returns... ... ... 7c
Shipping of Newcastle ... ... ... 15m
Silly, A. L 51d
Silver, Lead and Zinc Mining ... 22a 8-i
Skins, Export Statistics of ... ... 24h
PAGE
Smith, Chas. ... ... ... ... 17a
Softgoods ... ... ... ...sd9d
South Bulli and Bellambi Collieries ... 7g
Southern Coal Owners’ Agency ... 19g
Spain, A. ... ... ... ... ... 5m
State Fire Insurance Co., Ltd. ... .;. 25k
Standard F. and M. Insurance Co. ... 30k
Statistician’s Department ... ... 9m
Steam Fleet of N.S.W. ... 7c
Steamers, Passenger Certificated ... 7c
Storey, J. H. ... ... ... ... 19a
Stocks and Shares ... ... ... 8b
Stoddart, F. W. ... ... ... 13d 25d
Storey, David and Co. ... ... ... 30d
Storey, David ... ... ... ... 31d
Strang, W. S. ... ... ... ... 61d
Sugar, Export Statistics of ... ... 30h
Sun Insurance Office, London ... ... 30k
Sydney, Chamber of Commerce ... 25a
Tallow, Export Statistics of ... ... 14h
Taylor and Co., Enoch ... ... ... 6e
Tea Trade ... ... ... ... 6d
Teece, R. ... ... ... ... 11k
Thatcher, F. H. ... ... ... ... 27e
Thomson, William ... ... ... 35e
Tillock and Co. ... ... ... ... 48d
Tillock, F. K 49d
Tillock, J. T 12d 49d
Tillock, Thomas Edward ... ... 49d
Timber, Export Statistics of ... 25h-26h
Tin Mining ... ... .... 23a 8-1
Tonnage per Capita (Shipping)... ... 6c
Towns, Capt. R.... ... ... ... 15a
Trade, Foreign ... ... ... ... 10b
Trade Review of N.S.W. for 1902 ... 2b
Trading Companies ... ... ... 9b
Tuckett, Charles B. ... ... ... 35e
Tyser Line ... ... ... ... 30c
D nion Box and Packing Case Co., 9b 4e 28e
Union Insurance Co. of Canton ... 24k
Union Steamship Co.’s Wharf ... ... 9c
Vessels built during Year ... ... 7c
Vessels on the Register ... ... ... 7c
Vickery, Hon. Ebenezer ... ... 19g
Vickery’s Buildings ... ... ... 12m
Wade and Co. ... ... ... ... 32e
Wade, D. C. ... 33e
Wade, John ... ... ... ... 33e
Wallarah Coal Co. ... ... ... 16g
Waller, T. F. ... 57c
Waley, F. G 8g
Warren and Strang ... ... ... 60d
Warren, Thomas W. ... ... ... 61d
Watt, J. B. ... ... ... ... 16a
White Star Line ... ... 6c 12c
Whiting, W. G 15d
Whaling and Sealing Industry... ... 4a
Wheat, Flour, etc., Export Statistics of
20h-21h
Willis, T. and W 42k
Willis, J. S 14a
Wines and Spirits ... ... ...2blod
Winchcombe, Carson and Co. ... ... 6f
Wool ... ... ... ... ... 6b 2h
Wool, Export Statistics of ... 5h 10h
Wool Trade of N.S.W. in 1902 2f
Wormaldßros. ... ... ... ... 38k
Wormald, J. D ... 39k
Wormald, H. P 39k
Wright, J. B. ... ... ... ... 15-1
Wright, James ... ... ... ... 25d
Wunderlich’s, Ltd. ... ... 3e 30e
Wunderlich, Alfred ... ... ... 31e
Wunderlich, E. H. C 31e
Wunderlich, Dr. Otto ... ... ... 31e
Yuill and Co., G. S. (Shipping) ... 34c
Yuill and Co., G. S 13g
INDEX —Continued.
