

THE
DAUGHTER OF ST. MARK,
A GRAND OPERA SERIA,
In Three Acts,
FIRST PERFORMED AT THE
ROYAL CICTORIA THEATRE, SYDNEY,
ON MONDAY, MAY 61, 1852.
THE MUSIC COMPOSED BY
W. M. BALFE,
THE LIBRETTO BY
ALFEED BU NN.
Author of “ The Bohemian Girl,” “2 he Enchantress,” “ Matilda of
Hungary,” Sfc., Sfc. : fe..
, THE MUSIC ARRANGED FOR THIS THEATRE BY MR. J. GIBBS,
AM) CAN BE OBTAINED AT THE PUBLISHERS’,
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY WOOLCOTT AND CLARKE,
Music-sellers, Print-sellers, and Publishers, 555, George-slreet.
1852.


THE
DAUGHTER OF ST. MARK,
A GRAND OPERA SERIA,
In Three Acts,
FIRST PERFORMED AT THE
THEATRE ROYAL, DRURY LANE,
NOVEMBER, 27TH, 1844,
AND AT THE
ROYAL VICTORIA THETRE, SYDNEY,
ON 1853.
THE MUSIC COMPOSED BY
W. M. BALFE,
THE LIBRETTO BY
ALFRED BUNN.
Author of “ The Bohemian Girl," ”Stradella,’’ “ The Maid of Artois,''
*• The Crusaders,” “ The Enchantress,” “ Guillaume Tell,” “ The
Syren,” “Matilda of Hungary,” “ Minister and Meraer,” “ Lestocq”
“Bronze Horse,” “My Neighbours Wife,” “Loretta“ The
Bondmanfyc.,
THE MUSIC ARRANGED FOR THIS THEATRE BY MR. J. GIBBS.
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY WOOLCOTT AND CLARKE,
Music-sellers, Print-sellers, and Publishers, 555, George-street ,
1852.


DRAMATIS PERSONS.
Lusignano ( King of Cyprus ) Madame Saha Flower.
Andrea Comoro ( a Paiircian of Venice). .Mr. F. Howson.
Moncenigo ( one of the Council of Ten) .. Mr. .Rogers.
Adolphe de Courcy {a French Knight) . .Mr. J. Howson.
Strozzi {Officer of the Guard) Mr. Willis,
Mariano ( Page to the King) Miss A. Hart.
Principal Herald Mr. Turner,
Assassins Messrs. Spencer, Welch, and
McGowan.
Minstrels Messrs. Sharp and Hollis,
Mesdames Gibbs, Carandini,
Gautrot, Hart, the Misses
Griffiths, Hart, and Collins.
Catarina Cornaro ( niece to Andrea) Mrs. Guerin.
Priests, Officers, Guards, Standard Bearers, Seamen, &c.
Nobility, Maids of Honour, Bridesmaids, Venetian
Suite, Flower Girls, &c., &c., &c.
First Act, and part of Second, at Venice—the remainder at Cyprus.
Period : 1469.


THE DAUGHTER OF ST. MARK.
ACT I.
Scene I. — Festal Hall in the Villa of Andrea — on the o. p. side a
large staircase and gallery, leading to the apartments of Catarina—
and on the p. s. the balcony to a terrace two large doors o. p. and
p. s. chair on p. s.
Enter Catarina, down the stairs o. p.
RECITATIVE.
There is fond delight much dearer far
Than all our other raptured moments are ;
‘Tis when we picture more than we possess,
And fancy coming joys can ne’er be less ;
When hope unto our earliest feelings brings,
That charm to which the heart with fervour clings ;
And which, when broken, other ties it nurst,
It owns the longest, as it knew the first.
That hope is mine, for Adolphe, here to-day,
My vows with vows as faithful will repay;
And on the holy shrine, that pledge renew,
By him declared, by me received, as true !
Ado. (exclaiming outside the balcony) Catarina —
Cat. ’Tis he!
Adolphe ( singing without).
SERENADE.
There’s sunlight in Heaven,
There’s calm on the sea :
Perfume on the flower,
And bloom on the tree ;
With nature as beaming
As beauty can be,
And all around smiling—
Oh ! smile thou on me !
Catarina, running up to Adolphe, who enters at p.s. door.


RECITATIVE.
Adolphe ! my own Adolphe—
Ado. My best beloved
From whom one thought an instant ne’er hath roved.
My bosom’s hope, my heart’s delight and pride,
With whom each wish alone I would divide I
Cat. Adolphe !my husband—
Ado, Ah ! unto my heart,
That sacred name a transport doth impart:
The joy ’tis linked with through my soul doth thrill,
And all its vows I hasten to fulfil.
DUET.
Be this moment the brightest
That love hath yet known ;
And its sorrows the lightest
O’er love that hath flown.
Thou art mine ! thou art mine 1
As mine arms round thee twine.
Ado. The hour is come that union now to see,
Which makes us happy while it leaves us free :
Free to select a home—to bid farewell
To one I seek no longer in to dwell:
Where plots by tyranny at freedom hurled,
Have rendered Venice hateful to the world!
Cat. (with a feeling of reproof)
My Adolphe bear in mind this spot of earth,
Is that which gave thy Catarina birth !
Ado. Thy land no longer ! mine with open arms
Would give full welcome to such priceless charms —
France now adopts thee —
Cat. Cans’t thou then forget
The scenes we’ve lived in, and when first we met ;
The place—with spell to me all spell above—
Where first I listened to thy words of love ?
CAVATINA.
As the fair world 1 traversed,
The same ’twere to me,
What the peril surrounding
Where honour might be.
And thus guided by Fortune,
Thy young Cavalier,
Though he sought glory elsewhere,
Found happiness here!


Cat. The home I loved so, leaving,
O’er those I loved there grieving—
I quit with fate unshrinking,
Of that tie only thinking ;
Which, while fate cannot sever,
Makes thee mine, and for ever.
DUET.
The chain thy beauty’s weaving,
The sigh thy breast is heaving —
The look so bashful shining,
Which yields without repining
Despite thy vain endeavour,
Make thee mine, and for ever.
[At the end of this, enter Andrea at o.p. door, who crosses and
comes down between Adolphe and Catarina.
And. (to Adolphe)
My noble Adolphe, whom this morning’s rite
Will with those honours which are mine unite.
I bid thee welcome here {then to Catarina) my much loved child.
Around that cheek, which long hath sweetly smiled,
Now smiles, as charged with peace and beauty play,
In fond approval of this joyous day.
Ado , When once my name with thine allied shall be,
For all thou dost confer,
My arm, my blood, my life I give to thee—
My hand and heart to her.
TRlO.— Ensemble.
Ado. and Cat. (to Andrea )
To those whose wisdom is the guiding star
Of this happy day,
Two hearts with gratitude o’erflowing are,
A tribute to pay.
And. To thee who looketh from thy realm afar,
On this happy day,
On this happy day :
My thoughts with gratitude o’erflowing are,
All homage to pay.
\ln the execution of this trio, Andrea crosses to p. s,, and
Adolphe and Catarina get towards o.p. during the last few
bars, Moncenigo has ascended the Terrace, and taken up a
fixed position near the p.s. column.
Andrea (aside and alarmed at seeing Moncenigo)
One of the Council placed within my halls !
His hated presence every sense appals—


Some strange mysterious purpose brings him here,
To awe with wonder, or to chill with fear.
(turns to Adolphe)
Now haste thee, Adolphe—hasten to complete
This day’s great purport —we again will meet
Beneath this roof, and consecrate a scene,
Bright as any have its annals been.
(to Catarina)
Go, gentle girl, and standing by thy side,
Him of whose house thou long hast been the pride ;
Thou shalt in all his tried affection see
Confirming acts, but promised yet to thee.
\_Adolphe conducts Catarina to the o.p. staircase , hy which she
returns to her apartment, and he, wrapping his cloak around
him , exit at p. s. door, token Moncenigo comes down the stage
to Andrea.
Mon. Are we alone?
And. We are, speak your purpose.
Mon. Here, from the Secret Ten assembled, I come to give their
message, alike important to the state and thee.
And. The Ten in Council—horror chills my blood —proceed.
Mon. ’Tis rumoured Adolphe de Coureey is betrothed to your niece,
and will shortly wed her.
And. This day.
Mon. Wilt thou obey the Council, second the lofty project they have
in view—give to the Council such assistance as V enice counts upon when
she needs a friend?
And. I hear ye, Sir.
Mon. Then, by the law of Venice, which holds her subjects—as her
foes—in awe, the Council, by my voice, bids thee annul this marriage.
And. Ah ! do I hear aright, or do I dream ? Annul this marriage—
violate that bond —all ties of feeling thus tear asunder, and drag down
hearts, now happy, to despair—to heap upon this head —
Mon. The state demands the sacrifice. To her thine honour, as thy
hlood belongs, should she require it at thy hands.
And. And would’st thou have me violate a sacred vow, and taint my
cheek with shame —would’st have me court the hate of all the world ?
Never! such outrage Venice would disclaim; my life is her’s —my honour
is my own !
Mon. But instead of this stranger Knight, 1 bring thee an offer so
brilliant thy pride cannot question.
And. I would wer’t a King.
Mon. ’ Tis a King.
And. What words are these, an Empire at my feet, my name enrolled
with lofty lineage. But ’tis a vain regret, and why repine o'er dreams of
greatness which can ne’er be realised.
Mon. Listen ! Cyprus has driven from her shores the high descendant of
her kingly race, and Venice, ready in the hour of need to crush rebellion
and uphold the right, would fain espouse the cause of Lusignano, the lass
scion of that mighty house.
And. Well!
Mon. Though proscribed by them, yet has the Council resolved 14
keep him on the throne, and to defeat their malice and complete
compact of alliance to bind each state together. Venice hath chosen him


a wife, upon whose brows the Crown of Cyprus once again shall shine in
all the splendour of its brightest days, and having deemed thee loyal it
is thy niece she raises to this rank.
And. Is it possible ?
Mon. Relying on thy prudence, now I leave thee, soon to retnrn to
hear thy determination. Reflect while Venice seeks to make thee great,
she can revenge an insult. Think not lightly of my words, one hour
decides. Thv glory or thy death. {Exit.
And. What’s to he done : on one side glory extends her arms to
welcome me and mine ; upon the other yawns a gulph ’neath two young
hearts whose hopes are in their dawn. But I forget, the Council now
awaits their victim’s answer.
This way the crowd are bending—let me fly, and in solitude
conceal the anguish which now preys upon my heart.
[,Andrea exit by the p.s. door, while the company enter by the p.s.
staircase, one passing down to place the arm chair in order on
the p. s .side, when Catarina, attended by her-, bridesmaids,
enters from o.p. and descends the staircase.
CHORUS, on the entry of Catarina.
As pure in ray
As early day,
In the vestal beam which lighteth,
The sacred flame
Of woman’s fame,
When her bridal vow she plighteth.
There is no guile
Within her smile,
Which in maiden beauty shineth ;
Chaste as a star
That from afar,
Its light round the earth entwineth.
[ These ladies remain on the o. p., while Catarina crossing to the
Nobles on the p. s. side, makes them a profound reverence,
which they return, tvhen she crosses back to the Bridesmaids.
Adolphe enters by the p.s. staircase,preceded by the banner
of De Courcey.
CHORUS, on the entry of Adolphe.
In manhood’s bloom,
With helm and plume,
In his pride the Chief advanceth—
Though love would seem
The raptured theme,
To which still his light heart danceth.
His manly form,
In calm or storm,
All its wonted nerve retaineth ;
Firm as the rock,
In tempest’s shock,
Which its hold unmoved maintaineth.


[Adolphe, then presenting her to his friends, who again return her
curtsey, he conducts her to the chair placed for her on tht
p. s. side ; her ladies follow her and stand- around, she being
seated, Adolphe’s friends surround him, he being seated on
Catarina’s right; the ladies of the Corps de Ballet present
Catarina with bouquets, which are taken by her, passing
behind the gentlemen on the o. p. and then in front of those on
the p. s,, and regaining their original places. When all are
grouped at the end of this second chorus , begins
THE DIVERTISSEMENT.
\_And as soon ai the Divertissement is finished, an Officer of the
Household- is seen to make his way from the f. s, stairs, and to
come dozen the stage.
Officer (to Adolphe and, Catarina')
The altar is prepared, the incense burns,
And to the shrine the bidden beadsman turns.
[Exit Officer at p. s. stairs.
FULL CHORUS.
Let every voice swell high
To the realms of the vaulted sky !
CHORUS OF MEN.
And the hearts of the brave shall be
Enrolled in the cause of Chivalry !
CHORUS OF WOMEN.
While loves more gentle lay
Its melody shall play.
FULL CHORUS.
May Fortune’s star preside
O’er the Chieftain and his bride.
QUARTETTE.
Happy hearts, fond and fair
Be your young days ;
May ye ne’er feel the care
Which the world sways !
And when Time plumes his flight
O’er ye at last,
May his wing sweep as light
As if ne’er past !
And should grief ever mar
Scenes that so lovely are,
Hope shall still dash afar
Clouds o’er ye cast!


Ensemble.
Happy -hearts, fond and fair
Be your young days !
May ye ne’er feel the care
Which the world sways !
Adolphe (offering his hand to Catarina')
Mine own beloved one, let us not delay
One moment more the rapture of this day.
Cat. (with uneasiness)
But where is Andrea ? one to both so dear,
Our joy were wanting, unless he were here.
Ado. (to Catarina)
Perchance this moment, at the Holy Shrine,
True to his word, he waits to make thee mine.
[Adolphe takes the hand of Catarina, and followed by the
Bridesmaids, Nobles, and the body of guests, has passed
round the stage, and is about to go off by the p. s. side, when
Andrea, pale and agitated, enters on the Terrace by the
p. s. staircase
FINALE.
And, Hold ! stop this marriage, by the words now heard
It is my will these rites shall be deferred.
{aside)
Deferred ! this brain will burst, this heart will break,
While thus its feelings to their centre shake:
{aloud)
No ! not deferred, for every w r ord I spoke,
The pledge I gave ye, I do now revoke.
[ General movement of the whole group, Catarina, her maids, and sundry
Nobles, tahe up a position on the o. p. side ; Adolphe and his
friends on the p. s, ; Andrea between Catarina and Adolphe ;
the other Ladies, Nobles, and Pages in the back ground:
alarm of all.
ADOLPHE, CATARINA, AND CHORUS.
What mean those words ? break off the rites prepared ?
Defeat the hopes by all so deeply shared ?
Refuse the vows of honour to maintain,
And life’s fond ties dissolve at once in twain !
To know the cause we seek —
Let him speak! let him speak !
[Andrea remains silent and absorbed, when Adolphe advancei
from the p. s. towards Mm.
Ado. Without reproach, or angry thought,
Which justly might arise ;
With mind a moment overwrought,
That now I tranquilize.


By friendships bonds remembered well,
By those more dear I feel:
The pangs which thus my bosom swell,
In faith to me reveal.
And. ’Twere fruitless here such question to resolve
For word and promise, I alike dissolve ;
Adolphe, farewell, forgive me, and forget,
The strife we part in, and that e’er we met.
Cat. That fate which made thee mine,
The tie can sever :
Heaven may the knot entwine,
But man shall —never !
[Crosses to p. s ,hy the side of Adolphe.
Ado. If in some petty plot or state intrigue,
Thy soul, once noble, condescends to league ;
If for some shameful motive, unexplained,
My country’s honour and mine own be stained :
That deep affront I will, upon this day—
Meant to be one of happiness—repay.
And. Take all I own, my wealth, my rank, my life—
All, saving her, I cannot make thy wife.
Ado. And can’st thou thus thy solemn oath foreswear 1
(;to Andrea ) 1
Nought can my fury now assuage,
This perjured act to me :
Despite my feelings and thine age,
Shall soon resented be.
Chorus , {to Andrea)
No words can calm our pride or rage,
Such perjured act to see ;
And never doubt, despite thine age, £
It will resented be. r”
Cat. Though hearts by honour held an age pi*
No perjured act can free ;
Better by death this storm assuage,
Than thus its victim be.
Chorus {to Andrea')
Nought can ourfurj r now assuage,
This perjured act on thee :
Despite all feeling, and thine age,
Shall soon resented be. J
Cat, Where is thy right, and from what claim derived,
To act this part, by scheme or fraud contrived ;
Here, before Heaven, whose light doth oe’er us shine.
Break thine own oath, but bid me not break mine !


And. The right which thou would’st question is that power,
Thy parent gave me in her dying hour ;
Though from thy mind thou would’st at once efface,
All thoughts of him who fills that parent’s place :
There is a duty, which by her was left
For thy protection, when of her bereft;
And knowing well the web around thee spun,
And danger near, that duty shall be done,
ADOLPHE AND CHORUS.
False as thyself thy tale,
This cheat shall not prevail;
This outrage upon me,
Shall well resented be.
CHORUS.
By us resented be !
Cat. (to Andrea ) ARIA.
From ail around apart,
Oh ! for my sake :
On this distracted heart
Some pity take.
Do not in wilder fears
My feelings steep,
But dry the burning tears
& You''see me weep.
Think how in early days
In love we dwelt,
And how, with speechless praise,
That love I felt!
Oh ! from these streaming eyes
Turn not your sight ;
Nor let the peace you prize
Be broken quite!
And. (aside) Oh ! grief beyond enduring,
When while her life assuring,
* I rend its dearest tie !
Then their regard requiting,
By their hearts disuniting,
’Twere better far to die.
Ensemble.
And. and Cat. Oh ! grief beyond enduring,
When while | | life assuring,
I rend 7 - tg f } cares t tie !
He rends )


Thaa {their} regard requiting,
By { their 1. hearts disuniting,
• t — {’sr}
REPRlSE. —Ensemble.
Ado. Nought can my fury now assuage,
This perjured act to me ;
Despite my feelings and thine age,
Shall soon resented be.
Cat. Though hearts by honour held in gage,
No perjured act can free ;
Better by death this storm assuage,
Than thus its victim be !
Ladies and Nobles. No words can quell our pride or rage,
Such perjured act to see ;
And never doubt, despite thine age,
It will resented be.
Adolphe's friends. (to Andrea) Nought can our fury now assuage.
This perjured act on thee,
Despite all feeling, and thine age,
Shall soon resented be.
[Towards the last bars of the Finale , when the music becomes
animated, the friends of Adolphe, and the partizans of
Andrea, are about to rush on each other sword in hand, when
the Ladies from the bach ground interfere between them,
Iceeping those on the o. r. side, while Catarina restraining
those on the p. s., Adolphe prepares to leave the hall, and
Catarina, in the agony of her feelings, falls at the feet of
Andrea, who turns aside to conceal his tears.
TABLEAU.
END OF ACT TARSI’.


ACT II.
Scene I. — The oratory of Catarina. — Ihe scene is divided into two
compartments. In the front part is a secret door on the o. p. side,
and a smaller one on the p. s. leading to Catarina’s apartments,
by the side of which is a prie-dieu with a prayer booh on it, an
arm chair and foot stool on the p. s, side, and a square table on the
o. p, with a candelabra on it, lighted up. In the inner compartment
there is a large centre windoiv opening on a balcony. Catarina is
discovered in a recess of the balcony on the p. s. side,
DISTANT CHORUS (of Gondoliers.)
There’s not a sound, however light,
To break the charm of gentle night ;
The latest sigh of morning’s gale,
Hath not a breath to swell our sail.
Yet o’er the quiet main,
The haven we shall gain ;
For the Madonna guides our bark,
Whether the sky be bright or dark !
[At the end of this Chorus, Catarina comes down the stage , tahes.
off her veil, and places it on the arm chair.
BARCAROLE.
The Gondolier, to wind and wave
’His fragile boat confides ;
Assured the soul that’s pure and brave,
Can stem the rudest tides.
While able thus through clime or sea,
Thy dauntless course to steer ;
Where thou may’st be, oh ! pray for me,
Poor Gondolier!
The Gondolier, by vesper’s chime,
When bid no more to roam :
Contented hails the happy time,
That wakens thoughts of home.
Beneath that roof, on bended knee—
With 'all to thee so dear—
When thou shalt be, oh ! pray for me,
Good Gondolier!
SCENA.
Oh ! when thus they’ve bereft me,
Of the only hope left me,
And stifled of sorrow the cry !
Oh ! ’twere best in such anguish,
Thus no longer to languish,
But burst through its torture, and die !


RECITATIVE.
Forgive me, Heaven, if on this fatal theme,
Thy sacred edicts I should e’er blaspheme ;
And, touch’d with pity, may’st thou calm the breast,
Which those, without remorse, have thus oppressed.
Oh ! see me now in holy prayer,
Before thine altar kneel;
And in oblivion may I there
Sweet consolation feel!
[She moves slowly towards the prie-dieu, kneels down on it, and
on opening the book of prayer lying on it, she exclaims :
Cat. Ah? what do I behold? a writing traced by Adolphe’s pen con-
cealed within this sacred volume ; whether for grief or joy—for weal or
woe —my heart throbs to learn its contents. Beads: “At the hour of
midnight, when the moon shines in peaceful splendour on the lulled
Lagune, if in thy solitude the mirthful music of the Gondolier should
greet thine ear, open thy casement (let no whisper break the calm of
night), and safely moored beneath, thou shalt behold one resolved to sot
thee free!” Why should I tremble ? what fears appal me? Yes! dear
Adolphe, I will obey thy summons —the Daughter of Venice will brave
all for thy sake!—Aye, if Heaven wills it, die.
CAVATINA.
He comes to breathe again,
Each well remembered word :
Of that beguiling strain,
In happier hours I heard ;
That feeling highly wrought,
Which once around me cast:
The heart so loved—it thought
For ever it would last. ( Listening .)
RECITATIVE.
Is it a bark, which o’er the sleeping tide,
With noiseless course so tranquilly doth glide.
The truth he will reveal
My destiny must seal!
’Tis he—’tis he !
He comes to breathe again
Each well remembered word :
Of that beguiling strain,
In happier hours I heard ;
That feeling highly wrought,
Which once around me cast:
The heart so loved —it thought
For ever it would last.
[As Catarina is descending the steps, Andrea enters the v. s, door,
and Catarina utters a loud scream on beholding him.


Cat. Great Heav’n !
And. The sorrow heaped on thee,
Thou may’st believe, hath not been caused by me.
Think not for thee one grief I could create,
Without enduring anguish far more great.
The act of Venice bad me break mine oath,
And brought this scene of ruin upon both.
Thou know’st the might—the vengeance she can wield,
To which, in horror, I was forced to yield.
And while compelled such rigour to assume,
It was to save thee from a darker doom,
Cat. He who can read all hearts will thine lay bare,
And from its cell each latent secret tear.
And, I can before His dread tribunal stand,
With guiltless spirit, and with unstained hand !
Alas ! thou dost not know what further ill
Awaits thy feelings, and usurps thy will,
’Tis not enough one cherished heart to break,
But Venice wills another thou shalt take.
Cat. Another ?
And. Aye, if thou aside can’st fling
The thoughts to which thy memory loves to cling ;
And think no more of plighted faith or vow,
To-morrow sees A CROWN upon thy brow.
Cat. Never!
And, But hear me ?
Cat. I alike despise,
The threats of Venice and her kingly ties ;
And though mine own betrothed from me she rends,
Yet nor on her, nor thee, this hand depends.
And. Were it on me alone that Venice sought
To pass the outrage she on both has brought :
I had all bounds of state or fear o’erleapt,
And still my faith beneath her dagger’s kept;
But knowing well the force of her decree,
I could not peril him thou lov’st, nor thee.
Cat. Adolphe ! though on my doom they now are bent,
Oh ! what against him can be their intent ?
And. As from the shrine we can the idol reach,
They think through one, that they can master each.
Thou understand’st my words—oh! slight them not.
And Heaven, that shields the good, watch o’er thy lot*
SOLO ( Andrea).
When all around our path is dreary,
And sorrow o’er us sweep— a
"When rest denied is to the weary,
And : i’ n tr ;uires t ir. v j.m


When those the bitter world neglecteth,
But ruin near them see :
Then, Heaven, the innocent protecteth,
If pure their spirit be.
When friends in their affection falter,
We deemed before so true ;
And that regard begins to alter,
Which fond was hitherto.
When time, that heals all grief, respecteth
No more the ills we see :
Then, Heaven, the innocent protecteth,
If pure their spirit be. [Exit.
Cat. Did I hear aright! Dare they threaten ; they little know the
resolution of her they brave ; their chains, their poison, an d their loath-
some dungeons, move not my fears—this night will end it all. This night
Adolphe will bear me to that land where those who truly love may
repose in peace and freedom. Yes, Adolphe, secure from the dangers
which now threaten, we may he happy, if no more we’re great.
\_Duriny the above, Moncenigo enters from secret door o. p.
Mon. Ladj r , hear me, and remember that through me thy country
speaks, if thou would’st preserve Adolphe de Courcy from perils which
neither he nor thou are prepared to hrave, tell him that, lured by brighter
prospects, the love he covets is no longer thine to give.
Cat , ’Twere blasphemy to utter lie so base.
Mon. It rests with thee ; thou hast been told, respect thyself, and the
decrees of Venice, and thou shalt avert the danger in which he stands.
Cat. And who dares seek his life ?
Mon. Behold them ( lifting curtains and showing assassins).
(Clock strikes 12.) [Exit.
[Catarina is on the point of falling dotvn at the foot of the table
o. r ., ivhen she sees Adolphe climb over the balcony. He
takes off his cloak, throws it to the boatmen , and seeing
Catarina, runs to her. She remains immoveable, with her eyes
fixed on the secret chamber.
DUET.
Ado. Enchantress of ray life !
Again, ’tis thee
I see,
My own affianced wife.
From foes and from false friends, I come now to tear time,
And where thou may’st be happy and honored be, bear thee.
C 'at. Adolphe !
-Ado. Ah ! in their shame and guilt,
They bad two hearts bereaved:
Whose hopes were on devotion built,
And vows to Heaven received !
Cat. (aside) Adolphe ! my tongue expression doth deny—
Ado Ah ! why, when near me, do I hear that sigh ?
Cat. (aside) If happiness be here, yet death is there.
{Points to secret door.


Ado. And dost thou not this joyful moment share—
Partake of that delight, the vast excess
Of this fond bosom which to thine I press ?
Cat. Forgive me should there steal
Of grief one latent tear ;
Ado. What sorrow can’st thou feel
When thine Adolphe is near ?
Cat. (aside) May Heaven forgive this seeming guilt,
Which one so true deceived :
Whose hopes were on devotion built,
And vows by Heaven received.
Ado. Oh ! well nigh in their shame and guilt
They had two hearts bereaved.
Whose hopes were on devotion built.
And vows by Heaven received.
(‘pointing to the window)
My bark, which o’er the tide
Shall float with muffled oar.
Is watched for by a guide,
On yonder friendly shore.
Come while the wave is sparkling
Far from the strand—
Come while the shade is darkling
Under the land.
The moon may guard the night,
While all around her sleeps ;
Yet love, by that pure light,
Its constant vigil keeps.
■Cat. (Escaping from the arms of Adolphe, who is attempting to
draw her towards the balcony.)
No, no, Adolphe, it must not, cannot be,
Fly hence, at once, and think no more of me.
Ado, And is that oath, which closely linked our lot,
Thus disregarded, or remembered not ?
Cat. (aside) That he should thus upbraid,
When I’m the victim made !
Ado. Say you no longer love ? my life or death —
My very being hangs upon your breath !
Cat. Have pity !
Ado, Speak!
Gat. Hold ! hold ! my madden’d brain !
[She perceives the curtain over the secret chamber lifted up,and
the glittering of the assassins poignards.
Then—l confess—l ne’er can love again—•
I mean —not thee—
[Catarina, with a convulsive sob, buries her face in her hnnds 3
while Adolphe stands as if nailed to the spot.


Ado. And her own lips proclaim,
At once her guilt, her perfidy, and shame.
Cat. {aside) Abandoned and betrayed,
Forsaken now by all;
I heed no more if ill
Or ruin o’er me fall.
May—my deceitful words,
Forgiven be above;
For ’tis him, only him,
That ever I can love.
Ado, Oh ! let ms not believe, while thus I sue to thee,
That one I worshipped so, can ever perjured be.
Gat. {aside) May Heaven that mercy show, denied to man—
{to him) Depart Adolphe —in safety—while you can.
[Catarina crosses to p.s.
Ado. The truth is told—that truth which hath revealed
The fearful secret which thy breast hath steeled.
Cat. What secret ?
Ado. —to the (now deemed slender) claim
Of deep affection and unspotted fame.
A rival offers to thy dazzled eyes,
Kank, wealth, and station—baubles women prize.
Gat. Oh, Heavens !
Ado. It is the talk of Venice—from each lip—
The base and idle do the scandal sip—
A Prince ! —a King hath offered thee a hand,
With gold and gear thy pride cannot withstand.
Cat. This is too dreadful.
Ado. If these rumours be—
Say but one word.
[Catarina perceiving Moncenigo, who appears at the door of the
secret chamber in a threatening gesture, and disappears.
Cat. ’Tis too true !
{then aside) let me die.
Ado, I pardon thee, for whom I cherish yet
Unworthy fondness, and a vain regret;
But he my heart who rifled—from it tore
The peace therein, which time cannot restore:
Him will I course to earth’s remotest part,
And at the altar’s foot stab through his heart.
Ensemble.
Gat. Despite this scorching pain,
Which seems to crush my brain,
One solace is for me ;
That but for each false word,
By him in credence heard,
His life would forfeit be !


Ado. Despite this scorching pain,
Which seems to crush the brain,
One thought comes back to me :
That with each perjured word,
Mine ear too sadly heard,
Her heart thus changed should be.
Cat. ( running to Adolphe as he rushes up the stage)
Adolphe, one word before you quite efface —
Ado. With thee, who these ties for another can sever ?
Cat. Alas ! you know not —were you in my place —
Ado. I would not have betrayed.
Cat. You go then ?
Ado. For ever!
[Adolphe throws Catarina from him. and rushes off over the
balcony , near to which Catarina falls senseless on the stage;
at the same moment the curtain is withdrawn, and the assassins
enter at that door , preceded by Moncenigo.
Mon. A kingdom and a Crown those tears will dry—
Catarina !
[Pointing to the body of Catarina, then addressing the assassins.
With her to Cyprus hie.
[The assassins go up the stage, as Moncenigo exit at the secret
chamber door, and the scene closes them in.
Scene. — Apartments in the Moncenigo Palace. Enter Moncenigo,
Ist E. o.p.
Mon. My dream is fulfilled —my ambitious hopes are realised—l feel
as though a Crown did grace my brow; that gewgaw I gladly yield to
Cyprus, while the power of Venice I hold within my grasp, as her Am-
bassador received and known, I obtain there station, wealth, without the
odium I incur in Venice ; and what is more than all, the means to
gratify the hate I bear to Andrea and his race (perhaps unjustly), but
imbibed so deep that vengeance cannot pause, nor action slumber, and
these two principles combined in force excite the feeling and direct the
mind.
AIR,
Oh, what hopes at their height,
Now burst forth upon the sight ;
For wealth and rank, in all their might,
Shall both be mine to-night.
’Tis in vain we would hush
All the strifes the heart which flush—
An idle dream those thoughts to crush
Which from its sources rush.
The course I follow will, through the world,
Despite the malice by others hurled
Of those thoughts in their might,
All my hopes to requite—
While pursuit shall be mine, and to night.


2nd.
In revenge there’s delight,
With that feeling at its height —
And such revenge in all its might,
I revel in to-night.
’Tis in vain we would quell
All the storms the heart which swell;
Or seek to calm the griefs that dwell
Within that secret cell.
The course I follow will, through the world,
Despite the malice by others hurled—
Of revenge in its might,
All my wrongs to requite —
Which revenge shall be mine, and to-night. (Exit.
Scene 111. — The battlements of the Palace of Famagosta in Cyprus,
with a view of the port seen under them, and the stage thronged with
the populace, sailors, fyc.
CHORUS.
Hail to this joyous day,
May the smiles which o’er each cheek now play,
To all around attest,
The hearts they spring from are at rest.
The banner of war is furled, and peace
Now bids all the feelings of discord cease ;
Like her the fair, and him the free,
Meeting in love and harmony,
Let all united be.
A DIVERTISSEMENT HERE TAKES PLACE, AT THE
END OF WHICH A PROCLAMATION.
People of Cyprus, in the barque which nears
Our port, our monarch’s chosen Queen appears;
St. Mark’s immortal lion gilds her sail,
Filled by the breath of love upon the gale;
In fervent prayer your voices now unite,
That joy and peace her gentle path may light!
CHORUS.
Power divine,
Before thee we incline !
Humbly we thee implore.
Thou of whom earth and sky
Worship the might and majesty—
Thy gifts on them to pour !
{During this Chorus, the fleet, which accompanies the state vessel r
with Catarina on hoard, is seen to pass in the distance, firing
a salute, which is returned by the guns of the port; loudflourish


of trumpets, fyc., heard on all sides, and with a brilliant march,
at first distant, then louder, the procession begins. The King r,
followed by till his Court, a body of Knights and their
respective banners, and a file of soldiers. At a given point,
the state vessel reaches the port. Catarina then descends, led
by Andrea and Moncenigo. She is met by the King , who kneels
at her feet and kisses her hand; then rising, he leads her
forward, and presents her to the people, who all how before
her: the King advances and sings :
SOLO.
People of Cyprus ! on this solemn day
To her, our Queen affianced, homage pay;
While bowed in thankfulness to him above,
You offer fervent prayers —
Oh, may the Crown she wears
Be on her brow supported by your love.
FULL CHORUS.
Long live Catarina—long may live the King !
CHORUS OF PRIESTS.
Hosannah, glory be to the Most High!
CHORUS OF ALL.
Let our song of joy and duty ring
Throughout the gladdened sky.
[The dancing and sports are carried on in the distance, the vessels
hoist their flags, and guns keep up an incessant firing, a deaf-
ning shout from the whole populace, and the waving of banners
until the Act drops.
■END OF ACT SECOND,


ACT III.
Scene I.— The gardens of a Casino ai Nicosia, in Cyprus. On the
o. p. a sort of Vine Arbour, having the appearance of a green
tunnel, extending up the stage. On the p.s. massive trees, clumps
of verdure, tyc., two large tables in front o.p. and p.s. On the p.s.
steps leading to the interior of the Casino. On the rising of the
curtain, groups of Cypriots and Venetians are discovered at the
tables drinking and playing, while others are standing about.
CHORUS.
The world is only, after all,
A game—
It’s end—how high the stake or small —
The same.
And love and joy fly off with pace
Of wind —
And leave not in their flight a trace
Behind,
Your sage will blame the world, and will with rigour view it,
Your fool is with it pleased, and all belonging to it.
lAs the Chorus and Dancers mingle together, and exeunt, and as
the sounds are dying away, Moncenigo enters through the
Arbour, attended by Strozzi, and followed by the three assas-
sins in the distance, in cloaks and masks.
Strozzi. I claim the ear one moment of Venice’s Ambassador.
Mon, Speak.
Stra. Adolphe is here.
Mon, What dost thou say —thou dost not mean at Cyprus?
Stro. Thyself be judge, for see where, musing beneath yon Porch, he
stands.
f Pointing to a Knight, who, wrapped in a cloak, is descending the
staircase
Mon. {aside) Ah, this may mar my plans, for should he once declare
the secret of his love, the King —thus undeceived —may break the chain
thus wove around him. {Pausing — then to Strozzi) Your poignards—
Stro. Are at hand. {Pointing p.s. to assassins.)
Mon. You will answer for the rest.
[Strozzi directs the assassins to follow Adolphe, who has crossed to
the end of the garden, Moncenigo exits, making a sign for
Strozzi to remain. Clashing of swords heard without.
Ado, ( without ) Assassins on my track—help, give me aid !
CHORUS OF ASSASSINS.
Strike through his heart, each blow will well be paid.
On hearing the noise, Strozzi goes off in the direction of Moncenigo,
when Adolphe rushes in sword in hand, followed by Lusignauo, who is
masked.
Ado, Oh, let my lip its grateful homage speak,
For succour when the strong oppressed the weak.


J.us. Sir Knight, I trust, that all like me had felt,
And turned aside the blows assassins dealt.
(Lusignano his mask , and they both sheath their
swords.
DUET.
Ado. Oh ! you who knighthood’s honours grace,
Who follow knighthood's laws ;
Who dangers front can boldly face,
In glory’s dazzling cause—
Tell me your name ?
Lus. The sole reward
For this slight service shown,
I ask you now, is your accord
To keep that name unknown.
Ado. May I not ask to whom I owe
My life ?
Lus. A friendly hand.
Ado. Your country then ?
Lais, France gave me birth.
Ado. Mine own—mine ever lovely land !
Oh, joy that few can know
When those of that blest spot of earth,
Meet on a foreign strand !
JuUS, Oh, what ennobling thoughts
My soul entrance,
To clasp here in mine arms
A son of France!
Ado. and Lus. Flail to that noble land, A ba
To the free and happy there : f g
The dwelling of the good and grand, C 2,
Of the spotless and the fair. j
ARIA ( Lusignano .)
Lus. Sad exile on the strangers shore,
Flow often have I sighed,
For days that can return no more,
And hopes that with them died :
For scenes whereon my childhood basked,
In bliss so far beyond
My dreams of joy, I never asked
If others w T ere as fond,
{to Adolphe')
Oh, do thou, with my words proclaim,
Though here condemned to dwell,
That I’ve an arm to shield her fame —
A heart that loves her well.
Ado. Vain hope, though gladly I her shores wquld fly,
Yet on this isle fate chains me down to die.


Lus. To die !
Ado. Like you, upon the strangers shore,
How often have I sighed
For days that can return no more,
And hopes that with them died :
For scenes whereon ipy childhood basked,
In bliss so far beyond
Myd reams of joy, I never asked
If others were as fond.
I had an arm to shield her fame—
A heart that loved her well.
Ado. I had an arm to shield her fame — A
A heart that loved her well. f g
Lus. Your arm shall ever shield her fame C
Your heart still love her well. /
li%s. Are you unhappy ? say—
Ado. I must conceal,
Save from my God, the grief ’tis mine to feel.
Lus, If or my ranker sword can ever speed
Thee or thy sorrows, in their utmost need :
Come thou and claim them, and thy wishes bring
E’en to the very palace of the King.
Ado. {aside) The King ! that rival who hath doomed my life
To the vile thirst of the assassins knife.
[Flourishes of trumpets and salvos of artillery are heard.
Lus. List to the distant, but the joyous sound,
Which doth from sphere to sphere thus startling bound.
Ado. What signal doth it bear ?
Lus, It is—to say
Unto the empire, that with early day
A Queen is theirs, the cannons now give breath—
'Ado. {aside) For me the signal of revenge or death.
ENSEMBLE.
[. Accompanied hy the sound of trumpets, and firing of artillery.
:Lus. {aside) The cannon rebounding,
Enkindles my soul,
As far away sounding
Its loud echoes roll;
Beloved and lovely woman, bq
Thy smile doth dispel >
All the fears of thy people,
And monarch as well. ST*
Ado. {aside) The cannon rebounding,
Enkindles my soul,
Whose fury is bounding
Beyond my controul. J


Deceitful, perjured woman,
Whose heart could rebel, f g
And break the vows my sorrows f.
Remember too well. j
Both Brother in arms adieu.
[Lusignano and Adolphe grasp each other by the hand, the sounds
of cannon, trumpets, fyc., continues. Lusignano exits 0.p,,
and Adolphe is about to rush off p.s., when he perceives
Catarina descending the stairs, and he reels bach to the o.p. side.
Ado. (aside ) Great Heaven ! some film hath shrouded o’er mine eyes,
Some chance hath stirred my heart with wild surprise—
Almost too much to bear, —’tis she, ’tis she !
And thoughts of madness and of memory
Rush back at once upon me.
Cat. The calm night,
The freshness of the air, that solitude
On which no sick’ning revel can intrude
Suit best my soul; unfettered, I can think,
Amidst the conflicts which my spirits sink,
On other scenes, contrasted as they are,
Remembered always, though divided far !
( Turns round, sees Adolphe, and draws her veil over her.)
A stranger here! some spy, perchance, to hear \
The words with which I fear te trust the air.
( Turning round to Adolphe)
What is’t ye seek here ?
Ado. Nothing more of you !
Gat. (recognising his voice and shrieking)
Adolphe ( almost falling.)
Ado. A principle 'twere vain to guess,
Maintained by honour, and despair no less,
Have led me here, but Heaven my witness be,
The shaft was aimed at others —not at thee.
Gat. Have pity on me ?
Ado. I’ve essayed in vain
The peace I once could boast of, to regain ;
The dreams of night, the visions of the day,
Has all, but one remembrance, chased away:
Which clings around me, till my senses wake —
Then weep themselves to rest.
Gat, Some pity take.
Ado. And where each furrow of despair appears,
Its lines can never be effaced by tears ;
But if the darkened light once more should break
Upon these aching eyes —
Cat, Oh ! pity take !


BALLAD.
Ado. Oh ! smile as thou wert wont to s mile,
Before the weight of care
Had crushed thy heart, and for a while
Left only sorrow there ;
Some thoughts, perchance, ’twere best to quell—
Some impulse to forget,
On which, should mem’ry cease to dwell,
We may be happy yet!
Oh never name departed daya,
Nor vows you whispered then,
Round which too sad a feeling plays
To trust their tones again ;
Regard their shadows round thee cast
As if we ne’er had met,
And thus unmindful of the past,
We may be happy yet!
Gat. This is too much, and now despite the oath
Which fettered one, and broke the peace of both,
I will my soul unburthen—on that night,
When urged by thee to trust our fate to flight;
With thee my honour, hope, and all to lose,
I dared myself of faithlessness accuse :
When shunning truths 1 was forbid to tell,
I lisped—l could not speak—words false as hell!
Ado. Say on ! say all!
Gat. Assassins were concealed
Within ray chamber, where, had I appealed,
Or spoken word, or made one gest, or sign.
Thy days were lost (I g ave no thought of mine) ;
For thee I prized e’en then all things above—
More than my life —I sacrificed my love !
Ado. {falling at Catarina’s feet)
Forgive me, Catarina!
[During the last part, Moncenigo, attended by Strozzi, has
appeared in the bach ground—he gives Strozzi directions on
perceiving Adolphe at the feet of Catarina, and exit Strozzi.
Cat. Now fly—
Mon. {advancing between them)
It is too late—
Cat . What brought you here
Unbidden ?
Ado. (to Moncenigo) Face to face at length we meet,
And vengeance long delayed is doubly sweet !
Mon, Speak on.
Ado. Can’st thou deny that all this scene of torture, madness, injury,
has been thy woik, and that as a creature of the King thou did’st by
menace obtain her sad consent? Cans't thou deny that Bravoesin thy
service extorted oaths to lie her life away —that spies pursued her steps


and by thy hellish machinations, I was doomed to the assassins hand ?
Cans’t thou deny—
Mon. I came prepared to avouch each word and deed by thee detailed
so well.
Cat. This issue, then, of horrors —this hellish plot was all conceived —
Mon. By me.
Cat, And when these acts, remorseless as they’re base, Ito the King,
my lord and thine, disclose —
Mon. The King will not believe you; but when I disclose to him the
scene I chanced this moment to behold —a rival kneeling at your feet,
branding upon his brow the mark of shame ; —when his betrothed, the
dame who seemed so pure, is, by the laws of Cyprus, deemed an adul-
teress—
Cat. Great Heavens!
Mon. When thy treason to the throne —to him who sways the sceptre,
is unveiled—Monarch and subject, overwhelming thee with scorn, shall
to the world proclaim thee what thou art.
[Adolphe and Catarina stand as if pe r rifted, while Moncenigo
makes a sign for Strozzi to advance with the guards, who have
entered at hack during the scene.
Mon. On to the Citadel, and on your life, see both these traitors
watched and guarded well.
\_Exit Moncenigo up the stage, as a party march off with Adolphe
on the o.p. side, and another party, headed hy Strozzi, with
Catarina, on the p.s., and the scene closes.
Scene. — An apartment in the Palace. Enter Lusignano and
Andrea.
Lus. We meet again, but not as once we met,
And when and why, the task is to forget.
And. What moves your highness ?
Lus. Sorrow, shame, and guilt,
Blood that I fain would save, but must be spilt.
Know’st thou Adolphe de Courcy ?
And. Once I knew
A Knight so called, to faith and honour true !
Lus. That Knight, thy niece’s paramour, has dared
To shame the crown, which I with her had shared ;
Hither he’s come, those scenes to play once more,
Which Venice saw without a blush before.
And. Not more in her than him do I confide,
And any tongue, but thine, had darkly lied
To pass his crime upon them.
Lus. For the fact —
Lord Moncenigo vouches, and will act.
DUET.
Lus, Before those bursting eyes, bj
High in the gaze of all, f g
She, deemed of worth the prize, C |*
Shall in her beauty fall. J


The blow which parts the links of life
Its fondest ties may sever,
But better years of lasting strife,
Than live dishonoured ever.
And. She whom so much I prize,
If once contemned of all, »
Unpitied in mine eyes,
Shall in her beauty fall.
In scenes of sorrow and of strife,
From fond ties doomed to sever:
’Twere better burst the bonds of life,
Than live dishonoured ever. J
And. Should Moncenigo’s word with thee prevail!
For as he told, so hath he forged, this tale, —
Bring him before my face.
Lus. Be well assured
That thou shalt see him, and with her secured ;
Now in her dungeons, Cyprus, too, shall see
The doom is just, though dread its course may be.
And. Encircled by some plot, pursued by hate,
That raised at first, and now completes her fate ;
Has Moncenigo lured his victim still,
But there is one can thwart , and who will —
Be thou but just.
Lus. Full justice shall thou find,
For though embittered now, this heart was kind
No more then, and begone ! upon the brink
Gf fate, as now she stands, if I could think
Thy—mine no longer—Catarina free
From crime, tho’ now with crime accused she be,
A load were off my heart: but ’tis in vain,
And mine the grief, the madness, and the stain !
And. She shall not fall alone aside far now her birth
The papers will attest, perhaps her worth,
(to Lusignano)
Let all beware, this shame on me who cast,
For those who wronged her most, may aid her last.
Lus. Upon her head the guilt, on mine the grief,
Which seeks no solace, and hopes no relief.
Before these bursting eyes,
High in the gaze of all,
She, deemed of worth the prize, N
Shall in her beauty fall; t £
The blow which parts the links of life ?
Its fondest ties may sever,
And better years of lasting strife,
Than live dishonoured ever ! J


And. She whom so much I prize, 1
If once contemned of all,
Unpitied in mine eyes, kj
Shall in her beauty fall; i £
In scenes of sorrow and of strife,
From fond ties doomed to sever, S'
’Twere better burst the bonds of life,
Than live dishonoured ever, J
[At the end of this ensemble, Lusignano rushes off 0.p., Andrea p.s.
Last Scene. — Public place of Nicosa. Scaffold 'erected on} : an
elevated stage, lined with soldier s extending from scaffold to front
of stage, where Catarina is discovered "kneeling in the centre.
Herald at hack, the populace crowd on either side tip to\ the
extreme extent and height of stage —the King conceals his face in
his hands —Moncenigo stands by his side—deep belf tolling,
muffled drums beating.
CHORUS OF PENITENTS.
Pray for the soul’s repose,
Pray for the peace of those
Whose thoughts on Heaven are bent.
Cat. That Heaven knows
I am innocent,
CHORUS OF WOMEN.
Pray for a sister’s woes,
Whose erring days now close,
May Heaven forgive a life mis-spent I
Herald. For treason to the State.
Deemed fatal in the Council’s eyes :
For dishonour to the King,
Catarina Cornaro dies!
(addressing Catarina)
Wherefore the law should stop its dread intent,
What can’st thou plead ?
Cat. That I am innocent!
Herald, {aloud) Who can allege a reason why
The guilty should not perish!
And. (rushing frantically through the soldiers) I!
[ General movement —the King rises, and comes down —Andrea
kneels at Ms feet, then rises —Moncenigo crosses to the
centre, while Catarina springs up, and reels towards the p.s.
the Herald retires up the centre.
And. Your pardon, mighty liege, {then to Catarina ) poor blighted
Almost without a hope to which to cling— (thing,
Without a hope? ’tis false ! this speaking proof
May soften hate and keep revenge aloof.
{turning upon Moncenigo^


Inhuman fiend ! by lips through fear though sealed
In Venice, here the truth shall be revealed—
Know’st thou Bianca Sforza?
(Moncenigo staggers )
Ha! that name
Flings o’er thy cheek the deepenedlblush of shame ;
That heiress of her noble house, e’en as she died,
Had barely strength her secret to confide :
As the last Words of parting life she gasp’d,
In sudden energy my hand she clasped—
Gave me this protest, blest her babe to light,
Just born, then sunk in endless night;
While poor Bianca Sforza, she whom art
Ruined, and left to die with broken heart.
She was her mother, speciously beguiled— |
('pointing to Moncenigo)
He the betrayer— (pointing to Catarina) —and there stands
(rushing up to Moncenigo with desperation ) (their child.
Cat. What do I hear ? Oh, nature, how thy laws
Bring back our feelings to their primal cause—
Bewildered —almost mad—pursued by hate,
Standing, through him, upon the verge of fate :
Whate’er his guilt—whate’er my lot may be,
Oh ! Heaven, he is my father!
(staggers over to Moncenigo, and falls in his arms.
Lus. (to officer ) Adolphe de Courcy
Hither call,
And on the guilty retribution fall.
(Exit officer, homing to the King o. p,
T RlO.— Ensemble.
Lus. ( astounded) If true his tale—unstained her name,
My deep remorse I would proclaim :
Atone for blood my rage had spilt,
In deep conviction of her guilt!
Mon. ( Catarina senseless in his arms )
Too true his tale—her tender frame
I spotless deem, and will proclaim :
And thus atone for years of guilt,
And blood a false revenge had spilt!
And. (with energy) Too true my tale—her noble name,
As spotless, I aloud proclaim
Free from dishonour, and that guilt
For which they now her blood had spilt.
\_At the end of Trio, Adolphe de Courcy is conducted in by the
Officer; he is greatly excited on seeing Catarina, and behold-
ing the King.


Lus. Well may’st thou shrink, when he thy life who gave,
Has, for thy baseness, stripped thee of thy glaive !
Ado. (erect and with great pride)
I will not now disguise, whate’er the shame,
It was to take thy life I hither came ;
I do not seek thy pardon, but, to spare
Her life, so good, I solemnly declare,
Before that judge who hidden hearts can see,
Her soul is pure as virtue e’er can be.
Lus. Ido believe thee, and the world shall find,
To justice, station cannot make me blind ;
pointing to officer, and then addressing Adolphe
Adolphe de Courcy, sheathe thy sword again,
Which thou has worn thus far without a stain ;
Lord Moncenigo, in oblivion now,
The past I bury, and do here avow
My will, to all announced, by all here heard,
Her hand be on the heart loved best, conferred.
[Here Lusignano passes the centre, and joins the hands oj Catalina
and Adolphe, Mencenigo standson 0.p., Andrea p.s.
RONDO.
Cat. ( advancing ) There is no human joy.
No bliss the soul which fills—
No hope the heart can buoy,
Like that each sense now thrills :
My thoughts almost o’efleaps
The barrier reason keeps.
FULL CHORUS*
Envied for ever be
Her noble name !
Afar her purity
Let all proclaim !
\_A long shout from the astonished multitude, the flour
trumpets, heating of drums , waving of banners, andja general
display of animation continues until the curtain falls.
END OF OPERA.
Mason and Power, Printers, 139, King-street East, Sydney.


t© tub
irusii® ipm tiq:g iphasot i. .mapi
beautifully printed from engraved plates, and
UNIFORMLY CORRECT, AT
SIXPENCE for single and ONE SHILLING Jor double pieces
comprising—
MELODIES, from all the admired operas.
All the newest Polkas, Quadrilles, and IValt/t .v.
New and favourite Sonya, English , Seal eh, derma./. and Oneralir.
EASY SOLOS and DUETS for the piano.
SACRED MUSIC, vocal and instrumental.
Celebrated GLEES and DUETS.
Catalogues mag be had.
JUST RECEIVED, A FURTHER SELECTION OF
THEVIA M I S T A.
Nos. 1 to 137.
s^-
Wo have been a subscriber from the first to the last of the Pianista, and
can very truly say, for correctness and beauty of engraving, it surpasses
the dear priced music. Every musical family will heartily thank us for
recommending the work. — Weeldg Chronicle.
The Pianista is beautifully brought out, and always correct. — Spectator.
Tine Pianista gives monthly good standard music at a remarkably low
price. Times.
Scrupulously correct, and printed in a style lit for the pianoforte of any
i! obi cin an .—H era Id.
A CHOICE SELECTION OF THE CLASSICAL WORKS OF
Sclndhoff, Buryrnulltr, Wallace , Ravina, Liszt, Thalbery,
Osborne, Richards, Herz, DreyschocJc, Reseller/, Hunten ,
Goria, Beyer, cNc., always kept on hand, and regularly received
from the first London and Continental publishers.
ALSO—
THE LATEST DANCE COMPOSITIONS OF
,J ulli.cn, I)'Albert, Koenig, JVeipperf, ftc., Sfc., many superbly illustrated.


a::d popular songs and duets by barker,
, a LEE, GLOVER, BALFE <&c.
SUPERIOR CORNOPEANS, highly finished, in case, f0r.... £3 10
r'\ BRASS SLIDE TRUMPETS, with four crooks 2
/v BRASS TRUM PEI’S, with 2 valves 4
Tj Ditto ditto with 3 valves 4 10
- 4 BASS It OR AS, 4 keys, copper 5
VIOLIN STRING'S, English and Roman, af the best description.
GUITAR STRINGS and VIOLONCELLO STRINGS.
VIOLINS, FLUTES, AND FIFES.
Instruction Books fertile Violin, Cornopean, Accovdeon, ' Piano, Flute.
Guitar, &c.
f
A collection of superb modern engravings, historical, landscape, and
domestic, including the finest works of —Landseer, Turner, Leslie,
Eastlake, Wilkie, Hilton, &c., &c., &c.
Tragedies? Comedies Farces, and Cper.-s, sisp3iice
each, viz:
A New Way to Pay Old Debts, Venice Preserved, The Jealous Wife
Douglas, The Gamester, Tom Thumb, High Life Below Stairs, Duenna,
Maid of the Mill, A Bold Stroke for a Wife, Pizarro, Adopted Child,
Bashful Man, Hypocrite, Check to the King, Gustavus Vasa, Lord of the
Manor, Rule a Wife and Have a Wife, My Spouse and I, Little Madcap,
Also sire pence each :
King Henry Fifth, As you Like It, Coviolanus, The-Tempest, Hamlet, U
Richard the Third, Twelfth Night. |-
goag 33oofes, in 'FarUtn—Sentimental, CBomic. ISnolish, Evislj, anh Scotch, ?,'•
From 6d. each. p
■ WOO&COTT JkW H : €£«!!,
Music Sellers , Print Sellers , and Publishers ,
555, GEORGE-STREET, NEXT BANK OF AUSTRALASIA,
PICTURE FRAMES OF EVERY DESCRIPTION MADE
TO ORDER IN THE BEST MANNER.
