

WHAT
IS THE
LABOUR
FEDERATION?
The Interests
of all Workers
are Identical.
A Question for theose
who Believe in Unionism.
Price One Penny.
1898




“ There is already a division between
the Haves and Have Nots. The Eight
Hours Day is in many trades but a senti-
ment. Legislation against sweating and pro-
posals which smack of the poorhouse warn us
that we are approaching the industrial con-
ditions of old countries” —The *' Age,” Aug.
30, 1898.


INTRODUCTION.
Figures showing the expansion of the wealth, trade, agriculture and manufac-
tures of Victoria are paraded before us to excite admiration at the rapid progress
of “our" country. But what progress do the people make towards a life unworn
by needless anxiety for the future ? That is what we ought to consider. Not
the accumulations of the few, but the comfort of the many constitutes the true
guage of a nation’s progress.
Since 1871 the wealth of Victoria has increased more than threefold. Are
workers three times better off? Are they any better off? Is it easier to get
employment now than then ? To all these questions the answer is—No 1
TO-DAY
15 per cent, of the population own the wealth of Victoria. The other 85
per cent, die without securing in life either house, land or banking account.
The reference of the politicians to Savings Banks to prove the well-being of the
mass is pure statistical jugglery. Twenty per cent, of depositors own go per
cent, of the deposits. The majority of depositors have only a few shillings to
their credit--are depositors in little more than name.
MANUFACTURES.
Between the census of 1881 and that of 1891 the manufacturing production of
Victoria doubled. But there was not a corresponding increase of employment.
The extension of mechanical methods of production “ saved ” the labour of
20,000 persons, while the simplification of machinery enabled women and
children to largely take the place of adult males.
AGRICULTURE.
Since 1881 the land under cultivation has increased over 50 per cent , yet it
only gives al2 per cent, increase of employment. That we are developing the
Agricultural Bonanza is demonstrated by the fact that while the area of produc-
tion has enormously increased the number of farms has decreased from 49,637 to
34,509. And this enlarged scale of production, side by side with improved
machinery, enables 1000 acres of Victorian soil to be cultivated with 25 per
cent, less labour than in 1881. Thus, taken together, the two main industries of
the country have failed to furnish employment commensurate with the exten-
sion of production or the growth of population. In agriculture, as in manufac-
tures. we are developing a capitalistic class, who own but toil not ; who employ
managers to provide brains—to save labour: to make profit—to heap wealth
in the laps of a few while the multitude eke ont a mere hand-to-mouth existence.
In one direction, as in the other, the smallest producers—the weakest—are
driven to the wall.
THE TWO NATIONS.
Thus we see in the new country, as in the old, the “ Two Nations ” —the
Have Alls and the Have Nothings. The capitalist groups, in their policy of
mutual extermination, become ever fewer, and the survivors more powerful.
Thus capitalism proceeds to its climax into one great combine : all rivals anni


hilated : owning all the agencies of production : upon which all men depend for
existence : into whose coffer flows the wealth poured forth by the brains and
muscles of the community.
In this situation we need a community alive to its interests and prepared to
protect them—working to make itself master of the soil and industrial agencies
upon which the “ life, liberty, and happiness ” of the community depend.
This is the end to which all working-class effort should be directed, but the
power to realise that end is not in vain cursing of the few rich. It is only to be
found in the conversion of the mass to definite ideas as to what is necessary,
and in the realisation of power necessary to apply ideas. For in the hour that
we can say “ our opinions are the strongest in society,” we may proceed to
make society what we think it ought to be.
ORGANISE ! ! !
That is an old cry. But what avails organisation if the methods are obso-
lete ? It is to cry, “To ” when the only weapons are feathers.
military general or the capitalist who stands to old weapons or appliances is
beaten back in the struggle f>r supremacy, and the workers who adhere to
obsolete methods wage war against the Maxim guns of capitalist concentration
with Matabele spears. ■ The Evolution of organisation is essential to the triumph
of the Labour Movement. The mode of organisation needs to be adapted to the
circumstances and forces that xve have to meet. The concentration of capita ist
industry into ever fewer, richer, more powerful combinations of wealth is the
fact that we have to face. The concentration of the working class into one
mighty, wealthy, widespread, all-embracing combination, so that Syndicated
Labour may grapple with the evil power of Syndicated Wealth—that is the
requisite of the hour.
So organisation is the subject of this pamphlet, and to the men and women
of Victoria, who believe in the Evolution of Unionism, in the power ot United
Effort to stimulate and hasten the progressive march of huminity, the Victorian
Labour Federation dedicates this pamphlet, hoping it will meet with their ap-
proval and the organisation with their adherence.
On behalf of the V.L.F.,
FRANK ANSTEY (Seamen’s Union), President.
GEORGE ELMSLIE (Masons’ Union), Secretary.
THOMAS TUNNECLIFFE (Bootmakers’ Union), Treasurer.


MEASURER.
PRESIDENT.
SECRETARY.




The Victim and the Vampire.
Awake to Light at last
Thy death dewed dreams are o’er:
That fiend-form of the Past
Shall suck thy blood no more.
Come forth with me, and drive
From Austral seas and soil
The parasites that thrive
Upon the blood of Toil.


WAGE EARNERS OE VICTORIA.
Diagram showing pro-
portion of Organised to Un-
organised wage earners.
05,852 engaged in commerce
50,803 engaged in factories
48,156 engaged on farms and stations
49,330 classed as unskilled laborers
19,510 engaged in mining
19,465 engaged construction and renova-
tion of buildings
26,704 engaged in professional and other
occupations
279,820 total male wage earners
82,987 females, all occupations
362,807 Victorian wage earners.
Diagram showing 10
years’ “progress” of Trades
Unionism in Victoria.


THE V.L.F.
AND
THE ORGANISATION OF LABOUR.
MMf advantage of organised over isolated effort needs no
jjig lengthy demonstration. It is to the workers of all coun-
-A- fries the instrument of progression. It enables to be
done by association what no man can do by himself—-
by it the individual helps to raise the status of his class and with
it his own.
SEEN FROM THE MASTHEAD.
We see that there proceeds in the modern world a three-
cornered contest —between masters for trade, between workers for
employment, between masters and men for the right to fix the
price of labour.
The struggle between masters for industrial supremacy impels
them to cut expenses, including labour, to the lowest possible
point. To maintain the wage standard workers in many occupa-
tions have united. To break their power the capitalists have also
organised, until there exists in every country a capitalist alliance,
having everywhere its agencies for the collection and transport,
whenever necessary, of one set of workers to fight against another.
The alliance is aided in its efforts to depress or retard the rise of
wages by that development of machinery which ever simplifying
industrial operations enables them to be performed with ever
diminishing tuition. The machine reduces, and in many cases
abolishes, skill. It reduces labour to one common level of utility.
It enables the men of one occupation, to easily take the place of
men in another. In short, the machine is sweeping away all the
old distinctions between men of different trades.
Under these conditions, the men who fight to keep up a union
for each trade merely keep lingering associations which with every
development of capitalism become more obsolete in their capacity
to defend. Against the onslaught of organised capital, rapidly
concentrating its strength and resources in a few gigantic com-
panies, the old unions are as powerless as a feather against the
blast of the hurricane.


THE WAITERS.
Yet in the face of these facts the old leaders make no effort to
meet the situation. Micawber like, they wait for something to
turn up, in the hope that it will give to fossil methods their old
places in the world of industrial activity. From year to year con-
ferences meet and devise schemes, but the outcome of all the de-
liberations and expenditure is only a proposal for a loose alliance
to secure a system of mutual assistance that shall leave undis-
turbed the old tribal distinctions and the obsolete methods. Even
with this inadequate measure, they arrive no further than mere
resolutions.
It cannot be surprising that, under these circumstances, the
old unions fail to enlarge their sphere of usefulness. Hundreds of
men belong to them who clearly recognise their inefficiency, who
uphold their membership because in the past they have found no
other outlet for the embodiment of their faith in the principle of
unionism. But there are thousands who are not to be so held,
who want, in short, to see something for their money. Others,
again, especially the rising generation in outlying districts, are
heathen to unionism because—the gospel has never been given to
them.
AS WE ARE.
Thus it comes about that we are to-day in Victoria confronted
with a working class destitute of power, because it is disunited.
The gospel of unionism finds no organised propaganda to rally the
weak-hearted. The unions stagnate. Their condition demon-
strates the supremacy and the corrosive influence of the non-pro-
gressive idea. They have lost that capacity of adaptability to
changing conditions which is ever essential to life and development.
They tendto ossify into an unchanging routine ofcustom, destructive
to the expansion of power, and detrimental to the principles that
they exist to expound and apply. Thus they have become a de-
cadent force—no longer an inspiration to the downtrodden, nor a
fear to their enemies This result is inevitable whenever an insti-
tution, be it industrial, political or religious, comes to be controlled
by men who seem to think that their divinely appointed mission is,
not to make converts to a cause, but to draw their salaries with
unswerving regularity.
ALTERED CIRCUMSTANCES.
The idea of sectional organisation was born of the guild system
and the age of hand work. It rose and developed in the old land
when the revolution of industrial methods brought about by
machinery was in its infancy: when the effects of that revolution
were imperfectly understood : when the social ideal, as a conse-
quence, was hazy and indefinite. And this system of working-
class organisation has been transplanted in America and the
colonies without any consideration as to whether it was adapted
to the times and places. Yet there are men advanced in their


ideas, politically and socially, >vho cling tenaciously to modes of
action utterly obsolete for the realisation of the ideas they advocate,
simply because they have not yet thought themselves out of the
groove of old practices. This is the age of machinery—not of
hand work ; of great organisations—not of small ; and the utility
of sectional unions passed away with the industrial periods that
gave birth to them.
TOWN AND COUNTRY.
That the old methods are not adapted to the requirements of an
immense territory with a small and scattered population is proved
by the fact that no separate trade union has been able to effectively
organise the large number of men of its calling scattered through-
out Victoria. Thus we have ever had a vast area over which
workers of every occupation have been outside the pale of union-
ism.
In the cities the workers (so far as they are organised) are
organised in little “go on your own ” independent groups, be-
tween which there exists no bond of co-operation. In many cases
there exists a union for each little branch of a trade, while in other
cases two unions compete for the men of one occupation.
Thus contributions are absorbed in multiplied rents and
official expenses. There is divided authority, lack of common
action, weakness born of division, absence of propaganda, while
expenditure is piled up out of all proportion to the benefits.
WHAT CAPITALISM TEACHES.
If there is any one fact more than another impressed upon us
by observation of capitalist society it is this: Many industries
previously carried on by different capitalists and capitalistic com-
panies are from time to time syndicated, under one set of direc-
tors, with increased economy and efficiency in their operation and
added benefit to the few proprietors.
And if from this fact we may draw any inference at all, surely
it is that there may be applied to the organisation of the workers
the same principle of concentration with corresponding augmenta-
tion of power, increased economy in administration, and multiplied
benefits to every person within the fold of membership.
And if it can be shown that within the Labour movement this
principle of concentration can be and is applied—that it is in oper-
ation, and productive of results which no isolated trade union could
secure —then the position is moved from the region of mere theory
to the impregnable fortress of fact.


THE MIRROR OF HISTORY.
“Public spirit in the masses was dead or sleeping. The multitude was
kept quiet by the morsels of meat that were flung to it.”—(Froude’s
“Caesar,” p. 20.)
CLUTCH OF THE MONEY POWER.
He seizes upon the father, drags the mother from the fireside, and even
the little children are victims to his greed.


The Belgian "Workers' Union."
The Belgian “Workers’ Union” was started 17 years ago It
is now known as the “ Workers’ Party/’ consisting of 489 branches,
embracing within the fold of membership 437,000 men and women
of various occupations, covering the whole organised proletariat.
THE AUTONOMY OF THE TRADES.
Under the banner of ONE UNION the workers of each
occupation constitute a trade section, devising its own rules, rates,
and regulations ; the interests of the section are watched by a trade
committee representing each shop ; the committee is empowered to
administer in all minor matters and to call the section together
on all questions affecting wages or conditions of work. Every
section is subject to the authority of the entire Union Democracy
upon those questions where the aid of the whole is sought and its
financial interests concerned. Thus self-government is secured
for the workers of every trade side by side with the most unified
and economic form of federal administration. No trade contest
can fail for want of funds, for no one trade constitutes more than
an infinitesimal part of the whole. And so enormous are the funds
at the disposal of this organisation, so widespread its influence,
so extensive its command of information, so perfect the combina-
tion, that in many cases it is able to win for individual trades,
without strike , what no trade could win for itself. Thus it limits
the area, the period, and the resultant misery of strikes; while of
the strikes entered upon during the year ending 1897 no' less than
96 per cent, ended in success, realising increased wages or reduced
hours for nearly 200,000 members.
And in cases of defeat, where the power of the combination is
not yet sufficient to break down the resistance of the capitalist
sweaters, it keeps its members until they are able to obtain em-
ployment. It provides them with all the advantages of a benefit
society; keeps up a large staff of doctors and chemists; gives
medical and pharmaceutical aid free ; gives indemnities to the
injured, pay to the sick, bread and groceries to the out-of-work.
And the Member’s Subscription is only 2d. each per week.
Yet the cash value of the benefits derived by the members
during the year 1897 (outside the ordinary trade union benefits, in
the shape of increased wages and hours) were more than
it


five times the amount of subscriptions paid in. As a mallcr of fact, the
Union can now afford to pay out us benefits even if the members
did not put in another penny.
How can it confer these enormous benefits ?
Because, unlike old labour organisations , it does not loan its funds
t$ banking corporations to aid the development of capi a ism.
IT DOES ITS OWN INVESTMENT.
It recognises that the worker must spend his wages in per-
sonal and household requirements.
Those from whom he buys get the profit. •
While the worker buys in capitalist-owned shops, * ie
away three or four shillings every week in the s ape o P . •
keep the very individuals who, for the most part, vo eag ■,
and help to cut his wages. He helps to make Foy or
—to make a few individuals enormously wealthy, or at least in-
dependent.
As for the Unions, they lend their funds to the banker■ at 4
per cent., who loans to the employer at 10 P er
borrowed money employs labour, makes a profit o , PJ
banker, who returns to labour 4 of the 20 that it has produced
If the employer fails, he goes insolvent; if the banker fails,
closes upon the deposit in the name of - reconstruction if the
worker strikes, he is fought with his own deposit. , , ’
individually or collectively, only gets interest on condition'“** c®
first of all earns it and pays at the same time a profit to ‘he
banker and the master. Thus, the workers nr th e ir combinatrcns,
boom with their funds the very system which, with its de-
velopment, augments the unemployed and piles up the riches
the few. _
Recognising these facts, the Belgian organisation utilised i s
funds in starting shops of its own, so that those who purchase
helped to make the Union, instead of an individual, im !" ensel yr c
and powerful. No shop is started in any district until the
bers in that district are sufficient to provide such a turnover as to
ensure success irrespective of outside custom. Under this gover -
ing principle no shop has failed. Every purchasing non-unioms
is made a contributor to the funds, and the members, ins ea
booming capitalist industry, are enabled to build up enterp -
beneficial to themselves. To-day the Union owns 37° shops,
dairies, bakeries, factories, halls and restaurants, and 22 daily,
weekly, and monthly newspapers to advocate the cause. ine
profits from these supply the Union with 86 per cent. o l s
income. The profits defray the expenses and pay for tbe b(pe-
fits conferred upon members. It is a self-feeding machine, gr
ing out benefits at no other cost to members than the trouble of
buying in a union-owned shop instead of from the capitalist trader.
That is bow they finance the Labour movement in Belgium,


A CONTRAST.
Under ihe British system of working class organisation, the
man who upholds the Labour movement pays first into a Union,
then into a Benefit Society, then gives a little more to the political
movement, then pays something more towards the rents, taxes, and
profits of all the people he buys from. The Co-operative Societies
have no direct connection with the Labour movement; thousands
of men belonging to them are the most hard-shell conservatives
and the worst of non-unionists, and the million profits made by
the English Co-operative Societies during the year 1897 did not
go in the least to help a strike, start a Labour paper, extend a
union, or make the House of Commons anything but what it is—a
nest of landlords and capitalists.
Under the Belgian system of organisation the profits on mem-
bers’ custom furnishes them with the means of propaganda, all
the benefits of a trades union, all the advantages of a benefit
society, the aid of a powerful Labour press, and a properly united
political force. It unites the functions of all working-class com-
binations in One Union, under One Executive. Thus it secures
economy in administration and real unity of the working class.
Under it every man, even if he is an opponent of unionism, in so
far as he buys in a union-owned shop, contributes to its funds just
as the English worker in buying from a capitalist contributes to
the wealth of that capitalist. The trading part of the organisa-
tion is merely a means of raising money, that money a means to
an end, that end the realisation' of a widespread association of
man with man, which, embracing the whole nation, gives Socialism
—the solution of the Labour Problem.
These methods have been adopted in Sweden and in France.
They have been accepted by the Swiss Workers’ Union. In Eng-
land the idea is being pushed to the front by Labour papers and
prominent trade unionist leaders. In West Ham (Eng.) local
branches of different unions have pooled a portion of their funds
to start a “Self-supply Association,” the profits of which goto
defray the expenses of Labour representatives in the West Ham
County Council.


TEH DEVIL.
Thus are the workers ground between the upper and nether millstones of
indifference and disunion into agonizing wretchedness.
THE GLUTTONY OF PLUTOCRACY.
The ancient legends tell of a dragon which devoured the sun, the moon,
and the stars. The dragon of Plutocracy has seized the earth, and to the
toilers there is left —Nothing.


The Victorian Labour Federation.
For the reasons advanced, the V.L.F. holds that the argu-
ments, both for the unification of workers and for the direct in-
vestment of their funds, are rendered impregnable by the evidence
of benefits conferred. It seeks to apply those methods to the work-
C^aSS • moVemen * : * n Victoria. It, therefore, seeks ONE
UNION in order to concentrate the power of Labour. It seeks
ONE FUND in order to consolidate the financial resources of
Labour. It seeks a better use of that fund in order to increase its
revenues, augment its benefits, add to its attractiveness, multiply
its power, finance the Labour movement, and hasten its suprem-
acy.
* * * *
The V.L.F. recognises that Union is Strength ’> that the
greatest strength will result from the greatest unity ; that unity is
b° r “> no t °f the diversities of ioo petty unions, but of the all-
embracing One Union, with its sheltering branches everywhere. To
that end it seeks the consolidation of working class forces in One
Union, with branches in every town and suburb, so that it may
be widespread in its influence and unified in its power.
* * * *
. wor^ers in each occupation will have complete autonomy
in their own trade affairs, subject to central authority in those
cases where they desire general aid. Thus the V.L.F is a TRADES
UNION securing self-government of the sections side by side with
the most compact, economical and powerful federation of the
working class.
* * * *
The V.L.F. recognises that it has to cater for men whose
means are small and whose living for the most part is precarious.
Therefore, the funds will be used for the establishment of Union-
owned distributive agencies, in which the workers can purchase
the necessities of life. Every £i spent in these shops will mean
at least 3/- to the funds of the V.L.F. These funds will be ex-
pended in extending the functions of the organisation, in providing
relief to members in sickness or unemployment. Thus the VL F
will be a FRIENDLY SOCIETY, providing a maximum of
benefits for a minimum of fees—an incentive to membership and
an inducement to maintain it.


Political, as industrial action, being with the V.L.F. but a
means to an end—that end the Socialist solution of the Labour
question: that solution only possible by the possession of organ-
ised power to apply it—the V.L.F. will only enter the political
arena to secure the election of men who will pledge themselves to
use the opportunities of their Parliamentary position to propa-
gate the principles and organise on behalf of the V.L.F. in order
to extend working class power. But no official will be permitted
to become even a candidate for Parliament without at once for-
feiting his position and being disqualified from ever again holding
office. Thus while with every increase in membership the V.L.fi.
will become correspondingly a POLITICAL POWER, its inter-
nal administration is safeguarded against the manipulation ot
political aspirants.
* * * *
The policy of the V.L.F. is a recognition of the evolutionary
process operating throughout all nature, to which all organisms
must adapt themselves or perish. The might of Right is a dream ,
the right of Might is a fact everywhere and always. And it is
needful for the supremacy of the Labour movement that there
shall be an organisation to fit modern conditions as improved
machines supplant the old. The V.L.F. is the adaptation of
organisation to the capitalist environment. It is a combination
not only new in its structure, but in its working, so operating with
its funds that it will become ever more self-sustaining, working at
ever diminishing expense, while ever increasing its capacity to
produce larger and larger benefits to its multitude of proprietors.
* * * *
And in the adoption of these methods the V.L.F. demon-
strates that it is for the workers the best gun and most up-to-date
machine.
It recognises the cause and trend of things.
It fits the requirements of our time and country.
IT IS THE ONLY WORKING CLASS ORGANISA-
TION IN VICTORIA THAT PRESENTS ITSELF WITH
A WELL DEFINED AIM AND POLICY.
* * * *
The V.L.F. renders possible the organisation of workers in
every town and village. Like the great syndicate, it gives a
guarantee of economic administration—utterly impossible in small
combinations. The Labour Problem being in every country identi-
cal needs everywhere the unified power of the working class to
solve it. To be powerful, it must be organised. Therefore, to
establish a unity of workers co extensive with the country, so that
the power of all—industrially, financially, politically and socially—
may be directed to the realisation of the common good—that is
the mission of the V.L.F.


And in thus striving to secure a working class reconciled with
itself—agreed as to what it wants, how to get it, united to get it—
the V.L.F. becomes something more than a mere class party. It
is a unity of all those who, whatever their class, or creed, or
country consider the Labour question the all-important question.
* * * *
CONCLUSION.
The purpose of this pamphlet is to make known our object
and our methods, in the hope that we may be able to rally beneath
the standard of the V.L.F. all those in agreement with its prin-
ciples. To make converts to a cause, that is the task we have set
ourselves to accomplish. Another convert —that is another unit
of power. Another convert—that is a real step nearer to the goal.
And to have opinions—to speak for them —write for them—fight for
them—to win converts from other opinions to our own —to unite
opinions—to make them a power in the land —that is the really
practical work. For it is not time, nor the chanting of dead
formulae—not the repetition of stale platitudes, nor the shibboleths
of old parties—but efforts made, desires awakened, power estab-
lished and applied, which constitute in every land and age the
factors of progression.
♦ * * *
It is not fierce denunciation, nor tears dropped ostentatiously
upon the public platform—not prayers or psalms—not sentiment
nor talk of human love —that give a movement substance and
vitality. Victory to the strongest ! That is the dictum of the un-
written law, from which neither birds nor beasts, nations or com-
panies, workers or capitalists can escape. Make yourself the
strongest —that is the law of life and of progress. Every religion
that the world has seen, be it the brutalising superstition of the
savage or the creed of the cultured, present us with the same
picture—the eternal struggle between the Spirits of Good and of
Evil, in which they triumph who have most power. Workers, unite !
It is not a question of passion, nor of sentiment, but of enlightened
self-interest—the interests of yourselves, your wives, your children
call upon you to associate your efforts. Make yourselves the
strongest in society! For what purpose? So that you may, by
association, render your material environment more and more
favourable. So that by means of Leisure, Science and Education
you may develop your individual capacities, reach a higher mor-
ality, a more intellectual existence, and establish the really great
nation upon the basis of a prosperous and progressive people.
* * * *
Those, then, who see with us the evils to be combatted, the
need of organised effort, the weakness of old methods, the possi-
bilities of the new, will demonstrate the depth of their convictions
by helping to build up the power to give to their convictions the
necessary application—-by joining the V.L.F.


THE TOCSIN OFFICE PB.INT., 181 LITTLE COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.
Tlie worKBFS’ Parts of BBipinn —
(Taken from the Official Report presented to the Annual Congress held at
Verviers, April, 1898.)
Membership ... ... ... ... 437'°°°
Funds and Property £2,227,000
Revenue for 1897.
Members’ Subscriptions ... ... £184,000
Profits from Enterprises owned by
the Combination ... ... 1,090,000
Total £1,274,000
What the Members Got.
Medical Service, Sick Pay, and
Funeral Expenses £397> 000
Food and Clothing to those on
Strike and others Out of Work,
and Cash Relief to the extent of £135,000
Concerts, Dramatic Entertainments,
Schools, Maintenance of Brussels
University, Education and
Amusement alike free to Mem-
bers and their Families ... ... £238,000
A large amount was also spent in erection of new buildings,
propaganda literature, election contests and other items, and
a large sum placed to reserve. The revenue was only one-
sixth of the English Co-operative Societies, but it was so
used as to create a Labour Movement united in all its parts
—a powerful Trades Unionist force—a Benefit system—22
Labour Papers—a solid phalanx in Parliament, and Organ-
isers throughout the country. The advantages are obvious.


THE V.Ij.F.
me Ificlorieo LaDour Federation
. . IS A . .
COMBINE OF THE WORKERS,
Irrespective of their Occupation or Sex.
Entrance Fee, Is. - Contributions, 3d. per Week.
All friends in the country will be enrolled as
members and held financial for 12 months upon
payment of 2/6. When in any district there are
sufficient members a branch will be formed, and
the usual weekly subscription of 3d. charged from
date of formation.
Correspondence invited and replied to with promptitude.
Address Secretary, GEO. ELMSLIE,
No. 3 Room, Trades Hall, Melbourne.
Every Monday Night the Secretary will be in attendance from 8 to
io o’clock to enrol new members. *•
Don’t DELAY. Don’t put off for another week. Procrastination is
the death of good intentions.
The V.L.F. is here to stay.
It moves right along, over every obstacle, to success.
Next Monday Night, No. 3 Room, Trades Hall, you can
become a Member. Do it


