

A Song Composed by JOHN JONES, “The Welsh Poet.”
The Australian Brave and all the British Dominion.
TUNE: “Where is My Wandering Boy., To-Night?”
There are many men in Australia to-day, left mother, children, wife and pap,
Went down to Egypt to fight the Turks and got them safely in their trap.
“They volunteered without a growl or squeal,”
And were .called to the Fort of Dardanelles, and made many Turks die upon the
battlefield.
CHORUS.
Many a wife and mother with a worried heart sick and sore,
i Because their dear ones volunteered to go to the war.
“For never to be seen any more,”
But hope that they may meet on the other shore.
The “New Zealand” Boys they acted very good and brave,
They volunteered to help old England, to keep her from going down to the;grave;
They shouldered their guns and knapsacks and shields, and were called to Fort of
Dardanelles,
And made many Turks die upon the battlefields. j CHORUS.
The Tasmanian Boys also did the same,
They showed they were no cowards, but very brave and game.
They volunteered to put their shoulder to the wheel,
They were called to the Fort of Dardanelles and made many Turks die upon the
battlefield. CHORUS.
The Canadian Boys did not say so, they cast their daily clothes away,
They Volunteered to help old Ei gland, for honor and not for .what they got in pay.
They she ttldered their guns, bayonets, and on their heads they sealed,
Tivey went to the front and made many Germans die upon the battlefield.
CHORUS.
The Irish, Welsh, Scotch and English went on a hunt, , . i
And got to the front and made Germans grunt,
They didn’t go there to gad, play or steal,
But went to fight the Germans, and made many die upoh the battlefield.
The Hindoos came from India, altho’ they don’t look to me very stout,
They volunteered to help old England out.
To the front they did come, in the trenches did kneel,
And puured bullets; to the Germans, and made many Germans die on the batlefieldr
The, Russians were very strong and brave, they fought real well;
And made the Austrians think they were very close to hell;
They made the Austrians think they weren’t very good with to deal,
They took prisoners by the thousands and made thousands die upon the battlefield
The Italians canre over the mountains gap, •< .
To help the Allies put the Germans, Turks, and Austrians off the map.
For to Austria for justice the Italians did appeal,
They would not do what was right, so'the Italians made many a one die on the
battlefield. CHORUS.
The way the Germans did with the Belgians, it was a dirty shame,
And for what they did I hope the Devil will take them to that place, and burn
them in the flame.
The Germans took the Belgian’s stock, cows, horses, sheep and creel;
But the Belgians they were brave, and made many Germans die upon the battle-
field. CHORUS.
Tire French arc good industrious people, and they cannot be beat,
They’re different to the Germans, they’re not selfish, mean and deceit,
To the Germans the bombs and bullets they did speal,
And made many Germans die upon the battlefield.
I hope the old Kaiser will be caught, and hung by the toes,
And his eyes', ears and nose, will be eat up by the raving crows,
And peace will be on sea and land, a British subject shall never go for want of a
meal,
And old England shall never again have cause to call her subjects out to die on
the battlefield.
THE OUTCOME OF THE WAR.
Eng'and, Belgium and France will occupy the whole German Empire.
Utah'. Russia and Servia will occupy the whole Empire of Austria.
England shall occupy the Dardanelles and Turkey in Europe and Palestine,
And make it a free gift to the Jews, Russia shall take a great possession of Turkey
If Roumania and Greece come in to help the Allies, they will be rewarded with a
great prize.
“AND FOR EVER OLD ENGLAND SHALL LIVEI”
GOD SAVE THE KING ! '
