





THE REVELATIONS
P. A.,
NEWS FROM OUR PENAL SETTLEMENT,
TIM BOBBIN.
HOBART TOvVX
PRINTED BY J. C, MALL, 52, LIVERPOOL STREET.
1868,


tl ' |-U
- —'


llte
PREEEACE
The Revelations of a Penal Settlement, before they ap-
peared in print were submitted to several Gentlemen,
who approved of the humorous manner in which the
introductory part of this Pamphlet is brought before
the Public. As the Reader advances he will find that
these “ Revelations ” are neither more nor less than an
exposure of the manners and habits of a class of officials,
at the Penal Settlement of Port Arthur. They are as
numerous, in a manner of speaking, as a hive of bees,
who are subsisting on the golden honey derived from
the Imperial and Colonial Treasury, and this without
any return of benefit, unless it_be to themselves. Many
visitors have been to this place, and when these have
been of a superior class, every preparation has been
made to receive them, in such a manner, as would elicit
their recommendation, as to the cleanliness, industry,
and regularity of the Settlement. Every man would
be found at work, which in many instances, was pro-
ductive of nothing except employment. Certainly at
times there has been a rumaging over of books, previous
to the expected arrival, and a set of returns and other
documents prepared, and such like, and these, as a set
off‘ appeared very well on paper, in case any particular


enquiry might be made. These returns are made to
show well and Gentlemen unacquainted with the routine
of business could do no less than compliment the Civil
Commandant when taking leave, and remark how well
the place was conducted ; and what a nice place Port
Arthur is, and such like. With regard to the Civil Com-
mandant, he merits much praise for his perseverance,
in keeping up such a useless and expensive establish-
ment, when it is not required, ; but it must be admitted
in addition to this that he is always ready to recom-
mend and assist those (either free or bond) whose con-
duct and behaviour merit it. Many occurences at
this settlement are at times beyond detection, and would
even endanger the situation of a constable, was he to
interfere, as all Constables at Port Arthur are supposed
to obey any Overseer who might give them instructions,
consequently a Constable becomes a mere tool in the
hands of those who think proper to use him, and forcibly
brings to mind the following two lines, of an old song —
“ Right or wrong it matters not
Its legal at Port Arthur.”
In many cases there has been no person who knew
anything, unless he might have been a Prisoner, and
the parties concerned knew that his evidence was use-
less and could be easily crushed at once, (if they had
any suspicion) by giving the man in charge, bringing
him to the office next morning, charging him with mis-
conduct or defamation of character, the result being a
sentence of some description or other and the case is
squashed. Should any of the parties feel calumniated
or particularly grieved at that which will hereinafter
appear in the “ Pevelations,” the Writer is fully able
to contend with them in any of the Public journals, and
will do them the pleasure, if required, of writing a more
bulky treatise, wherein he will oblige by publishing copies
from genuine documents now in his possession. I was
going to say something about other things, but as Ido
] ot wish to be bad friends with the whole of my neigh-


hours at P. A., I shall conclude this Preface, by inform-
ing those who require to know who Tim Bobbin is and
what he formerly was, so that these good people, will
have some slight idea of Tim’s abilities. Tim was born
early in the year of 18 —being very young at the time of
his birth ; his father being an independent person or
what in Tasmania would be called a Gentleman, Tim
was sent to a Ladies’ school, under Miss Kinder; it
being a first class boarding school it had many young
lady boarders belonging to families of reputation both
from at home and abroad. Tim being a very sprightly
little boy he became a great favorite ; circumstances
alter cases, which after days have proved—nevertheless,
at this time Tim had a brother, who was a Lieutenant
in the “ Essex Fencibles ” who commanded the recruit-
ing Depots in his native town. The “ Essex Fencibles "
being under the command of Col. Urquhart. In 1809
Tim’s brother was attached to the 84th which formed
part of the Walcheren expedition. This immense
armament consisted of 35 line of battle ships—two 50
gun frigates—three of 44 guns and 197 sloops,
bombs and other armed vessels; with an army of 39-
219 men, including officers, all assembled in the Downs
on the 27th of July 1809. The whole under the com-
mand of Bear A dm. Sir B. Strachan, and General the
Earl of Chatham. Tim’s brother, upon his return from
Flushing left the 84th and joined the 2 bath of the 9th
“ Holy Boys ” and was at the battle of Salamanca, where
this Begiment being run short of paper used leaves
from the Bibles, and were afterwards termed the “ Holy
Boys.” Unfortunately in 1830 he had a quarrel, which
was fatally ended by the use of swords. Tim had also
another brother who was an officer in the Ist Dragoon
Guards and was present with his Begiment at “ Water-
loo,” and for some time after lay wounded at Brussels,
where he was visited by Tim and his Mother soon after
the battle had been fought.
After Tim left the Ladies’ school, he was put to a


Commercial one, kept by a Mr. Bothwell, where he
was instructed in Beading, Writing and Arithmetic.
The next move was to Tysack’s Academy in Notting-
hamshire, where he became acquainted with boys who
have since risen to distinction in the political world.
After a sojourn at the latter school the next move was
to the Shrewsbury Academy then under the master-
ship of Mr. Meredith. Harrow has also Tim’s name on
its books ; at all these celebrated seats of education new
acquisitions of boyish friendship took place, as well as
school boy quarrels, one of which was of a serious nature.
Young Peter Priestly, a very near relative of the cele-
brated Priestly of oxygen-gas renown, was boarder at
one of these seats of education, and often had Tim’s
assistance, when writing his latin exercises ; when one
morning before breakfast a quarrel took place, and ended
with fighting a duel with penknives, in which young
Priestly was dangerously wounded in the right breast,
fortunately the bone turned the blade and the result was a
recovery on one side, and an apology on the other. The
next serious squabble in which Tim was involved, was
a real duel in earnest, which took place one fine sum-
mer’s morning at a place known by the name of “ Bobert
Nut tabs Hill,” and curious to relate, Tim’s antagonist’s
name was Hill also, he was the son of a rich
planter, residing at Calcutta, and was at the time re-
ceiving his finishing course at one of these English Aca-
demies ; he is since dead; at the time of his decease
being a colonel in the Indian Army. This affair of
honor having arisen in a quarrel, relating to a “ Miss
Grace Haigh,” who afterwards became the lady of an
Attorney General of one of the West India islands.
This dispute was ended by Tim’s ball going through
Hill’s hat, and Hill’s ball grazing the inside of
Tim’s left knee, but without doing any material dam-
age. One of the seconds, is now Major, since 1855, in
a cavalry corps, denominated the “ Duke of Lancaster’s
Own the brother of the other second, was E. I. W. P.,


since a Lieutenant in the Ist life Gurads, and in 1859
was a Lieutenant in the “ Duke of Lancasters Own.” In
18z3 Tim himself belonged to the latter cavalry
corps. Tim’s profession was in the medical line, and
after he had studied and passed his surgical ordeal, he
also received another sword, which he carried as far as
Fort William, and from thence to Bum Bum and back
again to England, Tim will now conclude this Preface
by stating that his family are connected with personages
who have been Governors ; one of his own towneys and
also a schoolfellow was not very long ago Governor of
Cuba.
Yours faithfully,
Tim Bobbin.
Hobart Town, September sth, 1868.
The following is a true copy of a letter addressed to
Tim
Davey Street, Hobart Town,
September 1, 1868.
Sib.—l return your manuscript with thanks. It
shows much which never before was heard of and
ought to be read by the Tasmanian Public. I have no
doubt as to the success of your undertaking.
I have the honor, &c., &c.,
J. M.
Other notes have also been addressed to Tim Bobbin,
two of them run in a similar strain.
Macquarie Street,
Monday Morning,
September 7th, 1868.
Sir.—l feel pleased with your manuscript; it has much
humour combined with facts, which are handled in a
bold style, and when published must cause much sensa-
tion.
I canot see why it should not be put into the hands


of your Printer at once, as it will be appreciated by the
public, &c.
Yours &c,,
M. L. C
Mr. T. Bobbin.
Macquarie Street,
September 7, 1868.
Sir.— Every one who reads your “ Revelation ” when
in print will be repaid with the humorous manner of
the introduction.
The word “ Revelations ” is very applicable, nothing
could be clearer to the eyes of the public. I would ad-
vise you to publish it at once as I have no doubts about
the success of your undertaking.
I remain, &c., &c.,
A. B.


The revelations of p. a.
It must be admitted as a general fact that there is not,
nor never was a commencement without a beginning,
and many a beginning is and ever will be shrouded in
mystery. There are many mysteries, and the more
they are looked into and studied the more perplexing
they appeal*. The World abounds in histories and
mysteries, there are jmivate family mysteries and pri-
vate family histories, there are court histories and court
mysteries, and various other mysteries never heard off;
and as it would appear odd to be out of fashion, we
have mysteries in this part of the world, known as Tas-
mania. One of the greatest Tasmanian mysteries
has it centre in one of its peninsulas where lies secluded
a little self constituted city, with a port and harbour.
This little city although a dependence, has (in a manner)
an independent Government and has its own laws man-
ners and customs, not foregoing its pleasure and punish-
ments. It may be compared to one of the little independ-
ent cities of Germany with its Grand Duke—ministers,
directors, comptrollers, governors, sub-governors, clergy
and so forth ; and although this little Tasmanian city
has no military at present quarted in it, it has its naval
Officers, armed-police and unarmed-police —it has like-
wise other authorities connected with its executive and
administrative councils. This little city also possesses
a grand literary institute, an observatory for meteorologi-
cal observations, a theatre, a custom house, and also a
flagstaff and battery. Few there are in Tasmania who


have not heard of this little place, and hundreds since
its foundation have experienced its punishment—many
a literal bombardment it has withstood and at the present
time its nobles and commander are of opinion it can yet
maintain the seige for two or three years longer; and
so it can, if Old Bull will support its garrison. The
garrison of this little city comprises its nobles with sure
incomes, nothing to do, good residences, and in expecta-
tion of good pensions when it falls—what is the chief
strength of this place !—From whence is its commerce
and prosperity derived ? Those who know, require no
telling—to others, it is a mystery—its great building,
formerly the domicile for hundreds, is now but scantily
inhabited ; half of its extensive dormitory where reposed
its monks of the yellow-garb, is destitute of sleepers—
The only apartments which keep their inhabitants are
the pretty little rooms below, these still appear to re-
tain their lodgers—The great and splendid dining hall
where hundreds of old refreshed themselves is now lost
in space ; yet its bright lamps may be seen burning, its
entrance hall has lately been decorated with a new de-
crip tion of lamps, and passages still retain the same
rows of bright burning lights. Is it not astonishing to
find that with this decrease new avenues planted with
Oaks, leading two new buildings of much extent and
of more expense have been erected for men belong-
ing to the moon—but this is not so wonderful after all,
when for ought any one knows, the next improvement
will consist of a New Market, a New Square, a Caledonian
Club House, a Railway Termimus and a City Bank,
and it is not impossible but there might be a Royal Hotel
as the present hotel in this city is little known, in Sly
Street, and is at present only frequented by those who
are honest enough to be trusted—the brandy in Sly
Street Ranges from nine to ten shilling per bottle—rum
six shillings, gin eight shillings, this at times scarce—
spirits have been so scarce in Sly Street, that fifteen
shillings per bottle has been given for rum. A great


inconvenience is experienced by vistitors, as there is no
sign to the house, but those initiated, will direct you
“ Round the Corner” This city has only two main
streets known by the names of Cross and Square Street.
This is a most peculiar little city, for there being no
Market Place, many transactions are often done “on
the quiet,” in fact the principal commercial business in
cash and goods is all “on the quiet.” Any visitor
(unless in company with an initiated guide) would not
credit the traffic in cows, pigs, goats, fowls &c., to say
nothing of tea, sugar, bacon, &c. This is not all—visit
the Institute in the evening (Sunday and Thursday ex-
cepted), where you will always find some of the nobles
and citizens expatiating on the qualities and value of
some article which will soon change hands by virtue of
the dice box. For example, over the fire-place hangs a
notice, “To be raffled for, 25 members at ss. each—a
melodie, &c.” This raffle, is not unfrequently put into
the hands of an agent, who manages all the untaken-up
shares with the cue at the bagatelle table. This 25
member “ melodie ” was said to belong to one of the
rural nobility, whose residence is near some bay or other
in the vicinity of the city. This must appear myste-
rious to many, but it is nothing when you are informed
that gold watches, gold chains, silver and electro-silver
services, and even to bedsteads, have changed hands by
the power of the dice-box in this very Hall of Litera-
ture. Header, this may not after all be so much out of
place when you are informed that it is very rare to find
a noble who is not very fond of the dice-box. Most of
these articles are put up for more than they even cost
at first —one example may serve to show how these
articles deteriorate in value. For instance, the reader
may imagine, that on Wednesday, July Ist, 1868, a
raffle takes place —the articles are put up for £s—they
are won by an individual who, without leaving the
table, puts them up again for £3 10s. —the next winner
puts them under his arm and makes off with them until
b 2


(well say) Saturday evening, July 4tli, when these self-
same articles are placed on the table at another place
for £2 10s., and the winning throw purchased for £l.
Now what may this be termed ? Does this come under
the head of gambling or recreation ? In all ducal cities
we find a division in the orders of their nobility. Now
in this city the lower class, which (until recently)
amused themselves by throwing for trifles, without an-
ticipating any gain, only pastime, are now prohibited,
unless by authority. The question is—has a man with
2s. a day as much right to put up a Ham as a superior
officer has a Gold Watch ? If the finances of this little
city were not in good repair, and regularly kept in
motion with John Bull's golden oil, it would soon fall,
its nobles would be scattered by the winds of fortune ;
their names would no longer appear in the book of
prosperity ; their city and mansions would fall to ruin,
and the passer-by would exclaim, is this the place where
once stood the city upheld by John Bull's cheques ?
By way of anecdote (the dice-box resumed) there was
once a noble who had an elder son (in this city), the
son had a hat, this hat like all other things of this
world became out of date or out of fashion, I forget
which, but however its fortunes were to be decided by
the box, it is not stated at how many throws, or the
value placed upon it, but eventually a friend rescued
the doomed beaver, and purchased it for twelve shil-
lings, The black tile is now, I believe, travelling through
the provinces on the head of its master, and who knows
like all sublunary articles, it may not yet be disposed of
for the value of a pot of beer.
Go reader and visit this parvien urbum, —every one
is busy—all the chimnies are smoking—all its mansions
are occupied—all its free population are commanders of
some grade. Who do they command ? Begiments of
infantry? No. Cavalry? No. Volunteers? No.
They all command detachments of infantry, trained and
disciplined to the use of the plough, cross-cut saw, axe,


pick, spade, &c., so that they must be engineers, their
uniform varies from grey to yellow and black and yellow,
some by way of distinction for their bravery wear chains,
hut, being a peculiarly distinguished body, in place of
the chains decorating their necks, they ornament their
legs. The whole force may be rather more than two
hundred men employed on the city works, commanded
in one way or another by about thirty officers of various
distinctions, saying nothing about officers commanding
outposts. To this thirty may be added twenty preserv-
ers of the peace, so that should the whole force of en-
gineers on the city roll be numbered at two hundred
and fifty! they are under the orders of fifty! officers, or
one officer to five men. There is also, exclusive of the
above, one naval officer, employed about the bays and
harbours, who will be referred to hereafter. Now, as
all officers are allowed servants from their corps, an es-
timate may be made of about fifty men from the work-
ing parties as servants in one way or another. Among
these may be enumerated the above naval officer and
his crew, and the vessels under his command (varying
from 10 to 40 tons). These vessels are nearly wholly
employed in conveying firewood, except in some in-
stances, and these are but slight. These nobles or officers
are divided into three classes—and according to their
classes so are their residences, gardens, and private
dairies ; for let it be known many of them are cow-
keepers, and make a profitable remuneration from their
cattle in one way or other. For instance, should one of
these worthies be about to leave the city, through long
service or otherwise, he at once (what is termed) makes
it right to dispose of his live stock (a cow or more) to
the government, somewhat after the following manner :
One or two officers are appointed to value and approve
the cow, upon this approval the cow is transferred to the
Imperial Shippon and the cash from the Imperial funds.
Under this routine of dealing cows not worth more than
three pounds , and could have been carried on the back


of a man strong enough, have been transferred to Her
Majesty’s Government for eight pounds; pigs have also
been purchased the same way at prices by far more than
they were worth ; —and poor old “ John Bull” has to
uphold all this, whilst his pockets are touched daily, and
these nobles and citizens wink at each other, and whis-
per “don’t wake him.” A little anecdote about these
pigs may not be out of place. Some time ago having
had occasion to be a visitor, I was passing down one of
the streets of this city, I think its name is Squareum-
street, but being a stranger I am not certain, but it
matters little ; well, to my surprise, I met a couple of
men driving one of the largest and most splendid boars
I ever set eyes on. It had just been landed from Her
Majesty’s frigate, I forget her name, although I know
her commander. This fine boar was on its way to the
Imperial piggery. I saw it take up its abode, and being
such a fine animal I enquired to whom it belonged. No
one could give any definite information, any further
than that it was thought it belonged to the governor.
Now we all know that the word governor applies to the
heads of families, and is used to designate masters, as
the following application will show:— “Look out, here
comes the Governor.” Some time after I was there
again, and was speaking to the secretary of the pigs, and
he informed me that this fine boar had never been
shown in any returns, as it had been a present. Why
then, said I, is it kept at the Imperial or government
piggery ? The reply made was it’s all amy stery. Just
after I had left the secretary or clerk I met a Welshman
who was feeding about forty pigs (the boar amongst the
rest) with boiled potatatoes. I enquired from him, but
all the answer I could obtain was that “ She was kept
to pull the cows.” However this boar, lam informed,
was slaughtered a few months ago, and having had the
skin taken off, was issued as rations to the working en-
gineers of this city. This reminds me of the male na-
tives, who always regaled themselves with the best part


of the opossum, and threw the refuse over their shoul-
ders to their wives. A simile may be drawn in the
above case, for as a fact, this is not the first old tough
boar that has been issued in the above mentioned man-
ner, whilst the nice tender young pigs are sold to the
officers. Who did this fine hoar belong to ? There is
generally in all smooth deep streams an under-current
which oftentimes proves the destruction of those who
are unfortunate enough to be drawn into it. Many-an
unfortunate man has been drawn into this current, and
has had to pay the penalty of his temerity. If justice
were to be done, and a revisal of the records of this
little city were to take place, the public would be
astonished at its bare-faced punishments. Sentences
out of number have been given, merely to cover the
faults of those most implicated, and when the principals
have exculpated themselves, after a form, by what is
termed “ making it right,” in order to re-establish their
authority and save themselves, they have turned round
on their servants, and vauntingly charged them with
defamation of character, when at the same time they
never had a character, unless a very loose one, and to
those who know them never will have one, which proves
the proverb “ Put the Devil on horseback and he’ll ride
to hell.” Deader imagine yourself a nabob or officer of
this settlement or city. You have a servant—you give
your servant a sum of money or anvthing else, for which
this servant has to obtain something for you, say pota-
toes. These potatoes are to be got on what is termed
“ the cross,” as you don’t care how they are got, so that
they are got either by hook or by crook. The unfortu-
nate servant gets what is termed “pinched,” placed in
handcuffs and escorted to the “jug.” The next day he
is brought before the “Big Man,” and the result is that
the master charges the unfortunate servant with defama-
tion of character, coolly walks out of the hall of justice,
and exclaims, f‘ What a flat that fellow was for getting
pinched” This is a proof of the proverb that “the


Weakest goes to the wall.'’ To counteract the above
assertion the “ Big Man” will say that he has nothing
to do only attend to the evidence given before him.
All lawyers admit the same, but the groundwork of the
law ought to be the constitution of justice; A word
from an officer will fell a servant to the ground, and
why is this ? The answer is simple—guess it if you
can. If it was possible to bring before the public the
enormous quantity of underhanded traffic of this little
secluded place men would say, “Well, what do you
think of that?” In all cases of malady there is gene-'-
rally an antidote. What description of antidote is re-
quired here; probably one might be recommended—say
more publicity; but as all communications with the
public journals of the colony are strictly forbidden, the
physician who made himself bold enough to administer
such a powerful antidote might get as his fee (what is
termed) the “dirty kick out,” and receive a “travelling
ticket,” to pass the Neck. Things in this little place are
encircled by a lofty barrier, and once found breaking
through its defences, by publishing the mysteries of the
order, the victim is doomed never hereafter to re-attain
his position amongst this brotherhood of high and
and mighty community. The only force competent to
contend against the society of such a city as this is ex-
perience combined with publicity. Outward show of
honesty and duty covers the character of many a de-
faulter, while innocence is sometimes only the outward
appearance of incnnstancy. A countryman once ex-
claimed (upon seeing St. Paul’s) “By gum wonders
will never cease.” Secrets and wonders are very nearly
allied to each other. Wonders are things which at
times have been thought to be impossibilities, but in
time have been converted by the power either of science
or art, and in the end have become subservient. Now
this wonderful city, with its secrets and mysteries, may
although so hard yet be smashed with a powerful sledge.
Secrets are not always things unknown, as the follow-


lug little story will prove. Once upon a time an officer
and his lady dwelt in a city, and the lady it must be
understood dealt in commodities; it appears a man be-
longing to the moon, wearing a grey garb, became inti-
mate with the lady in the way of trade. Now when
accounts were settled the lady stood indebted “ one
shilling” to the moon-man. After a short time the
moon-gentleman paid the lady another visit and urgently
desired to have a commodity which he could not obtain
for less than five shillings. Let it be understood that
this moonite had only four shillings, whilst the lady
exacted the last farthing. “ All right,” replied the man
of the moon, “ you owe me one shilling, here is four
more, so now for the commodity.” The argument for
the commodity was so warmly contested at the time,
that a third person was not seen, who had popped in to
purchase a bottle of jam, and had stood until the account
was settled unobserved behind the door. Another lady
of the same city (as the story goes) had a certain com-
modity which one evening, about ten o’clock, vowed
she would not take less than ten shillings for. The
gentleman not having sufficient funds, the lady allowing
no credit, and a laugh being heard hard bye, both par-
ties “cut.” Stories are only stories after all, yet there
are true stories and mysterious stories. The reader can
select for himself. A sort of barter is sometimes re-
sorted to, when cash is short, for instance, we will say,
two gallons of oil or 50fts. of 12 % Hour, and perhaps
on some occasions a couple of bars of soap has been
given and accepted. In fact the under-current traffic
of this place, if it could be laid bare, as Paddy says,
“bates Bannagher,” and although some might contend
that proof was wanting, still there remains sufficient
facts for exposure. The reader might ask, “Is there
no police T It has been already said that there is a
police force, and a very strong one too. In the city and
its environs the number of police on the 28th of June,
1868, amounted to somewhere about sixty six men,


under the supervision of and including one district con-
stable, one senior constable, two sergeants, and one
corporal ; the whole force being considerably more than
would be required for the city of Hobart Town and its
20,000 inhabitants. But why are they termed police,
when that division which is in the city or settlement
are only employed as running footmen, under the orders
of every individual who may be termed officer. If a
policeman at P. A. performed his duties conscientiously
according to his oath, short would be the period he
would wear the scarlet and blue uniform. It is not
wholly the unfortunate men who wear the yellow uni-
form who require detection. It is a common saying,
“if there were no receivers there would be no thieves.”
How many men at this place have been punished for
being drunk ? Could these men have got drunk unless
the liquor had either been given or sold to them ? The
former of these may easily be solved by the old maxim
of “nothing for nothing .” By the application of a mi-
croscope some of these nearly imperceptible nothings
would be magnified into very large somethings. “Take
warning in time,” is a saying of much consequence, for
this microscope might be used, and should such be the
case, pack up your duds and bundle and go. The most
singular mystery of this wonderful place, which is under
the government of the officer-and-no-soldier system, is
a little private shop, kept in a little private house,
without any exhibition of goods displayed in its small
window ; so unpretending is its aspect that a stranger
would imagine that its cash box would be mouldy for
want of use. Not so—this little box is the depository
of “ Old John Bull’s” little cheques. These bits of
paper are the deposits for goods received. There have
been many queries as to the origin and exclusiveness of
this little emporium, for be it understood that no com-
petition in the shopkeeping line is allowed. The ques-
tion-—-Why are not others allowed to sell ? Enquire as
to its origin and you will be informed that this shop


was established fur the convenience of officers. Be this
as it may, it is certainly a convenience (I mean) for
certain individuals who have left-off garments to dispose
of, and other sundries, such as fresh butter and eggs.
A certain person once remarked to the mistress of this
establishment that her charges were high, upon which
she replied “If you knew all I pay dear enough for
selling How would this remark (admitting its truth)
stand the test of the microscope. Probably the mistress
must have alluded to the high rate of her licence. Ho
shopkeepers pay licence ? Why is not this shop carried
on in the name of the husband ? Because the husband
is a government official, and is prohibited from publicly
dealing or trafficing during the period of his being in
the government employ ; consequently the establish-
ment is carried on in the name of the wife. Is this ac-
cording to law ? if SO) it is not according to freedom and
justice. An old proverb says “ secrets will out,” and
some day or other this secret will -out. Why not allow
a branch shop from some of the Hobart Town grocery
establishments. No, that would never do.. Probably
the Hobart Town dealer would object to the high rate
of licence. It cannot be disputed, admitting the truth
of right and wrong, that this shop must be supported
by some constitutional endowment or perhaps some
influential sleeping partner. Many a remark has been
made as to who this partner was, but as. it appeared
dangerous to name the suspected party in public, all
came to nothing, but in private it has been asserted
that “the C. C. had a hand in it," and had a profit out
of this establishment. Sometime ago a man named
Wright, who had a wooden leg, and a real or wooden
sentence, was sent to the settlement for a term of years
to recover his behaviour. By trade this man was a
tailor, and a good one too, and for the means of cheap-
ening his labor, was what is termed “ invalided,” and
being a good workman, was worked into this shop, bis
employer paying only slight wages for his labor to


the government, whilst on the other hand a good profit
was the result. Peg-leg, also in his little way, worked
somewhere about £IOO into his pocket when he left this
little emporium of secresy. Many a suit was here made
and altered “on the quiet,” by Peg’s needle. New
garments were not always the order of the day, for at
times coats, trowsers, and hats have been sent to this
little shop for sale, which, according to remark, once
adorned the person of the C. C., whilst other persons
assert that butter and eggs have also been sent here for
sale, and the proceeds placed to the account of J. B.
Is J. B. the mysterious personage who derives any pro-
fitable remuneration as the supporter of this exclusive
system of dealing ? Suspicion points its finger, but like
many other things a true revelation will never take
place, nor is it likely that any admission will ever be
made. This rests only with the implicated, but suspi-
cion sometimes creeps out when least suspected. At
one time it was not an uncommon thing to see a man
(an invalid or pauper) walking about the corner of this
establishment on the look out for customers, and always
ready to promote the sale of anything that might be
required to change hands, for dealers at times are not
very nice about their bargains be they cross or square,
so long as they are what is termed “ all right.” It is
quite time that the public was made aware of the secrets
of this penal settlement, and its under-workings, its
system, and its management, not forgetting its expences
and extravagancies. Its officcis and overseers are in a
manner little nobles, receiving enormous salaries, and
in fact performing literally nothing ; and although per-
forming nothing more than any other individuals can
do (and in some cases less), are in expectation of receiv-
ing handsome pensions for doing less. Some of these
officials are in the receipt of £l5O per annum, and most
of them receive £IOO 7s. Gd. yearlv for merely perform-
ing nothing. _ What would Sir George Arthur or Sir
John Franklin have said to this useless expenditure ?


Compare the expenditure and profits of 1838 with those
of 1868. What will be the difference ? In 1838 the
expences of the settlement were only small, whilst the
returns made by the prisoners were profitable. In 1838
nothing appeared in the abstracts like <£Boo per annum
or £6OO, but this will be referred to elsewhere. To
take everything in its turn —a few words may be said
in regard to the “ Literary Institute” of this settlement,
or what is commonly termed the “ Officers’ Library and
Reading Room.” As far as regards this establishment,
according to its denomination, it is one of use and enter-
tainment, but its foundation and support are not of a
free character, on the contrary, this establishment is one
of compulsion. Some time ago an article appeared in
one of the colonial papers, headed “ Chesapeake and
Shannon,” where a certain individual (once a partaker
of the good things of this settlement) informed the Tas-
manian public that when a boy he was on board of the
“ Shannon” frigate, (he was for anything that may be
known to the contrary). It appears that this late
official was presented with two volumes, accompanied
by a complimentary note headed “ Officers’ Library and
Reading Room.” Why should it be termed thus, when
this establishment is largely supported by constables,
who it may be said pay about thirty pounds annually
into its treasury, and strange to say I never heard of
any of them being members of its committee of manage-
ment, nor have they ever been combined under the head
of “ Officers’ and Constables’ Library.” No works or
other presents from this institution ought to be given
or appropriated to any individual or purpose without
the consent of the whole body of subscribers. But this
is not a free establishment, and unlike others of its
kind is governed by an arbitrary power. Scores of
pounds, in the way of fines, from half a crown to three
pounds, have been inflicted to found and support this
fashionable resort of Port Arthur dunces. This room
is open every evening for subscribers, and is generally


well attended on the evenings the post arrives, in order
that its inmates may satisfy themselves about the trans-
actions of the Tasmanian Parliament,, as to whether
there is anything brought forward about the reduction
of overseers, or diminution of salaries. The least hint
of this puts all these great officials in a tremble, and
you might hear them whisper, “ I think its coming to a
close.” If nothing has been brought forward, they
regain their confidence, conversation becomes animated,
the balls on the bagatelle table are struck merrily, and
they all appear to say to themselves “Its all right yet”
The foregoing remarks apply only to the routine of
common evenings. It has been before stated that
Thursday evening is an exception. This evening is set
apart for things of greater display. The meeting
generally commences at eight o’clock, when all the
quality, robed in their best, pay homage to the Presi-
dent (weather and circumstances permitting), when
everything is displayed to the best advantage, but no-
thing is done until the chair is taken, unless the distri-
bution of ginger beer at the rate of one penny per glass,
the account being settled at the end of each month . In
a gallery, on the left hand side as you enter, sits the
band, accoutred in full uniform of blue and scarlet.
Under this gallery you will find forms placed, where
the lower order of officials may seat themselves ; oppo-
site stands a table, where will be found those of a
higher grade. At the head of this table stands the
presidential chair, on the right and left of which are
chairs for the great people. On the table may be found
what is called the “programme,” which informs its
readers that the evening’s amusement will consist of
reading, singing, and music. The chair being taken,
and the President having received the compliments of
the company, the band strikes up something like “ the
Conquering Hero comes,” or perhaps “ the Big Man has
arrived,” and not unfrequently the tune (for anything I
know) may be “ pay homage to the great.” A stretch


of dignity from the chair may be observed during the
last tune, and a most maitlal-like deportment is
assumed by its occupant. Who then at this court
dare question or interfere with the affairs of this
mighty monarch ? This high personage is some-
times supported on the right by a very reverend Dean,
belonging to some church or other, but it has been said
of no religion ; but people must not be taken by their
outward appearances, for many deceive their
there being no general rule without exceptions. On the
same side sometimes sits an officer, who, if not known,
might be taken, from his appearance and gait, to be a
rat-catcher , being the dead image of men of that pro-
fession, only he keeps neither ferrets nor terrier dogs ;
still he is to be seen at the pulling-up of drains, repairs
of back-yards, alterations of old stores, &c. He is a
faithful companion to his master, and when in his com-
pany is always close to his heels, and is ever ready to
make a snap. He runs to the tune of about £l7 per
month, and once possessed a horse which had two odd
eyes. This little creature arrived in Van Diemen’s
Land from England in 1834, per ship , being sent
away under peculiar circumstances, but being assiduous
in his trade, and his scent being good he got patronised,
by a long gentleman with one arm. Another public
character, often is seen on the left of the chair. This
gent has travelled much, has been in Melbourne, some
say in South America also ; he is a native of that prin-
cipality where the inhabitants carry a leek in their hats
on St. Tavit’s Day, and always shout “ Hurrah for Sir
Watkin.” This knight, be it known, never lost a race.
I have heard it said that these descendants of the
Britons stand on the city walls of Chester during the
races, and exclaim, upon seeing him first, “ Look how
Sir Watkin leaves them behind her,” and when he has
been last, “Look how Sir Watkin drives them before
her.” This gentleman deals in pills, and begs trifles,
such as mangold and cabbage plants ; and, if it be true,


lie charges very high if called out of his paid district.
It is reported that a short time ago he attended the
accouchrnent of a miners wife, for which this truly
benevolent physician charged the mild sum of Six
Pounds. He also deals in pigs as well as pills. At
times he is not very complacent to his patients, as the
following is an instance. A patient not very long since
visited this medicus or crodgy, who after a while asked
the man what he wanted. Upon the patient explain-
ing the nature of his complaint, this knight of the pestle
took two pills in one hand and a pannican with water
in the other, and in a very coarse tone said, “ Here
take these two jhlls.” The patient, being an old prac-
titioner himself, knew this was not the medicine he
required, and the pills being so hot to the tongue, he
spit them them out into his hand unseen, but the irri-
tation caused to the mouth continued for some hours
after. Having asked another question, the doctor re-
plied, “Go outside and wait.” These two pills were
afterwards placed inside a piece of meat and given to a
dog —the effects produced were of an extremely loose
nature—they might have been croton oil pills. A few
more of these court attendants may be enumerated, who
seldom fail to pay their respects, and, as a court never
shines without the presence of ladies, the fair sex of
this establishment must be noticed. If you therefore
take a peep in and cast your eye to the chairs, you will
sometimes see Lady McQuirk, who laughs and smiles
at everything both read and said. This lady is a cele-
brated local actress, and has more than once appeared
on the boards or tables (the latter being a more appro-
priate designation) of this little city theatre ; her prin-
cipal characters being taken in the “ Irish Schoolmas-
ter,” or “ The Silent Woman,” her eldest daughter
generally playing the silent woman. This young lady
might have improved her abilities as a comedian had
she remained at this theatre, but unfortunately her
engagement was cut short by an unforseen event which


Occurred in the ball-room at the celebration of H. M.
birthday, on the evening of the 2 7th May, 1868, where
loyalty rose so high that (it is reported) a pugilistic
engagement took place, in which this young lady’s
spouse was in some manner or other implicated, and he
received his “ travelling ticket.” Her youngest daugh-
ter is still at home, and attends this court with her
mamma, where she sometimes sings (very prettily) to
the piano, accompanied by a gentleman who is also a
comedian of some repute. Look to the left (as the
showman says) and you will see Lady D d and her
youthful daughters, all complacency and smiles; at
times engaged in conversation with a countryman of
Sir Watkins, whilst at others she attends to some
stuttering speech of one of the blustering orators of the
assembly. This good lady was once seized with spasms
upon hearing that one of her daughters spoke to a man
who was of a respectable family and of good abilities,
simply because this individual at one time had belonged
to the order of grey friars, and had carried the number
of his order marked in white paint on his back. This
lady, though so virtuous and discreet in her behaviour,
did not think it indecorous to receive the visits of a
certain “ Old Colonial Surgeon,” who scarcely ever
omitted paying his compliments between the hours of
ten or eleven o’clock in the morning, when he knew her
good lord was absent on his duties. Now this good
lady forgets that for many years past both herself and
the whole of her family have been clothed, fed, and sup-
ported through the faults, follies, and crimes of this
class of brotherhood. Probably these remarks may cut
to the quick this good lady’s feelings, but in addition,
she does not despise a load of firewood, when it can be
obtained on the “sly,” or commonly termed “-on the
cross.” Take a squint at the company assembled round
the table, and there you will find this lady’s lord and
master peering through his glasses at the “ Mercury,”
or “Times,” in search of intelligence respecting any-


thing 1 that might have transpired in the Parliament
relative to matters of reduction. Should he anticipate
having f to move, his thoughts are employed in consider-
ing the price or value that might be set on his cow.,
which by the way might be wheeled in a barrow. He
conscientiously believes, let come what will, this giver
of milk and butter will travel the same path as its bre-
thren, and will be directed to the Imperial cow-shed,
and a good remuneration be directed into his own
pocket. In another part of this congregation may be
seen a tall, stout, grey-headed, elderly gentleman,
scanning over the ‘Tasmanian Times,’ to see if anything
is hinted about Invalids and Paupers, satisfied that all
is right, he takes oft his spectacles, places himself in an
erect position, and looks quite at home, muttering to
himself at the same time, “ Thank God, if the worst
happens, I’m due for a pension.” He only deals in a
little bacon and fresh butter, when he has got it to
spare. He is also in charge of the battery, and com-
mands the local artillery (made for the purpose) when
firing salutes on the royal birth-days. Good fortune
has placed him in better circumstances than many of the
order to which he once belonged, and no blame ought
to be attached to any man for bettering his condition.
Another officer may be observed sitting at the table, in
an erect manner, and paying much attention to the
President, and always ready to obey the least gesture
made from the chair. He is not very tall—walks
quick—has a dark complexion—not very old—rather
consequential—and enjoys a game of bagatelle. When
out walks much about—not a bad man in his place,
though all the working class are generally on the look
out for him, and upon being seen the office is given to
“Look out for the S,” This official is the Commissioner
of Police, therefore his situation places him out of the
line of the general business. It is reported that his
live stock consists of a couple or so of turkies and a
P u PP} r - Close to the above official you may perceive


another, of about the same build and complexion. This
is one of the under-secretaries—a commissioner of edu-
cation—a member of Maynooth—and a sub-inquisitor.
Being an under-secretary he has not much time to de-
vote to farming or dairy pursuits, unless he may possess
a few hens. He patronises the ‘ Tasmanian Catholic
Standard,’ and abhors-the ‘Leader.’ It is said that he
is all the rage with some of the fair sex, and has made
one convert. He is now (according to rumor) endea-
voring to walk round a younger sister and persuade her
to renounce an erroneous creed, become a member of
the true Church, and confess that she loves him; Ano-
ther young notable is sometimss seated close by (who
has lately been transferred) say from the marine, and
is now located in his mansion, has made his appearance
as a resident member of this literary community. He
pays much attention, looks- well in his suit of black,
and is very affable. Being a new-comer, he is at pre-
sent (what medical men term) under observation. His
situation is a sort of sub-comptroller over the flour,
treacle, and oatmeal department. It has been hinted
in private that when this young man was first lieutenant
on board a certain little schooner, he was entrusted
with a certain case containing spirits, to be delivered
at a certain place. On enquiry this case was said to
have been lost in some way or other ; be this as it may,
this little case was paid for and further rumor ceased.
At times may be seen a tall, well-made, sedate-looking
personage, with a complexion somewhat dark, having a.
touch of the Somersetshire dialect. This gent is not a
regular attendant, as his taste is more inclined to
psalmody, and sublime poetry. At one time he gave
out the hymns at church, and pronounced the “amen,”
and was rewarded for his Christian labor with a little
salary, besides another little payment annually for fill-
ing and emptying the post-bag, seeing it sealed up, and
forwarded to its destination. Add to these little sala-
ries one of larger amount for performing the office of
d 2


Chief Secretary—the amenship has been given up—
but he can yet dance to the tune of about £l5O per
annum. His importation was caused through a slight
mistake in writing a wrong name. He dabbles a little
in the small way line, but does not speculate to any
large amount. Amongst this group may be seen occa-
sionally a little gentleman lame in his foot, an expe-
rienced man in his profession, of a hasty temper, but
good conduct. This is the junior naval officer, and is
in charge of all the vessels, both afloat or laid up in or-
dinary—in fact this is the Port Officer. When at sea
he has a lieutenant, whose duty it is to steer a launch
up the bay to be loaded with firewood and logs. This
naval gentleman, as before stated, being lame, hops to
the tune of about £l2O per annum. By way of review,
the next in rotation will be the commodore or senior
coxswain, who by seniority should have taken prece-
dence, but as he is the most of his time afloat, he is
seldom seen at the Literary Institute, unless it be to
exchange a parcel of books for cabin reading. This
naval commander cruises in the channel between Hobart
Town and Port Arthur ; he has a mansion in the first-
named city furnished with a glass-fronted verandah ; at
one time he had quarters at the latter place. Like
other old edifices he suspected that this building was
haunted either by real or imaginary beings, but the
phantom spirit was at last detected in the form and
shape of a real man planted under the parlor sofa, who
had merely come into the parlor to regulate and
examine the clock belonging to the commodore’s wife.
As Welshmen are of a superstitious disposition (our
commodore being from the land of the leeks) he deter-
mined to be no more annoyed by anything either real
or ghostly, he therefore purchased a fresh house and
also a fresh wife. When on board his frigate (the
“ Harriett) he cuts his conduct according to his passen-
gers, but at the. best it is of a morose and distant cha-
racter ; hs is in no way accommodating except to his


superiors, and cares little or nothing about anybody
excepting himself. He does a little in the kangaroo
skin line, and makes an honest penny when he can.
He is a big heavy stout man of the Owen-ap-Griffiths
family, and tunes his lyre to the air of rather more than
£l4O per annum. To return to those who are attend-
ants at the Institute, and we shall see a dosey gentle-
man, who at times amuses the company with bungling
lectures on chemistry, and half forgets one word before
he speaks another. His experiments are scarcely or
ever carried out, excepting a stray electric shock, which
is produced more by good luck than by good judgment.
This professor generally forgets something, and whilst
looking for it, has totally forgotten what he was about
before. A few evenings ago this experimentaliser
brought down his galvanic battery, and caused much
amusement in the way in which he demonstrated ; his
appearance was that of a complete noodle, or one under
the influence of opium ; had the company not been
aware of the contrary they might have imagined our
scientific professor was playing on musical glasses, as
his fingers were in continual motion, and his brains in
continual confusion. In addition to his being a lec-
turer on galvanism and a dispenser of medicine at H.
M. hospital, he sits under the parson at church, and in
a sleepy droning tone gives out the Sunday hymns.
He scarcely ever arrives before it is time to sing, and
as to the “ amen,” it never occurs to him to pronounce
the word. This gentleman is so easy and unenergetic
that it is impossible for him to disentangle himself from
the labyrinth of sleepy forgetfulness. His f ivorite song
goes to the tune of somewhere about £IOO annually.
By way of description another of these Port Arthur
rulers must be enumerated. This worthy goes under
the appellation of No. 2 Commandant —at other times
he is called James—sometimes he is entitled the
ploughman, and not unfrequently the gravedigger—■
one of his favorite expressions is “butter or meat,”— he


sometimes takes off his hat and exclaims “this is the
style of hair-cutting now.”' This personage (as the say-
ing goes) is an official in reality ; he interferes with
everyone except mad dogs; these being dangerous
animals, he perhaps fears they might make a snap at
him and endanger his billet; he once showed his own
teeth to his master, but the words “down sir,” caused
him to crouch and slink away with his tail between his
legs. This Port Arthur grandee was imported (it is
said) from London, where he had a residence in a Shore
ending in ditch. Being from this locality nothing can
be expected but coarseness and ignorance. In his own
imagination he thinks that he will rise to a more lucra-
tive billet, but the day has gone by, for the last of the
Mohicans is now on the Port Arthur throne. Upon
his arrival he received a petty situation, and although
a new chum, was raised over the heads of more deserv-
ing men, and made “ keeper” or head gaoler of the
separate prison (perhaps for his assiduity and integrity)
and though in the receipt of a handsome salary (of £l2O
or £l3O yearly) he felt himself discontented at his low
rate of wages, and said something about resignation.
The aftair was settled by an exchange with “ Quiet
George,” who was then S. 0. Now the new S. 0. was
so elated when he told his lady of the circumstance that
he exultingly exclaimed “My dear, I am now the
Station Officer, and I’ll soon be Civil Commandant.”
Now this S. 0. is so much elevated that it matters
little to him (as far as he thinks) who he interferes with,
but he like other mortals is not one of the elect. This
man presumes on the position he holds, and his secrets
if made bare would not stand the test of honesty. The
prominent characters of this Literary Institution having
had a cursory sketch, my readers may, as the Sheffield
hardware man says, be shown something else.
The next that stands in rotation is the “ Observa-
tory.” This observatory was first erected in the garden
attached to the Government Cottage, known as the


‘Church Garden, the instruments were transferred from
the Royal Observatory at Hobait Town, and the first
person in charge of the Port Arthur Observatory was
a Scotchman. Some time after this Observatory was
removed to the signal station behind the house of the
Civil Commandant, and the calculations and meteoro-
logical observations made by the signalman. Now I
declare that many of these were nothing but copies
from prior observations, and many of the men who were
entrusted with these observations knew no more about
meteorological observations than Tom the Cat, and yet
it may be seen time after time in the “ Mercury,” in the
Transactions of the Royal Society of Tasmania —“ Me-
teorological Observations, received from J. Boyd, Esq.,
Port Arthur,” J. Boyd in reality has no more to do
wfith these observations than he had with the large
blocks of blue gum that were procured by the prisoners
for the Melbourne Exhibition, although branded with
“J. Boyd, Port Arthur,” which brand was objected to
by Dr. Officer, and the term “ Commissioners” inserted
in its place. It is all mere fudge and a bottle of smoke,
as far as regards these bombastic inscriptions.
The next for observation is the Theatre. This es-
tablishment for amusement is nothing more than the
mess-room of the Invalids and Paupers, The stage is
composed of a collection of tables belonging to the
room. The performers are the overseers and constables
of the settlement. As far as regards a place of recrea-
tion and amusement there is nothing bad in it. When
a performance is announced the attendance is generally
large, but you will see many others of a different class,
sitting as spectators under the denomination of good
conduct. Query, might not this be allowed in order to
keep the thing dark from public discussion. Ido not
intend to answer this question. The writer of these
pages could if called upon draw a better picture of these
Port Arthur grandees, but sufficient may have been
said to give an insight into their court and manners.


Xo man would believe the enormous expenditure thrown
away at this Penal Establishment, without the least
production of a good result. The only accomplished end
is an army of idlers, under the denomination of officers.
Who and what are these officers? Many of these who
are receiving £IOO per annum can scarcely write their
own names, and but for the intellectual prisoners, who
are allowed them as clerks (called writers); these nobles
would be nowhere. What is it that keeps the settle-
ment on its legs? The question is simply answered.
The few Imperial prisoners now under sentence, and
who are regularly reported as incorrigibles, or cannot
be trusted with their liberty, and so long as this system
exists, Port Arthur and its army of idlers will be a
burthen to Tasmania. Give these men above-men-
tioned their freedom, or transmit them to some other
place, say Swan Piver, and then where would be the
Comptroller’s £BOO per annum, and the Civil Com-
mandant’s £6OO. This force of useless officers would
then think themselves turned into an army of martyrs—
their useless services would be no longer required.
This will some day be the end, and then there will be
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth. Mark the
impudence of some of these bombastic Furiosos ! Some
of these are as before stated receiving £IOO per annum
for doing nothing more than walking about, and when
they are discharged they expect £SO annually as a
pension for sitting down ; and if any person was to
inform them to the contrary it would be taken as an
insult to their dignity. Dignity ! little of this belongs
to a ganger or guard over a body of prisoners. This
high and mighty system is now near at an end. Some-
thing has already been hinted at relative to raffles.
Throwing dice and playing cards are both gaming, and
cannot be defined to be the contrary; for all that one
party may play for amusement, without any interest
for gain, whilst another party plays for the sake of
gain, if a man throws dice for a stake, it matters not


whether that stake be a golden sovereign or a
tea-kettle, the result is equally the same. Ido not
intend these remarks for the public at large ; the}’ are
directed against those who, according to the rules and
regulations of a penal settlement, are prohibited from
playing or gaming in public. To come to the point at
once.—lt cannot be denied that such a thing as a gold
watch has changed hands at Port Arthur through the
dice box, and this gold watch was the property of the
Civil Commandant of Tasman’s Peninsula. This watch
was put up by him or his agent to be raffled for, and
was won by one of the overseers. When the Civil
Commandant is at the head, and patronises this descrip-
tion of public gaming, contrary to regulations, does he
not give a licence to others ? A short time ago a pro-
hibition was made against the constables amusing them-
selves by raffling for some little articles or other, such
as hams ; this was done as a pastime during the even-
ings, and had no bad intent attached to it. Through
some occurrence or other an order was issued that no
more raffling would be allowed in the constables’ quar-
ters, without a requisition being sent for the approval
of the Civil Commandant, consequently, the result was,
this sport for small trifles ceased. This was the cause
of many remarks, such as “Now the Commandant has
got his gold watch off, he is rightwhilst many other
remarks were made use of. With regard to the anec-
dote about the hat, something may be stated :—-This
hat (the present possessor has publicly affirmed) for-
merly belonged to the eldest son of the Civil Com-
mandant of Port Arthur ; it was sent to either the
constables’ quarters or the library to be raffled for, but
it did not undergo the ordeal of the dice-box, having
been saved by its present owner purchasing it for the
sum of twelve shillings. Another hat, which has been
alluded to, in the remarks of the shop now kept at
Port Arthur, once belonged to the Civil Commandant
himself some time back, and was sent to this shop to
E


be disposed of. This was a description of grey felt hat,
and was purchased by a man named Shaw. The butter
and eggs before mentioned used to be regularly for-
warded to this shop for sale by the commandant’s lady.
These transactions of the highest local authority of
Port Arthur do not bring much credit. More might
be brought to light, but this may suffice for the present,
and each reader is at leisure to draw his own picture.
It has been before mentioned that the expenditure of
this settlement is enormous, and why not, when such
an army of useless officials is maintained ! Port Arthur
is a very snug and accommodating locality for its re-
sidents, to wit, only imagine a person receiving five
shillings and sixpence daily, a house, a servant, a gar-
den, wood and water, for merely conducting a small
gang of unfortunate men. This is more than one-third
of the inhabitants of Hobart Town can boast of. Others
such as assistant overseers are in receipt of four shil-
lings a day and the same allowances ; whilst that body
ox men denominated constables receive only two shil-
lings daily, performing at the same time the most duty,
and have scarcely time enough allowed them to eat
their meals. Hie number of officials of every denomina-
tion (including the Civil Commandant) on the 14th
June, 1868, amounted to about 50, and the force of
constables was very nearly 67, not including the crew
of the schooner “ Harriett,” who are (I am informed)
constables also. The settlement constables are the
most employed and the least remunerated, and are
something like lacqueys, especially those who are em-
ployed on the settlement, being under the orders of
any official who may think proper to command them.
In fact the police force of Port Arthur are only in place
of a make-shift. Many discussions have taken place
relative to the outlays and expenses of this settlement.
"With regard to the expenses of the maintenance of the
prisoners, this is but small. It is not this body of
unfortunate men who swallow up so many thousands of


pounds annually. The expenses of the prisoner is only
trifling, but the expenses of the overseers are enormous.
In place of reading “ expenses of Prisoners at Port
Arthur,” it ought to be read “ expenses and salaries of
Overseers and Idlers at Port Arthur,” and the difler-
ence substracted will give the true and correct answer.
Are ail these officials required ? Any person expe-
rienced in these matters will answer —No. In 1834,
according to the parliamentary returns, there were
15,538 prisoners in Van Diemen’s Land, and, according
to the same authority, in 1835 the number of prisoners
in this colony amounted to 16,968, and in 1836 the
number of sentenced men at Port Arthur amounted to
911, besides 270 boys at Point Puer. In the year
1835 the number of prisoners discharged from Port
Arthur was 286, and the quantity received was 466.
Port Arthur was formed into a penal settlement in the
year 1830 (Macquarie Harbour formerly being so), and
in 1834 the latter place was abandoned, and the re-
maining prisoners were transferred to Port Arthur.
During the period of Macquarie Harbour being a
penal settlement 116 men absconded from it, out of
which 75 are supposed to have perished in the bush
One was hanged for murdering and eating six of his
companions. 24 escaped. 13 were hanged for bush-
ranging, and two were hanged for murder. These were
awful times, and required more coercion and power to
keep crime under than the present; still the cost wr s
only a fraction when compared with the present outlay
and expenses at .Port Arthur. In 1835 no less than
16,968 prisoners were in Van Diemen’s Land, which
did not cost the government as much for overseer’s pay
as the few men now do at Port Arthur. In 1836 Port
Arthur had upwards of 1000 prisoners governed by
one Military Commandant (Captain C. O’Hara Booth),
one Superintendent, one Superintendent of Shoe-
makers, and one Overseer of Shoemakers ; besides these
there was one Chief Constable, and three Sub-Con-


stables, the latter being men under sentence, —the
working gangs being under the control of sub-over-
seers. Besides these there were twelve constables on
the line and other out-stations, each receiving one shil-
ling per day and rations. What a difference between
then and now ! The number of men now under sen-
tence at Port Arthur does not exceed 300, when they
are all scraped up, and these unfortunates are presided
over by somewhere about 50 somebodies, and a force of
upwards of 60 police ! add to this the expences of
keeping their residences in repair, and other miscella-
neous costs, and the reader may well exclaim “ enor-
mous.” With all this army of overlookers, who are
paid by the government to manage and take care of
things entrusted to their charge, a most wilful and
careless waste is the result. In all parts of the bush
tools may be found, in open huts, American axes, cross
cut saws, picks, spades, &c., which appear to say to the
passer-by “ come and pick me up, I’m only govern-
ment,” and can be replaced if I am missed. In spite
of this every overseer signs a book, kept for the pur-
pose, every evening, wherein he states every thing all
correct and all edge tools under lock and key. Look
into their gardens, there you see government property
converted to their own private use, such as spades,
hoes, &c. Look into their back yards and there you
will see American axes (some of which might have been
purchased on the cross for one shilling) which cost the
government from seven to eight shillings each. Should
the axe be blunt the only thing to be done is to put in
a requisition for a new one, which is generally approved
of without further enquiry. Look on the top of their
pigstyes, their back fences, or the entrance to their
kitchens, and you might see a commissariat sack used
as a door mat; if not seen there, look into their goat
pens or fowl-houses, and perhaps more than one might
be detected in a half or full rotten state. Poor old
John Bull, how you are deceived ! Look under their


Carpets (those who possess any), and it would not be an
impossibility to find a few government rugs, and then
peep at their bedding, where it would not be a wonder
to see 8.0. on some of their blankets. Their boxes
and drawers, being under the blacksmith, cannot be
interfered with. More than one American axe has
been drawn from the stores for government use which
has been sold for one shilling before it left the settle-
ment—but as the saying goes “ its all government.”
How would these remarks correspond with the days of
old, say about 1838. At this period every prisoner
was answerable for his own tools, and had to bring
them to the stores every evening ; the tools of the whole
gang having been counted and examined by the sub-
overseer when leaving off labor. Besides this, all the
tools in use were mustered once in three months.
None of this now. It would not fit, there being a sort
' O
of sympathetic feeling in existence. The following is
an extract from the Tasmanian Almanac for 1868, and
perhaps may be allowed a place here. It is far from
being correct in many places, therefore it may not be
amiss to point out its errors to the public : —“ Port
Arthur, a penal settlement for convicts under penal
servitude and long sentence of imprisonment with hard
labor. An invalid depot and lunatic branch are also
attached to this station, occupied principally by inmates
maintained at the expense of the Imperial government.
Civil Commandant, J. Boyd; Church of England
Chaplain, Bev. George Eastman; Homan Catholic
Chaplain, Very Bev. A. Maguire, Dean; Senior
Medical Officer, George Dinham, j.p. ; Junior Medical
Officer, J. K. Lewis, j.p. ; Foreman of Works, J.
Strutt; Chief Clerk and Accountant, J. C. Tapp;
Second Clerk and Librarian, J. S. Hill ; Dispenser, E.
Huxtable ; Senior Coxswain, Daniel Griffiths ; Keeper
of Separate Prison, George Whittington ; Dry Store-
keeper, William Whittington; Superintendent of
Agriculture, J. W. Luttrell; Head Keeper of Insane,


J. Lawson ; District Constable, A. W. Chatfield (this
should be J. Peppard) ; one Superintendent of Timber;
one Overseer of Agriculture, at £IOO per annum ; five
Overseers of Prisoners, at 3s, 6d. per day, and one at
£B2 per year ; eleven assistant Overseers, at £75 per
year ; one Coxswain, £132 ; two ditto of guard-boats,
at 3s. 6d. per diem each ; one Junior Clerk, at £llO ;
one Clerk, at £BO ; two Undar-Keepers of Insane at
4s. per day each ; Overseer of Paupers, at £IOO ; Ward-
master, at £9O a year ; Master of Free School, at £75
a year ; Mistress of Free School, £ls a year ; assistant
Schoolmaster, Is. per day ; one Senior Constable ; 12
constables, settlement guard, 58 petty constables ; four
seamen of schooner ; 12 attendants of Insane, and five
Warders in care of Invalids/’ The same authority also
states that “on the Ist December, 1866, there were
503 convicts under detention at Port Arthur—3B4 were
charged on colonial funds, and 119 on imperial funds.”
The foregoing extract states that five overseers at Port
Arthur receive only three shillings and sixpence a day.
In contradiction to this it will be understood that an
overseer receives five shillings and sixpence daily, and
assistant overseers four shillings per diem. Nothing is
said about the five overseers in charge of farms, who
receive annually about £6OO, divided amongst them,
for superintending the growth of rotten potatoes, and
the replanting of those which never came up. A few
seasons ago, say in 1867, no less than 3000 lbs. of
potato seed rotted in the ground at Impression Bay
farm through nothing but ignorance and mismanage-
ment, On the Settlement Farm the same season little
less than six acres of potato seed rotted. “ Hush, don’t
say anything, let it drop.” If a true and faithful ac-
count of the wear and tear of these farms could be got
at it would astonish the public. Their cost is little
less than five thousand pounds annually, whereas their
whole produce, both rotten and sound, fails short of
tw r o thousand. This is somewhere about the profit and


loss. Should this be contradicted, the writer is in pos-
session of documents and other papers which he does
not wish to bring before the public at present. “On
the Ist December, 18j6, says our Tasmanian weather
guager, “there were 503 convicts under detention at
.Poit Arthur. "Why not inform us of the number there
on the Ist December, 1867 ? It has been remarked in
tiie commencement of this paper that now the prisoners
under sentence exceed little more than 300, who main-
tain a free population of upwards that number. On
Satuiday, June 13th, 1868, the number of men (in
mess) in the penitentiary, exclusive of servants, (who
receive a monthly ration) were 198, and those confined
in the separate prison amounted to 22 ; this will make
a total oi 220 men ; besides these there were 104 pau-
pers and invalids in mess. This cannot be confuted, for
as I write I have the return before me. The nonsensi-
cal display of officials may be judged when it takes 14
of them to be present at the mustering of 45 quiet men.
Deny it if you can. On Sunday evening, July 26th,
1868, the number of men mustered in the dormitory
numbered 45. The following is a list of the persons
present. 1 station officer, 1 gang overseer, 1 senior
constable, 8 petty constables, 1 writer, 1 corporal of
watch, and 1 petty watchman.—Total 14. Now all
could have been performed by two persons. I have
known no less than from 800 to 900 men at this very
settlement mustered every evening by three persons,
and now it takes 14 to be present at the muster of 45
men. Let it be perfectly understood that this does not
include the men mustered in the little bed-rooms or
separate apartments of this establishment. On Monday
evening, July 27th, 1868, the number of scholars who
attended the evening school amounted to seven, and to
keep these seven quiet scholars in awe and obedience
no less than four officials were present, consisting of 1
schoolmaster, 1 overseer, 1 constable, and 1 watchman.
These are facts and cannot be denied. Qn Friday


evening, 31st July, the number of men mustered in the
dormitory were 42, and 12 officials attended that
muster!
Oh, John Bull! John Bull!
Lead us not astray,
Let us not in thy wrath
Be cook’d or cast away.
On the Ist of August, 1868, the following indivi-
duals derived their incomes and livings from this settle-
ment, and have been classed accordingly :—W. E.
Nairn, Comptroller-General ; C. F. Belstead, clerk ;
G. Harbroe, temporary clerk ; Murphy, messenger ;
J. Boyd, civil commandant; Bev. G. Eastman, Church
of England chaplain; Bev. A. Maguire, Boman Ca-
tholic chaplain ; George Dinham, senior medical officer ;
J. K. Lewis, junior medical officer ; George Strutt,
foreman of works ; J. C. Tapp, chief clerk and ac-
countant ; J. Connelly, assistant accountant (although
only termed a writer he is in reality assistant account-
ant) ; J. S. Hill, second or police clerk; Michael
Aherne, third clerk : F. Huxtable, dispenser of medi-
cine ; Thomas Card, commissariat storekeeper ; Thomas
Todd, provision storekeeper; William Whittington,
dry storekeeper; James Aylett, station overseer;
George Whittington, keeper of separate prison ; J.
Lawson, keeper of insane department; S. Smith, under
keeper; J. Frost, under keeper of branch department
of Insane at Safety Cove farm ; William Markham,
overseer of invalids and paupers ; Busk, assistant
overseer of ditto ; J. Peppard, district constable ; G.
Napier, senior constable ; J. W, Luttrell, superintend-
ent of agriculture and overseer Cascade farm ; Luttrell,
junior, assistant overseer Impression Bay farm ; W.
Gibbins, overseer of Safety Cove farm ; Edward Chris-
tie, overseer Settlement farm ; J. Cassidy, overseer
Salt Water Biver farm ; Daniel Griffiths, senior cox-


swain in charge of schooner Harriett©— W. Chadwick,
2nd coxswain in charge of settlement boats, also one
coxswain at Y7oody Island, and one at Sophia Island—
AY. Downward, wardmaster at hospital—WilliamTodd,
schoolmaster—Jessie Todd, schoolmistress—John Sul-
livan, overseer of cook and bakehouse —S. McCann,
overseer of chain gang —William Morley, overseer of
penitentiary—Win. Barnard, assistant overseer of log
gang —McKecknie, overseer of carpenters —Stavely, do,
chain gang—McGinnis, night overseer in penitentiary
McGough, overseer in separate prison—Ashton, assist-
ant overseer separate prison—Sweeney, assistant over-
seer, Long Bay station—Aspinal, do, bush gang —F.
Keith, overseer of No 1 log gang—McCarthy, overseer
of wood gang—Hawkins, assistant overseer of bush
gang. To th e above list of large and small men may be
added about 1G more as paid boats’ crews ; another 16
for Wardens and attendants, and to make up this ac-
count put down G 6 constables. The total will not be
much less than 150 officials of every description, deriving
good and splendid rewards from that institution named
“ Port Arthur.” On the Ist July, 1868, the number
of men employed as servants, woodcutters, &c., to this
army of officials was as follows : —Cutting and procur-
ing firewood, 16 men and one overseer ; boatmen, 6 do,
1 coxswain, 1 constable ; carting and carrying water, 5
do, 1 constable ; servants to overseers, &c., say 30 men.
Total—s 7 men. It will be seen from the above that
5 7 men, 1 overseer, 1 coxswain, and 2 constables are
employed as servants to their honors. Much more
might be written about this place, and many more of
its faults and follies exposed—as the saying goes,
“ Time will tell all things ,” a reserve, in case of attack
has not been forgotten, and will appear at some future
timq and in a more bulky volume. However, before
taking leave, I wish to enquire about the twelve hun-
dred blankets, are they still astray ? if so they are easily
rectified when a board of survey is called, by making


one go for two by dividing it down the middle, which
is as good a dodge as filling bottles with water and
passing them off (at a certain survey) for rum—“ So
don't wake him.”
Your very obedient Servant,
TIM BOBBIN.
42




