

THE CASE
OF
LIEUT-GENERAL RALPH DARLING;
AS CONNECTED WITH
THE LIBEL
OF
MR. ROBERT ROBISON.
AND WITH REFEREKNCE TO THE MOTION OF WHICH NOTICE HAS BEEN GIVEN
IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, BY MR. MAURICE O'CONNELI, AND STANDS
APPOINTED FOR MONDAY, JUNE 15TH, 1835.
London:
PRINTED BY JOHN MG'OWAN,
16, GREAT WINDMILL ST. HAYMARKET.
1830.




THE CASE
OF
LIEUT-GENERAL RALPH DARLING;
AS CONNECTED WITH
THE
LIBEL OF MR. ROBERT ROBISON.
In the year 1825, Lieutenant-General Darling was appointed by
His Majesty, Governor of the Colony of New South Wales.
In the following year (1826) Mr. Robison came out to the Colony
as Captain of a Company of Veterans; one of three independent com-
panies which had been raised for the service of New South Wales and
Van Dieman’s Land.
Mr. Robison had the advantage of strong recommendations Irom
persons of influence in England. He had entered the army in tic
year 1807, and after nineteen years service, part of which he had
spent in Spain and in the East Indies, he procured the before men-
tioned Commission in the Veterans, in the hope (as it was understood)
of obtaining some permanent employment in New South Wales. Un
his arrival there, he found the conduct of public affairs such as he
did not approve, and after a course of loud complaints against every
body and every thing, he sent home Complaints against General Dar-
ling, without previously communicating them to the General, as re-
quired by the rules of the Public Service. ,
In 1828, Mr. Robison was tried by a Court Martial for the above
and other offences, and was dismissed His Majesty’s Service.
In 1829, Mr. Wentworth, a friend of Mr. Robisons sent home
more formal charges against General Darling, which were answered by
him to the satisfaction of His Majesty s Ministers.
In 1830, Mr. Robison returned to England, and procured com-
plaints to be made against General Darling in the House of Commons,
and at the same time instituted by himself and his friends, most ur-
gent and importunate solicitations to His Majesty s Government, to
be restored to his rank and half-pay. There was every disposition on
the part of the Government to treat his case with lenity, and at length
in October, 1831, he succeeded by his own and his friends solicita-
tions, on the pleas of having purchased part of his Commissions and
of urgent present distress, in obtaining an allowance of the sum ol
£7OO, being the value of a Lieutenancy of Infantry ; but he was in-
formed at the same time, that it was impossible to restore him to his
rank and half-pay. . , , . , . .
Notwithstanding this, Mr. Robison continued to urge his claim to


be restored to the Service, on the ground of the supposed irregular
proceeding of the Court Martial by which he had been tried ; but,
having failed in this, he resorted again to the House of Commons,
and had the address to represent his case to some of the most
active Members of that House, in such a manner as to secure their
zealous advocacy of his cause, which was brought forward on the
11th of July, 1833, upon a motion by Doctor Lushington—for pro-
duction of the minutes of his Court Martial; when, after a long de-
bate in which Mr. Robert Grant, His Majesty’s Judge Advocate
General, Sir Francis Vincent, Sir Henry Hardinge, Major Beau-
clerk, Sir Rufane Donkin, Mr. Aglionby, Sir James Scarlett, Mr.
O'Connell, Sir Harry Verney, Sir Edward Kerrison, Captain Cur-
teis, Mr. Flume, and Colonel Evans took part, the House was so well
convinced that there was no ground for their interference, that by a
majority of Seventy-two against Forty-two the motion was rejected.
Notwithstanding this signal and public repulse, Mr. Robison still
persevered and addressed to Lord Althorp as the Chief Minister ot
the Crown in the House of Commons, a letter containing twenty-
seven closely printed pages, and having for its object to answer the
Speech of Mr. Robert Grant; to which his Lordship replied as tot-
lows •
Wiseton, 27 th September , 1833.
“ Sir,
“ When I heard the debate on the subject of your petition to
“ the House of Commons, the impression made upon my mind was,
“ that no case was established for producing the minutes of the Court
“ Martial. , , ... ,
“Upon reading the'printed report of the debate which you have
“ sent me, the impression on my mind remained the same. I then
“ read your letter, and have bestowed upon it all the consideration in
“my power. You say that your object in writing it was to answer
“ Mr. Robert Grant’s speech: I have considered it and examined how
“ far you have succeeded in effecting this object, and I am sorry to be
“ obliged to tell you, that in my opinion, you have failed.
“ I have, &c.
“ R. Robison, Esq. “Althorp.
“ &c. &c. &c.”
During the course of these proceedings, Mr. Robison appears to
have acted in a great measure under the advice and direction of Mr.
Joseph Hume, the Member for Middlesex, who had conceived
upon Mr. Robison’s representations, a strong opinion that he had
been unjustly and oppressively treated ; and that General Darling s
official administration of the Colony, demanded a public investiga-
tion; and who, on bringing the Case before the Flouse of Commons,
acted upon these impressions with the well known ardour of his be-
nevolent and patriotic spirit—Mr. Robison having been countenanced
by Mr. Hume’s adoption of his Cause, and having thus (as he says)
exerted himself in every legal way to obtain redress for his supposed
injuries never suspected that his failure was attributable to any de-
fect in ’the merits of his Case, but like many other men of ardent
minds and overweening confidence, conceived that he was justified
in seeking by violence, the redress which the law did not afford


him; and, published the libel in question intending it as a forcible
assault upon the character of General Darling, whom he considered
(though very erroneously) as the sole impediment to his hopes of ob-
taining restoration to his rank and halt-pay.
General Darling considering himself much aggrieved by Mr.
Hume’s hasty adoption of the erroneous information which had been
communicated to him, addressed a Letter on his return to England,
to that gentleman, denying the truth of those statements ; whereupon,
Mr. Hume called on Mr. Robison to obtain for him the information
necessary to substantiate the charges, a precaution which would have
been more fitly taken before the charges were made.
In this Letter, General Darling had felt it due to the justice of his
Cause, to express himself in a way which proved so disagreeable to
Mr. Hume, that he once thought of making it a subject of complaint
before the House of Commons as a Breach of Privilege, but was
deterred, as he states, by an apprehension lest the cause of truth
(which he was pleased to assume to be the Cause of Mr. Robison)
should be injured by such a proceeding.
Mr. Hume therefore, set about substantiating his charges with the
additional stimulus of his own wounded feelings, and called on all
persons upon whose authority he had made them, to furnish him with
the grounds on which he believed the same to he true, Such is Mr.
Hume's own statement, in an affidavit lately tendered by him to the
Court of King’s Bench in behalf of Mr. Robison, and it teas in con-
sequence of this call from Mr. Hume, that Mr. Robison brought for-
ward the various allegations which form the first part of his Libel.
Amongst other sources to which Mr. Hume resorted, he wrote him-
self to Mr. Edward Smith Hall, of New South Wales, the Editor of a
Newspaper called the “ Sydney Monitor, and who had always been
vehemently opposed to the Government there, requesting fiom him
information in support of his (Mr. Humes) charges against General
Darling; and in consequence of such application from Mr. Hume, Mr
Hall published in the “Sydney Monitor” in March 1833, a Letter,
addressed to General Darling, occupying seventy-four pages of Mr.
Robison’s Libel of virulent abuse of General Darling and of his
Government, and sent a Copy of it to Mr. Hume, who, being unable
(as he alleges) by the pressure of other business to bring, this matter
forward himself, advised Mr. Robison to republish Mr. Halls letter in
London, as a means of elucidating the truth of the complaints which had
been made against General Darling, and in order (as he states) to give
General Darling an opportunity of replying to Mr. Hall by a repuhli-
cation of his Letter, or of submitting the truth of Mr, Humes charges
to a Jury !
It would certainly have been a more constitutional course, though
perhaps not equally convenient to Mr. Hume, if he had satisfied him-
self of the truth of these charges in the first instance, before he
availed himself of his Parliamentary privilege to accuse General
Darling publicly. But supposing it excusable in him, to have made
in his place in Parliament, charges against an individual, which,
when made, he found he had not the means of substantiating, it
seems a most inexcusable error of his judgment, more especially
being a Member of the Legislature, to have advised the publication
of this libel by Mr. Robison.


It may be fit and conducive to the public good, that a Member of
the House of Commons, should be able to indulge his patriotic feel-
ings, by publishing in that House complaints against individuals
without any previous enquiry as to the truth or falsehood of them.
In the House of Commons, this may be properly deemed a privileged
communication, and, for the sake of the public benefit resulting from
the allowance of it, individuals must sometimes be content to bear
patiently the injuries resulting from its abuse; but the law is not yet
reformed to such a degree as to extend this principle to every print-
ing press in the country, or to enable a private individual to publish
such statements for the purpose of advancing his own interests or
gratifying his own resentment under the mask of patriotism; or to
oblige persons so attacked, to descend into the arena of newspaper
controversy; or compel them to become their own prosecutors by
adopting the accusations of their enemies, brought forward for the
pretended purpose of enabling them to repel them : but really with
the hope, that, however false and unfounded they may be, some part
at least of the imputation will adhere.
One great inconvenience resulting from the course Mr. Hume has
taken, is, that through haste and inadvertency he has been personally
pledged by it to make good his denunciations against General
Darling; and that, in addition to all the annoyance and expence
which General Darling has already suffered from the machinations
of Mr. Robison, he may yet have to encounter the more formidable
attacks of Mr. Hume and his coadjutors.
If such proceedings could be countenanced by the House of Com-
mons, they would form a very serious drawback from the blessings of
a popular government.
General Darling has taken the only course which was fairly open
to him of meeting Mr. Robison’s libel, and elucidating, as desired by
Mr. Hume, the truth of his accusations. He has not been deterred
from proceeding against Mr. Robison in a way which has produced
from that gentleman a reassertion and repetition of his unfounded
calumnies, but which has at the same time given to General Darling
a legitimate opportunity of contradicting them upon oath, and of pro-
curing contradictions from other competent witnesses as far as such
testimony was within his reach : and if Mr. Hume will take the
trouble to read the following pages, he may have the satisfaction of
seeing, what he has so long desired, “ the truth elucidated."
A person found guilty of publishing a libel is allowed the privilege
of submitting to the Court of King’s Bench, before his sentence is
pronounced, affidavits of such facts as he may conceive calculated to
procure a mitigation of his punishment; and it sometimes happens,
that this privilege is abused so as to aggravate instead of palliating
the offence ; and Mr. Robison has availed himself largely of this prh
vilege by filing very long affidavits, which has fortunately given to
General Darling the opportunity of answering them. The substance
of the charges thus preferred, and of the answers given to them is as
follows, viz.—


MR. ROBISON'S CHARGES
WITH
GENERAL DARLING'S REPLIES.
In the Charges the Roman numerals refer to the pages of the First
Part of the Libel, the other numbers to the pages of the Second Part
of the Libel, or of the Affidavits where so expressed. In the Replies
the number of the pages refer to General Darling's Affidavit.
That high indictable misdemeanours were the ordi-
nary sports of General Darling’s government, and that
twenty acts of this character might be proved, to which
General Darling and his Secretary, Mr. MT.eay, had
been parties; and such a series of fraud, tyranny, and
corruption as had never occurred before in Colonial
Governments. Page xi.
That General Darling tried to influence the judges
by latent intimidation, and Grants of Land, and Convict
labour. Page 15.
That in order to raise a plea to increase the depend-
ance and gratitude of his adulators and addressers.
General Darling invented the system of giving addi-
tional Grants to all those who had improved their first
grants, taking care to enable his friends to improve
their’s by assigning to them an excessive quantity of 5
Convict labour, and that for cunning intrigue, and for
cajoling the King’s Ministers there w r as never his equal
in any land, not even excepting Mrs. Clarke herself
(of Duke of York’s notoriety) whom Mr. Robison calls
General Darling’s quondam friend and tutoress.
That General Darling disgraced his character as a
British Governor in the most audacious and dangerous
manner, and whenever he was pleased to select a victim
interfered with the judges and magistrates judicially,
and by ways and means virtually amounting to menace,
and when fear did not accomplish his end, he intrigued
against the due administration of the laws; and that sir
George Murray (who seems to have been completely led
by the nose by General Darling) added to other acts of
tyranny, before explained, that most disgraceful act of
all, namely, the threat to Chief Justice Forbes, that un-
less: he condescended to act the part of a dissembler and
seek General Darling’s detested friendship he should be
removed. Page 70.
General Mis-
conduct.
Charge A.


General Darling swears, that in exercising the pow-
ers and fulfilling the duties of his office, it was through-
out his earnest wish and endeavour to administer jus-
tice to all parties with strict impartiality, and without
favour, affection or unnecessary severity to any one,
and generally to act in such a manner as might prove
beneficial to the Colony at large, and promote the true
interests of all classes of persons under his Government.
Page 1. ,
That on occasion of his quitting the Government, he
received a letter from Viscount Goderich, then His Ma-
jesty’s principal Secretary of State for the Colonies,
dated March, 1831, informing General Darling, that as
the period of six 'years, which was the ordinary termi-
nation of a Governor’s tenure of his office, would expire
in the course of that year, it was His Majesty’s inten-
tion to relieve General Darling at that time. Viscount
Goderich added, that His Majesty fully appreciated the
zeal for the public service, with which General Darling
had discharged his duties in the arduous situation in
which he had been placed, and that the peculiar cir-
cumstances of the said Colony were such as to impose
great difficulties upon its Governor, and that the efforts
which had been made to establish a variety of charges
against General Darling had entirely failed, and he as-
sured General Darling that in those cases which had
been under his (Viscount Goderich’s) view, he consi-
dered General Darling to be free from the blame im-
puted to him.
The several matters principally alluded to in the
libel have been repeatedly brought under the considera-
tion of the responsible servants of the Crown in their
several departments (that is to say) of His Majesty s
Secretary of State for the Colonies, the Commander-
in-chief of His Majesty’s Forces, His Majesty’s Judge
Advocate General, and of His Majesty’s Attorney and
Solicitor-Generals ; all of whom in their several depart-
ments have been of opinion, that there was no ground
for any charge against General Darling, and the same
matters have been made the subject of discussion in the
House of Commons, with a view to criminate General
Darling on four different occasions, in the years 1828,
1830, 1832 and 1833 ; but on all which occasions the
House of Commons has declined to interfere further
than to order the production and printing of sundry
official documents relating to the same, upon which no
ulterior proceedings have been had.
Archdeacon Scott deposes that according to the best
of his observations, judgment, and belief. General Dar-
ling conducted himself in the Government of the Colony
with impartiality, and without improper favour or un-
necessary severity to any one, and with a due regard to
the interests of the Colony and of all classes of persons


under his Command, and generally to the satisfaction ot
the respectable part of the community.
That he does not believe it to be true that General
Darling ever did make lavish or improper Grants of
Land in the Colony to any person whomsoever, or that
he ever did refuse to make a grant to any person who
was entitled to such grant according to the Government
Regulations.
General Darling denies that he invented the system
of giving additional grants to those who had improved
their first grants for the purpose of benefitting his friends
and dependants, as stated in the Libel —that system hav-
ing been established before General Darling s time—
and denies that he ever saw or had any communication
whatever with Mrs. Clarke, who is stated in the Libel
to have been his friend and tutoress. Page 13.
That the treatment of the Convicts was dreadful, the
wretches were starved, and in rags, and without blan-
kets, and yet were (logged without trial, and many were
flogged to death, while others committed murder in
order to be hanged,—of all which General Darling was
well aware. Page 34.
That General Darling’s total disregard of the well
being of the Convicts led to monstrous oppression of
hundreds of them, and his conduct to individuals was
rigorous in the extreme. Page 69.
That a man named Alexander Lockaye, alias Edwards,
was driven by the barbarous and illegal Conduct ot
General Darling to commit suicide, which involved ano-
ther charge of murder against the General. Page xi.
That General Darling’s conduct was rigorous in the
extreme, in the transportation of old M'Hue, who is
stated to be one of the most inoffensive men in the Co-
lony. Page €9.
Alexander Lockaye was a Convict who had escaped
from the Colony before General Darling assumed the
Government, and had settled at the Cape of Good
Hope, where he was convicted of a fresh offence, and
was sentenced to be again transported to New South
Wales, where great indulgence was shewn him until he
made preparations for again absconding, of which Gene-
ral Darling had proof by a Letter under his own hand ;
and he was therefore sentenced by the magistrates to be
sent to a penal settlement, and was consequently sent to
Norfolk Island, as being the only settlement where there
were adequate means of securing him. Lockaye had
attempted to destroy himself at the Cape, and after-
wards to poison himself at Sydney, and he hanged
himself on the night of his arrival at Norfolk Island,-
General Darling positively denies that Lockaye com-
mitted suicide from any conduct of his towards him,
other than such as he was bound to hold by his official
duty as Governor, in order to prevent his effecting his
escape from the Co'ony a second time. Page 9, 10.


With respect to Dennis M'Hue, who is stated in
Mr. Robison’s Libel to have been one of the most in-
offensive men in the Colony, it appears by the Official
Documents laid before Parliament, that he arrived in
the Colony as a Convict for Life, was afterwards in the
year 1822 convicted in Sydney of receiving stolen goods,
and sentenced to transportation to a penal settlement;
that he was pardoned by General Darling in 1826, and
brought to Sydney, but soon after was sentenced for
misconduct to the ’lreadmill. In the yeai 1828 ho
was implicated in the robbery of the Bank of Australia,
which was to a considerable amount; and in order to
facilitate the discovery of the other thieves he was sent
to Moreton Bay, not as under sentence of transporta-
tion, but as stated in the Notification to the Comman-
dant, as a Convict in “ the ordinary service of the
“ Crown.” Page 14.
That complaints were made by Mr. Robison to Ge-
neral Darling soon after his arrival, of sundry acts of
impropriety on the part ol Public Officers, and of ill-
treatment by the pensioners; but such complaints were
treated by General Darling with neglect, which led to
his recall. Affidavit, p. 4.
General Darling denies that the Reports made to him
by Mr. Robison or the complaints of the soldiers under
his command, were treated with neglect, but swears that
all such complaints were properly enquired into and
redressed, in all cases in which the same appeared to
be well founded. Page 16,
This charge against General Darling of having neg-
lected the complaints of the soldiers, is also expressly
contradicted by the affidavit of Captain de la Conda-
mine his Military Secretary. .
Viscount Goderich addressed a letter to Major Ge-
neral Bourke, General Darling’s successor, directing
him to give the utmost publicity to the statement, that
the recent change in the Government was in no degree
whatever produced by any representation which might
have been made to the Secretary of State for the Co-
lonies. , , ,
The employment of the Veterans in Military duty
alone was not in contravention of the proclamation un-
der which they had been embodied ; for the proclama-
tion declares, that the soldiers were to be employed as
superintendants and overseers of convicts “in addition
to their Military duty.
That General Darling struck off from military duty
certain Officers of the Veterans, and appointed them to
Civil stations, retaining their pay in addition to their
Civil Salaries, which Mr. Robison asserts to be in vio-
lation of the Articles of War, and the Kings Regula-
tlC>General Darling admits that some of the Officers of
the Veteran Companies were employed in civil situa-


lions, ami received their pay in addition to their civil
salaries, but he denies that such appointments were
in violation of the Articles of War or the Kings Regu-
lations. , • 1 TI T
That the three Companies of \ cterans to which Mr.
Robison had been appointed formed a Corps under his
command; but that shortly after his arrival in the Co-
lony he was deprived of the Command of it by General
Darling, without any cause being assigned, and the
greater part of his own Company given to the charge of
Junior Subalterns, for which they received extra allow-
ances, while he was chiefly employed in Commands at
Out-stations. Affidavit, p. 4.
It is not true as alleged by Mr. Robison, that he was
appointed to the command of a Corps of Out Pensioners,
or that he was removed from it, by General Darling.
Or that the greater part of his Company was given in
charge of subaltern Officers, of the line, for which they
received extra Colonial pay and allowances —for the said
Out Pensioners were not raised as a Corps, but in three
Distinct Companies, and Mr. Robison was the second
only in Rank and Seniority of the three captains, so that
there could be no ground or pretence for him to consider
the three companies as a Corps, or to state that he had
been appointed to the command of it. And this is con-
firmed by Mr. Cannon’s affidavit as well as General
Darling’s. Agreeably to the purpose for which the Ve-
teran Companies had been raised, a considerable num-
ber of the soldiers were appointed to serve as superinten-
dants and overseers of Convicts, and were therefore ne-
cessarily separated from their Officers. The persons
under whom such soldiers were employed were in some
instances civilians, in others Officeis of the Line, but
none of the Officers received extra pay or allowances
in consequence of the employment of soldiers undei
their superintendance, or other than they had receiver
previously to the soldiers being so employed. Page 15.
Mr. Robison’s affidavit upon these points is expressly
contradicted not only by General Darling s affidavit, but
by those of Captain de la Condaminc and of Mr. Rich-
ard Cannon, the Chief Clerk in the Office of the A<
jutant General of His Majesty s forces.
That the Charges upon which Mr. Robison was
brought to a Court Martial by General Darling were
infamous and unfounded, and originated in the most
vindictive motives, on account of the feeling of disap-
probation expressed by Mr. Robison, at the sight of
Sudds’ Irons, respecting which he admits, in anothei
place, that he publicly used strong language in censure
of General Darling. Page \ iii. Affidavit, p. 6.
Mr. Robison complains of the constitution of the
Court Martial ; and that although he objected to two
of the Members, namely. Captain Crotty and Captain
Charge E.
General Ill-
treatment of
Mr. Robison.
Reply E.
General Ill-
treatment of
Mr. Robison.
Charge F.
Mr. Robison’s
Court Martial.


Forbes, the Deputy Judge Advocate, his objections
'were over-ruled. Affidavit, p. 13.
' General Darling expressly declares that the charges
preferred by him against Mr. Robison did not emanate
from malicious or personally vindictive motives or feel-
ings, but solely from a desire to maintain the discipline
of His Majesty’s Service. And it is proved that those
charges were well founded, by Mr. Robison having been
sentenced to be dismissed the service, and by the refusal
of His Majesty’s Government to restore him, followed
by the refusal of the House of Commons, after full
debate, to interfere. 1
General Darling declares that the Officers constitu-
ting the Court Martial, were named without any unfa-
vourable bias to Mr. Robison, and were the most fit
from their rank and experience in the Service that could
be found. The court consisted of Nine Members, where-
as five would have been sufficient, and in proof that the
Court was formed with a strict regard to impartial jus-
tice, General Darling states that he addressed a Letter
to the Officer in Command of the Troops at Van Die-
man’s Land, directing him to order two Captains, ivith-
out naming them, to repair to Sydney for the purpose
of becoming members of the Court, and observing, that
as the case was one in which the discipline of the Ser-
vice was concerned, it was desirable that these Officers
should be men of experience. And as a further proof
of the care taken to have the Court composed of Offi-
cers of experience, General Darling states, that all the
Members of the Court with the exception of one only,
have long since been promoted, in consequence of their
standing and seniority in the service. Page 7.
Mr. Robison had a right to challenge any Member of
the Court against whom he might have a fair ground of
objection, and he did challenge one Member, and one
only, viz. Captain Crotty, on the ground that he was his
own intimate and particular friend ! Page 18.
When Mr. Robison was brought up for judgment, his
counsel adverted strongly to two facts, evidently on the
mis information which he had received from the defend-
ant, which it may be important to explain, and which
can easily be done. —
Ist. That of Mr. Robison having broken open the
Mail Bag, and taken out his letters; which charge is
stated to have been dismissed by the Magistrates as a
“ frivolous, scandalous, and vexatious attack.”
The circumstance of Mr. Robison having opened a
Mail Bag, in the absence of the Post-master, and taken
letters therefrom, was ordered to be inquired into by the
Magistrates, who were required simply to take deposi-
tions of the facts, and therefore could not and did not, as
staled, dismiss the charges as “ frivolous, scandalous, and
“ vexatious."


To prove that it was not a proceeding which admitted
of any such opinion being given by the Magistrates, it
will be sufficient to state, that it was left to Mr. Robison’s
option, whether the inquiry should take place in the Court-
room—the Magistrates private room, or at Mr. Robison’s
own quarters. In order to strengthen his supposed griev-
ance, he chose the former, and procured a Magistrate,
a private friend of his, to attend, who may possibly have
expressed to Mr. Robison the opinion which he has
thought proper to state to have been the opinion of the
Bench. If it was, let him produce a report of the trial—
Mr. Robison would not have omitted possessing him-
self of a document so important to his case.
His conduct in this instance was most unwarrantable,
and highly injurious in point of example, ihe Post-
master happening to be absent when the packet arrived,
Mr. Robison vent on board, took possession of the Mail
Bag, carried it to his quarters, and there broke the seal,
and took several letters addressed to himself and others.
As he complains of my bringing a charge against
him for this before the Court Martial, may it not be asked
would an Officer in England, be allowed to act in such a
manner with impunity P Mr. Robison would have, it
believed, that he was Commandant at Newcastle; but
he knows it is not the fact. His authority did not extend
beyond the detachment of Veterans under his orders.
Therefore, being satisfied on receiving the depositions
from the Magistrates, that the circumstance which had
been reported was correct, a charge was accordingly
preferred against him, and he was found “ guilty of hav-
“ ing in an unauthorized and unwarrantable manner
“ caused the Mail Bag to be opened.’
Mr. Robison’s Counsel appears to have animadverted
on the circumstance of General Darling not having ad-
ded that the Court Martial did not find Mr. Robison
guilty of unofficer-like and ungentleman-like conduct in
this particular. Whether his conduct was or was not so
in this case, appears to admit of a difference of opinion ;
but that such a proceeding required to be checked by
the Government in an effectual manner, there can be no
doubt-
2nd. That of Captain Sturt, who was temporarily em-
ployed as Military Secretary, having addressed a letter to
Lieutenant Sweeney, with a view of influencing the testi-
mony he was to give at the Court Martial, to be held on
Captain Robison.
The following affidavit of Captain Sturt, explains the
cause of his having written the letter to Lieutenant
Sweeney, and shows that it was written without General
Darling’s knowledge or privity.
In point of fact, General Darling knew nothing of the
letter to Lieutenant Sweeney until he was informed of
it by Mr. Robison.


AFFIDAVIT.
Charles Sturt, Captain 39th Regiment, maketh oath
and saith, that having perceived by the report of a De-
bate which took place in the House of Commons, on
Wednesday, the 271 h day of March last, on the presenta-
tion of the'Petition of Mr. Robert Robison, late Captain
of the New South Wales Royal Veteran Companies, that
allusion was made to a private letter which deponent
had written when acting in the capacity of Military Se-
cretary, at New South Wales; the said deponent feels
himself called upon to state, and doth hereby state, as
well injustice to Lieut-General Darling, as to his own
character, that his the said deponent’s object in writing
the letter above alluded to, was to put Lieutenant Swee-
ney, to whom it was addressed, on his guard against
any improper influence being exercised on the part ot
his Commanding Officer, he, the said Lieutenant Swee-
ney, having informed deponent, that such influence had
been exercised on a former occasion ; Deponent further
maketh oath and saith, that the said letter was written,
not only without Lieut-General Darling’s authority, but
without his knowledge either directly or indirectly, no
communication whatever having been had with him upon
the subject. Signed, CHARLES STURT,
Captain, 39th Regiment.
Sivorn at Bow Street,
the Ith day of June,
1833, before me,
Signed, THOMAS HALLS.
Captain Sturt has been absent from England, for
some time past, which has prevented a more formal
affidavit being obtained from him, on the occasion ot
Mr. Robison’s trial.
The following observations on the above letter, made
by Mr. Robert Grant the Judge Advocate General, and
Sir Henry Hardinge, in the Debate which took place
on the 11th of July 1833; are extracted from the Mir-
ror of Parliament.
• “ When Governor Darling received from Captain
“ Robison his letter, proclaiming the fact that a private
“ and confidential letter had been written by his secre-
“ tary to Lieutenant Sweeney ‘calculated,’ Captain Robi-
“ son said, ‘ to sap the very foundations of justice,’ Ge-
« neral Darling directed a letter to be written to Lieute-
« nant Sweeney, calling upon him to explain the tran-
“ saction. It was under these circumstances that
“ Lieutenant Sweeney wrote a letter, giving an account
“of the transaction. I read that letter this morning,
“ and copied the concluding sentence, which runs thus
“ ‘ I further beg to pledge my honour, as an officer and


*i ‘ a gentleman, that this statement is confined to the
“ ‘ strictest truth.’ This was written on the sth of May,
“ and in the July following, he is called upon to give
“ evidence of these very facts before the court-martial.
“ Upon a perusal of the minutes ol the court, 1 am
“ bound to say that he did so in the most evasive and
“ reluctant manner; indeed, in a manner so evasive and
reluctant, that, after passing its sentence upon the de-
“ fendant, the court thought fit to mark him by a pecu-
“ liar censure. The court says, ‘the court feel them-
“ ‘selves bound to notice the evasive and reluctant inaii-
« ‘ ner in which the testimony of Lieutenant Sweeney
“ ‘ was given.’ Now I say that, in point of law, a party
“ producing a witness who gives evidence so reluctantly
“ and evasively, as to produce an impression ol his want
of veracity, is at liberty not to discredit him generally,
“ but for the sake of justice, to put in any letter or de-
“ position of that witness which may discredit him upon
“ the particular point, with respect to which he is being
“ examined, I say this upon the authority of Mr. Phillips,
« who, in his book on evidence, distinctly lays down the
“ doctrine 1 have advanced.
Sir Henry Hardinge’s observations are to the follow-
ing effect—
“ The letter written by Captain Sturt is, in my mind,
“ one of the most important parts of the case. 1 admit
“ (he imprudence of writing that letter, but 1 have come
“ to the same conclusion upon it, as the Right Honor-
“ able Gentleman opposite. However imprudent or even
“ improper, the motive which dictated it, was an honest
“ one. We must remember that Captain Sturt w r as on
“ terms of intimacy with Lieutenant Sweeney that
“ they had lived in the same barrack —that Lieutenant
“ Sweeney had a large family of seven children was
“ a good natured and easy person, but in a great deg ice
“ under the influence of, or I may say, domineered
“ over, by Captain Robison, a man of a much more
“ energetic character than himself. It must be borne
“in mind, too, that at the moment Captain Stuit
“ was warning Lieutenant Sweeney to guard himsclt
“ against the influence of Captain Robison, Lieutenant
“ Sweeney had, under his directions, signed the statc-
“ ment of the veteran soldiers, which Captain Robison
“ had sent to England, and to a certain extent might be
“presumed to have implicated himself in that impro-
“ per line of conduct for which his Captain was brought
g t.o trial
“ Under these circumstances, it was that Captain
“ Sturt wrote this letter to Lieutenant Sweeney. When
“ that officer received it, Captain Robison was present,
“ who took the letter which had fallen on the groum ,
“ and notwithstanding it was directed to Lieutenant
“ Sweeney, and marked at the top ‘ strictly private and


“ f confidential, he read the contents. Lieutenant Swee-
« ney, not doubting the friendly motives of Captain
“ Sturt was anxious to keep the letter unknown, and
Captain Robison pledged his honour that he would
“ not divulge the contents. Then what occurs ? Cap-
“ tain Robison writes immediately to General Darling,
“ complaining of this very letter, but the terms he uses
" iu speaking of it in his official letter to General Dar-
“ ling, are not ‘ improper and injurious’ merely, as used
“ in the petition to this House, but they are * scandalous
‘‘‘and injurious:' in substance it amounted to this—
‘ your military secretary, Captain Sturt, has conducted
“ himself in a ‘scandalous’ manner in writing to Lieu-
u tenant Sweeney. I ask how was General Darling to
“ act under these circumstances ? If he had not taken
“ serious notice of the letter, what would have been the
“ consequence P Why, the imputation would have
“ been, and Captain Robison with a strong colour of
“ reason would have had a right to have said to him—
“ You do not dare to bring forward the subject of this
“ letter, you and Captain Sturt are parties to it; I
“ charge your military secretary with scandalous con-
" duct, and as you do not meet the charge, 1 have a
“ right to infer that you have been tampering with the
4f witness. Lieutenant Sweeney. General Darling, then,
“ had no alternative, but was obliged to bring forward this
“ charge, on which the court decided that Captain Robi-
“ son’s conduct had been scandalous and dishonourable.
“ 1 beg to observe here that these are the recorded
“ statements in the sentence of the court furnished to
“me by General Darling. Of course, 1 know very
“ little of the case of my own knowledge ; but I take—
“ if I may use the expression—my brief from official
“ documents in the possession of General Darling.”
In Mr. Robison’s Petition to the House of Commons,
it was stated, that “a material witness brought forward
“for the prosecution, acknowledged, during his cross-
examination, that he had been tampered with by the
“prosecutor, General Darling .” The falsehood of this
assertion having been exposed in the debate which took
place on the 11th of July, 1833, Mr. Robison has
thought it as well in his affidavit to state the fact, that
one Witness (Thomas Budd) admitted on his Cross-
examination, that he had told some of his Comrades that
he had been closetted for hours with General Darling,
and had received promises of reward in the event of his
giving Evidence against Mr. Robison, and that after
the Court Martial was over, Budd received a Grant of
Land. Affidavit, p. 14.
General Darling never had any conversation or com-
munication whatever, direct or indirect, with private
Thomas Budd, as insinuated by Mr. Robison’s affidavit,
nor ever gave him a grant of land, other than such as


all the men of the veterans received, on obtaining their
discharge. Budd, in his cross-examination before the
Court Martial, deposed, that he did not see General
Darling on the occasion referred to, as he had before
untruly stated in conversation with some of his com-
rades, and consequently Mr. Robison must have known
at the time of swearing* to his affidavit, that the insinu-
ation therein contained that a witness had been tam-
pered with by General Darling, and had been rewarded
by him, was false and unfounded. Page 18.
‘ Mr. Robison had asserted in his affidavit that the
court had received the evidence of a convicted felon,
while still under sentence ; notwithstanding the obvious
dependence of such felon, on the will of the prosecutor
as Governor, but it appears that two convicts only were
called as witnesses—one of whom was called by Mr.
Robison himself, and that the evidence of both related
to a point on which Mr. Robison was acquitted. It is
however customary in the courts in New South Wales,
to receive the evidence of convicts.
Mr. Robison’s complaints respecting the constitution
of the Court-Martial, and his false insinuations that the
witness Budd had been tampered with by General Dar-
ling, are completely contradicted and exposed, not only
by the affidavit of General Darling, but by those of
Captain de la Condamine and of Mr. Jonathan Scol-
lick, the chief clerk in the Office of His Majesty’s Judge
Advocate.
Mr. Robison complains generally of the great length
of time he was kept under Arrest, and of the undue se-
verity of the sentence pronounced upon him by the
Court Martial.
The delay complained of was unavoidable. It was
occasioned by the necessity of transmitting the Minutes
of the Proceedings of the Court Martial for Fis Ma-
jesty’s consideration. The Court of Inquiry was held
in the month of April, 1828. The Court Martial could
not be assembled until the 11th of July, it having been
necessary to send to Van Dieman’s Land for officers of
experience as members. The Court closed its pro-
ceedings on the 13th of September following, the Mi-
nutes of which were sent home by the first opportunity
to the Judge Advocate General.
General Lord Hill’s letter notifying His Majesty s
approval and confirmation of the finding and sentence
of the Court, is dated the 19th of October, 1829. It
was received at‘Sydney in the month of April 1830,
and was immediately published in General Orders on
the 20lh of that month.
The following are the Observations of the Judge Ad-
vocate General :
“ It is favourable to General Darling, and a mark
“ of respect to Captain Robison, that his Court Martial


Charge L.
Death of Jo -
seph Sudds.
“ consisted of a greater number of officers than the law
“ required. There is another circumstance connected
“ with the constitution of the court, which I feel it ue-
“ cessary to state in justification of the court itself. Of
“ all the officers composing the Court there was only
“ one who was not of equal rank with the Captain him-
“ self; and most of them had been long in the service.
“ The House will see the importance of this fact, when
“ I inform them that the Court would have been le-
“ gaily constituted if all the officers, except the Presi-
“ dent, had been of inferior rank to Captain Robison.
“ I scarcely recollect a case in which so much care
“ seems to have been taken to select officers to compose
“ the Court, who bad been long in the service, and of equal
“ rank with the defendant. My Honorable and Learned
“ Friend has told the House that the Court Martial sat
‘‘from the 11th July to the 15th of September, two
“ whole months ; but he did not tell them that four-
“ fifths of that time were taken up by the defendant in
“cross-examining his witnesses; and that this oppres-
“ sive Court gave him three weeks out of those two
“ months for the preparation of his defence.”
As to the supposed undue severity of the Sentence,
the Judge Advocate General, in the Debate alluded to,
stated as follows :
“ The question then comes to this:—was the finding
“ of the Court-Martial faithfully come to, or could the
“ Court have pronounced any other than the lament-
“ able sentence it did ? 1 will not refer to the serious
“ charge of exciting the veterans to something little short
“of mutiny; hut when I find Captain Robison pro-
“ nonneed guilty of scandalous and dishonourable con-
“ duct, unbecoming an officer and a gentleman, the Arti-
“ cles of War at once put an end to discretion — and, as I
“ find, upon reference to the Act passed that year — corn-
Spelled the Court Martial to pronounce upon him sen-
“ tencc of dismissal from the service he had so disho-
“ non red.”
That tw o soldiers, named Joseph Sudds and Patrick
Thompson, having been convicted of a theft committed
for the avowed purpose of procuring their discharge from
the army. General Darlingfor their punishment caused a
set of Irons to be manufactured, such as were never be-
fore heard of in the Colony even for the most atrocious
Murderers, and the men were by his order taken out of
the hands of the civil power in defiance of the remon-
strance against its illegality by the sheriff. That Sudds
was in such ill health, that he was supported to the
parade by a man holding each arm, and was seated on
the Ground to have the Irons put on not having
strength to stand, and in five days after the infliction of
this Torture (the Irons being still kept on him in Jail)
he died ! ! and that notwithstanding a simultaneous


cry from the whole Colony, a Coroner’s Inquest was
prevented by General Darling. Page iv.
Mr. Bannister deposes that he has read the libel,
“ especially that part which concerns two Soldiers,
“ Sudds and Thompson, one of whom Deponent be-
“ lieves to have died with a spiked Iron Collar put
■“ round his neck, in the Gaol of Sydney, or in a short
“ time after such collar w r as put on.”
Mr. Robison has filled six close written pages of his
Affidavit, with garbled Extracts from the parliamentary
papers relating to this Case, all tending in his opinion
to justify the foregoing assertions, but all of which will
be found contradicted or satisfactorily explained by
General Darling. Affidavit, p. 21 to 27.
And even these Extracts contain nothing to justify
his Statement, that Sudds was supported by two men
or that he died with the Irons on him, which last men-
tioned falsehood is also represented in a very aggrava-
ted manner in a print which forms the frontispiece to
his libel. On the contrary it is expressly stated in the
evidence of Martin Wilson the under gaoler, as quoted
by Mr. Robison, that Sudds appeared to be unwell on
the 22nd November, the day he was marched to the
Barracks to have the Irons put on, and put his hands
on Thompson’s shoulder as be descended the steps, but
he did not complain till the 23rd, and was sent to the
Hospital on the 26th; and by the Evidence of John
Toole the first turnkey, also quoted by Mr. Robison, it
is said that he had been taken ill a few days before his
Trial, which took place on the 6th November, and had
been attended by the surgeons ; that on his return from
he Barracks with the Irons on, on the 22nd, he appear-
ed low spirited and unwell, and was taken ill the follow-
ing day and put into the Hospital, where the Irons
were removed on the same day. Affidavit, p. 22.
The Evidence of John Thompson, the Medical at-
tendant at the gaol, also quoted by Mr. Robison, is to
the same effect with fuller particulars of his illness,
which appears to have been serious in the early part of
November —from Dropsy, with which he had formerly
•been afflicted. Thompson states that Sudds was brought
to the Hospital between twelve and two on the 23rd,
and placed in bed and visited immediately by Mr.
M’lntyre the Surgeon, and his Irons were afterwards
taken off by Mr. M'lntyre’s order about four o’clock.
On Sunday the 26th November, Sudds was removed
to the General Hospital where he died the following
morning. Affidavit, p. 23.
Mr. Robison affirms in his affidavit, that Sudds
Irons weighed thirty pounds, and he has filed an affi-
davit of John Head, formerly a convict, who swears
that he estimated the weight of them at thirty-five
pounds, and another affidavit of John Staples, formerly a


soldier of Mr. Robison’s company, who believed them
to weigh above thirty pounds, and another affidavit of
John Robison also of the same company, who swears
that Edmund Mundy informed him, they weighed for*
ty-eight pounds, all which assertions will be found con-
tradicted by the Witnesses examined before the Execu-
tive Council as well as by General Darling s affidavit.
p. 31.
That from some expressions used by Mr. M'lntyre
the Surgeon, who was examined before the Council, Mfc.
Robison believed General Darling had influenced or
desired to influence Mr. M'lntyre in the Evidence that
he should give, and that from comparing the dates of
certain papers, he suspected undue practices in taking
and transmitting the Examinations* and inferred that
this could only from Consciousness of Guilt.
Affidavit, j). 28.
That when Mr. Robison was examined before the
ccutive Council in 1829, Irons were produced, as having
been those worn by Sudds, and which he had put on
at Emu Plains ; but he believes they were not the same
that had been on Sudds, and that the identity of them
was not established by tracing them from Sudds’ person
in an unaltered state, and Mr. Robison therefore be-
lieved General Darling to be conscious that his conduct
would not bear the Test of Enquiry. Affidavit, p. 29, 31.
Previously to General Darling’s arrival in the Co-
lony, a dangerous disposition had manifested itself on
the part of the military, to obtain their discharge from
the service by maiming themselves or committing felo-
nies, and shortly after his arrival, two men of the 57th
regiment maimed themselves for that purpose, on which
occasion an order was issued, dated 22d of April, 1826,
directing that those men, although useless as soldiers,
should be continued in the service, and be employed as
pioneers at the barracks, of one of the remote stations,
which order was approved by the Secretary at War,
and a similar regulation was afterwards adopted in the
Mutiny Act. This order bad the effect of preventing
soldiers from maiming themselves but the two men
Sudds and Thompson afterwards committed a robbery,
and avowed that they did it with a view of obtaining
their discharge, and being convicted before the Court
of Quarter Sessions, were sentenced to be transported
to one of the penal settlements, where they were liable
to be worked in irons on the public roads. Page 3, 4.
The offence of Sudds and Thompson was very se-
rious, both in a military and moral point of view,—hay-
ing meditated desertion, and in order to accomplish it
without the risk of forfeiting their lives, having deli-
berately committed a felony. The offence appeared to
General Darling to require exemplary punishment, as
being calculated to seduce the military from (heir alle-


giance and to hold out the degraded condition of a
convict as superior to that of a soldier.
The Governor being empowered by a law of the local
legislature, to withdraw persons transported to penal
settlements, and to order them to be worked in irons on
the public roads in the Colony, it was considered that
the evil would be more effectually cheeked by sending
the two men. Sudds and Thompson, at once to work
on the public roads and by exposing them to the troops
under circumstances of degradation, which might deter
others from incurring the risk of similar disgrace, and
with this view the said two men were, by General Dar-
ling's order, drummed out of the garrison, convict
dresses having been previously put on them in presence
of the troops, instead of in the gaol as was usual. The
irons were such as had been previously made and used
in the Colony, by order of Lieutenant-Governor Grose,
for disorderly female convicts.
Charges having been preferred against General Dar-
ling on this subject, the Executive Council of the Colony
was convened on the 4th of May 1829, and several
subsequent days until the 21st of that month, and on
one of those days, the Irons were weighed before the
Council and were found to weigh, the one set fourteen
pounds six ounces ; and the other thirteen pounds twelve
ounces, being less than the ordinary weight of a Sol-
dier’s Firelock, and not exceeding one fourth part of
the whole weight usually carried by a soldier, in heavy
marching order. Four Witnesses were also examined,
touching the weight of the Irons, namely William
Dumaresq Esq. Civil Engineer and Matthew Gibbons,
Storekeeper, both of whom had actually weighed them;
and Benjamin Constable, Overseer of Blacksmiths, being
the person who had the charge of making them, and
who swore that they were calculated to weigh fifteen
pounds, but that afterwards part of the Iron was taken
away; and Mr. James Kinghorne Superintendant of the
Establishment at Emu Plains, who had the Irons in
his custody more than Twelve Months, swore that he
judged the same to weigh from twelve to fourteen
pounds, all which Depositions appear in the Parlia-
mentary papers, which were referred to by Mr. Robison
at the time he filed the before mentioned affidavits of
John Head, John Staples and .1. Robison. Page 6.
It appears by the same Official Papers, that the Irons,
having in presence of the Executive Council been put
on a Soldier of the same stature, and size as Sudds,
“ their dimensions were found ample, and there was
“ nothing in their construction to prevent a Man lying
“ in any posture,” and it appears by the Evidence of
Mr. James Kinghorne that Mr. Robison, although con-
siderably taller and stouter than Sudds, did actually
put on the Irons when he first saw them at Emu Plains)


an d did lie down in them at full length on the floor,
and Mr. Alexander Kinghorne swore, that Mr. Robison
did lie down, and tarn himself on the floor with the said
Irons on. Page 6.
These Irons were intended only to be worn on occa-
sion of the two Soldiers being drummed out of the
Garrison, in order, by their appearance, to produce an
effect on the Troops, and not to subject the Men to any
extraordinary punishment; but in consequence of what
occurred at the lime. General Darling thought it pro-
per not to remove the Irons from Thompson so soon as
he had previously intended, and Thompson wore them
for three weeks, and actually worked in them without
sustaining any injury.
It appears from the same Official Papers, that Sudds
was not obliged to be supported to the parade as alleged
in the Libel, but on the contrary walked without assis-
tance, and even danced as he returned (when he had
the Irons on) and held his cap in the air to shew Ins
indifference to the degradation, to which he had been
subjected.
With respect to Mr. Bannisters Affidavit, any pel son
reading it would suppose, that he was in New South
Wales at the time of Sudds’ death, and that he was
personally cognizant of all the details connected with it.
But the fact is, that Mr. Bannister had left the Colony
a month previously, having sailed in the ship England
on the 22nd of October, 1826, so that he could be no
more competent to speak to the facts of that case than
any person who had never been in New South Wales.
and in stating, that “ Sudds died with a spiked iron
“ Collar put round his neck, in the Gaol of Sydney, or
« in a short time after such Collar was put on,” he
must have spoken only from the false information of
Mr. Robison.
Mr. Bannister’s affidavit was not answered by Gene-
ral Darling, as on the 22nd of January last, the Court
fixed the following Saturday, the 24th, as the last day
for filing affidavits on behalf of the defendant, and when
Mr. Robison was brought up on the 29th, no affidavit
from Mr. Bannister had been received. On the 18th
of April, a copy of the affidavit, which has since been
admitted by the Court, was sent to General Darling s
solicitors, who replied that according to the order of the
Court, it could not be received, and of course no answer
was prepared, or attention paid to it.
The Irons were not put on Sudds in the Gaol, but in
the Barrack Square ; nor did he die in the gaol; but, on
the contrary, when he complained of being ill the Irons
were removed, and he was immediately conveyed to the
Infirmary, and afterwards to the General Hospital; and
the whole time the Irons were upon him was twenty-
eight hours, and not five days. Page t.


Sudds was taken ill at the time of his first going into
gaol, and previous to his trial, which took place on the
6th of November; but no report of his illness was ever
made to General Darling, nor was it known to him
until after the man’s death —which was not caused by
General Darling, nor by any harsh treatment, but from
natural causes, as described in the Minutes of Council
laid before Parliament.
That instead of causing an Inquest to be held. Ge-
neral Darling immediately convoked the Executive
Council, the greater part of whom were dependants and
creatures of his own, upon whom he had lavished free
grants of thousands of acres of the best. Land, &c.
They consisted of the Chief Justice Forbes, Colonial
Secretary M’Leay, Archdeacon Scott, (who was absent
on the first investigation,) and Lieutenant-Governor
Colonel Stewart, 3rd regiment. This illegal conclave
met for the purpose of bolstering up his defence; and,
on which occasion General Darling had the indecency
and illegality of himself presiding; thus, in all in-
stances, when his conduct has been impeached, consti-
tuting himself Judge in his own case; and another of
his brothers-in-law. Captain and Brevet-Lieutenant Co-
lonel Dumai’esq, of the Veteran Companies, acted as
the Council’s Clerk or Secretary. Page v.
There was not any cry or application for an Inquest
to be held on the Body of Sudds until after his Burial,
which took place in the usual course. It was not
General Darling’s duty as Governor to order or direct
Inquests to be held; and he most positively and ex-
pressly denies having interfered in any way to prevent
an Inquest, but says, that in consequence of some ob-
servations in the public Newspapers he convoked the
Executive Council on the sth of December, 1826, to
enquire into the circumstances for the information of
the Secretary of State. Page 8.
The Council, which was afterwards assembled on the
4th of May, 1829, was held for the purpose of investi-
gating the charges already noticed, and consisted of the
Venerable Archdeacon Scott, Alexander Me. Leay, Esq.,
Colonial Secretary, and Colonel Patrick Lindesay, the
second in command. General Darling was not present
during the proceedings, and neither Chief Justice Forbes
nor Colonel Stewart were Members of the Council.
Lieutenant-Colonel Dumaresq, the “ brother-in-law” of
General Darling, did not act as Clerk to the Council,
being then in England. Mr. Robison was himself ex-
amined before the Council, and must therefore have
known the several allegations made by him respecting
its Constitution and proceedings to be false.
General Darling did not, as is falsely asserted in the
Libel, constitute himself a Judge in his own cause, by
indecently and illegally presiding on the occasion in


question; but on the contrary (bs appears by the Par-
liamentary papers to which Mr. Robison so frequently
refers), he declined taking any part in the enquiry, and
accordingly retired. Page 9. . „
Archdeacon Scott deposes, that in virtue of his odhce,
he was a Member of the Executive Council. 1 hat.
at v. of the Libel, mention is made of the said
Council, which was convened by General Darling, on
the 4th of May, 1829, to inquire into certain Charges
preferred by Mr. Wentworth against General Darling;
and that, contrary to what is asserted in the said Libel,
the Members of the Executive Council were upright
and independent men, and had received no grants ot
Land from General Darling, except such as were au-
thorized by his Majesty’s Government. 1 hat the Coun-
cil did impartially, and conscientiously, carry on the
Inquiry ; —that General Darling did not preside, and
was not even present, during the Inquiry that Depo-
nent, as senior Member, presided in his stead, and that
neither Chief Justice Forbes, nor Lieutenant-Governor
Stewart, nor Lieutenant-Colonel DuQtiaresq, were pre-
sent at the said Counciland that the Defendant, Mr.
R Robison, was himself examined before the Council,
and must have known, that his said several assertions
were false. Archdeacon Scott further deposes, that the
two sets of Irons mentioned in the Libel, were weighed
before the Council,—that one set weighed 14 pounds
6 ounces ; the other, 13 pounds 12 ounces ; that Mr.
E. D. Thompson, the Clerk of the Council, “ put on
“ the said Irons, and lay down with them, at his full
“ length, on the floor, and turned as he lay, without
difficulty that the Inspector and the Surgeon ol
the Hospital, and the Governor of the Jail at Sydney,
“ were all examined before the Council, and all seve-
“ rally deposed, that the illness of the said Sudds was
“ not reported to the said Lieutenant-General Darling,
“ or to the Colonial Secretary previous to his death.
It is singularly inconsistent with any pretence of
serious accusation on the part of Mr. Robison, respect-
ing the case of Sudds, that Mr. Robison should have
seen and heard all that he states himself to have seen
and heard on this subject in the year 1826, but should
never have preferred any accusation against General
Darling respecting it until the year 1833, three years
after his return to England; when he brings it forward,
not by Indictment, nor even by a Motion in the House
of Commons, founded upon the papers moved for in
1828,1830, or 1832, but in the shape ot a catchpenny
libel/for the avowed purpose (acknowledged in his affi-
davit) of protecting his own interests. He pretends that
the Irons produced before the Council were not tin-
same which had been put upon Sudds, and which he
first saw ; but he states no ground whatever, nor is there


any ground for such a charge, unless perhaps in his
own suspicious imagination: at all events, the state-
ment is contradicted by all the evidence.
It is stated, at page 10 of the Libel, that you
(General Darling) did not forget Captain Steele,
availing yourself of some secret charges brought
against him: —you directed a Commission of Inquiry
into his Conduct; —they made to you a Report;—you
allowed Captain Steele no Defence—no Explanation
of any sort; —you Dismissed him without giving him
a Reason for his dismissal, and immediately ap-
pointed a person, who, from his proneness to ine-
briety, was/ of all men in the Colony, most unfit to
fill the office. Captain Steele was then reduced to
penury, &c.
The Charge respecting Captain Steele is expressly
contradicted by General Darling, who states, that no
Charges, secret or other, against Captain Steele,
were received during General Darling’s government,
consequently, no Commission was appointed to In-
quire into his Conduct, —no Report was made, —Cap-
tain Steele was not prevented making his Defence, —
and, further, was not dismissed without a Reason
being assigned. In short. Captain Steele was Gover-
nor of the Jail of Sydney when General Darling left
the Colony; and the General never heard of Captain
Steele’s dismissal, until he saw Mr. Robison’s Pam-
phlet 1
That General Darling did all he could to ruin the
Bank of New South Wales, because some of its wealthy
and intelligent proprietors were suspected by him of de-
testing his measures. Page 34.
General Darling denies that he attempted to ruin the
Bank of New South Wales, aud swears that on the
contrary, he afforded it every assistance in his power,
by having on two occasions authorized advances from
the public treasury to a large amount on loan, by which
the Bank was enabled to go on, although it had on one
occasion in fact, though not avowedly, stopped pay-
ment. Page 13.
That after receiving Lord Althorp’s unfavourable re-
ply to his Letter as already stated; as a last resource
he made a further appeal to the Commander-in Chief,
supported by a strong recommendation signed by the
Earl of Belmore and twenty-seven distinguished Mem-
bers of Parliament, but this Memorial also was refused,
and on the 20th of February, 1834, he presented a Pe-
tition to the King in Council, but the Lords of the
Council returned it as not coming under their cogni-
zance. Affidavit, p. 18, 19.
That feeling himself the victim of an unjust and un-
merited persecution, and debarred of all possible means
of procuring even a rehearing of his case, and acting
Charge N.
Captain Steele.
Reply N.
Captain Steele.
Charge O.
Ruin of the
Bank.
Reply O.
Bank of New
South Wales.
Charge P.
Mr. Robison’s
apology for
his Libel.


Reply P.
Mr. Robison’s
Apology for
under the impression that when public men of such ac-
knowledged weight and influence as the twenty-seven
members of Parliament before mentioned, with Lord
Belmore at their head could not succeed in obtaining
even the scanty redress of inquiry, although they pub-
licly and privately avowed their full conviction of the
wrong which had been done to him by his illegal 1 rial,
he felt assured that the true explanation of his defeat
was to be found in the fact, that throughout the whole
proceedings was involved a personal question on the is-
sue of which depended either the Military honour of
Mr. Robison, or the character of General Darling’s Co-
lonial Administration; and therefore with a view to pro-
tect his own interests in the only way in which it now
appeared they could be protected, he published the Li-
bel in question. Page 20.
That he thought it competent to him in law to pub-
lish to the world what he personally knew, and what had
been the subject of public discussion in Parliament, and
respecting which General Darling had never called for
any public investigation of his conduct except by the
Executive Council of the Colony. Affidavit, p. 30. /
That General Darling used expressions which were
insulting to him, both in Dispatches to Sir George Mur-
ray, and in some printed Remarks on Mr. Robison s
first Petition to the House of Commons, and refused to
give him a Copy that he might answer them. He there-
fore accuses General Darling as being the first Aggres-
sor, and justifies his libel as being a fair measure of
retaliation. Affidavit, p. 32, 33.
Three grounds are alleged by Mr. Robison in his
affidavit for the purpose of justifying his conduct in
publishing the libel—namely, first, that his inability to
obtain redress of his supposed grievances from the Go-
vernment, justified him in making a personal attack
against the character and conduct of General Darling.
Secondly, that the libel was justified as a retaliation of
offensive expressions, used by General Darling in dis-
patches to the Secretary of State; and again in a paper
printed for the private information of certain members
of the House of Commons, on the occasion of a motion
brought forward in reference to General Darlings con-
duct at the instigation of Mr. Robison : and thirdly,
that the libel was justifiable as the continuation of a
public discussion first provoked by General Darling
upon a matter of public interest. Page 19.
General Darling observes that these three grounds of
vindication cannot be admitted as a justification of the
libel; that the first in particular is an aggravation of
the offence, inasmuch as it admits that Mr. Robison
was actuated by views of advancing his own personal
interests at the expence of General Darling. With re-
spect to the second, General Darling observes that


what he wrote concerning Mr. Robison, on the occa-
sions referred to, were privileged communications, and
such as circumstances fully justified. With respect to
the third ground, he positively denies that he first pro-
voked any public discussion of the matters in question.
And he observes, that the reiteration by Mr. Robison
in his affidavit of so large a mass of the false and offen-
sive matter contained in the libel, is an aggravation of
the injury done to him (General Darling) by the origi-
nal publication of it.
The true explanation, however, of all these proceed-
ings was given by Mr. Robison himself when a prose-
cution was threatened against his Printer, and he came
forward to avow himself the Author of the Libel. He
then declared that the affair must be the death
Either of him or General Darling ; whereupon
his friend, Mr. Charles Tennant, added in his presence,
that it was an affair of character, in which the credit
OF ONE OR THE OTHER OF THOSE GENTLEMEN MUST
BE TOTALLY DESTROYED.
Since the publication of the Libel articles have ap-
peared in a great variety of Newspapers and other
periodical publications referring to it, and reproaching
and reviling General Darling for not answering the
same; all of which, there is good ground to believe,
have been published at the instance, or with the privity,
of Mr. Robison. Page 20.
It was General Darling’s wish to have proceeded
against Mr. Robison by Criminal Information, in order
that he might have an opportunity of denying and con-
tradicting in the most solemn manner all Mr. Robison’s
scandalous and wicked imputations; but he was pre-
vented taking this course by the assurance of his
Counsel, that, so far from its proving the means of
elucidating the truth in a case of such vague and mul-
tifarious Libel, relating to occurrences at times long
since past in a distant Colony, he would find himself
involved by it in a labyrinth of contradictory affidavits,
entailing upon him much expense, vexation, and delay,
and which the Court would have no opportunity of in-
vestigating, so as to form a correct judgment of the
truth j and that it would besides, be unsuitable to no-
tice, otherwise than by the ordinary course of indict-
ment, a libel of so gross a character, relating to matters
which had already been made the subject of investiga-
tion, and which had been disposed of by the constituted
authorities of the State. Page 20.
London, June 9th, 1835.
Printed ly M'Gowan, Ifi, Great Windmill Street.


