

Day i Events
IN THE LIGHT OF PROPHECY.
GREAT HAPPENINGS TO TAKE PLACE SOON.
THE
SECOND ADVENT OF CHRIST.
Revival ol tKe
Climax of Civilization.
“Babylon Mystery
Croat Iritiiiatwh of lie End —Armageddon/
AiißF Efii'HliNCES TO GOD’S PURPOSES IN RELATION
■TO THE JEWS, THE GENTILES, AND THE CHURCH
FROM THE TIME OF CREATION TO THE END OF THE
FreSENT DISPENSATION.
An Address by
F W. ARMSTRONG.
PRIGS THREEPENCE
Published by
THE CHRISTIAN AVORKERS 1 DEPOT,
Commonwealth and Reservoir Streets, Sydney,


Books on the Second Coming.
Christ is Coming. T, 11. Salmon Paper 9d, Cloth 1/9
When He Cometh. T. H, Salmon Paper 9cl, Cloth 1/9 X!
Waiting the Coming One. T. H. Salmon Cloth 1/9
Beturn of the Lord Jesus. R. A. Torrey, P.D A. ..... 1/6
Addresses on Prophecy. E. J. Scofield, D.D. ..... .'... ...... 1/6
Looking for the Saviour. Phillip Mauro 1/6
The Golden Age of the World. JAS. Austin ....... 3/- ||
The Apocalypse of Jesus Christ. W.. Willis- Mead . 3/- J
What will take place when Christ Returns? P. F. Marsh 3/-
Lectures on Prophecy, W. Trotter .... .. .. 4/6 !
God’s Oath. Ford Oilman 3/6
■ ■ _ '
Behold the Bridegroom. G. F. Wimberley o/6
Imperialism and Christ. Ford Oilman o/ 6
Unfolding of the Ages. Ford Oilman . .. 8/6
Momentous Events. Francis Fair 2/9
Revelation. A. C. Gaebelein 3/-
/,/- ;/AA
; Israel and the Church. J. H. Brookes ......... Paper 1/6, Cloth 3/6
Daniel. A. C. Gaebelein 3/~ Jj
Zechariah. A. C. Gaebelein 2/9 I
Behold He Cometh. Luther Rees -/3 j
Rightly Dividing the Word of Truth. C. J. Scofield ......... -/3 j
Also Targe numbers of others. - ;
,A a * A " u m /A . li
A splendid assortment of helpful expositions of the Word of God. I
OHEiifmif wmisiEr a /a;
Commonwealth & Reservoir Streets (Near Central Railway Station),
' " A Ami i
* Phone, Paddington 231.


THE SECOND ADVENT of CHRIST
-PREFACE.
In response to the wish of a number of friends, I have
resolved to issue out in pamphlet form this Address, delivered by
me at the Leichhardt Men’s Brotherhood on the 11th March,
1917. ' ■
The language contained therein is simple, and the expres-
sions resorted to are as mild as the subject will allow, and all
founded upon what I believe to be a fairly accurate interpreta-
tion of Holy Writ.
I earnestly hope that my humble efforts, through this little
book, may be instrumental in assisting some of my fellow
creatures to seek God while He may be found, realising, as I
do, according to the ‘‘signs of the times, ” that a stupendous
crisis is about to break upon the world.
God is calling upon all men now, to repent, that they might
be saved.
LVW. ARMSTRONG;
Bayswater Street, Druihmoyne
July, 1917.


SIGNS TO APPEAR BEFORE THE SECOND COMING
OF CHRIST.
"'Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against 'king-
dom. And great earthquakes shall be in divers places, and
famines, and pestilences ; and fearful sights and great signs
shall there be from Heaven.” (Luke 21, 10-11.)
"'And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in
the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with per-
plexity; the sea and the waves roaring; men’s hearts failing
them for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the earth: for the powers of Heaven shall be
shaken.” (Luke 21, 25-26.)
"'Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be account-
ed worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass,
' and to stand before the Son of Man.” (Luke 21, 36.)
"'Search and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you.” (Matt. 7,7.)
“If any man hear My voice and open his heart I will come in and
sup with him.” (Rev. 3, 20.)
Regeneration v. Evolution
The general conception in these days seems to be that man
is, and has been throughout the ages, evolving into the perfect
state through the ordinary course of natural events. The World,
according’to a recent oration by a leading English theologian, is
rolling steadily but surely into a glorious era of light. Human
nature of its own accord is becoming better as time rolls on,
the consideration being that of a perfect condition of affairs
through the agency of the Mosaic laws.
I venture to say that there is no mention in any portion of
Holy Writ, not even a suggestion, of sucli a possibility prior to
the second coming of Christ in powerful personal glory with His
Saints—those of the firstborn, to which I will allude later.
My purpose is to show that the Word of God demands
in definite language the regeneration of the individual
by means of a new birth, the work of the Holy


Spirit. There is no other way; notwithstanding this,
however, that strange, mysterious, ecclesiastical earthly
machine called the Church (with its dark history) con-
tinues to scatter forth amongst unthinking multitudes the false
doctrine of evolution as a solution to all the problems of stricken
humanity. The divine spark, as it were, in all men only needs
fanning into a flame. Some religious leaders have, in fact, gone
further by stating that where a man has been cut off suddenly
from this earth, especially if it be on the battlefield, his period
of training is extended to the next world.
This really means drawing the line of evolution from this
planet in an obscure senseless manner to the spiritual state. But
bear in mind those who make such daring and damning declara-
tions seldom ever bear out their arguments on a Scriptural
basis; if they do it is by misrepresentation, or complete ignor-
ance of the Divine plan.
MAN A FALLEN CREATURE.
In the beginning God created man “in His own image.’ 9
He placed the first couple, Adam and Eve, on this earth in a
state of purity and perfection; but they rebelled; and desire
crept into their hearts. Why was this! Because of their having
been seduced by the “satanic power” which influenced them to
the effect that by eating of the tree of knowledge “they would
become as Gods.” Evidently man was created for outward con-
templation, for the construction of the human body was such
that the creature was able to exist without any conception of his
inner organisms, which were incased with a covering and invis-
ible to the eye. Nevertheless, Adam and his wife, through having
fallen from God’s ways, became ashamed and knew of their
nakedness. They became self-conscious and the desire for pro-
gress ruled their being. Satan, the counterfeit, was at least suc-
cessful in as he succeeded in establishing within the human
heart the impulse for gain. The spirit of deceit entered into
man, through Adam and Eve, and has permeated the human race
ever since.
Why should there be any doubt v of the plain Scriptural
account of the creation and its fall through sin! Good fruit
cannot be expected from a corrupt tree. Whatever is sown is
reaped. So it is with the offspring of Adam. Through the sin


of one man the whole creation fell. It has been groaning and
travailing in pain ever since. The earth was cursed by God, and
the judgment passed by Him was that woman ever after would
travail in pain in connection with her peculiar relationship to
the propagation of the human species, and man would eat bread
with the sweat of his brow. The first couple were banished
from the Garden of Eden and prevented from eating of the tree
of life. Thus a corrupt seed has been sown from the beginning.
Sin entered the world through one man —and the wages of sin
is death. The death sentence'was passed by the Almighty and
there is no hope of its suspension until Christ returns in His
own personal glory to set up the kingdom for which He has been
ordained by the Father. (
We are living in a remarkable age—an age of great material
progress, which is in reality the reflex of the descendants of
Cain who built a city, invented metal workings, devised musical
instruments, composed poetry in praise of doings of man (Gen.
iv, 17-24). With all this* heaped up worldly knowledge, how-
ever, there is no stability • change and decay has : been pre-
eminent right through the generations. Death has held full
sway, and still claims its endless chain of victims. Every page
of this world’s sad history is blotted with blood.
THE WAY TO SALVATION.
God has, however, in His own wonderful way, made full
provision for the redemption of mankind. But in order to get a
clear view of the Divine plan, it is necessary of course to refer
to the various dispensations; and time would not allow of my
entering into such a discourse on this occasion, except to say
that God has dealt with man in many different forms in all ages.
He sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to this dark world 1900 years ago
as a revelation to man —to fulfil a prophecy given prior to the
Advent—to give His chosen people, Israel, as a nation, the
opportunity to receive their rightful and just King. What did
they do? Crucified Him! But the Messiah knew he was to die,
and that He was carrying out the will of His Father in Heaven,
whom He was with in the beginning’ and always was. It was
necessary also that Christ should die before the Disciples could
receive the Holy Spirit which gave them the gift of tongues sfi
that they could comply with the command to preach the Word of
God to the Gentiles, to every man in his own language. What


1 )(i1 iti pencd co the Jews in the meantime—-since they rejected.
their Saviour ? They have been without a kingdom, scattered
all over the earth, and subjected to terrible persecutions at the
hands of all nations. ,
RESTORATION OP ISRAEL.
But notwithstanding the awful trials undergone by this
peculiar people for their own iniquity, God made a promise to
Abraham that his- seed would be again restored to Divine favor
and He measured out the land which would be theirs at the
Coming 1 of the Son of man—at the time of the fulness of the
Gentiles. Yes, in that day the 12 tribes of Israel are to be
gathered—sifted from all nations and re-established as a nation
in the Holy Land with its extensions and glorious privileges
according to Holy Writ. Of course, it is generally recognised
that the Jews have been returning to their former land" for a
number of years. There are about 70,000 there already. But the
Turk—their tyrannical oppressor for centuries—had, until the
war, been viewing sharply their actions politically; with the
object of frustrating any attempt made for freedom of franchise
or any other special privileges. The war, however, has distract-
ed practically all Turkey ’s attentions in that regard. In fact,
it strengthens the position of the Jews, and will rather quicken
that powerful organisation of the scattered Jews, known as the
Zionist movement, with branches all over the world, and its
headquarters m Switzerland • and great wealth at its disposal;
whose object is to settle the young Jews in Palestine. No doubt
it has taken a long time to settle in the land individually, but
when Israel is to return as a nation, I believe God will do the
work quickly.
Now, quite apart from this wonderful movement of the
Jews, who are unconsciously fulfilling prophecy, there are other
forces at work in preparation for their return. The land which
was barren for generations has for the past 30 years
been recording an average rainfall of three to four
inches each year. This is the latter rain referred to
in _ the Scriptures. Palestine is beginning to bloom.
Railways have been built; irrigation has been carried out on an
extensive scale. The soil is exceedingly rich, the climate is
unsurpassed.


GOD SAW THE END FROM THE BEGINNING.
Since the desolation and the peeling of Israel, it pleased God
to give to the Gentiles temporary dominion of the world; but
their rule has not been a success. There is no record m the
Scriptures that would even suggest that it would be. In fact
God has shown that Gentile Government would cease.
Hear how God has foretold the end through His prophet,
Daniel. King Nebuchadnezzar, the first Gentile monarch, had a
strange dream which caused him to be troubled in spirit. ®
called to the magicians and astrologers and commanded that
they enlighten him as to the meaning of his dream They stood
before the king—together with the sorcerers and the Chaldeans.
But none of them We able to explain the dream although
threatened with death. It then came to pass that Daniel was
sought, after he had had the secret revealed to him in a night
vision by Go cL ' . .
Daniel stood before tbe King and said: There is a God m
Heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketb known to tbe_ King
Nebuchadnezzar what shall he in the latter days. Thy dream,
and the visions of thy head upon thy bed are these; as for thee,
O King thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed, what
shonl dcome to pass hereafter; and He that revealeth secrets
maketh known to thee what shall come to pass, rhon, 0 tang,
sawest, and beheld a great image. _ This great image, whose
brightness was excellent, stood betore thee; and the form
thereof was terrible. This image’s head was of fine gold, his
breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, his
legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay. Thou sawest
till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the
image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and broke them
to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass the silver, and
the gold broken to pieces together, and became like the chart of
the summer threshing floors; and the wind carried them away,
that no place was found for them; and the stone that smote t
image became a great mountain and filled the whole earth.
(Dan. ii, 28-35.)
Daniel then went on to interpret the dream and showed to
the kino* that the four different metals of which the image con-
sisted were symbolical of the four world-enemies to be—-prior
the setting up of the fifth kingdom with Christ at its head, in


His' glorious Millennial reign, an everlasting kingdom subduing
all others.
The gold represented Babylonia:; the silver, Medo-Persia;
the brass, Greek-Macedonia; the iron, Rome. Now, these king-
doms have actually existed in strict accord and accuracy of the
prophetic forecast. But it will be noticed that in the feet and
toes of the image a foreign element has crept in—“the potter's
clay." There can be no doubt this represents Democracy. It is
indeed the clay element of the human race, the rising multitudes
of the poor; striving against the iron—the ruling classes.
Note also the significance of the clay in the toes. There we
have depicted the 10 kingdoms of the last days, with Democracy
very much in evidence. Soon after the war, I believe, this con-
dition will come about. The economic position itself and the
reconstruction necessary will make this possible.
It is in the days of these kings that the God of Heaven will
set up His kingdom never to be destroyed, but to break in
pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for
tver. (Dan. ii, 44..)
RELIGIOUS AND POLITICAL ANTICHRISTS.
In conjunction with the 10 kings of the last days, the Book
of Revelation says that two beasts will arise. The first rose up
out of the sea, and had seven heads and ten horns, and upon his
horns ten crowns, and upon Ms heads the name of blasphemy.
There came up from among the 10 horns a little horn, with eyes
like a man, subduing three of those before him. He is the eighth
head—a great personage—the Roman Prince who will derive his
power from the dragon, and exercise great authority.
The second beast was seen to come up out of the earth; he
had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon, exercising
all the powers of the first beast before him, causing all that dwell
on the earth to worship the first beast whose deadly wound was
healed. This is mysteriously related to Roman idolatry, mother
of all the harlot religions-—pagan worship.
When I speak of Roman idolatry I refer to a false religion
which had its origin before even the foundation of Babylon;
before thdfe was any Roman Emperor.
Now let us see where the Roman religion more closely


approximates to what lam speaking of than the Protestant form
of worship. < v Did you ever think how the Pope derived his name*
“Pontifex Maximus”? That-was the name of the Priest King
of Pergamum who carried on the pagan religion which was exist-
ing in Babylon at the time it was overthrown by the Medes and
Persians.
Look up the Book of Revelation 11, 13, and yon will see
where Satan’s seat is mysteriously connected with Pergamunn
What was sown at that place of evil has been reaped in the
Roman form of worship to this day (only temporal power 1 has
for a time been withheld). Rome, however, does not stand alone.,
as a harlot, for there are thousands of other false cults even iii
the Protestant arena to which the term harlot can be safely
applied because of their horrible conception of the Deity. The
subtility of the successive Roman Emperors from the time of
Julius Caesar, has been such that they have succeeded in con-
taminating the pure meal of the Gospel by the introduction of
their deadly leaven. I would like to tell yon many things in con-
nexion with the history of Rome, but I must leave that to
another occasion. ■
Think of the horrors of the Inquisition; and the millions
martyred; the tortures that arc indescribable—-too loathsome to
relate. Think also of the horrible licentious worship and the
abominable practices in connection with the ceremonies of pagan
religion.
Roman domination of course was not confined to religion
alone,-but wielded power over great nations. *
At a later date I hope to be privileged to relate some of my
own personal experiences in connection with democratic politics,
when I could show how the P mystery of iniquity ’ ’ is working in
this country towards the regaining of temporal power for Rome.
Paul refers to it as “The mystery of iniquity doth already
work:” Soon after the war, I believe we shall find Roman dic-
tation much in evidence'.'; Do yon know that in 1914 Great
Britain-sent an envoy to the Holy See ? the first representative
since about the year 1500. The modernist movement of the
Roman Catholic Church is leaving no stone ■■ .unturned to get
control of the Australian Governments. At the present time it
is working within the Labor movement because it believes that
Democracy is the power which will finally triumph


THE END OF CIVILIZATION.
; What I wish to make clear is, that this so-called Christian
civilization is coming to an end.' Why do I know'it? Because
the Bible foretells it. For holding these opinions, I like many
others, have been called a faddist. 1 have been charged with
being a Seventh-day Adventist, and a member of the Inter-
national Bible Students’ Association, a disciple of the Theo-
sophical society, and so forth. Well, as a matter of fact, I belong
to no particular religious sect. My views are based solely upon
the Bible, and this is the only haven of shelter there is amidst
the storm of confusion that exists through wrong interpretation.
The Scriptures can be read to mean anything. One individual
reads them one way, and another gets an entirely different ver-
sion. This is brought about in many cases through blindness
caused by reading philosophical works of a shallow nature ;
therefore resulting in a prejudiced mind towards spiritual
things. , The Bible can never be- understood in this way. Why!
Because it is the living Word of God. It is spiritual: it is in-
spired; that being the case the man desiring light must seek
first to get in harmony with his Creator. The only way to do
this is by a meek arid humble spirit,, a repentant nature, and by
being a doer of the Word of God as well as a believer. The same
as the coherer of a wireless station becoming sensitive to the
ether waves conveying a message of the sender (by certain
manipulation of the parts, which regulate the antennae wires;
condensers, discharge knobs, etc.), so it is in relation to God and
inan. The Holy Spirit comes to the man or woman who seeks
it in the proper way, invisibly but sure. That is what Christ
meant when He said, "Ye must be born again ’Abom of the
Spirit. There is no understanding without it, and the result is
confusion, and strife abounds.
The Bible can never be understood by the natural man.
Well, now 1 have led you off the subject. I was speaking of
the two beasts of Revelation. The first ( a tyrannical military
system) will undoubtedly culminate in the head of a huge con-
federacy; and the second (an apostate religious system) will
end in the personal antichrist, his lieutenant, who will be in
Jerusalem. Christ referred to this time when He said, "When I
came in the name of My Father in Heaven you received me not;
but if another shall come in his own name him; will ye receive.”


I sum it up ini this way; shortly after this war lam expect-
ing that three great personages will arise, with mighty influence,
the chief Of them being the political head of 10 confederated
states or nations, who will dominate the 10 kings in his capacity
of political head. He will deceive, by lying wonders, and
eventually put himself up as God and be accepted. _ (He is team-
ed seripturally as the first beast or little horn). His co-partner,
the Antichrist, otherwise known Biblically as the man of sin, or
worthless shepherd, will be the religious leader: and it is he who
will cause all on earth to worship the image of the first beast
or be put to death. The third personage is referred to in the
39th chapter of Ezekiel, verse 1, as the Prince of Rosh or
scourge; (Meshech and Tubal, Gog, land of Magog). I have n®
time now to go- into the history of these names, but I can say
confidently that Russia is the kingdom, of the North which will
attack Israel after having been restored as a nation in the latter
days. That is just immediately before Christ’s return, as
deliverer of His chosen people Israel. He will set His feet on
that day on the Mount of Olives and they will see Him whom
they pierced. He is to call the king of the North against them
to show that He is the Christ. In their tribulation they will cry
out for deliverance, and the king of the North, with the rest of
th® invading nations of the earth, will be driven hack by the
personal coming of Christ with His saints, with power and great
glory, to mete out judgment and set up the kingdom of a 1000
years.
I believe that Russia will be a kingdom quite apart from
the confederation of nations in the last days; and there is a good-
deal of Scriptural evidence to justify such a belief.
According to Holy Writ, then, this world’s Anti-Christ
systems are doomed. The 10 kings will come out from the melt-
ing-pot into Which the nations are now being plunged. Then
civilization will eventually culminate in the three important
personages I have already spoken of. They will represent the
last phase of human Government, which has been a failure from
start to finish. The end will he the great apostacy Tribulation,
such as never was since the world began, or ever shall he.
RAPTURE OP THE CHURCH.
But before all these things Happen, the rapture of the true
Church of God will have taken place. Yes, the salt of the earth


will be taken away. All moral restraint will go. This is no
fable. Many people ridicule this most important fact of Scrip-
ture. But lam not surprised. The Bible says such will be in
the last days; many will question and scoff at His coming. They
will be turned unto fables. "The wise (not necessarily the
worldly wise) will understand—multitudes will not. 5 ’ Many
shall be called, but few chosen. What does the Bible say again
in this connexion, "Blessed are they who have part in the first
resurrection, for they shall live for ever ; on those the second
death hath no power. ’ ’ Listen to this. ‘ ‘ The Lord Himself shall
descend from Heaven with a shout; with the voice of the Arch-
Angel and with the trump of God, and those that sleep in the
dust (the dead in Christ) shall rise first, then those who are alive
and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds
to meet the Lord in the air”; to see Him as He is and be for ever
with Him and like Him.
We know not yet what form of bodies we shall put on, but
we know we shall be like Him when He comes, have glorified
bodies that do not perish. We know not the hour when the Lord
will come, but we are taught to watch and be ready—"have oil
in our lamps.” What are we to watch for? Certain signs;
and when we see these signs what do they denote ? That He is
near even at the doors.
This is the solemn Word of God; yet what indifference there
m to this all-important instruction from the Great Omnipotent
God by multitudes of peoples, who, many of them, perhaps never
dream of the possibility of their being left to face the awful
tribulation coming upon the world from which there is no
escape except by means of the first resurrection.
Yes-1 I may be speaking rather strongly; but I am not
afraid to do so. The day has now come for plain speaking. I
say that any person who regards lightly the Divine command to
Watch for the signs of His personal coming and thus be
ready—that unless that hope of His coming has entered into
the heart —purifying as it does—that person stands on danger-
ous ground. He risks being classed among the disobedient; and
those who do know of the truth and fail to warn others of the
fast approaching night are liable to have their lot with the
hypocrites, God is not mocked!
Let me appeal to you in this way. While the Holy Spirit is
in the world, the way is open. Did it ever occur to you what


would happen if the Spirit were withdrawn? Try to imagine
what horror would confront you if you were among, those left
behind when Christ came for His saints: some that were dear
to you were taken and you were left.
' "The mystery of lawlessness doth already work; only there
is One that restraineth now, until He be taken out of the way.
-And then shall be revealed the lawless one (the personal (anti-
Christ, culminating from an anti-Christ system)./ 7 (2 Them.
2-7, R.Y.)
What is: the hindering one but the Holy Spirit of God at
Pentecost. He came to dwell with the Church of God on earth,
and as long as the Church is in the world the Spirit will alsn
remain. Thus it can be seen that the last horrible form' of
human government cannot take place until the true Church of
God is taken out of the way. It is the Temple of God; and
when Christ comes To the air the Church gobs, to meet Him. The
Holy'Spirit also ascends. Then it will be woe betide dwellers
on the-earth, for Satan will have assumed full control of the
world. He will energise that remarkable personage known
scripturally as the wicked prince.
Take heed ere it is too late; get right with God without
delay, for the: first stage of His Second Advent may happen at
any moment now'. Behold, when once the Master rises up and,
the door is shut, those who knock will he told by Him,-'/'! know
you not whence: you are—depart for ever from My presence.
The; second, stage of His advent is when He comes- with His
saints of the first resurrection, in fierce wrath and terrible judg-
ment to a wicked world in its most horrid state at the end of the
great tribulation, culminating in the battle of "Armageddon. 77
Remember, this will be a stern reality, because the Word of
God gives the plain premonitory forecast of that terrible day.
FULNESS OF THE TIMES OF THE GENTILES,
Wow, let ns consider further some of the "signs by which
we are to know that He is near even at the doors. 77
"For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom ; and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earth-
quakes, in divers places. All these are the beginning of sor-
rows. 77 (Matt. Axiv, 7,8.) .


"And many false prophets shall rise. and deceive many.
And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax
cold. But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be
saved. ’ ’ (Matt, xxiv, 11,12> IB).
Now learn a parable of the fig tree; when his branch is yet
tender, and pntteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh.
So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is
near even at the doors.
What does this important parable denote! It is to warn
of the impending doom—" For then shall be great tribulation,
such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no,
nor ever shall be. ” (Matt, xxiv, 21.) Prior to the second ad-
vent of Christ in power and great glory.; As were the Mays of
Noah, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.
Now, does not this age approximate to the conditions that
existed in the days of Noah, when .God looked upon man in his
dreadful wickedness; and it grieved Him that ever He had
created man on earth; and to such extent was the good God
moved that He decided forthwith to exercise such fearful judg-
ment, What were the Antediluvians doing to merit such awful
punishment—to provoke t|ie just God! They were not merely
eating, drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage; but were
living lives of wanton luxury, degradation and vice.
Yes! I say that the conditions of the peoples of those times
do decisively reflect themselves in this civilisation of our day.
The Scriptures give warning of another such condition prior to
the second coming of Christ. "They knew not until the flood
came, and took them all away;'so shall also the coming of the
Son?of Man be.P (Matt, xxiv, 39.)
This is exactly how multitudes are to-day—-they are
indifferent to the solemn warnings of God; and to such the Lord
will come as a thief in the night.
"Thus shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and
the other left. Two women shall be grinding at the mill; the
one shall be taken, and the other left. Watch therefore, for ye
know not what hour your Lord' doth come.” (Matt, xxiv, 40,
41, 42.)
Here is the warning—will you take heed before it is too
late ! I firmly believe this particular portion of Scripture refers
to the‘ great mystery—the Rapture of the True'Church-, of God


from earth, which cannot he far off now, according to the signs
of the times. Many people, however, attach no significance to *
this most important Scripture-—the greatest hope in the whole
Bible and which God wanted us to know. They seem to regard
it as an impossibility. Well, a person who isi not born of the
Spirit could only be expected to view a message of scriptural
import from a natural standpoint. The natural man cannot
take in a great mass of scriptural facts, analyse, divide and sum
them all up under a complete heading and draw them to pro-
perly defined conclusion. The wisdom from God is necessary—
the Holy Spirit must dwell within the man in order that he may
understand.
I could, if I had time, give a number of illustrations to show
that it is not illogical even from a natural conception to believe
in the possibility of the changing of this body of flesh and bone
to that of another order. A revelation may be had by a study
of the wonderful powers contained in the sun’s rays, in its
effects upon elements of the earth; how it can attract different
particles of matter of the one kind and bind them together, and
extract others of a foreign nature to go into their own particular
orb; solidifying each combination in its respective order.
Ruskin in his “Modern Painters” shows the latent possi-
bilities that lie in the thick black mud or slime of a footpath in
the outskirts of a manufacturing town. The black slime is com-
posed of four elements—clay, soot, sand and water. These four
may each he separated the one from the other. The clay par-
ticles, left to follow their own instinct of unity, become a clear,
hard substance, so set that it can deal with light in a wonderful
way and gather out of it the loveliest blue rays, only refusing
the rest. We call it, then, a sapphire. The sand arranges itself
in mysterious infinitely parallel lines which reflect the blue,
green, purple and red rays, in the greatest beauty. We call it
then an opal. The soot becomes the hardest thing in the world
and the blackness it had obtains the power of reflecting all the
rays of the sun at once and in the vividest blaze that any solid
thing can shoot. We call it then a diamond. Last of all the
water becomes a dewdrop and a crystaline star of snow. So
writes Ruskin of the marvellous features that can be drawn
from the black city slime by the power of the sun, which is only
the agent of the Creator.


A true knowledge of the laws of circularity in their bearing
even upon the animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms (not ex-
cluding the celestial regions) should in themselves grant to the
possessor a keen consciousness of the wonderful
movements in connexion with the Divine purposes.
Yes! the Great all-powerful God is at the back of it all. He is
the inscrutable energy from whence all things proceed. How
unsearchable is His wisdom and His ways past finding out.
DANIEL'S SEVENTY WEEKS.
We have, however, with the aid of the Holy Spirit, the
privilege to know many things relative to the Divine plan. Now
let us review some of these “signs of the last days 7 ' in connexion
with chronology, to see if we can get further light concerning
the purposes of God in His dealings with Israel and then the
Gentiles, I believe that Gentile rule is coming to its end very
soon. The time is fixed definitely by God in accordance with
His own Divine measurements. Israel was carried away into
captivity by the first Gentile king, and the Prophet Jeremiah
announced the time decided by God, before they would be allow-
ed to return to their own land —a period of 70 years; that was to
be conditional on their being repentant and returning to God's
ways. But at the end of that time they were still rebellious.
Therefore judgment was again passed upon the nation to the
effect that punishment would be 70 times 7—70 X 7 years—
that is 490 years altogether.
Hear how God revealed it to the Prophet Daniel: “Seventy
weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy Holy City
to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to
make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy and to
anoint the Most Holy. (Dan. ix, 24.) The prophetic weeks of
Daniel are weeks of years, not weeks of days.
Prom the going forth of the commandment to restore and to
build Jerusalem unto Messiah the Prince was to be seven weeks
—7 X 7 49 years, and threescore and two weeks, 62 weeks—
-62 X 7' = 434 years. Total, 483 years. Immediately after that
period the Messiah was cut off, leaving the last week unfulfilled.
What has happened since? Nothing but desolation, and it will
be so until the fulfilment of the last week. But many people say


this time has passed. Now, a conception of this kind,is wrong,
because none of the Divine objects have yet been achieved’
There is still as much sin and transgression in the world as ever
there was—iniquity abounds. Righteousness has not triumphed,
nor has the Holy One been anointed.
m . ' . . ;-V ~ .V , . n . , . is '■
bo it can be seen that between the 69th and the 70th week
God has cut Israel off for an indefinite period—their land was
to lie and enjoy its sabbaths. The Messiah knew He was to be
put to death and from that time the Gentiles would be in pos-
session of the earthly governments. He was cut off at the end
of 483 years from issuing of decree (by Artaxerxes, in the 20th
year of his reign) to rebuild Jerusalem (69th week); and the
70th week (7 years period) has not yet commenced, because God
fixed a definite intervening time for Gentile rule.
Knowing these things, therefore, we look ahead and see
how rapidly the Anti-Christ systems of this world are paving
the way for the great apostaey of the: end, ■culminating in the
climax of civilization—the battle of "Armageddon/ 7 the last
and most terrible war in the history of man. This will be the
terrible day of the Lord—the great judgment prior to the set-
ting up of the kingdom.
When may we expect the last prophetic week of Daniel to
commence? Well, as soon as Christ comes to the air to call
away His church; because then all moral restraint will have
gone. The salt of the earth must go first; then the last period of
human government (7 years) is ushered in with the advent of
that remarkable personage who (will blaspheme the Most High
-—set himself up as God and demand worship from every
human being upon the face of the earth ; and any defaulter will
be put to death. He will, at the beginning of the week, make a
covenant with Israel—then restored as a nation—but in the
middle of the week will break that covenant; that is when 1260
days have elapsed (42 months—3% years—a time times and
half a time). ‘What is a time ? A. round of time; a year.
THE MARK OF THE BEAST.
Then will it be that every dweller on the earth must receive
the mark of the beast either in their forehead or in their right
hand or be put to death. What is the Scriptural interpretation
of this? It implies the very decided truth that every living


human being, small and great,- bond and free, rich and poor,
working with either brain or hand, cannot, unless he receives the
mark of the beast, buy or sell, or trade in any capacity. The
right to live, otherwise, will be denied. All who refuse the mark
of the beast will die. No doubt there will be a number who will
offer up the supreme sacrifice. They will be the martyrs. Those
who had not sufficient oil in their lamps when Christ came for'
His saints. They were left; and the stern reality of their awful
position dawned on them, when it was too late. The Lord came
as.a thief in the night to them. By their sacrifice for the truth,
however, they will be specially resurrected and join those of the
first resurrection, to live for ever-—put on immortality.
I do not wish, at the same time, to emphasise or dwell upon
the possibility of entering the kingdom in this way • because my
main object is to show the way, how the terrible persecution
may be avoided. Besides it can be understood that when the
-Church has left the earth, the possibility of many of those left
being saved will be very remote on. account of the Holy Spirit
having been withdrawn; and further, through the- strong delu-
sion which will be sent by God that they believe the lie , who
loved not the truth; the punishment for which is to be shut out
forever from His presence. All those who receive the beast and
his mark, the Bible says, will be damned.
Now, let us consider if there are yet any marked indica-
tions whereby it may be learned what form of society is prevail-
ing at the present time, and which would probably be the pre-
dominant factor preparing the way for the, rule of the beast —■
the last human despot. Some have said that lie would arise from
Democracy. Now, my version is that such cannot be. I believe,
as I have,said before, that the Roman Empire (which received
the deadly wound, and which is to be healed again) will for a*
brief period complete its history with the ten-toed kingdom. Ten
crowns; 10 nations confederated, with an additional head—the
Roman Prince.
THE REVIVED ROMAN 7 EMPIRE
Yes, the original Roman frontier must be restored. In fact,
the Imperial Conference is but a primary step in that direction.
When 10 nations initially pend their represehtatives to conference
to decide their future-conjoint policy, the most important plank


of which will be the question of preservation and extension
of trade, by means of strengthening the military powers at their
command, then will it become necessary to elect a supreme
Arbitrator for that specific purpose. So it can be seen that the
great ruler will not arise from Democracy, but he will come as
the result of deliberations made by the various nations con-
cerned and which are to constitute that of the original Roman
Empire. He will be a great war lord, ' representing the last
phase of plutocracy. It is therefore the military cast that is
going to usher in the last horror of human history. Russia, I
believe, will, under the circumstances already outlined, separate
herself from the allied nations, and that very soon.
bo terrible will be the rule of this monster in human form
who is to derive his power from the dragon and who will mag-
nify himself above God, that a state bf lawlessness will even-
tuate m its worst form. This will he the awful day spoken of in
the Bible, when civil wars will be rife in every land, when
neighbour will betray neighbour, when members of families will
divide one against the other. The whole world will be in a state
of chaos and revolution. It will he tribulation such as never
was_ since the world began. The final result of an apostate
Christendom-—an anti-Christ world. Soon will be heard the cry
in the night—Christ’s coming for His Church—the cry to be
heard only by those who are His.
The world is almost ripe for pre-Millennial judgment; the
time is fast approaching for the separation of the tares from the
wheat The harvest is near at hand when the sickle is to be
east in. ‘‘He treadeth the winepress to overflowing with the
fierceness of His wrath.” He will gather the nations from the
four corners of the earth for terrible judgment.
The king of the North (Russia), with his hordes, will be
broken without hand when arraying his great armies against
Israel. Then the Scriptures tell us of how the stone falls and
grinds to powder the ‘‘image of the end.” The whole of the
anti-Christ systems of this world will come to their end—for the
fulness of the times of the Gentiles will have come to pass.
THE DOOM OF CHRISTENDOM.
Time does not allow of my going into detail, but I would
say that the three last monsters in human form, already des?


scribed Scripturally as beasts, will come to their end by specially
reserved judgments too terrible to imagine. Satan will be
chained for a thousand years. The remnant of Israel will then
-be restored as a nation, with Christ at its head. Not only will
He rule oyer Israel, but the whole world will be under His own
Government, which He will share with His' saints. 4 4 Blessed are
they who hath part in the first resurrection/' He will rule the
nations with a rod of iron; and any departure from the truth
in that day will not be reckoned with evidence of the eye or ear,
for the Almighty Himself will scan every man's heart and any
sign of iniquity will be judged on the spot with righteous judg-
ment. His Word will be sent out to all the nations that they
may learn of His ways. It will he the Gospel of the kingdom.
Those nations who do not come up at stated times to worship
Him who will sit in the Temple of Government, will be judged
with famines. The Great King will cause the rain to cease. He
will be the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Thus will be the
beginning of the glorious Millennial reign of Christ for a thous-
and years. There will he no night, for the, light of the Lord will
ever shine. In that day man will live to a much greater age
than he does in this dispensation. Glorious privileges will exist.
At the end of the thousand years, Satan will be released
for a little season to try those who dwell on the earth as a final
test- —for all men's hearts will not have become completely sub-
missive to God's ways. At length when Christ has subdued all
things—a full restitution has been made —He will hand the
kingdom- over to His Father. Then comes the final resurrection
and the judgment of the “Great White Throne"; and all
creation from the beginning will stand before Him who sits on
the Throne to receive final judgment for deeds done in the body.
Those not coming up to the standard required by Divine judg-
ment will be cast into utter darkness,' to he for ever from His
presence. This is the second death. Then will all things
material fade away from the sight of Him who sits on the
Throne, There will he a New Heaven and a New Earth, for the
old Heavens and old earth will have passed away. Christ even
then will be submissive to His Father. This will be the ever-
lasting Kingdom, one with a foundation, and which can never
pass away, but abideth for ever. Then will be God in all and all
in God. “AH things pass away, hut my Word abideth for ever,"
This is what the Lord has said in connection with the reward
for His Church, “In my Father's House there are many man-


sions. If I.go to prepare a place for you I will come in like
manner as you saw Me go, to take you unto Myself, that where
lam you may be also. Neither has the eye seen nor the ear
things which God has prepared for. those who love
- m * ft is beyond the imagination of the human mind.
THE MYSTERY—BABYLON.
Many people believe that Babylon was destroyed
long - ago. Well, that iYersion is correct, of course
in so far as it relates to the city itself then existing’
out the general idea is that Babylon is not to be re-
built. The Scriptures, speak expressly of it as not only
a great city , hut also as a huge commercial-religious system.
Hear how it is described in the Book of Revelation: “Babylon
mystery—Great City, mother of harlots. The whore which sits
upon scarlet-colored beast with seven heads and ten horns, full
of names of blasphemy. The woman (city) was arrayed in
purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious
stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication. The inhabitants
of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornica-
tion. Upon her head was written, mystery, Babylon the Great,
the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth.”
.It can therefore be understood in this way;— Babylon (as
a city) was—yet is not—(as a city); yet is (as a system). That
is, i believe, the true interpretation of the Scripture, which
says: “Mystery Babylon which was, yet is not, but yet is.”
Yes, Babylon was a great commercial centre, intermixed with
an apostate religion, reflected from the days of Seth. Although
the city was destroyed, the system still remains. The civiliza-
tion of to-day has inherited what was sown at Babylon. The
Bible clearly foretells, to my mind, that this great ancient city
is to be re-established (although I have no controversy with
those: who may differ from me in this respect). ; Whenf ' In the
days,: when the Roman Empire shall be revived. The city is
described as a woman sitting on a beast with seven heads and
ten hoi ns. The seven heads are symbolical of seven mountains* '
which are in Rome; and the 10 horns signify 10 kings to come!
If time permitted I conld show where there are many signs of
the re-building of Babylon; the materials are already at hand.


Before'the war Germany was engaged making a railway from
Constantinople to Bagdad and Babylon. In this; _ connexion
friendly relations existed between Germany and Turkey, but
through England’s intervention the work was not completed.
If it had been there would have been a direct linking up of
Europe, Berlin with Babylon. A most notable feature of the
war has been the interest gathered around Bagdad by the dif-
ferent nations in conflict. They all covet the rich plains of
Shinar, a land of great resources, only awaiting to be developed*.
Millions of pounds have been reserved for this purpose. Take
the Suez Canal, for instance. Then again, the railway line
across Asia, which will ultimately be the means of connecting
India with Europe within a few days’ journey. Now, as I have
said before, those rich plains of Shinar were once the centre of
great commercial activity, the centre of the world’s-civilization*
The extensive irrigation works that have been in progress are
another significant factor in connection with the restoration of
that wonderful land to its former glory. Great Babylon, with
its majestic walls, beautiful roof gardens, well-kept streets and
thoroughfares and mighty terraces, has outshone in glory and
splendour all earthly cities since its time. Still it fell into decay
for its moral corruption. So will it be again a great city to be
destroyed, not only for ever as a city, but a monstrous commer-
cial-religeo system which has to answer to God for the countless-
armies whose blood has been spilt on the earth for generations.
Yes! the blood of thousands of millions of human beings awaits
to be avenged; it cries out to Jehovah from the earth; and the
day is fast approaching—-that “terrible day of the Lord” who*
saith “vengeance is mine.”
THE HOLOCAUST OF WAR,
Up to the middle of the 19th century 6860 million men have
been slain in wars; and these,were not. the weak, but,the strong
and stalwart, and those best fitted physically for a nation’s life.
Just think of the number-—more than four times the population
of the world to-day.
Before the 1914 war the European nations’ “Peace-war
struggle” cost 700 million’pounds per annum.
America has, quite recently, voted £117,000,000 for arma-
ment ; and that nation purposes building ironclads of a tremen-
dous size and with enormous power.


At the present juncture the British nation is spending
approximately 7% millions a day for war purposes.
Now that I have shown but briefly the heavy cost of wars
in blood and gold, let ns proceed to contrast these figures with
others I propose to give in another direction.
During the past century Christendom has spent £60,000,000
for the conversion of the heathen—that is at the rate of Id per
head for the 850,000,000 of heathendom—equivalent to
£3,541,666 per year. To put it plainly, the European nations
have spent Id per head to convert the heathen, and £1 per head
to destroy each other. Can this be anything else but folly?
Listen here again: After 1900 years of Christendom, out of
1500 million, which is the world's population, there are said to
be nearly ten hundred millions Who have not even heard of
Christ. There are more now than when Christ first sent out His
disciples. Those who have had the Gospel have rejected it.
- 3,000,000 heathen are supposed to have been converted in a
century, but during the same period the heathen population has
increased by 200,000,000. How long do you think it would take
to convert the world with the Gospel under such conditions?
More than an eternity, I think.
Out of 1500 million on earth, 410 million are nominal
Christians—all the rest are said to be heathens. Hut it is neces-
sary also to make deductions from those termed nominal
Christians, which comprise criminals, infidels, agnostics, har-
lots, unbelievers, spiritualists, and all in relation to the many
false religious conceptions and notions too innumerable to men-
tion. There are, of course, millions of Mohammedans and Budd-
hists.
# I believe, after all, there will be a small number of true
Christians to be found on this earth, compared with the vast
population of the world. Perhaps there are about 12,000,000
who could truly be termed faithful, and who actually try to live
up to the teachings of the Word of God. The rest merely profess
it and that is all. To put it in a Biblical phrase, “They have
the form of Godliness, but deny: the power thereof."
It can be seen, therefore, that wars, and preparation for
wars, cannot make for peace and righteousness, because such
methods are not in accord with the teachings of the Prince of
Peace, which were peace on earth, goodwill to men.


Where one nation prepares, another does likewise—so
where is the finality ? Who can tell? Listen to this! After this
war. the worst in the whole annals of history, the world will be
more of an armed camp than ever. While Christendom is loud in
its aspirations for a lasting peace as a result of the heavy sacri-
fices through the present upheaval, it is blind to the fact that
this war is merely the forerunner of others far greater—it is
but the beginning' of sorrows. The changing in connection with
the geographical position alone will make it imperative for more
war preparation, only on a greater scale than before.
Now, I have given but a brief account of the terrible wast-
age caused through wars. The loss of blood is irreparable.
Then think of the millions of homes that have been made deso-
late, the sorrowing ones who have waited in vain for those they
loved, who were never to return. 'But can it be wondered that
such awful destruction comes; upon the earth, when'the nations
are continually in conflict over trade and territory, at enmity
one with the other. Perpetual peace can never be had in this
way.
Quite apart, however, from the inevitable sacrifices the
nations are, from time to time, compelled to make from a war
standpoint, and have'been, apparently, unable to avoid through
all ages, based upon their narrow conception of God, it is
deplorable to see how little attention is given by Statesmen, even
in these times of increased knowledge, to those matters affecting
the moral welfare of the people. I propose now to say some-
thing concerning even our own Empire, which should leaven
that spirit of self-righteousness before God that is so preva-
lent.
RESULTS OF SO-CALLED CIVILISATION.
Prior to the war there were in England 13,000,000 people on
the verge of starvation. When Keir Hardie asked the Govern-
ment to relieve the suffering by the voting of a million pounds,
Ms request was refused. Then to add to the degradation the
drink bill at about the same time totalled £170,000,000 for The
year. Not forgetting, either, how opium was forced on China ;
and how also the tobacco habit has been acquired at the instiga-
tion of wealthy merchants. If I had time I could tell you of the
slum conditions of England. Think of the slum births 1 and
what hope have we for a virile race. Think of the poor unfor-


tunates whocome into this world of woe with not a chance, with
enfeebled mind, and a body not capable of development to fight
the, battle of life. What does it all spell? Race degeneration!
Refer to the figures of the infant mortality lists (on the
increase), then contrast these with the decreased birth rate,
intensified through the war, not only of our own Empire, but the
other nations also, and see where the human race is drifting. It
is not the beautiful picture painted and rhythmed, by artist and
poet of the Paradise to come, but the horrid climax of a boasted
Christian civilization, governed by vain glory and hypocrisy
a false religion, and a bloodthirsty commerce.
-• Now, J have before me some figures which may be interest-
ing. At the time of Christ, the world’s gold amounted to
approximately £85,000,000. There was no marked increase for
many centuries. In the year 1800 it reached to only
£350,000,000. .But 10 years later it had increased at a terrific
rate—amounting to £1,140,000,000. At the present time it is
estimated to be £2,000,000,000. Thus the wealth of the world has
increased by £860,000,000 during the last 25 years. Now. what
is this significant of? Just, what the Word of God says would
happen in the last days. Riches would accumulate; and they
are still increasing. The rich man is getting richer abid the poor
man is getting ipoorer.
J. D. Rockefeller, the American millionaire, is said to own
£100,000,000, which brings him in an annual income of about
£20,000,000. This means more, millions. Thus we have the
evidence of heaped up treasure upon the basis of unearned
increment. Accumulated interest from the masses of the toiling
poor. The world’s wealth is owned by comparatively few men.°
.Hear what the Bible says in this connexion: ‘‘ Go to now,
je rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come
upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are
moth-eaten. Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of
them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as
it were fire. Ye have heaped up treasure together for the last
days. Behold, the hire of the laborers who have reaped down
your fields which is of you kept back by fraud, erieth.- and the
cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the
Jjord of Sabaoth. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and
been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of
slaughter. Ye have'condemned and killed the just; and he doth
not resist you.” (James v, 1-6.)


There is every indication, according to this Scripture,, that
there is a terrible judgment ahead for those responsible for
gambling with the products of the earth for profit-making (not
saying anything of gambling with the lives of helpless human
beings)—those who are callous to the cries of starving multi-
tudes, whom they rob of the necessaries of life in order to
become wealthy. Remember, these things are all done in the-
name of commerce; and now that the world’s wealth is becom-
ing more centralised than ever, with a few men, comparatively
speaking, taking advantage of an unjust system of distribution
and exchange, it can be understood that a climax must come-
soon.
The economic position after the war, with its long train of
many perplexities, will indeed lead to confusion—and it will not
be long after when those who have mercilessly robbed the poor
and killed the just, will be faced with the judgment that the
Bible describes. The day of lawlessness is near at hand (which
is already manifesting itself), the culmination of the kingdom,
partly weak and partly strong. The ruling classes clashing with
Democracy, the outcome of the organised masses The' simmer-
ing out of the last form of human government prior to the com-
ing of Christ in judgment to set up the kingdom of His Millen-
nial reign.
“For as the lightning cometh out of the east and shineth
even unto the west; so shall also*the coming of the Son of Man
be.” (Matt, xxiv, 27.).
“Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the
sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the
stars shall fall from Heaven, and the powers of the Heavens
shall be shaken: and then shall appear the sign of the Son of
Man in Heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn,
and they shall see the Son v of Man coming in the, clouds of
Heaven with power and great glory.” (Matt, xxiv, 29-30.)
We are living in perilous times —when men’s hearts are
failing with fear—the last days, when evil men shall wax worse
and worse, deceive and be deceived, unto the end. (II Tim. iv,
i-i 3.) ;f *
“They will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own
lusts shall heap to themselves teachers having itching ears; and
they shall turn their ears and shall be turned unto fables.”
(II Tim., iv, 3.)


Bell old I have told you before, the Spirit speaketh ex-
pressly: in the last days some will depart from the faith, giving
heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons, speaking lies
in hypocrisy.” (Matt, xxiv, 25.)
RELIGIOUS INDIFFERENCE.
Hear further what the Word of God says shall come to pass
in the last days:—There shall be a falling away from the truth,
loss of natural affection; men shall be lovers of pleasure more
than lovers of God; lovers of their own selves; boasters, blas-
phemers, murderers, adulterers, unthankful,, incontinent, un-
holy, despisers of good, heady, high-minded, scoffers; having a
form of Godliness but denying the power thereof. Who can say
that these things do not characterise human life of this day!
God has said that iniquity would abound, that thelove of many
would wax cold. Many false prophets shall appear, angels of
Satan transformed into ministers of light-deceiving multitudes.
Inwardly they are ravening wolves, seeking to destroy.
It is alarming to notice the indifference there is towards
religious matters ; I have noticed the Prophecies of the Bible
surely being fulfilled every day almost—when in conversation
with men, and from accounts given even in the newspapers,
more especially since the war broke out. I believe that the fall-
ing away from the truth was given vent to in Holy Writ, where
it gives warning to the “watchmen of the approaching night.”
Now, what is the Scriptural term, “watchmen,” significant off
It applies to Ministers of religion into whose hands the Word of
God has been entrusted, and. all those who know the truth; thus
being responsible to God fhr the true and accurate interpreta-
tion of His Holy Word.
Can it be said that the modern Church is warning of the
•darkness which is coming upon the world—when no man can
work—and of the
URGENT NECESSITY OF PREPARATION FOR CHRIST’S
SUDDEN COMING TO THE AIR FOR HIS SAINTS?
I am sorry to say that solemn warning has not
been given, except in isolated cases. Leaders of reli-
gion in these days seem to pay more attention to


worldly matters (than they d» the Scriptures.; in fact, so
materialistic are many of them, tkat they cannot see their folly.
They become blind to the truth. Many men will tell you that
they see no good in religion. Now, in what ranks are these men
generally to"be found? They are the indifferent; who seldom, if
ever, search the Scriptures themselves, but have relied mostly
upon what was told them from the pulpit, the message of which
has not been made clear and audible according to their under-
standing, the consequence being a wrong conception of
Christianity. In this way multitudes have fallen away without
even an idea of what real Christianity is.
It is astounding to notice the rapid growth of the various
new religions, which are innumerable, and still growing. They
are the false religious notions and heresies the Bible speaks of
that shall come in the last days.
I could stand here all day naming them, there are so many ;
thousands of them. But, now let us consider seriously the vast
difference existing between the earthly religion of this world
and the religion of Christ.
The Great King—the Lord Himself—is the Head of “one
great Church, ’ ’ His owns elect people whom He has selected Him-
self from the Day of Pentecost to the present time. He is still
building His Temple—it is a Temple built without hands. The
Spirit of God dwelling in the earthly tabernacle of the true
Christian on earth until the time appointed for the Spirit (the
Hinderer) to he withdrawn in the manner I have already des-
cribed.
THE TRUE AND FALSE CHURCH.
What is the meaning of Church? An assembly or body.
Where did the word originate? In Greece. Yes; the ancient
Greeks called their legislative halls by the name of churches ;
also other governing bodies. Subsequently, religious institutions
then set up were known by a Greek word for Ecclesia, meaning
church.
Now, I have shown yon where the ‘‘man-made church” first
got its name—the church divided into many orders of a multi-
tudinous character in these the last days, in which the Spirit of
God does not exist.
Because of the* predominance- of materialism,: there- is. a fall-


lug away from the faith. They know not God although pro-
fessing His name. In what noticeable way has the Almighty
made reference to the false church? He says, “I will spew thee
out of My mouth ? 7 —-meaning that when they shall knock for
admittance to the Kingdom they will be told that they are too
late and that they are not known. So you can see, the Church
of God, an assembly of true believers, born of the Spirit, is alto-
gether different to the Church of Christendom.
The Church, the body of which Christ is the Head, con-
sisting of peoples after His name, both Jew and Gentile, from all
nations, kindreds and tongues, in the nature of its construction,
is nothing in common with the modern church. It is in the world,
but not of the world. How then can the religious systems of this
earth claim to be Christian:—even from the viewpoint of their
division into so many thousands of different creeds? Such a
condition cannot be identical with the teachings of Christ,
which were on the basis of regeneration of the individual, and
on the ground that His elect would be one body indwelt by the
Spirit
Here is another example of the difference “existing between
the Apostate and the True Church. Take the parable of the meal
and the leaven; the woman (false church) put three measures
of leaven into the meal until the whole was leavened. The,,
ordinary version is that the leaven represents a pure ingredient
being poured into the world, which in: course of time would
ultimately end in the purification of the whole of humanity.
That is to say, further, the meal (the world), through its con-
tact with the leaven, is becoming better through tW natural -
process of evolution. The evil is giving way to perfection as a
natural sequence. Now, this is an entirely wrong conception—
a delusion ! The true interpretation is really in the direction of
the good being made had through a corruptible substance
(leaven) having been placed in the pure meal of the Gospel.
That is the Biblical version plainly enough, and which ex-
plains itself in the corrupt state of the world prior to Christ’s
Telurn to set up the kingdom.
Now, where can it he shown in any portion of Holy Writ
that leaven is symbolical of anything but a corrupt or decayed
substance? The Word of God signifies, in unmistakable lan-
guage that leaven represents corruption; yet in the face of the
Divine version, Christendom twists the Scripture into an entirely


opposite meaning and calls the corruption purity, and vice versa.
Another outstanding feature of the laxity of the modern
Church concerning Spiritual matters is exhibited in its utter
indifference to the precepts laid down by Christ when He
ordered His Chief Disciple, Peter, to put the sword back in its
sheath, which he drew in defence of His Master, and cut off the
ear of the, Chief Priest’s servant:. The Lord Himself knew that
if He had chosen to use His own power no man could lay hand
on Him ; but it was the Divine will of His Father in Heaven that
He should die to procure salvation for man.
Does Christendom accept this great revelation and act up
to it f No! It ignores it altogether, although pretending to
follow the cross.
Jesus Christ came in a state op humiliation. He was meek
and lowly—had nowhere to lay His. head. He brought good
tidings to man and preached peace on earth,-goodwill: to men.
He did not tell men that the Divine law justified the lifting of
the sword. When He was questioned with regard to the Law
of Moses, He replied that it existed because of the hardness of
men’s hearts. He did not come to interfere with the ordinances
that existed, but to appeal to the heart of man—when the heart
was softened then the way could be opened to show how death
could be destroyed, and how eternal life could be had. His
message was. a message of love- and truth. He proved this by
the sacrifice of Himself without even a resistance. Yes, the
Word of the Lord was to Resist not evil with evil 51
AH, UNWORLDLY KINGDOM,
What did He say when he told the Disciple to sheath the
sword? "My Kingdom is not of this world—if it were, then
would my followers fight.”
How then can Christendom claim that it is following the
cross of Christ, wdien it is doing directly opposite to what He
taught—and what He died for to make knoym? The nations
now in conflict, engaged in the bloodiest war that has ever been,
all think they are right and all pray to the one God for victory.
Each has its various forms of worship and systems of religious
orders. But can it be said that the conception of God in any of
those nations is sufficient to warrant Divine favor to any marked


degree? Ido not think so. If they were obeying the command
of God they would not be at war—the awful carnage
of the last two years would not have been (and
which if often likened to a sacrifice on a par with the
atonement of Christ, but certainly is not). There is complete
indifference to the commandment, "Thou shalt not kill!"— and
the warning that as many as shall take to the sword shall perish
thereby. This war has roused up the vilest passions in men; it
has sown the gospel of hate, which in due course will have its
reaction.
When Christ wag on earth He said, "love thine enemy—do
good to those who hate yon," "resist not evil wdth evil." These
precepts were, never put into operation by any nation; the true
Christianity has never been tried. Therefore, Christendom
cannot claim adherence to the Prince of Peace who died for as
many of those who would believe on Him, and Him that sent
Him, that they might be saved. It seems to me, the same spirit
that actuated the people when Christ was nailed upon the cross
of Calvary—through their acceptance of Barrabas, the mur-
derer, in preference to the Saviour—is manifesting itself more
than ever to-day, despite the many wonderful achievements of
the age. Man boasts of'his genius, but after all he has only
learned to a fractional part how to harness certain forces of
nature. Where is the man who can properly define what elec-
tricity is? He cannot be found. We know of the existence of
this wonderful natural force by the manifestation of its power.
Great wonders have been worked with its aid, but yet there are
secrets attaching to it that are unfathomable. To be brief, man
is really progressing in material knowledge, and which has
accumulated in these the last days, in exactly the same order as
God’s Holy Prophets prophesied thousands of years ago. So
nothing is really new, for our history was pre-written by God,
who saw the end from the beginning. The powers existed
before man, who has only learned to make use of some of them.
I believe that the problems accruing from the present war
will be unsolvable. Take, for instance, the question of finance,
with its maze of intricacies. Then what about population to
make good the wastage upon the wide human abattoir of
Europe? Have you not noticed already the laxity in every
nation in connexion with the marriage laws, and what may be
the outcome of it? Further, we are living in the days when


famines will stalk the earth as never before; plagues and pesti-
lences are rife in every land, but still in their infancy compared
with expected developments at a later stage.
God has said all these things must come to pass in these
the last days. “There shall be earthquakes in divers places;
plagues, famines, wars, rumours of wars, etc., etc.” “Remem-
ber, when ye see all these things, know that your redemption
draweth nigh.’’ This was His message to the Church, not the
Church of Christendom, but the true Church of God, of which
Christ is the Head, made up of all individuals bom of the Holy
Spirit, regenerated beings thereby; from all nations, kindreds,
tongues.
As many as will believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and the One
who sent Him, and keep His commandments, accepting the Gift
of the Spirit from God, are promised eternal life. Glory for ever
and blessings without end. They shall shine as the brightness
of the firmament. Be luminant as the stars of Heaven for ever
and ever—each member in his proper order, appointed accord-
ing to the value of his works.
Will you become a member of the true Church of God,
which is going shortly to meet its Head in the realms above ?
Do not delay in case you are disappointed, and find the Master
has come, and you are left behind. When once the door is shut,
it will be too late; enter in while there is yet time.


HELPFUL MAGAZINES IN STOCK.
SXJBSCEIBEES ENROLLED.
THE MORNING STAR.
Published weekly. A Herald of the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Price, 6/6 per annum, -posted.
OUR HOPE.
A Monthly Magazine, devoted to BIBLE STUDY, ESPECIALLY
THE PROPHETIC WORD, Editor: A. O'. Gaebelein, of A r ew
York - .
Post Free,: 5/6 per annum.
_ '
‘rvjK > ;RK,i/'T’L4j/ V/ VHL fcV/ ' M
Editoi feiiu: M un D.i
Post Free, 6/3 per annum.
Published Monthly by flu \i k I Bible Institute Y f t r - 1 ) Huh
issue contains important articles on current topics, and also articles
suited to Sunday School workers, outline addresses for busy
Christian workers, etc., etc.
fill EISWE l:¥Q«jDfiiSS.
Editor; Dr. R. A. Torrey.
For help in all Religious Work and Experience.
Post Free, 5/6 per annum.
WATCHWORD AND TRUTH.
Editors: Robert Cameron, D.D., M. A. Matthews, D.D., LL.D.
Published Monthly. Contains important articles each issue on cur-
rent problems in religious life and experience.
Post Eree, 5/6 per annum.
THE “CHRISTIAN WORKER’’ FOLDING ORGAN.
Suitable for Outdoor Meetings, Mission Halls, etc., from £5 to
£lO/10/-.
THE CHRISTIAN WORKERS’ DEPOT,
'ftrimmbnweaMti& Reservoir Streets (Near Central Railway Station),
SYDNEY.


' : ::Dop©ii
COMMONWEALTH _ AND RESERVOIR ' STREETS
(Near Central Rahway Station), SYDNEY,
has in a splendid assortment of
BOQKS, PAMPHLETS. TRACTS. &c.
. ' suitable for
SUNDAY SCHOOLS, : TRACT DISTRIBUTORS*.
as well as for.
PREACHERS AND BIBLE STUDENTS GENERALLY,
BIBLfeS, TESTAMENTS and PORTIONS
in great variety.
REDEMPTION HYMN BOOKS. Music and Words, from’ 3/-.
Words only from 4d.
PAMPHLETS ON PRESENT DAY ERRORS.
SPIRITISM, SOCIALISM, MILLENNIAL DAWN ISM,
CHRISTADELPHIANISM, CHRISTIAN SCIENCE,
SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTISM,
THE ORDER OP THE STAR OF THE EAST,
MORMONISM, &c„ &c.
FROM ONE PENNY EACH
SEND FOB 1 COMPLETE CATALOGFK.
