

'
f - *
•
r>. & v * w ySjJfSlL i."
.✓ . " '
X-
1 w*- 1
1




bell, and others, late of his Majefty’s Ship the
Wager, which was wreck’d on a defolate
I (land in Lat. 47. S. Long. 81. 40. W. in the
•
South-Seas, Anno 1741.
CONTAINING
The whole interfperfed with Defcriptions of the Coun-
tries in which the various Scenes of their Adventures
lay j the Manners, fcf c. of the American Indians and
Spaniards, and their Treatment of the Author and
his Companions.
My ALEXANDER CAMPBEL
Late Midfliipman of the Wager.
THE
SEQUEL
T O
Bu Ike ley and Cummins's
VOYAGE
T O T H E
SOUTH-SEAS :
OR, THE
Adventures of Capt. Cheap , the Hon. ,
Mr. Byron , Lieut, Hamilton , Alexander Camp-
A faithful Narrative of the unparallell’d Sufferings
of thefe Gentlemen, after being left on the faid
Ifland by the reft of the Officers and Crew, who
went off in the Long boat. Their deplorable Con-
dition, defperate Enterprizes, and prodigious Di-
ftreffes, till they fell into the Hands of the Indians ,
who carried them into New Spam , where they re-
mained Prifoners of War, till fent back to Europe %
/ on the Terms of the Cartel, in 1746.
DUBLIN:
Printed by S. Powell,
For W. Brien in Damefireet, near Crow-firset,
Bookfeller, M d cc xlvii.




To the Honourable
JOHN BING , Efq;
Rear-Admiral of the Blue.
s I R,
AS I have had the Honour of fervlng under
you, in his Majefty’s Ship the Augujia ,
in 1738, and the Year following j and
as I am well allured that no one will
more impartially read, or is more capable of form-
ing a right Judgment of the enfuing Pages, fo 1
know not to whom they could have been more
properly infcribed.
You will not. Sir, expe& a Seaman to fay fine
Things in a Dedication. Befides, fuch Things as
I might be inclinable to fay of you, though un-
queftionably true, would fo much refemble the
Flattery ufual on thefe Occafions, as not only
would ill-become a Maritime Pen, but, I dare
fay, be no way acceptable to your Honour.
All I have to fay, in Behalf of the following
Sheets, is, that they are void of Art, Malice, or
Mifreprefentation. The Fa6ls related in them are
undeniable, drefied in the plain unfophifticated
Language of an honeft Tar, whofe principal View
in publilhing them, is to clear his Character from
a very grols Calumny. Moft of the Hardlhips I
fuffered in following the Fortune of Captain Cheap
were the Confequence of my voluntary Attachment
to that Gentleman, and the Diftrefies I underwent
A a with


with him, and for him, are fuch as perhaps have
never been equalled. In Reward for this, the Cap-
tain has approved himfelf the greateft Enemy I have
in the World. On my Return to my Native
Country, after fuch aVoyage as God grant no other
Man may ever make, I hoped that my Services
and Sufferings would have Sufficiently pleaded my
Caufe, and at laft have turned out to my Advan-
tage. But inftead of this, I now find myfelf desti-
tute of Employment, and without the leaft Profpeft
of being provided for in the Service of my King
and Country. Whether or not I have merited
from either fo hard a Fate, I leave to your Ho-
nour’s Judgment, on the Perufal of the enfuing
Narrative ; in Oppofition to which I fhould re-
joice at your being thoroughly acquainted with the
very worft that my Enemies can prove againft me ;
for as your Penetration cannot be impofed on by
grofs Untruths, and palpable Mifreprefentations,
and as they have nothing elfe to bring againft me,
fo, in Proportion to the Weaknefs of fuch Evi-
dence, the more ftrongly muft the Innocence ap-
pear of
Tour Honours moji humble ,
and mo ft obedient Servant ,
Portfmouthy
Nov. 1. *746.
Alexander Campbell.
THE
<ji v


f V ]
THE
INTRODUCTION.
H- AVIN G been cruelly afperfed by thofe
; who, of all Perfons in the World, ought
to have fpoken, if not kindly , at leaft fairly
- of me, I thought it neceffary to publifh the
enfuing Narrative, in order to juftify my Conduit,
and make it appear to the World, that I have not been
generbufly treated. This is a Piece of Juftice which I
owe to myfelf, and which any other Man in the like
Circumftances would be willing to pay.
I fhall not fay much of my Services to Captain
Cheap, in order to aggravate his ungenerous Returns.
Had I never done, or endeavoured to do him the leaft
Service, yet he ought not to have afperfed my Cha-
racter, nor to have charged me with a Crime which I
would be the laft Man in his Majefty’s Navy to com-
mit. The Captain was a Witnefs to all my Sufferings,
A 3 and


and was it not cruel in him to prevent my receiving
any Recompence ? Had I even been the Aggreflbr in
any Mifunderflanding with him, yet it ought to have
been beneath him to purfue with fo much Malice, and
take fo fevere a Revenge on his Fellow-Sufferer and
faithful Servant, for fuch 1 voluntarily became to him
in his greatefl Diftrefs: But I was not the Aggreflbr;
jior did I ever imagine he would have proved my
Enemy, who was never his, but the very Reverfe,
Happening to come Home a little before me, he
takes the Opportunity of reporting that I was gone
into the Spanijh Service. And what more could he
bave done to render me odious among my Brother-
Sailors, and hinder me from being again employed,
and getting my Bread as formerly in the Service of my
.King and Country ? This groundlefs Charge has been
propagated with fo much Succefs, and (unfortunately
for me) has been fo generally believed at the Admi-
ralty Office, and by feme Gentlemen in the Navy,
who might elfe have done me Service, that I am
looked on as a Traitor, or traiteroufly inclined, and
am therefore ejefted oat of his Majefly’s Service, and
indeed out of all other Service, unlefs I will actually
go over to the Enemy, as it has been falfly faid I have
done ; But rather than do this, I will fubmit to beg
my Bread, or, ftarving, die a Repreach to ungrateful
and cruel Men.
That the Publick may truly be informed of my In-
nocence, I have printed this Account of the Voyage
I was fo unfortunately engaged in. When the Wager
was fliipwreck’d on the defolate Ifland in the South-
Seas, mentioned in the Title, the Crew thought them-
felves no longer oblig’d to obey their Captain j and
when they found that he would not give up his Com-
mand, they took Arms and freed themfelves from it
by confining him. But when all except the very few
whom anon I fhall have Occafion to mention, defpifed
and left the Captain, I remained fleadily attached to
him, even in his greatefl Extremity ; and on this Ac-
count was my felf defpifed, and without Regret aban-
don’d to an almoft hopelefs Fate.
Indeed


The INTRODUCTION, vii
Indeed while I was neceffary to him the Captain
exprefled great Kindnefs for me, and made me large
Promifes ; but after following his defperate Fortune
for Three Years, his ungenerous Ufage of me, forced
me to quit his Company, and embark for Europe in a
Spanifh Ship, rather than go home with him in a French
One. This however gave him the Opportunity of ar-
riving in England, a few Weeks before me : And an
Opportunity for doing me a Prejudice which the Cap-
tain induftrioufly improved ; very generoufly and ho-
neftly reporting that I had enter’d into the Spanijh Ser-
vice ; tho’ Ido not believe he himfelf fufpefted it;
As to my not being come home when he arrived, that
was no Proof, nor even ground for Sufpicion that I
was voluntarily abfent. Fie could not know whether
I was ftill alive, or whether detained by Sicknefs, Im-
prifonment in old Spain , or by contrary Winds, or
twenty other Means which a generous Man would
have fuppofed, rather than judge fo uncharitably.
But if I live to be again employed i»i the Royal Na-
vy, I hope that Opportunities may occur for convincing
my Countrymen (by all the Services one in my Station
can perform) that my Zeal for, and Fidelity to my
King and Country, ever have been, and ever will be
incapable of being moved either by Temptations or
Dangers. I delire no greater Happinefs in this World,
than to make it publickly appear, that there is not a
Briton this Day alive, who hath a greater Regard for
his own and his Country’s Flonour, than I have ever
preferved. To one Proof of this Captain Cheap him-
felf is no Stranger. Namely, that I might have had,
in Nezv Spain, as well as at Madrid, the Command of
a Spanijh Man of War given me, if I would havp
quitted the King of Great-Britain' s Service.
If the Reader Ihould think that any Thing in this
Narrative borders in any Degree upon the marvellous,
let it be tried by a Collation with the Accounts of
other Voyagers; and then it will appear that never
any Traveller more avoided Exaggeration than I have
done, 1 have defigned this Trail as a plain fimple
A 4 Relation


Relation of Fads, intended chiefly to place my own
Adions in a juft Light. If here and there I have in-
troduced Defcriptions of the Countries, iffc. which
I had the Misfortune to fee, ’tis only in Complai-
fance to the Cuftom of journalifts. However I have
been fcrupuloufly careful not to infert one Word of
Untruth : For Falfities of any kind would be highly
abfurd in a Work defigned to refeue the Author’s
Charader from the Imputation of Vnfaitbfulnefs.
a. a
The INTRODUCTION.


VOYAGE
TO THE
SO UTH-S E AS.
BOOK I.
A fuccinß Narrative of Commodore An- -
ion's Voyage to the South Seas, from
his Jetting out in the Tear 1740, to '■>
the Lofs oj the Ship Wager.
WHEN our unhappy Ship was loft, there
was not one Journal faved out of her;
therefore I fliall not pretend to give a
more Circumftantial Account of the
Voyage, than meerly what occurs to my
Memory. But what I relate I perfectly remember,
and will ftake my Reputation on the Truth of every
Circumftance.
A 5 Sept.


Sept. 18th, the Fleet confifting of Eight Sail, Store-
Ihips included, failed from St, Helens. Ottober 28th,
anchor’d in the Bay of Madeira. I was then on board
the Tryal, Capt. Murray. Here we wooded and wa-
tered, and took in Wines for the ufe of the Fleet. In
Nov: the Hon. Capt. Murray's Command was trans-
ferred to the Wager , and I was removed with him.
Here Commodore Anfon received Information of a
Squadron of ten Sail of Spanijh Men of War, under
Admiral Pizarro cruifing to the Weftward. On the
aSthcrofs’d the Equino&al ; and, December 19th an-
chor’d at the Ifle of St. Catherines , in Lat. 28. S.
January 18th failed for the River of St. Julians , on
the Coaft of Patagonia. The 2 2d, loft Sight of the
Pearly Capt. Kidd. February 17th, the Pearl re-join-
ed us. During her Abfence Ihe had been chafed by
five Men of War, of Pizarro's Fleet; but throwing
her Boat, frefh Water, and a great Quantity of Stores
over board, (he was thereby greatly lightned, and out-
ran the Enemy. Mean-time Capt. Kidd died, and
Capt. Murray fucceeding him in the Pearl, Capt. Cheap
was appointed Commander of the Wager.
On the 28th, failed from St. Julians *, and March
7th, pafs’d the Streights of La Maire. April 19th,
loft fight of the Commodore. This was a great Mis-
fortune to us, we being at that Time in a very bad
Condition, having loft our Mizen-maft fome Days be-
fore. Here I muft obferve, in Behalf of our Lieu-
tenant, Mr. Beans, who had the Watch that Night,
and has had, fome Reflexions caft on him, for lofing
fight of the Commodore, that I had the Watch with
him that Night, and was moft of the Time on the
Foretop-fail-yard, iu order to take in the Foretop-fail ;
and I could not fee the Commodore : But the Lieute-
nant did often call to know if I could fee Mr. Anfoti s
Lights. The 23d, I narrowly efcaped drowning.
Going
* For what particularly Regards the Fleet from this Time to our
Separation from the Commodore, I refer the Reader to the Accounts
published by the 'Gentlemen of the other Ships, whole Journal*
we.e not loft.


Going up the Fore-lhrouds, I was knock’d down by a
Man falling from the Futtock-lhrouds ; but I lighting
between the Sheet Anchor-flock and the Shrouds, was
preferved, tho’ the other Man was drowned.
We now underflood that the Fleet was to rendez-
vous at the Ifland of N. S. del Secora , in Lat. 45 S;
May 14th, the Straps of the Fore-jeer Blocks unfor-
tunately broke, and the Fore-yard came down about
our Ears : The fame Day alfo we faw Land. Here-
upon the Captain ordered me to get up the Fore-yard
as foon as poflible ; but moft of the People being Tick,
this could not be done very fpeedily; and now a con-
ftant Series of Misfortunes began to fall on us. Firfl,
our Captain had the Mifhap to fall down the After-
ladder, as he was coming forward to fee us get the
Fore-yard up, and diflocated his Shoulder. This Ac-
cident was the more unfortunate, as it happened at a
Jundure, when his Care and Skill, and Authority
were moil wanted. ! Probably, had he not been thus
difab’ed from difcharging the Duties of his Poll, the
Ship had not been lofl ; for not a Man in her ever
doubted his Abilities, both as a Commander and a
Sailor. Befides, his Authority, had he been capable
of ftirring about and exerting himfelf, would have
kept every one to the Duty of his Station, which
might have gone a great way towards preferving the
•Ship. •
May 14th, betwixt four and five o’Clock in the
Morning, the Veflel ftruck. I was then in my Birth
Ihifting my felf; and on feeling the Shock, I ran up
and alked the Mailer what was the Matter. • He an-
fwer’d Nothing ; it was only a great Sea under the
Counter. He had no fooner fpoken thefe Words,
than Ihe ftruck again, with a more dreadful Shock
than Before. All in the Ship were now alarmed, and
running forward to get Hands to wear the Ship, I faw
Breakers to the Leeward ; whereupon I ran aft again,
and told what I had feen, upon which we hauled the
Wind again. The Captain order’d to let go the An-
chor, but the Bite of the Cable being over the Cat-
head, we could not clear the Anchor till it was too
late; for in the mean time the Ship ftruck fo hard that Ihe
broke
to the South-Seas.


broke the Tiller, and an Anchor of 48 Hundred, be-
longing to the Centurion , and which lay in the main
Hatch-way, went through her Bottom. Hereupon,
we were obliged to haul up our Main-fail, and bear
away for the Land, fleering the Veflel by the Braces
and Sheets. But we were unable to make the Shore,
and the Ship had immediately been loft out-right, had
not Providence conduced us betwixt two Rocks, where
the Ship ftuck faft, unable either to proceed or fink,
I now went to the Captain, who was in a miferable
Condition, on account of his diflocated Shoulder ;
and alked him if he would gc alhore, for I was afraid
Ihe would part very foon. His Anfwer was. Go and
fa<ve all the Jick, and don't mind me. He alfo gave Or-
ders for hoifting the Boats out as foon as pofllble ;
and thereupon we all were immediately employed in
getting Things neceflary for our Prefervation, The
Yaul went on Shore firft, and carried as many People
as could get into her. Then the Barge and Cutter went
with as many as would yet go a-lhore.
I obferved that this very Day, the Spirit of Difcord
and Diflention had enter’d the People. When I re-
quired fome of them to return with me in the Yaul,
to fetch fuch Things from the Ship as were neceflary
for every Man, (feeing there was nothing to be got on
this defolate Ifland, for fuch we then guefled, and foon
found it to be,) they plainly anfwer’d, that they would
not go: However, fome of the Petty Officers went
with me, and we inform’d the Captain that if he
pleafed to go a-lhore, the Yaul was ready to carry
him. But he would not for a good while confent to
go, faying. Carry every Body elfe firjl, and afterwards
1 will go. I then informed him that every one that
would go was already on Shore, whereupon the Cap-
tain railed himfelf in his Bed, but not being able to
move along, we helped him into the Boat, and carried
him a-lhore: There was on the Ifland two or three
Huts built by* the Indians , who frequently land on it,
and flay feveral Days. One of thefe was fixed on for
the Captain ; and happy for him it was, that any Ha-
bitation could be had: For in his Condition he had
certainly


certainly loft his Life without fuch a Shelter, as many
of the People afterwards did.
As foon as the Captain got into this Hut, he order’d
me to take the Yaul, and fee if the Men cn board
would come a-lhore. Accordingly I went, but found
them all in fuch Confufion as cannot be imagined by
any who were not Eye-witneffes of it. Some were
fmging Pfalms, others fighting, others fwearing, and
fome lay drunk on the Deck. Seeing them in this
ftrange Diforder, I fpoke not a Word to any Body,but
obferving fome Cafks of Ball and Powder on the Quar-
ter Deck, I began to put them into the Boat; where-
upon two of the Men came to me, crying out. Damn
ye ! you Jhall not have them, for the Ship is loji and it is
ours. A third came with a Bayonet, fwearing he
would kill me ; adding thefe Words, Damn you!
you have carried a ftrait Arm all the Voyage, and you
Jhallfuffer for it. And with that he threw the Bayo-
net at me, but mifs’d his Mark, and I immediately got
into the Yaul, and returned to the Shore,
About the middle of the enfuing Night, when the
Tide and Wind together made a great Sea, and the
Ship waf violently working, the People on board be-
gan to be afraid, expecting every Moment that fhe
would part. At laft they pointed one of the Guns
(a four Pounder, that lay on the Quarter-deck) towards
the Captain’s Hut, and had like to have hit it, which
if they had, it mull infallibly have been beat to
Pieces,and might have proved fatal to thofe within. The
Captain not liking that they fhould fend Cannon Balls
on MelTages to him, order’d me and three others
of the Petty Officers to fetch the People from on
Board. But it was now impoffible for us to get on
board, by reafon of the Mali that lay a long-fide,
and a great Sea ; fo we went back and inform’d the
Captain of thefe Impediments. / cannot help it, repli-
ed he, but Jhould be very glad if they nuere all fafe on
Jhore. So thefe People were left fome Time longer
on board, to continue their outrageous Diforders.
Some of them broke open the Lazaretto, where the
Wine was flowed, fcuttled the Pipes, made themfelves
drunk.
13
to the South-Seas.


drunk, and feveral tumbled into the Water that wa*
in the Ship, and were drowned, which was more owing
to the Liquor within than without, others broke open
the Chefts and Cabbins, and loaded themfelves with
Plunder, which however they were foon forced to re-
linquifh.
Next Day the Captain again ordered the Boat to
go and try to bring the People from on Board; but
when the Petty Officers called for Hands to row the
Boat off to the Ship, the Men refufcd, declaring plain-
ly that they would not go, for the Ship was loft, and
every one was at Liberty to Jhift for himjelf Hereupon
I, being always willing to obey my Captain, attempted
to perfwade the Men, by dint of dry Blows, to go
into the Boat. But tho’ the ftrongeji Arguments of this
Nature, that I could ufe, were in fome Meafure effec-
tual, yet they ferved to exafperate the Men againft me
to that Degree, that I was in Danger of my Life :
But this I never fufpedled, till the Lieutenant, Mr,
Beans, informed me, that the Gunner’s Mate, and one
of the Boatfwain’s Mates were plotting to murder me ;
upon which I took proper Precautions for my own
Security.
Mean time the Captain was taking all polfible Care
to prevent Mutiny, ordering the Officers to difarm the
Seamen as they came a-fhore ; and a Bell Tent was
ere&ed, in which the Arms and Ammunition were
depofited : But this proved of very little Service ; for
the Men went on board in the Night, and again fur-
nifh’d themfelves with both, fo that in a fhort time
they were all in a Capacity of bidding their Officers
Defiance. Thus the Ship being in Effeft entirely loft,
we were involved in a State of Anarchy and Confufion,
which lafted till part of the People went off in the
Long-Boat, and which added not a little to the Hard-
ships we endured on this Ifland,
BOOK
J. ...IV/


BOOK 11,
rfhe Proceedings of the Officers and Crew
from the Lofs oj the Ship y to the De~
parture oj the Long-boat from Wager-
Ifland,
ON the feventh Day after the Ship was loft, we
began to want Proviftons ; but the Weather be-
ing fo bad that we could not work on the Wreck,
moft of us went along Shore, and gathered Shell-fifb,
of which we found a good Quantity.
As foon as the Weather would permit, the Captain
order’d the Boat to the Wreck, and feveral Calks of
Flower with fomeWine were brought off. All this Time
the Captain expreffed the greateft Concern fortheSafety
of the People,and caufed a Store-tent to be made forfe-
curing the Provifions : But to little Purpofe,for fome of
the Men robb’d it every Night. Hereupon the Cap-
tain order’d the Petty Officers to Hand Century at this
Tent, each four Hours at a Time, which was a great
Hard (hip upon us, who were only four, and the
Weather rainy for feveral Weeks without Inter-
miffion.
The Ship’s Company by this Time were formed
into Bodies, and lodged in Tents. The Captain with
fome of his Officers occupied the Hut afore-mention-
ed. The Warrant Officers were in another, and the
Mafter with fome of the Petty-Officers in a third.
Going one Day aboard the Ship, we faw three Ca 2
noes full of Indians making towards ua. We made
Signals to them with our Hats, and thereupon they
came near us without further Hefitation. They had
with them their Captain, or Cajique , as they called him.
I went with them on Shore to our Captain, who
’ , treated
to the South-Seas,


id * A VOYAGE
treated them with great Civility; upon which the next
Day they brought us three Sheep, and a large Quan-
tity of very fine Mufcles : So juft a Senfe of Gratitude
had thefe poor ignorant People, without any other In-
ftru&ion than what Nature gave them : A good Exam'
pie to many Christians ?
Thefe Indians are of a very dark fwarthy Complex-
ion, of a middling Stature ; but extremely courteous
in their Behaviour. Their Cloathing is but thin,
though the Climate is very cold. They only wear a
Clout about their Middle and fomething like a Blanket
which they wear about their Shoulders, having a
Hole to put their Head through ; and this they call
a Punch.
The Time advancing, the Captain grew uneafy at
our Stay here, and would have had the People at-
tempt to go the Rendezvous (which we were now told
was to be at the ifland of Juan Ferdinandex) in or-
der to join the Commodore. But fuch Animofities
were now among the People, both Officers and Sailors,
that it was abfolutely uncertain what might be the
confequence : Many were continually exclaiming
againft the Captain, and threatning the Petty Officers
that flood by him : As for their Reafons for behaving
in this Manner, I could never rightly comprehend
them. In Truth, it muft be owned that my At-
tachment to the Captain was zealous, even to Bigo-
try. At latt all the People of one Tent deferred
us, and rambled whither they plcafed : It was faid
that they had a Defign to blow up the Captain in his
Tent : but this Report was not generally believed,
nor did any Thing of that Sort ever happen.
By the Captain’s Orders we were every Day work-
ing on the Wreck, except when the Weather would
not permit us to go oh Board ; and I am fure if it
had not been for the Captain, many would have pe-
xifhed before they would have given themfelves this
necejfary Trouble, though the Prefervation of their
own Lives, and the Lives of their Friends and Com-
panions depended on it.
June


June 6th, Mr Cozens , my Brother.Midlhipman,
was confined by the Captain, whom he, being drunk
had ufed with fuch indecent Language as the latter
could hardly be expefted to receive without punifhing :
Nevertheless, in the Evening of the fame Day the
Captain ordered him to be releafed. Soon after this,
Mr. Cozens quarrel’d with the Surgeon, whofe Inti-
macy with, and Regard for the Captain was thought
to be the chief caufe of the Midfliipman’s Anger.
They went to blows, but the Surgeon got the better,
and tying the Hands of his Antagonift behind him,
left him to be releafed by the next that came that
Way. At laft this unhappy Gentleman going to the
Store-Tent, where the Purfer was ferving the Provi-
fions, a Quarrel enfued, and the latter took out a
Piftol to fhoot Mr. Cozens, but was prevented by the
Cooper, who ftruck the Piftol afide. The Captain
hearing the Piftol go off, and at the Time the Purfer
crying out Captain Cheap ! Here is Cozens come to
kill us ; he thought that Cozens, had fired the Piftol i
and thereupon taking up another he difcharged it at
Cozens, and mortally wounded him in the Head.
The unfortunate Midfhipman Lnguilhed feveral Days
after, and then died : He was when fober, one of the
beft natur’d Men [ ever knew. Mefs. Cummins and
Bulkeley have brought a heavy charge of cruelty againft
Captain Cheap, giving us to underftand that he would
not allow the Surgeon to drefs Mr. Cozens' s Wound.
This may be true for ought that I can pofitively fay
to the contrary, but fuch a Thing was never intimated
to me, except by their Journal: To which I refer the
Reader for many Occurrences relating to our Voyage
before thofe two Gentlemen and their Aflbciates left
us on this defolate Ifland.
About the End of June, the Carpenter begun to
alter the Long-boat, intending to make her Eleven or
Twelve Foot longer by the Keel ; but this Work
was extreamly protrafted by the Difturbances among
the People : For in (hort our Animofxties and Diffenti-
ons grew every Day worfe and worfe. Some of the Offi-
cers being weary of afting under the Captain’s Com-
mand,


i 8 A VOYAGE
mand, and having the Majority of the People on their
Side, formed the Defign of going through the Streights
of Magellan for the Coail of Brazil , infilling upon it
that this was the only probable Step towards their re-
turning in fafety to England. Thefe Proje&ors drew up
a Writing, fetting forth their Reafons for attempting
to go that Way, rather than to the Commodore ; and
after it was figned by themfelves and their Party, they
laid it before the Captain(whofe Confent to this Projedl
they had in vain foilicited) defiring him alfo to Cgn it.
But this he refufed, telling them, “ Their Scheme was
“ inconfillent with Reafon, and that it was alfiagainft
“ his Honour ever to turn his Back on the Enemy.”
On this all the hjen declared thy would not go to the
Northward, and that in Cafe the Captain fooiild perfifl
in his Refufal to Jign the Paper , he ought to have his
Command taken from him.
And now all the People came armed with their
Chiefs tar the Captain’s Tent, telling him he Jhould no
longer command them, and ufed him fomewhat rudely.
Some Days after, the Captain, feeing that the Car-
penter would not finiffi the Boat, fent for him, and
fome of the Officers, telling them he would go where
they pleafed. Hereupon the Boat was finished, and
Ihortly after launched ; and every Thing was now
made ready for our quitting this Ifland, But flill they
diitrulled the Captain, (who in Truth, did not fincere-
ly intend to go with them) and therefore they deter-
mined to imprilbn him; which they did in a violent
Manner, tying his Hands behind him with a Rope,
and leading him out of his Tent in his Shirt, (for he
was in Bed when they took him) they confined him
in another Tent, in which he remained till the Boat
went off: His Guard confifted of fix Men and one
Officer.
All this Time I never fpoke of thefe Things in
publick, thinking it fomewhat dangerous, as 1 was
looked upon as one of the Captain’s Friends. How-
ever, after he was confined, I v/ent to fpeak with him,
but the Officer of the Guard would not fuffer me to
fpeak to him by myfelf, nor would he let me into the


Tent ’till I was fearched. When I had Admiflion to
the Captain, I told him that I was willing to take my
Chance with him, as I underdood he chofe to remain
on the Ifland after the Boat was gone off; which
Offer the Captain gladly accepted. However as our
new Mailers only propofed to leave the Yaul with us,
which was not large enough to carry us off, I went
and defired them to leave the Barge, whict they re-
fufed, unlefs they ten Men that were in her would
ftay with us: But I could only prevail on three of
them. - ,
OSloher 16th, by our Account (for there was two
Days Diijerence betwixt the Captain’s Account and
that kept by Bulhuley and Cummins and their Party)
the Long-Boat put to Sea, and the Barge with her,
in which I alio fet out as tho’ I would have gone
with them. Thus was Captain Cheap left on this
defolate liland, in a miferable Condition*, with only
a few Friends with him, (whofe Names the Reader
will fee anon) with no other V :iTel than a little Yaul
with her Broadfide out ; and all the Fire-Arms he had
were very much out of Older.
On the 17th, being now out at Sea, I had an Op-
portunity of fpeaking to the People that were with
me in the Barge, and reprefented to them what a
Shame it was to leave their Captain in fuch a Situ-
ation ; and added, “ That if they did get Home,
“ which they could not reafonahly hope to do the
“ Way they were going, they would be hanged for
“ Mutiny. But if, on the other Hand, we ihould go
" back to the Captain, and with him to the North-
“ ward, we had a much better Chance.”
My Difcourfe wrought upon moft of them and
they confented to go back; but at the fame Time
obje&ed to our want of Provisions, and obferved,
that it <would be dangerous to ajk thofe in the Boat for
any.
* For a particular Account of the Captain’s unwlllingnefs to
go in the Boat to the Southward, and the People’s Reafons for not
forcing him along with them, and carrying him to England, as a
Prifoner for murdering Cixtns, fee BnUeley and Cummins' s Ka-
ra the.
19
to the South-Seas.


any, left they Jhould take the Barge from us. How-
ever, as Toon as we came to an Anchor, and went
on board the Boat, it luckily happened that lAr.Bulke-
ley the Gunner, whom we now looked on as Captain,
ordered me to return with the Barge to Wager- l/land
as we called it, and to bring off a Tent belonging to
Capt. Pemberton of the Marines, which he laid he
fhould want to make Sails for the Boat. Hereupon,
determining to let them fee no more of the Barge, I
obferved to the Hon. Mr, Byron , Midfhipman, and
Brother to the Lord Byron, that now was the Time if
he had a Mind to go back to the Captain. This he
immediately refolved to do, but was afraid our new
Chiefs would fufpeft our Intention, and flop our
Voyage : But they did not, and we happily got fafe
to Wager-JJland that Night, where the Captai'n gladly
received us.
Befides, Mr. Byron and myfelf, eight others went
back with us in the Barge, viz. William Harvey,
David Buchly, iVilliam Rojs, Richard Noi'e, Peter
Plajlovj , Jojeph Clinch, Rovjland Cru/fet, and John
Bojman.
When I went on Shore, I afked the Captain what
he would have done with the Barge ; for the
Wind blew very hard, and as /he had no Grapling but
the Ship’s Bell, I was afraid it would not ride her.
And in Cafe fhe fhould be ftove,we fhould then be in a
moft miferable State : However, we were forced to
venture her, having no Remedy in our Power.
This Night the Hon. Mr. Byron and I fupp’d with
Capt. Cheap, Mr. Hamilton Lieutenant of Marines,
and the Surgeon, and having much to talk upon, we
went home to our Tent very late. The next Morning
it blowing fo very hard that we could not go out to Sea
to get Shell-filh, the Captain gave us fome Flower, and
two Pieces of his Pork, and the Day following, it be-
ing moderate Weather, we afked the Captain Leave to
go over to the other Side of the Lagone, which we called
Long-IJland ; and to travel to the Long-boat, which we
knew would be ftill waiting there, upon other Accounts,
befides the expefted Return of the Barge. As our Bu-
finefs with the Long-Boat was to afk for our Share of
Provifions,
A VOYAGE


Proviiions, the Captain readily contented to our going
over. Accordingly we tet out, and after travelling all
Day through Woods and Marte.es, we came to the Vef-
tel in the Evening. We found moftof the People em-
ployed in getting Shell-fite, and among the reft, the new
Commanders NVx .Bulkeley and Mr. Beans ; one of them
afked me, in a furly Manner, Where the Barge was ?
Which I told them ; and at the fame Time defired a
Share of the Provisions for us who chote to ftay with
the Captain, and alfo the few Things I had in the
Boat. No, damn you, it was replied, you Jhall have
nothing except you bring the Barge. Mr. Byron went
on board, and fpoke to the People, but could not pre-
vail on them to give us any thing : On the contrary,
they told us, “ That if we did not return the next
Day with the Barge, they would arm the Cutter and
“ tend her for itHowever,they knew better things ;
for if the Cutter had come, we ihould have endeavour-
ed to have taken her from them. In fhort, not being
able to obtain any Thing from this obftinate Crew, we
went back and told the Captain of our iliSuccefs: To
which he replied, “ Gentlemen, there is no help for
“ it ; but the little Provifions and Cloaths they have
** left me (hall be equally ftiared among us He gave
me three Shirts and two white Waiftcoats, and to the
others in Proportion.
BOOK
21
to the South-Seas.


BOOK 111.
The Adventures and Difreffes of Captain
David Cheap, the Hon. John Byron
and Alexander Campbell, Midffipmen ,
and others , f rom the Time when the
Boat lejt them on the defolate If and,
by them named Wager-Ifland, to their
Departure from thence in the Barge ;
with their Sufferings Ay Sea among
the Indians, till their Arrival at Chili
in New-Spain.
BEING thus abandoned by the Long-boat, and
having but a fmall Stock of Provifions to truft to,
for our future Subfiftence, our Profpeft was now difmal
enough ; for indeed we had nothing but Providence
(without the Appearance of any human Means for our
Deliverance) to depend on.
Soon after the Departure of the Boat, I and fome
Others went over to Long-ljland , to gather Shell-
fifti; but coming home at Night, it blew fo hard at
North, that we could not weather the Point of
Rocks to get into Qheap's-Bay, as we called it, but
were obliged to bear away up the Lagone, where
we found feven of our Men, who had been fet alhore
there for fome Mifdemeanors, and whom the People in
the Boat had left to ftarve ; however, we brought them
to Captain Cheap.
We are now twenty Souls in this Ifland, m. Capt,
Cheap , Lieutenant Hatnilton of Marines ; William Har-
vey, Quarter-mafter ; Walter Elliot, Surgeon ; the Hon.
Johnßyron, Midfliipman; AlexanderCampbel, ditto; Rofs,
ditto ; Noble, ditto ; Peter Plajiov. >, Captain’s Steward;
David


David Bulkeley, fecond Gunner ; John Bofman, Sea-
man ; Dennis O'Lare, ditto; Ridvuood, Boatfwain’s Yeo-
man ; Crofslet , Corporal of Marines ; Hales, Hertford,
Smith, Clinch, Demand, and CreJJvjick, all Mariners, Our
two Veffeis, viz. the Barge and Yaul, we hauled up to
High-water Mark, both greatly wanting to be repaired.
NeceJJity has no Lava, fays the old Proverb, and this wc
now experienced ; for we all became Workmen and
Carpenters, Nor was Captain Cheap himfclf (who,
from the Lofs of the Ship till this Time, had hardly
ever ftirred out of his Hut) an idle Spectator of our
Labours. He now became very brilk, went about eve-
ry where to get Wood and Water, made Fires, and
proved an excellent Cook. I had the Honour **o fup
with him one Night, when we had a Slaugh-cake of
his making, the bell I ever eat on the Ifland, This
the Reader will doubtiefs think a ftrange fort of Food:
It was nothing but Water and Flour made into a Batter,
and mixed with a fmall Sea-weed [i.e, the Slaugh),which
grows on the fubmarine Rocks; and the whole is fried
with Pork-flulh. This poor Stuff even the Captain
was forced to content himfelf with f
All the Month of November the Weather was fo ve-
ry bad that we could feldom get any Shell-filh, on
which lay our chief Dependance for Subfiftence. When
the Captain’s Provihons were gone, we had nothing
but Slaugh fry’d with Tallow Candles, which we found
along fliore, whither they were driven from the Wreck ;
and hereupon we became fo weak, as hardly to be
able to walk.
At length two Indian Canoes came, but they brought
nothing with them except a few Dogs, fome of which
we killed and eat. The Weather being fo bad, in-
creafed our Misfortune, becaufe the Indians could nei-
ther catch Seal, nor dive for Mufcles, which is all they
have to live on. Next Day they went away, and we
faw no more of them for upwards of a Month after-
wards.
Mean time we lived in the utmoft Neceffity : Our
chief Dependance was upon the Sea Fowl, of which
we


14 -A VOYAGE
we fhot now and then a few, going out in the Yaul
for this Purpofe,
Soon after the Indians left us, three of our Company
could not refill the Temptation of breaking open the
Captain’s Store-tent, in which he had fayed fome Flour,
fearing it would be more wanted when we fhould put
out to Sea, and might not be able to reach the Shore
to get Shell-filh, as we now fometimes could, though
but in fmall Quantities. Some of this Flour was taken
by the three Men who broke open the Tent ; their
Names were Peter Plajio'w, John Rid'wood, and Ronv-
land Crejpwick. They were difcovered by a little of
the Flour leaving white Marks in their Tent, The
Captain ordered them to be confined in another Hut,
till they would confefs, which they foon did ; but in
the Night Plajio'w made his Efcape, and hid himfelf
in the Woods. The next Day Rid'wocd and Crejpwick
were tied to a Tree, fevereiy whipped, and ordered to
Long-IJland ; but CreJJ'wick escaping, Rid'wood alone was
fent thither in the Barge, and left by himfelf on that
Ifland, where in a fhort Time he miferably perifhed.
December the third being a fine Day, with a foutherly
Wind, the Captain ordered me off to the Wreck, to
fee if I could find any thing ; and I had the good For-
tune to take up three Cafks of very fine Beef. When
I returned afhore with this welcome Cargo, Captain
Cheap, Mr. Hamilton, the Hon. Mr. Byron, and the
Surgeon, were Handing on the Beach ; and the Captain
faid, “Gentlemen, remember this Day is the third of
“ December, that you may be able to fwear to it, if
*< you Ihould be called for ; By my InftrufHons, we are
*t t 0 be paid as long as we can take any thing from
“ the Wreck.”—However, I did not find it fo, being
paid only to the Time when the Ship was call away.
As foon as we had got the Meat afhore, the Capt.
ordered me to divide it equally to every Man ; which I
did ; and as I had always the Honour to mefs with Mr.
Byron, fo he and I took up our Meat together,which, if
I remember right, came to fifty-three Pieces of Beef ;
fo that we lived very well during the Remainder of the
thne


time we ftaid on the Ifland, and began to grow ftrong
again with this good Englijh Provifion.
One Method of cooking, and the Manner in which
we eat our Beef was this ; we fried the Fat with Slaugh
and other Sea-weed, and this Compofition ferved us
for Bread to our Meat. There grows upon this Ifland
a Sort of wild Purflain, which we boiled, and this for
fome time ferved us for Cabbage to our Beef; but as
it had a very bad Effeft upon us,.purging us to a moll
defperate Degree, we were obliged to leave it off,, tho’
this Herb was our onlyßefource in bad Weather, when
we could get no Shell-fifh.
At length the People began to grow impatient for
their Departure from this Ifland, but the Weather con-
tinuing hill fo very bad that it would have been down-
right Madnefs to put to Sea (unlefs we could have
done it in a good Ship) the Captain therefore per-
fwaded them to flay, from time to time, till it fhould
fettle ; and at laft, on the fifteenth of December , in
the Morning, the People came to me, and defired me
to go to the Captain, and to let him know it was a very
fine Day, and the Wind fair for running over the Bay.
Accordingly we went to the Captain, and reported to
him what they faid. Hereupon he took me up to the
Top of a Hill, called by us Mount Mifery, and through
a Perfpedfive fhewed me that the Sea was very rough
in the Horizon, — While the Captain and I were here,
he faid to me, “ Camp l ell, I am very much obliged
“ to you for your good Behaviour to me, and your
“ Zeal for his Mijelly’s Service; and depend upon it,
** if it pleafe God to fend us home, as I hope he will,
“ I will do all that lies in my Power for your Pre-
“ ferment.”- But, to my great Misfortune, he has
adled quite a contrary Part, having done all that lay
in his Power to prevent my Preferment.
When we returned from Mtunt AUfiery, the People
afked the Captain, if they fhouid launch the Boat j to
which he replied, “ With all my Heart, if you will;
“ but you’ll find a great Sea without.” This was a-
bout Nine o’clock in the Forenoon : We immediately
launched both Boats, got every thing we had into them,
B and


and then put to Sea. The Captain, with the honour-
able Mr. Byron , and the Surgeon, were in the Barge,
with eight Men to row ; Mr. Hamilton and myfelf
were in the Yaul, and we had fix Men to row.
We had not failed above an Hour and a half, when
it began to blow hard, and the Wind Ihifted more to the
Weflward, fo that we were obliged to bear away right
before it. The Seas were now fo rough that we every
Inftant expedled to go to the Bottom j to avoid which
as far as lay in our Power, we flung over-board almoft
every thing we had, even the Beef which we had ta-
ken from the Wreck, notwithftanding we knew not
where to get a Bit more to fave us from perifliing
through Hunger, the moll miferable of all Deaths; But
this we did to avoid an immediate Death, though of
a lefs (hocking Nature ; trufting to God for our future
Prefervacion. Our Situation was the more defperate,
as we were running (we knew not whither) on a Lee-
fhore in two open Boats, with a terrible Gale of Wind,
a great Sea, and Night coming on. Mr. Hamilton and
I were obliged to fet our Backs againft the Stern of the
Veflel, to keep the Seas out of her, though we did not
think any thing lefs than a Miracle could preferve us
from Deftrudtion.
We did not all this time fee the Barge, the Sea
running fo high ; in (hort it is impofllble to conceive
how a Boat could live in fuch Weather. But it pleafed
God, as we advanced on the Lee (hore, looking every
Moment when we (hould ftrike againft the Rocks, and
while every Man was preparing for another World,
as well as he could, we faw an Opening in the Rock,
which we flood for, and found an Inlet through the
Mountains, but fo narrow that we could hardly row
with our Oars. The Minute we entered this Inlet, we.
found ourfelves in a perfedl Calm, and were therefore
obliged to row. Soon after, through the Providence of
the Almighty, the Barge came to the fame Place. None
but thofe who have been in the like Circumftances can
conceive our Joy on fo happy a Meeting, after fuch
dreadful Dangers pad : But, alas [ this is only a Sha-
dow or Type of what \ye are yet to experience.
There


There are many Inlets through the Mountains we
are now among, but we durk not venture through, not
having any Compafs; and thefe vaft Mountains
being fo high, and furrounding us on all Sides, we could
not fo much as fee the Sun to keer by.
We had not proceeded far up the above mentioned
Inlet e’er we landed, and went in Search of a Place
proper for making a Fire, but could hardly find one, the
Rocks being fo high and perpendicular. At lak, with
a great deal of Trouble, we found a hollow Place,
where we lay all Night; We had for our Bedding only
hard Rocks, and thofe who did not like a Bed of this
fort, were forced to take up with a watry one. The
Heavens were our Canopy, and the only Covering we
had. When on Wager-lfland our Cafe was bad enough,
but ’tis now much worfe.There we found, or made Huts,
which we lived in, fecure from the Rigour of the Wea-
ther ; but here we have no other Houfe than the wide
World. The Weather was fo terribly cold, and it
froze fo hard, that by Morning feveral of us were almofl
dead. We were up early, and the Captain feeing the
Weather appeared fomewhat more favourable, ordered
every Man to the Boats, in order to put to Sea again;
but though the Storm was much abated, we found fuch
a great Sea, that we could hardly pull out; and when
we did get out to Sea, we found the Wind contrary ;
fo that all this Day we plied with the Oars.
Though there was a very great Sea in the Evening,
we rowed for the Shore among fome fmall Iflands, in
order to flicker ourfelves; but here we found but very
indifferent Accommodations, the Iflands being low, and
the Ground all fwamp. It kill raining very hard, the
Captain ordered the Barge’s Main-fail on fhore to make
a Tent of, but this was of very little Service to us. The
People flickered themfelves under a great Tree ; and
making a good Fire, dried one Side while the other
was wetting. For Eatables, this Place produced us a
Sea weed, which we called Sea-tangle ; it grows only
on the funken Rocks, and fome of it is very large.
The next Day being kill rainy, the People were all
employed in looking for Food, except tw'o Marines who
were lying in their Wigwham. The Captain ordering
B 2 me
27
to the South-Seas.


me to fee after them, I accordingly went, and found
them lying in the wet, and almoft dead with cold :
However I was obliged to beat them out to feek forSub-
fiftence for themfelves.
At this Time the Captain, Mr. Hamilton , the Hon.
Mr. Byron, Mr. Elliot the Surgeon, and my felf mefs’d
together, and we were all employed in providing
Victuals and other Neceflaries for ourfelves. Mr. Ha-
milton and I fetch’d Wood from the other Side of
the Illand, which coft us no little Trouble ; and Mr.
Byron was employed in cutting it: The Sugeon (hot
a wild Goofe, and the Captain made a Fire and cook-
ed it.
Our Stay here lafled three Days, the Weather being
all the while fo bad that we could not put to Sea. The
Bay here we called Swamp-Bay, becaufe all the Iflands
about it were mere Swamp. When we left this Place,
we fleered away Northward to the other Side of the
Bay ; and as we were rowing over it, we difeovered
an Opening between the High-land and a Point of
Low-land, which we conjedured was an 'flrnd. Be-
. ing always willing to keep from the Coaft as far as we
could, we fleer’d for this Opening ; and when we
came there we found a very fine Bay, down which we
rowed all this Day till we came to the End of it,
when to our Sorrow we found ourfelves obliged to
come all the Way back.
We lay the next Night in a little Cove very conve-
nient for the Boats, but not for us ; for here we could
procure nothing to eat, and Victuals was what we now
wanted moft. In this Cove there is a red Wood fome-
what like Iron Wood, which burnt very well thb’
Green : We called this Place Bed-wood Cove.
Next Day we put to Sea, and about Nine o’Clock
were favoured with a fine Gale at South-w eft, as near
as we could guefs, our Courfes being North-eaft or near
it. The Land a-head was very high, and there was
an Opening between it and the Mountains, which
we fleer’d for. The Captain ordered me to go a-head
with the Yaul, to fee if there was any Paflage between
the above High -land and the Continent; I did fo, and
found
28
A VOYAGE


found an Ifland which we called the Duke of Montrofs
If and. Here we all went alhore, and made a Fire
upon a ftony Beach, in order to drefs Supper, This is
the fixth or feventh Day fmce we left Wager ■lf and,
and the Captain had expended all the Flour which
he had faved for his Sea-flore, We had a tolerable
good Night, clear Weather *, and could fee a great
Way. As there was a large Bay to the North of us,
and very Low-land, fo we were in Hopes that the
word of our Voyage was over ; for we had then come
forty Leagues to the Northward from Wager-Ifand.
We flatter’d ourfelves that the Ifland in the Offing
might be the Ifland of N. S. del Secora, in Lat. 45,
but it proved otherwife to our great Sorrow and Dif-
appointment.
Next Morning we left Montrofs-Jfand , it being a
pretty good Day, and the Weather calm, though we
had a great Sea from the South-wefhvard. We rowed
to the Bottom of the Bay above-mentioned, hoping
to find fome Inlet, but could not; fo w ere obliged to
return and work along the Shore to the Wefhvard.
But the Wind fpringing up at North, and being off
Shore in fmooth Water, we then failed along Shore till
we came to a Head-land nine or ten Leagues from
Montrofs-Ifand. Endeavouring to double this Head-
land, we difeovered a great Bay opening to the North-
ward, but the Night being fo nigh, and the Wind
contrary, we were obliged to put back into a Cove
juft by the Head-land,
This Day as we w'ere failing along Shore, Mr Ha-
nt’kon ihot a Shage, which gave rife to great Animo-
fities among us. We were not to eat any thing but
what was equally fliared among ' us who eat together,
•viz. The Captain, Mr. Byron , Mr. Elliot , Mr. Ha-
milton, and myfelf. But this Night Mr. Hamilton and
I being by ourfelves, we drefs’d the Shage which he
had killed, and eat it for Supper, not thinkfhg fuch
a Trifle would have given Umbrage to any. But the
B 3 next
* But our Lodging was hard, be : ng forced to lie all Night On
the Beach, to which the Captain gave the Name of Stonc-£eaek,
to the South-Seas.


next Morning by Break of Day we faw the Barg.e
under Way, going to Sea without faying any thing to
us. However as we were ready (for we lay in our
Boat all Night, there being no Place on Shore to lie
on) we got up our Anchor, and went after them.
This Day the Wind being contrary, we rowed till
Night, and then could find no Harbour to put into;
fo we put into a fandy Bay , in which we were forced
to lie till Morning upon our Oars. It was a terrible
Night, the Wind and Rain were both violent; and
jbefides, (which made our Cafe the more deplorable)
we were in great want of Provifions: However we
got a few Shell-filh, and a fmall Quantity of Tangle.
Next Day, being (by our Account) Chrijimas Day,
1741, we weighed Anchor in the Morning, and the
Weather being calm, we rowed over this Bay to a
Head-land about eight or nine Leagues to the Weft-
ward of us. At Noon w e feafted ourfelves with fome
Tangle and Adam's Wine, in which we drank the
King’s Health. In the Evening we arrived at the
Head land, and as we were going in, the Captain
called to me to go and look for a Place to anchor the
Boat at, which 1 did immediately. Near the Shore I
found a fine fandy Bay, which I fleer’d for, thinking
it would be a very good Place to land at, but I found
the contrary ; for an unexpe&ed Breaker drove the
Yaul afnore. We all got out and thought to launch
her, but the next Sea fill’d her full, and drove her
upon the Beach. Being unable to launch her in this
Condition, we took every Thing out of her, and then
happily got her a-float, and thanks be to God for it;
for if we could not have launched her, we muft have
Raid there, the Barge all this while never coming near
us, but went to anotner Bay more to the Northward,
Mean time we in the Yaul were in a moil miferable
Condition, having nothing to eat or drink, and all our
Rags oh Cloaths quite wet; and when we went to
the Barge, thinking they would offer us a dry Shirr,
or a Pair of Stockings, we found ourfelves woefully
miftaken, We afked them for a little frefh Water,
knowing very well that they had fome, but they told
ua


us they had none. We then defired the Captain to
let us go up to fee if we could find any Place where
we could make a Fire to dry ourfelves by. We had
his Leave, but having a Point of Land to go round,
and the Wind blowing very hard, we were forced to
go back to the Barge and lie (trembling with Cold and
Hunger) in the Bay all Night.
Next Day both our Boats weighed Anchor, but the
Weather being fo bad that we couM not get out to
Sea, we rowed down the Bay in Hopes of finding
fomething to eat; but not fucceeding, we returned to
the Place where we lay the Night before, and there
going afhore, found fome Shell-filh and Tangle.
Next Morning we weighed to go round the Cape,
which \yas the laft we could fee, and which likewife
proved the worft. Sailing along Shore, we doubled
one of the Head-lands, but the Wind blowing ex-
tremely hard, obliged us to put back for the Bay, in
which we lay the preceding Night ; but the Night
came upon us before we could reach the Bay, and
forced us to lie all Night on our Oars. Next Day
the Weather continuing very bad, we were laid up,
and all Hands were employed in looking for Provi-
fions, of which we found but very little here: The
Sca-weeds called by us Slaugb and Tangle , were all
the Viduals we could get.
As we were fome Time detained here by the bad
Weather, and being forced up to the Head of the Bay
in Search of Provilions, we met with fine Lagones,
found Plenty of Muicles, and killed fome Seal, fo that
we had now a Sea-ftock fiifficient, to lait us while we
try’d to double the Cape in order to proceed to the
Northward. This Cape is called by the Spaniards
Cape Monter t> eas Monter ; for it confilts of three
Head-lands of equal Height. When we came to the
firll of thele Head-lands, we found the Wind right
againft us; whereupon we took down our Malls, and
rowed till we puffed the lecond. But now the Wind
and Tide running llrong, made a Sea worfe than the
Race of Portland ; and Night coming on, and finding
no Harbour to put into, we were forced back to our for-
mer Bay. B 4 Next
31
to the South-S£ as.


Next Day the Weather continuing fo bad as to pre-
vent our going to Sea, all Hands went afhore to get
Provilion, except two Men left in each Boat to take
care of them.
This Day we killed a young Seal, drefled it for
Dinner, and furely no Lamb was ever to be compared
with it. After Dinner Mr. Hamilton and I went out
with our Guns, to fee if we could fhoot any thing.
He went one Way and I another; and as I came
back I faw the Boats riding at a grapling; but the
Wind Ihifting in an Inftant, from the Northward to
the Southward, made a great Sea tumble into the Bay
in which the Boats rode, and began to break without
the Boats, and the third Breaker that came filled the
Yaul full and funk her. The two Men in her were
Marines; one of them was drowned, but the other
I faved by hauling him out of the Sea.
The Lofs of the Yaul was a great Misfortune to
us w’ho belonged to her (being feven in Number) all
our Cloaths, Arms, &c. being 101 l with her. As the
Barge was not capable of carrying both us and her
ov. n Comapny, being in all feventeen Men, it was de-
termined to leave four of the Marines on this defo-
late Place, This was a melancholy thing, but Necef-
fity compelled us to it: And as we were obliged to
leave fome behind us, the Marines were fixed on, as
not being of any Service on board What made the
Cafe of thefe poor Men the more deplorable, was the
Place being dellitute of Seal, Shell-filh, or any thing
they could poffibly live upon. The Captain left them
Arms, Ammunition, a frying Pan, and feveral other
Necelfaries.
This difmal Affair concluded, the reft of us went
with the Barge to try the aforefaid Cape again ; and
when w'e departed the four poor W retches flood on
the Beach, gave us three Cheers and cry’d, Gon bleft
the King ! Our Hearts melted with Compaffion for
them, but there was no helping their Misfortune.
Their Names were Smith , Hobbs, Htrtford, and Ler-
poral Crojiltt .
Wheij
A VOYAGE


When we got to the Cape, we found ourfelves the
the third Time dilappointed there -, the Wind being
always from the North to the Weft, with fuch a ter-
rible great Sea, that it was impofftble for any open
Boat to get round: c o we were obliged to return to
Marine's Bay, as we called it, on account of the four
Men left there.
All that Night we were obliged to lie on our Oars,
for it was fo dark that we durft not attempt to go
alhore, efpecially in the rough State the Sea was in,
which would greatly have hazarded the lofs of the
Barge alfo, and then we muft all have infallibly pe-
riftied.
It is now fix Weeks fince we left Wager-lfland,
during which our chief Subfiftence has been drawn
from under the Stones at low Water •, and we have
been every Day obliged to remove from Place to Place
to gather Shell-fifh. The lofs of the Yaul was the
more unfortunate to us who belonged to her, as there-
in we loft all the poor Cloaths we had, except what
we happened at that time to have on our Backs. All
the Cloaths I had now left, were an old ohirt, one
Pair of Cloth Breeches, one Waiftcoat, and an old
Hat, but neither Shoe nor Stocking.
On the twenty ninth of Jan> ary, fome of the People
declared againft making a frelh Trial to go round the
Cape, and infilled on returning to Wage> IJland;
others were for leaving the Barge, and attempting to
travel over Land, which was the maddeft thought
imaginable, it being impofllble to travel in this wretch-
ed Part of the American Continent. Por on the Coatl
Side it is all Wood and Swamp, fo that if a Man
fhould happen to fall, he would be in great Danger
of drowning.
At laft all agreed to go back to Wager If.and, tho’
we had now loft all Hopes of ever re-vifiting our Na-
tive Country, all we expended being to die at Wager
If and, looking on that Place, which we had been fo
much ufed to, as a kind of Home.
Before we fet out we killed fome Seal for our Voy-
age. As we came by the Place where we left the four
B 5 Marines,


Marines, we refolved to go and bring them off: For we
confidered that if the Boat funk, we then fhould be free
from the miferable Life we led, and die all together.
But alas f all we could find of them, or belonging to
them, was one Mufket and their Ammunition ; and we
doubted not but had ’ere now perifhed by
fome Means or other. Here it was that I eat the
Liver of a Seal which we killed as fhe was going to
whelp ; but it threw me into a Fever, which occafion-
ed all my Skin to come off from Head to Foot.
Putting to Sea from Marine's Bay, we rowed away
for the Head-land that we left on Chriftmas Day ; but
it being calm all the Day, it was Night before we
could get into the Cove; and then we were obliged to
lie all Night upon our Oars, keeping the Boat’s Head
out to the Sea, for it both rained and blew very hard.
Next Day we fet out for Montrofs IJland, but as foon
as we opened the Head-land that lay to the Weftward
of us, the Veffel almofl over-fet, and filled fo faft
with Water, that we were forced to return to the
Head-land, and put into the Cove, which as I have
before obferved, we called Stone Cove. There we lay
Weather-bound for two Days, after which we again
fct out for Montrofs IJland; but could not yet fetch it,
and were obliged to put into another Harbour. While
we lay in this Harbour, I went on Shore, and being
very weak, my Foot flip’d fo that I fell from one Rock
.to another, then into the Water, and was almofl
drowned, being ftun’d with the Fall from the Rocks.
Having lain here one Day, we again put to Sea,
rowing to Windward, with the Wind at North, in
order to get to Montrofs IJland. All this while we had
nothing to eat but Seal, which was almoft rotten, and
we could get no Slaugh, fo that we were in very great
Diflrefs. It pleafed God that the next Night brought
us to Montrofs IJland, which was one of the beft we
could find in this Part of the World, though it pro-
duced nothing to eat, except a Berry which tailed
like a Goofeberry ; but it was black, and grew on a
Bufh like a Thorn,
Her®


to the South-Seas.'
Here we (laid Tome time, the Weather being exceed-
ing bad, and we had far to go without any Harbour
in the Way : And even when we did put to Sea, the
Wind blew fo hard, that we were forced to put back
to the fame.lfland we came from. Next Day we again
put to Sea, with Wind and Rain pretty moderate.
But we had not been long out e’er it began .to blow
hard, and was fo thick that we could not fee whither
we were fleering, till we heard the Breakers on the
Shore, and in a little time could fee them white all
around us. We were then obliged to haul aft the
Sheet, and ftand off the Shore, which we happily,
and I might alfo fay miraculoufly cleared : For who
could imagine that any Boat could carry fo much Sail
in fuch a Storm ?
At laft it pieafed God that we got fafe into Redwood
Cove ; but being ftraitned for want of Provifions,
were obliged to put to Sea the next Day, though the
Weather was ftill exceeding bad. We were all Day pul-
ling from this Cove to the next Ifland, at which we
arrived before Night, and every one went out to ga-
ther Shell-fifh.
At this time Mr. Byron, Mr. Hamilton , and I eat
together, and when we came on Shore I went with
the former to gather Fifh, but Mr. Hamilton being fickf
ftaid at Home to make a half Wigwham. This fort of
Wigwham (or Indian Houfe) confifts of three Arches
about a Yard and a half high, and two Yards wide,
cover’d with Bufhes, or whatever can be got for Thatch,
We made a Fire at the Door-place, or Broad-fide, but
it proved of no Ufe, for the Smoak would not fuffer
us to tarry in the Wigwham ; fo we called this Place
Smoak Cove.
Here it was that I was obliged to eat my Shoes;
they were of Seal-fkin, and were at that time a very
great Dainty. We found here an Indian Canoe bv her-
felf, which we thought would be very ferviceable to
us, as a Fifliing-veflel, when we got to Wager IJland ;
She was eafily launched and hauled up, fo that we
could fave the Barge by laying her by while we ufed
the


the Canoe : We put two Hands into her, and towed
her aftern of the Barge.
When we fet out from Smoak Cove, the Weather
was £ar with little Wind, which obliged us to row all
the Way ; and it pleafed God we got fafe into Cheap's
Bay the fame Day, about five or fix o’Clock in the
Afternoon. We were all in a ftarved Condition, ha-
ving eat nothing for three Days but Tangle and other
Sea weeds. After landing we moored the Barge with
\her Grapling to the Sea, and Stern fall to the Land.
Going up to the Huts which we left two Months be-
fore, we found one of them nailed up, and were o-
bliged to break open the Door to get in. It appeared
that the Indians had been there, by that
were in the Hut, particularly, a Quantity of Iron and
other Materials which we knew they had taken from
the Wreck of our unfortunate Ship. As the Indians
hereabouts know nothing of Iron, and fet no Value
on it, we conjedlured that thofe who had been here
.traded with the Spaniards.
We found fome Seal among th« Bulhes, which the
Indians had thrown away, for it was fo rotten, that
none but Men in our Condition could have born the
Smell of it; we parted it equally among us, eat it all
and gave Thanks to Almighty God for his pro-
vidential Care of us hitherto.
AVe ftaid here fifteen Days before any of the Indians
came to the Ifland. Mean time we endured the great-
eft Hardlhips imaginable, the Weather being fo bad,
that we could neither get Shell-filh nor Sea-weeds.
In the Interim fome Differences happened between
the Captain, Mr. Byron, Lieutenant Hamilton, and
myfelf. There had been fome Mifunderltanding a -
mong us ever fince Chrijimas Day ; This being the
twelfth of February by our Account. On this Day
Mr. ham it on walking along Shore, difeovered feveral
Pieces of Beef walking in the Sea, and brought fome
of them Home to Mr. Byron and myfelf, his Mefs-
xnates. Hereupon I went with Mr. Byron, and we
took up feveral Pieces more. The fame Night we
silked the Captain for his frying Pan to melt down the
fat,
€ A VOYAGE


Fat, in order to preferve it for frying of Slaugh or any
thing elfe. When we carried it home, with one half
of the Fat we had found, the Captain would not re-
ceive the Fat,
Soon after this Affair fome Indians came with two
Canoes, and in one of them was a Native of the
Ifland of Chileva, who could fpeak a little Spani/h.
The Surgeon could fpeak it likewife, and he afked the
Indian if he would carry us to Chileva in the Barge,
telling him that he fhould have her for his Trouble,
with all that was in her, as foon as we came there.
The Indian confenting, we immediately fell to pro-
viding for the Voyage; and were foon ready, for
God knows we had neither Vi&uals nor Cloathing to
trouble ourfelves with.
March 6, 1741-2, we all, except one Marine, em-
barked in the Barge with the Indian for our Pilot.
This Marine, when we were going on board, came
upon the Beach and ftole a great Coat belonging to
one of the Men; which done he hid himfelf in the
Woods, fo that we could not find him, nor had we
ever any Account of him afterwards.
And now high Words arofe between the Captain and
Mr. Hamilton , concerning the fat Beef he had found
fome Days before ; and the Difference arofe to fuch a
Pitch, f hat the Captain threatned to leave the Lieute-
nant on the Ifland. After this they did not fpeak to
each other for a long 1 ime.
The firft Night of this our new Voyage, we lay at
an Ifland which we called Sheep- IJland, from three
Sheep which the Indians formerly brought from it, and
prefented to the Captain. Next Day the Wind came
to the South, and we ran to the Weftward of Mon-
trofs llland. This Night we lay on our Oars, for we
could not find an Harbour for the Boat : All this while
we were in great Want of Provifions. On the Mor-
row we went to the Bottom of a great Bay, where we
found our Indian s Hut and his Wife and two Children.
Here we flaid two or three Days, and then fet out
with our Guide, his Wife, Children, and another In-
dian, a young Fellow, who was either his Servant, or
Partner


Partner in the Canoe. He carried us to the Mouth of
a River, which we were to go up, but this was found
impoffible, the Stream was fo rapid. In this River we
were pulling and hauling from eight o’clock in the
Morning till fix in the Afternoon. When we came
out, we were almoft dead with Fatigue and Want of
Suftenance ; and John Bojman, Seaman, one of the
llrongeft Men in the Boat, died this Evening, being
the third Day fince we left the Indian % Hut, and in
the Interim had nothing to eat but a little boiled
Tangle.
This Evening we had for Supper fome wild Purflain,
boiled with fmall Mufcles. As 1 was lying by the Fire,
I heard the People fay, that it would be well done to
go off, and leave the Captain behind for his Cruelty :
For this Day, as we lay in the River, and were all
faint for Want of Food, he took out, before us all, a
great Piece of boiled Seal with Tangle, and he and the
Surgeon eat it, without offering a Bit to any one of
us, though he knew that poor Bofman perifhed merely
for want of fomething to eat.
The next Day I acquainted Captain Cheap, with the
Murmurs among the People, and that Mr. Hamilton
alfo heard what they faid, at leaft he might have heard
them if he was not afleep, being as near to them as I
was. Upon this the Captain called Mr. Hamilton
afide, and taxed him with confpiring to take the Com-
mand from him. This Day the Indian with his Wife
and Children, went out in their Canoe to get fome Seal,
for we had nothing to eat ; but at the fame Time he
left us the Indian his Partner, to carry us to a Place
where we might get fome Shell fifh. As foon as we
got thither every one went along Shore, except Mr.
Elliot the Surgeon, who was very ill. The Men got
back to the Boat before the Officers, and Mr. Elliot ,
defired them to go off a little, and try if they could
fhoot him a Gull. Hereupon they all, being fix in (
Number, got into the Barge, taking the young Indian
with them for their Guide; and we never law them
again, nor could we conceive whither it vvas that they
thought proper to convey themfelves,
1 leave


I leave the Reader to imagine what a Condition we
five poor Souls were now in ! The Country was all
Rocks and Woods, a mere Defart, affording us no
better Houle or Habitation than the Shade of a Tree.
Nor had we one Morfel of Victuals; no Arms, nor
Ammunition, nor Fire, nor Cloathing, except the few
wretched Rags on our Backs. For my own Part,
indeed, I loft very little by the Departure of the
Barge, all that I had to lofe being already gone into
the Yaul.
In this miferablc State we were comforting one ano-
ther in the bell Manner we could, when we faw a Boat at
a great Diftance, going over to the eaftern Shore. We
firft made Signals to her with our Hats, then tied a
Handkerchief to a long Stick, and waved it in the
Air till they faw us, and made for the Place where
we were ; but not being able to make the Land any
where near us, on account of the great Sea which
then ran on the Beach, they put alhore about two
Miles to the Weftward of us. Upon this the Captain
and Mr. Byron went to fee what they were, and found
’em to be the Indian and his Wife who had left us fome
Days before, to go in fearch of Provifions for us.
Thefe poor honeft Creatures were terribly afraid
that we would kill them, as they fufpedled that the
Men who had ran away with the Barge, had ferved
or would ferve the young Indian they carried off with
them : They made grievous Lamentations for their
Partner, and it was with great Difficulty that we
quieted them by Affuraces that no Harm would hap-
pen to him. At length they were prevailed with to
haul their Canoe over Land, and put her into a Bay
on the other Side of the Ifland j from whence the
Captain and Mr. Byron went with them by Sea to
another Point'of the Ifland, whither the other three
of us whom the Barge had left, viz. Mr. Hamilton,
Mr. Elliot, and myfelf, went alfo, and ftaid fifteen
Days, the Indian expecting to be joned there by fome
Other Indians.
Mean time our Indian and his Wife entirely main-
tained us, tho’ upon very fliort Allowance. The
Woman


40 A VOYAGE
Woman being an excellent Diver, went every Day
at low Water, and dived for Sea-eggs. On thefe we
fubfifted during the aforefaid fifteen Days, but being
narrowly Hinted as to the Number of our Eggs,
we were all the while at Death’s Door, for want of
Food.
The Surgeon’s Illnefs increafing, he fent for me,
and told me that all he had he would leave to me ;
but having neither Pen nor Ink, his Will was not
ftrong enough to fecure to me any thing but his
Watch, and even this I was afterwards forced to give
away, when a Prifoner among the Spaniards,
At laft the expedled Indians came, and brought a
little Seal with them ; and, two Days after, they fent
two Canoes with young Men in them to catch Seal
and Sea-fowl. Thefe Canoes only ftaid away one
Night, and returned loaden with Seal and above
three hundred Sea-fowls ; fo we now lived very well,
till all.was eaten up ; for it is their Way never to lay
in frelh Provifiom till their laft Supply is all gone :
But we durft not find the leaft Fault with their con-
du£l, they looking upon themfelves as our Mailers,
and we finding ourfelves obliged to fubmit to them in
all Things.
All the Meat thefe Indians have is Seal, Shell filh,
and fometimes white Filh and Sea-Fowl. They have
fhort Nets, with which eight or ten of them at a time
go a filhing. They Hand almoft up to their Shoulders
in the Water, with their Nets extended, two Men to
a Net ; in one Hand they have a Ihort Battoon, with
which, as the Filh jump, they knock them down, and
then with the other Hand receive them into the Net :
Moreover they have Dogs which they train up to go
into the Water, and therein bark till they fcare the
Filh into the Nets. They have alfo darts made of
Seal’s Bones, with which they often ftrike the Filh.
Their Way of catching Seal is comical enough.
They go in their Canoes along Shore, and when they
find that the Creatures are alhore, they go up into the
Hills, and then come down behind the Seals (which are
commonly very numerous in thefe Parts), and vVith a
long


long Club knock the Animals on the Head. They do
not care to come before the Seal, and attack him Face
to Face, for thefe Creatures are very bold, and will fight
defperately ; but it is eafy to avoid them ; for having
no Legs, they cannot readily wheel round to defend
themfelves in Flank and Rear: but they can turn about
with great Agility in the Water. When the Indians have
killed the Seal, they cut him up in great Pieces, which
they carry about with them in their Canoes. Another
Method of theirs to catch this Animal, is as follows:
They have a round Net made of Seal fkin, which
they fatten to a Hoop, and this Net draws in the Mouth
with a very long Rope, made alfo of Seal fkin, and one
End of the Rope fattened on (hore. Wlthjthis Hoop
an Indian goes into the Water, till he comes to the
Place where the Seal lies, and holds the Hoop up before
him ; at the fame time another Man who is alhore, af-
frights the Animal, fo that he jumps into the Net,
driving it forward till the Rope is pulled ftrait, and
then, as the other End is fattened alhore, the Mouth
of the Net clofes upon the Prifoner.
In fome Parts they have Sea fowl in great Plenty,
particularly hages. They have alfo wild Geefe, and
a fort of Geefe which cannot fly, but will run upon the
Water as fail as the others can fly ; we called them
Race horfesj others call them Penguins, but they are not
the right Penguins : Their Down is very fine, and the
Indians fpin, and make a fort of Blankets of it; Of
thefe Blankets 1 have feen very fine ones among the
Spaniards . The Indian Art of Fowling is whimfical
enough. At Night when the Fowls go on (hore to
rooft, the fowlers light up the Bark of a Tree, which,
when dry, burns like a 1 orch ; and going along Ihore
with this Light (which dazzles the Eyes of the Fowl) in
one Hand, and a Stick in the other, they knock the
Fowl down, and catch them.
There are many diiferent Nations or Tribes of thefe
Indians. One fort are called Petegonens y another Coucous,
and among thefe laft we mollly lived : Our Guide
was of another Tribe, called Chonas. The Coucous are
rery barbarous, yet not ill-natured. They are alfo
natty


natty and loufy ; the Lice they eat, and I fancy,
think them a great Dainty, for I have obferved when
an Indian has been gone from Home, his favourite
Wife (for they have feveral) has fearched the Childrens
Heads, and faved the Vermin in a Mufcle-fhell, for a
prefent to her Hufband on his Return.
Their Seal and Fowls they always roaft, or rather
barbecue. The Meat is fattened on a Stick, one End
of which they put into the Ground before the Fire,
and keep it turning till done. Their Method of batting
their Roaft meat is extremely curious; they give Lumps
of Fat to the young Children, which-they chew, and, as
it melts in their Mouths, fpit it out on the Meat.
In their Commerce with the Women, thefe Indians
in fome Kefpedls att very monftroufly, having no Scru-
ples as to Proximity of Blood, the Men taking their own
Sifters and Daughters for Wives ; as I was one Day
converfing with an Indian, who had two Wives, the one
old and the other very young, he made me underftand,
by Signs, that the latter was his Daughter by the for-
mer. This I could hardly believe, till our Guide af-
terwards confirmed what the other faid.
Their R ligion I could never underiUbd. Indeed all
the Appearances of any that I could dii'darh among them
was only this. They were often taken with ttrange Fits
of Madnefs. at which time the Men attemble in the
largeft Wigwhams, and the firft thing they do is to cook
a great deal of Provifions : Some are employed in read-
ing, others in cutting the Meat into Pieces proper for the
Spit ; then fome fall to fmging, others whittle others
cry, and now and then give terrible Shrieks, which al-
moft frighted us, before we were ufed to them. Some of
them would frequently fall into Fits like Convulfions,
and taking Fire-brands in their Hands, would go about
burning and fcorching the reft ; while others would
paint all the Company, Strangers and all, if any hap-
pened to be among them ; and thus they ferved me
twice, nor durtt I otter to hinder them. It is impof-
ttble to exprefs the Pafiion or Enthufiafm thefe poor
Wretches are in when thefe ranting Fits of Devotion
are on them. After the Men, the Women take their
Turn,


Turn, and aft much in the fame manner : I have feen
an old Woman fourteen or fifteen Days together in this
Blocking Condition. The Songs they fing on thefe,
and indeed on all other Occafions, are very melancholy j
at lead they feemed fo to me, the Noife they make
being rather like crying than finging. Thefe Religious
Fits only take them when they have got in a large
Stock of Provifions, and they generally continue in
them for a Week together.
Thefe Indians are of a middling Stature, very
firong, healthy, and robuft ; all the while I was among
them I did not fee one of them fick. There is fome-
thing very odd in their manner of interring their Dead;
They place the Corpfe in the famePofture in which the
Infant is faid to lie in the Womb ; it is bound and held
in this manner by the Bark of a large Tree. At Ma-
rines-Bay we faw fome of thefe Corpfe in a Cove, in
which a Scaffold was erefted, about fix Feet high, and
made of forked Poles fixed in the Ground, with Ears
laid a-crofs : There were fome Corpfe upon this Scaf-
fold and fome underneath it.
The Language of thefe Indians founds like the Arabic ,
every Word they fpeak coming gutterally from the
Throat. Their Canoes are made of Planks, fewed
together with what we call a Supple-jack. They fplit
the Jack in two, fcrape it very well, and let it dry j
after which it is ftrong, and will lall a long time. Some
of thefe Canoes are very large, having five Planks j
(whereas the common ones have but three) one for the
Sail, and two on each Side. The Men’s Cloathing is
much the fame as defcribed, when fpeaking of the In-
dians who firft came to us at The Wo-
men wear only a Piece of Cloth about their Middle.
All the Arms the Indians ufe, are Launces or Darts,
with which they very dexteroufly ftrike whatever they
aim at, as Fifh, Seal, ftfr.
In the Middle of March we again embarked with
the Indians, who did not put any two of us together in
the fame Canoe; but the Wind being contrary, they
foon landed again, at a fmall Diftance from the Place
they let out from, their Canoes not being able to keep
the
43
to the South-Seas.


the Sea. Here Mr. ElUot, Surgeon of his Majdly’ B
Ship the Wager, departed this milerable Life.
After two Days we again put to Sea, and went o-
ver a Bay to the Mouth of a River, into which the In-
dians rowed, and proceeded up it for three Days to-
gether. This River runs into a great many Branches,
and is in fome Places very rapid. We could get nothing
to cat during thefe three Days, except a fort of Burdock
which the Indians feemed very fond of j they called it
Panque.
I was extremely glad when we got to the Head of the
River, for my Mailers made me work very hard, for
which, at that time, I was not in a proper Condition.
At firll I was obliged to row ; but feeing that I want-
ed Strength, they fet me to heave the Water out of the
Canoe, which fhe made in fuch great Quantities, that
I could hardly keep her dry.—When vve landed at the
River-head, they hauled the Canoes up into the Woods,
purpoling to draw them further over-land in the Morn-
ing. When the Morning came, myMafter, Cepey (for that
was his Name), gave me a Pair of Oars to carry ; but
they being too heavy, I was forced to leave them in
the Way till he brou'ght them off himfelf
It is impoffible to exprefs the Hardlhips'we endured
at this Juncture, and as difficult to determine which of
the two we wanted moll. Food or ■ aiment; We were
indeed miferable Objeds; our Bodies were languid, e-
jnaciated, and equally preyed on by Hunger within, and
the moll odious of Vermin without.
On the Day after our Arrival in this new Country, we
were obliged to walk about eight Miles thro’ a Wood,
without Shoe or Stocking, and in the worll Road that
ever Man travelled. Our March all the Way was upon
(or rather we waded through) a mere Puddle, in which
we often funk above Knee-deep: And this wretched
Way was moreover full of Stumps of Trees hid under
the Water, which cut our Feet and Legs in a terrible
Manner.
The next Day the Indians got their Canoes over the
Ifland, and put them into a very line Lagone. In the
Afternoon we all embarked, rowed over the Lagone,
and


and entered a River, which, though pretty long, we
foon run through, and then found ourfelves out at Sea.
Captain Cheap , Mr. Byron, and myfelf, were now to-
gether in one large Canoe ; but Mr, Hamilton liked his
Patron fo well that he would not leave him, and fo went
in another Canoe, Our Guide, or new Mailer, made
Mr. Byron and myfelf pull at the Oar, and though we
were fo weak as to be hardly able to Hand, much lefs
to work, yet we were forced to buckle too, whether
able or not. Indeed we laboured the more willingly,
as we were glad to do any tiling towards our own Pre-
fervation. Though, as 1 have laid, our Canoe was
large, yet there was nobody in her to row but the In-
dian, his Partner, us two, and the Indian's Wife who
fleered. She was now our Miflrefs, but not a very good
one ; for when Ihe divided the V ifl aals, Ihe gave us
but a fmall Share, though we had a great Share of the
Work. Thus we lived from the middle of March to
the Beginning of June , 1742,
Mean time we came by I'ttle and little to the North-
ward, always hoping to get away to the Spaniards, be-
ing naked, and ftarved to fach a Degree, that neither
Tongue nor en can poffibly exprefs our Mifery.
In this our Pilgrimage, one Day we happened to
meet with fome other Indians, with whom we had a
great deal of Converfation. By them we underllood
that there had been a Ship on the Coafl and by their
Defcription of her. and particularly her ed Flag, vve
gueffed her to be En? t/h. and fo it proved; for when
wc came to ChVoe, we were there told, that the Anne
Fink had come to an Anchor on the Coall, and had
taken an Indian and his Wife on board. They who
gave us this Intelligence were Spaniards, taken Prifoners
by Mr. Anfon, who put them on board the Anne Pink,
but they foon found means to make their Efcape in her
Long-boat.
Some time before we got to Chiloe, our Mailer be-
ing to feparate from the reft of the Indians, he defired
Mr. Hamilton to come into our Canoe, and go with
fjs to Chi Ice', but the latter having fallen out with Mr.
Cepey, he did not care to go with him. Indeed Cepey
. r


was the moft inhuman Fellow I ever knew among the
Indians. Though he made Mr. Byron and I work like
Slaves, he would not give us a Morfel of Victuals, ex-
cept when poffeffed of more than he himfelf could eat.
The reft of the Indians leaving us, carried Mr. Ha-
milton with them, and it was three Months before we
faw him again. However, one little Canoe ftaid with
us, the Mafter of which had once been my Patron, and
was very kind to me. And as my prefent Mafter ufed
me ill, I now refblved to go the reft of the Voyage
with my former Mafter ; but Captain Cheap Teeming to
be difpleafed at my Intention, I remained in the fame
Canoe with him, till we came to an Ifland about thirty
Leagues South-eaft of Chiloe ; at which we waited two
Days for a fair Wind, and then proceeded with the
Wind nigh South ; but it blew To hard as to caufe a great
Sea, which rolling into the Canoe, kept us continually
lading, the Sail was likewife fo very bad, that we eve-
ry Moment expedted to go to the Bottom. But it plea-
fed God to deliver us from this, as he had done from
every preceding Danger) and the next Day we arrived
fafe at i hiloe, an ifland in Lat. 43. inhabited both by
Indians and Spaniards.
The Day after we arrived, a great Snow fell, and
the Cold almoft killed us j efpecially the Captain, who
had for fome time been exceeding ill. The fame Day
our Mafter (after he had hid ail the things he brought
from the Wreck of the Wager , for fear of the Spaniards)
carried us to the Houfe of an Indian of his Acquaint-
ance, who lived with the Spaniards ; but it being
Night before we got thither, the People were all afleep.
Hereupon our Patron, in order to fhew his Bravery
made me load a Fowling-piece of Mr. Byron' s, and he
fired it off. On the Report of the Gun, the Indians ,
who are but a little acquainted with Fire-arms, got out
of their Hut, and ran to the Woods, frighted out of
their Senfes ; but Toon after one of them got upon a Hill
adjoining to the Place where we were, and from thence
calling to us, afked if we were Chriftians ? to which
our Patron replied in the Affirmative, and told who
himfelf was: Then they came to us* and that Night


we had a fine Supper of dry’d Filh, Broth, and Pota-
toes.
Supper over, they carried us away to another Vil-
lage, where our Patron (who was a Cafique or Captain
over the People hereabouts, and confequently a Man of
great Authority) waked one of the Inhabitants, and
made him open the Door of his Hut. Here the Indians
compaffionating the Captain’s Illnefs, took great Care
of him, made him a Bed of Sheep-lkins, and laid him
before the Fire j for it was now (in June) the Middle
of Winter here, and excellive cold. The Froft was
very fevere, and it went the harder with us, as we were
very thinly cloathed. .Capt. Cheap was indeed extremely
fortunate in meeting with fo much Kindnefs from thefe
Indians » for had they not taken fo much care of him
as they did, he could not have lived two Days after
his Arrival among them. He was really in a mod de-
plorable Condition. His Legs were nothing but Skin
and Bone ; and yet the Skin was puffed out from the
Bone, till they appeared to be of a monftrous large Size.
Neverthelefs, by the Care of thefe Indians, under God,
he efcaped that Death which now fo terribly threaten-
ed him, after having furmounted fuch and fo many im-
minent Perils.
Whether it were that the Chilaean Indians took us
for Spaniards, md therefore out of Policy were the more
induced to ufe us fo kindly ; or whether their Beha-
viour was the pure Effedt of their natural Hurpanity, I
cannot at all determine ; but however the Cafe might
be, Gratitude demands that I fpeak a little more par-
ticularly of their Kindnefs to us, efpecially on the firll
Night of our Arrival among them.— That Night they
had no Provifions in the Houfe, except a little Barley-
meal, of which a Cake was immediately baked. As
we had not for a long time tailed any Sort of Bread, we
thought this Cake the belt we had ever eat in our Lives.
However, though it was Night, the Indians went out
for a Sheep, of which they made Broth, and we had
Eggs and Potatoes with our Meat. Next Morning came
feveral of their Women, each with a Plate of Viftuals;
feme brought Mutton, others Hens and Chickens. In
1 the


the Afternoon as many of the Men got together as a
Hut would hold, and brought with them great Jars of
Liquor made of Barley-meal, and by them called Chi-
cha ; and over this we all made merry. Afterwards
came the Women, each with an earthen Pot full of
drefled Viduals. In fhort, they made us as welcome,
and (hewed us as much Civility as poluble in their Cir-
cumftances ; However, they could give us no Cloaths,
the poor Creatures having very few for themfelves.
As foon as we came among them, they fent to in-
form the Spanijh Corregidore of us; rnd it was not long
e’er we were lent for. When the Indium came to carry
us to the Place where feme Spaniards , by Appointment,
waited to receive us, I was in the Woods, endeavour-
ing to rid my felt of fome of the numerous Herd of Cat-
tle I had grazing on my Commons. It was Night by
the Time we got to the Spaniards. The Indians took
us into a Hut, in which we were received by a Civil
Officer, who, with a ftrong Guard of Soldiers, was to
carry us to the Town where the Corregidore lived,
which they called the City of Ca/fro. However, they
did not take us thither diredly, but for the prefent
confined us to a Hovel, a Building with a Root but no
W.dls, in which we were ftridlly guarded by the Sol-
diers,whom we found nothing like fo humane and good-
natured as the Indians.
All the Peo; le of the Ifland now came to fee us,
though they did not care to venture too near us, being
difcreetly apprehenfive of our Vermin. Mean time our
friendly Indians continued very kind to us, and gave us
Victuals as before ; but the Spaniards had no Compaf-
fion on us: we were even forced to lie on the cold
Ground, for want of fome kind of Bedding.
Among others, a Jefuit came to fee us. He brought
in his Pocket a Bottle of Brandy, and gave us a Dram.
Perceiving that I had a Watch, the fame Mr. Elliot left
me, he alked to fee it; and then he defired me to
change with him for an old one which he had in his
Pocket, or to fell him mine. We underftood the Fa-
ther’s Meaning ; and knowing the great Power which
thofe of his Order have in Popip Countries, and that it
might
A VOYAGE


might be dangerous to difoblige him j therefore, and
becaufe it was Captain Cheap's Defire, I made the Fa.
ther a Prefent of my Watch. He was not ungrateful ;
for foon after his Departure, he fentmea Piece of coarfe
Cloath, to make me two Shirts ; alfo two Pair of
Thread Stockings without Feet, and one Pair of Shoes,
which proved too little for me. He alfo fent me a fort
of Blanket, or Indian Punch, with a Hole in the mid-
dle to put my Head through, as the Indians do.
Soon after we were fent for to Cajiro. The Spani-
ards carried us away in the Evening, becaufe we Ihould
not fee their City ; at which, when we arrived, they
ufed all the Ceremony of a Garrifon, haling the Canoe,
and requiring us to flop till they had acquainted the
Commanding Officer. This done, they admitted us,
under a ftrong Guard of Soldiers, with forked Sticks
in their Hands. During all this Ceremony, I doubted
not but that there was a Garrifon, with Fortifications,
&c. But as we went up the Hill, which lies betwixt this
fuppofed Fortification and the Town itfelf, I could fee
no fuch thing. In the Town we were brought before
an old Gentleman whom they called the Corregidore,
and who was dreffed in a Cloak, a very old Tye-wig,
and a long Spado. He received us in great Pomp,'con-
duced us to the Jefuit’s College, and pmented us to
the Principal, faying. Father , pray fee if (hefe Men art
Chrifians , or not. Then he took his le&v of us: and
the Fathers conduCed us to a Room, i which were
two Beds, one for the
two Beds, one for the Ct , tain, and the .her for Mr,
Byron and myfelf. Then they had u? a very good
Supper. Every thing was clean and .‘ cent, and wo
had a Glafs of good W ne,
When we went to bed. we found catt a clean Shirt,
a clean Sheet, and a good Bed ; which made this the
moil agreeable Night I ever knew. Next Morning I
burned my old Rags, left they Ihould bret. 5 a Peftilence
in the Place. Here we ftaid and experienced the lame
good Ufage for above a Week, till the Governor, who
lived at the North End of the Illand, at the Port of
, Chaco, fent his Son with a Guard, to conduC us to that
Place.
C When


When we left Cajlro, our Guard ufed the fame Cere*
irony as at our Arrival there. They carried us out in
the Night to a Farm-houfe, in which we lay till next
Morning, when we got Horfes, and rid acrofs the
Country to a Bay, in which they had Canoes ready
for us to embark; All this Time we were ftridly
guarded by the Soldiers. After three Days, we arrived
at a little Bay near the Town of Chaco, from whence
a Soldier was fent to the Governor, to acquaint him
with our Arrival there. Hereupon the Governor fent
them Orders not to come in till it was dark ; and we
Were accordingly brought into the Town in the Night.
As we marched up to the Governor’s, we paffed by a
Line of Men armed with Match-locks, the only Fire-
arms they have in this Country, and their Matches were
lighted. The Governor received us in all his Glory,
fitting at the Head of a great Table, covered with red
Baize. We alfo fat down at this Table, and the Go-
vernor converfed with us by his Linguift, who was an
Englijk.nan, born at Falmouth .
The Governor examined the Indian that brought us,
and made him go with his Canoes and fome Soldiers
to Wager-Ifand, io work upon the Wreck of our Ship,
and to bring off Mr. Hamilton rrom among the Indians ,
with Whom we had left him ; and accordingly Mr.
Hamilton was brought hither.
The Indian Language is what every body here fpeaks
more than th tSpaniJh ; but it is quite different from that
of the Indians with whom we had fo many Adventures
after we left Wager-IJland. The Language of the Chi-
ioean Indians feemed to us very fine and foft ; and the
Spaniards who underftand it efteem it as fuch.
This Ifland lies in the South-Seas, in Lat. 43. 15.
and is the moft Southern Settlement the Spaniards have
in this Part of the World. Shelvocke, in his Voyage
to thefe Seas, tells us. that this Jfland is as good, and as
plentifully ftored with the Neceffaries of Life, as the
IJle of Wight. But what he fays is far from being true,
and I may venture to affert that the Spaniards here are
more roiferable than any other European Colony in A-
qyrica. The Climate is extremely bad; and moft of
the


the Inhabitants eat nothing but Fifh, and even this for
the moft part only of the Shell-kind. Their Bread is
chiefly Potatoes, of which they have a very good Sort,
and in fuch Plenty that they feed their Hogs with ’em.
The Swine here are fmall, but their Flelh is very fweet,
and makes excellent Hams. Some Wheat is raiftd
in this Ifland, but not much *. Their moft plentiful
Grain is Barley, of which, as I before obferved, they
make their Chicha. They likewife eat Barley-meal with
Chicha and with Water. They are but thinly flocked
with Cows and Sheep, and what they have are very lean,
through Want of good Pafture, the Country being over-
run with great Woods: In thefe their Horfes, which are
alfo lean and fmall, chiefly fubfift.
The Spaniards and Indians here live much alike ;
.their Houfes are Straw Huts, without Chimneys, though
not without Fire, which they make in the Middle of
the Houfe, and thereby fmoke themfelves fufficiently ;
Even the Governor’s Houfe hath no Chimney.
Their Cloathing is alfo very poor, none but Perfons of
Rank wearing Shirts } for they only are able to buy
Linen when the annual Lima Ship arrives. All their
Trade is in Hams, Pork-flufh, and Deals, of which
they have a great many. Coarfe Baize is brought hi-
ther from Lima ; they call it the Country Cloth, be-
caufe it is made in Peru. From Paraguay they have
an Herb called the Herb of Paraguay , on account of
its growing there, and no where elfe : Of this they
make Tea, both for the Morning and Afternoon ; and
it is much drank all over Chili and Peru.
At Chaco is a very good Harbour ; but it is dange-
rous coming into it, becaufe the Tides run ftrong, and
alfo, in the Middle of its Mouth lies a funken Rock,
which ought equally to be guarded againll both in com-
ing in and going out. The Town conflftsof only a few
Straw Huts, fcattered here and there ; and ’tis as thinly
inhabited as built, except when the Lima Ship arrives,
and then the Country People flock all to this Town;
Here is a little Earthen Fort, encircled by a Ditch, and
C 2 the
* They fow but little Wheat, becaufe of their continual Rains*
which rot the Seed.
td the South-Seas.


the Ditch by a fort of Pallifade, It mounts thirteen
Guns, four to the Land and nine to the Sea. The Gar-
rifon confifts of a Captain of Foot (which Pott the Go-
vernor himfelf fills), a Town major, a Lieutenant, an
Enfign and eighty private Men. As for Arms, they
Slave only Match-locks, as I have already obferved ;
At the Ifland of Calabuco , which lies N. E, from hence
at the Diftance of two Leagues, there is another Cap-
tain-governor, who is called the Captain of Calabuco .
When the Governor of Chi-toe fent the Canoes to the
Wreck of the Wager , we were in Hopes that they
would find the Barge, and bring her here. The Go-
vernor promifed Captain Cheap that he fhould have the
Barge reftored to him, with all that was in her. But
when his People did actually bring the Barge with them,
he kept her concealed at another Ifland, thinking we
could never know that he had it in his Power to keep
liis Word. But he was miftaken, for foon after we left
the Ifland, we heard that the Barge was brought thi-
ther, with two of the Men in her, the other four hav-
ing perifhed through Want, after they left us.
About the middle of December the annual Lima Ship
arrived at this Ifland. Her coming made me reflect on
the unfortunate Step taken by the Gunner and Car-
penter of our Ship, and their Party. Had they, in-
ttead of going to the Southward in the Long-boat, gone
all together with the Captain to the Northward, we
might have made ourfelves Matters of the Ifland of Chi-
Joe, and the Lima Ship into the bargain. But their Ob-
ilinacy deprived both themfelves and us of this Op-
portunity of making our Fortunes, and doing confi-
derable Service to our Country at the fame time. In-
stead of which, the few of the unfortunate Officers and
Crew of the Wager, who furvived the Hardlhips they
underwent in this ill-fated Voyage, have brought no-
thing home with them but the melancholy Tale of their
prodigious Sufferings; a fad Relation of the Lives loft
merely in the Search of Prefervation, not of Riches.
The Lima Ship is a fine Veffel, of about two hun-
dred Tons Burthen, but carries neither great Guns
nor Mufijuets. This, that we faw, had only fix white
Mem
52
i VOYAGE


Men on board, viz. the Matter, Mate, Boatfwain and
his Mate, and the Chaplain and his Clerk ; all the o-
thers were Indians and Negroes.
January 2, 1742-3, We embarked on board of this
Ship, and four Days after fhe anchored in the
Port of Velprijio, in Lat. 33. S. in the Kingdom of
Chili. Here the Matter of the Ship fent his Boat
afhore, to acquaint the Governor that he had four
Englijh Prifoners aboard ; and foon after we were or-
der’d afhore: And now we thought ourfelves one*
more in the Land of the Living.
53
to the South-Seas.


BOOK IV.
*The Adventures of Alexander Campbell,
from his Arrival in Chili, to his Return
to Europe on board a Spanifh Man oj
War , and his happy Arrival at Portf*
mouth, in 1746.
WHEN we firft appeared on the Beach, no body
came near us, except the Children to gaze, for
to be lure they never faw fuch a ragged sight in their
Lives before : but when it was publickly known that we
were EngliJhgNe had all the Town about us. After ha-
ving been carried before the Governor, Don Andrews
ds Arabal, who was blind, we were by his Order,
confined in a very disagreeable Hole, fo dark that we
could not fee each other : The Soldiers told us that it
was the Place wherein they kept their Whores : So that
we were now got into the Houfe of Correction,
We had not been long in this Prifon, e’er the Cap-
tain and Mr. Hamilton were fent for to St. "f ago, by
the Prefident Don Jo/eph Manfo, who lived there,
Mr. Byron and I were continued in the Houfe of Cor-
rection, till the Captain got to St , *Jago, where ho
prevailed on Don Jofeph to fend for us ; and Jan. 24.
we were introduced to the Prefident. He told us he
was glad to: fee us fo happily delivered out of fo many
Dangers. Then he defired us to go to the Place where
the Captain was, and to reft ourfelves. We found
the Captain at the Houfe of an EngUJh Gentleman,,
who alfo invited us, and gave us very hofpitable En-
tertainment : Nay, he treated us all as if we had been
his own Brothers; and during the whole two Years
that we remained here, we wanted for nothing that he
could any Way procure.
Oa
A VOYAGE


On the Day after our Arrival, the Prefident fent his
Secretary to invite the honourable Mr. Byron and my-
felf to Dinner, We found Admiral Piza/ro and feve-
ral of his Officers there: They had come from Buenos
Ayres by Land, in order to proceed to Lima ; for they
could not get their Ships of War round Cape-horn.
As we were at this time without Money, and alfo
wanted Cloaths, one of the Spanijh Officers offered us
Money upon our Bill payable by the Englijh Conful-
at Lijion. Hereupon we drew a joint Bill on the Lord
Commiffioner of his Majefty’s Navy,, directed for
the Conful at Lijion. When the Captain received
the Money, which was 600 Dollars, he gave Mr.-
Hamilton and Byron their Share,, but to me he
gave only eighty Dollars out of the fix hundred. This
gave Rile to fome Words betwixt the Captain and me.
I thought it very hard, as I had figned the Bill equally
with the reft, and was at the fame Time as naked and
neceffitous as they, that I fhould not receive my whole
fhare, which was 150 Dollars, and which Sum my
Brother-midfhipman Mr. Byron had. The Captain’*
obftinate Refufal to give me the reft W'as the opening
of that Breach, which was very much widened by ano*
ther Affair of much the fame Nature, <viz.
When he had been in this Country near twelve
Months, one Mr. William Lindfey , who had for-
merly been in the South-Sea Company’s Service afc
Buenos Ayres, hearing that four Englijh Prifoners were
at fuch a Place, he wrote to'inform us, that if we
wanted Money, he had fome in a Merchant’s Hands
at St. Jago, which we might have upon fending him our
Bills. This Money the Captain received, and divided’
betwixt himfelf, Mr. Byron, and Mr. Hamilton. But
when I afked him for my Share, he gave me to un-
derftand that I fhould not have a Farthing ; in vain
did I reprefent to him the Neceffity I was in*
and that Mr. Lindjey s Intention was to ferve us all*
and not any one in Preference to another : In vain
were my Complaints, my worthy Captain, for whom
I had expreffed fo much Zeal, w r as inexorable^——
X appeal to the impartial Reader whether this was
C 4 cither
55
to the South-Seas.


either juft or generous Ufage ; efpecially as Mr. Lind-
fey had wrote alike to us all, intending the Favour as
much to any one as to the other three ? Surely
none but Captain Cheap would have aided thus 1 But
he ought to have treated me otherwife, had it been
but meerly out of Compaffion to a Man in fuch ne-
ceffitous Circumdanccs as I was in, not having Cloaths
to cover me from the cold : But how much greater
was the Obligation upon him, who has himfelf owned
that he was indebted to me for the Prefervation of
his Life, more than once or twice ? In Ihort, I
thought myfelf fo ill ufed, that I left the Houfe where-
in he redded, and took my Abode in another.
As the Reader will doubtlefs expeft that I fhould
give fome Account of Chili , J have drawn up the fol-
lowing Remarks.
This Country is perhaps the fined in the World.
Jt has five very good Sea ports. The fouthermod is
Buldamia, a garrifoned Town, in Lat. 40. S. It is on
the Frontiers, betwixt the Spaniards and a Nation of
Warlike Indians , who inhabit another exceeding fine
Traft of Land. Thefe Indians are continually at
War with the Spaniards , to whom they never give
Quarter They have fine Horfes, and I have been
told that they are Ihod with Silver. However ’tis cer-
tain that they have the riched filver Mines in America.
Some Years ago they fuddenly fell upon three Spanijh
Towns in one Night, and maflacred all the Inhabi-
tant*. Thefe Towns were the fined the Spaniards had
in thofe Parts. They are called A for nan. Imperial ,
and Villarica , i. e. the rich Village. In (hort thefe
Indians are a brave People, and fight in good Order ;
and therefore the Spaniards don’t much care to didurb
them.
Conception is the next of the five, but this
I never faw ; however I have had an Account of the
Indians who inhabit the Country on that Side, and
which may be depended on. In December they have
a grand Meeting with the Spaniards at Conception ,
whither the Governor goes in Perfon ; and with him
the Indiant renew or confirm the Amity betwixt the


two Nations j or, if they do not agree on the Arti-
cles, declare War. When they make Peace they cqt
off the Head of a Lamb ; and when it is to be War,
they carry off the Lamb with them. They do not
write, but keep all their Accounts by Knots on a
String, which they tell over j and in this Manner
they will compofe a tolerable good Hiftory. I have
already defcribed the Indian Garment called a Punch.
Of thefe the Indians I now fpeak make a very fine
Sort, which the Spaniards wear when they ride
abroad.
Velprifio is the principal Sea-port of Chili : Yet it
has but a little Town, and moll of the Inhabitant*
are Seamen’s Wives, and People that get their living
by the Shipping, of which above 26 Sail come here
annually, which is no fmall Number, the Nature of
the Trade from Old Spain hither confidered. The
Town has two Forts ; one in very good Order, re-
gularly built, hath twenty Pieces of Brafs Cannon, and
two of Iron. The other Fort they call the Old
Cajile i it lies under a great Hill, on the Right Hand
as the Ships come into the Harbour. Csckimbo ,
and Corpeopo, are the two lall of the aforefaid five Sea-
ports Their Trade, which is chiefly to Lima , is
but fmall, and confifts moftly of Wheal-flour, jerked
Beef, Fruits, Gold in Bars, and the Herb of Paraguay,.
In return they bring from Lima Sugar, and coarfe
Cloath for their Indians and Negroes. They have
likevvife fome Trade with Buenos Ayres, whither they
fend Wine, Fruits, and Dollars ; and bring back all
Sorts of Linnen-cloths, Broad-cloths, Velvets, Silks,
Stockings, in Ihort, all Sorts of wearing Apparel :
But this is a contraband Trade.—They trade alfo with
Peru for Mules, which they carry away in great Num-
bers.
Without difpute the Climate in Chili is as fine as
any in the World. The Winter is very moderate ;
yet nigh the Town of St. Jago, is a Mountain al-
ways covered with Snow, but the Town itfelf is nei-
ther very cold in Winter, nor too hot in Summer,
tho’ in Lat. 33. S. The Soil of the Country in ge-
C 5 * neral
to the


jS . 'A VOYAGE
xieral Is extremely fertile ; the Hufbandmen do no more
than open the. Ground, and fow the Wheat, and',
without Manure, it commonly gives an hundred-fold.
Their Fruit-trees bear when only two Years old'.
The Failure is very the Cattle fat, and the
Meat as fine as any in the World, and Beef and
Mutton are here very cheap : A good Cow fells for
three Dollars, andji Sheep for four Rials, which is
Slot quite two Shmings Sterling. The Chilians have
Very fine HorfeS for all ufes; I have fee'n fome of
them, pace as .fall as other. Horfes caa gallop. The
Country-people are Ilrong and healthy,.but very lazy ;
what makes them the more fo is the goodnefs of the
Country, which furnilhes them with all the Necefla-
xies of Life, and many of its Superfluities, and all this
without requiring much Labour from the People.
They are good Horfemen, and are almoft continually
bn Horfeback, not. chufing to go but from one Houfe
to another without riding ; and tho’ they have nothing,
to do with the Horfe, yet they mull have him all the
Day at the Door ready faddled..
The Earth here produces all Sorts of Metals, viz.
Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Tin, Lead, and Quick-
Slver.; but as the Inhabitants know not how to work
the laflr Sort ; they lie uncultivated ; neither do they
make much of the Lead-Mines. It is obferved by the
'Spaniards, that never any Worker in thefe Mines died
rich ; for when they have got a good Sum before-hand,,
they go no more to the Mines till all is fpent. The
Gold Mines are very rich, but the Workers don’t
rightly underftand them, and therefore they are of
much fmaller Advantage to the Country than they
might be. They make the moll of their Copper,
with which they fupply all Peru, and alfo fend a great
deal to Europe : The French who come into thefe Seas,
are more fond of this Copper than any thing, not
only on account of its cheapnefs, but for the fake of
the Gold they get out of it.
The Inhabitants of Chili are Spaniards and Indians,
befides the Negroes, Slaves to the former. The Spa-
niards are very proud, and drefs extremely gay ; par-
ticularly


tlcularly the Women, who fpend a great deal of Mo-
ney on their Perfons and Houfes. They are a good
Sort of People, and very courteous to Strangers:
Their Women are alfo fond of Gentlemen from other
Countries, and of other Nations. The Drefs of the
Pair Sex here is widely different from that of the Spa-
vijh Women in Europe. They wear no Stays, only 3
little Jacket, with large white Sleeves to it. Their
Petty-coats are not clofe all round like the European
Petty-coat; they are very fhort, one part doubles over
the other, and they tie it as low as Men button the
Waift-band of their Breeches. They wear no Hoop,
for the (mailer they are below, the more in Fafhion,
Their Shoes have no Heels, and are all cut in Figures.
Their Hair they drefs in a very line Tatte, and wear-
ing no Caps, it looks extremely handfome.
The Indians here are little better than Slaves to the
Spaniards , as well as the Negroes. The Corregidore,
or Governor of the Province, makes them work all
the Year, and pays them as he pleafes.
The chief Diverfions of the Spaniards here, are
wild-bull-feafting, and a fort of Cricket, In the Bull-
feaft there is nothing that I thought diverting, except
the Dexterity of the Horfemen, and of the Horfes,
which are trained up to the Exercife. When they go
to catch the Bull, they have a very ftrong Rope made
of twilled Bull’s Leather. The Horfeman has one
End of this Rope fattened to his Saddle ; the other
End hath a running Noofe. When the Horfeman
and the Bull approach to meet each other (for the lat-
ter fcldom fails to give his Antagonift the Meeting) the
Man very dextroufly toffes the Noofe End of the Rope
at the Bull’s Head, and catches him by the Neck or
Horns, tho’ at the Diftance of eight, ten, or a dozen
Yards. The Horfe feeling the Rope (the other End
of which is fattened to his Saddle) pulled ftrait, im-
mediately attempts to gallop off. The Bull follows
in great Wrath, but in vain, being unable either to
overtake the Horfe or to get from him ; and the
fury of the Bead on this Account furnilhes mottof the
Sport.
Anion®.
to the


Among the Fruits which this Country produces, are
Apples, Pears, Peaches, Apricots, Plumbs, Cherries,
Lemons, Oranges, and Vines, which bear great
Quantities of Grapes, of which they make pretty good
Wine.
The principal Town of this Province is St. Jago
of which I have already fpoke. It is lituated in a
fine Valley, is regularly built, and the Houfes good,
tho’ low, having but one Floor. They build thus,
on account of the Earthquakes that happen here al-
moft every Week. There are feveral Rivers about
this Town, which are plentifully flock’d with Fifh,
particularly exceeding fine Trout. In ftiort, if I
fpoke lavilhly when I called this one of the fineft
Countries in the World, yet I muft infill upon it,
that it only wants induftrious Inhabitants to make
it fuch.
When we had been here eighteen Months, we
heard of the Cartel that was agreed on betwixt Eng-
land and Spain , and the Governor told us we might
return to Europe in the firft Ship that Ihould fail for
Old-Spain. About fix Months after this, a French
Ship came to Velprijio, and from thence was to return
to Europe. On Board this Ship Captain Cheap, Mr.
Hamilton, and Mr. Byron * embarked ; but the Mif-
■underftanding betwixt me and the Captain, as already
related, and fince which we had not converfed toge-
ther, induced me not to go home in the fame Ship
with a Man who had ufed me fo ill ; but rather to
embark in a Spanifh Man of War then lying at Buenos
Ayres. Admiral Pizarro readily granted me a Paf-
fage, faying, you and the other Gentlemen Jhall he wel-
come and added at the fame time, that he Jhould be at
home before the French Ship.
On the 20th of Jan. f 1744-5, I fet out from St,
Jago for Buenos Ayres , in Company with four of Ad-
miral
* Since their return Captain Chiap has had the Command of a
Man of War of 40 Guns giien him ; and Mr. Byron that of 4
20 Gun Ship.
f And the French Ship did not fail till the azd of February fol-
lowing. •


miral Pisano' s Officers. We rid about 30 Miles the
firft Day, but the Sun was fo hot that not being able
to travel in the middle of the Day, we were obliged
to make it out in the Night. The 21ft we arrived at
the Foot of a Mountain, faid to be the higheft in the
known World. The next Day we began to afcend
this vaft Mountain, and were obliged to travel all
Day, the Roads being fo dangerous that we durft not
fiir in the Night. They are winding like a Stair-cafe,
and at the fame time extremely narrow : In fome
Places the Mules have but feven Inches breadth of
Ground to fet their Feet on : They are moreover
prodigious high and perpendicular. At the Bottom
runs a great River full of Rocks, fo that whoever
has the Misfortune to fall down from the Road, muft
infallibly be daffied to Pieces ; but the Mules are fo
ufed to thefe Roads, that they travel full as fafe as a
Man on Foot can do. Indeed when they are loaded
with cumberfome Goods they are in greater Danger,
and too many of them fall down thefe fatal Precipi-
ces. I faw one of them fall, and before the poor
Creature came to the Bottom, both he and his Burthen,
which was Merchants Goods, were dafhed into a thou-
fand Pieces.
We were five Days before we got to the Top of
this great Mountain : Indeed we were delayed by be-
ing obliged to go with the Carriers, who move but
flowly. On all this Mountain hardly the lead: green
Thing appears to cheer the Sight of the weary Tra-
veller : ’Tis all little elfe than bare Rock. When
we came to the Top, we found the Air fo exceffive
cold, tho’ in the midft of Summer, as to ftarve or
freeze two of the Carriers to Death. At the fame
time I found myfelf as if I had been Sea-fick, and
vomited very much: This I conjecture might be
owing to the Heigth of the Hill, and the Air being
ratified fo much more than that which I had been
ufed to breathe in the lower World,
Though it was very troublefome to afcend this
Mountain, it was ftill worfe to go down it ; which we
alfo were five Days in doing. It was matter of afto-
niffiment


nifhment to me, that oae Angle Mule, out of all wff'
had, cfcaped tumbling down : Indeed the Carriers did
lofe 20 of them, fome in going up, others in defend-
ing the Mountain ; fome broke their Legs, others diflo-
cated their Shoulders,and others penlhed thro’ Hanger.
At Mendofa, a little Town on the eaft Side of the
Mountain, we ftaid three Days to get frefh Mufcles,
Prom Mendofa to Buenos Ayres is 400 Leagues, and
all the Way is fo defert, that in above 100 Leagues
not one Houfe is to be feen, In this Road there are
many Dangers to encounter. The wild Indians , who
are always at War with the Spaniards, to whom they
give no Quarter, are here in great Multitudes. There
are likewife a great many Tygers, who frequently fall
upon Travellers and devour them ; Nay, People are
fometimes killed by them in the very Streets of Men-
dofa and Buenos Ayres. Here is alfo a Creature which
the Spaniards call a Lion, but ’tis more like a Cat,
but large, and exceeding ravenous, and for fear of
them no Man dares travel by himfelf.
The Officers that travelled with me rid upon Mules
as I did ; but Admiral Pizarro himfelf with the reft of
his Officers, went in Waggons, which are very large,
and drawn by Oxen. Thefe poor Animals, as well
as the Mules, often perifh on this Road for want of
Water, a Want which is rendered ftill the more infup-
portable by the hot Weather, nor can the Traveller
find a Angle Tree under which to reft himfelf, or
take (belter from the fcorching Rays of the Sun : Thus
he Ands the Country for above 200 Leagues together,
nor is a Drop of Water to be had at above one Place in
all that Way.
The Indians inhabiting the Country thro’ which this
undelightful Road runs, are a very warlike People.
Their Arms are Lances and Slings, in the ufe of which
they arc exceeding dextrous. Their Stature is large.
Complexion fwarthy, and their Agility in the Exer-
cifes of War admirable. They live on thefe vaft
Plains in Tribes, or Parties, each Party having a chief
Captain, or Commander When any of thefe Cap-
tains invites another to join in an Expedition againft
the


the Spaniards, the Inviter dares not fly, let what will
happen, for if he does, the other cuts off his Head di-
redlly.——Thefe uncivilized People are never at Peace
either with the Spaniards T or amongft themfelves, or
other Indians in the Neighbourhood. They have
fine Horfcs, are very good Horfemen, and ride fome-
what like our European Hujfan. Their Saddles are as
final! as thofe ufed for Race-horfes in England; and'
their Stirrup is only a Bit of Wood with a Hole in it,
big enough to let in the Rider’s great Toe : Their
Bridles are made of Hair with a wooden Bit. Fixed
Habitations they have none,, but keep roving about
from Place to Place, like the wild Arabs, fo that the
Spaniards can feldom find them. Their Food is for
the moll Part Horfe-Flelh, tho’ they have Plenty of
Black-cattle, wild-Deer, and Sheep of a Kind pecu-
liar to that Country. They have alfo a great many
Clinches, which they kill for the Sake of their Fea-
thers to wear when going to Battle.
Thefe Indians often vifit the Spanijh Frontiers and
carry off both People and Cattle. The Men they kill,
but keep the Women and Children for Slaves. How-
ever, fome Indians in thefe Parts are at Peace with the
Spaniards, and trade with them for Cloths, in exchange
for which they give the Spaniards Tygers Skins, &c.
I have feen them kill thefe Creatures in the following
Manner. In his Left-hand the Indian holds a Battoon
about nine Inches long, round the Middle of which is
a Balket like our Cudgel-balkets, which is a guard for
the Hand. In his Right-hand he holds a Knife, and
thus prepared he feeks the Tyger, and either attacks
him, or awaits the Creature’s coming, according as it
happens. When the Beall makes at the Man, the
latter runs the Battoon into the Tyger’s Mouth, which
gags him fo that he cannot Ihot his Jaws; at the fame
inftant the Knife is run into his Belly, then he falls to
the Ground, and is eafily difpatched. But if the Indian
miffes his Aim, and does not llrike the Battoon into the
Tyger’s Mouth at the firll Moment of the onfet, the
Beall generally has the Advantage, and, as it frequently
happens, the Man falls a Prey to his Adverfary.
We


We faw great Numbers of Black-cattle, Horfcs,
and Mules, running wild on the Plains, and every;
Man has them for catching : Many People at Buenos
Ayres, make it their Bufmefs to go out all the Summer
to kill Cattle only for the Skins.
In this Journey we were obliged to carry our Pro-
vifions with us, (exclufive of Beef, of which we could
get enough any wherel and Water to drink. We ar-
rived at Buenos Ayres on the tenth of March , after an
unpleafant Journey of feven Weeks. But in three or
four Days after our Arrival, an Advice-boat from
Ferrol came with Orders for Admiral Pizarro not to
fail from this Town till the Month of October, that he
might arrive in Spain in the January following:
This was to prevent his falling in with the Englijh
Fleet, which the Spaniards knew would cruize in thofe
Seas all the Summer : For Pizarro' s Fleet was fo bad-
ly mann’d, and fo very rich, that it was not thought
fafe to run the Rifle of a Summer Paflage home.
Here I met with three of our Ship’s Company, who
had been left aflrore * by the People of the Long-boat,
a little to the fouthward of Buenos Ayres. The Ac-
count they gave of their Misfortune was as follows,
•viz. “ That fome time after Bulkeley and Cummins,
41 with the reft of the People, who failed from Wager
“ IJland in the Long-boat and Cutter, had left that
“ Place, they were obliged to fend fome of the People
“ afhore to get frefh Water. Some of thefe returned
“ on board, but before all could return, the Boat was
“ driven out to Sea, and eight poor miferable Men
4 ‘ who were left afhore never faw her afterwards.
“To avoid perifhing through Want of the Neeeffaries
“ of Life, on this defart Coaft, they attempted to
“ find the Way to Buenos Ayres , but were not able to
“ travel, the Country being marfhy to fuch a degree
“ as rendered it impaffable. Hereupon they built a
Hut, and lived there upwards of a Year, fubfifting
“ by the following Means. The Country abounding
with wild Dogs they took fome Puppies, and brought
“ ’em
* See an Account of theft three Men and their Companions in
Bulkeley and Narrative.


’em up to catch Deer, of which there is Plenty on
this Coaft, and on the Venifon they lived well j till
one fatal Day, as they were divided, four in a Par-
ty, feeking Provifions, when one Party came Home,
they found their Hut plundered, and all their Things
gone : For they had Arms and other Conveniencies
left them when the Boat went away. This Difafter
great’y furprized them, thinking the other four had
robbed them, and were gone to feek themfelves
another Dwelling-place. But to their greater Sur-
prize as well as Terror, they foon found their Mi-
ftake; for as they were going about their Hut, they
found their four Comrades lying on the Ground,
with their Throats cut from Ear to Ear. I leave
the Reader to imagine how difmally the other four
paffed the Night, expelling the dreadful Moment
when they fhould be ferved in the fame manner.
Next Morning their Eyes were faluted with the un-
welcome Sight of a great many Indians on Horfe-
back coming towards their Hut. Hereupon, not
daring to fly, they advanced to meet the Savages,
and fell on their Knees imploring Mercy; but the
Barbarians little regarding their humble Sub million,
were jull going to flai.gnter them, when an old Man,
one of their Captains, prevented them. After a
long Confutation among themfelves, the Indiant
made their Prisoners mount behind four of them,
and fo carried them off.
“ Thefe Indians fold them for Slaves to other In-
dian ■ with whom they remained till a Captain that
was at Peace with the Spaniards, of which Na-
tion he took thefe four Men to be, went to the Go-
vernor of Buenos >y>es, and agreed for a Reward
for bringing them off. The Governor promifed him
fifteeh Dollars for each ; but when he returned,
the Indianj would on no Terms let him have a Mo -
latta , who was one of the four, infilling upon his
being an Indian, and therefore they would keep
him : His Name was John Dud, born in London.
The other three were Ifaac Morris , Samuel Cooper ,
and John 4adre'ws. The Names of their four
“ Companions
to the South-Seas.


" Companions who were maffacred, were Guy Broad-
** water, Benjamin Smith, John Allen, and Jofeph
“ Clinch
This Account Morris,- Cooper, and Andrews gave,
and defired me to publifh as (bon as I came to England.
They came with me from Buenos Ayres to Spain, where
I left them, waiting for a Difcharge by the Cartel.
They told me that the Indians have a great many Spa-
rs if? Women among them, whom they have taken
Captive; that they had each of them a Spanijh Wo-
man given him to Wife, and that forae of them had
left Children behind them. -I fhall now fay fome-
thing of my own Concerns during my fix Months re-
fidence at Buenos Ayres , where, as hath been mention-
ed, I was obliged to wait till the time came at which
Admiral Pizarro was to fet fail.
On the Day of my Arrival at this Town, I waited
on the Governor, Don Domingo Rojfes ; who invited
me to dine at his Houfe, which I did. I little thought
that I fhould be now confined, after having been at
Liberty in Chili above two Years on my Parole, and
had always behaved as became a Prifoner at large;
but after Dinner, as I was coming away ; to my great
Surprize I found that I was to be confined in the Port,
aud not to go out of the Gate. Accordingly I re-
mained in the Fort fix and thirty Days, at the end of
which I was let out by the Admiral’s Procurement,,
and then I had the whole Town for my Prifon. But
fome Time after, upon a groundlefs Report that a
Squadron of Englifh Men of War were coming into
the River of Plate, I was again confined in the Fort,
and remained there twenty-two Days more ; but the
Rumour being blown over, I was again enlarged.
Gratitude will not let me omit to mention the Kind-
nefs of the Governor of the Portuguefe Settlement ad-
joining to Buenos Ayres. Hearing of me while in that
Town, he wrote me a Letter in Englifh, acquainting
me that he would fupply. me with Money, if I had oc-
cafion ; and at the fame time fent me a Prefent of
Englifh Butter and a Box of Sweet-meats. This Gen-
tleman was Governor of St. Katherine's, when Com-
modore
i VOYAGE


to the South-Seas.
modor tAnfon was there: His Name Don J of ephSih a.
de Pays.
The Town of Buenos Ayres is pretty large, and in
it are a great many Merchants ; but how they live I
can’t imagine ; for all their Trade is confined to the
neighbouring Portuguefe Colony, and even this is con-
traband, and carried on only in the Night. I was
told that there goes every Year from Buenos Ayres to-
the above Colony, above five Millions of Dollars, and
upwards of thirty thoufand Cow-hides.
Here runs the famous River of Plate , which is faid
to be the largeft in the World. At Buenos Ayres it is
fifteen Leagues wide, and its Mouth, from Cape St.
Mary's to Cape St. Antonio's , is eighty Leagues over,
and all frefh Water. There are but three Settlements
on it, Buenos Ayres is the largeft ; the fecond the Por~
tuguefe Colony, on the north Side of the River, op-
polite to Buenos Ayres; Monteaoida is the third, on the
North Side alfo, and forty Leagues to the eaftward of
the Portuguefe. Here is an Harbour for Ships of fmall
Burthen; however one of the Spanijh Men of War
lay here : She was indeed obliged to unfhip her Rud-
der for want of Water, of which there is not above
feventeen Foot at the higheft Tides; but there is a
great deal of Mud, into which fhe funk, and lay there
two Years, with her Guns, &c. in her, and received
no Damage. -Here the Spaniards have begun
to build a line Fortification, which they fay will be
the beft and ftrongeft in America , and which will en-
tirely command the River; on which they are very
apprehenfive, of the Englijh making a Settlement.
A little below Montevida there is another fine Har-
bour, called Malduna, with more Water; the Mouth
is narrow, but within there is room for 200 Sail of
Ships : ’Tis one of the fafeft in the World, and wants
for no Accommodations that Nature can furnifti On
the South fide there is alfo another very line Harbour,
befides Buenos Ayres : The Spaniards call it the Infa-
nada of Bar agon.
Buenos Ayres can indeed boaft a healthy Climate, but
it is very fubjeft to fudden Thunder and Lightning, with
terrible


terrible Squalls of Wind and Rain, which generally
do much ‘Damage. Here all Garden Seeds brought
from Europe grow wild in two Years after they are
fown ; nor does any Tree whatever grow to a large
Size. At a fmall Diftance from Montevida, is a Hill
enriched with Gold Mines, and fome Diamonds,
which the Portuguefe from the River Grand, come to
gather in the River Negro, or the Black River, which
empties itfelf into the River of Plate, a little above
Montevida. ,
In Auguji 1745, I received Orders from the Gover-
nor of Buenos Ayres to go to Montevida , to embark
for Europe, The Governor of the latter Place treated
me in a much handfomer Manner than the Governor
of Buenos Ayres. He invited me to Dinner on the
Day of my Arrival there, appointed me a Room, and
told me I might go where I would on my Parole..
The fame Day, in the Evening, I had a general Vilit,
from the Officers of the Garrifon, who behaved to me
with great Politenefs, Next Day I had another Vilit
from the Officers of the Man of War that lay in the
Harbour, among whom were two Irifh Captains, one
Scotch Captain, and one Englijh Lieutenant, all belong-
ing to Plzarra's Fleet.
Montevida is a newly fettled Town, has but few In-
habitants, and little Trade. Now and then aßegifter-
Ship puts in, and here Ihe gets a Pilot to conduct hex
to Buenos Ayres, The Garrifon confifts of two Com-
panies of Foot, and one of Dragoons, all regulai
Troops from Old Spain, but in all they ,do not amount
to above an hundred Men. On the Point going to the,
Harbour is the Fort, which mounts fifteen Pieces of
Cannon. The Citadel which they are building here,
and which will command both Sea, and Land, and
the River, is four square; at each Corner is a Bullion,
mounting fixteen Guns, fo that the. Citadel mounts in
all fixiy- our Pieces of Cannon. Some other Fort*
are alfo begun, which when finilhed will make the
Place very Itrong j but while I was there a Stop was
put to the Work, probably for want of Money, or
fome particular Materials. The Town is finely fitu-
atcd.
68
A VOYAGE


ated, in a pleafant Country, abounding in all the Ne-
ceflaries of Life : They might make a vaft deal of
Wine, if they would cultivate their Vines, the few
they have planted yielding very plentifully.
I ftaid here from the middle of Augujl till the thir-
teenth of Oflober, when I embarked on board the
Spanijh Man of War above mentioned, in order to
return to Europe. On board this Ship I found fixteen
Englijh Prifoners, who had been taken two Years be-
fore, in the River of Elate. They belonged to the
Philip , Captain Penkethman , whom the Spanijh Mer-
chants treacheroufly and barbaroully murdered. They
went on board to trade, but found an Opportunity to
kill the Captain, with eight or nine of his People, and
then made themfelves Matters of the Veffel.
OSober the 17th, N. S. being got out of Sight of
Land, about nine o’Clock at Night, as I was going to
Bed, fomething fell down upon the Quarter-deck,
which, as the Ship was in a very bad Condition, I
imagined was one of her Matts or Yards carried away,
of which ! had been all along apprehenfive. But the
Noife being repeated, and growing louder, I got up
to fee what was the Matter; but as I was going up
the After ladder, I was faluted with a Blow on the
Head which knocked me down. Prefently after I faw
a Soldier drop down dead. All the Ship’s Company
were now in an Uproar, crying out, a Mutiny! a
Mutiny ! Hereupon I went to my Birth, and fat down,
waiting the Iflue. At laft feeing feveral Officers and
Men wounded, while others were killed out-right, I
enquired the Caufe of fo much Blood-fhed, and was
informed that twelve Indians from the Plains of Buenos
Ayres., whom the Spaniards had taken Prifoners and
were carrying to Spain for Galley-Slaves, had rifen
upon the Captors, and feemed as if refolved to be cut to
Pieces rather than be carried into Slavery. Hearing
this, I went on the Fore cattle, where I found the
Irijh and Scots Captains with moft of the Spanijh Offi-
cers, all in Confufion; for by this time the twelve
Indians had made themfelves Matters of the Quarter-
dtck, and not a Spaniard durft attack them. Fearing
they
69
to the South-Seas.


they would fet Fire to the Ship, which they might
eafily have done, all the Nettings on the Quarter-deck
being full of Hay for the Cattle, which were on
board, I therefore propofed to go on the Quarter-
deck, and attack them Sword in Hand. I was brave-
ly feconded by one of the Irijh Officers, who tho’ an
old Man, had as much Courage as the youngeft aboard.
Followed by a few others, we attack’d both Gang-
ways at once, prefs’d the Indian f hard, and kill’d their
Cafique or Captain, and one other. Their Captain
(whom they called a King, and whofe Name was Gal-
lidana) was a very brave Fellow ; during the whole
Adlion he continually encouraged his Men, by putting
his Hand to his Mouth, and making the Noife they
call the War-hoop; and crying out. We are brume
Indians, but the Spaniards are Poltroons, or Words to
that Effiafi. -As long as he fpoke, his Men flood their
Ground,though attacked two Ways at once; but when
he fell, and as fbon as his Voice they all got
on the Rails of the Quarter-deck, and jumped over-
board, crying out, *Though you have killed our King, you
Jhan't have the Pleafure of killing us.
The Enemy having thus fled the Field, the Spaniards
began to look after their Dead and Wounded. They
found eleven Men flain out-right, among whom were
the Matter of the Ship and two Mates. Thirty- eight
were wounded, five of whom died of their Wounds.'
A Jefuit alfo had his Arm broke, and was otherwife ve-
ry much hurt. All this Havock did twelve Indians
(armed with nothing but Knives, and fome of the
double-head Shot, flung in the middle, with which they
knocked down the Spaniards) make among 444 Men
that were aboard, among whom were thirty-two com-
miffioned Officers, moft of them formerly belonging to
other Ships of Pizarro' s Squadron, which had been loft.
After this unlucky Affair, nothing occurred to us
but what is common at Sea, till we arrived on the Coaft
of Portugal % when the Appearance of fome Ships put
the Spaniards into a great Fright, and they immediately
confined me and the other Prifoners. They were un-
der Arms three Days and three Nights; and ’tis cerfain
. ;hey


they had good Reafon for their Fears, for in the firft
place the Ship was very rich, having upwards of five
Millions of Dollars on board, tho 4 not ail regiflered :
Secondly (he was in great Want of Hands, and thofe
that were on board were very weak and fickly.
January zoth, 1745-6, we arrived at the Port of
Corkvion, near Cape Finijire ; where I waited twenty
Days while the Ship went round. Coming to Ferro/,
I was ordered to Madrid , where, on the Day after my
Arrival, I was introduced to one of the Miniftry, who,
after afking me fome Queftions, ordered me to a Room
till further Notice. —Two Days after I was called for
again, and he enqtmed of me the Particulars of Mr,
Anjon's Voyage ; to which I anfwered in general, that
I was only a petty Officer in the Fleet, and that all my
Bufmefs was to do as I was ordered by ray Superiors.
When they made made me Offers of entering into their
Service, I plainly refufed, telling them, I would rather
be a common Sailor in the Service of my own King,
than an Officer under another. When I begged to be
let at Liberty, and to go Home by the Way of Portu-
j gal, the Minif.er faid he would acquaint his Majefty
with my Demand, and that I Ihould foon have an An-
fwer. Next Day I waited on the fame Minifter, and
he ordered me to go to the Secretary at War’s Office,
where I Ihould have a Paffport to Lijbon. I went di-
reflly, and got the Paffport, with fifteen Dollars for
my travelling Charges; and then I would have fet out
immediately, but the Weather being bad, was obliged
to flay at Madrid five Days longer ; and when I did
fet out, I found it almoft impoffible to travel, the hea-
vy Rains had fo fpoiled the Roads j but the mod dif-
agreeable Circumftance was the Lightnefs of my Purfe,
which rendered myjourney very uncomfortable indeed;
At laft it pleafed God that I got fafe to Lijbon, where
I no fooner arrived, than I waited on the Englijh Con-
ful, who told me that the Edinburgh, Commodore
Coates, was going from thence to England. Hereupon
I waited on the Commodore, and deflred my Paffage
Home, which he readily granted. After flaying at
Lijbon only three Days, I embarked for England, and
to the South-Seas.


,
t 72 AVOY A G E, &V.
in fix more arrived at Plymouth ; thus happily fin-mount-
ing, through the Mercy of the Almighty, a long and
unfortunate Voyage of five Years and eight Months
From Plymouth \ went to Port/mouth in the fame Ship
and proceeded dire&ly to London, where I arrived in
the Beginning of May, 1746, and informed the Lords
of the Admiralty of my Arrival, by a Petition to their ;
Lordlhips. Speaking at the fame time with Mr. Corbet ,
Secretary to the Admiralty, I found, to my great Sur-
prize that their Lordlhips had been told by Captain
Cheap , that I was in the Spanijh Service ! That this
was a falfe Afperfion, the Publick will hardly require
any other Proof than the reading the foregoing Narra -
tive. If I had been in the Spanijh Service, how could
I have acquired a Paflport * from a Minifter of Spain,
and how could I likewife arrive here in England fo foon
after the Captain ? Upon the whole, I hope that what
I have here wrote will be fufficient to fatiafy the Publick 1
of my Innocence, and clear me of what is fo wrongfully
, / ,vv )
laid to my Charge. »
Alexander Campbell.
• This Paflport I lent, inclofed in a Letter to Mr. Secretary Cn-
hit.
FINIS.
" ■ ' • ' ' r - ■<
•-V


i


